
      
         
            
            
            
            
               
            
         
         
            
               
               
                  〈…〉
                Partly of such, as he hath Slaunderously 
                  〈…〉
                Harding withal: Partly of such other, as 
                  〈…〉
                committed about the triall thereof, in the Text of the foure first Articles of his Replie. VVith a Reioyndre vpon the Principall Matters of the Replie, treated in the Thirde and Fourthe Articles.
            By Thomas Stapleton student in Diuinite.
            
               Magna est Veritas, & praeualet.
               Greate is the Truthe, and it preuayleth. 
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
               
            
            
               SPES ALIT AGRICOLAS
            
            Printed in Antwerpe, by Iohn Latius, At the signe of the Sower. 1566. With Speciall Grace and Priuilege.
         
         
            
            
               
                  〈…〉
                Maiestatis Gratia Speciali 
                  〈…〉
                est Thomae Stapletono 
                  〈◊〉
                inscriptum, A Returne of Vntruthes vpon M. Ievvelles Replie &c. per aliquem Typographorum admissorum tuto & libere imprimendum curare, & publicé distrahere, nullo prohibente. Datum Bruxellis .26. Aprilis. Anno .1566.
            
               Subsign. Pratz.
            
         
         
            
            A TABLE OF TH
                  •
                PRINCIPALL MATTERS, BY THE ORDER OF THE ALphabet, VVherein, Art. signifieth the Article. Fol. the leafe .a. and .b. the first and second side.
            
               A.
               Asia the lesse (in great parte) vnderstode not the Greke tongue. Proued out of Strabo against M. Ievvell. Art. 3. fol. 64. b. 65. a. & b.
               Aultars in the Apostles time. Art. 3. fol. 118. b.
               S. Augustin our Apostle defended from the Reproches, Lies, and Slaunders of M. Ievvell. Art. 3. fol. 129. b. 130.131. and 133. a. & b
               S. Augustin our Apostle commended by Venerable Bede. Art. 3. fol. 129. a. & b. by S. Gregory fol. 132. a. & b
               Athanasius facingly belyed of M· Ievvell. Art. 4. fol. 27. b
               Athanasius ad Marcum Papam defended. Art. 4. fol. 26. b. 27.39.41. b. and 42. a
               Athanasius thrise banished, and thrise restored. Art. 4. fol. 159. b. & 160. a
               Of the Africanes dealing tovvarde Pope Zosimus, and of their Copie
                     •
                   of the Nicene Councell. Art. 4. fol. 47. b. and 48. a. & b
               Appeales to Rome decreed in the Nicene Coun
                     ••
                  ll. Art. 
                     •
                  . fol▪ 
                  
                     〈…〉
                   73. Also in the Councell of Sardica. fol. 74.
               Appeales to the Pope: of Chrysostom to 
                     〈…〉
                  . Art. 4. fol. 82. and in many folovving. Of 
                     〈…〉
                   Iul
                     •
                  us. fol. 89.90. and 91. Of Flauianu
                     •
                   to Leo fol. 92. a. Of The 
                     〈◊〉
                   to Leo also fol. 102. b. Of Iohn Talaida patriarke of Alexandria, to 
                     〈◊〉
                  . fol. 109. a
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                   proue a Superiorite in him, to vvhom the Appeale is made. Art. 4. fol. 
                     〈…〉
                   104.
               The Appeale of Donatus to Constantin the Emperour mislyked and reproued by S. Augustin, by Optatus, and by Constantin him selfe. Art· 4. fol. 104. b. 105.106. a
               No Appeales made of Ecclesiasticall matters to any Prince lavvfully. Art. 4. fol. 104. b. & seq. 107· and 108.
               Appeales made to the Pope, vvhen the Emperour toke the contrary parte. Art. 4. fol. 108. b. and 199. a
               No Appeale remoued from the Pope to any other Iudge lavvefully. Art. 4. fol. 110. a. and b.
            
            
               B.
               S. Basils place touching the number of Communicants expounded. fol. 7. a
               Brittanny receiued their first, open, and settled Christendom from Rome. Art. 1. fol. 19. b. Art. 3. fol. 124. and 128.
               Broth
                     •
                  r
                     •
                   be not allvvaies names of equalite. Art. 4. fol. 119·
               Confirmation of Bishops by and from the Pope· Art. 4. f. 126. b. 127. b. 128. b. 129.
               Bishops restored by the Pope. Art. 4. f. 158. b. & seq. Reconciled to the Pope. fol. 165. b. & s
                     •
                  q.
            
            
               C.
               The Communion of Englande differeth from the Order of the Mass
                     •
                   Recorded

in S. Dy
                     •
                  nis
                     •
                  . Art. 1. fol. 3. a. And in S. Basill and Chrysostom. Ibidem. b. Like
                  
                     •
                  ise in Cyrillus bishop of Hierusalem. Ibidem. fol. 4. a.
               
                  
                     •
                  Vh
                     •
                  re Sacrifice the Communion booke lacketh. Art. 1. fol. 5. b. & 6. a. In the Comm
                     •
                  nion of Englande there is no Consecration: Ibidem.
               Th
                     •
                   Number of Communicants at a Masse or Communion is no parte of Christes Institution. Art. 1. fol. 7. a. and .b. Item fol. 8. a
               Communion betvvene those that neuer savve, one the other. Art. 1. fol. 10. a. Item betvvene those vvhich vvere absent one from the other. Ibidem fol. 14. b. and 15. a. Such Communion in distinction of places proued. Art. 1. fol. 15. b.
               The vanitie of M. Ievvelles Challenge. Art. 4. fol. 186. a
               The Intent of M. Ievvelles Challenge. Art. 1. fo. 34. a. Art. 4. fo. 181. b.
               Communion vnder One kinde proued out of holy Scripture. Art. 2. fo. 49. b. & seq.
               The vvordes of Christ, Drinke ye all of this, doe not force the laye people to R
                     •
                  
                  ceiue the Communion vnder bothe kindes. Art. 2. fol. 44. a. & b. & seq.
               M. Ievvelles Challenge is ansvvered, but he altereth the Question, three sundry vvayes. Art. 2. fol. 55. a
               Calfhill and M. Ievvell in contrary opinions. Art. 3. fo. 103. b. & 126. a. & b
               Constantinople subiect to Rome in spirituall Iurisdiction. Art. 4. fol. 19.20. and 21.
               Chrysostomes Appeale to Innocentius th
                     •
                   Pope. Art. 4. fol. 84. b. 85.86.87. & seq. Item. 94.95.9
                     •
                  .
               Foure Conditions 
                     ••
                  quired to a compromisse. Art. 4. fol. 101. b
               Dedication of Churc
                     •
                  es in the yer
                     •
                   of our Lorde. 346. Art. 4. fol. 134. b
               Councelles Confirmed by the Pope. Art. 4. fol. 134. b. to the leafe 157.
               The Chalcedon Councell allovved and defended Art. 4. fo. 174. & seq.
               Hovve Constantinople obtayned the second place after the Bishop of Rome. Art. 4. fol. 155. b. 1
                     •
                  6. a. and .b.
            
            
               E.
               VVhat vvere the Syrian psalmes of Ephr
                     •
                  m. Art. 3. fol. 93. a
               Englande receiued their first Faithe and Christendom from Rome, not from grekes or hebrevves. Art. 3. fol. 127. and in many leaues folovving, all M. Ievvelles Argumentes to the Contrary dissolued.
               The Communion of England, See C.
               The Seruice of Engl
                     •
                  nd in many pointes contrary to the Catholike Faithe. Art. 
                     •
                  . fol. 133. b. 134. a
               Emperours neuer iudged ouer bishops in matters of the Faithe Art. 4. fol. 92. b
               Bishops oft the East subiect to the See of Rome. Art. 4. fol. 14. b. to the leafe. 20. 
                     〈◊〉
                   fol. 117. to the leafe. 126.
            
            
               F.
               VVhy the Sacrifice is not Celebrated vpon good Frydaye. Art. 2. fol. 54. a
               The first preachers of the faithe in Fraunce. Art. 3. fol. 67.
               The latin Seruice in Fraunce, not vnderstanded vvithin the first 600. yeres Art. 3. fol. 100.
            
            
               G.
               Hovve S. Gregory abhorred the name of Vniuersall Bishop▪ and yet practised him selfe an vniuersall Supremacy ouer the Churche Art. 4. fol. 7.8.9. and in many leaues folovving.
               S. Gregory our Apostle. Art. 4. fol. 24. a
            
            
               H.
               H
                     •
                  vvseling of persons practi
                     •
                  ed in the primitiue Churche. Art. 1. fol. 11. a. and .b. the Pope called Head of the Chalc
                     •
                  don Councell by the letters of the Councell
               
                  〈1… pages missing〉
               
            
         
         
            
            TO M. IOHN IEVVEL THOMAS STAPLETON vvissheth the loue of Truthe.
            
               IF you are, M. Ievvell, the Man that you pretēd to be, desirous of Gods honour, a Zelatour in the House of God, and a Boulter out off that Truthe, vvhich you haue vaunted, and many doe thinke, can not be founde: it shall not seme straunge vnto you, much lesse it shal offende you, if I amonge the rest, though a Man to you vnknovven, yet a Christen Man and your Countreman, do put my helping hande to this your Zelous enterprise, and as if it vvere shevve you some parte of the vvaye that may leade you thereunto. For as betvvene the Flynt and Yron, being striken together, fyre doth Flye out, so Iudgementes and VVittes contending, the Light off right knovvleadge must nedes appeare. Suche Lighte ones appearing, the Truthe is soone had. You M. Ievvel, to haue this Truthe tryed, haue proposed your Questions, and haue Challenged all that vvill, to ioyne issue vvith you in a number of Articles. To that your Challenge it hathe bene Ansvvered Copiously and Lernedly. And

the Truthe hathe bene proued, not only in the Termes of your Challenge vvhich is lesse material, but much more in the Matter, comprised in those Termes. To that Ansvver you haue Replied largely also and painefully.
            In this your Replie as you haue spared no Rhetorike, multiplyed Allegatyons, hunted after Common places, entred in to Digressyons, al to make a Shevve of lerning, and a Countenance of a Iuste and Full Replie to the Matter it selfe: so haue you for the Disgracing of your Aduersary, and for Discredityng the Author him selfe, vsed much Arte and taken great Paynes. Novve vvith Scoffes and Tauntes, Novve dissembling a great vvhile his Meaning, and reasoning sadly against that no man saied, coming in after vvith your, But M. Harding will saie, Then altering quite his text in your Replie, and so confuting at pleasure your ovvne Inuentyon. At other times not Replying to him at all, but Opposing off your ovvne store. But one Caste you haue inuented, vvhich I remembre not that any other vvriter euer Vsed before. A Caste I saie sufficient alone, if it vvere clenly conuayed, and vprightlye practised, not only to discredit the Author and to Cō
               founde the Aduersary, but also to ouerthrovve his Doctrine, and to satisfie the Matter. VVhat is

that trovve vve? Forsothe you haue scored all alonge the Ansvver of D. Harding, euen from the beginning to the ending, Vntruthes, as you call them, Slaunders, in dede they be.
            In these Vntruthes, you note to the Reader, not only the presumed faultes, errours or escapes of the Author, in penning and treating his Matter, but much more you note euery Principall pointe of Doctrine, euery Proued Proposition, and Matter treated, that semed to you and your humour, Vntrue. In this Inuentyon you take great pleasure. Of it you make great Vaūtes. By it you thinke to vvinne the Credit and Persuasion of al men. For, this point you note to your Reader oftentimes not only in the text of your Replie, but in your Preface, in your Conclusyon, and in the Table of your booke. In your Text, tovvard the ende of your first Article, hauing thē charged D. Harding vvith .44. Vntruthes, you Crie out, and saie. O M. Harding,
               Ievvell. pag. 91. 
               is it not possible your doctrine maye stande without lies? So many Vntruthes, in so litle roome, without the shame of the worlde, without feare of God? In an other place you put the Reader in minde againe of this matter, and you saie of D. Harding. This man coulde neuer vtter so many Vntruthes together without some speciall priuilege.
               Pag. 195. In your Preface you require these Vntruthes, first and especially to be

discharged, or amended, for thus you saie. Before he addresse him selfe to his Second Booke, I woulde counsel him to consider better the ouersightes and scapes of his former Booke. And a litle after. But before all thinges lett him write no moe Vntruthes. For thereof he hath sent vs enough already. Let him no more wreast and racke the Scriptures: let him nomore neither misalleage, nor mysconstrue, nor corrupte, nor alter the holy Fathers. Thus many vvaies you presume D. Harding to haue dealed Vntruly. And this you vvil not haue your Reader to forgette. In your Cōclusion you put againe the Reader in minde of them, as a Matter aboue all other to be boren avvaye. For amonge other thinges thus there you speake to D. Harding. Your Vntruthes be so notorious, and so many, that it pi
                     •••
                  th me in your behalfe to remembre them. But the places be euident, and Crie Corruptiō, and maye by no shifte be denied. The like you doe in your Table, vpon the Name of M. Harding noting very sadly and solemnely the totall summe off Vntruthes, vvhiche by your good Audit ariseth in the vvhole Ansvver of D. Harding, to the number of 255. adding, that they are with better aduise to be redressed.
            
            Novve verely M. Ievvel, vvere your Audit herein good, and your Notes true, that so many Vntruthes in that ansvver vvere in dede cōmitted, partly by the Autho
                  •
               s faulte and ouersight

(to speake the leste) partly 
                  〈…〉
                
               
                  •
               nd Vntrue Doctrine therein con
                  ••
               yned▪ 
               
                  〈…〉
                the booke vvorthy to be reproued, 
                  〈…〉
                greatly to be blamed. Yea I vvi
                  ••
                
               
                  〈…〉
                you M. Ievvell, then vvere his doctrine 
                  〈…〉
                tolerated, and his Person neuer to be cr
                  ••••
               ed. Then vvas it bothe vvisely done of you to discouer it, and charitably done to expresse it, to note it, and to open it vnto all the vvorlde. For more Charite it is, that one false Teacher abide the Shame, Blame, and Reproche, then that a Thousand ignorant and innocent soules be induced to Errour, False doctrine, and Heresy.
            But if on the Contrary parte, these are no Vntruthes, vvhich for such you haue Noted, M. Ievvell, if neither the Doctrine neither the Dealing of D. Harding is founde Vntrue, if all these Vntruthes, (as farre as I haue yet entred vvithe you, vvhich is to the one halfe thereof) be Returned euery one vpon you (One Only excepted, vvhich yet is no Vntruth in doctrine, but a missetaking of the Author) if they be proued to be your ovvne Vntruthes and that Slaunderous: vvhat can remaine but that bothe the Ansvver of D. Harding, is so farre, good and perfect, and voide of Vntruthe, and yovv for your part are founde to be a greate Slaunderer of your Aduersary,

and an Open enemy to the Truthe, vvhich you vvil seme to defende?
            I vvill saie farder M. Ievvell. VVhat if you, not through your vvhole Replie, nor yet through out the former Halfe thereof, vvhich at this time I haue only taken in hande, but through those places only of this Halfe, in vvhiche you labour in the text to Iustifie the Vntruthe noted in the Margin, vvhat I saie if in these small Parcelles of halfe your Replie, (though in dede the Principal and most Important Parcelles thereof) you haue beside of your ovvne parte, vvhat vvith false Doctrine, vvhat vvith extreme Levvde Dealing, cō
               mitted certain Hundreds of Vntruthes your selfe: then vvhat shal vve saie vnto you, or of vvhat Credit ought you hereafter to be, vvith all men, that loue the Truthe, and are not Fastned to Factions.
            Maye vve not then saie to you vvith the prophet.
                  Esa. 5. 
               Veh qui dicitis malum bonum, bonum malum? Accursed be you that call euill, good, and good, euill? vvhich call Truthe, Vntruthe, and persuade Vntruthes for Truthe? Maye vve not truly take you for one of them, vvhich the Apostle saieth, shall come in the later dayes, In hypocrisi loquentiū mendaciū, Vttering lyes in Hypocrysy?1. Tim. 4. For vvhat greater Hypocrysy is there, then to Charge Vntruthes,

               
                  〈◊〉
                Vntruly, and to impugne the Truthe vvith the coulour of Truthe? Maye you not vvorthely be thought to be one of them, vvhom the Prophet describeth saying,
                  Esa. 28. 
               Posuimus mendacium spem nostram, & m
                     •
                  ndacio pr
                     •
                  tecti sumus. VVe haue put our Confidence in Lying, and Lies haue bene oure Sauegarde▪ Are you not truly like to those false prophets of the Ievves, vvho (as the prophet saieth) Docue
                     ••••
                   ling
                     •
                  am suam loqui mendacium,
               
                  Ierem. 9. 
               vt inique agerint laborau
                     ••
                   a
                     •
                  t. Framed their tounges to Vtter Lies and toke great paynes to Deale Falsely: For so Manifolde and so Thicke are your Vntruthes that it maye seme, you haue Laboured your selfe to Vtter them. Yea maye vve not then thinke, that S. Peter, as it vvere pointed to you M. Ievvel, vvhen he saied, As there were false prophets amonge the people (of Israël) so there shall be lying Masters amonge you,
               2. Pet. 2. 
               which shall bringe in wicked and damnable sectes? Verely M. Ievvell vve maie saye al this and much more most truly of you, and that therefore (your excessiue lying and Vntrue dealing being so euident) neither your doctrine is to be tolerated, neither your Person euer more to be credited.
            For vvhat kinde is there of Authors, that you haue not Corrupted, Misalleaged, False Translated, and by one meanes or other Abused? VVhat

Faulte in vvriting is there that you haue not in this your Replie committed? I speake not off your VVhole Replie, but of that Parte only vvhich I at this present haue taken in hande to examine, that is, the Effect and Principall Pointes of your foure first Articles.
            
               A briefe Summary of M. Ievvelles Allegatyons.As touching your Authors and Allegatyons, vvhich you haue so Ambitiously Multiplyed through out your booke, and vvhereby the simple are much abused, beholding therein a Coū
               tenaunce of Lerning, but not able to descrie the Couered Falshood, you haue Falsifyed and Misalleaged the Doctours and holy Fathers of Christes Church, the Decrees of Councelles, the lavves of Emperours, the Ecclesiasticall Histories, the Schoolemen, and other good VVriters a numbre. You haue falsifyed and mangled the very Text of holy Scripture, namely of S. Paule ☞*in one Chapter ix. times as the Reader maye see in the thirde Article fol. 107. and in certaine leaues folovving.The Text of D. Hard. falsified. You haue Altered the Text of D. Harding, not vvhen you alleage his vvhole text alonge in the diuisions, as you cal them (for that you savve vvell, vvere to much open a legerdemaine) but in the Text of your Ovvne Replie, vvhen you Repete his vvordes pecemele, to cō
               fute them. For there lo, sometime you adde a

vvorde, and then dispute against your ovvne Addition (as Art. 3. fol. 62. b. 63. a) at other times you quite Alter his vvordes and meaning, and so you Replie against that vvhiche he neuer saied. This levvdenesse you haue committed in many and sondry places of this parte of your Replie, especially in the .3. Article. Namely fol. 117. fiue times in one place.In the Letter I. Other particularites of this your dealing are noted to the Reader in the Table of this booke. But brefely to geue you a vevve thereof, beholde M. Ievvell vvhat Authors and of hovve diuerse sortes you haue in so thicke Allegatyons Missealleaged, and Abused. I note you vvithall the leafe and page of this Booke, vvhere you shall finde them eche one so declared and proued to the eye.
            The holy Fathers by you thus vsed or rather misuded are.Doctours Stories, and other good Authors missealleaged by M. Ievvell.
            
            
               S. Ciprian.
               Articulo. 3. fo. 70. b. Art. 4. fo. 76. a. 127. a. &. b
               S. Basill.
               Art. 4. fol. 122. b
               S. Ambrose.
               Art. 3. fol. 95. a
               S. Hierom.
               Art. 3. fol. 84.
               S. Chrysostom.
               Art. 1. fol. 39. Art. 3. fol. 90. Art. 4. fo. 83. a
               S. Augustin.
               Art. 3. fol. 70. a. Art. 4. fol. 57. a.
               Athanasius.
               Art. 4. fol. 27.
               Leo.
               Art. 4. fol. 152. b. 163. b. 176. a.
               S. Gregory.
               Art. 4. fol. 3. a. fol. 141. a.
               S. Bernarde.
               Art. 4. fol. 80. b.
            
            The Historiographers, with whom also you haue so dealed, 
                  •
                are
            
               
               Ruffinus.
               Art. 4. fol. 121. a
               Socrates.
               Art. 4. fol. 28. a
               Sozomenus.
               Art. 4. fol. 131. a. 153. b
               Theodoretus.
               Art. 3. fol. 124. b. Art. 4. fol. 139. a. 160. b
               Cassiodorus.
               Art. 4. fol. 159. a
               Beda.
               Art. 3. fol. 133. a
               Galfridus Monemuth.
               Art. 3. fol. 130. b
            
            Other good Authors bothe olde and newe, whom you haue in like maner and with the like Sincerite alleaged, are.
            
               
                  Clemens Alexandrinus
               
               Art. 3. fol. 90. a
               
                  Liberatus.
               
               Art. 4. fol. 142. a. 155. a.
               
                  Sulpitius
               
               Art. 3. fol. 100. a
               
                  Gelasius
               
               Art. 4. fol. 175. a
               
                  Gennadius.
               
               Art. 4. fol. 120. b
               
                  Innocentius. 3.
               Art. 3. fol. 97. & 98. a
               
                  Eckius.
               
               Art. 3. fol. 87. a
            
            VVhat Councells you haue in like maner falsified and Misalleaged, it maye be sene, Art. 1. fol. 28. b. 37. a. Art. 4. fol. 37. a. 40. b. 71. b. 74. b. In alleaging your Ciuill Lavves and decrees of the Canon lavve hovve you haue partly to a vvronge vnderstanding dravven them,Councels and Lavves missealleaged. either of your ovvne ignorance, or of lavvyers misse information, partly quite mangled them and falsified them, you maye beholde M. Ievvell, touching the first, our Ansvver to your Replie cō
               cerning Iustinians Constitution Art. 3. fol· 77. & seq. and touching Appeales Art. 4. fol. 103. & 104.

concerning the later point, the lavves of Iustiniā Art. 4. fo. 51. a. 52. b. 53. b. of Honorious fo. 79. a. & b. and the decrees Artic. 4. fol. 115. and. 176. b.
            The Schoolemen likevvise, Durandus,Schoolemen Abused The Cause of M. Ievvelles so many and thicke Quotatyon
                     •
                  . Art. 3. fo. 87. b. Thomas Aquinas. fol. 88. b. and Lyra. fo. 103. b. you haue Alleaged for your purpose, but falsely and Corruptely. By such falshood and Sleighte, you haue Multiplied your Allegatiōs, and furnished your booke vvith Quotations, not caring hovve or vvhat you brought, so that the Margyn vvere stuffed. These Quotatyons you vsed as a Call for birdes. VVith them you Tolled and Bayted your Reader. VVho taketh in gladly the Bayte of Authorite, but seeth not the Hooke of Falshood and Vntruthe vvherevvith you Choke him. For this purpose you haue a knacke to macke sundry Allegations vvhich are but one. As in the fourthe Article. fol. 6. a. you doe most Ambitiously. Also Artic. 1. fol. 27. and Art. 3. fol. 105. b. By such shevve of lerning you thought to vvinne credit. And vnder the Visarde of the Fathers and Coūcels, of Histories and Lavves, of Authors bothe olde and nevve, you thought to plaie the part of a Lerned VVriter and of a true Teacher. But the visarde being novv plucked of, your Vntrue Alleagatyons discouered, your Bonovved Fethers pilled avvaye, you vvil remaine

not only for opinion of good lerning as pilde as AEsops davve, but also for farder Credit off your VVorde, you vvill stande (I feare) for yanckeroute. Verely if Truthe maye preuaile, as she euer hath and vvill preuaile, you for your Vntruthes (except you redresse them) are no more to be acompted for a Teacher of Truthe, but to be taken for (as S. Peter termeth suche) a Lying Master.
            Of your other yehauyour and Dealing M. Ievvel, if I should put you particularly in minde, vvhat faulte is there of an honest, discrete, and vpright vvriter to be auoyded, that you haue not incurred, and either Ignorantly or vvilfully committed? Your Ouersightes touching the Storie, Time, and Practise of the Churche are Greate and Many.The greate Ouerfightes of M. Ievvel. I reporte you and the Reader to these places for example thereof Art. 3. fol. 82.83. b. Art. 4. fol. 39. b. 42. a. 44. b. 94. a. 140. b. 160. b. 162. b. 164. b. 174. b. Hovvbeit this maye procede of Ignorance, and is Excusable.
            
               He claimeth by heretikes.But that you should Claime by Open Condemned Heretikes, and Builde your Proufes vpon their sayinges and doinges, vvhat Ignorance can you here pretende, or vvhat Coulour off Excuse can you deuise? If you remembre you haue done no such thing, Cōsider I beseche you

hovve Often and hovve Boldely you alleage the Arrians, their sayinges and doinges, in the fourthe Article against the lavvfull and devve Obedience, (practised by the Carholike bishops vvhom those Arrians persecuted) to Christes Vicaire here in earthe, the bishop of Rome. For the readyer vevve hereof, and hovve also you Claime by the late Grekes, by Eutychiās and by Donatistes, these places noted may pointe vnto you. Art. 1. fol. 13. a. Art. 4. fol. 75. b. 97. b. 109.110.119. b. 120. a. & b. 126. a. 130. b. 162. b. 163. a. 169. a. If suche Plea maye commende your Action, then must you seeke for an other Benche, and an other Courte. The Catholike Churche admitteth no such vvitnesses to speake or to geue euidence. VVe haue not so Lerned Christ, M. Ievvell. This point verely of all levvdenesse, is the levvdest.
            An other sleight or Crafte you haue to destroye a Truthe by telling a Truthe. Example vvhereof you maye beholde. Art. 4. fo. 160. a. and 161. a. By that meanes you make many longe Processes, to very shorte Purposes.
            Your maner of vvriting is beside so Dissolut Loose and Negligent,His loose Maner of vvriting. or els your selfe so Impotent, in contradiction, that many times you are founde   Contrary to your selfe,  sometime in plaine vvordes to Confute your selfe,  at other

times by the force of your ovvne reasoning to be Cast in your ovvne Turne. For a vievve of particular examples in eche one of these faultes, I remitt you to these places. For the first, Art. 1. fo. 11, b. 31. b. Art. 2. fo. 50. b. Art. 4. fo. 62. a. 158. a. For the seconde, Art. 1. fol. 19. a. 25. a. 32. a. Art. 4. fol. 149. b. 150. a. For the thirde and laste. Art. 2. fo. 45. a. Art. 3. fol. 85. b. 111. b.
            
               His vvrō
                  ge and levvde maner of Reasoning.Your maner of Reasoning, is so beside al Reason, and so Squarre from the Purpose, that thereof arise a huge and mayne Number of levvde and Fonde Argumentes, vvhich by the Force of your talke must nedes be Concluded. Verely no lesse fonde and foolish, then those vvhiche you made and framed your selfe also in your Replie vnder the name of D. Hard
                  •
               nges Arguments. Only this is the difference. Those in your Replie vvere fathered of you vpon D. Harding vntruly (as it hath bene othervvhere declared vnto you) and vvere your ovvne,By M. Rastel .li. 2. cap. 4. but made in sporte, or els to make sporte: These vvhich are to be founde in this Booke, are rightly youres, and of your selfe made in good earnest. I haue only brought them in to their Forme, and exemplifyed them by the like. VVherein hovve vprightly I haue dealed, I make euery Indifferent Reader, yea your selfe M. Ievvell, if any Indifferency

be in you, the Iudge. VVhere and in vvhat places these your levvde and fonde Argumentes maye be founde, bicause the number is not conuenient to be noted in this place, I remitt you to the Table of this Booke, and to the first letter of your ovvne Name therein. Other generall examples of your levvde Dealing, or rather VVrā
               gling, you maye consider M. Ievvell (not to trouble you vvith longe serche thereof) Art. 1. fo. 4. b. 17. b. Art. 2. fol. 46. b. Art. 3. fol. 62. b. 121. b. Art. 4. fol. 3. a. 30. a. 56. b. 133. b. 185. a. 186. b.His levvde dealing and vvrangling. Many particular faultes might yet more be noted. But for a shorte vievve thereof, I remitt you M. Ievvell, or any other the Reader hereof to the Table of this booke, and the place, of it aboue saied. All vvhich layed together, euery Indifferent Reader and your selfe also shall see, except in suche thinges you can see and not see, that bothe for your Vntrue Allegatyons of the Fathers, the Councelles, the very text of holy Scripture, the Ecclesiastical histories, the Lavves and Decrees, and of other good Authors bothe Olde and Nevve, as also for your vnhonest and levvde dealing through your vvhole maner of vvriting, neither your Person is to be Credited, and muche lesse your doctrine to be tolerated.
            By this also it may appeare, that I haue rightfully

Returned Vntruthes vpon you,The Title of this booke. and haue therefore not vvithout good Cause Intitled this my small labour. A Returne of Vntruthes vpon M. Iewell &c. vvhich yet I haue so Intitled not only for this Cause, but also and that Principally bicause the Vntruthes vvhich in these Foure Articles, to the Number of a Hundred tvventy and fyve, you haue charged and turned vpō D. Harding I haue discharged him thereof, and Recharged or Returned them vpon you againe. The other nevvly Charged vpon you to the number of certain hundreds, are suche as you haue committed in your Replie, in such places as you labour to Iustifie and to proue, that thinge, vvhich in the Margin of D. Hardinges text you noted for Vntruth. VVhich paynes you take not allvvaies, and therefore allvvaies I enter not to your Replie, but shortly do Iustifie the vntruthe, and so Returne it vpon you for a Slaunder. Only you take that paynes, vvhen the Vntruthe requireth such a proufe or declaration: As vvhen it contayneth a Matter of Doctrine. And at suche times I enter your Replie, and vvhat I finde touching that vntruthe, I goe thourough vvith it, especially in the thirde and fourthe Articles. In the other tvvo vvhy I do not so, the reason shall be geuen in my Preface to the Reader.
            
               But touching these Vntruthes,Vpon vvhat groundes, M. Ievvell hath Noted D. Harding vvith Vntruthes. vvhich it hath liked you M. Ievvell in these foure first Articles to charge D. Harding vvithall, if vve shoulde Consider a litle your maner of Dealing therein, and somevvhat specifie the same, vvoulde it, trovve you, thereby appeare, that you did it, either for the Loue and Zele of Truthe it selfe, or els vpon good and substantial groundes moued thereunto? No truly. But directly the Contrary. For (as touching the first) vvhat Loue or Zele of Truthe can be presumed to haue bene herein (I appeale but to all indifferent Readers) vvhen you note that for Vntruthe, vvhiche you coulde not be ignorant, vvas not the saying of D. Harding him selfe, but of his Author alleaged then presently? Examples of this your Dealing the Diligent Reader maye espie. Art. 1. fo. 10.26. and 29. Also Art. 3. fol. 120. b. Art. 4. fo. 48. b. For in these places, you note for vntruthes those vvordes vvhich are the very vvordes of S. Hierom, of S. Augustin. Of Leontius, of Origen,The Doctours ovvne sayinges are made D. Hardinges Vntruthes. and of the Nicene Councell out of Franciscus Turrianus. All vvhich Authors being by D. Harding in those places alleaged, are noted by M. Ievvell to speake vntruly. If you vvoulde nedes note the matter for vntrue, you shoulde haue noted the vntruth M. Ievvel vpon such and such

Authors, not vpon D. Harding. Novve vvhat shall I call that in you, grosse ignorance or vvillfull dissimulation, vvhen you note those sayinges of D. Harding for Vntrue, vvhich are the very saiynges of other good Authors though not alleaged then presently? So you Note that for Vntruthe, yea and for a foule deprauation or holi scripture, vvhich is the very saying and doctrine of S. Hilary. Art. 2. fol. 48. b. The like you doe Art. 4. folio. 170. a. by a saying of Innocentius the first, defended also by S. Augustin. In these pointes M. Ievvell either you loued not the Truthe, or els you must confesse, you missed of the grounde thereof.
            
               Vntruthes noted vpō a vvronge dissembled meaning of the Author.Againe vvhen you dissemble the Course of D. Hardinges treatyse, and vpon that Dissimulation do score vp Vntruthes, bicause that is not Concluded, vvhich in dede vvas not of him in that place Intended, can this your dissimulation procede of the zele and loue of Truthe? In the first Article, vvhen D. Hardinge alleaged Clement, S. Dyonise, Iustinus Martyr and Ireneus, S. Basill and Chrysostom and last of all Cyrillus for proufe of the Sacrifice of the masse, you note vpon al these Allegatyons a number off vntruthes, bicause (you saie there) those Doctours do speake of a Communion and not of Priuat Masse, vvhereas

yet (as I saied) they vvere expressely brought to proue the Sacrifice of the Masse not to proue priuat Masse. Of this your leude dealing you maye reade more particularly in this Returne Art. 1. fol. 4. b. But this your open and manifest dissimulation, can it (I appeale to your ovvne Conscience) procede of any Zele or loue of the Truthe? Did the Truth, I saie, moue you to note those Vntruthes? The like dissimulatyon you vse in a number of other Vntruthes, vvhich you haue scored vpon D. Harding, as the diligent Reader maye consider Art. 1. fol. 5. & 6. a. folio. 9. b. 10. b. 17. b. Art. 2. fo. 53. a. Art. 3. folio. 117. b. 119. a. 121. a. 123. a. Artic. 4. fol. 185. a. 186. b. but especially in the same Article. fol. 2 b. and .3. a. vvhere you charge D. Harding though not with Vntruthe in the Margin, yet vvith a great Vntruthe in your text, as if he had nipped a saying of S. Gregory quite in the middest, scoffing also there at him, as if he had (you saie) the Choynecyngh &c. and all that bicause (you saie in that place) D. Harding alleaged those wordes of S. Gregory to proue that the B. of Rome was called the Vniuersall bishop. vvhich thing in that place vvas not of him at all Intended, but an other Matter expressely taken in hande, as in that place (Art. 4. fol 2. b. and .3. a.) you maye beholde and see to the eye M. Ievvell. Novve this so open

and greate dissimulation of youres, in scoring and charging of Vntruthes vpon D. Harding, hath it I saie on your part any Colour or Apparence, of any loue or zele of the Truthe? All the vvorlde seeth you did it to Deface, to Shame, and to discredit your Aduersary, vvhom othervvise you coulde not vvith any force of good Reason, any lerning, truth, probabilite or Authorite ouerthrovve.
            Other your Vntruthes scored vpon D. Harding are such sayinges and Assertions, as not only D. Harding but all the Catholike Churche affirmeth and holdeth for assured verites of the Catholike Faithe.Commō Verites of the Catholike Churche, noted for speciall Vntruthes of D. Harding. You coulde not then iustly note them as speciall Vntruthes of D. Harding, as if they had bene of his ovvne Inuentyon, but if you vvoulde nedes score them vp for vntruthes, you shoulde haue scored them vpon the vvhole Church of Christ, or (as you esteme that Churche,) vpon all Papistes in generall. For novve as you haue ordred the Matter, your brethern do vaunte (as I haue heard some of them my selfe) that D. Harding hath committed this great number of vntruthes, him selfe by his ovvne negligence or vvilfulnesse. Such your vntruthes so noted maye shortly be sene. Art. 1. fol. 1. b. touching the name of Masse. fol. 6. b. 7. b. 8. a. 11.

b. 20. a. and. b. 32. a. Art. 2. fol. 41. a. 43. a. 44. a. 54. b. 57. a. Art. 4. fol. 1. a. 58. b. 71. a. 111. a. 116.126. b. 134. a. 165. a. 170. a. &c. By this vvaie you might note M. Ievvel a number of Vntruthes not only vpon all Catholike vvriters of these dayes, but also in the Olde Fathers and Doctours of Christes Churche, vvho saie herein no lesse then vve saye, as vpon these your Vntruthes it hath bene here declared. Againe these matters being betvvene you and vs in question and controuersy, you to proclaime them for vntruthes, it is to blovve the Triumphe before the Victory.
            But that in this your Singular Deuise of Scoring vp Vntruthes, you rather sought meanes to fill vp the Score, then to boulte out the Truthe,Vntruthes repeted to make vp the Score. it maye vvel appeare by the repeting of one selfe Vntruthe, so often times. For some you repete foure times in one Article, as Art. 1. fol. 32. a. some other three times, as in the same Article fol. 40. b. and Art. 4. fol. 172. but many there are vvhiche you repete tvvise, only to make vp the Number. As Art. 1. fol. 8. a. Art. 2. fol. 53. b. 54. b. Art. 3. fol. 123. b. Art. 4. fol. 19. By vvhich your dealing it maye easely appeare to any Indifferent Reader that in the great Number of these Vntruthes, you sought more the Number then the Truthe.
            To you therefore M. Ievvell that thus vntruly

haue dealed, that so many vvaies haue betrayed your corrupted Affectyon, and Blotted your selfe so much, intending to Blemish your Aduersary, I maye vvell ansvver vvith the vvise and discrete saying of that Noble Philosopher Plato, vvherevvith he touched that Rude Reprocher Diogenes. Calcasti fastum Platonis, sed maiore fastu. Or rather I maye tell you, as in the Grand Senat off Rome it vvas tolde ones to a dissolut and ryotous younge Man declayming sadly off Vertu, Quis te ferat cenantem vt Crassus,
               
                  Plutarchus in Catone Vticensi.
                
               aedificantem vt Lucullus, loquentem vt Cato? VVho can abide thee, to lauish in sumptuous building as Lucullus, to ryot in bā
               ketyng as Crassus, and yet to talke sadly as an other Cato? VVhich Reproche as he had right vvorthely before that Honourable Senat, for his extreme dissimulation and vvretched Hypocryse: so deserue you M. Ievvell in the estimation of all men to be taken, for a dissembler and Hypocrite, you (I saie) that vvith such and so manifolde Vntruthes do charge other of vntruthe, and dealing your selfe most vntruly pretende to be a Singular proctour of Truthe. For vvho may abyde you M. Ievvell, to Corrupt the Fathers as haue done olde heretikes, to scoffe like an other Lucyan, to lie as faste as an other Sinon, and yet to talke like a Teacher of Truthe, to preache like

an other Paule, and to be a Comptroller of other mens Vntruthes? Blamers shoulde allvvaie be Blamelesse, and Fault finders ought of all right to be Faultelesse. Remembre the holy Scripture Master Ievvell, that speaketh thus vnto you. Hypocrita, eijce primum trabem do oculo tuo,
               
                  Matth. 7. 
               & tunc videbis eijcere festucam de oculo fratris. Thou Hypocrite, cast out first the beame out of thy ovvne eye, and then thou shalt see to pike out the mote of thy brothers eye. You M. Ievvell that note your brother of vntruthe, deale first your selfe Truly. Then shall you see better, vvhat is Vntruthe, and then maye you more boldely tell the other his faulte. Remoue avvaye first the mighty beame of your so many, so Notorious, and so Open Vntruthes. Then may you vvith a better face, pike avvaye the motes, the small errours and escapes, vvhich your brothers eye semeth to haue.
            For like as the Sonne or Moone at their arising or going dovvne,
                  A Similitude.
                vvhen either the Misty Morning vapours, or the euening falling devve dimmeth our sight betvvene, do seme to our eyes much greater, then tovvarde none time or midnight vvhen mounting on highe they haue passed all such lettes: or like as the shining sonne beames yelde not their light so clere, vvhere a

spotted glasse vvindovve standeth betvvene, as in the open fielde: so verely M. Ievvell your Iudgement being partly dimmed vvith a vvronge persuasyon of many Vntruthes, partly blinded vvith a corrupted Affection of Singularite, desire of Contradiction, or some other vvorse passion, can not so clerely Pearce to the true trial of the Truthe, and to descrie Vntruthe in others, as if your Iudgemēt vvere Vpright, and your Affection Clere. For novve the Case in you standing, as vve see it dothe, euery light escape in D. Harding semeth a wilfull and Manifest Falsifying of the Author, euery true and Catholike propositiō, contrary to the humour of your Affection semeth a Notorious and wilfull Vntruthe. Yea and of this it falleth out, that many times either you misse the true meaning of your Aduersary for vvante of Iudgement, or els dissemble it vtterly for no vvante of euil Affection, so to take Occasion and Matter of Vntruthe. Of this also it ariseth, that the Fathers ovvne saiynges, are D. Hardinges Vntruthes. And to make matter of Replie, D. Harding is made to saie, that vvich he neuer saied.
            Correct therefore your selfe M. Ievvell, and Amende that is amisse: Your greate Faultes I meane, vvhich in this preface you see Opened

vnto you. VVhich for your ovvne sake I haue so Opened, that beholding them at the first so Particularly layed for the, you might thinke either that you are in dede (vvhiche I promised at the first) brought somevvhat in the vvaie, to finde out the Truthe, vvhich so earnestly you pretend to seke after: or els that you are shortly admonisshed to Clere your selfe, and to teache vs the Truthe, if vve haue missed thereof. God sende you M. Ievvell, I hartely vvishe, a harty and earnest loue of the Truthe, at perfect knovvledge thereof, and Grace from Almighty God to teache other the same. Farre you vvel in Christ Iesus.
            
               Thomas Stapleton.
            
         
         
            
            THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
            
               ALbeit in the Epistle prefixed to M. Iewell, I haue (Christen Reader) saied so much, as maye in greate parte suffise to instruct and prepare thy Attention to the reading and vnderstanding of this Returne of Vntruthes &c: yet, to thentent that before thou enter to perusing thereof, thou maye all thinges thouroughly be instructed, I haue thought good shortly to laye before thee, the Cause of this our Enterprise: the Order and maner of our present writing: the Matter principally contayned therein: and the profit that hereof maye be looked for.
            Touching the first it is not vnknowen to all those that any thinge haue trauayled in perusing such bookes, as of late haue come forthe touching matters in religion controuersious, neither what Challenge was published at Paules Crosse of late yeres, neither what Answer hath bene made thereunto, nor last of all what Replie hath come forthe against that Answer. The Replie is knowen to be greate, estemed to be lerned, and thought to be such a piece, as the party impugned shall neuer be able to answer. VVhat answer the party can make, it shall in the Reioynder appeare. But for one man to answer the whole, and that stitche by stitche (as the Replier requireth) bothe the time woulde be so longe, that many a soule in the meane might perish, abused

by that lewde piece of worke, and also the booke woulde be so greate that fewe woulde bye it, fewer peruse it, and 
                  •
               ot one amonge a hundred reade it ouer. It hath bene thought good therefore of those that in Truthes cause loue to take payne, that for better expedition, many sett vpon it, though eche one did but a litle. The Answerer hath not bene ydle, as by his Reioynder it wil wel appeare. Yet other mens pennes he coulde not staye, euery one to folowe, as Zele pricked forwarde,
                  D. Sanders in the 7. booke.
                One hath confuted an Article of the Replie: an Article amōge the rest most importāt. An other hath taught vs to Bevvare of M. Ievvel.
               
                  M. Rastel.
                I haue thought good to Iustifie the Vntruthes, which it hath liked the Replyer to charge vpon his Aduersary all alonge his Replie. To this I was moued by diuerse reasons.
                  The Cause of the setting forthe of this Returne &c.
                I euer thought (as in the processe afterwarde I sawe it fell out) that the weakest partes through out the Replie, should be those, where such Vntruthes were noted. For I thought not, nor any man els I trowe wil thinke, either that the Replyer hath so litle witt as not to espie, which partes were most lykely to be Vntrue, and there to score vp his Vntruthe (the proper Badge in dede of this Replyers Cognysance) either that he owed any such good wil to his aduersary (whō by that Inuentiō he minded for euer to deface and discredit) as that he would dissemble and winke at great faultes, and note only certayne small escapes. These weaker partes therefore being proued stronge and good, I thought the residewe of the whole Answer shoulde nede at al no defence: but might stande for true, as

being passed ouer by the Replyer without any note of Vntruthe. For as in a brokē nette, the holes being sowed vp, the whole net is good and wil serue wel againe: so it semed me, these presumed Vntruthes being redressed or discharged, the whole Answer might goe for good, godly, and true. By this meanes therefore going through the Replie, a compendyous waie was founde, shortly and yet sufficiently bothe to defende the former Answer, and to satisfie this Replie. And this lo was one and the first Cause that moued me to (deuise this Returne. An other Cause (which perusing a longe the Vntruthes as they stode in the Margin of the Diuisions I espied) was this. The Replyer in all these foure Articles, the former halfe of his Replie, hath noted for Vntruthes, bothe the principall Matters treated and proued in the Articles, and also the Conclusions thereof, as not yet proued. I sawe therefore that in Iustifying these Vntruthes it was necessary to enter the Replie: to labour the principall Matters: and to proue, that all thinges were wel proued. This is in effect to answer the whole. For, other small matters neither so waighty, as the Replyer woulde cauille at them, neither so weake as he coulde finde any Coulour of Vntruthe to sett vpon them, might well for breuities sake, in a full and perfect Reioyndre be omitted. This therfore I haue done, and by this the Replyer maye thinke him selfe sufficiently answered, in this former halfe of his Replie.
            Howe, in what Order and maner, and howe farre I haue this done, it shall nowe appeare. I do first laye forthe the

wordes of D. Harding printed in a seueral letter,
                  The Order and maner of setting forthe the same.
                vpon and aboute the which, the Replier hath noted the Vntruthe. Then foloweth īmediatly the Vntruthe and the nūber thereof noted by the Replyer, worde for worde, as it standeth in the Margin of his Replie vpon the text of D.H. After in an other distinct letter, foloweth the Iustifying and discharging of the Vntruthe, whereby the Replyer is Recharged, the Vntruthe vpō him Returned, and he proued a Slaunderer. VVhen occasion serueth, as when some principall Matter contayning doctrine and concerning the state of the Questiō occurreth, whereby the Reader maye be edifyed, the whole text of the Replie cōcerning that matter is inserted, and to euery parcel thereof Answer is made. In the first Article I haue done this only in two places, cōtayning the very substaunce of the Article, as I shal anon declare. All the other Vntruthes I Iustifie shortly without entring to the text of the Replyer. Thus I haue there done bicause D.H. hath him selfe made a full and perfit Reioyndre to this first Article. In the Seconde Article, as the Vntruthes there noted, require very seldom such labour, but may shortly be Iustified, so haue I not often entred the text of the Replie, but only aboute the Principall matters of the Article, whereof I shall speake anon. In the thirde and Fourthe Articles, especially in the Fourthe, I haue not lefte any whit of M. Iewelles Replie, were it neuer so longe and tedyous, vnanswered, in such places as Vntruthes were noted. VVhat principall Matters I haue after this sorte in these foure Articles

treated, and discussed, it remayneth nowe to declare.
            
               
                  The Principall Matters treated and contayned therein· Fol. 21. & seq.In the first Article, the Vntruthe noted against the dayly externall Sacrifice of Christes Churche, I haue persecuted at large and touched M. Iewelles Replie therein. This I haue done at large and abundatly, bicause the grounde of this Article, which is of priuat Masse standeth hereupon. For a daily externall Sacrifice on the priestes parte being necessary, and yet the people not bounde by any lawe or precept daily to communicat, it remayneth most necessary, that in Case none will Receiue, the priest maye and ought to Receiue alone, seing without Receiuing the Sacrifice maye not be celebrated. And thus priuat Masse, which is the sole Receiuing of the priest, is founde not only lawfull, but necessary. In the last Vntruthe in like maner touching the place of Chrysostom, M. Iewelles whole Replie is answered, priuat Masse is expressely proued out of Crysostom, and the Replyer forced by all reason to Subscribe.
            In the seconde Article, concerning the very questyon of the Challenge,Fol. 43. b 44. a. the Replyer altereth it and enlargeth it, and entreth a newe Action, confessing secretly that in the former he is Guilty. The groundes of the Question, as that Christ is wholy receiued vnder eche kinde. and that the Commaundement of Christ. Drinke ye all of this, partayneth not to the laye people, but to pristes only (for these being graunted, there is neither Inconuenience, neither the breache of any Cōmaundement committed in receiuing vnder Fol. 41. a. fol. 44. a. & seq.One kinde) are bothe treated and proued in two seueral

Vntruthes of that Article, and the Replyers text in the later point answered.
            In the thirde Article it is proued against Vntruthes noted to the contrary, bothe that we at the first Receiuing of the Faithe in our Nation,Fol. 56. b. 57. b. & seq. and that the East and VVest Church within the first 600. yeres had their Churche Seruice in the Greke and Latin tounges, which the Common people vnderstode not. VVhereby at the beginning the Replyer is forced by all reason to Subscribe. VVhat other speciall Matters in this Article are treated, and howe farre I haue entred the Replyers text,Art. 3. fol 134. a. bicause at the ende of the same Article I haue allready particularly declared, I thinke it not nedefull here to repete.
            In the Fourthe Article these principall matters are more especially treated and discussed by occasion of the Vntruthes noted.Art. 4. fo. 7. &. seq. 9. &. seq. First howe Iohn of Constantinople vsurped the Title of vniuersall Bishop, in what sence he vsurped it, and howe the holy Pope Gregory abhorred it. Next that the same Lerned Father S. Gregory not withstanding he so abhorred the Name, Practised yet him selfe a Supremacy vniuersall ouer all partes of the Church,Fol. 29. & seq. bothe of the East and of the VVest. The greate Cōtrouersy touching a (anon of the Nicene Coūcell for the Popes primacy forged (as the Replyer saieth) by Pope Zosinius is againe a freshe debated, and the lōge lying text of the Replyer in that behalfe thouroughly answered,Fol. 50. e
                     •
                   seq. Zosimus clered and the Popes primacy cōfirmed. Iustinians Cōstitutions and decrees cōfessing

the Popes primacy are defended from the lewde and fonde expositions of the Replyer, and his whole text thereupon perfectly examined.Fol. 59. & seq. By occasion of the 104. Vntruthe noted by the Replyer, it is proued by holy Scripture, and confirmed by the Fathers, that Peter was left by Christ as the Foundation of his whole Churche and therefore as the principall Gouuerner,Fol. 62.63. et seq. and Vniuersall Vicair the
                  •
               eof. The next Vntruthe forced me to discouer a great number of textes of holy Scripture racked, wrested, and corrupted, partly in generall by all protestants, partly by the Replyer him selfe in this Fourthe Article. VVherein many other pointes touching the Popes primacy (the matter of this Article) by the waie are opened. The .106. and 107. Vntruthes occasioned me to enter to the Replyers text touching Appeales to Rome.Fol. 71. & seq. to the leafe. 111.
                There it is proued against all the Argumentes and Obiectiōs of the Replyer, that Appeales to Rome were decreed by the holy Councels, practised by the holy and lerned Fathers, namely of Athanasius and S. Chrysostom two of the greatest patriarches after the B. of Rome, and two of the most lerned Fathers of the greke Churche. Last of all that such Appeales doe necessarely importe a Soueraine Authorite of the Pope ouer the whole Churche. Item that no Appeales can be remoued from the Pope or made to the Emperour in causes ecclesiasticall, as the Replyer laboureth in vaine to proue. It is proued also at large in this Article, by occasion of Vntruthes noted to the Contrary, that the Pope erreth not in faithe: that he hathe allwaies

bene ouer the bishops of the East, that the Pope Cō
               firmeth bishops,Fol. 111 117.127.135.158.167.107.
                that he Cōfirmeth and Approueth al General Councelles and without him none can be confirmed: that he Restoreth bishops and Patriarches vniustly depriued, to their Churches againe: that he Recōcileth them vpō penaunce after Excōmunication: last of al that all doubtes and questions of greater Importance haue bene Remoued to him. Al this by the Practise of the first .600. yeres. And in eche of all these Matters the whole text of the Replyer is answered lyne by lyne and stiche by stiche. In fine it is proued against the Replyers Vntruthes,Fol. 175. e
                     •
                   seq. and against his whole text thereupō, bothe that the Bishop of Rome was Called, Saluted and Intitled Vniuersal bishop in the Chalcedō Coūcel: yea and that of the Bishops and Councell it selfe: and also that many waies and oftē he hath bene called Head of all Churches,Fol. 193.194.
                and bishop of the Vniuersall Church. By the meanes whereof the Replyer is forced by good and expresse euidence, either to reuoke his ouerbolde Challenge, or els to come to the Booke and Subscribe. And thus much of the principall matters especially treated and debated in the processe of these foure Articles.
            VVhat profit of all these Matters thus debated, maye of thee be looked for (gentle Reader) thou mayest soone concieue considering only this one Case. D. Harding in his Answer, treating first most of these Matters, bothe hath vttered such good lerning as he founde in other Catholike writers, treating before of the same in latin: and also by his lerned and priuat study beside hath added much thereunto, M.

Iewell hath in his Replie partly vttered such escapes to auoide the Authorites alleaged, as commonly of the Latin writers of his secte are vsed, partly and that most commonly hath aleaged beside against the Truthe all tha
                  •
                he coulde finde in other, or hath read him selfe. He hath, I saie, saied for him selfe, as much and more then coulde honestly be saied. He hath opposed, Argument
                  •
               , Allegations, reasons and Authorytes for the Contrary parte: As if he did not Replie against an other, but treate him selfe freely and freshly of the matter. By this meanes in these two bookes (the Answer of D. Harding, and the Replie of M. Iewell) bothe partes haue saied their minde, the one for the Catholike faithe: the other not only against the Catholike faythe, but also for his owne secte and opinion. I haue bene therefore driuen in persecuting the text of the Replies, not only to defende the Catholike, but also to answer the heretike: not only to vpholde our owne groūdes and to repayre them with newe defences, against the Replyers newe assaultes, but much more to ouerthrowe the Aduersaryes groundes and foundations which he opposeth and setteth vp afresh against the Truthe. I haue done therefore herein a thirde and newe labour in most pointes not before done of any. By perusing whereeof, thou shalt (gentle Reader) be instructed, not only howe to maintaine the Catholike doctrine, but also howe to ouerthrowe the heresy: not only to see the groundes of the Catholike faithe established, fortified and confirmed, but also to beholde the fickle foundations of the

Lutheran and Caluinian Religion (touching the pointes here treated) battered, shaken, and ouerthrowen. Brefely thou shalt see in the person of M. Iewell and of his maner of reasoning, that the foundation of his and his felowes Religiō, especially against their dewe Obedience to the See Apostolike, standeth vpon Ignorance of the stories, falsifying of the doctours, of councelles, of the lawes,
                  His Vntruthes in this Returne Arise to .562. and of other good Authors bothe olde and newe. For hereof loe, Arise the hundreds of Vntruthes committed by this Replyer in the treating only of these principall matters aboue specified and in fighting only against the weakest and vntruest partes of his aduersaryes Answer. If our purpose had bene, to haue gone alonge his whole Replie and to haue persecuted his text vpon other partes of the Answer, not so noted with Vntruthes, and therefore of all lykelyhood the more True partes, the Stronger, and the lesse able truly to be reproued, this Replyer then should tel by the Thousandes, and might go for a Pinner for his Numbers of Vntruthes. But of his Dealing in the Epistle prefixed to him, it hath bene saied sufficiently. To returne to our matter I saie.
            If the Argument of these other three first Articles do lesse delight, as being in dede of lesse importaunce, yet Consider I beseche thee (gentle Reader, if thou shortly desire to be informed which waye to take) and diligently peruse the Fourthe Article of this booke. Namely in such places where M. Iewelles Replie against Appeales made to the Pope, against the Confirmation of Generall Councelles, and of

Bishops that were doubtefully Ordred, against the Restoring of bishops depriued, the Reconciliation of bishops excommunicated, and against the Authorite of the Pope ouer the East Churche is examined, answered, and confuted. For in those places it shall appeare, bothe with what shiftes, absurdities, Inconueniences, and open Vntruthes the allegatyōs of D. Harding are impugned, and much more with what extreme lying, lewde and Vntrue dealing, the contrary parte is by M. Iewell vpholded and defended. Being in this Article persuaded, euery wise and discrete Reader, shall incontinently in al other matters nowe denied by heretikes, retire to the vnite and belefe of the Catholike Church. For the bisshop of that Apostolike See being by such Clere and so manifolde Practise, by so many Graue and Irrefragable Authorities beside, both of holy Scripture and of the lerned Fathers, Cōfessed and proued to be the Head, Chiefe Ouerseer, and Guide of Gods house (the vniuersall Churche) being also euident that his Faith (as it is also in this Article proued) in any matter to be decreed and deliuered to the Churche,Fol. 111. & seq. neither hath at any time nor can possibly erre: what doubte remaineth, but in all pointes we must beleue as that holy See beleueth, and behaue our selues in the house of God, in all thinges touching the Seruice of God, after no other waie or facyon, then the order taken by that Souerain See hath of longe appointed, vsed and accustomed, This Article therefore, as I haue especially laboured therein, and spent more then halfe this booke thereupon: so euery Reader that

seketh by this my small labour to be aedified or instructed, I desire most earnestly, diligently to peruse.
            If any one of my dere Countremen may hereby, or by any part of this rude labour (rudely in dede, and hastely compyled) be instructed, or any waie edified to a better consideration of his duty to God (as that many maie I most hartely wishe, and verely hope) him or them for all reward I beseche to helpe me and them selues with their good praiers: to helpe I saie the Catholike Churche (whereof both we and they are children and membres) to call earnestly and often vpon the Mercy of God, that he staie this raging storme off schisme and heresie, neither suffer it to ouergrowe this part of the worlde (as the Arrian heresy ouergrewe the Easte Church) and to crepe on like a Cancre, as we see it daily dothe (only for the multitude of our iniquities prouoking allwaie his iust indignation) but that he looke mercifully vpon his spouse, and confounde al her enemies,Psal. 128. 
               vt cōfundantur & auertantur retrorsum omnes qui oderunt Syon. that they be confoū
               ded and recoyled backe all that hate Sion, the holy Catholike Church. Farewel.
            
               
                  In Antvverpe 
                  
                      the 24. of Iuly. 1566.
                  
               
               Thomas Stapleton.
            
         
         
            
            FAVLTES ESCAPED IN printing of this booke.
            
               
                  
                     Leafe.
                     Syde.
                     Line.
                     Fault.
                     Correction.
                  
                  
                     In The Epistle.
                  
                  
                     10.
                     a.
                     20.
                     Choynecyngh
                     Choyneco
                           •
                        gh
                  
                  
                     In The .3. Article.
                  
                  
                     113.
                     b.
                     3.
                     fore
                     fere
                  
                  
                     114.
                     a.
                     10.
                     fiet
                     fit
                  
                  
                     116.
                     a.
                     20.
                     as
                     is
                  
                  
                     121.
                     
                        In the margin Saint Paule to the Corin. &c. put it out.
                     
                  
                  
                     122.
                  
                  
                     123.
                  
                  
                     125.
                     b.
                     15.
                     put in the margyn
                     Pantaleon in Chronographia
                  
                  
                     129.
                     a
                     12.
                     nation
                     Incarnation.
                  
                  
                     134.
                     b.
                     21.
                     ten
                     nyne
                  
                  
                     In The .4. Article.
                  
                  
                     104
                     b.
                     15.
                     three but
                     three assaultes made, but
                  
                  
                     107
                     b.
                     11.
                     extrema
                     externa
                  
                  
                      
                      
                     27
                     comentum
                     conuentum
                  
                  
                     115.
                     b.
                     1.
                     decree
                     drawe
                  
                  
                      
                      
                     13.
                     3000
                     300
                  
                  
                     133.
                     a.
                     
                        
                           •
                        .
                     pointed
                     painted
                  
                  
                     13
                           •
                        .
                     b.
                     6.
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     146.
                     a.
                     16.
                     were summoned
                     were not summoned
                  
                  
                     147.
                     b.
                     33.
                     Constantius
                     Constantinus
                  
                  
                     165
                     a.
                     5.
                     of
                     ofte
                  
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A RETVRNE OF VNTRVTHES VPON M. IEVVEL. &c.
            The first Article.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               
                  THE communion likewise of the Sacrament,
               Diuis. 1. 
               is a publike feast by Christ through the ministerie of the priest in the same: prepared for euery faitheful person.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                The first Vntruthe:Pag. 1.
               The first Slaunderous Vntruthe of M. Iewel, for charging D. Harding vvith Vntruthe, where none is. Harding. For there is no such preparation.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                There is preparation made by the Priest, for all such as wil receiue. When none will receiue, no such preparation is made. Yet bicause euery faithefull person duly prepared thereunto may receiue, if he will, and for all such the feast is prepared of Christ by the ministerie of the priest, it is prepared for euery faithfull person.
            
               And so being common by order of the firste institution, and by will of the ministres, it ought to be reputed for common not priuate.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                The second Vntruthe. There appeareth no suche will in the Ministre.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                Though there appeare no such will in the Minister to you M. Iewell, and others, The secō
                  de Vntruthe of M. Iewel, and that a Slaunderous. which will deme the worste of the Priest, yet to all well meaning folcke, such will doth appeare, who knowe the duty of the priest to be, to distribute vnto all which duly prepared come to receiue. The priestes will is not to be iudged of any externall vsage or practise, such as you gather, but of this only, if any coming to the communion, duly and semely prepared be repelled of the priest. Which thinge bicause

in no priest appeareth, or if euer it appered, by the Churche it was neuer allowed, therefore it is true, that by the will of the minister admitting gladly al faithful folcke prepared thereunto, the feast is commō for all, not priuat for the priest alone. These two Vntruthes are gathered only of the externall behauiour of the priest: whereas the truth thereof dependeth of the preparation and deuotion of the people ioyntly concurring with the ministerie of the priest, by the meanes whereof the feast is commō. It appeareth also by Reseruation, that the Catholike Churche prepareth more for the people, then the protestants which abhorre from all Reseruation.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               Diuis. 2.
               Therefore in this respect, we do not acknowleadg any priuat Masse, but leaue that terme to Luthers schoole, where it was first diuised.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               Pag. 2.
               The third Slaunderous Vntruthe.The 3. Vntruthe.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                Here is an Vntruthe noted, but no cause or reason brought to proue it so. Therefore vntell M. Iewell bringe some elder thē Luther, which termed priuat Masse of the Sole Receiuing of the priest, it is truly saied, that, that terme in that sence was in Luthers schole first diuised.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               Diuis. 5.
               The vnblouddy and daily sacrifice of the church, commonly called the Masse.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
                Pag. 4.The 4. Vntruthe. The olde Fathers neuer commonly called it so.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                Yet the younge Fathers in kinge Edwardes dayes called it the Masse. For in the first communion booke, it is saied. The Cōmunion,The 4. slaunderous Vntruthe, 
                     •
                  oyned vvith an other Capitain Vntruthe touching the olde Fathers, vvhich maketh the fifte. Ambros. 33. epist. Leo ep. 81. Greg. li. 4. epist. 32. 
               otherwise called the Masse. Howbeit all were it true, that the olde Fathers neuer commonly called it so, yet were it no Vntruthe, to saye it is commonly called so: For if these ix. C. yeares onely the daily sacrifice had ben commōly called the Masse, were it an Vntruthe, trowe ye, to write, cōmonly called the masse? The ile of Brytanny is now commonly called England

and, and Scotland. Yet the olde writers aboue litle more then a thousand yeares, neuer called it so. Shal it be now an Vntruth if a writer saie, The ile of Britanny commonly called England and Scotland? But the olde fathers euen within the compasse of six hundred yeares, did commonly call it so. S. Ambrose, Leo the first, and S. Gregory. The olde fathers in the councells off 
                  Can. 12.Milleuet, of whom S. Augustine was one, and in the 
                  Can. 3. second at Carthage in Afrike,
                  Can. 2. the olde fathers of the councells of Arelat, off 
                  Can. 22. Orleans, and 
                  Can. 21. & 47. Agatha in Fraunce, the olde Fathers of the councels of 
                  Can. 4. Ilerd and 
                  Ca
                        •
                     . 3. Gerund in Spayne, all within the compasse of 500. yeares speaking of that dayly sacrifice do call it by the name of Masse. Iudge now gentle reader, whether it be an Vntruthe, to saye, Commonly called the Masse.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               VVe Haue for proofe of the sacrifice beside other places &c, the Institutyon of Christ in the new Testament.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                The 5. Vntruthe. Christ speaketh not one worde of any Sacrifice.The 6. Slaunderous Vntruthe.
            
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                Christ speaketh not one worde of any Sacrament in the last Supper, and yet it is no Vntruthe to say, For proofe of the Sacrament we haue the institution of Christ in the new Testament. But a
                  •
                Christ instituted a Sacrament by doing, not by  speaking, so Christ instituted a Sacrifice by doing and sacrificing in dede, not by speaking or reporting a Sacrifice. Againe  that Christ instituted a Sacrament in the last Supper, we lerne it not by any expresse naming of a Sacrament in the Scripture. But by the authorite of the Church expounding so the Siripture. Right so that Christ sacrificed in dede vnto God the Father, his precious body and bloud in the last supper, we lerne by the Fathers of the Chrurch, expounding vnto vs the Institution of Christ, not by the expresse termes of Sacrifice in the Scripture. The consent of the Fathers so teaching vs is other where at large expressed. In the 34. Vntruthe. Last 
               
of all, the sacrifice of Christ on the crosse is not of any Euangelist named, and yet off the Euangelistes we lerne, that Christ was sacrificed on the Crosse.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               That S. Andrew the apostle, touching the substaunce of the masse, worshipped God euery day with the same seruice as priestes now doe in celebrating the externall sacrifice of the Church.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                The .6. Vntruthe. S. Andrew saide the Communion and not the Masse.Pag. 5.
            
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                First the Masse and the Communion Dewly ministred is all one.The 7. vntruthe Slaunderous, and the 8. touching. S. Andrevve. Therefore you doe but fondly to make as though it were a Contradiction bewene the Communion and the Masse. Againe S. Andrew offred vnto God the sacrifice of his dere Son, the body and bloud of our Sauiour. This is the substaūce of the Masse of which only D. Harding here speaketh. This was no such Communion as ye do practise, where no externall sacrifice of Christ his body is. This was masse where such externall sacrifice is made.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               Abdias who saw Christ our Sauiour in the flesh.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                The 7. Vntruthe. This Abdias neuer saw Christ in the flesh. It is a very legende of lyes.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                If Abdias neuer sawe Christ in the flesh, it is an Vntruthe of the history, which in the name of Abdias so reporteth. It is no Vntruthe on D. Hardinges part.The 9. Slaunderous Vntruthe. But how proueth M. Iewell the history of Abdias to reporte Vntruly? Marry saieth he of it. It is a very legende of lyes. This is sone saied, but nothing proued. As for that which in the text M. Iewell bringeth for proofe hereof, it is of M. D. Harding thouroughly confuted.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               They shall finde in Clement the whole order and forme of the Masse, set foorth by the Apostles them selues.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                The 8. Vntruthe. There is no maner token or shew of priuat Masse.
            
               
               
                  Stapletō. 
                Clement is brought to proue the Sacrifice of the Masse not to proue Priuat Masse, that is,The 10. Slaunderous Vntruthe. Sole Receiuing of the priest in the Masse. Therefore it is true that in Clement touching the Substaunce of the Masse, which is the daily Sacrifice of the Church, the whole order and fourme of the Masse is to be founde, though there be in him no token or shew of Priuat Masse.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               They shall finde the same most plainly treated of, and a forme of the Masse much agreable to that is vsed in these daies, set foorth by S. Dionyse.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                The 9. Vntruthe. It is the very fourme of the Communion, and no thinge like the priuat Masse.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                It hath external Oblation, Consecration of the Mysteries, Prayer for the dead, Aultar, Censing, Memory of the saintes,The 11. Vntruthe Slaund. Eccles. Hier. ca. 3. al which thinges M. Iewelles Communion lacketh and the Masse hath. And to proue the Masse it was brought, not to proue Priuat Masse.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               I do farder referre thee to Iustinus the martyr, and philoso
                     •
                  her, To Irenaeus the martyr and bishop of Lyons etc. To the olde Bishop and Martyr Hippolytus.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                10. A Burthen of Vntruthes.
            
               
                  Stapletō 
                Not one Vntruthe. For all these Fathers do clerely testifie the Sacrifice of the masse, for the which they are brought. Reade the 2. Apologie of Iustinus martyr,
               The 12. Vntruthe Slaund. 
               Ireneus lib. 4. cap. 32. and Hippolitus, as it is in M. D. Harding alleaged. Iustinus saieth Panis, vinum, & aqua offeruntur. The bread, wine and water are offred. Ireneus saith of Christ in his last Supper, Noui testamenti nouam docuit Oblationem, quam ecclesia ab Apostolis accipiens in vniuerso mundo offert deo. He taught a new sacrifice of the new Testament, which the Church receiuing of the Apostles doth offer vnto God through out all the worlde. Hippolytus

saieth Pontifices immolare preciosum Corpus & Sanguinem Christi quotidie. That bishops do offer the precyous Body and Bloud of Christ daily. These considered, I trust the burthen will sone be dis
                  •
               urdened
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               Finally I referre them in stede of many to the two worthy fathers, Basill and Chrysostom, whose Masses be lefte to the posterite at this time extant.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 13. Vntruthe Slaund. and the 14. belying S. Bas
                     •
                  l and Chrysostom.The 11. Vntruthe. They conteine the very order of the Cōmunion.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                Basil and Chrysostom are brought to witnesse the Sacrifice of the Masse, as the other fathers aboue are. That to be true let their wordes testifie. In the Masse of S. Basil after the Consecration of the mysteries the priest offreth them vnto God, saying. Tua ex tuis tibi offerimus per omnia & in omnibus. We offer vnto thee thy owne of thy owne thourough all thinges and in all thinges. The very same wordes are in the Masse off Chrysostom.1. Ob
                     •
                  ation of the my
                     ••
                  eries. After which (as well in the Masse off S, Basyll, as of Chrisostom) a commemoration of the blessed Saints in heauen, namely of our Lady, of Saint Iohn Baptist, and of the Saint of the day,2. Memory of Saints. is made, and praier for the dead in the faith of Christ, is had. Is this the very order of the Communion M. Iewell? Doe you offer the mysteries in your communion? Make you any Cōmemoration of the Saints?3. Praier for the dead. Pray you for the dead? Is it now an Vntruthe that S. Basill and Chrysostom in their Masses, do witnesse the daily sacrifice of the Church? Or is it true that the Masses of S. Basill and Chrysostom do conteine the very order of the Communion? For though a number of communicants be mentioned in bothe those masses, yet doth al the rest conteine the very order of the Communion, as you now vse it M. Iewell?
                  In sua Translat.
                Againe your frende Erasmus M. Iewell, calleth the lyturgie of S. Chrysostom, Masse. I trust it shall be no Vntruthe with you M. Iewell to call thinges as Erasmus

calleth them.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               Amongest all Cyrillus Hierosoly mitanus is not to be passed ouer lightly, who at large expoundeth the whole Masse vsed in Hierusalem in his time, the same which now we finde in Clement.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                The 12. Vntruthe. It is the very expresse order of the Communion: It is no priuat Masse.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                This is not alleaged for Priuat Masse,The 15. Vntruthe Slaunderous and the 16. in belying S. Cyrillus. In catechesi Mystagogica. 5 but to proue a Sacrifice the substaunce of the Masse, and the order of the whole Masse in his time concurring with the Masse that nowe is. This his owne wordes shall trie which are these. Cum hoc sacrificium offerimus, postea facimus mentionē etiam eorum qui ante nos obdormierūt. Primum patriarcharum, Prophetarum, Apostolorum, Martyrum, vt deus orationibus illorum & deprecationibus suscipiat preces nostras. Deinde pro defunctis sanctis patribus & episcopis, d
                     •
                  nique pro omnibus oramus, qui inter nos vita functi sunt maximum esse credentes animarum iuuamen pro quibus offertur obsecratio sancti illius & tremendi quod in altari positum est, sacrificij. When we offer this Sacrifice, afterward we make mētion of them which haue dep
                  •
               rted this life before vs. First of the patriarches, of the Prophets, of the Apostles, of the Martyrs, that God by their praiers and intercessions may receiue our petitions. Then for the holy fathers and bishops departed, last of all, for all men we pray, which amonge vs haue deceased, beleuing it to be a great relief of soules, for whō the intercessiō of that holy and dreadful sacrifice, which is layed vpon the aultar, is offred. Thus farre Cyrillus.  Here is a Sacrifice offred, and that vpon an Aultar.  Here is a memory and intercession of Saints:  Here is prayer for the dead. Is this the very expresse order of the Communion M. Iewell? Or bicause it maketh nothing for priuat Masse (for the which it was not brought in of M.D. harding) is it therefore

Vntruly brought in for the Masse and Sacrifice therof? These V. last Vntruthes were gathered to make a number,The lewde dealing of M. Iewel. vpon this false grounde, as though they were all brought to proue Priuat Masse. Now M. Iewell knewe well enough that from the first part of this 5. Diuision, hetherto, profes are brought onely for the Sacrifice and substaunce of the Masse. And againe he knew that in the very next Diuis
                  •
               on only he beginneth to speake of Priuat Masse, where the wordes of M. D. Harding are these. Now this presupposed,
               D. Hard. in the 6. diuision pag. 13. 
               that the Masse standeth vpon good and sufficient groundes, for the stay of all true Christen mens b
                     •
                  lefe, let vs come to our special purpose, and say somewhat of Priuat Masse. These words of M. D. Harding, do immediatly folow the former allegatyons of Dyonise, Basill, Chrisostom, Clemēt, and Cyrillus. Now what Vntrue dealing is this, to heape so many Vntruthes, vpon one false grounde to euidently appearing? God amende you M. Iewell, and sende you some shame or honesty, that you dissemble no more so impudently.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               The feast is common. All be inuited.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                The 13. Vntruthe. They inuite no man.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
               
               The 17. Vntruthe Slaunderous. For by order of the churche all be inuited.Though the priest expressely inuiteth no man by worde or by gesture, yet the order of the Church, the sermons of the Priest, the counsel in Confessions do inuite al men to frequēt the holy Sacrament. In this sence it is true that all be inuited. In this sence wrote D. Harding. Of any wordes off the Priest or gesture of the Deacon in the seruice of the Masse he meant not, nor spake not. Now M. Iewell, bicause he will imagine no other inuiting but this, he calleth it a manifest Vntruthe, that all be inuited. But to proue an Vntruthe in the Author, yow must take the meaning of the Author, and not appoint him what meaning yow list. So euery foole may comptroll the wise.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               They hauing quite abrogated the other two (Consecration

and Oblation) and not so much as once naming them in their bookes of seruice.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                The .14. Vntruthe. The Sacrifice is specially named in the Communion booke: And in the masse it selfe consecration is not named.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                The Sacrifice of Christes body and bloud,The 18. Vntruthe Slaunderous. as in the last Supper our Sauiour first offred it, the Oblatiō of the holy Mysteries, in the Cōmunion booke, is neither named, nor practised. The sacrifice of Christ on the crosse is mentioned. The sacrifice of prayse and thankes geuing on Our parte, the offring vp of our selues, our soules and bodies to be a reasonable, holy, and liuely sacrifice to God, is in the Communion booke wel mētioned, if the Daily Sacrifice of the Church, the precious body and bloud of Christ, vnder the forme of bread and wine, were offred there also. By the which we offer in dede a Sacrifice of prayse and thākes geuing vnto God, by the which we offer vnto God a reasonable holy and liuely Sacrifice, not our selues onely, but much more the most precious Body and Bloud of our Sauiour, and by that and with that our selues also. Without this Sacrifice to saye in your Communion booke, that ye offer a Sacrifice of thankes geuing, to saie that ye offer your selues a liuely Sacrifice vnto God, it is but mockery with God and the Church: you doe damnably abuse your selues and the people. For M. Iewell, you omitt the Institution of Christ, and make one of your owne. Harken to the holy Fathers, to whome you offer to yelde, and lerne that you do so.
                  Lib. 2. Epist. 3. S. Ciprian sayeth. If Iesus Christ our Lorde and God he himselfe be the highe priest of God the Father, and he him selfe first offred a Sacrifice to God the Father and Cōmaunded the same to be done in the remēbraunce of him, surely that Priest doth truly perfourme the office of Christ who foloweth that, that Christ dyd, and thē doth offer a full Sacrifice in the Church to God the Father, if he so beginne to offer according as he

seeth Christ to haue offred. What Sacrifice is that M. Iewel which Christ offred to God the Father and commaunded the same to be done in the remembraunce of him? Was it the Sacrifice vpon the Crosse? Did Christ commaunde the Church to Sacrifice him on the Crosse in the remembraunce of him againe? Was it not in his last Supper, that he commaunded vs to do in his remembraunce? Doth not S. Ciprian dispute there expressely Cōtra Aquarios against such as would Cōsecrat the Sacramēt with only Water, prouing vnto them that they must vse bothe Wine and Water, where you vse Wine only and no Water in your detestable Communion? Dothe he not expressely speake of the Sacrifice in the last Supper? Can you denie al this M. Iewell? Or will you yelde to this one Clere Sentence of so Auncient a Father so longe aboue the compasse of your 600. yeares?
            Againe S. Ciprian saieth, That Priest doth truly perfourme the office of Christ,
               
                  Lib. 2. Epist. 3. 
               who foloweth that that Christ did, and then doth offer a full Sacrifice in the Church to God the Father, if he so beginne to offer, according as he seeth Christ to haue offred. But what did Christ offer in the last supper? Let S. Cyprian instruct vs. In the same place and epistle he saieth. Quis magis sacerdos dei summi quàm dominus noster Iesus Christus qui sacrificium deo patri obtulit? & obtulit hoc idem quod Melchisedech ob
                     •
                  ulerat, id est, panem & vinum, suam scilicet corpus & sanguinem. Who is more the priest of God most highe, then our Lorde Iesus Christ, which offred a sacrifice to God the Father? And offred the same which Melchisedech offred that is, bread and wine, that is to saie his body and bloud.VVhat Sacrifice the Communion Booke lacketh. This is the Sacrifice which Christ offred in the last Supper. This Sacrifice the true Priestes of Christe doe offer in the church, and so as Christ himselfe offred. This sacrifice the Cōmuniō booke hath not, nameth not, vseth not. This sacrifice, this Oblation of the holy mysteries,

of Christes body and bloud S. Ciprian speaketh of. This Sacrifice M.D. Harding most truly saied that you haue abrogated. This Sacrifice most truly he saied that not ones you haue named it in your bookes of seruice. Goe now M. Iewell, and if ye wil note an Vntruth in M.D. Har. note not, as here you note, The Sacrifice is expressely named in the Communion booke. but note, This sacrifice is expressely named in the Communion booke. And so shall yow in dede make a great manifest Lie on your owne part, and finde no Vntruthe at al in M.D. Harding. For alas it is to true, that you haue not the Sacrifice of the church in your Communiō booke. Alas it is to true that damnably yow haue omitted Christes Institution. Cursedly you deceaue the people, and most miserably 
                  •
               yow condemne your owne selues. Other Fathers that doe witnesse an externall Sacrifice which in the Communion booke is vtterly lefte out and omitted, when I come to the 34. Vntruthe, I shall haue more occasion to recite. As touching Consecration, S. Augustin saieth, speaking of the blessed Sacrament, Certa Consecratione fit nobis Mysticus panis.
               
                  Contra Faustum Manichae. Lib. 20. cap. 13. The Mysticall Breade is made vnto vs by a certaine and knowen Consecration. Such Consecration the Cōmunion bokes haue not. And though in the Masse booke no mention thereof be made, yet the order thereof being so many hundred yeres before taken, such speciall mention is not nowe nedefull or required. But the Communion bookes containing a new order of the Ministration,In the communion of England there is no consecration of the Mysteries. if therin they had vsed any Cōsecration at al, that being one principal parte of Christes Institution, they ought to haue expressed the same. Howbeit certaine it is not only by that they make no mention thereof, but also by that they geue the remnant of their bread to the dogges, that they vse no Consecration at all, but accompte it as very cōmon bread. Likewise the wine that is left, either the Minister drinketh it

with his common meate, or if very litle remaineth, it is cast in the flowre, as Poynet a late pretēded bishop of Winchester did in an open Communion ministred in the Cathedrall Church of Winchester. By these their doinges, saie and pretende what they lift in wordes, all the worlde seeth and knoweth, they vse no Consecratiō at al. For good and euident proof thereof I 
                  •
               eferre the studious Reader to the treatise of our lordes Supper lately sette forthe by D. Sanders: In the seconde booke the xiiij. Chapter it is proued that the figuratiue doctrine of M. Iewell and his felowes, can not stande with a Sacrament, which hath Consecration.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               The number of communicants together in one place is no parte of Christes institution.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                The 15. Vntruthe. For S. Basill thinketh the number is parte of Christes institution. Exercitationis ad p
                     •
                  etatem Sermone 4.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                Would God M. Iewell, as to proue the Institution of Christ you alleage onely the iudgement of S. Basill,The 19. Vntruthe Slaunderous. and the 20. For S. Basill by the place alleged, is not proued to thinke any such matter. so you would stande to his onely iudgement, or to the iudgement of the lerned Fathers in other matters. But S. Basill saieth no such thinge. This he saieth in the place by you alleaged. Spiritualis lex non pauciores quam duodecim esse vult, mysticum pastha comedentes. The spirituall lawe admitteth no lesse then twelue to eate the mysticall passeouer. Now M. Iewell is this the Institution of Christ, or is it not? If it be, why then do you in your Communion bookes take an expresse order that three may make a sufficient Communion? Why breake you the Institution of Christ, in the very springe of your ghospel? If it be not the Institution of Christ, nor S. Basill meant no such thinge, why speake you so Vntruly, why saie you S. Basill thinketh the number is parte of Christes Institution? For other wordes tending to any such purpose, in al that Sermon he hath none.

But S. Basill his meaning is this.The true meaning of. S. Pasils place alleaged by M. Iewell. He willeth that such as take vpon them the contemplatiue life, should liue in some number together and not vnder ten or twelue in a company, that their life and behauiour might be voide of all sinister suspicion. For that purpose he bringeth the exāple of the twelue at Christes maunde where that most holy mysteries were wrought. But as touching the matter it selfe, whether a number of communicants be parte of Christes Institution, Brefely thus I saie. Christ gaue it to a number, Christ gaue it after meate, Christ gaue it at night time.
                  That the nu
                        •
                     ber of Communicāts is no parte of christ
                        •
                     s Institution.
                  
                     August. ad Ianuarium.
                  
                  
                     Epist. 118.
                You with vs do confesse the two later pointes to be no Partes of Christes Institution. You geue it neither after meate, neither at night time, but in the fore noone, and before all other meates. Why so? Forsothe bicause bothe you and we beleue as S. Augustin did, quòd si hoc monuisset Christus, eum morem nemo variasset: that if Christ had commaunded that, no man would haue chaunged that maner. Wherein S. Augustin and we bothe haue left the fact of Christ, and folowed the tradition of the Church beleuing vpon the custome of the Church, that the same fact of Christ was no Cōmaūdment. Right so M. Iewel bicause the Church of Christ so many hundred yeares hath celebrated this holy Sacrament without a number of communicāts, we beleue verely that Christ neuer commaunded a number in this celebration, and we beleue that if he had so commaunded, eum morem nemo variasset, no man would haue chaunged that maner or order. This is our belefe M. Iewell grounded vpon the Doctrine of the Church: which we are assured by holy Scriptures (as I haue otherwheres at large proued) can not erre in the faith,
                  In the Fortresse par. 1.
                  Cap. 3.4. & seq.
                but must for euer (not only v. or vj. C. yeares as it shal please you to appoint) continew in sounde and vpright doctrine. Your opinion to the cōtrary procedeth by schismaticall departing from the Church.
            
               
               
                  Harding. 
               
               Diuis. 8.
               The maner, number, and other rites of receiuing, is not fixed nor determined by the Institutiō of Christ, but ordred by the Churches disposition.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                The 16. Vntruthe. Christ appointed a number, although no certain fixed numbre.Pag. 18.
            
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
               
               The 21. Vntruthe Slaund. and the 22. For the number is no part of Christes Institution, as it shall yet farder appeare.If it be truly saied, Christ appointed no certain fixed numbre, why note you it for an Vntruthe, The number is not fixed by the Institution of Christ? What difference is there in those two sayinges? Or is the one true bicause M. Iewell saieth it, and the other Vntrue bicause D. Harding saieth it?
            But how proue you M. Iewel that Christ appointed a number, and yet no certain number, Bicause Christ saied Take ye, eate ye, drinke ye all, diuide ye amonge your selues, doe ye this in my remembraunce? All this was saied to a certain numbre, as to twelue. By these textes therefore, if these textes be a Commaundement, you must haue no lesse then twelue at a Communion. Now three by the Communion booke are sufficient. But as ye vrge al these textes, so we may vrge you, with vespere facto,
               
                  Matt. 26. 
               Caenantibus eis, discumbebat cum duodecim At euening time, as they supped, he sate downe with the twelue, and so forth, we may vrge you I saye, with these, and saye, You breake Christes institution, You do it not at euening time, You do it not after supper,
               
                  Luc. 22. Mar. 14. Mat. 26. 
               You sitt not but knele at it, You haue sometime lesse, sometime more then twelue to communicat, and those not all waies priests as the Apostles were. What answer you to this? Is not all this the Scripture? Is not all this writen of the Euangelistes? Is not all this reported in the ghospell euen in the very same place, where the rest of Christes Institutiō touching this blessed Sacrament is writen? Why then are not these partes also of Christes Institutiō, or why omitt you them as no partes thereof? Why is not the fact of Christ as well a Commaundement,

as his wordes, Diuide ye, &c? What can you saye here,The Practise of the C
                     •
                  urche. but that the Practise of Christes Church hath declared that al these of time, and place be no substantiall Partes of Christes Institution, but Circumstances accidentall, and casull Cerimonies? Euen so we answer you that the Church also hath declared vs by the Practise of many hundred yeares, the number to be no part of Christes Institution. We answer I saie, that as no certain numbre (as you confesse) is appointed by Christ, so no number at all is by him necessarely prescribed. Bothe these pointes we lerne of the Church, expounding to vs the Scripture when it is a Commaundement and when it is not. The one of these you haue also lerned of the Church, the other you lerne of your selues, and of your late vpstert masters of Germany and Geneua against the church. I saie the church of these last ix. C. yeres by your owne confession,In the fortresse par. 1. per totum. which is the true Church of Christ no lesse then the first vj.C. yeares, as I haue proued vnto you out of holy Scripture otherwere.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               Christes example importeth necessite off receiuing onely, the other rites, as number, place,
               Diuisi. 9. 
               time &c. be of congruence and order.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                The 17. Vntruthe. For number is not only of Congruence but also of Institution.
                  pag. 22.
               
            
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
               
               The 23. Vntruthe Slaunderous. That the number of Communicāts is no parte of Christes Institution. Iewell. Pag. 202. Though this Vntruthe serueth but to make vp the score, as being the same with the last Vntruthe noted before, yet bicause M. Iewell standeth so gladly on this grounde, we will trie farder what sure holdefast he hath to staie him self thereon. I aske of M. Iewell, why is the number more a parte of Christes Institution, then a certain number, then time, and place? He saieth Christ hath by speciall wordes appoynted a number to receiue, when he saied, diuide ye amonge your selues, take ye, eate ye, breake ye, do ye this &c, All this sayeth he, importeth a nūber of necessite. I answer. First all this was saied to the Apostles as to priestes.

For none but Priestes can do that which Christ did, none  but Priestes can minister the holy Sacrament as Christ then  did. Againe a number receiueth daily thourough out the whole Church of Christ, a number eateth, breaketh, and dothe that which Christ did. And so the commaundement of a number  is fulfilled. Last of al this is in dede the example of Christ, that in his blessed Supper, a number did communicat. But this is no commaundement of Christ that for euer a number should in like maner cōmunicat together. He saied: Hoc facite, doe ye this, bicause they were then made priestes that should so do, he saied not Sic facite, do ye after this sorte as ye see I haue done. For thē not only the number, but also the time, and the maner in all pointes ought precisely and inuiolably to haue ben obserued.
            
               Ievvell. Pag. 22. The obiection. The Answer.Well, saieth M. Iewell, it was a commaundement, and that appeareth well for that the Apostles and holy Fathers of the primitiue Church practised it so. Well saie we, it was no commaundement, and that appeareth well for that the Apostles successours and holy Fathers of many a more hundred yeares did practise it otherwise. I meane the bishops and priestes of the church of Christ these ix.C. yeares. What ende now shall there be of this controuersie? You appeale to the first 600. yeares for example of a number. I appeale to the later ix.C. yeares for the contrary. You saie the first 600. yeares kept the true Institution of Christ. And I saye the later ix. C. yeares kept the same also. No saie you, these later times haue broken the Institution off Christ. For thus you saye in the text.pagina 22. & 23.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Christ sayed not do this in Hierusalem, or in this parler, or after supper, or at this table,The replie. or being so many together, or standing, or sitting. But he saied thus. Do ye this, that is, take ye bread, blesse it, breake it, geue it, in my remembrance. This is not a Ceremonial accident, but the very ende, purpose, and substance of Christes Institution.
            How thē?The Answer. Must a nūber take it, blesse it, breake it, and geue it, in one place at ones? Thē you must haue not onely a numbre to receiue at ones, but also a nūber to Minister the cōmuniō at

ones. For as to Take it, pertaineth to a number of Communicants, so to Blesse it, to Breake it, to Geue it, pertaineth to a nū
               ber of Ministers, and Priestes, not to all that communicat.
            But to the matter brefely I saie. The approuing of the breache of Christes Institution is a damnable errour. No damnable errour coulde haue ben allowed in the vniuersall churche these ix. C. yeares. Ergo the breache of Christes Institution could not possibly be approued these ix. C . yeares in the vniuersall church of Christ.In the Fortresse &c. par. 1. The minor or seconde proposition is proued abundantly out of the psalmes, the prophets, and the ghospell, otherwhere. The maior you can not denie. So the conclusion is vnuincible. What then? Forsothe then it remaineth, that neither the first 600. yeares in the communion of a nūber, neither the later ix.C. yeares, in the Sole Receiuing off the priest, which you cal Priuat Masse, did breake Christes Institution. Bicause the churche can not vniuersally erre at all, much lesse for anye continuance of time. This being so, it remaineth clere, that the number of communicants is no parte of Christes Institution, nor commaundement of Christ.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               Diuis. 8.
               In whiche thinges the Church hathe taken ordre, willing and charging that all shall communicat that be worthy and disposed.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                The 18. vntruthe. The Church of Rome hath taken no such ordre.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
               
               The 25. Vntruthe Slaunderous.The daily and continuall Practise of the church of Rome, repelling none, that are worthy and disposed, declareth suche Order to haue ben taken. Yea the churche hath taken expresse order that ones in the yere at the lest all faithefull persons shall communicat. Againe the embarring of this holy sacrament from excommunicated persons, from notorious offenders, and open penitents, declareth that to other not so excommunicated, not such notorious offenders, not yet continuing in their enioyned penaunce, this holy sacrament is not embarred, but is

free and open to be receyued of such as desire it. Touching the first, if any well disposed person were euer repelled from the blessed sacrament, let M. Iewell proue it, and then shall he proue his Vntruthe. Touching the later, al Canōs and Decrees, yea euen the Practise of the Protestants thē selues in their pretensed religiō, doth witnesse it. True it is therefore, that seing none Worthy are repelled, and only the Vnworthy by decree is repelled, that for the admitting alwaies of the worthy the Churche hath taken order.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               Diuis. 10
               It is not called communion, bicause many or as M. Iewell teacheth, the whole Congregation communicateth together in one place, but bicause of the effect of the Sacrament, &c.
            
             
               
                  Iewell. 
               
                pag. 25. The .26. Vntruthe Slaunderous.The .19. Vntrueth. For of communicating together it was called Communio.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
               
               The .27. Vntruthe in abrydging D. Hardings wordes.Yea forsothe, but not of communicating together in one place. These wordes in One place, you leaue out to make an Vntruthe where none is. For as we all confesse the worde Communion to be vsed of the Fathers, for the communicating together, either of eche of vs with and amonge our selues, or off vs all with God by the knot of this most heauenly Sacrament, So that this cōmunicating together ought of Necessite to be of the Whole Congregation in One place, that M.D. Harding denieth, that the Fathers neuer saied, that you can neuer proue M. Iewell. In that sence the worde Communion is not taken.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               diuis. 10.
               Thus we see S. Hierom and S. Augustine were of one Communion, and did communicat together, although they were farre asunder.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               pag. 26. The .28. Vntruthe Slaunderous.The .20. Vntruthe: Rising of the ambiguite or doubtfull taking off this worde Communion.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
                If this worde Communion be (as you confesse) ambiguous, if it signifie sometime A consent of religion (as after in the texte you saie pag. 28.) then yet vpon your owne confession it will

folowe, that saint Hierom and saint Augustine who consented in religion, were of one communion together, and communicated together, in that sence of the worde Communion, and so is it by your confession no Vntruthe that in a sence they were of one Communion, and Communicated together. For as you knowe, that saying is not Vntrue, which in any one sence or meaning is True. You could not therfore iustly, note this for an Vntruthe, being but of the minde that you are. But now D. Hardinges saying is so True, that he saieth no more then S. Hierom him selfe saied and professed. That is, that S. Augustin was Episcopus communionis sua,
               
                  In epist. ad Augustin.
                A bishop of his Communion. If saint Augustin were a bishop of saint Hieroms Communion, which saint Hierom him selfe saieth,M. Iewell noteth that for an vntruthe in D. Hardinge which is the very saying of S. Hierō. then were saint Austen and saint Hierom of One communion, which D. Harding saieth. If then this be an Vntruthe which D. Harding saieth, then is it also an Vntruthe that S. Hierom saied. Go nowe M. Iewel and note a number of Vntruthes vpo
                  •
                saint Hieroms workes, and let this stande for one, as truly as you haue noted D. Harding therfore. Againe as they were of One Communion, so they communicated bothe together: Wherein M, Iewell? In religion and faith only? If they did so only, yet thē were it true that they Communicated together.Howe S. Hierom and S. Augustin cō
                  municated together thoughe the one neuer sawe the other. For in this sence they Communicated. But nowe not only so. For they were saied to be of One Communion, bicause they communicated together in the blessed Sacrament. All Catholikes in that sence were saied to be of one communion. Heretikes M. Iewell, in that sence were not of one communion with the Catholike Fathers. Heretikes neuer communicated together with the Catholikes in the Churche. A clere and moste manifest example of this, is the daily Excommunicatian vsed in Christes Churche. For what is Excommunication but embarring from communicating in the Churche with other Christians? But as one excommunicated in London, if he be iustly

excommunicated, is excommunicated not only in Londō, but through all England, yea and through all Christendom beside (as longe as in Religion Englande ioyneth with the reste of Christendō) so he that cōmunicateth in London, and is of one communion with the faithfull people of London, he communicateth also with al England, and all Christendom beside, and is of one communion with them all. So were saint Hierom and saint Augustin of one communion, so they communicated together, though they neuer receiued the sacrament together, in all their life time, but liued in farre distant countries the one from the other, the one in Afrike, the other in Palestine.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               diuis. 11.
               The priest after that he hath receiued the Sacrament in the Church, taketh his naturall sustenance, and dineth, and then being called vpon, carieth the rest a mile or two to the sicke, in eche house none being disposed to receiue withe the sicke, he doth that he is required, (21) doth he not in this case communicat with them, and do not they communicat one with an other, rather hauing a will to communicat togeather in one place also, if oportunite serued?
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .29. Vntruthe Slaunderous.The .21. Vntruthe. M. Harding saieth, the priest doth communicat and not cōmunicat bothe together. Which is a cōtradiction in nature.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
                D. Harding saieth, the priest hauing saied Masse, doth Communicat with the sicke persons Receiuing their Housell after his masse, bicause they communicat the precious Body and Bloud of Christ, whereby they are made one in Christ, and betwene them selues. Againe he saieth, they do not communinicat for all that in One Place together. So in the first they haue a Communion. In the seconde they haue none. In one sence they haue, in an other they haue not. This is M. Iewell no contradiction in nature, nor yet in reason, and therfore no Vntruthe at all on D. Hardings parte. You know M. Iewell by

your logike. Omnis Contradictio est ad idem. Euery cōtradiction is about one selfe thing.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               If this might not be accompted as a laufull and good Communion, either people shoulde be denied that necessary vitaile of life at their departing hence, which were a cruel iniury and a thinge contrary to the examples and godly ordonances of the primitiue Church, or the priest &c.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
                The .30. Vntruthe Slaunderous. The 22. Vntruthe. This order was taken not for euery sicke party, but for persons excommunicat.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
               
               Con. Nice. C
                     •
                  n. 12. Con. Carth.Such order was not taken for persons excommunicat, but for such as being before excommunicated, and after reconciled receiued it, being in sickenesse and daunger of death, as al other Christen men did, as appereth by the Canons made in this behalfe. And who doubteth, but much more for sicke persons not excommunicate? Vnlesse the wisedom of M. Iewell will thinke the primitiue Church to haue graunted that benefitt to excommunicat persons, which to other not excommunicated was not graunted. Yes he saieth.
                  Iewell. 
               
               Pag. 32. The .31. Vntruthe Consisting in false Doctrine. Lib. 1. Epist. 2. Such reconciliation was thought necessary at thende for solace of the party. Yea truly M. Iewell would haue this Sacrament to be but an outward Solace and Token of his Reconciliation amonge the faithfull. But Cum ad hoc fiat Eucharistia, vt sit accipientibus tutela, seing the Eucharist is therefore made, that it might be a sauegarde and protectiō to those which receiued it, as S. Cipriā saieth, therefore not only to excommunicat persons in time of Sicknesse for their reconciliation or Solace (as M. Iewell fancyeth) it was graunted, but also for their sauegard and protection. It was called their Viaticum, their Vitail or foode of life, not only a Tokē of their reconciliation to the Church. This being the reason of the decree, it is to be thought the primitiue Church prouided not only for excommunicat persons, but also for euery sicke party which though not for the bonde of excōmunication, yet

for other considerations might stande in nede of this blessed Sacrament no lesse then the other.
            But what nede many wordes? M. Iewel him selfe confesseth, that Christen folcke in their sickenesse had the Sacrament ordinarely sent home vnto them.Pag .32. M. Iewell is contrary to him selfe For the which he alleageth Iustinus Martyr Apolog. 2. If so M. Iewell, then to denie to sicke persons their housell, is contrary to the example and godly ordonaunce of the primitiue church by your owne Cōfession, and the Authorite of Iustinus Martyr. Which is the thing that D. Harding saied, and you most vntruly and contrary to your selfe haue noted for an Vntruthe.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               Diui. 12.
               Now if we excepte those thinges which be necessarely required to this Sacrament by Christes Institution, either declared by written Scriptures, or taught by the holy ghost, as bread and wine mingled with water for the matter &c.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               pag. 32. The .32. Vntruthe Slaund. The .23. Vntruthe. The mingling of wine and water together is neither Catholike, nor necessary. Scotus.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
               
                The .33. Vntruthe auouching a clere heresy. Cipria. li. 2. epi. 3.Yes forsothe this is Catholike and therefore it is necessary. That it is Catholike I proue by the cōsent of the Catholike Fathers of all coūtres in the primitiue church. In Afrike S. Cipriā B. of Carthage affirmeth it in these words. Copulatio & coniunctio aquae & vini sic miscètur in calice domini, vt commixtio illa non possit abinuicē separari. The coupling and ioyning togeather of Wine and Water is so mingled in the Cuppe of our Lorde, that the same mingling maye not be separated the one part from the other. And againe. Sic in sanctificando calice domini offerri aqua sola non potest, quomodo nec vinum solum potest. Nam si vinum tantum quis offerat, sanguis Christi incipit esse sine nobis. Si vero aqua sola, plebs incipit esse sine Christo. Quādo autem vtrū
                  que miscetur, & adunatione confusa sibi inuicem copulatur, tunc sacramentum spirituale & caeleste perficitur. In sanctifying the cuppe of our Lorde so water alone can not be offred, as neither wine alone can be offered. For if any offer wine alone, then the

bloud of Christ beginneth to be without vs. But if Water be alone, the people beginneth to be without Christ.VVater must be mingled vvith vvine in the Sacrament. But whē bothe is mingled, and ioyned together, then the spirituall and heauenly Sacrament is perfyted. Thus much S. Cyprian and much more in that place disputing against those which vsed only water in consecrating the holy mysteries, teaching the Institutiō of Christ to be, that both Wine and Water be mingled to the perfyting of that heauenly Sacrament. S. Augustin an Africane about two hundred yeares after S. Cyprian witnesseth this practise of Christes church in his time also.
                  Li. de eccl. dogmat. Cap. 175. The seare his words. In Eucharistia nō debet pura aqua offerri, vt qui dā sobrietatis fallūtur imagine, sed vinū cum aqua mixtū. In the Euchariste Only water ought not to be offred, as some vnder the coulour of sobriete are deceiued,
                  Ad Quoduult deum haere. 64. but Wine mingled with Water. In an other place he reckoneth these in the rolle of heretikes, which offred Only water without Wine in the holy Sacrifice of Christes church. And against such heretikes the 3. Coū
               cell of Carthage vnto the which S. Augustin subscribed, made an expresse decree, not yet forbidding vtterly Water, but commāding wine and water Both to be mingled together. These are the words of the decree.
                  Con. 3. Carth. can. 
                  
                     •
                  4. 
               Vt in sacramētis Corporis & Sāguinis domini nihil amplius offeratur, quàm ipse dominus tradidit, hoc est, panis & Vinum aquae mixtū. That in the Sacraments of the Body and Bloud of our Lorde, nothing elles be offred, then oure Lorde him selfe deliuered, that is, bread and wine mingled with Water. This the Councell decreed not as then a new Institution, but as a Tradition coming from Christ him selfe. Thus we see in Afrike in S. Cyprians and S. Augustins time, the mingling of Water and Wine in the blessed Sacramēt was accompted Catholike and necessary. In Fraunce how the Sacrament was there celebrated, let Ireneus a very auncient writer and nigh vnto the Apostles wtnesse. Writing of this blessed Sacrament, and by the verite of Christes body and bloud

here in, prouing the verite of his true flesh and bloud walking here on earth, he hath these wordes. Quando & mixtus Calix, & factus panis percipit verbum dei, fit Eucharistia corporis & sanguinis Christi,
               
                  Irenaeus Lib. 5. 
               ex quibus augetur & consistit carnis nostrae substantia. that is. Whē the mingled Cuppe, and the made bread receaueth the worde of God, it is made the Euchariste of the Body and Bloud of Christ, of the which the substāce of our flesh is augmented and cōsisteth. The Mingled Cuppe that Ireneus speaketh of, cānot be meāt of any other, thē of wine mingled with water. Of such a cōmixtion in the blessed Sacrament a Councell holden in Fraunce aboue vnleuen hundred yeares past mencioneth. In Italy what the practise of the primitiue church was, by two witnesses it shall appere. Alexander the fift Pope of Rome after S. Peter, writeth thus, not as a new decree of his owne,
                  Concil. Auraicense Can. 17. but as he saieth, vt a patribus accepimus, as we haue receaued it frō the Fathers. Repulsis opinionum superstitionibus, panis tantum & vinum aqua permixtum in sacrificio offerantur. Laying aside all other superstitious opinions,
                  Epi. 1. To. 1. Conc.
                let only bread and wine Mingled with water be offred in the Sacrifice. S. Ambrose no Pope but a lerned and blessed B. of Millain, writeth thus.
                  Lib. 5. de Sacramēt. Cap. 1. 
               Diximus quòd in altari constituitur Calix, & panis. In Calicem, inquit, mittitur vinum: Et quid aliud? Aqua. Sed tu mihi dicis. Quomodo ergo Melchisedech panem & vinum obtulit? Quid sibi vult admixtio aquae? Rationem accipe. Primo omnium figura &c. that is. We saied before that vpon the aultar is put a Cuppe and bread. In to the Cuppe, saieth he, wine is putt. And what elles? Water. But thou saiest vnto me. How then did Melchisedech offer bread and wine?Two causes geuen by S. Ambrose of Mingling the VVater with VVine in the B. Sacrament. VVhat meaneth this Mingling of water? Harken to the Reason. First of all the figure, and so forthe, where S. Ambrose at large geueth ij causes of mingling VVater with wine in the blessed Sacrament: The one to answer to the figure of the Water running out of the rocke, stricken by Moyses, which was Christ, that is, betokened Christ. An

other, that as water and bloud ranne out of the side of Christ on the Crosse, bothe to redeme and to cleanse mankinde, so in this blessed Sacrifice being an expresse resemblance of Christes passion, Wine and Water be offred vp to perfit the Sacrament of Christes bloud. Thus now we haue Catholike witnesses of the primitiue Church in Italy, Fraunce, and Afrike, touching the Mingling of Water with wine in these holy mysteries. In Spaine also wi
                  •
               hin the compasse of M. Iewelles 600. yeares,
                  Conc. Braca
                        •
                     
                   
                  
                     •
                  . Can. 1. we reade the same confirmed in a Councel holden at Braccara, and the very wordes of S. Ciprian aboue alleaged, brought in. 
                  Iewell. 
                But (saieth M. Iewell) Scotus and Innocentius witnesse that the Greke Church in their time vsed it not.
            Is it come to that M. Iewell?pag. 34. Must we trie our Catholike faith, doctrine, and euen the meanest cerimonies by the consent of the first 600. yeares, and will you proue a doctrine not Catholike by the practise of certain countres litle more then 300. yeares past?M. Ievvel claimeth by heretikes. For about that time liued Innocentius and Scotus. At that time the grekes as they had many other errours, so no maruail if they had this also. And you do but your kinde to disproue the Catholike seruice by the exāple of heretikes. For the greke Church, M. Iewell, in the first 600. yeares remaining yet Catholike and vnder the obedience of the See of Rome, vsed this Mingling of Wine and Water as all the west Church did. You shall heare the lerned Fathers of the greke Church and of that time to saie so. First in the Greke Synods kept about a thousand yeares agoe, and gathered by Martinus bishop of Braccara in Spaine within the compasse of M. Iewelles 600. yeares we reade thus.
                  In capituli
                        •
                      g
                        •
                     acarum Synodorū. Cap. 55. 
               Non oportet aliquid aliud in sanctuario offerri, praeter panem & vinum & aquam, quae in typum Christi benedicuntur, quia de corpore eius dum in cruce penderet sanguis effluxit & aqua. Nothing must be offered in the holy place beside bread and Wine and Water, which are blessed for the remembraunce of Christ: bicause

while he hanged on the Crosse, bloud and Water rāne out of his Body. Iustinus Martyr a greke writer and very nigh the Apostles, calleth this part of the Sacramēt (as M. Iewell cōfesseth and mēcioneth him selfe) 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               .
                  Iustinus Apolog. 2. The Cuppe of water and mixture. Why, but bicause in the holy ministration Water was mingled in the Cuppe with wine? S. Basill in his Liturgie and masse Mingleth Water and wine in the Consecration of the holy mysteries,S. Basill. saying at the Consecration time these wordes, Similiter & calicem de genimine vitis accipiens, miscens, gratias agens, benedicens, sanctificans, &c. Taking in like maner the Cuppe, of the frute of the Vine, Mingling it, geuing thankes, blessing it &c. S. Iames the Apostle in his Lyturgie or Masse at the Consecration time recording the fact of Christ,S. Iames. hath these wordes. Similiter post quam caenauit, accipiens calicem, & permiscens ex vino & aqua, & caet. In like maner after he had supped, taking the Cuppe and Mingling it with Wine and Water, & caet. By the which wordes of S. Iames and S. Basill affirming that Christ him selfe mingled Wine with Water in his blessed Supper, we beleue verely he did so, though no mention thereof be made in the ghospell. Especially considering the consent of the Fathers, aboue alleaged, S. Cyprian, Alexander the fifte Pope after S. Peter, the 3. Councell of Carthage wherat S. Augustin was present, who al affirme that it came from Christ him selfe, that in this blessed Sacrament, Water shoulde bê Mingled with Wine.
            Last of all Gregory bishopp of Nissa S. Basill his brother, Chrysostom vpon the Ghospell of S. Iohn, Homil. 84. and Theophilact repeting the very wordes of Chrysostom in his commentaries vpon S. Iohn do note this maner of Christes Church mingling water with wine in these holy Mysteries.
                  In serm. ea techetico apud Euthy 
                        •
                     nium lib. 2. Pano pliae tit. 21. In cap. 19. Theophilact a greke writer about 800. yeares past in the same place toucheth the Armenians for mingling water with wine in these wordes. 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
               
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . Let the Armeniās be here cōfounded, whiche mingle not water with wine in the Mysteries. These Armeniās for this matter also were pronounced heretikes in the sixt generall Councell holden in Trullo. By this it appeareth, I trust,
                  Cap. 32. M. Iewell that the mingling of water and wine is allowed for Catholike and therfore necessary. If at the lest the diffinitiō of a generall Councell, and the consent of so many fathers from so many places of Christendom, may proue any thing to be Catholike: To you M. Iewel, especially, which offer to yelde to the Sentence of any One olde Father, or generall Councell in a number of matters of as litle importance as this is. By this also it appeareth that you M. Iewell, and all the newe clergy of of England by not Mingling water with wine, do against the clere and vniuersall Practise of the primitiue Church, do holde the heresye of the Armenians, and of the late grekes also if you will, do also breake a part of Christes Institution, as you haue heard. Finally by this it appeareth, the saying of D. Harding not only to be no Vntruthe, but also your opinion to the contrary to be a Clere Heresy.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               And therfore that one may Communicat with an other,
               diuis. 14. 
               thoughe they be not together in one place, and that it was thought lawfulll and good by the Fathers of the auncient Church neare to the Apostles time, it may be well proued by diuerse good Authorities.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
                pag. 38. The .34. Vntruthe Slaunderous.The .24. Vntruthe.  There appeareth no such thinge in any auncient Father.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                Howe true this Vntruthe is, we shall see by the wordes off the Fathers immediatly folowing, alleaged by D. Harding.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               Diuis. 15.
               Irenaeus his wordes be these. The Priestes (by whiche name in this place bishops are vnderstanded) that vvere afore thy time, though they kept not Easter as they

of Asia did,
                  Euseb lib. 5 cap. 24. 
                     
                        •
                     ist. eccles.
                yet vvhen the Bishops of the Churche there, came to Rome, did sende them the Sacrament 25. Thus those Bishops did communicat togeather before their meting in one place.
            
            
               
                  Iewel. 
               
               pag. 30.  The .25. Vntruthe. Ireneus sayeth not, they did Communicat togeather.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
               
               The 35. Vntruthe Slaunderous.No Sir: He saieth not so in these wordes alleaged. But he meaned euen so, and brought it to proue a Communion, as by the whole processe it shall nowe appeare. Thus was the case. The bishoppes of Asia dissented from Victor pope of Rome in obseruing the feast of Easter.
                  Eusebius hist. 
                        •
                     cc
                        •
                     es. li
                        •
                     . 5. cap. 24. The pope (sayeth Eusebius who writeth this historye, and out of whom the wordes off Ireneus are taken) totius Asiae ac vicinarum prouinciarum Ecclesias, à Communionis societate abscindere nititur. Goeth aboute to excommunicat the Churches of all Asia and the prouinces adioyning. This seuerite of the Pope liked not other bishops, saieth Eusebius, and amonge the rest Irenaeus a vertuous bishop then of Lyons in Fraunce writeth to Victor the Pope thereof and complaineth of his seuerite. Amonge other reasons, whereby he persuadeth the Pope not to excommunicat those bishops of Asia, but to admitt them to his Communion, he bringeth in the Examples of his Predecessours, the Popes before him, who all notwithstanding that diuersite did yet Communicat with them. For proufe whereof, he saieth, when such came 
                  •
               o Rome, the Pope sent vnto them the blessed Sacrament. whereby he declared to all the worlde that he communicated with thē. This was the Reason of Irenaeus to Victor the Pope persuading him to communicat with the bishoppes of Asia as his predecessours had done before him. For thus he reasoned. Your predecessours Anicetus, Pius, Hyginus, Telesphorus and Xystus did communicat with forrain bishops, notwithstanding this diuersite of opinion in obseruing the feast of Easter, Therefore you ought not now so sharpely to excommunicat them. They dissented

from your predecessours in this opinion, Nunquam tamen ob hoc repulsi-sunt ab-ecclesiae societate, Yet they were neuer for that matter remoued from the felowship of the Church. How shew you that Ireneus? How proue you they were neuer remoued or repelled from the felowship of the Church? It foloweth immediatly. Eucharistiam illis mittebant. They sent vnto them the Sacrament. What? Was this sending of the Sacrament any Token or Argumēt of their Cōmunicating together? Yea trul
                  •
               . Or els did Ireneus reason weakely and persuade wrongefully and vtterly beside the purpose, with Victor the pope. But an easier matter it is to let M. Iewell be ouersene in this Vntruthe a
                  •
                he hath ben hetherto in all the rest, then to marre the reason of Irenaeus so lerned, and famous a writer, writing in so earnest a cause, and to such a person as the Pope was. By this it appeareth though Ireneus saie not expressely, they did communicat together, to whom the Sacrament was so sent, yet vndoubtedly he meaned so and reasoned so. Thus not only this Vntruthe is proued true, but also which went next before, where M. Iewell very boldly s
                  •
               ied, that there appeared no such Cōmunicating together in sundry places, in any ancient Father. For now we haue one at the lest, in whom such a Communion appeareth. Let vs now considre an other.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               Diui. 16. Apologia. 2.
               Iustinus Martyr saieth thus, VVhen the priest hath made an ende of thankes and praìers, and all the people thereto haue saied, Amen, they vvhich vve call deacons, geue to euery one then present, bread and vvater and vvìne Consecrated to take parte of it for their housell, and for those that be not present, they beare it home to thē. Thus in that time they that serued God together in the common place of praier,

and some others that were absent, letted from coming to their compaine by sickenesse, busynes, or otherwise, communicated together though not in one place.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
                pag. 41. The .36. Vntruthe Slaund.The .26. Vntruthe. Iustinus speaketh not one worde of communicating together.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                What then M. Iewell? Ergo they did not Communicat together? How foloweth this reason? How holdeth your argument proceding negatiuely? But Iustinus saieth. The Sacrament was sent vnto them that were at home. Ergo they which were at home did cōmunicat with them which receiued in the Church or place of common praier. How saye you? Did they or did they not? If they did, then is D. Hardinges saying true. If they did not, then either they receiued the Sacrament at home without any Cōmunion at all, or els they had a seuerall Communion by them selues at home.A Communion in distinction of places is proued. If they had a seuerall Communion by them selues at home, then were there two Communions one day in one parishe, one in the Church of such as receiued there, an other at home of such as receiued in their houses. Let now M. Iewell chose, whether he will graunt that they which receiued at home communicated with the other and made but one Communion with the rest which Communicated in the Church (as M.D. Harding saieth, and as truthe is they did) or els that, they in the Church made one Communion by them selues, and they at home an other seuerall Communion also. For so shall we haue by M. Iewells confession two Cōmunions in one parish vpon one day, which is as much as ij Masses in one parish in one day. The thinge which he stoutely denieth in an other Article. If they which receiued their housel at home receiued it without a Communion at all, then the priuat housell of sicke persons at home, though none Communicat with them, is proued by this example of the primitiue Church. A Thinge cōtrary to the doctrine of M. Iewell and his felowe protestants in the Communion booke.
            
               
               
                  Harding. 
               
               Diuis. 17. Lib. 2. ad vxorem.
               
               Tertullian saieth thus. Non sciet maritus quid secre to ante omnem cibum cibum gustes? Et si scierit, panem, non illum credet este qui dicitur. VVill not thy husband knowe what thou eatest secretly before al other meate? And if he do knowe, he will beleue it to be bread, and not him who it is called.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               
                  Pag. 43. The. 37. Vntruthe Slaunderous.
               The .27. Vntruthe. The translation wilfully corrupted. It, violently turned into, him.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
                No Vntruthe at all, no wilfull corruption, no violent translation M. Iewel, in al these wordes. But rather a more distinct and euident translation, the better to expresse the Authors minde. For the worde illum, though it be referred as you would haue it to Panem Bread, yet it signifieth not materiall bread, such as the baker maketh, but it signifieth, that bread which came downe from heauen, it signifieth that Bread,
                  Ioan. 6. 
               which geueth life to him that eateth, of it. This Bread is Christ him selfe. It may therefore well and truly be translated not only, it, that is, that Bread, that I saye, which came downe from heauen, which geueth life to the receiuer thereof, but also him, that is, Christ. For bothe come to one. Whether you translate, illum, it, that Heauenly and lifegiuing Bread, or him, that is Crist, which is heauēly and lifegiuing bread. Thus there was no cause to note an Vntruthe (but if it were to make vp a numbre) or to crie vpon Wilfull corruption, or Violent translating of one worde for an other, Seing bothe wordes meane one thinge, being truly and sincerely taken.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               He who it is saide to be of Christen people, or who it is called, that is our Maker and Redemer, or which is the same, oure Lordes bodie.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .38. Vntruthe Slaund.The 28. Vntruthe. The Sacrament was neuer called our maker or Redemer by any of the olde Fathers.
            
               
               
                  Stapletō. 
                What then if no olde Father euer wrote so? How is this an Vntruth on D. Hardinges part?  Doth he saie, the olde Fathers called it so? No Sir: he saieth no such thinge. But that the Christē people called it so. And not precisely in such termes, but which is the same, our Lordes Body. Now M. Iewell, thinke you it an Vntruthe to saie, that in Tertullians time Christen folcke or the olde Fathers called, that bread, the B
                  •
               
               dy of Christ, and so consequently our Maker and Redemer? Tertullian him selfe saieth of that bread. Pan
                     •
                  m illum Corpus suum fecit.
               
                  Lib. 4. contra Marcionē.
                He made that Bread his Body. If Christ made it so as Tertullian saieth, thinke you M. Iewel it was not called so of the Christen people, as D. Harding saieth? But what saieth our Sauiour himselfe in the gospell? Doth not he saie of that Bread which he toke in his handes, which he brake and blessed This is my Body?
                  Luc. 22. Doth he not in these wordes call it, his body? Thinke you M. Iewell Christen people did not so call it also? If Christ so called it him selfe, and Tertullian after him in expresse wordes witnessed it, how is it an Vntruthe so to expounde Tertullians wordes, as bothe him selfe otherwere expressely speaketh, and as Christ him selfe in the ghospell pronounceth? But you stande vpon these wordes. Maker and Redemer. Why M. Iewell? What difference is there betwene Christes Body, and our Maker and Redemer? Is Christes Body any other then Christ him selfe? Doth not Christ saie of his owne flesh to be eaten of the Christians, Qui manducat me, viuit propter me? He that eateth me,
                  Ioan. 6. liueth thourough me? If then Christen people receiuing the Body of Christ, do receiue Christ him selfe, if Christ him selfe be our Maker and Redemer, how is this Vntrue, that this most Blessed Sacrament is called of the Christen people their Maker and Redemer? How the aunciē
               
                  •
                Fathers haue so called it, which here D. Harding saied not, and therefore you do but peuishly, to builde your Vntruthe vpon that reason, it shall hereafter

be sene vpō the Vntruthes of the xxj. Article. For there it is proued out of the Fathers that it was called our Lorde and God, which is as much as our Maker and Redemer. You maye not M. Iewell Miscere in len
                     •
                  e vnguenium, confounde questions together.
            
               
                  Harding. 
                Omnes in Eremis solitariam vitam agentes,Diuis. 18. vbi non est sacerdos, Communionem domi seruantes, à seipsis communicant. All they which liue a solitary life in wildernesse, where no priest is to be had, keeping the Communion at home, do communicat with them selves alone.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               pag. 47. The .39. Vntruthe Slaunderous. The 29. Vntruthe. M. Harding hath corrupted the translation. These wordes (with them selues alone) are not in S. Basill.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
                No are M. Iewell? What then meaneth that greke which you your selfe after do put in the margin of your text? These wordes I saie, what meane they? 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . Mary saie you, 
                  Iewell. 
               
               Pag. 49. The .40. Vntruthe For it, may not be well so vnderstanded.the english is, They receiue of them selues. VVhich say you may well be vnderstanded, that one of them receiued of an other for wtte of a priest. It may so be vnderstāded, you say. Then it may also otherwise, I saye. But that not only it may, but ought also otherwise to be vnderstanded then you saie, I proue. These Eremites came not one at an other. But liued, as S. Basil sayth, a Sole life. For betwene Eremites and Monkes this was the difference that the one liued as Anchorets did, vtterly without company. The other liued by great numbers vnder one Father. As it appeareth well by S. Augustin and S. Basill him selfe other where. Therefore receiuing at home,
                  
                     Aug. Lib. de moribus eccles.
                  
                  
                     Cath. c. 31. Bas. in Asceticis.
                  
                they receiued of them selues alone. But how then is the greke truly translated? Forsothe well enough M. Iewell. For that preposition in Greke 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , doth not allwaies signifie of or from, but sometime per, by and with it selfe alone.Xe
                     •
                  ophō in Cyro. As where we reade in Xenophon, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . It is in Latin

truly translated, per se potens prodesse, a man able to doe good by
him self alone. And so hath D. Hard. expressed truly, the greke

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . VVi
                     •
                  h them selues alone. It semeth you were not vtterly
ignorant hereof your selfe: And therefore you saie in your
text,I
                     •
                  well. pag. 49. th
                  •
               t you will not greatly striue aboute it. Yet must you nedes note it for an Vntruthe, to make vp a number, specially
in this first Article, that so euen at the first you might discredit
your aduersary for euer. Done, like a true Rhetoriciā M. Iewel
but not like a good Diuine, and searce like an honest mā.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               In this saying of Basill, it is to be noted. First that necessite here hath respect to the lacke of Priest and Deacon. So as (30) in that case the Sacrament might be receaued of a faithfull person with his owne hande.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .41. Vntruthe Slaunderous.The 30. Vntruthe. S. Basill saieth. The Communicant receiued with his owne hand euen in the presence of the Priest.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                The Lewdenesse of you M. Iewell, hath no measure. The wordes of S. Basill saie two thinges. First this they saie. As concerning this, that it is no greuous offence for one to be driuen by necessite in times of persecutiō,The lewde dealing of M. Iewel. to receiue the Communion with his owne hande no Priest nor Deacon being present, it is a thinge superfluous to declare, for that by longe custome and practise it hath ben confirmed and taken place. These are the wordes of S. Basill which D. Harding alleaged, and vpon the which he noteth most truly, that in the lacke of Priest and Deacon, in that case I saie, the Sacrament might be receiued of a faithfull person with his owne hāde. The other wordes of S. Basill mēcioning of an other sorte of common people, not Eremites, which in the Church taketh it in their owne handes euen in the presence of the Priest, are not noted by D. Harding in this place, but in the former, as I said. You haue done therefore most Lewdely in so clere wordes of S. Basil to note an Vntruth on D. Hardings part, You should haue marked, that though S. Basill

saie of some in the Later Part of his sentence that in the presence of the priest the Communicants receiued with their owne handes, yet he saieth of other before in the Former part that no priest nor Deacō being present they receiued the Cōmunion with their owne handes. You should also haue marked that D. Harding noteth the First maner spoken of by S. Basill, not the Later, as his wordes folowing do Clerely declare, where he saieth. 
                  Harding. 
               
               And that for the ratyfying of so doing he alleageth continuance of custome. For, this Custome S. Basill alleageth in the Maner of the Eremites, which receiued Alone M. Iewell, not in the Maner of those which Receiued in the Church in the presence of the Priest, as his words aboue alleaged do declare. Thus you should haue marked, if you had minded to deale Truly. But you wil be allwaies like your self. Lewde, False, and Vntrue. God amende you M. Iewell, and geue yow grace ones to be Honest, True, and Plaine Dealing.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               the 21. diuision.
               Euen in the Church of Rome it selfe (13.) where the true Religion hath euer ben most exactly obserued aboue al other places of the worlde.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               pag. 56. The .42. and 43. Vntruthes both Slaunderous. For Rome is nowe th
                     •
                   Mother of Vertue The .31. Vntruthe. Rome is now become the Mother of Fornication. Apocal. 17.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
               
               M. Iewelles Arguments.From wanton Lewdenesse you procede to Rayling Ribauldry. You note it for an Vntruthe that true Religion hath euer ben exactly obserued in Rome. But how disproue you this vniuersall proposition? You saie. It is nowe become the Mother of fornication. How holdeth this argument M. Iewell, you that haue framed so many lewde arguments against D. Hardinge, such as he neuer dreamed of?
            
               Rome is the Mother of Fornication.
            
            
               Ergo she lacketh true Religion.
            
            
               The fondnesse of this Argument maye be tried by the like.
            
               Englande is full of vice.
            
            
               Ergo it lacketh true religion. Or this.
            
               Certain of the bishop of Sarisbury his mē are f
                     ••
                  ōs and murderers.
            
            
               Ergo, The Bishop of Sarisbury hathe no true Religion.
            
            Is this Argument good M. Iewell? Verely as your Religion can not iustly be disproued, bicause some of your houshoulde cōmit Felony and Murder, so can not now the Religion of Rome be proued naught or Vntrue, bicause in that Cyte Fornication is vsed.Fol. 161. Touching this matter M. Iewell, you haue the answere of D. Hardinge in the Confutation of youre Apologie more at large. Answere to that, and then proue this Argument good. But what maketh here your note of the Apocalypse the 17. Chapter? Is it writen there, that Rome is now the Mother of Fornication? This is but a Blasphemy lerned off Baudy Bale, and your fonde notes in the Englishe Translation, whiche nowe for very shame you haue left oute in your later editions. Rome is not there named at all. But you thinke, or at the lest would haue other men to thinke, that by the greate whore of Babylon, Rome shoulde be meaned. Yea yea, proue this Master Iewell by the Fathers of the firste 600. yeares, by the Scriptures, or any generall Councell of that tyme, and then we will beleue, yelde, and Subscribe to yow in that pointe.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               And from whence (he meaneth Rome) all the Churches of the VVest haue taken their light. As the Bishoppes off Gallia, that nowe is called Fraunce, doo acknowleadge in an Epistle sent to Leo the Pope in these wordes.
               
                  Epist. proxima. post. 51. inter Epist. Leonis.
                Vnde Religionis nostrae propitio Christo Fons & Origo manauit. From the Apostolike See by the Mercye off Christe, the Fountaine and Spring of oure Religion hathe

come.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                The 32. Vntruthe.The .44. Vntruthe Slaunderous. and the 45. Vntruthe touching the faithe of the Vvest Church. Iewell. pag. 56. M. Iewell confuteth him selfe. The Faithe of the West Church came not first from Rome.
            D. Harding saieth not so muche. But that the West Churche toke their Light from Rome. Whereby he meaned that all the West Churches, haue had from Rome, thoughe not their verye Apostles and first Preachers, yet (whiche you your selfe Confesse in the Texte M. Iewel) the Cōfirmation of Doctrine, and also other great conference and comfort. For all this M. Iewell, is it not a light and helpe to Religion? This D. Harding saiyeth, the West Churches had from Rome. This you confesse they had and that you saye at the beginning. Why then note you D. Harding for Vntruthe in the Margin, which youre selfe saieth and confesseth for Truthe in the Text? But the Faithe off the VVest Church (saye you, adding it in the margin for a reason of the Vntruthe) came not first from Rome. First, they toke their light, though not their first faith. And therfore youre Vntruthe is no Vntruthe on D. Hardinges parte. But on your part how Vntrue it is, you shall see.Fraunce toke their first faith from Rome. First for Fraunce one of the greatest pillers of the West Churche, you haue in D. Harding his wordes a Confession of the Frenche bishoppes them selues aboue xj.C. yeares past, that the Fountaine and Springe of their Religion came from the See Apostolike, recorded in the vndoubted and Authentike workes of Leo. Therefore that you bringe to the contrarye in the text, off Nathanael, off Lazarus whom Christe raised, and of Saturninus, that they should first preache the faith in Fraunce, and yet as you saye, no Commission from Rome appearing, whereby they shoulde be sent thither, it is a Vaine Gheasse, against the expresse Testimonye and Confession of the Frenche bishoppes them selues aboue vnleuen hundred yeares paste, that whether by Commission from Rome, by the Mouthe of those that yow name, or whether by Romanes them selues, or other sent

from Rome,
                  S. Gregory witnesseth, that the first faith of Fraunce came frō Rome. Lib. 4. epist. 51. Bothe Englande Scotlande receiued their first faith from Rome.
                  
                     Beda Lib. 1. Cap. 4. Lib. 1. Cap. 13. Howe the faith came to vs Englishmen.
                and not these whiche withoute any Author or Writer, M. Iewel bringeth in here vpō his Owne Credit, whiche waie so euer it came I saye, that from Rome it came. Nowe not only Fraunce receiued their very first faithe from Rome, as by the testimonye of the Frenche bishoppes them selues appeareth, but many other principall countres of the Weste Churche also.
            Our owne countre being first called Britanny, and possessed of the Britons, whose posterite now only remaineth in Wales, receiued the faith from Eleutherius Pope of Rome, about the yeare of our Lorde 156. as Venerable Bede in the history of our Church of Englande recordeth. In the yeare of our Lorde 411. The Scottishmen receiued their first bishop Palladius from Celestinus then Pope of Rome, as witnesseth Bede also. Shortly after this time the Britains being forsaken of the Romains, oppressed with the Peightes and Scottes their euill neighbours, and last of all so ouerronne with the Saxons and English people, sent for in to ayde them, that with in lesse then ij. hundred yeares, all that is now called England, was brought vnder the dominion of the Saxons, and English people (the olde Brittons beinge driuē to the straightes, which they yet kepe) being all heathen and infidels, then to our countre of England and to vs Englishmen liuing in paganisme and idolatry, that holy and blessed bishop of Rome S. Gregory directed the holy and vertuous Monke S. Augustin our Apostle, who in his time conuerted Kent and Essex to the faith, whose felowes and Scholers conuerted in short space all the realme of England, that is, all the English people, to the faith of Christ. So that, as the olde Brittons from Eleutherius, the Schottishmen from Celestinus bothe holy Popes of Rome, so we Englishmen from S. Gregory a blessed and lerned Pope also,In the first and second bookes. receiued not only the Light of our religion, but also our very first Faith and belefe in Christ Iesus. All which may furder appeare to

him that will peruse the History of Venerable Bede lately sett forthe in English. Not only England, Fraunce, and Scotland,
                  Germany receiued their first faith frō Rome.
                  
                     Platina in Sergio, & in Gregorio. 2.
                  
                     Henr. Mutius lib. 7. Bedali. 5. Cap. 10. Vide Platinam & Blondum lib. 2. dec. 2.
                  
                     Lib. 7. Cap. 30.
                but the most part of Germany receiued euen from Rome their very first faith and knowleadg off Christ. For as Saxony had their first faith of Sergius the Pope about the yeare of our Lorde 690. so shortly after (an. 716.) all the inwarde partes of Germany receiued the faith from Gregory the second, a vertuous Pope also, by the preaching of Bonifacius (a Schottishman borne) directed thither frō Rome. Friselande in like maner conuerted to the faith by Willebrorde (an English monke) had him their first byshop confirmed from Rome. So Norwaie by the preaching of Adrian the fourth, Pope of Rome, Bulgaria by Nicolaus the first, Dalmatia and Sclauony, all much about a time, from the Church of Rome also receiued the faith. Socrates writeth that the Burgunyons came to the faith of Christ, perceauing by them selues 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , that the God of the Romains did mightely helpe such as feared him. How thinke you now M. Iewell? Had not D. Harding good cause to saie, and truly to saye, that the west Church toke their light from the Church of Rome, yea and to saye that the faith of it came first from Rome, which is more then D. Harding saied, and yet no Vntruthe neither, as the lerned do knowe?
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               As touching that the Oblation of the Body,
               Diuis. 23. 
               and bloud of Christ done in the Masse is the Sacrifice of the Church, and proper to the newe. Testament (33) Commaunded by Christ to be frequented according to his Institution &c.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                The .33. Vntruthe. Christ neuer commaunded or named any such sacrifice.pag. 57. The 46. Vntruthe Slaund. 1 
            
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
                This Vntruthe doth but serue to make vp a number. It is the same in effect, with the fifte Vntruthe. There it is answered. There it is proued that Christ Commaunded a Sacrifice,

though he named none. And D. Harding saieth, it was Commaūded by Christ, not named. I referre the Reader to the next Vntruthe folowing. Though M. Iewell may repete Vntruthes to make vp a number, yet it is not our ease nor the profit of the Reader, to repete idely one thinge, being ones thouroughly proued.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               Diui. 25.
               The opinion of the Fathers is, that the daily and continuall Sacrifice ought (34) Daily to be Sacrificed, that the death of our Lorde, and the worke of our redemption might alwaies be celebrated, and had in memory.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               pag. 60. The 47. Vntruthe Slaund. And the 48. Vntruthe, For no Fathers saie planely the contrary.The .34. Vntruthe. The Fathers say not so, but plainely the contrary.
            This Vntruthe, emplieth two Notorious and manifest Vntruthes on M. Iewelles part. First by denying the saying of D. Harding. Secondarely by auouching the contrary to be plaine in the Fathers. This second point M. Iewell should not only haue auoutched, but haue proued it also in his text, by the testimony at the lest of some one Father. Now as it is a manifest lie, and can neuer be proued, so no maruail if he brought nothinge for proufe thereof. As touching the first point, because he saieth, The Fathers say not so, I will now bringe him the Fathers, which say so. M. Iewell in denying the Fathers to saye,  that the Daily Sacrifice ought to be celebrated, denyeth it in the externall Sacrifice done on our part. For (saieth he) 
                  Iewell. 
               
               pag. 61. Linea. 16. Heb. 7. & 10.the strength and vertu of Christes Sacrifice resteth in it self and not in any diligēce or doing of oures. And for proufe hereof he allegeth S. Paul to the Hebrewes. That Christ 
                  Iewell. 
               
               Iewell. pag. 61. Lin. 58.hath offred vpō the crosse one sacrifice for al. Ful and perfit. Therfor we nede none other. One, and euerlasting. Therefore it nedeth no renewing. By priuilege geuen to him selfe only. Therefore it can not be wrought by any other. These are M. Iewelles gloses vpon S. Paule. These are his reasons, that the Sacrifice of Christes Crosse is called the daily Sacrifice, Not for that it must be renewed euery daie, but for

that being once done, it standeth good for all daies and for euer.
            For these are his owne very wordes. It shall be now proued against him out of the fathers that not withstāding the wordes of S. Paul the Church yet offreth a Daily Sacrifice, not as vpō the Crosse, but the selfe same thing which was offred on the crosse: nor to the derogatiō of that, but for the remēbraunce of that, which is the thing that D. Harding saied, that the Church teacheth, that Christ him self in his last Supper commaunded. The Doctours expounding these wordes of S. Paule to the Hebrewes, of one euerlasting Sacrifice, ones done for all, full, and perfyt, &c. do make thereupon them selues a doubte of the daily Sacrifice of Christes Church.How the Church offreth a daily Sacrifice at the Aultar, notwithstanding the One and Sufficiēt Sacrifice vpon the Crosse. How that may stande with the one Sacrifice of Christ vpon the Crosse ones offred for all. This doubt, if no such Sacrifice had ben, they woulde neuer haue moued. If there had ben only a remembraunce of that Sacrifice by the holy Ministration, as M. Iewell saieth, there had ben no cause of doubte, how that remembrance might stande with the one Oblatiō of Christ. For one thinge may be a thousand times remembred, and yet the thinge remaine One still. If none other had Offred, as M. Iewell saieth, but Christ Ones for all, then had not the doctours neded to moue this question, how Christ alone Offred Once for all, and yet how the Priestes in the Church do offer daily. Now the doctours do moue all these doubtes and questions (which M. Iewell bringeth as a plaine and clere doctrine) and do also resolue the same, writing their lerned commentaries vpon S. Paule to the Hebrewes. I will now bringe their owne wordes truly translated in to English. First Chrysostom after he had declared according to the minde of S. Paule, that the Sacrifices of the olde lawe were ofte repeted, as being weake and vnsufficient to purge sinne, but the Sacrifice of Christ on the Crosse was a Full and Perfitte oblation for all Mankinde, and therefore but Ones offred for

all, mouing this doubt of the Daily Sacrifice of the Church which M. Iewel denieth, he sayth. Quid ergo nos? Nōne per singulos dies offerimus? What thē do we? Do we not Offer euery daie? Lo M. Iewell.
                  Chrysost. Hom. l· 1
                     •
                  . ad Habr.
                Notwithstanding the One oblation of Christ, yet we, we bishops and Priestes (as Chrisostom was) do offer daily. For it foloweth. Offerimus quidē, sed ad recordationem facientes mortis eius, We offer in dede. But making (that oblation) for the remembraunce of his Death. Lo againe M. Iewell, not only a remembrāce, but an oblation is made, for that remembraū
               ce. But how then is it One oblation? How One Sacrifice? Chrisostom goeth forthe and telleth you. Et vna est haec hostia non multae. And this is One Hoste, One Sacrifice, not many. Yea? One Sacrifice done by vs Daily, and yet One vpon the Crosse done Ones for all? How can that be? Chrisostom will teache vs this also.Howe One Sacrifice vppon the Crosse, and 
                     •
                  ow One daily in the Church. For he saieth yet farder. Quomodo vna est & non multae? Quia semel oblata est insancta sanctorum. Hoc autem sacrificium exemplar est illius. Id ipsum semper offerimus. Nec nunc quidem alium agnum, crastina alium, sed semper eundem ipsum. Proinde vnum est hoc Sacrificium haec ratione. How is it One Hoste, One Sacrifice, and not many? Bicause it was ones offered in to the holy of holyes. But this Sacrifice (which we daily offer) is a paterne of that. (And why or how?) we Offer allwaies the selfe same thinge. Not now One Lambe, to morowe an other, but euery daie the selfe same. Therefore it is One Sacrifice by this reason. Vnderstande you this reason M. Iewell how and why it is One Sacrifice? Chrisostom saieth, it is one Sacrifice, bicause the Hoste, that is, the thinge Sacrificed, the thinge Offred now, is but One with that which was Offred on the crosse. It is one and the self Lābe, which was thē offred and which is euery daie offred. What is the lābe M. Iewell, that Chrisostom speaketh of, but the Body and bloud of Christ? This sayeth Chrisostom, is One and the selfe same (.eundem ipsum.) But how doth Chrisostom proue, it is One Lambe which we

do offer now, to morowe, and euery daye? He saieth in the wordes immediatly folowing. Alioquin quoniam in multis locis offertur, multi Christi sunt? Nequaquam. Sed vnus vbique est Christus, & hic plenus existens & illic plenus, Vnum corpus. Sicut enim qui vbique offertur vnum Corpus est, & non multa Corpora ita etiam & vnū sacrificium.
               
                  One christ euery vvhere.
                  One Body.
                  The Real presence proueth one Sacrifice bothe vpon the Crosse and vpo
                        •
                      the Aultar.
                Or els bicause it is offred in many places, are there many Christes? Not so. But there is one Christ euery where being Full and perfitt here, and full and perfitt there. One Body. For as he which is Offred euery where, is One Body, and not Many Bodies, so also this is One Sacrifice. Lo vpon the reall presence of Christes body (which is but One) Chrisostom defendeth the daily Sacrifice of Christes Church to be but One: and the One Sacrifice vppon the Crosse not to exclude the Daily Sacrifice of the Church, which in the Hoste, that is in the thing offred is One Selfe Same Sacrifice With the other: but in the maner of doing (bicause it is Vnbloudy) it is in recordationem eius in the remēbrance of that. But you M. Iewel do denie the real presence bicause you can abide no externall Sacrifice offred by vs. And you denie the externall Sacrifice bicause you will haue no reall presence. Here then is one Father, whiche sayeth, Wee doo offer euery daie, and that Christe him selfe, in the remembraunce off his Passion. And how many Fathers do saye the like? Theodoret a Greke Writer also in his Commentaries vpon this place of Saint Paule hath these wordes.
                  Theodoret. In cap. 6. ad Hebr.
                
               If bothe the Priesthood that is of the Law be ended, and the Priest according to the Order of Melchisedech hath offred a Sacrifice, and hath made that other Sacrifices be not necessary, whye do the Priestes off the newe Testament celebrate the Mysticall Sacrifice, or Liturgie? It is manifeste to those whiche are instructed in the matters of God, that we Offer not an other Sacrifice, but do celebrate the memoriall of that One and holsome Sacrifice: For this our Lorde hath commaunded vs, saying. Doo this in Remembraunce of me. Hetherto Theodorett.

Where you see he teacheth vs that we do celebrat in dede a Sacrifice, and that as Christe commaunded vs in his Last Supper, and yet no other Sacrifice (as touching the thinge Sacrificed) then that one Sacrifice on the Crosse.
                  Primas
                        •
                     us In ca. 10. ad Hebr.
                Primasius a lerned scholer of S. Augustine writing vppon this place of Saint Paule, is for the daily Sacrifice moste euident. I will alleage his wordes in English truly and sincerely.The olde Sacrific
                     •
                  s 
               VVhy did God commaunde (saieth Primasius) the olde Sacrifices to be daily offred? For the weakenesse of it. Bicause it coulde not perfectly cleanse. To the entent (by that meanes) their sinnes might be remembred and rebuked. VVhat shall we saye then? Do not oure Priestes doo the very same daily?
               The daily Sacrifice of oure Priestes. 
               Do they not offer a Sacrifice daily? They do offer truly, but for the Remembraunce of that deathe. And bicause we sinne daily, and haue nede daily to be clensed, bicause Christe can no more dye, he hathe geuen vs the Sacrament of his Body and Bloude, that 
                     •
                  uen as his Passion,
               VVhy it is daily. 
               was the Redemption and Cleansing of the worlde, so this Oblation also might be a Redemption and cleansing for all such as Offer it in the true Faith,
               Howe it differeth from the olde, being yet repeted as that was. 
               and haue a good Intention. For herein doth our Sacrifice whiche is also repeted, differ from that olde Sacrifice oftentimes repeted, bicause this is the Truthe, that a Figure:  This maketh a man perfit, that not so.  And this is repeted not bicause of any weakenes in it, as not being able to geue perfit saluation, but for the Remembraunce of Christes Passion, euen as he him selfe saied.  Do this in my Remembraunce. Here M. Iewell we haue an other Father, which affirmeth that the daily Sacrifice ought to be celebrated (nothwithstanding the One Sacrifice on the Crosse) and that for two causes.Note these two Causes. First bicause we sinne daily, and haue daily nede thereof. Secōdarely bicause Christ commaunded it so to be done for his Remembraunce. The like cause geueth Eusebius Emissenus in these wordes.
                  Eusebius Emissenus Homil. 5. de Pascha.
                
               Colitur iugiter per Mysterium, &ce. It is daily celebrated in a Mystery, which was ones offred for oure Redemption. To the entent that bicause the Redemption for Mankinde was Daily and neuer Ceasing, the Oblation

also of th
                     •
                  t Redemption might be Continuall, An Oblation rightly One and perfit, to be estemed by Faith not by outwarde shape, and not to be iudged by externall Appearance, but by inwarde Affection. Thus we haue three Fathers affirming not only a daily Oblation, but also that there ought so to be, partly for oure comfort and reliefe, partly for the Remembraunce of Christes death and Passion, the only comforte of al our faith in Christ Iesus.
            Againe this Sacrifice is a daily Sacrifice and neuer ceaseth bicause the Priesthood of Melchisedech,The third Cause off a daily Sacrifice. of whiche Priesthood this is the Sacrifice, is euerlasting and neuer ceaseh. This the Holy Fathers do teache vs. Oecumenius, expounding how Christe is a Priest according to the Order of Melchisedech for euer saieth.
                  Oecumenius In commentar. in Hebr. ca. 5 
               Allthough Christ offred not an vnbloudy Hoste (for he Offred his owne bodye) yet those whiche by him are made Priestes (whose high bishop being God him selfe he hath vouches
                     •
                  fed to be) shal offer an vnbloudy Sacrifice. For this, the worde In aeternum,The euer lasting Order off Melchisedech proueth a continuall Sacrifice. 
               For euer doth signifie. For the Sripture would neuer haue saied (he is a Priest) For euer, hauing respect to that Oblation and Sacrifice Ones made off God (vpon the Crosse) but hauing respect to the Priestes that now are, by whom as meanes Christ dothe Sacrifice, and is Sacrificed. VVho also in that Mysticall Supper deliuered vnto them the maner of this Sacrifice. Hetherto Oecumenius. Lo M. Iewell yet an other Father of the greke Churche which confesseth an Euerlasting and Neuer Ceasing Sacrifice, not that only which Christe made Ones for all in the Crosse (as you saie) but that also whiche the Priestes of Christes Church do nowe Offer. That I saie, which in the last Supper was taught vs and deliuered vs by Christ him selfe, for a liuely remembraunce of his death and Passion. In this sence as doth Oecumenius, speaketh also S. Augustine, when he saieth that Christ,
                  August. epist. 23. ad Bonifaciū.
                
               semel immolatus in seipso, Ones being Offred in him selfe, whiche was vppon the Crosse, tamen in sacramento non solum per omnes Paschae solemnitates,

sed omni die populis immolatur. Yet in a Sacrament not onely in euery solemnite of Easter, but euery daye he is offred for the people. This Sacrament, he callethe in an other place.
                  Lib. 10. cap. 6. De ciu
                        •
                     . Dei.
                
               Sacrificij in Cruce p
                     •
                  racti Sacramentum, id est, sacrum signum. The Sacrament, or holy signe of the Sacrifice done in the Crosse: But what? No Sacrifice therfore it selfe? Yes he c
                  •
               lleth it euen there, Quotidianum Ecclesiae Sacrificium. The daily Sacrifice of the Churche. This daily Sacrifice of the Church is a Sacramēt or holy Signe of that excelling Sacrifice on the Crosse.
                  The 49. Vntruthe standing in false translation.
                  Iew. pag. 61. Lin. 24.
                  
                     Immolari populis. Lib. 10. per totum. M. Iewell maketh the people his God.
                In this Sacrament Christ him selfe is offred not only in principal feastes, but Omni die euery day and that, not to the people as you turne (populis immolari M. Iewell) but for the people. For immolari doth not signifie to be offred, as offring or profering a thinge in to a mās hande, but immolari signifieth to be offred vp, to be Sacrificed, to haue that seruice which appertaineth neither to man nor to Angels, nor to diuels, but to God only, as S. Austen at large disputeth in his bookes de Ciuitate dei. But you M. Iewell, making the people your God, and drawing the blessed Sacrifice of Christ him selfe, to the offring of your pece of bread in to the peoples handes, you turne Immolari populis, to be offred vnto the people: which by the rules of all grammer, not of diuinitie only, doth signifie to immolat or Sacrifice for the people. For euen as S. Austen saied before, semelimmolatus est, He was ones offred vp, meaning in the Crosse,Offred in the Crosse, and Offred euery daie. so now he saieth, omni die immolatur populis in Sacramento. He is offred vp for the people euery day in a Sacrament. Immolari, in bothe places must haue one sence and meaning. Els the Cōparison and reason of S. Austē had bē fonde and foolish. O M. Iewell, leaue ones for gods loue and your owne, this false Iuggling and Lieger de main of youres, in matters of such weight and importaunce. Turne not the daily offring vp of Christ in a Sacrament for the people,
               
                  
                     •
                  . August.
                to the offring

of a piece of bread vnto the people. This chaunge you force them to make damnably for your selfe and them to, vnlesse God call you and them to repentaunce. Of this daily Sacrifice S. Austen writeth of his Mother quotidie Altari solitam assistere,
               M. Iewel. Augustin. Lib. 9. confess. Cap. 13. that she was wonte euery day to stande at the Altar, that is, euery daie to be present at the Sacrifice. Of the which S. Ciprian also saieth. Sacrificia dei quotidie celebramus. We do celebrat the Sacrifices of God euery daie.
                  lib. 1. ep. 2. An Obiection putt of. And that this was not a daily sacrifice, such as the people daily celebrated by recording the passion of Christ, and by Offring them selues vnto God,The daily Sa
                     •
                  rifice is Offred by priestes. but a daily Externall Sacrifice vsed of Priestes Only by the waie of Ministery, it appereth euidently, by that certain Fathers, for the Continuall and daily practise of this most dreadfull and holy Sacrifice, haue thought it in no case meete for priestes bounde daily thereunto, to haue Wiues. In this sence writeth S. Ambrose, when he saieth: Nunc quia non carnalis successio, sed perfectio spiritualis inquiritur,
               
                  Ambrosius In cap 3.1. ad Timoth.
                
               consequenter sacerdotibus vt semper altari queant assistere, semper ab vxoribus continendum. Now bicause not a carnal succession (of Priestes, as in the olde lawe) but a spirituall perfection is required, Priestes, that they may alwaies serue at the aultar, must alwaies refraine from mariage. S. Hierom in like maner.
                  Hieronymus. li. 1· in Iouinianum.
                
               Sacerdoti cui semper pro populo offerenda sunt Sacrificia, semper orandum est▪ si semper orandum, ergo semper carendū matrimonio. The priest which must alwaies offer Sacrifice for the people, must allwaies praie▪ If he must alwaies praie, then he must allwaies be vnmaried. Innocētius the first agreeth with these lerned doctours in the same maner of reasoning, and saieth. Tenere omnino Ecclesia debet,
               
                  Innocentius. 1. ad Decentium dist. 31. Cap. Tenere.
                
               vt Sacerdotes & Leuitae cū vxoribus suis nō misceantur qui ministerij quotidiani necessitatibus occupantur. The Church ought to obserue that the priestes and deacōs cōpany not with their wiues, which are occupied with the necessary busynes of the daily Seruice. This daily seruice the first Councel of Toledo calleth, quotidianū Ecclesiae sacrificium,
               
as S. Austen before did, the daily Sacrifice of the Church, and bindeth the clergy to serue thereat daily. Go now M. Iewell, and denie the Fathers to saie that the daily Sacrifice ought to be daily celebrated.Iewel as before. You haue heard Chrisostom, Primasius, Eusebius Emissenus, Oecumenius, S. Augustin to saie that this daily Sacrifice is and ought daily to be celebrated,  partly for the Remembraūce of Christes death,  partly for remedy of our sinnes,  partly also bicause by this Sacrifice the priesthood of Melchisedech is practised for euer.  You haue heard all these, and Theodoretus also to witnesse an externall Sacrifice on our part notwithstanding that one Sacrifice on the Crosse.  You haue heard S. Augustin againe, S. Ciprian and the Fathers of the first Councell of Toletu
                     •
                  
                to confesse a daily Sacrifice in the Church.  Last of all you haue heard by the testimonies of S. Ambrose, S. Hierom, and of Innocentius the firist (the Pope of Rome in S. Augustins time) this daily Sacrifice to be so necessary, that for that respect priestes ought to refraine from mariage. Now proue you that the Fathers euer taught plainely the contrary, as you saie they did.
                  Iewell. 
               
               Pag. 43.
            
            To leaue S. Basill ad Caesaream patritiam 
               
                  Can. 49. the Councell of Laodicea,
                  can. 52. the Councell of Constantinople holden in Trullo, and the Synodall Epistle sent from the Bishoppes of the East parte in the defence of Macarius. &c.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                All these Fathers M. Iewell will leaue, bicause he hath good store of other to bring. But let these that he bringeth, trie what the store is which he omitteth. It is not credible that M. Iewell hath either so litle witt, or so small good will, that he will leaue the strongest and best allegatiōs, and bringe in a fewe that make nothing at all for him. Then if these which he alleageth, are founde feble and to no purpose, I leaue it to the readers discretion to consider what the rest woulde haue appeared, if they had durst to shew their faces. Therefore to passe here (this being of D. Harding otherwhere handled) his dumbe witnesses, let vs see what weight his other Authorites doe beare. He saieth.
            
               
               
                  Iewell. 
                S. Augustin saieth. The Sacrament of this thinge is prepared or consecrate in the Church, and receiued of the Lordes table in some places euer
                     •
                   daye, in some places vpon certeyn dayes.
            
            
               
                  Stapletō 
                Lo S. Augustin saieth. In some places the Sacrament is consecrated euery daye.
               
                  In Ioan. tract. 26. And yet he is brought against the daily Sacrifice, and against the daily Cōsecration. What? Thinketh M. Iewell that Daily, and Euery daye is contrary? Or thinketh he the daily Sacrifice is either so auouched of the lerned Fathers, or so defended of the Catholikes that in all Places there must be a daily Sacrifice? Hath he forgot that in meane parish Churches it was neuer customably so?
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
                
                  In epi, & Timoth. 1. cap.
The .50. Vntruth.Likewise saieth S. Ambrose. Euery weeke we must celebrat the oblation, although not euery day vnto strangers, yet vnto the inhabitants at the lest twise in the weke.
               
                  Stapletō 
               
                For none saieth.
Not euery daie.  S. Augustine saieth, the Sacrament was ministred at certain dayes. S. Ambrose saieth sometimes twise in the weke, and (50) not euery daye.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                S. Augustin saieth in some places euery daie. And S. Ambrose saieth not, not euery daye, But at the lest twise in the weke. Thus twise in the weke is the lest. But what? Thinke you M. Iewell it may not be truly called a daily Sacrifice, though it were but twise in the weke? You saie your selfe in this very page of your Replie. VVhich also (meaning the Sacrament) may be called the daily bread, not for that it is daily receiued,pag. 36. but for that ther is no day excepted, but it may be receiued euery daye. Let your wisedome I beseche you, instruct vs M. Iewel, why the Sacrifice may not in like sence be called daily bothe of the Fathers and of D. Harding, as well as the Sacrament,M. Iewel confuteth him self. though it were not precisely euery daye celebrated, which yet in some places was so, as S. Augustin by you alleaged expressely saied? So properly you alleage the fathers to proue the Contrary. Againe that is not Vntruly called daily which in respect of so many daies in the yere is done euery weke twise at the lest. as S. Ambrose saieth, the Sacrifice was. For in S. Augustins and S. Ambrose his time the Sacrifice being wekely at the lest receiued, and yet the people

of duty then, as now a dayes, coming but once in the yere to receiue (as bothe S. Augustin and S. Ambrose do otherwhere expressely witnesse) the daily Sacrifice was after ministred without any company to receiue with the Priest,
                  Au. Hom. 28. de ver. Dom. sec. Luc. Amb. lib. 5. de sa
                        •
                     r. Cap. 4. for ought that appeareth. Againe the priest of duty at the lest euery Sonday celebrating, and yet the people of duty but ones in the yere receiuing, if without a company the priest could not receiue, he coulde not celebrate the Daily Sacrifice, yea he shoulde perhaps celebrat it but once in the yere. Thus the meaning of a daily Sacrifice though it were but wekely, not daily, (as the fathers expressely call it) yet in that sence also it should well serue the purpose of Priuat Masse, as M. Iewell calleth it. But now to your last allegation.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               
                  Concil. Tol. 4. cā. 9.
The .51. Vntruthe For this can not be well gathered.But what recorde hereof can be plainer, then the Councell of Toledo? The wordes in english be these. There be sundry priestes in Spayne that touching the prayer that the Lorde taught, and commaunded Daily to be saied, saie the same only vpon the Sonday, and vpon no daye els. (51) Hereof we may wel gather, that if the priestes in Spayne saied the Lordes prayer onely vpon the Sonday, for so much as Communion is neuer ministred without the Lordes prayer, therefore the priestes in Spaine ministred not the Communion, but onely vpon the Sonday.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                It appereth by the Councell that these priestes in Spayne saied Masse in the weke daies, without the Pater Noster. And therefore M. Iewelles Conclusion is vntruly gathered. The Councell in that Canon alleaged concludeth thus. VVhosoeuer therfore either of the priestes or of the inferiour clergy, do let passe our Lords prai
                     •
                  r ei
                     •
                  her in th
                     •
                   publike Seruice, or in the priuat Seruice, for his pride being cast le
                     •
                   him be depriued. Thus those priests omitting our lordes praier in the publike seruice, in the other weke daies, we may wel gather, that they saied Masse in the other weke daies (the Masse being the chiefest part of the publike seruice) and omitted therein the Pater Noster which that holy Councell worthely condemneth in this place. These be the fathers which, M. Iewell auoucheth in his Vntruthe, to saye plainly

the contrary, 
               
                  •
               hat is, to denie vtterly the daily Sacrifice. These be the picked Authorites which he hath chosen, to leaue such and such, as you heard him saie. Two of his allegations speaketh directly against him. The third is builded vpō an Vntrue collection, and vpon a condemned Abuse, if it were true.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               S Augustin expounding the fourthe petition of our Lordes praier, Geue vs this day our dayly bread,diui. 26. De verbis domini s
                        •
                     
                     cundum Lucā Homil. 28. 
               shewing that this may be taken either for materiall bread, either for the Sacrament of our Lordes Body, or of spirituall meate, which he alloweth best, woulde, that concerning the Sacrament of our Lordes Bodie, they of the Easte shoulde not moue question, how it might be vnderstanded to be their daily Bread, which were not daily partakers of oure Lordes Supper, (35)
                  Thse be the ve very wordes of S. Augustin.
                 VVhere as for all that, this bread is called daily Bread.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
                pag. 62. The .52. Vntruth Slaunderous, and peuish.The .35. Vntruthe. For S. Augusten saieth. In illis partibus non intelligitur quotidianus panis. In those partes it (the B. Sacrament) is not vnderstanded to be daily Bread.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                M. Iewell taketh holde vpon these wordes (where as for all that) as though D. Harding had sayed, where, that is, in which countres of the East. Which in dede had not ben only contrarye to S. Augustine, but to him selfe also which confesseth in the next line before that they of the East were Not daily partakers of our Lordes Supper.
                  Cum iste panis &c. not vbi.
                But these wordes (where as for all that) haue no relation to the place, but to the bread. And so I thinke euery One that vnderstandeth Englishe perceiueth wel enoughe. Nowe M. Iewell will forgett not onely all Diuinite and Grammer (as you sawe before in turning the wordes, Populis immolatur) but also his very Englishe Tongue, rather then he will lacke a number off Vntruthes to heape vp

in this firste Article. O miserable shiftes, off willfull Malyce.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               Although many times the people forbare to come to the Communion,
               diuis. 28 
               so as many times (36.) none at all were founde disposed to receiue.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
                pag. 64. The .53. Vntruthe Slaunderous.The .36. Vntruthe. M. Harding is able to shewe no such case.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
                Whē we come to the last Vntruthe of this Article the .45. in numbre, it shal be proued that D. Harding hath already shewed a Clere Case where the Sacrifice being celebrated, yet none dyd Receiue, and that out of the wordes of Chrysostome. To that place I remit the Reader
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               Diui. 29. Dist. 1. hoc quoque.
               
               VVhiche auncient decree (the decree of Soter, that tvvo at the lest must be present at the celebration of the Sacrifice) requireth not that all the people off Necessite be present, (37) much lesse that all so oftentimes shoulde communicat Sacramentally.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
                pag. 66. The .54. Vntruthe Slaunderous.The .37. Vntruthe. For all that were present, were willed either to Communicat, ot or departe.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
                Where were they so wisled M. Iewell? In this decree of Soter? There is no suche worde in all the decree. And then it is no Vntruthe to saie, that by Soters decree, all are not commaunded to Communicat sacramentally: which is the thinge that D. Hardinge sayed, meaning it off Soters decree which he alleaged. But in the texte M. Iewell addeth farder and will proue that the two whiche Soter speaketh of, were bounde to Communicat. But how proue you that M. Iewell? Forsoothe yow saie.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
                pag. 68 Dist 2. per acta.
The .55. Vntruthe. For this decree is of the bishops Masse. Sote
                     ••
                   decree is of the Priestes. De consecr. dist. 1. Epis. Deo.
               Consider this decree writen in the name of Pope Calixtus. The Consecration being done let all Communicat, vnlesse they will be remoued from the Churche. For so the Apostles appointed, and so holdeth the holy Churche off Rome. By this decree these two were bounde, either to Communicat with the Priest, or to departe foorth of the Churche.
            
               I answere. This decree of Caliztus was made of the Clergy only and of the bishop, when he executed. It is not made of the Priestes and their Masses, as the decree of Soter is, and therefore you deceiue your Reader shamefully and with a manifest Vntruthe. The whole decree of Calixtus is this. The bishop sacrificing vnto God, let him haue with with him witnesses. In the more solemne dayes; seuen or v. or iij. Deacons. whiche be called the Bishoppes eyes, and subdeacons and other Ministers. VVhich clothed in holy vestimentes before and behinde him, the Priestes also on the sides of him, on the left and the right hande, all with a contrite h
                     •
                  rte, and an humbled sprit, standing with their face bowing to the grounde, keping him from euill willing men, and geuing their consent to the sacrifice. But the Consecration being done, let all communicat, vnlesse they will be remoued from the Churche. Lo M. Iewell. This is the whole decree of Calixtus. You see it is all spoken of Deacons, subdeacons, Priestes and other Ecclesiasticall Ministres. Nowe the two commaunded to be present in Soters decree, to answer to the Priest, it was indifferent whether they were off the laie or of the clergy. But you wil proue they ought to be of the clergy that Soter speaketh of. For this purpose you bringe vnder the name of Anacletus, this selfe same decree,M. Iewell maketh two allegatiōs off one. which you brought before vnder the name of Calixtus (so false and lewde) you are to deceiue your Reader) and you bring the former piece thereof, to witt, that the Bishop must haue aboute him a certaine numbre of Deacons, subdeacons, and other Ministres
               ▪ I answer. The decree is made of a, bishop and that in solemnioribus diebus, in the more solemne daies, not of euery Priest, in euery meane or lowe day. But the decree of Soter is de praesbiteris, of priestes expressely, and of their Masses. Yet you bringe an other decree of Soter, to proue that these two must be of the clergy▪ that is, you saye,
                  De Cons. Dist. 1. vt illud.
                
               That euery Priest making the Sacrifice haue by him an other Priest to assiste him, and to make an ende of the Ministration, if any quamme or sickenesse happen to fall vpon him. When will

you leaue to deceiue your Reader M. Iewell? This decree speaketh not absolutely that all Priestes ought off Necessite allwayes so to haue. But the decree expressely saieth. Vbi temporis, vel loci, siue cleri copia suffragatur.
               The .56. Vntruthe Standing in f
                     •
                  lse Application. When the time dothe serue, or when the place admitteth it, or when good store of the clergy is present. Thus the decree prouided not absolutely so to be allwayes, but when the tyme was more solemne, the place more publike, or the clergye at commodite to helpe: as hauing not saied Masse them selues before, as in solemne dayes and in Cathedrall Churches moste did, and nowe doo. But that Euery Priest ought allwayes so to haue, that the decree saieth not. And therefore you haue not yet proued that they ought to be of the clergy. And more then this proof hereof you haue nothing in your text. Therefore farder they might be of the laye: and then not bounde to receiue with the Priest. Which being so, euen in this decree of Soter a Priuat Masse is proued, and a case is shewed where masse is saied of the Priest without any company bounde to receiue with him. Yet you conclude most impudently in your text, 
                  Iewell. 
               
               pag. 68. The 57. Vntruthe touching Soters decree.that whether they were of the clergy or of the laite those two whose presence Soter required, that the lawe constrained them to receiue togeather with the Priest. This I saie you conclude most impudently, hauing no Lawe, or Decree, or piece of Decree, that the Laite was bounde to receiue with the Priest, and hauing brought certain apparent pieces for the Clergy bounde to receiue, which yet in dede ioyned to the whole decree haue made no deale for you,
                  The 58 Vntruthe. For more then an inckling of Priuat Masse is founde in Soters decree.
                 as hath ben proued. After this you conclude, that M. Harding hath founde a Communion, and no manner token or inklinge of priuat Masse. Which how true it is in this one point, I leaue to the iudgement of euery indifferent Reader.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               Diuis. 31.
               In that Councell of Agatha we finde a decree, made by the Fathers assembled there, whereof (38) it appeareth that priestes oftentimes sayde Masse without others receiuing with

them.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                The 38. Vntruthe. There appeareth no such thinge,pag. 71. The 59. Vntruthe Slaund. The 60. Vntruthe For the Contrary dothe no
                     •
                   appeare. Can. 21. but rather the contrary.
            That we will now trie M. Iewell. The decree of the Councell is thus much in English. If any man will haue an oratorie or 
                     •
                  happell abrode in the countre beside the parish Chur
                     •
                  hes, in which laufull and ordinary assemblie is, for the rest of the holy daies that he haue Masses there in consideratiō of the werynesse of the houshoulde, with iust ordinaūce we do permitt. But at Easter, Christes birth, Epiphanie, the Ascension of our Lorde, Whitsonday and the Natiuite of S. Iohn Baptist, and if there be any other speciall festes, let them not k
                     •
                  pe their masses, but in the Cities and parishes. And as for the Clerkes if any will do, or haue their Masses at the foresaide, festes in chappels, vnlesse the Bishop so commaunde or permitt, let them be trust out from the Communion. Hetherto the decree. By this decree. (saieth D. Harding) we lerne that then Masses were commonly saide in priuate Chappels at home, at such times as the people were not accustomed to be houseled. And the reason hereof he geueth in these wordes.The reason of D. Harding 
               For when by commaundement and common order they receiued their rightes, as in the afore named feastes, then were the Priestes prohibited to say Masses in priuat oratories or chappels with out the parish Churches. The argument of D. Harding shortly is this.
            
               The cause why people was commaunded to resorte to the Cities and parish Churches in principall feastes, was their Communicating.
            
            
               Ergo being permitted to haue Masse in priuat Chappels, it appeareth, that in those priuat chappels they did not communicat.
            
            
               
                  Harding. 
                Now what saie you against this argument M. Iewel? Which as it is no necessary demonstration, nor was not brought for such, so is it a probable and well apparent reason. And for such, D. Harding brought it, saying expessely, that by this decree it appeareth priestes oftentimes saied Masse without others
               
               receiuing with them.
               M. Iewell Replieth not to the reason of D. Harding, but apposeth of his owne. You saye, there appeareth no such thinge, and therefore you make it an Vntruthe. But how proue you M. Iewell that no such thinge appeareth? What saie you to the reason or argument of D. Harding, whereby he gathereth that such a thinhe appeareth? You saie to his argument not one worde. You make an argument or two of your owne, which he made not, and against them you insult after your facion. After that you appose him, and aske him, 
                  Iewell. 
               
               pag. 71.what leadeth M. Harding thus to saie? His reason that leadd him so to saie was in the text, but you would not heare it at all. Againe you aske. Was there no company at all in the Chappell to communicat vvith the priest?The 61. Vntruthe, standing in manif
                     •
                  st falsyfying of the decree. If there were any, shewe you. Truly there appeareth none, by any worde of the decree, either to haue bene, either to ought to haue bene. Yes saie you. It is prouided by the decree it selfe, that there should be a lawful and an ordinarie companie. And you note in the Margin. Can. 21. In quibus est legitimus ordinariusque cōuentus, that is in English, in the which there is a lawful and an ordinary assemblie. In what which M. Iewel? Who is the Antecedēt to quibus?M. Ievvel maketh false construction to maintayne his false reli
                  
                     •
                  ion. I wil putt you the whole sentēce, and then see how you can construe it. Si quis extra Parochias, in quibus est legitimus ordinariusque conuentus, oratorium in agro habere voluerit. that is in English, If any man wil haue a Chappel in his groūde, beside the parishes, in which (s· parishes) there is a lawfull and an ordinary assemblie. Now M. Iewel. This priuat Masse that is saide to appere by this decree, is in the Chappel. You disproue the priuat Masse, bicause you saie the Decree hath prouided that there should be a lawfull and an ordinary assemblie in the parish churches. Thus by false cōstructiō M. Iewel, you deceiue againe
your Reader, wittingly and willingly, and do nought els but wrāgle childishly, by some meanes or other to weary your aduersary.
            After this you leape from Agatha to Gangra, from Fraunce to Grece, to proue that in these oratories and priuat houses,

there was a Communion. And thus you reason.
            
               In Grece about a hundred and fiftie yeres before, the Communion wa
                     •
                   receiued in priuat houses.
            
            
               Ergo in Fraunce so longe after, in their priuat Chappelles,
               M. Iewelles Argument. 
               there was also a Communion.
            
            The lewdenesse of this argumēt wil better appeare by the like.
            
               In Fraunce within these fifty yeres all Churches had priuat Masses.
            
            
               Ergo now in England all Churches haue the same. As true is the one as the other.
            But now M. Iewell saieth, He will geue a clere answer to M. Hardinges blinde gheasses. What is that trow we?The .62. Vntruthe ioyned with a Slaūder. Co. Agath. Can. 60. Epist. decret. Siricij.
                Forsothe an other Canon of the selfe same Councell, which biddeth the penitents to depart out of the Church with the Nouices that were not yet Christened, Item a decretal epistle of Siricius, Commaunding in like maner notorious offenders to departe out of the Church. Ergo the rest that remained, did communicat. I answer. All this was in Cities and Parish Churches vnto which the Nouices and open penitents resorted. This was not in Chappels of priuat houses, of which this decree of the Councelle of Agatha speaketh. This is M. Iewelles clere answer.
            
               They communicated in great cities and Parish Churches,
            
            
               Ergo in Priuat houses. An other like vnto that is this.M. Iewelles Argument.
            
            
               In the Church of Sarisbury, the Minister at euery Communion weareth a Cope.
            
            
               Ergo in all other Chappels at euery communion a cope is woren. Let now euery indifferent Reader iudge, whether any thinge hath ben brought by M. Iewell, why by the decree aboue mentioned, there should not appeare, in those priuat Chappelles to haue ben priuat Masses.
            
               
                  Harding 
               
                diuis. 23. In the wordes of Leontius. 
               At that time (39) he saieth Masse in his Chappell, hauing no other bodie with him but his seruaunt.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               pag. 74. Stapletō. The .63. Vntruthe Slaunderous.The .39. Vntruthe. There was neuer Priuate Masse saide in Alexandria neither before this time, nor at any time sythens.
            Here it may be sene howe true it is, that S. Paule saieth Scientia inflat, Knowleadg puffeth vp. For what a pride is this

of M. Iewell so stoutely and peremptorely to pronounce that in Alexandria there was neuer priuat Masse neither before the time of Leontius,
               The .64. Vntruth, impudētly auouched. 
               nor sithens. What? Hath M. Iewell such a confidence in his Knowleadg, that he is perfit of the Whole order of Gods Seruice that euer hath bene vsed or practised in Alexā
               dria, a Cyte (as he saieth him selfe)
                  Iewell. 
               
               pag. 78. a thousande myles beyonde all Christendom, and where the faithe of Christ hath continued so many hundred yeres before the time of Leontius, and longe after also? Is M. Iewell so sure that all that time in that great Cyte there was neuer priuat Masse, that though Leōtius a writer of more then 900. yeres sithens do write so, yet he is sure it was neuer so? Hath M. Iewell sene all? Hath he reade all? And Dothe he remembre all thinges that were euer done in the Churche Seruice of that Cyte? What is Impudency, what is Puffing Pride, what is Presumptuous Rashenesse, if this be not? As for the wordes which he noteth for an Vntruthe, they are the wordes of Leontius alleaged by D. Harding, they are not the wordes as auouched of D. Harding. And then truly if there were neuer priuat Masse in Alexandria, it was a greate Vntruthe on Leontius parte to write so.This Leō
                  tius is much cō
                  mended in the .7. Generall Councell Act. 4. Now whether M. Iewell be better to be beleued herein then is Leontius, a knowen approued writer these many hundred yeres, I leaue it to the Readers discretion. Leontius saieth plainely of Ihon the holy bishop of Alexādria. Facit Missas in oratorio suo, Nullum habens secum nisi ministrum suum. He saieth Masse in his Chappell, hauing None other bodie with him, but his seruāt. Here is a clere witnesse of priuat Masse,
                  He liued aboute the time of S. Gregory, within the first 600. yeres.
                  
                     Con. Nice. 
                     
                        •
                     . Act. 4.
                as M. Iewell termeth the receiuing of the priest without a company of communicants. And that within the first 600. yeres. For this Leontius (as the Fathers of the seuenth generall Councel do saie) floruit circa tempora Mauritij Imperatoris, flourished aboute the time of Mauritius the Emperour. Whose raigne begāne in the yere of our lord. 585. The witnesse being so clere, M. Iewel though good to out face

the matter, and stoutely to saie that neither before this Leontius, nor euer sithens there was euer priuat Masse saied in Alexandria.M. Iewel. outfaceth matters, when proofes faile him. This shamelesse and impudent facing semeth wel to be resembled by the Gorgons
head with the Anticke that M. Iewelles printer hath placed at the ende of euery Article. Where spare roome was. Frons perfricta, Os impudens.
            
            Whereas in the text M. Iewell woulde make vs beleue that Missae here should not signifie Masse, but any other kinde of praier (for he careth not what he make of it,
                  The 65. Vntruthe, aboute the significatiō of Missas facere.
                  
                  
                     Ambros. lib. 5. Epist. 33.
                so it be not Masse) he may as soone persuade any that is lerned that the Crow is white, as that Missas facere in this place doth not signifie to say Masse. For so he may tell vs that Missā facere caepi in S. Ambrose, doth not signifie I begāne to say Masse, but matins or euensong or some like thinge. Any thinge M. Iewell, so it be not Masse. And when S. Gregory charged Maximus the intruded bishop of Salona that being excommunicated, Missas facere praesumpsit it shall not signifie He presumed to saie Masse,
               
                  Gregor. lib. 4. epist. 34. but he presumed to saye his matins or euen songe, or any other kinde of praier, which no person excommunicated is forbidden to saie. In like maner when the Councell of Arels chargeth the bishops that for certain offenses, Anno integro Missas facere non praesumant,
               
                  Concil. Arelae. Can. 2. it shall not signifie that for the space of a whole yere they presume not to saie Masse, but that they presume not to saye matins or euensong all the yere longe, or some other kinde of prayer, what ye wil, so it be not Masse. But what shifte is there so impudent that M. Iewell will not vse, rather then to yelde, and acknowleadge his vanite and errour? An heretike (saieth S. Paule) is suo iudicio condemnatus,
               
                  Tit. 3. cō
               demned in his owne iudgement. M. Iewell knoweth him selfe that in this place he hath kicked and striued against a manifest Truthe. Yet he will not yelde. What other shiftes he hath vsed to defeate this clere Testimony, bicause it is in the Confutatiō of D. Harding, particularly refelled, I shall not nede presently

farder to entermedle. And this litle maye seme sufficient to iustifie the Vntruthe, of Leontius (iff it were an Vntruthe) for his wordes they are, not off D. Harding, whose wordes they are not.
            Againe M. Iewell denieth the Conclusion. For whereas Leontius saieth, that Iohn the bishop of Alexādria saied Masse in his Chappel,M. Iewell denieth the Conclusion. hauing no other body with him, but his seruāt, and of this it is Concluded, that in Alexandria there was priuat, Masse, M. Iewel denieth the Conclusion and saieth stoutely, there was neuer priuate Masse in Alexandria, neither before the time of Leontius, nor at any time sithens, and putteth that for an Vntruthe, which is Concluded. Wherein he fareth as a foole of Sanford by Oxforde was wonte to doe. Who resorting to the vniuersite at Christmasse time, and being by certaine sophismes made in the waye of pastime, proued to be an Asse, woulde allwayes denye the Conclusion, and saye. Naye: but I am no Asse. Wherein he shewed him selfe to be an Asse in dede.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               diuis. 33.
               Euen as our Sacramentaries do ascribe all to faith onely, and (40) call the most worthyest Sacrament none other but tokening bread, whiche of it selfe hath no diuine efficacy or operation.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               pag. 81. The .66. Vntruthe Slaunderous. Articu. 6.¶ The .40. Vntruthe. We neuer called it so.
            You Sacramentaries of Geneua do so call it, if you agree with the doctrine of Iohn Caluin youre Master. Who in his resolutions vppon the Sacramentes, hathe these verye wordes. Although the bread be geuen vnto vs as a Marke or pleadge of the Communion, yet bicause it is a signe, not the thinge it selfe, nor hathe not the thinge included in it, they which staie their mindes thereupon, worshipping therein Christ, they make an idoll of it. In these wordes Caluin maketh the Sacrament only a tokening bread, a signe without the thinge included in it, which is a bare signe and token.

Nowe to iudge the doctrine of the scholers, by the printed and published doctrine of the Master, it is no Vntruthe.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               Nowe one place more for priuate Masse,
               diuis. 34. 
               & caet. (41.) This place is twise founde in Chrysostom.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                The .41. Vntruthe.pag. 87. The .67. Vntruthe Slaunderous. Stapleton Priuate Masse is neuer founde in Chrysostome.
            The daily Sacrifice offred, without any to Communicat, is (in your sence M. Iewell) priuat Masse. But that is founde in Chrysostome. Ergo priuate Masse is founde in Chrysostome. The Maior or first proposition is clere. The seconde is the saying of Chrysostome. These are his wordes.
                  Homi. 61. ad p
                        •
                     p. A
                        •
                     
                     tioch.
                
               The daily sacrifice is offred in vaine. We stande at the aultar for naught. There is not one that will be houseled. Here lo is a daily Sacrifice offred, and yet not one to Comunicate, This place M. Iewell, if you wil stande to the letter, (as you do in all other places alleaged) you can neuer auoyde while you liue. And therfore there is no remedy. You must Subscribe.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               But all was in vaine (42) for none came.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                The .42. Vntruthe.The .68. Vntruthe Slaunderous. There came many bothe of the people and also of the clergy.
            Chrysostome sayeth. Nullus qui communicetur. There is not one that will be houseled. M. Iewell saieth it is not true, there came many. Then Chrysostom lieth, not D. Harding, who sayeth no one worde more herein, then Chrysostome him selfe saied. Then score vp this Vntruthe vpon Chrysostom, not vpō D. Harding.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               In that greate and populous Citye of Antioche, where the Scriptures were daily expounded and (43) preached.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                The .43. Vntruthe. There was no such daily preaching, as shall appeare.The .69. Vntruthe Slaundero
                     •
                  s.
            
            And how shall that appeare M. Iewell? Mary you alleage in your text Chrysostome which confesseth that such open sermons were made to the people but ones in the weke. What

then?How the Sacrifice and the preaching is called daily. Thē, saye you, it is an Vntruthe, to saie it was daily. No Vntruthe at al M. Iewell. For when the saying of an Author is true in that sence which he meaned, then is the saying true. Nor daily preaching, nor daily Sacrifice is so auouched, that precisely euery daie in the whole yeare, either sermōs were made, either the Sacrifice offred. That is called daily in the olde writers whiche was often done and ones at the lest euery weke. So was the preaching, so was the sacrifice. You heard S. Austen before call the Blessed Sacrament, our daily bread. And thereuppon you conclude your selfe,pag. 63. lin. 11. The people then receiued the Sacrament euery daye. And yet in the next page before disputinge againste the daily Sacrifice,M. Iewell contrarye to him selfe. you saye. Neyther was the Communion then Ministred euerye daye. For proufe whereoff yow alleage an epistle sent from certaine bishoppes, wherein it was confessed that the ministration was only vpon the Sondaies.pag. 62. lin. 3. Now then M. Iewell if the people receiued the Sacrament euery daie, and yet the Communiō was only ministred vpon the Sondaies, either you must graunt that they receiued without a Communiom which is by your doctrine a great abuse, either that a thinge may be called daily though it be done but ones in the weke. And then if you may so interpret the daily Sacrifice, why may not we interpret the daily preaching in like maner, bicause it was done ones in the weke, as the place which you alleage out of Chrysostom against D. Harding, witnesseth expressely?pag. 63. lin. 35. Thus it was no Vntruthe for D. Harding to call that daily preaching which was but ones in the weke, no more then it is for you to saye The people receiued euery daye,The 70. Vntruthe For before he saied: The people receiued euery daie.
                and yet The communion was ministred only vpon the Sonday.
            Againe to shifte away the daily sacrifice, you saie the Sacrament may be called daily bread not for that it is daily receiued, but for that there is no day excepted, but it may be receiued euery day. By this meanes also we may saie, The preaching in Antioche was called daily of D. Harding: bicause there was no day excepted,

but that there might be a Sermon made euery day. Thus M. Iewel by your owne phrases and expositions,M. Iewell confuteth him selfe. the saying of D. Harding is proued to be no Vntruthe. Wherefore you had very litle occasion to geue out such a Solemne Sentence, and to say. I note not this for that I mislyke with daily preaching,The 71. Vntruthe For there was no Vntruthe so boldely presuued. but for that Vntruthe so boldely presumed should not passe vntouched. You should rather haue saied, But for that otherwise the hart would haue broken, if malice this way had not vttered her venim. For truly M. Iewell you haue shewed your selfe herein to be made euen of the scrapinges of malice it selfe, which in a matter by your selfe not mislyked (as you confesse) would yet picke out a faulte, where none at all is. Which in your next Vntruthe appeareth yet more euidently.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               Either the Sacrifice ceased, and that was not done, which (44) Christ Commaunded to be done in his remembraunce, &c.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 72. Vntruthe Slaund. The .44. Vntruthe. Christ commaunded no such daily Sacrifice.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
                Why put you in the worde daily? That is more then D. Harding saied. But that Christ commaunded a Sacrifice to be done in remembraunce of him, yea and a daily Sacrifice, that hath ben proued before M. Iewell, in the 34. Vntruthe. Which you bothe before in the 5. the 33. and the 34. Vntruthe,M. Iewell repeteth one Vntruthe foure times. and now againe the fourthe time haue repeted only to make vp a number of Vntruthes, in this first article, wherein you thought to bringe D. Harding out of credit at the beginning for euer. For euen here you Boast and Vaunt out of measure, and that with such Impudency, as no man of lerning woulde vse but you. And you saie.Pag. 91. The 73. Vntruthe ioyned with passing impudency.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                O M. Harding, is it not possible your Doctrine may stande vvithout lies? So many Vntruthes, in so litle roome, without the shame of the worlde, vvithout feare of God?
            To the which I answer. O M. Iewel. Is it not possible to defende your most Vaine Chalenge, without such Impudent

Lies? So many Vntruthes Charged vpon D. Harding in so litle roome, euen at the entry of your Maine Labour, and not one of them True? All returned backe vnto you? And haue you done all this so Impudently, so Facingly, so extreme Braggingly, without the Shame of the worlde, Wihout Feare of God? You a preacher of Gods holy worde, you an instructer of the people, you a Bishop, and God will? Teache you Truthe at home, which haue printed openly so many notorious Lies, so outragious Vntruthes, so facing fashoods? Are not your selfe now guilty of all these Vntruthes (lege talionis) which in so 
                  ••
               tle roome and so many you haue forged vpon D. Harding?
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               By reporte of Chrysostom the Sacrifice in his time was daily offred, that is to saie, the Masse was celebrated. But many times no body came to communicat Sacramentally with the priestes, (45) as it is before proued.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               pag. 88. The 74. Vntruthe the Slaund.The .45. Vntruthe. This is not yet proued.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
                Yes M. Iewell it is so proued, that you shall neuer be able to auoide it, I meane euen by this place of Chrysostom. This is the syllogismus, or brief argument of the whole.
            
               Priuat Masse proued out of Chrysostom.
               VVhere the daily Sacrifice is made and none doth communicat with the Priest, there is Masse without communicants.
            
            
               But Chrisostom saieth the daily Sacrifice was made, and no body did communicat.
            
            
               Ergo by Chrysostoms saying, there was a Masse without communicants. Of this it foloweth.
            
               A masse without communicants is priuat Masse.
            
            
               Ergo there was priuat Masse.
            
            Here M. Iewell to defeate this argument presseth and wringeth him selfe, as many waies, as arte or witt coulde helpe him. And yet none will serue. First he demaundeth.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               pag. 88.Whether M. Harding wil rest vpon the bare wordes of Chrysostom, or qualifie them somewhat, and take his meaning.
            
               
               
                  Stapleton 
                To the which his answer is. He will rest vpon the wordes of Chrysostom not bare, but taking also his meaning. Which is to meane as he spake, and not contrary to his speache. M. Iewell disputeth on bothe sides. First he saieth.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                If he presse the wordes precisely,The 75. Vntruthe For it foloweth not by Chrysostoms wordes that he him selfe did not Communicat. then Chr
                  ••
               ostom him selfe did not Communicat. For he was Some body. And the plaine wordes be, No body did Communicat.
            Who euer thought M. Iewell had bene so very a foole, as to be ignorant, that in an vniuersall speache, s
                     •
                  mper excipitur persona loquentis. Euer the party that speaketh is excepted? Namely in such thinges which signifie an Action not touching the Speaker him selfe. As here. Chrysostom saying that No body did communicat, speaketh it of the communicating of Other with him, not of his Owne communicating. After this M. Iewell disputeth vpon Chrysostoms meaning by a Gheasse vtterly Vntrue, as it shall now appeare. He saieth.The .76. Vntruth. For S. Chrysostom speketh no one word of small compaines.
            
            It appeareth Chrisostoms purpose was to rebuke the negligence of the people for that of so poppulous a Citie, they came to the Communion in so small compaines.
            This Gheasse as it is vtterly vntrue, so it is vtterly vnproued. I will tell you Chrisostoms purpose, and proue it to by his owne wordes. His purpose was to persuade the people frō their vsuall ones receiuing at Easter, and to come oftener to receiue the holy Sacrament.The purpose of Chrysostom in the place alleaged These are his wordes euen next before the wordes last alleaged. I see great inequalite of thinges amonge you. At other times when as for most parte ye are in cleane life,, ye come not to receiue your rightes. But at Easter though ye haue done some thinges amisse, yet ye come. O what a custome is this: O what presumption is this?
               
                  Homi. 61. ad Pop. A tioch.
                
               The Daily Sacrifice is offred in vaine &c? Lo M. Iewell you heare what Chrisostōs purpose was by his own wordes: not by a Vaine Gheasse contrary to his wordes. For you saie,The 77. Vntruth. as before. vpō your former Vaine and Vntrue Gheasse that he calleth those Compaines, in a vehemency of speache & cae, No body. Now he speaketh against the custome of ones receiuing

of all the people at Easter, as it is nowe, and saieth that for all the Daily Sacrifice, yet Not One receiued. As for that you bringe exāples of Scripture and of Chrysostō, that Nemo, No Body, Doth sometime signifie a fewe and small company, you must remembre M. Iewell, that examples serue to expresse and to make clere one matter by an other, not to proue and conclude one thinge vpon an other. You knowe the rule. Exempla dilucidant non probant. Examples doe open that which is darke: they proue not. If you had first proued that Chrysostom by the word No body had meant smal Compaines, then for example of the like, your allegations would haue serued well. Nowe to proue this can not serue, but only to exemplifie. Thus your simple gheasse vpon Chrysostoms meaning is founde vtterly Vaine, Fonde, and Vntrue. So bothe the wordes and the meaning of Chrysostom make directly against you and proue clerely that none did communicat oftētimes in the daily Sacrifice, which is priuat Masse.
            Yeat M. Iewell hunteth after other shiftes, and sacketh euery corner of his olde notes, to ouerthrow and obscure this clere testimony of Chrysostom for priuat Masse. And saieth:
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               pag. 89.And albeit, this onely answer compared with the maner of Chrisostomes eloquence, which commonly is hote and feruent, and with the cōmon practise of the Church then,The 78. Vntruth. For this only Answer is in sufficient as shall appeare. may suffice to a man more desirous of truthe then of contention, yet I haue good hope &c.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                If you M. Iewell had bene more desirous of the truth, which your forefathers beleued, then of Contention to maintaine your late vpstert Faction the Lutheran Secte, if you had minded in dede to yelde to the Lerned Fathers, as you professed in your Sermon to doe, if your whole intent and ende in this Replie had not bene to defende your ouer fonde and rashe Chalenge, with the which your owne brethern are offended, but to trie the Truthe of our faithe in Christ Iesus, you woulde your self haue iudged that this your Answer to the place of Chrysostom

had bene very Fonde, Childish, and Peuish. For what Child but you, would call the wordes of Chrysostō in doubte, saying, There is no Body that Dothe Communicate, Bicause he him selfe communicated, which was some body? For I pray you M. Iewel, if these wordes cā not proue the Sole Receauing of the Priest which you call priuat Masse, what wordes shall euer be able to proue it? Did you Deuise your Chalenge vpon Certain Termes,The Intēt of M. Iewelles Chalēge. which you thought could neuer be founde in the Auncient Writers, or did you seke after the Matter comprised in such termes? If the first, then you your selfe M. Iewell are the man (that you speake of) more desirous of Cōtention, then of Truthe. If the last, then you haue here a Priuat Masse. You haue a daily Sacrifice which the Latin Church hath called the Masse euē before Chrysostōs time, without Cōmunicāts. If this, as I saied, do proue no Priuat Masse, I beseche you M. Iewel tel vs by what words wil you haue it proued? Wil you denie we haue had Priuat Masse these later 900. yeres? Wil you denie, the Catholikes haue it at this howre in Italy, Fraūce, Germany, Spayne, Portugall and other Christened Coūtres? I dare say, you wil not put vs to proue this. But if you should, I thinke verely we could neuer bringe better recorde out of any writer for any Countre,VVhy Priuat Masse cannot easely be proued in plaine termes. then is Chrysostom in this place for Antioche. For why? Many thinges are so well knowen, so certaine, so common, that therefore they are not put in writing. What example can you bringe M. Iewell out of all the first 600. yeres, that euer any man saied his Pater Noster Priuatly to him selfe alone, out of the Churche or Congregation?P
                     •
                  iu
                     •
                  t Pater Noster. And yet who doubteth but Thousandes did so att that tyme? And truly in lyke maner to proue by Recordes and writinges of lerned men, that Priuat Masse was saied in Spaine (for example) fourty yeares agoe, woulde be a thinge of as greate Difficulty, as to proue it in the first 600. yeares, if so plaine wordes as Chrysostomes are, maye not be admitted. For what can be

more plaine then this? We stande at the aultar, we Offer the daily sacrifice, and none doth Communicat. Yet thus muche saied Chrisostome. Therefore againste this Clere and Euident Assertion of Chrysostome, we admitte not youre Pelting Exception off Chrysostomes owne person, nor the bolde shifting off No body into small companies, exemplified, not proued. This answer I saye we admitt not, not for Contention sake, which doe not defende herein any Priuate Particular Doctrine of our owne, but the Faythe of oure forefathers, and the Faithe of all Christened Countres, beside you and a fewe others, but we reiecte it M. Iewell for Truthes sake. The Truthe I saye of that Faithe in the which bothe you and we were baptised, bothe your parents and oures haue yelded their soules to God. But nowe let vs see what is the hope that you haue conceiued although this Answer be reiected. You saye.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .79. Vntruthe For it is Master Iewelles Nemo, not D. Hardings, nor Chrysostoms neither.I haue good hope, it may be proued, notwithstanding Master Hardinges Nemo, that Chrysostome neither was alone, nor coulde be alone at the holy Ministration, and therefore coulde saye no priuate Masse.
            Beholde good Readers, howe M. Iewell deceiueth you. He will proue that Chrysostome coulde not be alone at the holy Ministration, and therfore coulde saye no Priuate Masse. And howe many Thousandes of Priestes do daily saye Priuate Masse, which yet be not alone at the holy Ministration? But if M. Iewell will proue that Chrysostome coulde saye no priuate Masse,M. Iewell stealeth from the Matter. he must proue that Chrysostom coulde not Receiue Alone. For what is Priuat Masse, as M. Iewel and his felowes take it, but the Sole Receiuing of the Priest? Proue then M. Iewel that Chrysostome could not Receiue alone.
               Marke, what the Answere of M. Iewell ought to be. Truly iff you can do so, you shall proue that vpon Chrysostome, whiche Chrysostom him selfe denieth. For beholde Chrysostom saied. He hath not one to Communicat. M. Iewell will proue. It is not possible but he shoulde haue some Body to Communicat. And so M. Iewel

wil proue that thinge to be done,M. Iewell wil proue S. Chrysostom a lyar. whiche yet Chrisostome saieth in plaine wordes, was not done. But because he woulde not seme to fight against Chrysostome, and his wordes: but against D. Harding and his wordes, he protesteth to proue this, Notwithstandinge M. Hardinges Nemo. He shoulde haue sayed, if he woulde speake truly.M. Iewell iuggleth one word for an other to make pastime. 
               Notwithstanding S. Chrysostomes Nullus, Not one. For that worde Nemo, No body whiche M. Iewell sporteth him selfe so much with in this place, is not founde either in Chrysostome, or in D. Hardinge: But is deuised of this Sir Iohn Hicke scorner to make sporte, and passe time withall. In dede the worde Nullus, Not one: which so graueleth M. Iewell, is the worde of Chrysostome, but not of D. Hardinges inuention. Thus he altereth and iuggleth, prouing and placing one thinge for an other, so to steale awaye and beguile the Reader. For you shal see, M. Iewell with al his Allegations, Shiftes and Euasions shall neuer be able to proue, that Chrysostome coulde not Receiue Alone at the holy Ministration, which is the only waye to proue that he coulde saye no priuat Masse. You shall see his wordes,
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                For if the whole Companye of the laye people woulde haue forsaken him, yet had he Companie sufficient of the Priestes and Deacōs,pag. 89. and others of the Quiere. And if the whole Quiere woulde haue forsaken him, yet had he Companie sufficient▪ of the people, as it maye be clerely proued.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                Lo you see, his proufes do tende not to proue that a companye Communicated with Chrysostome, but to proue that a company was Present. Now if the Presence of a company maye disproue Priuate Masse, then is there at this daye no Priuate Masse, nor neuer was in any Cathedrall or parish Churches vpon Sonday or holy day. Yet let vs consider M. Iewelles proufes.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                That there was then a greate numbre to Serue in the Ministery, it may diuersely wel appeare.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                Lo againe. He talketh of Wayters on, not of such as doe Cō
               municat.

And yet all this that he bringeth hereafter of the clergy, is Vtterly from the Purpose.
            
               
                  Iewell 
                Ignatius calleth Presbyterium, the sacred Colledge, the Councel and Cō
               panye of the Bishop.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                This proueth a companye to serue at the aultar with the Bishop. But it proueth not that they communicated with the Bishop. And thoughe it did, yet it proueth not that euerye other Priest had Alwaies at his Masse a Companie to cōmunicate with him. And Saint Chrysostome when he wrote these wordes (of whiche we nowe treate) was no Bishoppe, as it shall anon appeare. Therefore this is Vtterly from the Purpose.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Chrysostome him selfe in his Liturgie sayeth thus, The Deacons bringe the dishes with the holy Breade vnto the holye Aultar, the Rest carie the holye Cuppes. By whiche wordes appeareth bothe a number of the Ministerie, and also prouision for them that woulde Receiue.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                This then was the order, when people did receiue. It proueth not that people did at euery Masse receiue. As well you might, M. Iewell, bringe the latine Manuall of some churches, against Priuate Masse, where also order is taken for such as will receiue.
            Againe this was a solemnite in the Churche of Constantinople, when S. Chrysostom was bishop there. But the wordes of Chrysostom which we treate of nowe, were spoken in Antioche when he was yet but a priest, no bishop.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               
                  Euseb. lib. 6. cap. 43. Nazianzen in Apologet.
               Cornelius writeth that in the Churche of Rome there were fourtie and sixe priestes, seuen deacons, seuen subdeacons, forty and two Acoluthes, Exorcistes, Readers, and other officers of the Churche fiftie and two. VVydoues and other afflicted people that were there relieued a 1500. Nazianzen complaineth of the number of the clergie in his time, that they semed to be moe then the rest of the people. Therefore the Emperor Iustinian afterwarde thought nedefull to abridge the number and to make a lawe that in the great Churche at Constantinople, where Chrysostome was bishop,
            
               
                  Stapleton 
               (But not when he wrote this homelie out of the which

the wordes are taken, to the which M. Iewel nowe maketh answer)
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                There shoulde not be aboue the number of 60. priestes, one hundred deacons, fourescore and tenne subdeacons, one hundred and tenne Readers, and fiue and twenti Singers.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                All this proueth that your clergy of Laie Craftesmen, and Younge Scholers hauing only Ministres and deacons, is farre vnlike to the clergy of the primitiue Church, who had so many degrees beside of holy Orders: It proueth not that All these did at All Times Receiue with the Bishop. And for proufe hereof you bringe not one worde, but thus you Conclude M. Iewell.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Hereby we maye see, that Chrysostome being at Antioche in so populous a Citie, although he had none of the laye people with him, yet coulde not be vtterly lefte alone.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                This is loe, M. Iewelles Conclusion and this is his argument.The effect of M. Iewelles former Allegations. Ignatius a bishop of Antioche had a number of Priestes to waite vpon him, Chrysostom when he was bishop in Constantinople had the like, Cornelius bishop of Rome had so also, Nazianzen complaineth of the great number of the clergy, and Iustinian longe after Chrysostoms time restrained the nūber of the clergy in Constantinople, Ergo Chrysostome being no bishop but a Priest only at Antioche, had in Antioche Alwaies a Number to Serue and Waite vpon him. For thou must vnderstande (gentle Reader) when Chrysostom spake these wordes, which we are nowe aboute,
                  Hom. 6
                     •
                  . ad Pop. Antioch. Socrates. li. 6. cap. 3. Niceph. li. 31. ca. 2. (The daily Sacrifice is offred in vaine: we stande at the Aultar for nought: There is not one that will receiue) he spake those wordes in an homilie made to the people of Antioche where he toke the inferiour orders as Socrates and Nicephorus do write, where he was made Reader, deacon, and priest. He was then no bishop at all, but only a Priest at Antioche. Therefore all this number that M. Iewell hath hetherto proued, is vtterly beside the purpose. And that for ij. causes. First bicause all his allegations being of bishops, of Rome,

and of Constantinople,Al M. Iewelles allegations haue proued nothinge. they make nothinge to the wordes of Chrysostom who was then but a Priest and that at Antioche. Secondarely bicause, al these allegations proueth a number to Waite and Attende vpon the bishop, but they proue not a whit, that such a number ought allwaies to Receiue with the bishop. Nowe let vs see howe M. Iewell procedeth.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 80. Vntruthe ioyned with a Slaund. scoffe.Nowe if we saie that some of these priestes, deacons, or other Communicated with the Bishop, I tell them (saieth M. Harding) boldely and with a solemne countenaunce, which must nedes make good proofe, This is but a poore shifte and will not serue their turne.
            
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                D. Harding did not only tell you so M. Iewell, but he added also a reason wherefore. To the which reason you haue not answered one worde, but like a Hicke Scorner you thought to face out the mattter, making your Reader beleue, that it was only tolde with a bolde and solemne Countenaunce. Nowe this Shifte M. Iewell is not only Poore, but very Beggarly and starke False, and such as you are neuer able to Proue. To witte, that Euery Simple Priest at Euery time that he saied Masse, had a Number of other Priestes and deacons to communicat with him. For vnlesse you proue this M. Iewell, it will allwaies be but a Gheasse to saie, Chrysostom had certaine priestes and deacons to communicat. Yet you saie.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                But if it be true, it is riche enough, if it agree with Chrysostomes owne meaning, it is no shifte, and therefore sufficiently serueth our purpose.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                Proue it to be true, then it shall be ritche enough. Proue it to agree with Chrysostoms meaning, then it shall be no Shifte. You procede and saie.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .81. Vntruthe ioyned with a scoffe.And bicause he sitteth so fast vpon the bare wordes, and reposeth all his hope vpon Nemo, if we list to cauil in like sorte.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                It is no cauilling to presse the Authors wordes and meaning, as hath bene proued. But to wr
                  •
               st the Author to that which he neuer meant, as M. Iewell hath done, that is in dede to cauille.
            
               
               
                  Iewell. 
                VVe might soone finde warrant sufficient to answer this matter euen in the very plain wordes of Chrisostome. For thus they lie.The .82. Vntruth. For these plaine wordes of Chrisostom include no nūber to Receiue vvith him. 
               Frustra assistimus Altari. In vaine we stande at the Aultar. VVe stande, saieth he, and not. I stande, and therfore includeth a number and not one alone.
            He includeth in dede a number to stande at the Aultar, but he includeth no number to receiue at the Aultar, vnlesse M Iewell be of the opinion, that they receiued standing. Againe Chrysostom complaineth not only of him selfe and his owne flocke, but of other priestes also and their flockes.  We stande, we priestes do stande at the Aultar, we offer the daily Sacrifice, and yet: Nullus qui communicetur.
                There is not one that dothe communicat.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                How be it, our shiftes are not so poore: We nede not to take holde of so small aduantages.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                It is a pointe of Rhetorike to make great Bragges, when Matter fainteth. But when M. Iewell hath all saied, it will appeare that this Small Aduantage, is the best holde he hath. It foloweth.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                It is prouided by the Canons of the Apostles, that if any bishop or priest or Deacon, or any other of the Quiere, after Oblation is made, doe not receiue,
               
                  Cā. Apost. 8.
De Cons. Dist. 1. Episcopus. 
                
               onlesse he shewe some reasonable cause of his doing, that he stande excommunicat. The like lawe in the Churche of Rome was after renewed by Pope Anacletus.
            
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                M. Iewell did well to expounde the Canon of the Apostles by the lawe of Anacletus. For as the lawe of Anacletus speaketh expressely of bishops only, and of their Masses, so dothe Canon of the Apostles also, if at lest they be like: as M. Iewell saieth. And then they make nothinge to the Present Purpose. For (as it hath bene shewed before) Chrysostom was then no Bishop,The .83. Vntruthe in falsifying the Canō of the Apostles. when he spake the wordes which we nowe treate of, but a Priest in Antioche. Againe M. Iewell to stretche the Canon of the Apostles farder then it was intended, hath falsified a parte therof. For where he saith (or any other of the Quire) it is in the greke 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                in Latin, aut alius ordinis

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
eccl
                     •
                  siastici, in true english, or any other of the Clergy. For of the Clergy only this Canō was made, who in the Apostles time, and many yeres after, whē the bishop celebrated, vsed customably to receiue. For in that time many right holy and lerned men continewed in the inferiour orders of the clergy all the daies of their life. And were not admitted to priesthood but being called, and in a maner forced thereunto. Such at that time in the beginning of the faithe communicated with the bishop, bicause otherwise (as the Canon saieth) he shoulde seme to be, author offensionis populo, & suspicionem praebens in offerentem. A cause of offence to the people, and to bringe the party that offred into suspicion As being such a one, with whom his Clergy woulde not communicat. For this re pect at that time, such communicating with the bishop was thought necessary. The state of Chrisostoms time foure hundred yeres after was otherwise.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               pag. 90. Can. 14.The Councell of Nice decreeth thus. Let the Dea
                     •
                  ons in order after the Priestes receiue of the bishops, or of the Priest the holy Communion.
            
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                This proueth, that when the Deacons receiued, in such order they should receiue it. It doth not proue that at euery Ministration they were bounde to receiue. Againe the decree speaketh of bishops and of their Celebrating. Chrysostō now was no bishop.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               
                  Carth. 6. Can. 18.Likewise the Councell of Carthage. Let the Deacons receiue the Communion in order after the Priestes, either the bishop or the Priest ministring it.
            
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                Likewise we answer as before. They were not commaunded at euery Ministration to receiue &c.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               
                  Can. 59. T
                        •
                     l. 4. cap. 17.So the Councel of Laodicea. It is lawfull only for the Priestes of the Church to enter in to the place where the Aul
                     •
                  ar stan
                     •
                  eth, and there to Cōmunicate. So the Councel of Toledo. Let the Priestes and Deacons communicate before the Aultar: the Clerkes in the Quiere, and the people without the Quie
                     •
                  e.
            
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                To these I answer as before. It is an order howe, it is no cō
               maundement when, and how often they should receiue.
            
               
               
                  Iewell. 
                Nicolaus Cusanus hath these wordes. This thinge is specially to be noted, that the Priest did neuer celebrat without a Deacon.
               A
                     •
                   Clerū e
                     •
                   literatos Bohaemie
The .84. Vntruthe 
                     ••
                  uching the time of Chrysostom. In liturgia. 
               And that in euery Masse the Deacon receiued the Sacrament in the kinde of Bread at the Priestes hande, and the Priest the Cuppe at the Deacons hande.
            
            Yea forsothe they did so (as he saieth) but in the Apostles time only, and certain yeares after.
            But what nedeth much proofe in a case that is so plaine? Chrysostom him selfe foloweth the same order. After that the Priestes haue receiued (saieth he) the Archedeacon commaundeth the Deacons to come fort
                     •
                  e and they so coming receiue as the Priestes did before.
            
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                This proueth they did so in certain solemne and principall feastes. But that they did so allwaies euery daye or Sondaye, and that of bounded duty (whereby only it should be impossible that Chrysostom should communicat alone) that it proueth not, nor saieth no such thinge.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Now let M. Harding iudge vprightly whether these shiftes be so poore as he woulde make them.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                Now let not only M. Harding, but all the worlde iudge vprightly whether these be not (not onely Poore) but very Beggarly and moste Miserable Shiftes, and suche as proue no deale at all, that Chrysostome coulde in no wyse Communicate alone, and therfore did not Communicat alone. Whiche is the Purpose, wherefore all these Allegations are brought.
            M. Iewell perceauing very well that for all his former Allegations he could not proue the Clergy bounde to the daily cō
               municating, nowe he goeth aboute to proue it in the People. And that therefore Chrysostom must nedes haue some to cō
               municat with him, yea though he saied him selfe he had not one. These are his wordes.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Chrysostome in diuers places Semeth to diuide the whole multitude into three sortes, whereof some were Poenitent some Negligent, and some Deuoute.
            
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                We see presently all this is but a bare Gheasse, by the very

wordes off M. Iewell, Semeth to diuide. But let vs heare forthe.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .85. Vntruthe For the deuoute Receiued not alwayes.The Penitent were commaunded awaye, and might not Communicate. The negligent sometyme departed off them selues, and woulde not Communicate. The deuoute remained and receaued togeather.
            Howe proueth M. Iewell, this later pointe? Yow shall heare.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Nowe, that the deuoute remained stil with Chrysostome, the whole time of the holy Mysteries, it is plaine by the verye same place, that M. Harding here alleageth for his purpose.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                Yea: But you must proue that those deuoute, not only Remained still, but also Receiued with Chrysostom. How proue you that? You go forth and alleage your place.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               
                  Ad pop. Antioch. Homi. 61.For thus Chrysostome saieth vnto the people. Thou art come into the Church, and hast songe praises vnto God, with the rest, and hast confessed thy selfe to be one of the worthy, in that thou departedest not foorth with the vnworthy. By these wordes he sheweth that some were worthy, and some vnworthy. That the vnworthy departed, and the worthy remained.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                Yea M. Iewell. But here is not One Worde that those Worthy whiche Remained, did Receiue. That is but youre Gheasse. Neither yet is there any worde that those whiche Remained, were all Deuoute. For in dede withoute Gheasse or ayme those vnworthy which departed, were the penitents only, whiche were commaunded to departe the Church with the Catechumins or Nouices in the faith, straight after the Sermon. And those which remayned were all the reste of the people, as well Deuoute as not Deuoute. Agayne though they were all Deuoute,
                  Ad Ianuarium. epistol. 118. yet will it not folowe that they all Receiued. For by S. Augustins iudgement, a man maye bothe Receiue and Refraine from Receiuing with Deuotion. The one he compareth to Zachaeus which gladly and hastely receiued Christ in to his house, The other to the Centurion, whiche with no lesse loue of Christ,
                  Luca. 7. saied yet, Lorde I am not worthy, that thou shouldest entre

vnder my 
                     •
                  oufe. Yea Chrysostom in that place, After he had saied in a greate Vehemency,
                  Homi. 61. a
                        •
                      pop. Antoch.
                
               who so doth not Communicat, is one of the poenitents, straightwaye refrayning him selfe, lest he shoulde seme to condemne all that were present, he sayeth, At ex his non es, sed ex his qui possunt esse participes, & nihil curas, aut magnum opus censes. O but you are not such a poenitent, but of the number of those whiche maye Communicate.Those which remained in the Churche Receiued not. But you care not much for the matter, or you thinke it is a greate Busynes, &c, In which wordes it appeareth plainly that those which remained, were such as might Communicat: but yet such as partly of Negligence, partly of Feare and Reuerence did refraine. And therefore Chrysostome tempering his vehement talke saieth vnto such. Considera quaeso, Mensa Regalis est apposita,
               The drifte of Chrisostom in the Homilie alleaged. 
               & caet. Consider I beseche you. The kinges table is layde, and so forthe in many words, persuading them to come and Receiue oftener. After all whiche longe persuasion he concludeth att length, saying. Ne maius itaque vobis iudicium faciamus, vos ex
                  
                     •
                  ort
                     •
                  mur, non vt accedatis, sed vt praesentia vos & accessu dignos constituatis. Therefore that we may not encrease youre iudgement (meaning, that the more they were warned, the more should be their Damnation, if they obeied not) we do exhorte you not to come and receiue, but to make youre selfe worthy bothe to be present and to receiue. In which words he leaueth their Coming or not Coming to the Sacrament as free vnto them, charging them only to make them selues. Alwayes Worthy thereof, to the entent that at Easter, the Epiphanye, and such other principall Festes they shoulde not be founde Vnworthy. For so he disputeth in fewe lynes after sayinge. Dic mihi, quaeso, post Annum Communionem sumens, Quadraginta ne Dies ad totius temporis Peccatorum purificationem tibi satis esse putas? Et Hebdomade ipsa rursum ad Priora reuer
                     •
                  eris? Tell me I praye thee.Ones Receiuing in the yeare. Thow cominge to Receiue after a yeares space, thinkest thow that fourty

daies (he meaneth the Lent time) will be sufficient to purifie thee of thy sinnes of all that time? And then in that very weke thou returnest againe to thy former sinnes. For this cause that after Easter the people fell to dissolutnes, Chrysostom exhorted them so to liue the rest of the yeare, that they should Alwaies, though not Come and Receiue, yet be Worthy to come and Receiue. This is the Drift and Ende of all Chrysostoms disputatiō in that homelie, al most directly with out Gheasse or Ayme prouing Priuat Masse, that is the daily Sacrifice without Company of Communicants.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                And againe in the same homelie he saieth. The deacon standing on high, calleth some to the communio
                     •
                  ,
               The 86. Vntruthe standing in the manifest Corruption of Chrysostom. Stapleton 
               and putteth of some, th
                     •
                  usteth out some, and bringeth in some. Chrysostom saieth. Some are called, and, some are brought in to receiue with the priest. VVhere then is now M. Hardinges Nemo?
            
            Will you neuer leaue to deceiue your Reader and to abuse all the worlde with Patched Sentences beside the purpose? Chrysostom in these wordes telleth the maner of the deacons at the Seruice time, howe none but worthy are admitted. He speaketh not of any ordinary custome of the peoples receiuing at euery Ministration, as M. Iewell would haue it to seme. For Chrysostom after he had (as I shewed before) persuaded with the people to make them selues allwaies Worthy to Receiue, that they might not at Easter come Vnworthy, telling them therefore, that liuing in sinne all the yeare Longe, the fourty daies of Lēt would scant serue to purge them, and speaking the same so earnestly, that his hearers began to be afearde euen of that ones coming to the Sacrament, he saieth at last vnto them. Haec dico non vno & annuo vos prohibens accessu, sed vos semper ad sancta volens accedere.
               
                  Ho
                        ••
                     lia 61. ad pop. Antioch.
                I speake these thinges not forbidding you to come ones in the yere, but desirous to haue you come alwaies to these holy mysteries. After which wordes it foloweth. Propter hoc & Diaconus acclamat tunc sanctos vocans, & per hanc vocem omnium taxans maculas. For this cause (that ye may come worthely) the deacon crieth at that time (at the masse time)

calling, the holy, and by this worde (Holy) rebuking the faultes of al. After which wordes, discoursing in a fewe lines by a comparyson takē of a flocke of shepe, at lenght he saieth of the Deacon. Stans erectus, omnibus appar
                     •
                  ns, & magnum in illa tremenda quiete exclamans, hos quidē vocat hos autem arcet, non manu hoc faciens, sed per linguam quam per manum e
                     •
                  fica
                     •
                  ius. Illa nanque vox in aures incidens nostras, tanquam manus, hos quidem pelli
                     •
                   & ei
                     •
                  ci
                     •
                  , hos autem introducit & assistit. He standing vpright, in the sight of all the people, and crying Alowde, in that dreadfull Silence, some he calleth, and some he putteth of, not doing it with his Hande, but by his toumge more effectuously, then with his hande. For that worde (Holy) falling into our eares, like as a hande, driueth out some, and bringeth in other. This is lo, M. Iewell, the thrusting out, and bringing in, that the Deacon vseth. Not as though he brought in some to Receiue as you would make your Reader beleue, and as you expressely (but vntruly) do saie, but bicause, Crying out Holy, he excluded all Vnholy and vnworthy persons. Al which Chrysostō brought in only to set before the peoples eies, how none but Holy and Worthy might be admitted to receiue those Holy Mysteries. He speaketh not one worde of the peoples cōmunicating with him in Smal Cō
               panies. But cleane contrary, rebuketh their Ones Coming in the yeare, not so much for that they came but Ones, as for that they came euen then Vnworthy, or els soone after Easter fel to their olde negligence and naughtynes.
            Therefore (to Conclude) notwithstanding all your vaine Gheasses, Exceptions, and Allegations,
                  
                     •
                  riuat 
                     •
                  asse Concluded. it is Clere not only by the Wordes, but also by the Meaning and whole discourse of Chrysostom in that Homely, that the People Receiued but Ones in the yeare by any lawe, o
                  •
               der, or Custome, and that oftētimes the Daily Sacrifice was made, and yet Nullus qui communicetur. There was not one that came to communicat.
            Thus cōtrary to the Vntruthe noted by you vpō D. Harding,

The Daily Sacrifice was celebrated when Not One came to cōmunicat Sacramētally with the priest. Which is as much to saie, there was Priuat Masse. Thus also the 36. Vntruthe, where you saide M. Harding is able to shew no such case,pag. 64. where none of the people were founde disposed to receiue, is iustified and proued no Vntruthe. For in this Masse of Chrysostō Not One was founde. Thus Againe the 41. Vntruthe, where you noted that Priuat Masse is neuer founde in Chrysostom, is disproued also, and proued most true. Last of al thus we haue a Priuat Masse within the first 600. yeares, and thus you must Subscribe. There is no remedy.
         
         
            
            A RETVRNE OF VNTRVHES VPON M. IEWELL. &c.
             The Second Article.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               Diuis. 1.
               
                  WHereas vnder either kinde (46.) whole Christ is verely present, this healthefull Sacrament is of true Christian people with no lesse fruite Receiued vnder One Kinde, then vnder bothe.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
                 pag. 89. The 87. Vntruth. Slaunderous.The .46. Vntruthe. proceding only of the Grosse errour of transubstantiation.
            That Christ is wholy Receiued vnder either Kinde, semeth an Vntruth to M. Iewell. And why so? Forsothe bicause it procedeth of the Grosse errour of Transubstantiation. Thus he salueth one sore with an other, and defendeth one heresy with an other, and that condemned in a generall Councell. But for Truthes sake which here I defende, though this heresy of M. Iewelles be already determined in Generall Councell,
                  In Concil. Lateran·
                and therefore of no good Christen man any more to be disputed or doubted of, yet I will assaye shortly proue it. The rather bicause a greate pith of this Article lyeth herein. For if this doctrine of whole Christ to be Receiued vnder either kinde, procedeth (as M. Iewell saieth) of Transubstantiation, this being proued, the other is Concluded. This being Cōcluded that to Receiue vnder One Kinde, is not any Iniury to the Receiuer, but as healthefull and frutefull as to receiue vnder bothe Kindes, the are the great Outcries and Complaintes of the enemies of nods Churche cutt of, vpbrayding the vniuersall practise of Christendome these many hundred yeres by their owne Confession,

as guylty of Cruell Iniurie Done to Gods people. And then haue they lesse Cause in this Sacrament of Vnite, to rayse vp such a piteous storme of Variaunce and Dissension. Though yet M. Iewell full wisely in his text saieth, (of Receiuing whole Christ vnder either kinde).
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                This matter is moued by M. Harding out of season, as being no parte of this Question.pag. 98.
            
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                For so farre it belongeth to this Question of Communion vnder one Kinde, that it being ones graunted, there is no iniury that can be pretended, to be done to the people, as yet M. Iewell out of the Schoolemen him selfe laboureth to proue, contrary bothe to his owne last wordes,The .88. Vntruth ioyned with a folie. and to the whole doctrine of the Schoolemen Alexander de Hales, and Durandus, whom he alleageth very sadly in this place. But to be shorte, I proue Transubstantiation by Scripture and by authorite of the Fathers. If they teache vs grosse errours, for such let it be taken.
                  Transubstantiatiō proued by Scripture.
                  
                     Luc. 22.
                The Scripture saieth. Hoc est Corpus meum, This is my Body. Which this M. Iewell? Can you saie. This bread is my Body? You knowe, Hoc, this, is the neuter gendre. Panis Bread, is the masculin. Then what this? This forsothe which Christ had blessed, and made saying, This is my Body. For the saying of God is making. God maketh with his worde.
                  Genes. 1. The worde saied: Let light be made and light was made. The word saied This is my Body. And we beleue in so saying bicause it was not so before, he made it so euen then, For, Sine paenitentia sunt donae Dei & vocatio.
               
                  Rom. 11. God repēteth him not of his giftes and calling. If then that which God hath saied, can not be reuoked, and Christ true God saied (holding in his hand which before he spake, was but bread) that it was his Body, vndoubtedly as he was true God, so by saying he made it his Body. Now bicause if Christes true Body were ioyned with the nature of Bread, as his true Godhead was with the Nature of Fleshe, then the nature of Bread should be assumpted and ioyned in one person with the body of Christ, as his flesh and

Humanite was ioyned in one person with his Godhead (which to saie is a most wicked and blasphemous heresy) therefore it must of necessite folow, that the nature of Bread be vtterly changed in to the Body of Christ, and not to remaine with it. This if it be so, then is it a clere and vndoubted Trāsubstantiation, of the whole nature of Bread in to the whole and perfit Body of Christ. Neither is it any grosse errour, but a clere doctrine euidently gathered out of holy Scripture.
            By authorite of the Fathers thus I proue Transubstantiation. S. Ambrose saieth, speaking of the Sacrament. Forte dices. Aliud video. Quomodo tu mihi asseris quod Christi corpus accipiam? Et hoc nobis adhuc superest, vt probemus.
               Transubstantiatiō proued by the Fathers. 
               Quantis igitur vtimur exemplis vt probemus non hoc esse quod natura formauit, sed quod benedictio consecrauit, maioremque vim esse benedictionis quàm naturae, quia benedictione etiam ipsa natura mutatur. Thou saiest perhaps vnto me.
                  Lib. de ijs qui initiantur mysteriis. Cap. 9. I see an other maner of thinge. How then do you tell me that I receiue Christes body? Then this yet remaineth for vs to proue. And how many examples may we vse to proue, that it is not that, which Nature fashioned, but that which the Blessing Cōsecrated, and that the Power of Blessing ouercometh Nature, bicause by Blessing euen very Nature is chaunged? Thus farre S Ambrose. In the Sacrament, that which Nature made,Nature is Chaunged. is bread. This Nature saieth S. Ambrose is chaunged. And how? By Blessing. Into what is it chaūged? In to that which Blessing Consecrated. Nowe what dothe Blessing Consecrate, what is the ende of the Consecration made by Blessing? What els but the Body of Christ? Therefore by S. Ambrose his iudgement the nature of bread is chaunged in to the body of Christ. This is a Clere Transubstantiation by the verdit of S. Ambrose. Eusebius Emissenus an other auncient and lerned Father speaketh of this chaunging of Breade in to Christes body, more euidently. His wordes are.
                  De Pascha Homil. 5. 
               Inuisibilis Sacerdos visibiles creaturas

in substantiam corporis & sanguinis sui, verbo suo, secreta potestate conuertit, ita dicens: Accipite & edite: hoc est enim Corpus meum. The inuisible Prieste (Christe) turneth by his worde, with a secrete power, the visible creatures in to the substance of his Body and Bloude, saying. Take and eate. For this is my bodye. What are here the visible Creatures turned into the Body and Bloude of Christ, but the Breade and Wine whiche he toke in his handes at the last Supper? What is Transubstantiation, iff this be not? Go nowe M. Iewell and against the holy Scripture, and such lerned Fathers, call it a grosse errour, if ye list. Truly none but grosse Capharnaites can call this Doctrine grosse,The Catholike Doctrine of Christes Reall presence in the Sacrament. which in dede is the kaye of all our Coniunction with Christ, the assured warrant of oure Resurrection, the continuall Miracle of the Sonne of God, the most heauenly and dreadfull Mystery that Christ left to his Churche. Of this moste assured Doctrine, bicause Christe is no more any deade body (for death shall no more preuaile ouer him) it foloweth euidently that his body is not withoute Bloude. M. Iewell requireth some auncient Doctour to saye so. Yea truly he is full of his demaundes. But when all is saied, and a number of Doctours brought, it nothing moueth him. Touching this pointe, iff either Doctours or Scripture can persuade him, that Christes whole Humanite is really in the Sacramēt (whereof he saieth, 
                  Iewell. 
               
               pag. 98.Bolde Vauntes haue ben made, but was neuer yet proued) Let him reade the booke lately sett foorth of our Lordes Supper,By D. Sanders. and the Cōfutation of the Fifte Article of his Replie therein, he shal finde Doctours and Scriptures abundātly to auouche the same. Wherein being ones persuaded, he wil neuer aske. what Doctour in expresse wordes saied, that whole Christ is vnder one kinde. Or iff he be so Franticke and wilful as alwayes to striue vpon Termes, when the Thinge is euident, yet all wel meaning folcke wil soone be persuaded, that receiuing Christ really present vnder the forme of Breade, they receiue not onely

his blessed Flesh, but Bloude also, without the which the Flesh of Christ is not. Wherein they shall see there is no iniury done vnto them, as M. Iewel declaimeth, hauing it vnder one kynde. Nay rather (which I beseche al good Readers to Marke) M. Iewell and his felowes doth most open and cruell iniurye to al good Christen people of Englande,Protestāts do a thousand folde more Iniury to the People, by their double kinde, then the Catholikes in One Kinde. geuing them but Bread and Wine, in the Remembraunce of Christes deathe, whereas the Catholike Churche beside the true Body of Christe really present vnder fourme of Breade, geueth also to the people a cuppe of Wine, and so geu
                  •
               th the other kinde as muche as they do, geuing no more but mere wine at their Communion table. Thus if we esteme the outward formes Catholikes geue as muche. If we esteme the thinge it selfe, Catholikes geue the very true Body of Christ really present, which Protestants geue not, and Wine also no lesse then the protestants.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               diuis. 2.
               Nowe concerning the outewarde formes of Breade, and VVine, (47) their vse is imployed in signification onely. And be not off Necessite, so as Grace may not be obtayned by worthy receiuing of the Sacrament, vnlesse bothe kindes be Ministred.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                The .47. Vntruthe.pag. 99. The .89. Vntruthe Slaunderous. For the Breade and Wine signifie the Body and Bloud of Christ. The whitenes, the roundnesse and other outward formes signifie nothing.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                D. Harding saieth: the outwarde formes of bread and wine do but signifie, that is, are but the figures of the Body and bloude of Christe, and therefore seing (as it was proued before in prouing Transubstantiation) that the Body of Christ is really present vnder the forme of Breade, and without Bloud the body of Christ is not, the other kinde for grace to be obtained is not Necessary. For receiuing whole Christ, there can be no wante of grace. M. Iewell saieth: All this is an Vntruthe. And

why? For (saieth he) the Breade and Wine signifie the Bodye and Bloude of Christe. This is in plaine termes the Sacramentary heresy clerely ouerthrowen by the real presence of Christe in the Sacrament, which being (as I saied before) so clerely and abundantly proued against M. Iewel, it shal not nede here to stā
               de aboute the confutation of it.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               In distributing the blessed Sacrament to Christen people the Church hath vsed libertie (which Christ neuer embarred by any commaundement to the cōtrary) so as it hath euer bene moste for the behoulfe and commodite of the Receiuers. And hath ministred sometimes bothe kindes, sometimes one kinde only, as it hath ben thought most expedient in Regarde of time, place, and personnes.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 90. Vntruthe Slaund. The 91. Vntruthe in belying the state of the questio
                     •
                  .The .48. Vntruthe. The Church neuer thus ministred the Sacrament vnto the people in any open Congregation within the space of 600. yeares.
            You alter the question M. Iewell, and in so doing you yelde. Your first Chalenge was. Or that there was any Communion Ministred vnto the people vnder one kinde. Thus it stādeth in your Sermō, and thus it is againe repeted in the frōte or title of this Article. Now bicause you see your selfe clene ouerthrowen in that ouerbolde assertion of youres, you put in these wordes (in any opē Cōgregatiō) which is no part of your Chalēge, and therefore of D. Harding not intended to be confuted. So in the very entrie of this article, you tell the reader (and in so telling him, you mocke him and deceiue him) that the question moued betwene D. Harding and you, was moued, thus. 
                  Iewell. 
               
               Pag. 96.Whether the holy Communion at any time within the space of sixe hundred yeares after Christ, were euer ministredThose wordes are not in in the Sermon, nor in any part of the Chalenge. Openly in the Churche: vnto the people vnder one kinde. This is a manifest and notorious Vntruthe, M. Iewell. These wordes Openly in the Church, be not in your Sermon, They be not in your Chalenge. You neuer moued your question so. Why do you so lie and deceiue your

Reader? If you had moued the Question so, you had bene by D. Harding so answered and satisfied. Now hauing neuer moued your question with that condition (Openly in the Church) you crie out,M. Iewell crieth Guilty and yeldeth. that D. Harding hath brought priuat houses and priuat men to proue Communion vnder one kinde, and not done Openly in the Church. Whereby you crie Guilty, and yelde that your Chalenge is ouerthrowen. But now you will renewe the Combat, and make a newe state of the Question: And when that shall be Answered then you maye yet ones againe Renewe it, and Adde farther some other Clause or Condition vnto it, and so neuer haue ende of Quarelling. As touching this Vntruthe, bicause D. Harding saieth only the Church ministred sometimes in bothe kindes, sometimes in one kinde, which you confesse of priuat men he hath proued it, you note it an Vntruthe, bicause he hath not proued it to haue ben so ministred in open congregation. Which is no vntruthe on D. Hardinges parte, which hath proued that which he saieth, and that which you craked no man aliue could proue. But it is on your part M. Iewell a double and a pregnant, Vntruthe. First to note an Vntruthe where none is. And then so Impudently to Alter the question. You haue cried shame and Corruption against your selfe. God amende you.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               As touching the wordes of Christ,
               diuis. 3. bibite ex hoc omnes. Drinke ye all of this. They pertaine to the Apostles only and their successours.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                The .49. Vntruthe. For these wordes pertaine as well to the people as to the priestes, as shall appeare.The .92. Vntruthe Slaund. Stapleton Iewell. pag. 191.
            
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                In the text M. Iewel bringeth these reasons to make it so appeare. First, he saieth.
            If M. Harding will folowe the letter, the wordes be plaine. Drinke ye all of this.
            
            I answer. If M. Iewell will folowe the letter, then not only all the people such as be of lauful yeares and discretion, but also

all infantes and children that are Christened, must receiue bothe kindes. Which yet in the religiō of protestants is thought so great an abuse, that the Cōmunicating of infants being in S. Augustins time and longe before a customable thing, they note it for an errour in the doctrine of S. Augustin, that infants ought to communicat. And yet the wordes of Christ be plaine. Drinke ye all of this. Therefore the letter as it forceth not infants to receiue vnder any kinde at all, so neither doth it force the lay people to receiue vnder bothe kindes. M. Iewell goeth forthe.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .93. Vntruthe For S. Paule there hath not opened these wordes drinke ye all of this in that sence as M. Iewell fancyeth.If M. Harding will leaue the letter and take the meaning, S. Paule hath opened it. For writing vnto the whole Congregation at Corinthe, he saieth thus. As often as shall eate this bread, and drinke of this Cuppe, ye shall declare the Lordes death, vntill he come. If he doubte S. Paule, yet the very practise and continuall order of the primitiue Church fully declareth what Christ meant. And they saie, Custom is the best interpreter of the lawe. If he will take neither the wordes of Christe, nor Christes meaning, then I know not how to deale with him.
            Doubt you not M. Iewell. D. Harding will take and obey bothe Christes wordes and his meaning with all his harte. As for the wordes, you see they can not be precisely takē for all without exception. For then (as I saied) children and infantes should be forced to receiue. Which you thinke a great abuse,The .94. Vntruthe That practise declareth no such meaning 
                     •
                   is by 
                     •
                  . Iewell before 
                     •
                  uouched and we are persuaded that it nedeth not. Now then for the meaning of Christ, you bringe S. Paule and the practise of the primitiue Church which ministred vnder bothe kindes to the people, and here you wil haue Custome to interpret the lawe. I graunte S. Paule and the primitiue Church vsed so to do longe and many yeares. But after the same Church of Christ many hūdred yeares also vsed the contrary. As your selfe can not denie. Now then here be two Customes. Here is a double practise of the Church. What then? Hath one of these two brokē Christes Institution? No M. Iewel. We holde (and I haue proued it in an other place) that the Church of Christ can neuer erre damnably.In The Fo
                     •
                  tresse &c. As truly to breake Christes Institution is a damnable errour. Therefore by these two customes of the Church of

God, by this double practise of Christian people, we gather the meaning of Christes wordes (drinke ye all of this) not to haue ben precisely spoken as a commaundement to all Christen people, but to the Apostles and their successours, which should for euer Celebrat and receiue that holy Sacrament vnder bothe kindes. I will put you a clere example hereof confessed by your selfe. In the primitiue Churche certain hundred yeares, the Sacrament was ministred to infants and sucking Children being Christened, yea euen ioyntly with their baptim. The Church of many hundred yeares folowing, altered this custome, and admitted only Christen folcke of ripe yeares and discretion vnto this holy Sacrament, as we see it in our daies practised. This custome you haue not altered, but kepe it still, and thinke it no offence either against Christes literall wordes, Drinke ye all of this, either against the meaning of the wordes interpreted by the custome of the primitiue Church. Now as you would thinke him vnreasonable M. Iewell, which would say to you, Sir. Christ saied drinke ye all of this. The wordes be plaine, and excludeth none.M. Iewel. is cast in his owne turne. VVerefore then do ye not admitt babes and infants to drinke thereof? If ye will not folowe the letter, yet the very practise and continuall order of the primitiue Church at what time Babes did Communicat, fully declareth what Christ meante· Therefore if you will take neither the wordes of Christ, nor Christes meaning, then I knowe to not how deale with you, As I saie you would and might well thinke him very vnreasonable, specially if he were instructed by you that the vniuersall Churche of Christ, vsed the contrary order many hundred yeares after, whereby he might lerne neither the wordes nor the meaning of Christ to touche precisely infants or Babes, so truly are you M. Iewel very vnreasonable, and a trifling wrangler, to presse the literall wordes of Christ, which your selfe must nedes limit, and so to vrge the meaning of Christ vpon the practise of S. Paule and the primitiue Church, dissembling the contrary practise of the Church these many hundred yeres, whereby you knowe your

selfe that neither the letter nor the meaning of Christes wordes do of necessite touche the laye people, to do I saie all this, and then to conclude, If he will take neither the wordes of Christ, nor the meaning, I knowe not how to deale with him. Truly with such a wrangler and Childish quareller as you be, with such a dissembler and deceiuer of Gods people, I knowe not in the worlde how to deale.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               Aboue one hundred yeres past (50) chaunging the olde custome of the Church of receiuing the Communion vnder one kinde by their priuat authorite.
               diuis. 4.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               pag. 102. The .95. Vntruthe Slaunderours, and peuish.The .50. Vntruthe. They chaunged not but restored the olde custome.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                The schismatikes of Bohem (of whom D. Harding speaketh) chaunged that olde custome, which the Church then vsed and had before many hundred yeres vsed. This was true. And therefore no vntruthe of D. Harding to saie it. But they restored the olde, saieth M. Iewel. What then? Ergo they chaū
               ged not? This fonde peuish argument will the better appeare by the like. The Apostatas and rēnagat Sacramentaries of Lithuania playing now the Iewes and vsing Circūcision,M. Iewelles Argument. are charged of the Catholikes to breake the accustomed lawe of the Church of God. They answer and reason thus. We restore the olde lawe of God testified in holy Scripture. Ergo we chaunge not the lawe of God. Who seeth not the Fallacy of this lewde Argument, by the aequiuocation, or similitude in termes of the two olde and accustomed lawes of God? Howbeit those schismatikes of Bohem are not so much charged by D. Harding for chaunging the olde custome, as for doing it by their priuat authorite. This was the cause of their schisme: Not the change it selfe.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               Diuis. 6.
               Luther instructed of the Diuell with arguments against

the Sacrifice of the Masse, (51) that the memorie of our redemption by Christ wrought on the Crosse, might vtterly be abolished.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                The .51. Vntruthe ioyned with a slaunder.The .96. Vntruthe Slaunderous. Neuer man spake more reuerently of the oblation of Christ vpon the Crosse.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                What is the Vntruthe M. Iewell? Is it not true that Luther had argumentes geuen him of the Diuell against the Sacrifice of the Masse? Then let the shame be Luthers, who made such a lye of him selfe. For he writeth so him selfe in his booke De Missa angulari. Which booke also D. Harding alleaged in the margent of this place in his owne booke, though it be here by you or your printer omitted. You put to the Vntruthe a slaunder. And why? Forsothe bicause Luther spake reuerently of the oblation of Christ vpon the Crosse. So the Arrians spake reuerently of Christes Humanite, but yet denied his Diuinite. And the Manichees spake reuerenly of Christes Diuinite. But yet denied his true flesh and humanite. Heretikes speake allwaies some thinges well and truly. Els they should be infidels not heretikes. That the Masse and daily Sacrifice of Christes Churche is a clere memory of our redemption wrought vpon the Crosse it may appeare by the testimonies of the Fathers brought in the former Article to proue a Daily Sacrifice.In the leafe. 21. Therefore to abolish the Masse and the Daily Sacrifice of Christes Church, whether it were Luthers intent or the Diuells that instructed him, certaine it is, the ende thereof was to abolish the memory of our redemption. And how well you kepe that memory in your bread and wine, it shall appeare by the Confutation of M. Iewelles. xvij. Article.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               A canon alleaged for receiuing vnder one kinde out of the first Councell of Ephesus, Taken out of Vrbanus Regius a Doctour of Luthers schoole, in his booke De locis communibus.
            
               
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .97. Vntruthe Slaunderous.The .52. Vntruthe. There was no such Canon touched or once moued in that Councell.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                Then it is an Vntruthe of Vrbanus Regius, youre owne pewfelowe, not off D. Harding. Let the shame be his, if it were not true: And yet it is not proued false, but only bicause M. Iewel neuer sawe it.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               Nestorius amongest other Errours helde opinion, (53.) that vnder the Forme off Breade in the Sacrament is contayned the Bodye off Christe withoute hys Bloude.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .98. Vntruthe Slaunderous.The .53. Vntruthe. Nestorius neuer dreamed of anye suche folye.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                If Nestorius neuer dreamed any such thinge (as M. Iewell maketh him selfe sure) then Vrbanus Regius, Alardus, Michael Veh, Hosius and other Writers oute of whom D. Harding toke this saying (as also the Canon that shoulde be made in the Ephesine Councell) were deceiued. It is no Vntruthe of D. Hardinge to Reporte that he findeth writen in good Authors. Vnlesse also by M. Iewelles diuinite, we maye saye Saint Ambrose and S. Augustine wrote Vntruly, alleaging certain Canons of the Nicene Councell, which yet nowe in that Councel are not to be founde.The singular l
                     •
                  wdenesse of M. Iewel. M. Iewell is so at square with all Writers and lerned men that haue ben these ix. hundred yeares (excepte a fewe sence Luthers tyme, whiche wil saye as he sayeth) that he will beleue nothinge at their Reporte, vnlesse he finde it recorded in the first 600. yeares also. And then I maruail why he beleueth the very Writers of the firste 600. yeares, seing he can not knowe that those Writers wrote in that age, but by the Historyes, Chronicles and Testimonies of these later writers, as by Thrithemius, Gennadius, Vrspergensis, Sabelli
                     •
                  us, and such like. For as well might he saye that these later Writers had forged such bookes as S. Augustine S. Hierome, S. Basill, Chrysostome, Ambrose, and other lerned Fathers are saied to

haue writen, and all suche Councelles, whiche in those yeares are saied to haue ben holden, as to discredit other parcels off the Fathers, or Canons of Councels whiche are reported by them, though suche thinges in the Fathers and Councells are not to be founde. And so may M. Iewell make a Religion off his owne, beleue him selfe no man and yet require all men to beleue him.
            But bicause M. Iewell speaketh so peremptorely, that Nestorius neuer dreamed no suche thinge, you shall see howe lykely he was not to dreame only but euen to Speake and teache suche an heresye or foly, as M. Iewell termeth it,M. Iewell cōfesseth a foyle in the Lutherans. as to saie that vnder the fourme of Breade in the Sacrament is contayned the Body of Christe without Bloude. Whiche yet the Lutherans graunting the real presence of Christes body with the breade and teaching withall that the people receiuing vnder one kinde, haue iniury, and do receiue lesse then if they receiued both
                  •
               , are not farre from. For by their opinion it foloweth, that lacking somewhat vnder the one kinde, and hauing yet the Body of Christ, they lacke the bloude whiche is vnder the other kinde only. Nowe M. Iewell though he be a Sacramentary, yet hathe he good cause to fauour the Lutherans,
                  Peter Martyr.
                for his olde Masters sake, who at his first coming to Oxford, was an vpright Lutheran, and specially for Luthers sake who stroke the first sparckle of this greate glorious light, that M. Iewell and his fellowes, so vaunteth of. As touching Nestorius, his opinion was that we receaued the Flesh of Christe in the Sacrament without his diuinite. These are the wordes of Nestorius him selfe, as Cyrillus recordeth them. N
                     •
                  storius inquit, Audite attendentes verba. Qui manducat car
                     •
                  em meam,
               
                  Cyrillus ad Euoptium: In oppos
                        •
                     
                     tione ad Anamathe 
                        •
                     ismum 11. Tom. vlii. 
               memores estote quòd de carne est sermo: & quòd non a me adiectum est carnis nomen, ne videar sinistre interpretari. Qui manducat meam carnem & bibit meum singuinem, in me munet & ego in eo. Non ditit: Qui manducat meam diuinitatem, & bibit meam d
                     •
                  uinitatem. Qui manducat

meam carnem, inquit, & meum sanguinem bibit, in me manet & ego in eo. Memores estote, quod de carne dictum sit. Nestorius saieth. Heare and harken to the wordes, He that eateth my Flesh. Remember that Flesh is here mentioned, and that the name of Flesh is not added by me, lest I seme to expounde amisse. He that eateth my Flesh and drinketh my Bloude, abideth in me and I in him. He saieth not. He that eateth my diuinite, and drinketh my diuinite. He that eateth my Flesh, saieth he, and drinketh my Bloud, abideth in me and I him. Remember that this is spoken of the Fleshe. Thus farre Nestorius persuading his hearers that we receaued the bare Fleshe of Christe in the Sacrament without the diuinite or Godhead adioyned. Againste the which damnahle Heresye, Cyrillus disputing in the same place saieth. Num hominis comestionem nostrum hoc Sacramentum pronuncias, & ad crassas cogitationes vrges eorum qui crediderunt mentes? Doest thou (speaking to Nestorius) cal this our Sacrament, the eating of mans Flesh, and prouoke the Hartes of the faithefull to grosse cogitations? This then being the Opinion of Nestorius, as it is here euident that it was, that in the Sacrament we did eate the Fleshe of Christe onely, and drinke the Bloud only without the Diuinite adioyned, it must consequently folowe that his opinion was, that the bare Flesh was in the Sacrament a part by it self, and the Bloud by it selfe. For (and marke well this reason) the cause why the Catholike Church beleueth that vnder one part of the Sacrament whole Christ is contained,VVhy the Catholikes beleue that vnder either kinde whole Christ is present. and therefore the bloud with the body, is bicause it beleueth that vnder that one part of the Sacra
                  •
               ent Christ is as God, and not as bare man or bare flesh. Vpon this belefe also it is groūded that whole Christ is at one time in many places by the way of this most mystical Sacramēt, as Chrysostom and Primasius vpon the 10. chapter to the Hebrewes, do in expresse wordes declare.See their wordes before fol. 22. Now Nestorius not beleuing any such diuinite to be ioyned with the body of Christ in the

Sacrament, but the bare flesh to be by it selfe, and the Bloud in like maner by it selfe, it is easy to iudge that he was of this opiniō, that vnder the forme of Bread in the Sacramēt, was the Body of Christ without Bloud, which is the thinge that D. Harding and those other lerned writers do reporte of him. And the which M. Iewell peremptorely denieth without any proofe or Reason in the worlde to the contrary, but only by his Negatiue Proofes, Such and such mention no such thinge, Ergo there was no such matter. Thus whether D. Harding spake beside Truthe and lerning, let the indifferent reader iudge.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               Diuis. 10.
               For whereas Christ commaunded the Apostles to baptise in the name of the Father and the Sonne and the Holy Ghoste, they baptised in the name of Iesus Christ (54) only.
            
            The .54. Vntruthe. A foule deprauation of the Scriptures.I
                     •
                  well. pag. 113. The .99. Vntruthe Slaunderous. not only to D. Hard. but to S. Hilary whose very wordes those are.
            
            This deprauation M. Iewell laieth to D. Hardinges charge for putting the worde (only) in the last place. Truthe it is, that the Only baptim mencioned in the Actes of the Apostles, is mencioned to haue ben geuē in the name of Iesus. As in the second, the tenth, the eight and the seuententh chapters it may be sene. And so it is no Vntruthe, that by the letter of holy Scripture, the Apostles baptised only in the name of Iesus Christ. The displacing of a worde which altereth not the sence (vnlesse M. Iewel cā proue it was done of fraude or malice) is no Vntruthe in any vpright iudgement. The sence of holy scripture being kept, the Scripture is not depraued, though some worde be put out of order. Now that the Scripture so saieth, bothe the only mentioning of such forme of baptim, in all the Actes of the Apostles, bothe the letter it selfe I saie, and the meaning also of the letter, if we beleue the iudgemēt of S. Ambrose, cōuinceth. S. Ambrose disputing of this baptim mencioned in the Actes of the Apostles, hath these wordes. Cum dicitur, In nomine domini nostri Iesu Christi, per vnitatem nominis impletum mysterium est.
               
                  De spiritu S. lib. 1. Cap. 3.
               
When it is saied, In the name of our lorde Iesus Christ, by the vnite of the name, the sacrament is complete. For (as S. Ambrose saieth also in that place) he that is blessed in Christ, is blessed in the name of the Father and the Sonne and the Holy Ghoste. Thus by the letter and by the meaning of the letter (if we beleue. S. Ambrose) baptim was geuen in the name of Christ Only without mencioning the Father and the Holy Ghoste, and yet in dede, in the name of all.
            
               A clere Example of M. Iewell
                     •
                  s Grosse Ignorāce, or els of VVilf
                     •
                  ll Malice.But beholde (good Reader) either the Grosse Ignorance, or the Wilfull Malice of M. Iewell. This very saying and proposition of D. Harding, which M. Iewell noteth for an Vntruth, and which Slaunderously he calleth, A foule deprauation of holy Scripture, those very wordes I saie, are the clere saying of that most lerned and most holy Father S. Hilary, vttered of him aboue twelue hundred yeres past. For that holy Father alleaging against the Arrians, as D. Harding doth here against M. Iewell and his felowes, that many thinges Commaunded by Christ, were altered by the Apostles, and their Successours, bringeth this very matter for an example as D. Harding dothe, and vttereth these very wordes. Apostoli baptisare in Nomine Patris & Filij & Spiritus Sancti iussi,
               
                  In lib. de Synodis aduersus Arrian
                        •
                     s.
                
               Tantum in Iesu Nomine Baptisauerunt. The Apostles being Commaunded to Baptise in the Name of the Father and the Sonne, and of the Holy Ghoste, they baptised in the Name of Iesus Christ Only. Goe nowe M. Iewell, take your penne, and score vp this Vntruthe vpon S. Hilary,M. Iewell in Slaunderi
                     •
                  g D. Harding, slaū
                  dereth S. Hilary. as you haue done here vpon D. Harding. Tell your Reader, whom you fede with lies and Slaunderous Vntruthes, that S. Hilary hath made A foule deprauation of the S
                     •
                  riptures as you Slaunderously haue tolde him that D. Ha
                  •
               
               ding did make. Be wise I pray you A
                  •
               one, vnderstande the Scriptures Alone, Beleue your selfe no Body, and yet looke to be beleued Alone. By such Impudency, you vpholde your Religion.
            
               
               
                  Harding. 
               
               diuis. 10.
               To the Apostles only, and their successours, and to none other the (55) Catholike Church hath euer referred the necessite of that commaundemeut, Drinke ye all of this: And that in the celebration of the Sacrifice.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                The .55. Vntruthe. The Catholike or vniuersall Church, neuer vnderstode it so, but onely the Church of Rome,pag. 118. The 100. Vntruthe Sl
                     •
                  und.
The 101. Vntruthe For the Churche of Rome is neither late, nor particular which is but late and mere particular.
            The Church of Rome is at this day the most auncient Church in Christendom. The succession thereof hath continewed from S. Peter the Head of the Apostles vntill these our daies without interruptiō, by the number of 230. bishops which yet M. Iewell calleth a late Church, euen as he calleth the Catholike religion a corruption of late yeres.
            Againe he saieth, it is a mere particular Church, and therefore no Catholike Church. Yes forsothe M. Iewell it is called the Catholike Church of the lerned Fathers of the first 600. yeres. When S. Paule saied the Church of God to be the piller of truthe, what Churche meant he M. Iewell?1. ad Timo. 3. Meant he any particular Churche and not rather the Catholike and vniuersall churche of all Christendom, which in dede can not swarue from the truthe, as particular chu
                  •
               ches bothe may and haue done? Yeat S. Ambrose expounding that place of S. Paule, and speaking of that vniuersall Church of God, saieth:
                  In commentar. in 1. ad Tim. 3. 
               Cuius hodie rector est Damasus whose ruler at this daye Damasus is. This Damasus was then Pope. Lo by the iudgemēt of S. Ambrose (who I may be bolde to saie, vnderstode the Scriptures as wel as M. Iewell) the bishop of Rome, is the Ruler of the vniuersall Church. And how then is the Church of Rome of which the Pope is bishop a mere particular Church? Verely S. Hierom calleth the faith of Rome, the Catholike faith, writing against Ruffinus in these wordes, Fidem suam quam vocat?
                  In Apologia 1. aduersus Rufinū.
                
               Eam ne qua Romana pollet Ecclesia? an illam quae in Origenis voluminibus cōtinetur? Si Romanam

responderit ergo Catholici sumus. Sin Origenis blasphemia illius fides est, se haereticum probat. What dothe he call his faith? Meaneth he that faith,The faithe of Rome. which the Church of Rome alloweth? or that which in the bookes of Origen is taught? If he answer, it is the faith of Rome, then we be Catholikes. But if Origens blasphemy be his faith, he proueth him selfe an heretike. Thus the faith of Rome and the Catholike faith is to S. Hierō all one. Last of al S. Cyprian calleth the Church of Rome Catholicae ecclesiae radicē & matricē. The roote and mother church of the Catholike Churche.
                  Lib. 4. 
                     
                        •
                     pist. 8. Go now M. Iewell and call the Church of Rome a mere particular Church. It shall be no Vntruthe neither for D. Harding, nor for any man elles, to call the determination of the Church of Rome, the determination of the Catholike Church, as longe as we haue S. Ambrose, S. Hierom, and S. Cyprian to saie with vs.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               Diuis. 12.
               The two Disciples in Emaus as soone as they knewe Christ in breaking of the Bread, he vanished away from their sighter t
                     •
                  at he tooke the Cuppe into his handes and blissed it, and gaue it vnto them, (56.) as it appeareth euidently enough to S. Augustin, to Bede, and to all other that be not willfully opinatiue.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
                pag. 122. T
                     •
                  e .102. Vntruthe Slaunderous.
The .103. Vntruth. For beside S. Augustin and Bede S. Chrystom (one other aū
                  cient fath
                     •
                  r) is of that minde.The .56. Vntruthe. Neither S. Augustine, nor Beda, nor any other Auncient Father hath any such word, but rather the contrary.
            Yeas forsoth. Both S. Augustin and Bede, and Chrysostom an other auncient Father do teache the same Breaking of Bread to haue ben the Sacramēt. Which is the thing that D. Harding there affirmeth. And that Christ tooke not the Cuppe at all, it was no dede to alleage doctours. The Scripture in that place of S. Luke is plaine. Where no one worde of the Cuppe is made. S. Augustin saieth of this place. Non incongruenter accipimus, hoc impedimentū in oculis eorū a Satana factū fuisse, ne agnosceretur

Iesus: Sed tamē a Christo facta est permissio vsque ad Sacramentū 
                  
                     •
                  is,
               
                  August. In li. 3. de consensu euangelistarum cap. 25. 
               vt vnitate Corporis eius participata remoueri intelligatur impedimentum inimici, vt Christus possit agnosci. We thinke it not amisse to saye, that their eyes were blinded by the Deuill, so that they could not know Iesus. Yet notwithstanding that was done by the permission of Christ, vntill the Sacrament of the Bread. To thentent that the vnite of Christes Body being participated, the let of the enemy might be remoued, and Christ acknowleadged. This exposition yea and these very wordes of S. Augustin,
                  Beda. li. 6. Theophyl. In cap. Luc. 24. Bede in his commentaries vpon S. Luke foloweth and repereth. As also Theophilact foloweth herein Chrysostō (whose words we shal In the .57. Vntruth. hereafter recite) and saieth, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . He insinuateth yet an other thinge. That these Discipes participating the blissed Bread, had their eies straight waies opened to knowe Christ. For the flesh of our Lorde hath a great and vnspeakeable vertu. Thus lo by the iudgement of S. Augustine and Bede, of Chrysostom and Theophilact, that Bread which Christ gaue to the disciples in Emaus, was the Sacrament of his Body. Here is no one worde neither in the Scripture, neither in those Doctours off the Cuppe. And therfore by their iudgemēt here is a clere case of a Communion vnder One kinde Ministred by oure Sauiour him selfe. And so it is proued true, that Doctour Hardinge saied of a Communion vnder one kinde ministred to the disciples at Emaus. What saieth M. Iewell to these Doctours? He sayeth.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               pag. 123. The .104 Vntruthe For it was the Sacrament, as it hath bene proued.First, the Breade that Christ brake at Emaus, was cōmon table breade, and not the Sacrament.
            S. Augustine, and Bede, S. Chrysostom and Theophilact saye the contrary. Who is better to be credited? M. Iewell, or these

auncient Fathers? Truly he offreth him selfe to yelde vnto them.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .105. Vntruthe For it is gathered by good proofe oute of Gods worde.Secondely that, albeit some Writers seme to call it the Sacrament, yet none of them saieth, it was Ministred in one kinde, as M. Hardinge by his (105) sclender Gheasses would seme to gather.
            Not some writers, but some auncient Fathers, not seme to call it, but in expresse wordes do call it the Sacrament as you haue heard. And though none of them saie it was ministred in one kinde, yet bothe they and the Scripture making no mention at all of mo kindes then one, do geue vs to vnderstande that vnder one kinde only it was Ministred.
                  Lucae. 28. And that by the rule off Master Iewell him selfe,pag. 68. who sayeth. Argumentum ab authoritate negatiue, is thought to be good, when so euer proofe is taken off Gods worde. And is vsed not only by vs, but also by Sainte Paule, and by manye Catholike Fathers. Therefore it is no sclender Gheasse,
                  Luc. 28, but a good Proofe out off Gods Worde. Saint Luke in that place mentioned but One Kinde. Ergo Christe Ministred at the tyme vnder one kinde.M. Iewell saieth and vnsaieth. Yet here to this Argument M. Iewell saieth. This Argument maye be good in Master Hardinges Dyuinite, but it is off Small force in goodlogike. And thus when it maketh for M. Iewell, it shall be a good Argument, and such as bothe S. Paule, and the holy Fathers haue vsed. But when it maketh againste him, then it is of small force, &c.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .106 Vntruthe For Christes example proueth well our purpose.
The 107. Vntruthe For these two disciples in Emaus were thē no priestes.Thirdly although he were able to proue that Christ Ministred so at that time and in that place, yet were all this (106) nothinge to proue his purpose. For we ioyne issue of the people. He (107) answereth of the Priestes.
            Those two disciples in Emaus were of the .72. disciples, not of the Apostles: And therefore at that tyme they were no Priestes. Againe iff Priestes maye receiue vnder one kinde, muche more the people. For the order of Priesthood is the more excellent.
            I speake of the Churche: He speaketh of an Inne.
            
               The .108 VntrutheIn the tenour of your challenge you speake of no Churche.

You haue so altered the question sence.For in your challenge you speake not of the Churche. Bicause you see you are ouerthrowen in your assertion. Againe the example of Christe (me thinketh M. Iewell) should preuaile with you whether it were in Inne or Church. Vnlesse by the like reason you will except against the example of Christe in his last Supper. For that was also done in an Inne (Master Iewell) and not in a Church.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                And to conclude by this example it (109) appeareth that Christ him selfe receiued in one kinde.The .109 Vntruthe For that appeareth not in the Scripture Whiche one thinge ouerthroweth all that M. Harding hath built.
            Howe proue you M. Iewell that Christ Receiued with the disciples at Emaus vnder One kinde? It appeareth not in Scripture that with those disciples he receiued him selfe at all, either vnder one kinde, or vnder bothe. Againe if he did, wil you teache Christ his duty? Though Christ commaunded all priestes to receiue vnder bothe kindes, when they ministred to others, yet you will not (I trow) be so malapert, as to force Christe thereunto. Christ is God blessed for euer M. Iewel. You are a Base Creature.
            M. Iewell goeth forthe and bicause S. Augustine him selfe in an other place, Bede, and S. Gregory do saye,
                  August. in caten
                        •
                     . in 24. Lucae. Greg. in Euang. homil. 23. that those two disciples vsed a kind of Hospitalyte in Emaus, strayning Christ, (whom they toke for a straunger) to come into the Inne and refresh himself with thē, bicause I saye, these Doctours saie so, he inferreth that it was not the Sacrament which Christ brake and gaue vnto them. His reason is this.M. Iewels Argumēt
            
            
               The Disciples in Emaus vsed Hospitalite to Christ in an Inne.
            
            
               Ergo Christ did not geue them at that time the Sacrament.
            
            This fonde argument wil appeare by a like.
            
               Christ and the Apostles did eate the Iewes passeouer in an Inne.
               M. Iewell alleageth late writers againste the olde Doctours.
            
            
               Ergo he did not celebrat the Sacrament there.
            
            Now that after al this, he alleageth Dionysius the charter mō
               ke, Antonius Iulianus, Nicolaus de Lyra, and Wildefordus in a

contrary sentence to S. Augustine and Beda, to Chrysostom and Theophilact, if we should do so, he would Laugh vs to scorne, and turne them of with his Cōmon Prescriptions of 600. yeres and so forth. Therefore trouble your selfe no more M. Iewell, with heaping vp these writers against the Aunciēt Fathers, vnlesse you will beleue and saie as they do in the Substance of oure Faithe. Whiche if you doe, yow shall not mislike the diuerse Iudgementes of diuerse lerned men, agreing yet in One Faythe. Howbeit in all suche Diuersite, bothe you and we muste allwaies preferre the Auncient Fathers by so Vniuersall and Longe Consent of the Church allowed, and Authorised, before late writers not so allowed and authorised. And thus I leaue to the iudgement of euery indifferent Reader, not only how vntruly you haue charged D. Harding, but much more how vntruly yow haue quarelled against this clere proofe of Communion vnder one kinde, out of holy Scripture it selfe.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               diuis. 13.
               Chrysostom and other Fathers vnderstande that Bread that S. Paule in perill off shipwracke tooke, gaue thankes ouer, brake and eate, to be the Holy Sacrament.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               Iewell. pag. 125. The 110. Vntruthe Slaunderous.The .57. Vntruthe. Chrysostom vnderstandeth it of Common meate.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
                To this you haue ben answered M. Iewell longe before your booke came forth in printe, by a Briefe answer of D. Harding to this and other your Slaunderous Vntruthes, where with you charged him at Paules Crosse in your Sermon made there the viij. of Iuly this last Sommer. Yet you haue lett it go forthe stoutely for an Vntruthe, dissembling vtterly all that hath bene saied in defence thereof. Yea you vaunte furder and you saie in your text.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               
                   pag. 126. The .111. Vntruth. 
                        •
                     or he gaue it to S. Luke and his other disciples: VVho were no infidels pardy.
                  The .112. Vntruth. For this expositiō is not contrary to the other saying of Chrysostom.
                If S. Paule gaue the Sacrament being at that time in the Shippe, he gaue it (111) only to infidels, that knewe not Christ.
            No forsothe he gaue it to Luke and his other disciptes, as

Chrysostom saieth, who were no infidels, you will your selfe confesse. You shall heare anon the wordes of Chrysostom.
            And Chrysostomes exposition euen in the same place is (112) plaine to the contrary. For thus he enlargeth S. Paules wordes that he spake to the mariners. I pray you take some sustenaunce, It is beboufull for you that ye so 
                     •
                  oo. That is to say, take some meate, least perhaps ye die for hunger.
            
            No man denieth, but that the mariners were infidels. No man saieth that by Chrysostoms minde, Paule gaue them the Sacrament. And therefor you haue proued that no man denieth. But what conclude you of all this? You saie.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .113. Vntruth.
For D. Harding. hath made no vntrue reporte of his doctour.Now let M. Harding either say these wordes are spoken of the Sacrament, or confesse that he hath made (113) Vntrue reporte of his doctour.
            No M. Iewell, he will saye neither of these: and yet shall his first saying be true. For how saie you M. Iewell? Hath Chrysostom mentioned this fact of Paule in no place, but in his commentaries vpon that place? If you had ben a sobre writer, and not a quarelling wrangler, you might iustly haue saied. Sir I finde no such thinge in Chrysostom vpon that place, and therefore vnlesse you name vs where Chrysostom so saied, it may be thought, you haue missereported him. Thus or in some like maner, as you knowe best your selfe, M. Iewell, had not this willfull heresy taken awaye all modesty, you might haue laied to D. Hardinges charge. Now you first put it for an Vntruthe in the margin, yea and repete it againe in the next Vntruthe folowing, then you charge him in your text for an Vntrue Reporter of his doctour, and al most Vntruly and Slaūderously on your parte. For these are the wordes of Chrysostom, or as M. Nowell speaketh,
                  Hom. 17. operis imperfecti.
                of an auncient writer printed with Chrysostom and longe taken for him, Sed quia de sanctis caepimus dicere &c. Bicause we haue begonne to speake of holy thinges, it is not to be left vnspoken, that sanctification is one thinge, and that which is sanctified an other. For Sanctification is that which sanctifieth an other. But that which is sanctified, can not sanctifie an other, though it selfe be holy. As

for example:
               The signe of the Crosse. 
               Thou makest the signe of the Crosse ouer thy bread, right so as S. Paule saieth. For it is made holy by the worde of God and praier. Thou hast sanctified it, thou hast not made it Sanctification. But that which the priest geueth with his hand is not only a thinge sanctified,
               The Bl. Sacramēt is a sancticationfi. 
               but also Sanctification. For as much as not only that is geuen, which is sene, but also which is vnderstanded. And so it is laufull to cast of the sanctified bread to beastes, and to infidels, bicause it doth not sanctifie the receiuer. But if that which is tak
                     •
                  n of the hande of the priest were such a thinge as that which is eaten from of the borde, all would eate from of the borde, and no man would eate of the priestes hande. VVherefore our Lorde also did not only blesse the bread in the waye (he meaneth at Emaus) but gaue it also with his hande vnto Cleophas and his fellowe.
               
                  
                     
                        •
                     uc. 24. 
               And Paule as he was vnder saile did not only blesse the bread,
               
                  Act
                        •
                     . 27. 
               but also gaue it to Luke and to his other disciples. Now that which is geuen with the hande, is not to be geuen to beastes, nor to infidels, for that is not only Sanctified, but also Sanctification and sanctifieth the receiuer. Thus farre Chrysostom. In which wordes he doth bothe expounde the place of the 24. of S. Luke (whereof I spake a litle before) for the Sacrament, and also saieth expressely touching this place which we now talke of, the 27. of the Actes, that S. Paule in the ship gaue the bread with his hande to Luke, and to the rest of his disciples (not to infidels M. Iewel) and that the same was not only a holy Thinge, more then Common Meate sanctified by praier, and the worde of God, but also Sanctification, which Sanctifieth and maketh Holy the Receiuer, which is the Blessed Sacrament M. Iewell, not Common Meate. And thus M. Iewell, Chrysostom is not missereported of D. Harding, but D. Harding is Slaundered by M. Iewell.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               diuis. 14.
               It is not to be maruailed at, albeit S. Paule deliuered to the Corinthians thinstitution of our Lordes Supper vnder bothe kindes, that yet vpon occasion geuen, and when condition

of time so required (58) he ministred the Communion vnder one kinde, &c.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                The 58. Vntruthe. S. Paule neuer ministred the Communion so.pag. 126. The .114. Vntruth
                     •
                   slaunderous.
            
            This dependeth vpon the other Vntruthe that went before, which being by Chrysostom iustified, appeareth now no Vntruth on D. Hardinges part, but on Chrysostoms part, who reporteth that S. Paule in the shipp, gaue to Luke and his other disciples that Sanctification which sanctifieth the receiuer, which is the blissed Sacrement. And in that place no mention is made of the Cuppe, and therefore by M. Iewelles owne rule, whereof I tolde you before, it may be well gathered that he ministred vnder one Kinde.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               S. Paule toke that holy mystery vnder one kinde for the whole Sacrament, as we perceiue by his wordes, where he saieth,
               1 Cor. 10. One Bread and one Body vve being many are, all that doo participat of one Bread (59) where he speaketh nothing of the Cuppe.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                The .59. Vntruthe. For immediatly before he saieth.The 11
                     •
                  . Vntruthe slaunderous. 
               The Cuppe of bl
                     •
                  ssing, which we blesse, is it not the Communion of Christes bloud?
            To this M. Iewell, you haue the answer of D. Harding already in his Briefe answer touching certain Vntruthes with which you charged him at Paules Crosse the viij. Day of Iuly last. Yet bicause you vaunte here, as though you had neuer heard of it, and prouoke your Reader by your wonte repetitions and hypocriticall exclamations (which it nedeth not here to insert) to take him for a Deceiuer, &c. I will repete the very wordes of D. Harding, as they lie in his Answer. These are his wordes, after his other wordes aboue alleaged.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               Nowe iudge who list whether in respect of those wordes of S. Paule, One Bread and one Body &c. I might not

saie as I did, VVhere he speaketh nothing of the Cuppe. And that my worde (vvhere) hath relation to that sentence of S. Paule Only, not to the whole Chapter. For neither coulde I be so blinde, as not to so see mention of the Cuppe made Next Sentence before, and how absurde had it bene by denying so knowen a trouth to haue geuen such aduantage to the aduersarie? Now that S. Paule in that sentence speaketh nothinge of the Cuppe, I will be tried by the most auncient and truest copies bothe Greke and Latine, and by iudgement of them of M. Iewelles own secte them selues, yea by the English Bibles and newe Testaments of best authorite.
            
            This was D. Hardinges Answer then, and this it is nowe.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               diuis. 19.
               VVill not thy husband knowe, saieth Tertullian, what thou eatest secretly before all other meate? And in case he do knowe it, he will beleue it to be Bread, not him who it is called.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               pag. 131. The .116. Vntruthe Slaunderous.The .60. Vntruthe. Standing in the false translating of Tertullian.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
                This Vntruthe was noted before in the first Article, and is in number the xxvij. There it is answered. Yet here it is repeted to make vp a number.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               Diui. 22.
               It hath ben a (61) custome in the Latin Church from the Apostles time to our daies that on Good Friday as well Priestes, as other Christen people receiue the Sacrament vnder the forme of bread Onely, consecrated the day before, not without signification of a singular mysterie.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               pag. 135. The .117. Vntruthe Slaunderous.The .61. Vntruthe VVithout any colour or shew of truthe.
            Be bolde and blushe not M. Iewell. It may well become

a bishop of your religion to scoffe at the Mysteries of Christes Church, and to saie they haue no Colour or shewe of Truthe in them. Truly as you haue in the whole processe of this your Replie rather moued your reader to Laughter and Contempt of the Catholike faithe, by making a sorte of Lewde Argumē
               tes, such as you knowe D. Harding did neuer make, then by reason persuaded him the Truthe of the Cause: so haue you in this point plaied the right Hicke Scorner. But please not your selfe herein to much M. Iewell. Porphyrius, Lucian, Iulian the Apostata and Celsus haue farre passed you in this Arte, though they were neuer takē for bishops of Christes Church.
            But to omitte all your scoffing toyes alleaged out of Innocentius, Thomas Aquinas, Gerson and other, which they writing onely to the Lerned Deuoute Reader, thought it no such childishnes (as you make it) to Deuise of a good and Godly vsage, Causes not euill nor vngodly, though not so proper and waighty, to omitt those I say, I wil rest vpon that Cause which Hugo Cardinalis by you alleaged, reciteth. Whiche is this, that whereas the daily Sacrifice of Christes Churche, is a Memoriall and Remembraunce of Christes death on the Crosse (as it hath before out of no childishe fathers ben proued) vppon good Fridaye being the daye it selfe,VVhy the Sacrifice is not celebrated on good Frid
                     ••
                  e. in which our Sauiour suffred, the Churche M. Iewel (which you ought not to scoffe at, were you a Childe of that Mother) thought good that day for the better expressing of the thinge it selfe to omitt the Accustomed remembraunce thereof. Whiche omitting being Rare and Singular, did more liuely strike the Affection of Christen folcke, then the Accustomed Solemnities woulde haue done. For this cause also that daye we see the Churche withoute all pompe or Solemnitie, as though it were in heauinesse and lamentation to expresse the greate sorowe and desolation off our Lady and the blessed Apostles, which then at that time being

the onely Churche of Christ, suffred, by the death of their dere Master, whom they loued so tenderly, and of whose Resurrection they were not then persuaded thouroughly. This is M. Iewell in fewe wordes: a parte of the singular mysterie whiche the Church of God vseth in omitting the daily Sacrifice, on good Friday.1. Cor. 2. If this do not satisfie you, I maruail not. Animalis homo non percipit ea quae Dei sunt. The Sensuall man perceiueth not those thinges which are of God. Only this maye suffise to proue that this custome which D. Harding speaketh of, is not (as you Vntruly charge him) voide off all Colour or Shewe of Truthe.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               diuis. 28.
               Christ gaue no necessary Commaundement either for the one or for bothe kindes (beside and without the Celebration of the Sacrifice) but lefte that to the Determination of the Church.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .118. Vntruthe Slaunderous.The .62. Vntruthe. Christes Institution perteineth as well to the people as to the priest.
            This Vntruthe hath before at large ben answered, in this very article, being before noted by M. Iewell, and now againe repeted to make vp a number. It was before the 49. Vntruthe.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               diuis. 31.
               VVe beleue stedfastly with harte, and confesse openly with mouthe, that vnder eache kinde the very flesh and Bloud off Christ and whole Christ him self is present in the Sacrament (63) euen as Gelasius beleued.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               pag. 147. The .119. Vntruthe Slaunderous.The .63. Vntruthe. Gelasius neuer beleued so.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
               
               
                  Ex Gelasio contra Eu
                     
                        •
                     ic ben.
               How are you sure of that M. Iewell? You are very bolde and peremptory in all your assertions. But you proue as litle as he that saieth nothing. For notwithstanding his wordes which here you alleage, he beleued as al other bishoppes of Rome beleued, he beleued the reall presence of Christe in the Sacrament, as it is at large proued againste yow M. Iewell in the Confutation of your Apologye, fol. 98. To that place I referre

you for better vnderstandinge off Gelasius his belefe herein.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               diuis. 31.
               VVhereas before (64.) off some the Sacrament was receiued vnder one Kinde, and off some vnder bothe Kindes.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                The .64. Vntruthe.Iewell. pag. 148. The .120. Vntruthe Slaunderous..
M. Iewellee chalenge is answered. But he Altereth the Question pag. 69. and .142 pag. 132. pag. 148 No Catholike congregation euer receiued the Sacrament in one kinde.
            D. Harding saieth not so much, but that some haue so receiued it, which he saied truly, and proued it before in the Article abundantly. Whereby your challenge is also in this pointe answered. The tenour whereof was, that within the compasse of .600. yeares the Communion was neuer Ministred to the people vnder One kinde. Now that you adde before Openly in the Church and then againe. The whole people, and nowe a Catholike Congregation, this ofte Altering of the Question M. Iewel is but a mere wrangling, and a plaine proclaiming of your selfe Guilty. For had you ben able to haue auouched your first assertion, you would neuer haue added so many newe Conditions vnto it. And had not D. Harding vtterly ouerthrowen the same, you woulde not haue sought such shamelesse shiftes, as to make a newe Question of the whole matter, and to require a proofe of that which you had not yet denied: and whiche D. Harding, vnlesse he had had the Sprit of prophecye, to foresee these your alterations and extensions of the question, was in no wise bounde to proue. But M. Iewell, to knitt vp this mattter, to let passe your slaunderous charging of D. Harding with so many Vntruthes, and not one yet found to be such, finally to speake one worde shortly of this whole matter, thus you shall vnderstande.
            
                It hath sufficiētly appeared both by the treatise of D. Hardinge, and by the Iustifiyng of these Vntruthes,
               The Institution off Christ, & Practise of the Churche. that the Institutiō of Christ in the last Supper bindeth not all laye personnes or other to communicat vnder both kindes.  Also that within the space of the first 600. yeares th
                  •
                Church of God of that tyme

ministred vnto diuerse of Gods people the blessed Sacrament vnder one kind. This being so proued, this de Iure, and also De facto both by Right and by Practise appearing euidently, now for you M. Iewel to quarel, De facto alterius generis, of a practise more general, for you to require proofes in Churches, in Opē Assemblies, in an Open Order and Vsage off the Church, it is the part of a quareller and wrāgler. It is not the part of one that seketh vnite. It is no Bishoplike demeanour, no charitable dealing, no Christiā or Catholi
                  •
               e vsage. This is a Sacramēt of vnite.The double Practise of Gods Churche. The Church of God hath vsed it bothe waies, and hath by that double vsage, interpreted vs the meaning of Christes institutiō, touching the people, to be indifferēt. For we beleue M. Iewell (and let this be the ende of al) that the knowen Church of Christ not only of the first 600. yeares, but also of these later 900. yeares is and hath ben alwaies so guided and preserued of almighty God, (according to the Clere Promises of God in the psalmes, the prophets and the ghospel) that neither in Doctrine of faith,See the Fortresse annexed to Venerable Bede. neither in Practise of seruing him, it cā or hath at any time swarued, much lesse broken his owne Institutiō and ordonāce, in so weighty and daily a matter, as the Ministration of his holy Sacramētes is. This is our faith grounded vpō holy Scripture, and the worde of God. By thi
                  •
                faith we beleue and doo, as the church beleueth and doth, though we had no one testimonie of the anciēt primitiue Church, to cōfirme and witnesse the doinges of this later Church of our daies. For M. Iewel, the Church of God is but One: And hath continewed without interruption (sense the coming of Christ) in a knowen Multitude, and shall so Continewe euen to the worldes ende.
         
         
            
            A RETVRNE OF VNTRVTHES VPON M. IEWELL. &c. The Thirde Article. Of Seruice in the vulgar tounge.
            
               
                  IF you meane M. Iewell,
               D. Hard. Diuis. 1. 
               by the peoples Common praiers such as at that time they cōmonly made to God in priuate deuotion, I thinke they vttered them in that tounge, which they vnderstode, (65) and so doo Christian people now for the most parte.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .121. Vntruthe Slaunderous.The .65. Vntruthe. For vnder the subiection of the bishop of Rome, the people for the most parte praieth in latin.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
                They do not so now M. Iewell. For Now not only in these countries of the lower Germany where we now liue, but also in Fraunce and Italy (as I knowe by experience) the common people haue their common praiers in their vulgar tounge Doutche, Frenche and Italian. And in our countre (whatsoeuer they did fifty or fourty yeres agoe) in the late reigne of Quene Marie, the people had their common matins bookes bothe with latin and with english. Therefore that Now the people for the most parte praieth in the vulgar tounge, it was truly saied of D. Harding, and the contrary on your parte vntruly auoutched. Againe he speaketh of praiers made in priuat deuotion, which is not allwaies bounde to the booke, but oftentimes expresseth it selfe without booke, as thousandes doe, that can reade in no booke.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               Aboute 900· yeres paste (66) it is certaine, the people in some Countries had their seruice in an vnknowen tounge, as it shall be proued of our owne countre in England.
            
            
               
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 122. Vntruthe Slaund.The .66 Vntruthe. This certainte will neuer be proued.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
                Yes M. Iewell, I will make you a shorte argument whereby it shall be clerely proued.
            At the first planting of the faith amonge vs englishmen S. Gregory sent churche bookes to England from Rome for the Church Seruice of the new conuerted Englishmen.
            But those Church bookes sent from Rome were in the latin tongue.
            Ergo the Churche Seruice of the new conuerted Englishmen was in the latin tounge.
            
               
                  The Maior.
                  
                     Bed
                           •
                        . Lib. 1. Cap. 29. Histor. Angl.
               For proufe of the Maior, or first proposition, I bringe the testimony of Venerable Bede, a lerned countreman of oures, writen in the yere of our lorde, 730. His wordes be these. Farder more the saied Pope, (he meaneth S. Gregory) for so much as Augustine had aduertised him that there was a great haruest, and fewe workemen, sent him with his saied legates, more preachers: of the which the chefest were Mellitus, Iustus, and Ruffinianus. By them also he sent al such thinges as were necessary for the furniture and ministery of the Church: As holy vessels, aultar clothes, ornaments for the Churches, apparell also for the priestes and clergy. Also relikes of the holy Apostles and martyrs, and many Bookes. Thus farre Bede. In whose wordes we see for the Furniture and Ministery of the church Bookes to haue ben sent from Rome: That this was done at the first planting of Christen faith amonge vs Englishmen (vs Englishmen I saie, occupying at that time all that is now called England, the olde Brittons being driuen in to the straights of Wales) let the whole History of Venerable Bede be a witnesse to all englishmen, though M. Iewell in this Article afterwarde, most impiously, and impudently after his maner do denie it.
            Now touching the Minor, or second proposition that these Churche bookes sent from Rome were 
                  •
               n the latin tounge,The Minor. it nedeth not I trust to proue. It is euident that our english Saxon tounge was not at that time vnderstanded at Rome, neither of

those which came frō Rome, at their first arriual in to our coū
               tre, but the Latin tounge only. And therfore those bookes sent from Rome for the Furniture and Seruice of the Church were in Latin and not in English. Thus the premisses being clere, the Conclusion is vndoubted. Other argumentes are brought afterwarde in this Article by D. Harding, to the which how well M. Iewell hath replied, it will appeare in the Confutation thereof. Vpon this conclusion, that the Church seruiuice was in the Latin tounge, it shal not nede I trowe to inferre. Ergo it was in a straūge and vnknowen tounge to English men. I trust M. Iewell will not be so impudent as to saie that all Englishmen then conuerted to the faithe vnderstode the Latin tounge. Which if he will saie, as truly with no lesse impudency he denieth the faith to haue ben then first planted amonge vs englishmen and most wickedly violateth the blessed memory of our Apostle S. Augustin, the History of Venenerable Bede lately set foorth in the english tounge shall proue him a manifest lyar in the one, and a most notorious slaunderer in the other.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               I saie, as I saied before, that the seruice was then (within the compasse of 600. yeres after Christ) in a toung which some people vnderstode and some vnderstode not.
               Diuis. 3.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                The .67. Vntruthe.The .123. Vntruthe Slaunderous. M. Harding is not able to shew one nation that vnderstoode not their Common seruice.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                Yes forsothe M. Harding hath shewed it, as it shall well appeare before we haue ended this Article. Yet presently for the iustifying of this Vntruth (wherein in dede the whole Article dependeth, and the which being iustified your assertion M. Iewell is ouerthrow
                  •
               n) I proue that within the first 600. yeres certain nations vnderstode not their commō seruice. Thus I reason.
            
               
               Churche Seruice proued in a toū
                  ge not vnderstanded.
               All the inhabitans of Smyrna, Pontus, Cappadocia, Lyaconia, Caria, Thracia had their Common seruice in the Greke tounge.
            
            
               But all the inhabitants of those Nations vnderstode not the Greke tounge.
            
            Ergo all those inhabitans had not their seruice in a tounge which they vnderstoode.
            
            
               The Maior.For proufe of the Maior or first proposition, I wil bring the testimony of S. Hierom. S. Hierom writeth thus. Alexandria & Aegyptus in Septuaginta suis, Hesychium laudat authorem. Constantinopolis vsque Antiochiam,
               
                  Praefat. in Parali
                        •
                     .
                
               Luciani Martyris exemplaria probat. Mediae inter has prouinciae palestinos codices legunt, quos ab Origine elaboratos Eusebius & Pamphilus vulgauerunt, totusque orbis hac inter se trifaria varietate compugnat. That is. Alexandria and Aegypt in their Greke copies of the Bible do vse that trā
               slation of the 70. which Hesychius hath sett forthe. From Constantinople vnto Antioche the copies sett foorth by Lucianus Martyr are allowed. Other prouinces lying betwene these, do reade the bookes of Palestina, which Eusebius and Pamphilus, being first corrected by Origen, did sett foorth, and all the worlde in this triple variete of copies contendeth one with the other.
            By these wordes of S. Hierom it is euident, that in all the East parte of the worlde (which he calleth here the whole worlde) from Aegypt to Constantinople, and within all the countres lying betwene, comprehending al Asia the lesse, these three copies only of the Greke Bibles were vsed. For in this triple diuersite, he saieth all that parte of the world contendeth. Of those midle prouinces lying betwene Constantinople and Antioche, are those countres aboue named of the lesser Asia, except Thracia which is of the proper Iurisdictiō of Constantinople and no parte of the lesser Asia. As the skillfull in Cosmographie do knowe right well. Now out of this place of S. Hierom for proofe of the Maior or first proposition,

thus I reason.
            
               The common seruice of those countres was for the most parte taken out of their Bibles and holy Scripture.
            
            
               But by S. Hieroms testimony their Bibles were only in the Greke tounge of the 70. translation, sett forth either by Hysichius, or Lucianus the Martyr or Eusebius and Pamphilus.
            
            Ergo their common seruice was only in the Greke tounge.
            
            The maior of this Syllogismus, is euident bothe for that the Psalmes and the lessons are knowen to be the greater parte of the Seruice, and also by diuerse canons of that age and time,
                  Concil. Carthag. 3. Cā. 40. commaunding Scripture to be read in the Church seruice. The minor is S. Hieroms. So the Conclusion is certaine. Againe, S. Basill celebrated the Seruice in Cappadocia in the Greke tounge as it appeareth by his Liturgie yet extant in greke: Chrisostom also in Thracia, as it appeareth by his Liturgie or Masse yet extant also in Greke. Ergo the Publike Seruice in Cappadocia and Thracia were in the Greke tounge.
            The minor or seconde proposition of the firste Sylllogismus, which is, that all those countres aboue named,The Minor. vnderstoode not the greke tongue, is proued in this Article by D. Harding, by diuerse testimonies, First of Strabo and Plinie, as in the discussing of the 70. and 71. Vntruthes, I shall haue anon occasiō more largely to speake. And to speake particularly of some of these. That the vulgar tongue of Lycaonia, was not greke, it appeareth in the Actes of the Apostles, where it is sayed,
                  Act
                        •
                     . 14. that the people of Lystra a City in Licaonia, cried out to Paule and Barnabas in the Lycaonicall tongue. Saint Luke which wrote the Actes in greke, if that crye of the Lycaonians had bene in greke, woulde not haue termed it a seuerall language from the greke, as he doth, calling it Lycaonicall. Againe that the vulgar tongue of Thracia, was not greke, Chysostom him selfe bishoppe of Constantinople in Thracia doth witnesse.

For he preaching in greke,
                  In 1. Cor. 14. Homi 35. reakoneth vp amonge diuersite off tonges, the tongues of the Scythians, of Thracians, of Romaines, of Persians, of Indians, of the Aegyptians, and of other. Thirdly, that the vulgar tōge of Caria was no greke but a forrain and straunge tongue from the greke, Strabo is a sufficient witnesse, who speaking of the proper Language off the Carians,
                  Strabo lib. 14. faieth of it: Permulta Nomina Graeca per mixta habet. It hath many greke Names mingled in it. Wher
                  •
               of it is euident it was a cleane different tongue from the greke. Lyke as our Englishe tongue hathe a number of Frenche wordes in it, being yet a language vtterly diuerse from the Frenche. Fourthely the people of Cappadocia, Pontus, and Asia, of Phrygia, and Pamphylia:
                  Actor. 2. 
               Audiebat vnusquisque lingua sua illos loqu
                     •
                  ntes, hearde the Apostles to speake euery one in their owne tongue. And the Miracle was suche, that they saied one to an other. Are not all these that speake, of Galilee? Et quomodo nos audiuimu
                     •
                   vnusqu
                     •
                  sque linguam nostram, in qua nati sum us? And howe haue we hearde euery one of vs oure tongue in the whiche we were borne? Vnlesse the tongues, of Pontus and Asia, of Cappadocia, Phrygia, and Pamphylia (al countres of the lesser Asia) had bene so diuers and distincte natural tounges, that eche one vnderstode not the other, what Miracle or what cause of admonition had there bene in those peoples hearing the Apostles to pronounce and speake, euery of their natural and natiue tounges? What Miracle is it for the Notherne man and the Westerne man to vnderstande the Southerne preacher at Poules? But if the Spanyarde, the Italian and the Frenche man (being only skilfull of their Mother toungues) coulde yet vnderstande a Latine preacher, that were a Miracle in dede. For so were the the tongues of Pontus and Asia, of Cappadocya, Phrygia, and Pamphylia, deriued and deducted oute of the greke, as the Frenche. Italyan, and Spanyshe are deriued out of the Latin. And these proprietes of Languages were so diuers, and infinit,

that althoughe of certaine, as of the Atticke, the Ionicall, the Dorical, and the Aeolical tōgues proprietes might be gathered and collected in to some Orders of Rules, the other yet by no meanes coulde be so reduced, but were rather taken for diuerse and different toungues, then for proprietes of tounges. Therefore Ioannes Grammaticus writing hereof, saieth.
                  I
                        •
                     an Grā. 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . 
               Barbaras in multitudine existentes & incompraehensibiles non est facile tradere. Alioqui neque dicendum ipsas Dialectos, sed linguas. The Barbarous greke tounges being infinit, can not easely be brought to any rules to be taught by. And they are not so much to be called Dialectes or proprieties, as tonges. Such Diuers
                  •
               tes, multitudes, and differences of tounges and languages there were in the greke Churche, in the lesser Asia, and in that which in Ecclesiasticall writers is called the East parte of Chrystendome. Last of Master Iewell him selfe confesseth in this Article, that 
                  Iewell. 
               
               pag, 166.The Nations of the East parte of the worlde, had seuerall tounges and spake not all one onely tounge. This then being so, and yet the Easte parte of the worlde (as it hath bene proued) hauing onely the greke Seruice, it remaineth clere, that a Nation, yea sondry Nations are shewed which h
                  •
               d their Seruice not in their common knowen tounge, but in a lerned tounge whiche they vnstoode not.
            Againe M. Iewell is of the minde in this Article that in Rome the Seruice was euer in Latine. For he saieth,pag. 167. they had their exhortations and sermons in Latine. True it is the Church of Rome had the Seruice allwaies in the Latine tongue. The Sermons and Exhortations also for a greate space. But howe longe thinketh M. Iewell? He confesseth that S. Augustine sent in by S. Gregory to preache the Faith to vs Englishmē, prayed in Latine, and sayed Masse in Latine. And it is euidēt in the workes of sainte Gregorye that the Church Seruice in Rome was in his tyme Latine.
                  Lib. 7. Epist. 63. An
                  •
                he writeth that the people of Rome answered to Kyrie 
                     •
                  leeson, at the Masse tyme, as they doe

to this daye. Yet what thinketh M. Iewell? Did the people of Rome vnderstande Kyrie eleeson. Those wordes are Greke. But did they vnderstande Latin in Rome at that time? Verely the histories teache vs the contrary. Namely Sabellicus writeth that before the time of S. Gregory,
                  Aenead. 8. Lib. 5. euē frō the first coming in of the Longobardes to Italy, they lefte vtterly in Rome to speake latin. This was longe before the six hundred yeres expired. And no maruaile. For before that time, the Wandalles and Hunnes had spoyled Rome. The Gothes inhabited the very cyte of Rome and the rest of Italy many yeres. The Longobardes also had their dwellinges and remaining there. Yet was the Churche Seruice vntill S. Gregories time and euer sithens only in the latine tounge. Thus bothe in the greke Churche, and in the latine, the Churche seruice was in greke and latine, which soundry nations of grece, and the very Romanes them selues vnderstoode not. Thus the Vntruthe is iustified, and a natiō, yea sundry natiōs shewed, which vnderstoode not cōmonly their Cōmon Seruice, and thus in this Article euen at the beginning M. Iewell must yelde and Subscribe. Which yet, before we come to the ende, M. Iewel by Gods grace, shall diuers mo waies be forced vnto, if at lest he will stande and abide to his large offers and ouer bolde challenge.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               diuis. 3.
               If M. Iewell, or any of our learned aduersaries, or any man liuing coulde shewe good euidence and proufe, that the publike seruice of the Church was then in the Syriacall or Arabike, in the Aegiptian, Aethiopian, Persian, Armenian, Scythian, Frenche or Britaine tongue, then might they iustly claime prescription against vs in this article &c. But that doubtelesse can not appeare.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               pag. 154. The 124. Vntruthe Slaund.The .68. Vntruthe, For doubtelesse it will soone be shewed.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
                This shall appeare by the proufes which you bringe, M. Iewell.

Here in this place you saie somewhat. Afterwarde you saie more. To that which here you bringe, I will here presently answer. To that which you bringe afterwarde, I will answer when I come to it, which will be in the Returning of the .78. Vntruthe. Here you saie.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                For as much as the first tongue that M. Harding nameth amongest other, is the Syriacal, let him reade S. Hierom describing the pompe of Paules funerall. These be his wordes.
                  
                     Hieron in epitaphio Panloe.
                  
                  The 125. Vntruthe For this was no parte of the common Seruice, as it shall appeare bothe here and more at large in the 78. Vntruthe.
                
               At her funerall all the multitude of the Cities of Palestine mette together. The psalmes were songe in order in the hebrew, greke, Latin, and Syrian tongue. Here may he see that in one Citie foure seuerall Nations, in their Common seruice vsed foure Seuerall tongues amonge which tongues is the Syriacal. Which thing M. Harding thinketh all the worlde can not shewe.
            M. Iewell shooteth faire, but farre from the Marke. His purpose is to proue that the Common seruice of the Church was in the Syriacall tongue. And he telleth vs of certain psalmes songe at the funeral of a noble woman in the Syriā tongue. Of such psalmes or songes we shal speake more at large hereafter in the 
                  •
               8. Vntruthe, aboute the allegation of M. Iewell touching Ephrem. Presently let vs consider shortly M. Iewelles Argument. Thus he semeth to frame it.
            
               Psalmes were songe of the people at ones funerall in the vulgar tongue.
            
            
               Ergo the Churche seruice was alltogether in the vulgar tongue.
               M. Iewelles Argument.
            
            Soothely (good Reader) if it had liked M. Iewel to haue geuen the leaue to reade forthe the whole sentence of S. Hierom, thou shouldest haue sene this singing of psalmes was no parte of the Church seruice, but an extraordinary deuotion of that people toward that good woman deceased. For thus it foloweth immediatly after the wordes by M. Iewell alleaged. Psalmes were songe not only for three daies space, vntil the time she was buried vnder the Church nygh to the vawte of our lorde, but also through out the whole weke: al that came, thinking it their owne funerall and their owne sorowe. Now vnlesse M. Iewell will saie

that al the weke longe they were a saying her diriges, or that in a sett seruice of one Churche there should be a confusion of so many tounges, or that the Seruice was in all those foure tounges at once, this can nothing helpe him. Verely of such psalmes as were songe at her buriall as a parte of the seruice, S. Hierom mentioned that before in these wordes. Being caried to her graue by the handes of the bishops,
               
                  Hieron. in Epitaph. Paulae.
                
               carying the b
                     •
                  ere vpon their necke, while other bishops aryed candles and tapers b
                     •
                  fore her, other guided the quyer of the singing men, she was laied in the middle of the Church, of our Sauiour. Here is the Seruice, here be lightes and tapers, here is a quyer of singing men. Thus M. Iewelles psalme helpeth nothing his whole Seruice, but vtterly ouerthroweth the whole maner of their naked funeralls. He proueth the whole by a piece, the ordinary vsage by a casuall solemnite, the common Seruice by a priuat Funerall. Vpon such bare Gheasses, this great Alteration is builded. And here commeth an other to vnderproppe it.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                S. Augustin willing the priestes to applie their study to correct the errours of their latin speache,
                  De 
                        •
                     a
                        •
                     e
                        •
                     hi sandis rudib. cap. 9. The .126. Vntruthe For it is spoken only of latin tounge. addeth thereto this reason. That the people vnto the thi
                     •
                  ge that they pl
                     •
                  inely vnderstande, may say, Amen. This of S. Augustin seemeth (126) to be spoken generally of all tongues.
            It seemeth so M, Iewell. Yea forsoothe, he that seeth no marke must shoote by ayme. D. Harding asketh of the Syriacal, Arabike, Aegyptian, Aethiopian, Persian, Armenian, Scythian, Frenche or Britain tongue, and you answer of the Latin seruice vsed in Afrike. This is M. Iewelles argument.
            
               M. Iewelles Argument.
               The Latin Seruice was vsed in Affrike in Latin and the people thereto answeared, Amen.
            
            
               Ergo the Arabyans, Scythians, Aethyopians, Frenche men and other had their seruice in their vulgar tounge.
            
            This argument hangeth loosely. Euery childe may see thourough it. The foly of it will appeare by the like.
            
               
               In Rome at this houre the seruice is in Latin, and the people answeareth Amen.
            
            Ergo Spaine, Fraunce, and Dutcheland haue their seruice in their vulgare tounge.
            
            The truthe is. In all places and countres, the priest must so distinctly pronounce the Seruice, that when the people of duty must answer, he may be vnderstanded, what he say. So children and Parisheclarkes are taught to answer the Priest, knowing well the wordes what he saieth, though not vnderstanding what the wordes meane. And as now for the whole people one or a fewe doth answer, being taught and instructed thereto, so in the primitiue Church all the people for the most part was so instructed and did so answer. Thus M. Iewell hath hitherto proued the Latin Seruice, but for Seruice in the vulgar tounge he hath brought nothinge. But he goeth forth, and saieth.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                M. Harding him selfe at the ende of his treatie confesseth that the Armenians, Russians, Aethyopians, Slauons and Moscouites,middot; haue from the beginning of their faith in their publike Seruice vsed euer more their owne naturall countre tounges. Wherefore by M. Hardinges owne graunte, we may iustly claime prescription, and charge him with Antiquite, and require him to yelde to the Authorite of the primitiue Churche.The .127. Vntruthe for none of these examples are of the primitiue Church.
            
            It is well, M. Iewell, that all other stories, Doctours, Councells, and witnesses faylyng you, yet D. Harding hath stoode your good frende, to serue your turne in this distresse. Howbeit D. Harding though he might gladly pleasure, you yet coulde he in no casse so forgett him selfe, as to require you to proue that thinge, which he should after graūt you. Therfore you shall vnderstāde M. Iewel first that those Armenias, Russians and Aethiopiās vsed not such vulgar Seruice with in the first 600. yeres, but longe after. His question here is of that time and no other. Againe he asketh of such practise allowed and taken for good. Your answere vpon his graunte is of such

as vsed it so in Schisme. Thus hetherto it hath not appeared that any Countre had their Seruice, Within the first .600. yeres in a vulgar Barbarous tongue.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               I say that if I can shewe that the people of some Countries of the Greke Church (69) which all had their Cōmon praiers and Seruice in the Greke tounge, for the more parte vnderstoode not the Greke toung, more then Englishmen nowe the Latin tounge, then I haue proued that I promised to proue. &c.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 128. Vntruthe Slaund.The 69. Vntrueth. For it is certaine that sundrie of the East nations had not their Seruice in the greke tongue, as shall appeare.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                It shall appeare, saieth M. Iewell. But when and where? Forsothe in the 15. Diuision of this Article. In that place he repeateth this Vntruthe, and laboureth to poue it at large. In that place it shall appeare,It is the 78. Vntruthe. that he hath proued nothing. But take heede good Reader, in the meane while. Vnlesse thou eye M. Iewell well, he will steale from thee. For in this point lyeth the whole pith of this Article.The principal Issue of this Article. D. Harding putteth it here for clere and vndoubted, that all the Greke Church, and namely all the lesser Asia being a great parte thereof, had their Seruice in the Greke tongue. This being so clere and true that no lerned mā. would euer haue denied it (for whereof is it called Greca Ecclesia, the Greke Church, or Congregation, but bicause in al their assemblies and Churches the Greke tongue was vsed, Scriptures were read in Greke, homilies in Greke, and so forthe, as the writinges of S. Basill, of Gregorie Nazianzen, and Gregory of Nissa, al bishops in Asia the lesse do clerely conuince?) this I say being in the iudgement of all lerned men so clere a matter, D. Harding neither proued it, neither thought it nede to proue. No nor M. Iewell doth not then flatly denie it. But (saieth he)

               
                  Iewell. 
               
               pag. 160.
if it be denied, M. Harding with all his learning is not able to proue it. Yet he will not graunte it neither, bicause the graunting therof were a clere ouerthrowe of his assertion. This therefore being put for truth of D. Harding, he proueth that many coū
               tres of Asia the lesse vnderstode not the Greke tongue. Whereof it should folowe, that many countres of Asia the lesse had their Seruice in a toungue which they vnderstoode not. Bicause of this conclusion so directly folowing M. Iewell seing the Minor or second proposition to be directly and abundantly proued, and the Maior or first proposition no whit proued, to the Minor or second proposition, he saieth,
                  Iewell. 
               
               pag. 162. M. Harding ouer much paineth him self, to proue that thing that no wise man will denie him. And then he bringeth some proufes him selfe to helpe forthe the matter. To the Maior or first proposition, bicause it stoode vnproued, he toke his aduantage, and nowe de
                  •
               ied it vtterly, though it were of it selfe most clere and euident. Now bicause an vniuersall proposition being denied, an instā
               ce in some particular must be geuen by order of reason, therfore he taketh vpon him (as you heare him to saie in this Vntrutruthe) to proue afterwarde that sundry Natiōs of the East Church had not their Seruice in the Greke toung.
                  Iewell. 
                Whereby the vniuersall proposition of D. Harding, that all the East or Greke Church had their seruice in the greke tounge,
               D. Har. shall be ouerthrowen. This as I saied he will proue afterwarde. In the 78. Vntruthe I shall haue occasion to answer vnto the whole. Looke (gentle Reader) in that place, and marke how well he proueth it, and remēbre that if his proufes faile him (as I trust in God they shall euery one) that then Some Countres are founde in the Greke Churche of the first 600. yeares which had their Seruice in a toungue that all the people vnderstoode not: That so M. Iewelles Assertion will be ouerthrowen, and he bounde to Subscribe, if he stande to his offer.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               Strabo who trauailled ouer all the countres of Asia,Diuis. 8.
                  
nere about the time of S. Paules peregrination there, who also was borne in the same, in his .14. booke of Geographie writeth, that whereas within that Cherronesus that is the straight betwene sea and sea there were sixtiene Nations by reporte of Ephorus, of them all onely three were grekes, all the rest Barbarous.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                The .70. Vntruthe. Missereporting Straboes wordes.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
               
               The .129. Vntruthe Slaunderous..It greueth M. Iewell, that D. Hardinge shoulde speake anye Truthe in his whole booke. So ofte he noteth him of Vntruth, not only where none is (as he hath yet hitherto euer done) but also in such matters, which whether it be true or no, nothing helpeth or furdereth the state of the question. D. Harding will proue that in Asia the Lesse there were soundry Countres whiche vnderstoode not the Greke Toungue.
               D. Hard. M. Iewell sayeth.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               pag. 160.To what ende? For neither is it denied by any of vs, neither is it any part of our questiō. And yet notwithstanding is not M. Harding (130.) able to proue it with all his Gheasses.
            
               The .130. Vntruthe For by this Authorite of Strabo it is clerely proued.Lo: He will disproue D. Hardinges proufes, thoughe they make nothing to the purpose, yea though he denie not the thinge which is proued. And why so? Forsothe to encrease the quantite of his Replie, to deface (as he thinketh) his aduersary, and to leaue in the Reader some token of his learning and knowleadge, though he leaue withall a greate blott of his honesty. For marke good Reader I beseche thee, the demeanour of M Iewell in this pointe.The singular lewdenesse of M. Iewel. Bicause by no reason nor truthe he could ouerthrow the report of D. Harding out of Strabo, he in his text, repeting the text of D. Harding hath put in one worde more, then either D. Harding spake, or Strabo wrote, intending thereby to proue D. Hardinge to Missereporte Strabo. What worde is that? The worde is. Then. For whereas D. Harding out of Strabo reporteth, that, 
                  Harding. 
               
               whereas there were sixteene

soundrye Nations in Asia the lesse by reporte of Ephorus, off them all only three were Grekes, all the reste were Barbarous, M. Iewell, repetinge these wordes, repeteth them in this sorte, Whereas there were Then Sixtene sundry Nations,The .131. vntruthe, i
                     •
                  altering the texte of D. Harding. Iewell. pag. 161. &c. And then he crieth out.
            I knowe not whether M. Harding be vn wittingly deceiued him selfe, or wilfully go aboute to deceiue others. But wel I knowe, that this is no parte of Straboes meaning. For Strabo speaketh not this of his owne time, &c. And a litle after. For if Strabo had meant this of his owne time, to what ende, &c.
            Lo you see his proufe is directed againste the worde, Then: whiche worde D. Hardinge wrote not. He will proue it was not so in Straboes time, which D. Harding saied not at all. For euidence hereof I reporte me to all the copies extant, as well in both the printes of D. Hardings Answer, as also to the Copie, inserted here in M. Iewelles Replye. If there be any lye in putting in the worde Then, you haue made the lye, for you haue put in that worde. Then beshrowe the lyar. Thus M. Iewell, to fasten an Vntruthe vppon doctor Hardinge, and to proue him a deceiuer off the people, hathe dealed him selfe moste Vntruly, hath deceiued the people, and much abused his Reader.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               Likewise Plinius in the sixt Booke. Naturalis Historiae. ca. 2. declareth that within the circuit of that lande, were three greke Nations only, Dores, Iones, Aeoles. And that the rest were Barbarous.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                The .71. Vntruthe. Missereporting the wordes of Plinie.The .132. Vntruthe Slaunderous.
            
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
                The wordes of Plinie are these. In omni tractu eo proditurtres tantum gentes Graecas iure dici, Doricam, Aeonicam, Aeolicam, Caeteras Barbarorū esse. Within all that circuite (he meaneth off Asia the lesse) it is written, that onely three nations be rightly called grekes, and that the rest are of the Barbarous. Nowe howe hath D. Harding missereported Plinie his wordes? M. Iewell

in his texte to proue they are missereported, saieth nothinge. Let then the Reader iudge, by conferring together the wordes of Plinie and the wordes of doctor Hardinge, whether he saie any thinge more or lesse in effecte then Plinie doeth. In which two pointes Missereporting consisteth. Plinie saieth. Proditur. It is writen. And D. Harding vpon his auouching reporteth it. Plinye saieth. Three Onely Nations are rightly called Greke. So much saieth D. Harding also. Naie, sayeth M. Iewell.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               pag. 160. The .133. Vntruthe For Plinie can not so meane. In that he saieth, tres tantum gentes Graecas Iure dici, that only three Nations be rightly or naturally called Grekes (133) he must nedes meane that the reste were called Grekes also, althoughe not so rightly, and naturally as the other: For els the exception of this worde, Iure, that is, rightly or naturally, had bene in vaine.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
                Touching the language they were not called Grekes at all rightly. That is the saying of Plinie. He saieth not, Not so rightly, as M. Iewell gloseth. But they were not rightly Grekes, bicause they neither spake the greke tonge naturally, neither had arriued into that parte of Asia the lesse, as had the other three, but out of other Barbarous Countres. And the reason why onely those three Nations Dores, Iones, Aeoles, were rightly called grekes, is not (as M. Iewel fancieth) to make an exceptiō betwene rightly, and not so rightly, but it is (as Plinie expressely telleth vs) to make an exception that the other were no grekes at all. And therfore, he addeth immediatly to his former words. Caeteras Barbarorum esse. That the rest were of Barbarous. Now Syr. The Barbarous and the Grekes are two distincted Nations touchinge language at the lest, though lyuing in one Countre. As the grekes are not called Barbarous, so neither the Barbarous are called Grekes. And S. Paule maketh a clere difference betwene the Grekes and the Iewes,
                  Rom. 1. and the Barbarous. In that worde Barbarous, comprehending all other Natyons not Iewes nor Graekes. So dothe Strabo as we shall anon heare.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               And thus M. Harding seeking to proue that the people of Asia were no grekes, alleageth Plinius,The 134. Vntruthe For it appeareth not so by Plinie. by whose wordes it appeareth necessarely that they were grekes.
            It appeareth by Plinie three only were rightly called Grekes. All the rest were mere Barbarous. But this is not yet the Conclusion of D. Harding. M. Iewel sawe wel enough that he had first alleaged Strabo in whō the matter is more plaine, and that Plinie was brought but for the like. Therefore hauing hitherto shot at Rouers, nowe he cometh home to his longe Buttes, and saieth.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                But M. Harding will force the matter further. Strabo saieth, that these three Nations excepted, the rest were Barbarous: Ergo they vnderstoode no Greke.
               Vhe .135. Vntruthe Slaund. And hereupon resteth his whole proofe. But this is an other falsification of Straboes minde.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                So saieth M. Iewell, and so he hath added in the Margin. Thus. M. Harding falsifieth S
                     •
                  raboes minde. But nowe it shall appeare that al this is but a Slaunderous Vntruth. And that M. Iewell either vnderstode not in dede Straboes minde, or els, hath wilfully falsified his minde. For loe thus he foloweth the Matter.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                For Strabo calleth them Barbarous, which vnderstoode and spake Greke.The .136. Vntruthe.
            
            This is a manifest Vntruthe. Strabo calleth such, Barbariloquos, men of a barbarous speache, not Barbaros, Barbarous, As it shall anon appeare. But first let vs heare M. Iewelles proufes. He saieth.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                And what beter witnesse can we herein haue, then Strabo him selfe?
            
               
                  Stapl. 
                Verely his witnesse is good. But M. Iewell vnderstandeth him not.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Thus he writeth. Barbarismum in hijs dicere consueuimus, qui male loquuntur Grece, non au
                     •
                  em in 
                     ••
                  lis qui Cari
                     •
                  e lóquunur.
               
                  Lib. 14. Geograph.
                
               Sic etiā barbariloquos & barbari sermonis homines eos accipere debemus, qui male Graeca pro
                     •
                  un
                     •
                  iant. We take a barbarismus, or a barbarous maner of speache to be in them that speake the Greke d
                  •
               sorderly, and not in them that speake a straunge tounge as is the tounge of the Carians. So we ought to take them to be * barbarous,

or men of barbarous speache,
                  The 137. Vntruthe in false trāslatiō. Barbariloquus. is not barbarous, but a man of barbarous speache.
                  The .138. Vntruthe For Strabo saieth not so.
                that ill fauouredly pronounce the Greke. Thou maiest see good Reader with what faithe M. Harding alleageth the Authorite of olde writers. He woulde proue by Strabo that these people spake no graeke bicause they were Barbarous. And Strabo him selfe (138) saieth, not withstāding they were Barbarous, yet they spake Greke.
            M. Iewell hathe saied. But he hath saied many thinges vntruly. As for the faithe which D. Harding is presumed not to haue vsed, let it be tried by the Truthe that M. Iewell him selfe hath vsed. Verely he vnderstoode not his Author, or els he hath wilfully dissembled the Truthe. For thus it is. Strabo calleth not such men that spake greke ill fauouredly, Barbaros barbarous (as M. Iewell hath wrongely translated Strabo) but he calleth them Barbariloquos & barbari sermonis homines, men of barbarous speache. You haue deceiued your Reader M. Iewell willfully, or els your selfe grossely and ignorantly, with the similitude of termes.
            For Barbari, barbarous, a
                  •
               d Barbariloqui, men of a barbarous speache in Strabo are not all one.
                  Barbari and Barbariloqui.
                For whereas the Ion
                     •
                  s (who spake cleane greke) called the Ca
                  •
               ians Barbariloquos, men of a barbarous speache, in contempt and cōtumely, bicause (as Strabo writeth) they had much contention and continuall warre with them, and thereupon Anacreon their Poet termed them 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
                  Strabo Lib. 14. men of barbarous speche, Strabo asketh Quare eos barbarici sermonis appellat, Barbaros vero nunquam? Why doth he cal thē men of Barbarous speache, and not Barbarous? And after he saieth. Omnes qui crasse loquuntur Barbari dicuntur, quales sunt Nationes omnes praeter graecos. All which speake thicke and grosse are called Barbarous, such as all nations are beside the graekes. Therefore Chrysostom a Grecian reakoneth the Romans them selues inter barbaros,
               
                  In 1. Cor. 14. Hom. 35. amonge the barbarous. In like maner Tully, Liuie, and other latin writers call all other Nations (except the pure grekes) in comparison of them selues, Barbarous.
                  Lib. 14. 
               And therefore (saieth Strabo) A nacreon called the Carians

properly Barbarous at the beginning, bicause of their harde and roughe speache, But afterwarde we abused that worde as a common name to distinguish them from the grekes. Thus much of the worde Barbari, barbarous, or (in better englishe) forraine or straūge. After this he speaketh of such as were called Barbariloqui, men of barbarous speache (which M. Iewell confoundeth with the worde barbarous,) and saieth.Strabo. Ibidem.
                
               Alia quaedam & quasi barbara loquendi prauitas in lingua nostra videbatur, si quis non perfecte graeca pronunciaret, quod & apprimé Caribus contingit. There semed yet an other and a certaine barbarous offence in our tounge, if any pronounced greke not perfitly: which in these Carians is most euident. So he cōcludeth against Anacreon that the Carians were not called Barbariloqui, men of barbarous speache for their owne Carian tounge (for so they were called, Barbari barbarous, as al other Nations beside the greke were) but bicause they pronounced not well the greke tounge which they lerned. Vpon this he vttereth the wordes which M. Iewell alleageth, touching those which are properly called Barbariloqui, men of barbarous speache. Which is, that they are such as speake the greke tounge euill fauouredly: but barbari, barbarous are they whose lāguage is not greke at al, but a diuerse toūge from the greke, as you heard before in Straboes wordes. Nowe M. Iewel confoundeth the worde Barbaros, barbarous, and the worde Barbariloquos, men of barbarous speache, together, and so deceiueth the Reader (as I saied) in similitude of termes. It is therefore to be noted that bothe the wordes of Strabo before, reakoning by the reporte of Ephorus but three greke Nations only in Asia the lesse, and all the rest to the number of sixtene Barbarous, and also the wordes of Plinie affirming the very same, are spoken not of Barbariloqui, but of Barbari: not of mē of a Barbarous speache, which spake al Greke euil fauouredly, but of mere Barbarous, that is (in better english) of forrain and straunge Nations, hauing eche their tounges and languages

seuerall. For of the Grekes, as the same Strabo in an other place reakoneth, there were in Asia the lesse but foure Lāguages: the Attica, which yet he cōfoundeth with the Ionica (making but three in substance) Dorica and the Aeolica.
                  Strabo. Libr. 8. So that all that were called Barbarous in Asia the lesse, as the Carians, the Lycaonians, the Cappadocians, the Phrygians, the Pamphylians, the Galathians and other to the number of Sixtene Nations had their seuerall and distinct languages from the greke. As for exāple Strabo speaking of the proper language of the Carians, saieth of it. Permultae nomina graeca permixta habet. It hath may greke names mingled in it. Like as our English toung hath a number of Frenche wordes and that of the best sorte in it,
                  Libro. 14. being a language vtterly diuerse from the Fren
                  •
               he. That the Lycaonians spake not vulgarly greke, but Lyc
                     ••
                  ni
                     •
                  e in the Lycaonicall tounge,
                  Act. 14. nether Attice nor Aeolice nor Doricè, and therefore no greke at all, the Actes of the Apostles do expressely witnesse. Againe Cappadocia, Phrygia and Pamphylia, all prouinces of Asia the lesse, spake a diuerse language, that one vnderstode not the other. Els it had ben no miracle that al they (as the Actes do mention) hearing S. Peter to preache,
                  Cap. 2. should eche of thē haue thought, that he spake their seueral lā
               guages. Last of all this is afterwarde by D. Harding proued so clerely, namely by the Galathians a parte also of the lesser Asia,
                  Hierom. in pro
                        •
                     m. 2. ad Gal. Plinius li. 7. c. 24. Hist. Na
                        •
                     .
                and by the .22. tounges lerned of Mithridates kinge of that countre, that he might speake to all his people without an interpreter, that M. Iewell crieth out and calleth all that labour Vanitas vanitatum, and a great tokē of idlenesse to proue that which no man d
                     •
                  nieth. Yet you see how he laboureth by gheasses to ouerthrowe the authorites of Strabo and Plinie, and to proue him selfe the contrary, though yet he dare not affirme it him selfe,but saieth 
                  Iewell. 
               
               pag. 164. pag 16
                     •
                   162. it is not denied by any of vs Whereby it appeareth that if D. Harding had not proued it in dede at large and substancially, M. Iewell would vtterly haue denied it, as he

doth vtterly denie the other proposition, that all the Greke Church had the greke Seruice, bicause there were no proufes brought for it, the matter it selfe being to al the lerned so open and manifest. Thus you see no Vntruthe on D. Hardinges parte, but a great wrangling folie on M. Iewelles parte, and such a pelting contention, as litle becometh a diuine, and much lesse a Bishop as he would seme to be. Thus also you see the proposition of D. Harding clerely proued, that sundry Countres in Asia the lesse vnderstoode not the Greke tounge, but had a seuerall language from the greke as well in substaunce, as in speache and vndestanding.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               Hitherto of the Greke, and of the Seruice in that language.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                The .72. Vntruthe.middot; The .139. Vntruthe Slaunderous. For he hath not hitherto spoken one worde of thē Seruice.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                D. Hardinge in this same Article the 7. Diuision, taketh it as graunted of M. Iewell that the Greke Church had the greke seruice, and therefore he saieth in that place.middot; 
               
                  Harding. 
               
               That the Seruice was in the Greke tōge, and vsed in the greke Church I graūte. And again,
                  Harding. 
               
               Diuis. 7. 
               Thus much by vs bothe conf
                     •
                  ssed M. Iewell, and agreed vpon (touching the limitation of the Greke Church) I say that if I can shewe, that the people of some Countries of the Gr
                     •
                  ke C
                     •
                  urche, which all had their Common prai
                     •
                  rs and S
                     •
                  ruice in the Gr
                     •
                  ke tonge & caet? And afterwarde. 
                  Harding. 
               
               Diuis. 8.
               That the people of the l
                     •
                  sse Asia being a principall part of the Greke Church had their Seruice in the greke tounge, it is conf
                     •
                  ssed as manif
                     •
                  st, no lerned man wil denie it. In all those places he speaketh of the greeke Seruice. And yet M. Iewel saieth here stoutely, 
                  Iewell. 
                that he hath not hitherto spoken one worde of the Seru
                  •
               ce. Let now the reader iudge who speaketh Vntruly. As touching the matter, D. Harding in dede (as I saied before) proued it not bicause as you heare him saie, he toke it as a matter conf
                     •
                  ssed, and such as no lerned man would denie. And M. Iewell him selfe doth

not denie it, but he saieth that 
                  Iewell. 
                if it were denied, M. Harding were not able to proue it. Yea farder M. Iewell in this Article confesseth no lesse in a greate parte, saying.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Polycarpus in Smyrna, S. Basill in Cappadocia, Amphilochius in Lycaonia all preached in the Greke tounge.pag 161. T
                     •
                  e .140 Vntruthe the people of Lycaonia and of Cappadocia vnderstoode not the Greke tounge, as hath befo
                     •
                   bene proued. And the people vnderstoode them.
            Nowe all these Countres are in Asia the lesse. Whereof it will folowe that they had the Greke Seruice, which the people also might vnderstande by M. Iewelles confession, in a greate parte of Asia the lesse, though not in the whole greke Churche. Which yet also he must be driuen to confesse being not able (as it shall appeare hereafter, when I come to the .78. Vntruth) to geue any one instaunce or exceptyon in any one Countre of the greke Churche. And so D. Harding though he haue not proued it him selfe, yet M. Iewell hath proued it for him. For an Vniuersal proposition is well proued by Order of Schooles, and Reason, when no Instance, or Exception can be brought to the Contrary.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               Bicause the first preachers of the faith came to these west partes from Rome, &c.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .141. Vntruthe Slaunderous ioyned with a grosse ignorance.The .73. Vntruthe. The first preachinge of the Faith in these Weste Countries came not first from Rome.
            This Vntruthe was noted before by M. Iewell in the firste Article, and here it is repeted to make a number. It was the .32. Vntruthe. In that place we haue satisfied it, and shewed that Fraunce, Germanye, and the Englishe Nation our Forefathers had all their firste faithe from Rome. Maye it please thee gentle Reader to haue a recourse to that place,See in the leafe. 19. and 20. and then iudge what the impudency of M. Iewell deserueth: not only in repeting it now againe for an Vntruthe, but also auoutchinge it in the texte and noting also in the Margin that M. Hardinge wittingly and willingly auoucheth Vntruthe. He bringeth in surmises

without Authoritye that Nathanael, Saturninus and Lazarus preached first the Faithe of Fraunce. For this surmise and Gheasse of his, you had before alleaged a testimonye of the Frenche bishoppes them selues aboue a thousand yeares paste, confessing they had their Faithe firste from Rome. If that suffise not, beholde the particular testimony of diuerse the principall Churches in Fraunce to recorde the same. Demochares a Frenche Writer of late dayes reakoning vp the Bishops of euery bishoprike and Archebishoprike in Fraunce,
                  De Sacrificio Missa lib. 2. by the recordes of the Chapters of eche Churche, nameth vs their firste bishops to be these. Of Senes the first Bishop was S. Sauinianus sent from S. Peter, as also Antoninus witnesseth.
                  Cap. 25. tit. 6. primae partis Historiarū.
                Of Paris the first bishop was S. Denys sent by Clement, as the Monuments and Antiquites of Paris do yet testifie. Of Chartres Auentinus sent from S. Peter was the first bishop. Of Orleans Altinus sent likewise with the other two by S. Peter. By S. Clement Pope of Rome soone after S. Peter, were sent also diuers. Nicasius the firste bishoppe of Rhone, Exuperius of Ba, ieux, and Taurinus of Brye. The firste Bishop of Antissiodorum was S. Peregrinus sent from Sixtus the Pope of Rome, in the yeare of our Lorde. 30.
            Whereas M. Iewel writeth that Nathanael, Lazarus,The .142. Vntruthe For Saturninus preached in Fraunce .200. yeares aft
                     •
                  r the first preachers Petrus de Natalib. lib. 
                  
                     •
                  . ca. 5. li 1. cap. 9. & lib. 10. cap. 41. and Saturninus preached the Faith first in Fraunce, he hath taken that by lyke out of some Legēda aurea, and yet hath not al together truly reported it. For as touching Saturninus, he was bishop of Tolose in Fraunce in the persecutiō of Decius more then 200. yeares after Christ, and therfore could be none of the first that preached there the faithe. For Nathanael, Vrsinus is named to be the firste bishoppe of Burges. Of Lazarus arriuing to Massilia with Marye Magdalene, and Martha it is written, but that they planted the faithe in Fraunce it is very vncertaine. As for the coniectures of M. Iewell, from whence our countre receiued the faithe, I haue before in the 32. Vntruthe declared

the contrarye oute of the approued Historye of Venerable Bede.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Tertullian calleth Hierusalem, the Mother and the spring of Religiō So doth the Prophet Esaie longe before Prophecye:
                  T
                        ••
                     tul cō
                     tra Marci. lib 2. Esa. 2. 
               De Syon exibit lex & verbum Domini de Hierusalem. The lawe shall come forthe of Syon and the worde of the Lorde oute of Hierusalem. Our Sauioure also sending forthe his Apostles, biddeth them to beginne at Hierusalem, to preache to Samaria, and so vsque ad extremum terrae.
               
                  Acto. 1. euen to the vttermost of the earthe. In that sence all the worlde had the faith from Hierusalem. And so S. Augustine in the place by M. Iewell alleaged, when he saieth,
                  August. Epist. 178. 
               The faithe sprange first from the Grekes, by the grekes meaneth not the countre of grece, but the countre of Iury, who at that tyme was a part of the greke Churche, as by the greke Liturgie of S. Iames bishop of Hierusalem, by the greke Homilies of Cyrillus bishop there also, before S. Augustines time, l
                  •
               st of all by the wordes of S. Augustine him selfe in that selfe same epistle alleaged by M. Iewell it is euident. For in that same Epistle shewing that we ought not to reiect the greke worde 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                expressing the consubstantialite of Christ with God the father, bicause it was not written in holy Scripture, but made by the greke Fathers, saieth thus. Non enim in Africa, aut in cuncta Barbariae sed in Syria vel Graecia vbi & ipsa caro voluit de virgine nasci dominica, decuit vel oportuit verba fidei compendiose firmare. For not in Afrike nor in all the rest of barbarous and forrain countres, but in Syria or Grece where it liked our Sauiour to take Flesh of the Virgin, the wordes of our faithe ought or might wel be established. In whiche wordes he calleth Iury (where Christ was borne) by the name of Grece. The which also he doth in an other Epistle calling that countre.
                  August. Epst. 70. 
               Radicem Orientalium Ecclesiaru
                     •
                   vnde Euangelium in Africam venit, vnde terra si eis afferatur, adorant. The Roote of of the East Churches from whence the Ghospell came vnto

Afrike, and from whence the earthe if it be brought to them is worshipped: which can be meaned of no Lande but of the Holy Lande. Yet notwithstanding all this, that principally all Christendom hath their faithe from Hierusalem: thoughe she be the true Mother to vs all, though S. Augustine do confesse that from thence the faith came to Afrike, yet I saye notwithstandinge all this Saint Augustine in this very epistle, 70. in number, confesseth also that the Faythe came to Afrike from Rome. For speaking off the Donatistes condemned apud Ecclesiam transmarinam, whiche was at Rome by Melchiades the Pope, he addeth vnde ad istas partes Christianae fidei manauit authoritas, from the which Church of Rome the authorite of Christen faith hath ben deriued in to these partes. And so S. Gregory saieth that from Rome,
                  Greg. Lib. 7. ep. 32. Indict. 1. 
               in Africanis partibus sumpsit ordina
                     •
                  io saecerdotalis 
                     •
                  xordium, In the Coastes of Afrike, the beginning of priestly Order did springe. Thus notwitstanding that Hierusalem is the Mother of all Chrystendom, yet the Weste Churche (as we haue particularly declared in Fraunce, in Germany, in our countre, and last of all now in Afrike) hath taken their first faith properly and immediatly from Rome. And so hath there ben no Vntruthe auouched by D. Harding, but a manifest and willfull falshood defended by M. Iewell.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               They planted and sett vp in the Countres by them conuerted the Seruice of the Church of Rome or some other very like, and that (74) in the latin tounge onely, for ought that can be shewed to the contrary.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                The .74. Vntruthe. For the first preachers them selues spake no latine.The 143. Vntruthe Slaunderous.
            
            If this be all that you can shew to the contrary, then haue you shewed nothinge. For all those which S. Peter and S. Clement and other Popes sent vnto Fraunce, those which Eleutherins,

Celestinus, and S. Gregory sent to Britanny, those which other Popes sent to sundry partes of Germany and other the Northe partes as we haue before particularly declared, last of all those, which (as S. Augustin witnesseth) authorised the Chrystian faith in Afrike, thinke you M. Iewell that all they sent from Rome, had not the Romain language, which is the latin tonge? Bicause S. Peter was a Iewe borne and a Grecian, thinke you therefore they spake no latin? Where was then the gifte of tounges geuen to the Apostles? You should haue done well M. Iewell to haue named the first preachers of the west Church, which coulde speake no latin, and to haue proued that also. So you mihgt iustly haue charged D. Harding with an Vntruthe, affirming they spake al latin, for ought that can be shewed to the contrary. You haue noted it for an Vntruthe: but you haue shewed nothinge to the contrary. It is an easy matter to denie a Truthe. You knowe the prouerb M. Iewell. Plus potest Asinus negar
                     •
                   quàm Aristoteles probare.
            
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               He shall finde in the olde Fathers, that to Per omnia secula seculorum, to Dominus vobiscum, to Sursum corda, and to Gratias agamus domino deo nostro, the people answered (75) as nowe also they answer: Amen, & cum Spiritu tuo, habemus ad dominum, dignum & iustum est.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .144. Slaund. The 145. Vntruthe For D· Harding knoweth the contrary.The .75. Vntruthe. It is not so nowe. M. Hardinge knoweth, The people now answereth not the priest.
            It appeareth M. Iewell, you heard not Masse many a daie. If you had heard as many Masses while you were on this side of the seas, as you were present at Cōmunions, no doubt but you should haue sene the Catholike people to answer the priest at Masse euen now at this day, in all such wordes and termes, as D. Harding here mencioneth. Doubt you not but these wordes

and answeres are kept still in the Masse at this daye in all Catholike countres, euen as they were in the olde Fathers daies, in the times of Chrysostom, of S. Ciprian, and S. Augustin.
                  Chrysost. Homil. de Eucaenijs et Euchaecharistia. Ciprianus in expos. orat. Dō. August. in epist. 57. & serm. 44. de tempore.
                Yea and the people answereth the priest now as they did then. Come to Masse and you shall see it so. But you saie. Then all the people answered the priest, and that in such sorte, that Sainte Bafill compareth the sounde of the people to the sounde of whaues beating against the sea bankes, and S. Hierom compareth it to a thunderclappe. Then if this be all the difference that at that time the whole people answered, and now a fewe only of the people, or the Quiere for the people answeareth Amen, and such other thinges, it is no Vntruthe that the people doth answer, though not in so common and Large a maner as they did then, yea though they answer not euery one particularly, but some of them for all the rest, or some other for them all: As in great churches the Quyer, and in meane parishe churches the parish clarke. And thus also the maner expressed in S. Paule to the Corinthians (if that be spoken of the Church Seruice) is perfectly obserued.
                  Epist. 1. Cap. 14. For there it is not required that the people it selfe (expressed by the name Idiota) do answer Amē, but that he which supplieth the place of the people, do answer Amē. This place of the people is supplied either by the Quiere, or by the parish clarke: And so the people answeareth, Amē. For he is not Vntruly saied to do a thinge, which doth it by an other. So the Commōs geue their assent in Parliament by their Burgeoses, and so the Prince executeth Iustice by his Depute.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               The Constitution of Iustinian for celebrating the holy oblation not closely,
               Diuis. 14. 
               but with vtteraunce and sounde of Voice was ordained only for the greke Church, and thereto onely it is to be referred for that some thought the sacrifice should be celebrated rather with silence, after the maner of the Churche of Rome, specially at the Consecration.
            
            
               The .76. Vntruthe. For it touched the whole Empiere.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                The .7
                  •
               . Vntruthe. Fo
                  •
                the Priestes in Rome prai
                  •
               d alowde, as appereth by S. Hierome,pag. 171. T
                     •
                  e 146. and the 147. Vntruthes bothe Slaund. Leo, Ambrose &c.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
                These two Vntruthes noted by M Iewell in one sentence, I will Iustifie also in one labour, per
                  •
               sing alōge the whole text of M. Iewel that appertaineth hereunto. Thus M. Iewel in his text procedeth.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                The glose tha
                  •
                M. Hardinge hath here imagined, wherewith to defeate this g
                  •
               od Emperours w
                  •
               ole pu
                  •
               pose, maye seeme somwhat vnto th
                  •
                igno
                  •
               ant.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                I doubte not but it s
                  •
               meth also sufficient euen to the lerned, for ought that you ha
                  •
               e Replied to the contrary, as nowe it shall appea
                  ••
                (God willing) to the vnlerned also.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               Iustinian (saieth he) s
                     •
                  eaketh of the open vtteran
                     •
                  e, and soun
                     •
                  e of voi
                     •
                  e and agreeth with S. Augustine
                     •
                   p
                     •
                  ace, de M
                     •
                  gi
                     ••
                  ro. T
                     •
                  e
                     •
                  efore it no
                     •
                  hinge touche
                     •
                  h Praiers to be had in the vulgar tonge.
               The .148 Vntruth. 
                     •
                  or this Conclus
                     •
                  on is good and right. H
                  •
               re is a very vulgar Conclusion: as, I trust, hereafter shall a
                  •
               peare. Good Ch
                  •
               istian Reader, if it shall please thee onely to peruse these worde
                  •
                of the Emperour Iustinian and of S. Augustine by vs alleaged, I will make thee Iudge and Arbitrour of the whole.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                M. Iewell speaketh faire. But when the Fox preacheth, beware your geese. In dede if it will please vs to be deceiued and mocked by M. Iewell, we may soone so be. If it wil please vs to peruse the wordes of S. Augustin by him alleaged, and to seke no farder, but to truste his allegation, the Iudgement may happe to goe on his side. But if we take S. Augustin and looke in his very text, we shall see that M. Iewell spake not so faire without a vauntage. For he hath in dede wilfully and of purpose vtterly missereported and missealleaged S. Augustine, as anon we shall see.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                S. Augustine saieth. VVe nede not vtterance of voi
                     •
                  e to praye vnto God. For the Sac
                     •
                  ifi
                     •
                  e of iusti
                     •
                  e is sanctifie
                     •
                   in the temple of our min
                     •
                  e, and in the secre
                  
                     •
                  e 
                     •
                  hamber of ou
                     •
                   harte.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                This is hitherto true. S. Augustin saieth so in dede. But nowe M. Iewell will iuggle.
            
               Hereupon S. Augustine demaundeth this questyon. VVherefore then doth the P
                     •
                  iest lif
                     •
                  e vp his voi
                     •
                  e, and praye alow
                     •
                  e in the open assemblie in the Chu
                     •
                  che.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                This is the first Vntruthe.The .1
                     •
                  9 Vntruth. S. Aug
                     •
                  
                  stin demaundeth no such question. S. Augus
                  •
               in moueth no such question, as it shall straighte way appeare.
            He answereth, Not that God, but that man may 
                     •
                  eare him, that the peop
                     •
                  e by the sounde off his voi
                     •
                  e, and vnderstandi
                     •
                  g his meani
                     ••
                   may be put in 
                     〈◊〉
                   and by co
                     •
                  sent be ioy
                     •
                  e
                     •
                   togethe
                     •
                  , an
                     •
                   lif
                     •
                  ed vp to God. This is the very meaning and minde of S. Aug
                  •
               stine.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                S. Augustin as he made before no question, The .150 Vntruthe in falsifying S. 
                     •
                  ugustin so he maketh here no answer. Againe these wordes (and vnderstanding his meaning) 
                  •
               re not the words of S. Augustin, but of M. Iewel pretely conueyed in to the text of S. Augustin, the better to fu
                  •
               nishe and fashion vp his Vulgar Se
                  •
               uice. Last of all this is not the meaning of S. Augustin, as M. Iewell affirmeth. And so in these fewe wordes of S. Augustin, M. Iewell hath couched foure Vntruthes.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
                To proue all this, it shall suffice to recite the whole wordes of S. Augustin as they lie in the place alleaged. If any of M. Iewelles frendes that is vnlerned, mistrust my dealing herein, let him aske the aduise of any his lerned frendes, and trie my truth thereby. I wil put the whole wordes first in latin, and after geue you the true english therof. S. Augustin writeth thus. Vbi putas Sacrificium Iusticiae sa
                     •
                  rifi
                     •
                  a
                     •
                  i nisi in t
                     •
                  mplo mentis & in cubilibus cordis? 
                     •
                  bi aut
                     •
                  m sac
                     ••
                  ficandum est, ibi & orandum.
               
                  Lib de Magistro. Cap. 1. Where thinkest thou the Sacrifice of righteousn
                  •
               sse is sacrifi
                  •
               ed but in the temple of our minde, and in the se
                  •
               rete chamber of our ha
                  •
               te? But where we must Sac
                  •
               ifice, th
                  •••
                we 
                  •
               ust praye. And hereof he concludeth in these wordes. Quare non opus est locutione cum oramus, id 
                     •
                  st sonantibus verbis, nisi 
                     •
                  orte, sicut Sacerdotes faciunt, significandae mentis suae causa, non vt D
                     •
                  us, sed vt homines audiant, & cons
                     •
                  nsione quadam per commemorationem suspe
                     •
                  datur in D
                     •
                  um. 
               
                  •
               herefore we nede no Vtteraunce of

wordes, that is, no sounde of voice when we praye, vnlesse perhaps as Priestes doe to signifye their mynde, not that God, but that men maye heare them, and with a certaine consent throughe putting in minde, maye be lyfted vpp vnto God.
            These are the true wordes of Saint Augustine. Here is no question demaunded, wherefore Priestes do lifte vp their voices in the Churche, as M. Iewell alleageth. But it is brought in of Saint Augustine as an exception against his generall proposition, that in prayer we nede no vtteraunce of voyce. Againe the reason why the Prieste so lifted vp his voice is not (as M. Iewell sayeth) that the people vnderstandinge his meaning maye be put in mynde, &c. Saincte Augustine hath no such wordes: but he lifteth vp his voice Significandae mentis suae causa, to signifie his owne minde. And what minde of the Priest is that? No
                     •
                   that God maye heare him (who seeth the harte and nedeth no vtteraunce of voice) but that the people maye heare hym. And howe? To vnderstande what he saieth? S. Augustin saieth no suche thinge. But Vt consensione quadam per commemorationem suspendantur in Deum, to the entent that the people wi
                  •
               h a certaine consent (not of vnderstanding the Priest, but) through putting in minde (by the voice of the Priest) maye be lifted vp vnto God. This is the very meaning and minde of S. Augustin and as M. Iewell alleageth,
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Agreing fully with these wordes of S. Cyprian, The Prieste before Prayer prepareth the mindes off his B
                     •
                  etherne,
               
                  In exposit. orat. Dominicae.
                
               s
                     •
                  yinge thus. Lifte vpp youre hartes. To the entente they maye be put in mynde, they ought to thinke off nothinge els, but off the Lord For not the sounde off voice, but the min
                     •
                  e and vnderstanding must praye vnto the Lorde with pure Intention.
               The 151. Vntruthe in Nipping of quite in the middest the wordes of S. Ciprian.
            
            S. Augustine as M. Iewel saieth, agreeth with these wordes of Saint Cyprian, whiche shoulde the better haue appeared, if he had not nipped quite in the middest, these wordes. Dum respondet plebs, Habemus ad Dominum, while the people answereth (euen as they do nowe in the Masse to Sursum corda, lifte

vp your hartes) Habemus ad Dominū. We lifte them vp to oure Lorde. For the priest saying, Sursum corda, and the people answering, Hab
                     •
                  mus ad dominum by answering those wordes, Admon
                     •
                  ntur (as S. Ciprian saieth) nihil aliud quàm dominū cogitare debere: t
                  •
               ey are put in minde, they ought to thinke of nothing els but of God. And so are the people put in minde at this daye, where the Curat dothe his duty, though they vnderstande not the vulgar sence of the wordes, no more then the cōmō vulgar people of Afrike (where S. Ciprian spake these wordes) did, who had a punicall vulgar tounge beside the latin, (as it is in this Article at large proued) and yet the seruice in latin. But these wordes, while the people answereth, Habemus ad dominum M. Iewell thought good to nippe of quite in the middest of the Sentence, knowing very well, that his Newe Corrupt Doctrine, can not stande without the manifest Corruption of the Olde Doctours. Againe the later wordes of S. Cyprian which M. Iewell alleageth, as one continuall text,The 152. Vntruthe as appeareth. of the Author, and as a reason of the wordes that wēt before, these wordes I saie, For not the sounde of voyce &c. are no part
                  •
                of that sentence nor do pertaine therunto, but doe close vp an other Principall Sentence folowing, which is this. Clandatur contra aduersarium pectus &c. Let our breast be closed vp against the enemy, and be opened to God only, not suffring the en
                     •
                  mye of God at praier to haue accesse vnto vs. For he crepeth on oftentimes and perceth in, and guilefully deceiuing vs calleth awaye our praiers from God making vs to saye one thinge and to thinke an other: VVhereas not the sounde of voice, but the minde and vnderstanding ought to praie to God with pure intention. Here Loe these wordes are placed of S. Cyprian, not to proue, as M. Iewell woulde force them by wronge placing them, that we ought of necessite to vnderstande the Priest, but that when we praie, we shoulde praie in harte and minde, not in tounge or sound of voice only. Which harte and minde of vs is stirred vp

when the Priest lifteth vp his voice more at sometimes then at other, as towarde the time of the Holy Consecration of the most Dreadfull mysteries, when he crieth out allowde to the people Sursum Corda, as the Graecians also cried out 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               :
                  Chrysost. in Liturgia.
                though the common people neither in Afrike neither in Grece did allwaies customably and generally vnderstande the latin or the greke tounges. Thus with two notorious Vntruthes committed in the allegation of S. Ciprian, M. Iewell hath brought S. Augustin and S. Ciprian bothe agreing not with him, but with the Constitution of Iustinian against him, as it shall anon appeare.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .153. Vn
                     •
                  r
                     •
                  the For D. Harding s
                     •
                  i
                     •
                  d no such thinge.
               All thi
                     •
                  
                (saieth M. Hardinge) per
                     •
                  eine
                     •
                  h to the sense and vnderstanding of the praier, and nothing to the vulgare toun
                     •
                  e.
            
            As M. Iewell hath corrupted S. Augustin and S. Ciprian, so nowe he corrupteth the very text of D. Harding. For the wordes which M. Iewell as and for the wordes of D. Hardinge, alleageth, are not to be founde in his text. D. Hardinge saieth that this Constitution of Iustinian maketh not for the Seruice to be had in any vulga
                     •
                   tonge, but only that the Seruice be pronounced by the priest alowde, that it be vocall, not mentall, speaking not whispering with the breathe only. Which Custome agreeth to the maner also of the latin Churche as it is recorded by S. Augustin and S. Ciprian bothe. Who doe testifie the custome of the latin Masse as we haue it nowe, that the priest speaketh alowde Su
                     •
                  sum corda, and the people answereth, Habemus ad dominum. By which lowde speaking of the priest, the people is stirred to praier. This D. Harding saied to be the meaning of Iu
                  ••
               inians Constitution. Against this what doth M. Iewell Replie? Verely to the matter nothinge. But hauing first corrupted S. Augustin, nipped S. Ciprian, and then altered the wordes of D. Harding, he confuteth tha
                  •
                which was not auouched and fighteth with his owne shadowe, thus.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                And dothe he thinke, the people can vnderstande the praie
                  •
               , without

vnde
                  •
               standing of the tounge?
            As the people is not bounde to vnderstande the praier of the priest, so neither is it nedefull that they vnderstande the to
                  •
               nge.Stapl
                     •
                  ton Such vnderstanding of the people neither Iu
                  •
               tinian nor S. Augustin, nor S. Cyprian do require, neither the wordes of D. Harding doe affirme.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                S. Augustine if he were aliue,Vhe .154. Vntruthe t
                     •
                  ere is 
                     •
                  o cause of suc
                     •
                   sha
                     •
                  e geuen. woulde be ashamed to see suche a Comme
                  •
               t vpon his wordes.
            Ye
                  •
                M. Iewell not only S. Augustin but S. Ciprian also if they were aliue, woulde be ashamed and highly offended, to see their wordes so corrupted and mangled, and so vsed of you to maintaine a Schisme in the Churche which they so greuously abho
                  •
               red. Iustinian if he were aliue, how would he be ashamed to see his Constitution so racked to proue a Vulgar Seruice, which he neuer dreamed of? And had you any shame or regarde of your selfe M. Iewell, you woulde be ashamed and sorye to, thus to abuse bothe the doctours and auncient Fathers, and also the very text which lyeth open for any man to reade and peruse.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                He saieth further. The pries
                     •
                   lif
                     •
                  eth vp his voice,
               The 155. Vntruthe in falsifying the text of D. Hard. 
               not that the people may vnderstan
                     •
                  e him, but onely fo
                     •
                   a toke
                     •
                   to s
                     •
                  ewe, that he praieth.
            
            What passing impudency is this? Is the
                  •
               e nothinge in you but Vntruthe and falshood M. Iewell? Is the answer of D. Harding so good that you can not Replie without altering his wordes, or adding to his wordes? For first where you affirme, that D. Harding saieth, The priest lifteth vp his voice not that the people may vnderstande him, true it is he meaneth so, though he saied not so. But here you must remembre you make D. Harding to saie two contrary thinges. Before you reason with him as though he had saied, the people ought to vnderstande the praier, when you saied And dothe he thinke &c. Nowe you make him to saie, That the priest 
                     •
                  ifteth vp his voic
                     •
                   not that the people may vnderstande him. But nowe to come to your present Vntruthe, when you saie But onely for a token to shewe that he praieth,
               
that is a manifest Vntru
                  •
               he. For D. Hardinge tolde you out of S. Augustin, that the priest lifted vp his voice, to the ende that the people hearing the priest, might be lif
                     ••
                  d vp vnto God, and how: By a certaine cons
                     •
                  nt, through putting in minde of the priest.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                And thus he maketh the Mi
                  •
               ister of God, worse then a b
                  •
               asen trompet,The 1
                     •
                  6. Vntr
                     •
                  the ioy
                     •
                  ed with a Slaund. which, if it g
                  •
               ue no certaine sounde, as S. Paule saieth, no man can prepare him selfe to warre. This is the iust iudgement of God that who so seketh to blinde others, shall be geuen ouer, and become blinde him selfe.
            It is an easy matter, when a mans eies be pluckt out, to proue him blinde. As longe as you make D. Harding to speake at your pleasure, no maruail if you confute at pleasure. In dede if the Priest lifted vp his voice only for a token that he praied, and neither praied him selfe in dede, neither stirred other thereby to praier, then truly M. Iewelles collection might stande for good, and then the Belles were as good as the Priest. But if the Priest lifting vp his voice at the Seruice time bothe praieth him selfe vnto God,
                  The .157. Vntruthe For those wordes of S. Augustin. are not spoken of the pr
                        ••
                     st August. de Magistro.
                  
                  The .158. Vntruthe For the people vnderstā
                     deth what is tokened according to S. August. meaning.
                and stirreth also the people thereunto, as S. Augustin and S. Ciprian bothe haue saied, then is the priest a true Minister of God, then he geueth out a certaine sounde, and bothe doth well him selfe, and edifyeth other. And then M. Iewell hath lost a good argument.
            And notwithstanding S. Augustines minde cōcerning the speaking of the priest be plaine in it selfe, yet afterwarde in the same Booke he openeth it in this maner more at large. VVe are agreed vpo
                     •
                   this, that the (157) wordes we speake be tokens. But a token, vnlesse it betoken some thinge, is no token. Nowe if the priest after M. Hardinges construction vtter his wordes, which are the tokens of his meaning, in an vnknowen tounge, and (158) the people vnderstande not, what is tokened, according to S. Augustins meaning, he speaketh, and yet saieth nothinge, and sheweth tokens, and yet tokeneth nothing.
            All this cometh to one ende. The wordes of the Priest vttered in an vnknowen tounge, do vtter yet his meaning vnto the people,. For his meaning is, not that the people shall vnderstande the wordes that he speaketh (that hath not bene yet

proued), But his meaning is that the people thereby be stirred to deuotion, be put in minde of their duty in the Churche, and with one consent praie with the Priest. This is that which S. Augustin and Cipriā reporte. This is the meaning of Iustinians Constitution. And this is so true that amonge such infinit diue
                  •
               site of tounges and languages as well in the East Churche as in the West, the Seruice hath yet neuer bene in any other tounge then Greke and Latine, as it shall the next Vntruthe, at large appeare.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Further S. Augustines wordes be clere.The .159 Vntruthe For D. Harding saied no such thinge. 
               The Priest in the assemblie speaketh alowde. Significandae mentis causa, vt homines audiant &c. To the ende to declare his minde, that men may heare him and by the sounde off his voi
                     •
                  e be put in remembraunce. But M. Hardinge saieth. No. The P
                     •
                  iest speaketh not alowde, to thentent to declare his minde, nei
                     •
                  her that men may heare him, nor be put in remembraunce, but (159) only to geue a token that he praieth. And thus by his glose, he vtterly destroyeth the texte.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                Had this place of S. Augustine bene clere and euident on M. Iewelles side, he would not haue vsed such Shiftes, such Discourses, such Repetitiōs, such Alterations, such Coursing and Coyling of it, as he hath done. You see how ofte he hath turned and tossed it to make it serue, and yet it will not be. For whatsoeuer S. Augustin saied herein, D. Harding saied it also, who alleaged the whole wordes of S. Augustin in his text, and by those wordes interpreted the Constitution of Iustinian. Now cometh M. Iewell and after all other Shiftes, affir
                  ••
               eth D. Harding to saie all quite contra
                  •
               y to S. Augustin. I can saie no more herein but desire the discrete and indifferent Reader to peruse the wordes of D. Harding in his owne text. D. Harding denieth not (as M. Iewell saieth here, he doeth) that the Priest speaketh alowde to thentent to declare his minde, that men may heare him. He denieth not that the Priest p
                  •
               tteth the people in remembrance. Neither dothe he saie that the Priest geueth only a token that he praieth. But he saieth all the Contrary

euen as S. August in saieth, and in S. Augustins owne wordes. These three Vntruthes M. Iewell hath made againe vpon the wordes of D. Hardinge.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Now let vs resolue bothe S. Augustines and Iustinians wordes, into their causes: which is an infallible waye of vnderstanding.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                This way is very well to be liked, if it be done truly and clerckly. Let vs see.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                The ende of them bothe is according to the doctrine of S. Paul that people may saie. Amen.
                The .160. Vntruthe
            
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                S. Augustin speaketh of no such matter in all his wordes that haue bene hitherto alleaged. This is therefore one Vntruthe. Yet be it, the ende of Iustinians Constitution was suche. Procede M. Iewell.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Then further: the people must answer Amen vnto the prayer.The .161. Vntruth. For by the doctrine of S. Paule the people is not bounde to answer Amen.
            
            You shoulde haue added, or els one that supplied the Roome of of the people. For so runne the wordes of S. Paule. If you will grounde vpon scripture, diminish not the worde of the Lord, M. Iewell.
            Then must they vnderstande the praier.
            Here your Resolutiō faileth you: And that for .ij. Causes. For it is sufficiēt that one do answer for the whole people, and thē he only hath nede to vnderstande it and not the people. Againe the people may answer though they vnderstande not,The .162. Vntruthe standing in an Vnture Collection. without the breache of S. Paules doctrine. And to proue the possibilite hereof, we haue the Confessed Practise of the vniuersall Churche these 900. yeres. We haue also the practise of the first 600. yeres. At what time the Seruice was only in Greke and Latin (as it shall in the next Vntruthe appeare) and yet sundry Nations vnderstode not at that time the very Greke and Latin. This therefore is a very weake and false proceding of M. Iewell, in auouching that thinge, the contrary whereof is by

such an vniuersall practise of Christes Churche proued and iustified. For euery good Resolution M. Iewell, proceding from the causes to the effectes, (as this your Resolution would seme to doe) ought to procede A Causis per se & proximis. from proper causes, and those the nearest, not of bastarde surmised causes and those farre sought. As you do heare M. Iewell. For when you inferre, The people must answer, Amen, Ergo they must vnderstande the praier, making the vnderstanding of the people, to folowe necessarely of the answering Amen, you make a Fallax, of Non causa pro causa. For as I sayd, the people may and haue these many hūdred yeres answered Amen to the priest, though they vnderstāde not the priest. But the cause why the people must answer Amen, is as S. Augustin and S. Cyprian hath tolde you M. Iewell, partly to geue their consent to Gods Minister, partly thereby to lifte vp their hartes to God, and to praie with him. Thus therefore, as one linke of a chayne being broken, all that foloweth, falleth of, and will hange no more together, so your resolution fayling here in the middest, that which you drawe after, must nedes dragge behinde, and come shorte of the whole purpose. Howbeit M. Iewell limpeth on, as well as he maye, and saieth.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Yet further. The people must vnderstande the praier: then must the priest vtter the same bothe with a loude voice, and also in the vulgar tounge.
            
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                This Conclusion falleth downe right: It was broken of before quite in the middest: Therefore it hangeth very loosely. Euery Childe maye see thourough it.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Let vs againe resolue it forewarde.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                You see hitherto M. Iewel hath wrought backewarde, and therefore no maruaill if all his worke came to nought, Nowe he saieth, he will worke the matter forewarde.The 163. Vntruthe standing in false Collection.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                The priest, by M. Hardinges Iudgement, maye praie openly in a straunge tounge, then nedeth he not to speake alowde.
            Yes forsothe the priest must speake alowde significandae

mentis suae causa, to signifie his owne minde as S. Augustine saie
                  •
               h, Which is as S. Augustin expoundeth that men may heare him, and by the sounde of his voice be put in remēbraunce, bothe to geue their cōsent, and also to lifte vp their hartes to God and to praie with him. All which maye be done though the priest do praie in a straunge tounge. I saye straunge, that is, not Vulgar. For the Latin tounge in that respect as it is no Vulgar tonge, is to the Vulgar people a straunge tounge. Yet to the Latin Churche in an other respect it is no straunge tounge.The Straunge tounge. But that is straunge to the latin Churche, which in the latin Churche was neuer vsed. As is in dede all Seruice in the vulgar tounge, beside greke in the greke Churche and latin in the Latin Church. For this is so straūge a thinge that these xv.C. yeres in the Church of Christ it was neuer vsed, but vpon special priuilege, and that in this later age. As it shal in the next Vntruthe appeare. Thus the priest must speake aloude, and his so speaking shal not be frutelesse, though he praie in a straunge, that is, in an vnknowen tounge to the Vulgar people. And thus M. Iewelles Resolution faltreth and shaketh euen at the beginninge.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 164. Vntruthe For th
                     •
                  re is no breache of S. Paul
                     •
                  s doctrine committed.He speaketh not alowde, then cā not the people vnderstāde him. The people vnderstandeth not the priest then can they not sa
                  •
               e Amen. Thus M. Hardinge must nedes conclude his glose with the open breache of S. Paules doctrine.
            The people may answer Amen, as farre as S. Paule requireth them, though they vnderstande not the Priest. S. Paule requireth not the whole people so to answer, but qui supplet locū idio
                     •
                  ae. Him that supplieth the roome of the ignorāt. Againe to answer Amen requireth not an Vnderstanding of the wordes which the Priest speaketh, but it requireth a Cōsent to the wordes spoken, a lifting vp of the harte at the wordes spoken, and a praying with the priest so speaking. It is not to be doubted but the whole vniuersall Churche of Christ these many hundred yeres, vnderstoode the wordes of S. Paule as well M. Iewell dothe.

And it is not D. Hardinges glose, but the continuall practise of the vniuersall Churche which concludeth with the open breache of S. Paules doctrine, if to haue the Seruice in a tounge vnknowen to the common people,M. Iewell co
                     •
                  demneth the vniue
                     •
                  s
                     •
                  ll Churche with the open breache of S. Paules doctrine. be a breache of S. Paules doctrine. And thus M. Iewelles Resolution bothe backewarde and forwarde, faltring and fayling in the very beginning, falleth downe right in the ende, and proueth his purpose nothinge. Beside that in the whole drifte thereof he rangeth cleane wide from the wordes of S. Augustin and Iustinian, whose wordes he saied he woulde resolue into their causes. For neither S. Augustin nor Iustinian speaketh any one worde that the people ought to vnderstande the Seruice. But bothe do saie that the priest ought to speake alowde. The cause why; out of S. Augustin yon haue hearde allready. Iustinian also geueth the same, whose wordes are these, as M. Iewell him selfe alleageth them.Authen. Constit. 123. 
               VVe commaunde all bishoppes and priestes to Minister the holy Oblation and the praier at the Holy baptisme, not vnder silence, but with such voice, as may be hearde of the faithefull people: to 
                     〈◊〉
                  , that thereof the hartes of the heare
                     •
                  s maye be sturred to more deuotiō, and honour geuing to God. For so the holy Apostle teacheth, saying in the first epistle to the Corinthians. For if thou only blisse with the Spirit, how shall be, that supplieth the roume of the ignorant, saye,
               1. Cor. 14. 
               Amen, to God at thy thankes geuing? For he knoweth not what thou saiest. Thou geuest thankes well. But the other is not edified. For these causes therefore it behoueth, that the praier at the holy Oblation, and also other praiers be offred with lowde voice of the holy bishoppes and priestes vnto our Lorde Iesus Christ with the Father and the holy Ghoste. Thus farre the Constitution of Iustinian. His wordes do require (as S. Augustins also before) that the Priest do speake alowde at the holy Oblation time. And the cause thereoff he geueth. Not that the people may vnderstande him. For in Iustinians time, fewe or none of the common vulgar people vnderstode the lerned Greke or Latin wherein the

Church Seruice was then only saied. But that the people hearing the priest, might thereof be stirred to more deuotion, and honour geuing to God. To the which deuotion the people is stirred, when the priest lifteth vp his voice, stretcheth his handes, and knocketh his breast, with other such godly tokens of the inwarde man, though they vnderstande not the very wordes that the priest speaketh: Yea and better also then if they vnderstode them, as the very experience of deuotion in olde time,Vulgar Seruice Distracteth frō Deuotiō. and at these dayes dothe euidently declare. For nowe the people (as I haue heard them my selfe complaine) harkening to the Minister reading the Scriptures in English, and vnderstanding the meaning thereof as much as if they were readd in greke, they spende the litle time which they abide in the Churche rather in wondering at suche straunge matters, then in priuat deuotion and praier. Yea by that externall noyse of the English Seruice familiar to their eares, and strange to their vnderstanding, they are forced to harken to that which they attaine not, and remaine distracted from that which they woulde doe. But in the olde Latine Seruice when the priest saied his Confiteor, all the Parishe woule knele downe and lifte vp their hartes to God with him. Likewise somewhat before the Sacring, when the priest speaking more alowde, beganne to saie Per omnia secula seculorum, and that which foloweth, the whole Parish woulde stande vp, and lifte vp their hartes also to God with the priest, deuoutely attending the presence of their Maker in those most Holy and Dreadful Mysteries. Neither was there any so ignorant in al the parishe which did not at that time lifte vp his harte to God with the Priest, though he vnderstode no one worde that the Priest saied. For they came then to the Seruice to praye vnto allmighty God: They came to Sermons to lerne and to be instructed. In this deuotion many a thousand of englishmen, though they vnderstode no one worde of the Priest, haue yelded

their soules to Cod and attained to the blisse euerlasting, these nyne hundred yeres and vpwarde, all which time the English Church hath bene Christened and hath had the Church Seruice only in the latine tounge. Thus much of the meaning of Iustinians Constitution, of the which M. Iewell for all his Replie can not yet picke out his Vulgar Seruice. But nowe it shall farder appeare, that though that Constitution had bene made of such Countres, where the people vnderstode the Seruice, yet it was no generall Constitution nor touched not the latin Church, as you haue hearde in the wordes of D. Harding before alleaged, vpon the which M. Iewell though him selfe to haue a good occasion to note a Couple of Vntruthes. His Note in the Margin you haue heard before. Nowe he prosecuteth it in his text, and saieth.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                M. Harding saieth further. This lawe toke place onely in Constantinople,
               The 165. Vntruthe as shall appeare. Stapletō. 
               and not in the Churche of Rome. And so he coucheth two manifeste Vntruthes together in one sentence.
            First M. Iewel alleageth not the wordes of D. Harding truly. D. Har. saieth, Iustinian ordained thus for the Greke Church onely, and to that onely it is to be referred. Nowe Constantinople is but a parte of the greke Church. M. Iewel therefore after his maner, hath restrained much the wordes of D. Harding, thereby to make the Vntruthe more apparent, and the matter more odious. But nowe M. Iewell: Howe proue you this to be Vntrewe. Thus he flourisheth.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                But what? wil he saye, Iustinian, was not Emperour of Rome, or had nothinge to doo in the Churche of Rome.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                What nede is there, that D. Hardinge shoulde saye so muche? You knowe M. Iewell by your lawe, that the lawes and statutes of Emperours do not allwaies extende to all the prouinces of the Empire. Which shall euidently appeare by that which your selfe anon alleageth.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Verely he writeth him selfe the Emperour of Rome, of Fraunce, of

Almanie and Germany, &c.
            Iustinian dothe no where write him selfe Emperour of Rome.The 166. Vntruthe Iustinian writeth not him selfe Emperour of Rome.
In prefat. in lib. Novel.
                  Procopius lib. 3.
Blondus dec. 1. li. 8. Ioan. Fab. & 
                        •
                     oa. de P
                        •
                     a.
                  Bloud. li. 7. Les Annales de Fraunce.
                  Gagn. li. 2. Gagn. li. 1. And it is euident by the stories he had in Italy (as Contius noteth) But dubium Imperium, a doubteful and not settled Empiere. It is knowen that the Gotthes then possessed Italy, that Belisarius the Capitaine of Iustinian ouerthrewe them in often battailes, but did not yet vtterly extinguish them. And the first depute of the Greke Emperour at Rauenna in Italy, 
                  ••
               lled Exarchus, was in the time of Iustinus successour to 
                  〈◊〉
                Iustinian. Neither was Iustinian Emperour of Fraunce. Fo
                  •
                though he be called Francicus, yet that was not (as Blondus semeth to saie) of that we call nowe Fraunce, but of a parte of Almanie so called, as diuers other do write. And certain it is by the Chronicles of Fraunce, and other, that in the time of Iustinians Empire, Chilperic and Clotarius were kinges of Fraunce, succeding to Clouis who one hundred yeres before the Empire of Iustinian in the time of Theodosius the seconde occupied the realme of Fraunce. Sence which time Fraunce was neuer subiect to the Empire, more then other realmes were.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .167. Vntruthe For not I
                     •
                  stinian 
                     •
                  eposed them but the wicked Empresse by her Captaine Bel
                     •
                  s
                     •
                  rius viol
                     •
                  ntly banished them.
Tom 2. Conciliorum in vita Si
                        •
                     ue
                        •
                     ij.
               And deposed two Bishops of Rome, Syluerius and Vigilius.
VVhereof it may appeare he had somewhat to doo in the Churche
of Rome.
            Verely a small power woulde serue to bringe this to passe. The Emperesse Iustinians wife being an Eutychian heretike and offended with Pope Siluerius for not restoring Anthemius the Eutychian bishop of Constantinople, whom Agapetus the Pope, predecessour to Siluerius had deposed, and ordred in his place Menna, founde the meanes by her Capitaine Bellisarius, who occupied and defended Rome at that time against the Gotthes, to banishe the Pope Siluerius. This was no great Acte for such a Capitain as Bellisarius was to banishe a holy bishop. Such Imperiall despositions you

vse. Vigilius in like maner being placed in the roome of Siluerius by the drifte also of Belisarius at the Commaundement off the Eutychian Empresse, to whom he had promised that being Pope he would restore Anthemius,
                  Ibidem in vita Vigilij.
                whereas being made Pope in dede he woulde not perfourme his promise, nor contaminare that holy See with the approuing of any Heresy, he was by a trayne brought to Constantinople and so banished.
                  Liberatus Cap. 22 And all this was done rather by the wicked Empresse then by Iustiniā, who as Liberatus w
                  •
               i
                  •
               eth restored againe Siluerius (though by the meanes of Belisarius he was caried awaye againe into banishmēt) and Vigilius also as it appeareth in his life,
                  Tom. 2. Concil. in vita Vigilij.
                though he died by the waie in Sicilia. But what wil M. Iewel conclude hereof: Will he reason thus?
            
               Iustinians wife being an heretike expelled two godly bishoppes of Rome by violence.
            
            
               E
                     •
                  go his Constitution of pronoūcing the Seruice alowde, was made for the Church of Rome?
            This argument hangeth very loosely. Euery childe maye see thourough it.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Touching this Constitution, the lawe saieth. Generaliter dictum,
               The .168. Vntruthe for these lawes do not touche this Constitution of Iustinian. 
               generali
                     •
                  er est accipiendum. The thinge that is spoken generallly, muste be taken generally. And it is commonly saied. Vbi le
                     •
                   non distinguit nos distingue
                     •
                  e non debemus. Where the Lawe maketh no distinction, the
                  •
               e ought we to make no distinction.
            These lawes M. Iewell, are as good arguments for truantes, and as fitte tooles for cauillers as can possibly be deuised. And you knowe M. Iewell, Dolosus ve
                     •
                  satur in generalibus. The Wrangler walketh in generalls. And will you see howe manye exceptions this lawe, generaliter dictum, admitteth? It must be restrained and vnderstanded,  first according to the matter whereof the lawe treateth.  Then accordinge to the Conditions and qualites of the persons of whom the lawe speaketh.  Thirdly the Circumstances of the place and time must be considered.  Againe

the wordes which went before, or which come after:  The Common maner of speache:  Some other lawe speaking more specially,  Last of all (as the learned lawier Baldus teacheth you) secundum rationem expressam,
               
                  Baldus. L. Si. quis seruo. Cod. de fu
                        •
                     tis.
                
               vel subsequentem, vel tacitè inhaerentem, it must be vnderstanded according to the cause expressed, or folowing after, or secretly pertaining thereunto. These many Conditions and twenty moe, if a man would playe the Lawyer, might be alleaged to restraine this generall rule of M. Iewell, vnder the which he thinketh to cloke his erroure.
            
               
                  L. i §. Generaliter. ff D. leg praestand.
               And to touche some of thē particularly, the lawe saieth. Verba generalia secundum sui naturā generaliter intelligi debent. General wordes must be meaned generally accordinge to their nature. And so do the doctours expound the law alleaged by M. Iewel. Againe the lawe saieth.
                  
                     L. plenū §. equitj. ff. d. vsu et habit. L. ex militari. ff D. testa. milit.
                  
                  
                     L. cum pater. §. dulcis simis. ff. D. leg. 2.
                
               Verba generalia restringuntur, secundum qualitatē person
                     •
                  rū ad quas referūtur. General wordes are restrained according to the qualitees of the persons vnto the whiche they are referred. And so this lawe of Iustinian though the words runne generally, yet it is to be restrained only to such of the Greke Churche as it was made for. Farder the lawe saieth. Verba generalia regulātur a sua ratione. General words are ruled by their reason or cause. And so the reason or cause of Iustiniās Constitution being not the vnderstanding of the Priestes prayer, but the stirring of the people to deuotion, which may and hath longe tyme bene done thoughe the prayer be not vnderstanded vulgarly,
                  L. filius familias. ff. D. act. et obligat. iuncta. L. j. ff. ad Sena 
                        •
                     us. Maced. & L. iuris gentiū, §. si paciscar. ff. d. pact. iuncta L. tran sigere & ibi. glo. de transact.
                it maketh nothing for M. Iewels Vulgar Seruice. Lex simpliciter & indistincté loquens debet distingui secundum alias leges specialiter & distincté loquentes. The law speaking plainely and without any distinction, muste yet be distinguished according to other lawes speaking specially and distinctly. So certaine it is that M. Iewel hath alleaged. Where the law doth not distinguish, we must not distinguish. And therefore yet againe the lawe saieth, Lex generaliter & indistincté loquens non refertur ad casus specialiter notatos. The lawe that speaketh generally and

indistinctly, is not referred to cases specially noted. And to shewe briefly what a fickle and feble grounde M. Iewell hath layed to builde his wronge construction of Iustinians Constitution vppon notwithstanding his generall rules,
                  L. sanctio degū. ff. de poenis. L. doli clausula. ff. de stipulat. L. j. § quod ait. ff. ne quid in loc. sacr.
                the lawe expressely saieth. Verba quantumcunque generalia ad consonum int
                     •
                  llectum restringuntur. Wordes be they neuer so generall are restrained to a conuenient vnderstanding. By all whiche lawes it appeareth that although generall wordes by their owne nature be generall, as it is proued in M. Iewelles lawe, yet circunstaunces doe quite alter, order, and dispose the sence thereof. And thus the generall wordes of a lawe are not vnlike to a piece of clothe not yet cutt oute to make any garment. Which by circunstances being framed to some speciall thinge, doo then stande well and rightly for that speciall thinge. Otherwise it woulde happen which the lawe saithe. Plerumque dum proprietas v
                     •
                  rborum attenditur, sensus veritatis amittitur.
               
                  C. propterea ex. de verb. signi.
                Oftentimes while we sticke to the propriete of the wordes, we lese the vnderstanding of the Truthe. These rules therefore of M. Iewell, make no argument to proue that Iustinians constitution is generall to all the Worlde, but is only a smothering smoke to dasell the light of the Truthe, bicause in dede (as M. Iewell hathe saied him selfe) Dolosus versatur in generalibus.
               pag. 262. The deceitefull and wrangler walketh in generalles.
            To come nowe more particularly to this Constitution off Iustinian, the lawe geueth vs yet an other Circunstance to lighten this matter more, and that is this. The lawe saieth.
                  L. si vno ff. locati.
                
               Verba intelligi debent secundum subiectam materiam. Wordes are to be vnderstanded according to the matter proposed. And in an other place it speaketh more expressely, saying of wordes euen generally spoken. Generalia verba non extenduntur ad non cogitata,
               
                  L. Empto. §. Lucius et ibi Bart. ff. de pact.
                
               sed ad id tantum de quo agitur. Generall wordes are not extended to that which was neuer intended, but only to the matter whereof it is treated. And so Iustinian making this Constitution
for

the greke Church, though he spake generally, yet his wordes are to be drawen only to that which was of him intended, whiche was only the greke Churche, as it shall anon appere. As for example. If a lawe were made: Whosoeuer draweth blood with in the Courte gates, shall be hanged. These generall wordes generally taken (according to the wisedom of M. Iewell) wil hange the poticary of surgyan that letteth bloode by the Rules off his Arte to some Noble man lying sicke in the Courte: In like maner a generall pardon geuen by the Clemency of the Prince, shall acquitte traytours, by the wisedome of M. Iewell, thoughe yet the Prince intended not so. But as in bothe these lawes, the generall wordes are to be restrained to the intent of the lawe maker, whiche is vnderstanded, either by the Common maner of speache vsed in such lawes (as in the Case of generall pardons) or by the persons intended in the lawe, as in the firste Ca
                  •
               e, where poticaries and surgians were not meaned lettinge blood by their Arte, euen so in the lawe of Iustinian, thoughe his wordes runne generally, yet they are not therefore generally to be taken. Againe there is in the Constitution of Iustinian a Circunstaunce secretly included, which declareth the lawe not to be so generall, as to extende to the Romaine Empire. In the ende of the Constitution Commission is geuen to the Officier of Constantinople, Vt per prothemata in consuetis locis R
                     •
                  giae Ciuitatis affixa in cognitionem omnium perdu
                     •
                  ere festinet,
               
                  In Authē. Const. 137 
               & manis
                     •
                  sta facere omnibus qui prouincijs praesunt. That by proclamations sett vp in the accustomed places of Constantinople the lawe should be published, and notise be geuē to al that gouuerne the prouinces. Here the Officer of Constantinople is appointed to publishe this Constitution. Nowe woulde the Romaines take notise of him, who had as high Officers to publish such matters, as any was in Constantinople? And therefore Iustinian in his most generall Constitutions when he will haue them to extende to Rome, maketh expresse mention of

Rome by name. As when he saieth. Et hoc non solum in veteri Roma, vel in hac Regia Ciuitate sed in omni terra vbicunque Christianorum nomen colitur, obtinere sancimus. This lawe we will to take place not only in olde Rome,
                  Cod de Episc. & cle. L Generaliter.
                or in this Imperiall Cytye of Constantinople, but also in in all the worlde, where so euer the name of Christians is had in honour. Rome therefore in this Constitution of M. Iewell, being not expressed, it semeth by the lawe to be omitted. For the law saieth.
                  L. Item apud. §. h
                        •
                     c edictum. ff. d. iniurijs.
                
               Ea quae notabiliter fiunt nisi specialiter notentur, videntur quasi neglecta. Suche thinges as are notably done, vnlesse they be specially noted, they seme to be as though it were neglected. And thus it appeareth, notwithstanding the generall wordes of the Constitution, and the generall rules alleaged by M. Iewell, not only that therefore the Constitution is not necessarely to be generally taken, but also by the Circunstaunce of the lawe yt is gathered, that it ought not generallye to be extended to Rome, or to the Empire thereof. If we listed in other differences and Circunstances to vse the aduise of the lawyers, many moe reasons might be brought for this purpose, as the lerned in the lawe do knowe right well. But these fewe many suffise to declare that M. Iewelles Generall lawes can nothinge helpe to proue this Constitution to be Generall. Now let vs consider whether in the residewe he bringe any better lawes.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                And what reason hathe M. Hardinge,The .169. Vnt
                     •
                  uthe For D. Hard. saied not that O
                        ••
                     ly this lawe tooke no place, &c. or what witnesse more then his owne that this onely Lawe toke no place in the Churche off Rome?
            Forsothe he brought you a right good reason in his text, whiche yowe M. Iewell thought good to dissemble vtterlye. For thus D. Harding saied. As 
                     •
                  hat Constitution pertained to the gr
                     •
                  kes and not to the Latines, so was it not found in the Latine book
                     •
                  s, vntell Gregorius Haloander of G
                     •
                  rmany of late yeres translated the place. This is one reeson M. Iewell why this Constitution

appertaineth not to the Latin Churche. That is. Bicause it hath bene onely in Greke and not translated into Latin vntill nowe of late yeares. For if it had bene made for the Latin Churche, no doubte but it shoulde haue bene translated into Latin as the other Nouelles were euen from the time of S. Gregorye hitherto:
                  xi. q. i. C. 35. Itemin Decretal. tit. de test. cap. 1. & lib. 11. epist. 54.
Contius in prefat. in lib. Nouell.
                as it appeareth by certaine of these Nouel Constitutions alleaged in Latin after the olde translation by S. Gregorye. And this reason also touched by D. Harding, is noted before of Contius: who geuing a reason why manye of these Nouell Constitutions haue hitherto lacked in the Common Latin translation, saieth. Cur autem multae deperierint, in Causa haec sunt. Erant inter has leges permultae constitutiones 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   & locales, quarum nullus fere vsus esse visus est: illis praesertim Longobardis plus aequo Musas & humaniores literas abhorrentibus, nihilque quod non 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   conduceret, magni facientibus. Why manye of the Nouell Constitutions haue perished, these are the Causes. There were amonge these lawes manye Constitutions priuat, and proper to certaine places, whereof there semed to be no vse at all, specially to those Longobardes (who vpon the ende of Iustinians Empire possessed Italy) mē abhorring frō all good lerning, and regarding nothing that made not for the peny. This is one cause, why this lawe of Iustinian tooke no place in the Churche of Rome. And this reason was so good, that yowe M. Iewell, in all your Replie woulde neuer come nere it. But when the place came that yow shoulde haue awnswered it, yow turne the Readers minde an other waye, telling him that D. Harding semed to touche Gregorius Haloander with corruptiō of these lawes,pag. 173. and so yowe entre to defende him, whom no mā founde faulte with, Onelye D. Harding saied.
            
               As that Constitution perteined to the grekes, and not to the Latines, so was it not founde in the Latine bookes, vntill

Gregorius Haioander of Germany off late yeares translated the place.
            
            At these wordes yowe startle and wince, as feeling perhaps some sore touched, which yowe were lothe anye man shoulde come nere. And therefore yowe saie.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Gregorius Haloander, whom M. Harding semeth to touche withe corruption of these lawes, was a lerned man, and a faithefull translatour, and for his diligence deserued thankes: and therefore nedeth no excuse. He addeth nothing more then is to be founde in the Originall.
            What nede so muche a doo M. Iewell, if there were not some suspicion in the matter? Let euerye indifferent Reader Iudge, whether, the wordes of D. Harding do charge Haloander with any such matter as yow haue imagined. But the verse of Cato will allwaies be true. Conscius ipse sibi de se putat omnia dici. The guilty conscience thinketh all is spoken of him selfe. Yowe saie: Haloander was a faithefull translatour, and added nothing more then he founde in the Originall. Yet Contius a lerned lawyer, calleth this translation of Haloander,
                  In praefat. in lib. Nouell.
                
               A quodam priuato homine propria authoritate contaminatam translationem, A corrupted translation set forthe by a priuat man by priuat authorite. And againe he saieth of it. Dum vitat barbariem incidit plaerumque in prauam affectationem. While he coueteth to be Eloquent, he falleth oftentimes in to a corrupted affectation. This is the faithefull translation which M. Iewell so muche commendeth, and that beside all purpose. For this being brought in of D. Harding, as a reason why that Constitution remayning all this while vntill late yeares in the greke tounge and not translated in to Latine, as the other Nouell Constitutions were, shoulde appertaine to the greke Churche and not the Latin, M. Iewell to the reason and to the matter answereth nothinge, but seketh occasion to procure enuie to his aduersary, charging him with that which he neither saied

nor intended, whiche yet other lerned men haue bothe saied and writen. Done truly like a shifting Rhetorician, but not like a true dealing diuine.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 170. Vntruthe For many 
                     〈◊〉
                   them w
                     •
                  re 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  & 
                        •
                     ocales, proper to certaine places.Certainely the rest of the same Nouell Constitutions were made not onely for Constantinople, or for Rome, but also for the whole Empire.
            Iff all the rest were so made, then were it very probable that this Constitutiō should also be so made. But if some only were generall, some other were not, then this argumēt proueth nothinge. For as well maye this Constitution be of that sorte whiche are not generall, as of the other sorte whiche are generall. Nowe M. Iewell speaketh indefinitly, and doubtefully, as not knowing him selfe what to pronounce herein. The truthe is, some of these Nouell Constitutions were generall and some were not, as it hath bene before declared out of Contius, and as it shall by that which foloweth oute of M. Iewell farder appeare.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               T
                     •
                  e .171. Vntruthe For in the same 
                     •
                  itle w
                     •
                  ich is Dediuer 
                        •
                     s Ecclesias
                        •
                     i. capit. the wordes alleaged are not 
                     •
                  oūd.And the Emperoure Iustinian in the same Title sayeth thus, VVhat so euer thinges, touchinge this matter, were nedefull 
                     •
                  or this Imperiall Cytye off Constantinople, we haue comprised it in a speciall lawe ffor the same.
            
            By this it appeareth that all the Nouell Constitutions are not generall. But some made especially for Constantinople. But what leadeth M. Iewell to thinke that this Constitution should be therefore generall? He sawe there was small force in these wordes: and therefore he foloweth, and saieth.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                But what nede manye wordes? The Emperour him selfe calleth the Constitution that concerneth the clergie, a lawe generall, by these wordes.
                  In Authē. Col. 1 vt def 
                        •
                     it. numerus 
                        ••
                     eri
                
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               .
            It is true M. Iewell. He calleth suche a lawe a generall lawe. But what lawe meaned he? Meaned he this Constitution whereof we now treate? You perhaps would haue it so.

But Contius a better lawyer then you are M. Iewell, noteth that the same Constitution was made. In lege Graeca de ordinatione Episcoporum quae non exiat. In a Greke lawe touching the ordaining of Bishoppes, which is not extant.
                  Contius i
                        •
                      marg. D. auth. vt def. &c.
                Whereby it is euident, that the Constitution which we nowe treate of, by the iudgement of Contius is not that generall lawe whiche the Emperour meaned. For the Constitution which we nowe trete of was translated of Contius him selfe, oute of Greke into Latin. Againe this Constitution of Iustinian,
                  In Authē. Const. 137 which we nowe treate of, though it speake in dede at large, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , &c. Of the ordaining of bishoppes, yet it hath no one worde,
                  Authent. Col. 1. vt def. sunt numer. cler.
                
               de ordinatione Mulierum Diaconissarum, of the ordayning and admitting of Nonnes (for such were the Diaconissae, whiche the lawe speaketh of) such as the generall lawe meaned by Iustinian expressely treateth of. For so the wordes do reporte.
                  Eo. §. in alijs.
                
               De ordinatione venerabilium Episcoporum, & reuerendissimorum clericorum, nec non Mulierum Diaconissarum. We haue enacted in generall lawe touching the Ordering of the Reuerent bishoppes, and clerkes, and also of Nonnes. This Constitution therefore of Iustinian though it concerne the clergy, yet is it not that other generall lawe concerning bothe the clergy and Nonnes. This therefore can nothing helpe M. Iewell, vnlesse he minde to reason thus. Iustinian enacted by a generall and a Common lawe concerning the clergy and Nonnes, which is not extant.M. Iewelles Argument. Ergo in this Constitution whiche is extant and of the clergy onely, not off Nonnes he enacted also by a generall and Common lawe. This argument procedeth very weakely. Vnlesse Master Iewell looke better to it, I trowe it wil proue but a childish argument. Yet he limpeth forth as well as he maye, and saieth.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                And in the Code intreating namely of Bishoppes and Clerkes,
                  Cod. de Epis e
                        •
                      cler. General
                        •
                     
                     ter.
                he hathe these wordes. Et hoc non solum, & caet. This Lawe we will haue to take place, not only in the Cytye off olde Rome, or in this Imperiall Cytye off Constantinople, but also in all the worlde, where so euer the name off Christians is had in honoure.
            
            
               
               
                  Stapleton 
                Hetherto M. Iewell hath brought lawes in apparence for him selfe. Nowe he bringeth a lawe quite directly against hym selfe. For as I sayed before, so I saye nowe againe, this Constitution extending it selfe to Rome expressely, geueth vs to vnderstande that the other Constitution (whiche we nowe treate of) making no suche expresse mention of Rome, dothe not extende it selfe to Rome. And the reason is, bicause (as the lawe saieth) Suche thinges as are notably done,
               
                  L. Item apud. §. h
                        •
                     c 
                        •
                     dictum ff.
                
               vnlesse they be specially noted, they seme to be as though it were neglected. The special mentioning therefore of Rome in other lawes (which of no other prouince or Countre is vsed) is an euident argument, that this lawe making no mention of Rome, is not extended to Rome at all. As for example. Bicause in some lawes and certaine statutes of oure Countre, the free Denyses and sometimes other straungers not Denyses are especially comprysed, and mentioned, it is an vndoubted argument, that other lawes wherein they are not so mentioned, do not extende to such persons. And thus farre M. Iewell hath pleaded the lawe. Wherein if he haue missed the Cuishin, no maruaile: his Counsell perhaps had as much good lawe, as him selfe hath good Diuinite. Verely his lawe hathe not yet bene so weake aboute this matter, but his Diuinitye which foloweth, is much more weaker. For thus he procedeth.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                And howe can M. Harding make him selfe so sure, that the Church of Rome was neuer subiect to this lawe?
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                Forsothe bicause that Constitution was neuer yet translated into the Latine tounge, whereby it might haue serued the Latine Churche, vntill nowe of late dayes in our present age, and also for other reasons aboue specified. But especially M. Iewell, he made him selfe sure of it, bicause he knewe that you with all youre lawe and Diuinitie to, were neuer able to proue

that Constitution of Iustinian to be generall, and to extende it selfe to Rome.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Certainely bothe by Leo Bisshoppe off Rome,
                  De Ieiu
                        •
                     . 7. me
                        •
                     s· Serm. 6. De Sacra. lib. 4. ca. 5 The .172. Vntruthe For it appeareth not by any of these Fathers that the Churche of Rome was subiecte to this lawe. and also by Sainte Ambrose bisshoppe of Millain and other holy Fathers it appeareth otherwise.
            Beholde good Readers the grosse ignoraunce of M. Iewell. He will proue by Leo and Saint Ambrose, that the Constitution of Iustinian toke place in the Churche of Rome. Nowe vnderstande good readers, that Iustinian was Emperour in the yeare of oure Lorde fiue hundred and thirty. Leo was bishoppe of Rome in the yeare of oure Lorde foure hundred and fourty, and S. Ambrose was bishoppe of Millain threscore yeares before Leo. Thus by M. Iewelles wisedome the Constitution off Iustinian toke place in the Churche of Rome a hundred yeares and more before it was made. Vnlesse he will saie that Leo and S. Ambrose wrote of Iustinians Constitution by the Sprit of prophecye. Ah M. Iewell. Remembre youre owne poetry.
                  Vide Henr. Pantaleon
                        •
                      in Chronograph. Ecclesia.
                
               Nonsa
                     •
                  i co
                     •
                  modè diu
                     •
                  sa sunt temporibus tibi Daue haec. And what were they likely to saie of this Constitution of Iustinian? M. I
                  •
               well did well to bringe them forthe dumbe. Of like th
                  •
               ir wordes woulde haue stode him but in small stede. Howbeit seing he hathe so diligently quoted them in the margin (for the whiche quotation to fournish vp the Margin I thinke they were rather alleaged then for any weight in their wordes to M. Iewelles purpose) I will laye the wordes forthe to the Reader, and leaue it to his Iudgement, how much they touche either Iustinians Constiturion, or M. Iewelles Vulgar Seruice. The wordes of Leo are. Hoc ore sumitur, quod fide creditur,
               
                  Leo de Iei
                        ••
                     io. 7. mens. serm. 6. fere in fine.
                
               & frustra ab illis Amen respondetur, à quibus contraid quod accipitur disputatur. That is receiued by the mouthe (he speaketh off the blessed Sacrament) whiche is beleued by Faithe: and they doe answer Amen in vaine, who dispute against that whiche they

do receiue. The wordes of S. Ambrose are. Dicit tibi Sacerdos, Corpus Christi:
               
                  Ambros. de sacram. lib. 4. cap. 5. 
               & tu dicis, Amen. Hoc est, verum. Quod confitetur lingua, teneat affectus. The Priest saieth vnto thee. The Body off Christ. And thou saiest: Amen, that is, It is true. That which thy toungue confesseth, let thy affection kepe. These be the wordes of Leo and Saint Ambrose, by the whiche M. Iewell will proue that Iustinians Constitution made a hundred yeares after tooke place in Rome. Hathe not M. Iewell (trowe ye) shewed him selfe herein a trim Diuine? Thinketh M. Iewell that wheresoeuer he findeth the worde, Amen, in the Doctours, straightwayes he hath founde his Vulgar Seruice? Or thinketh he that bicause the people confessed the Reall presence of Christes Body in the Sacrament, answering Amen to the Priest, and confessing it to be true that the Priest saied, therefore the people had their Seruice in the Vulgar toungue? By such argumentes M. Iewell maye make his brethern beleue that to this daye in these Countres here, we haue also the Seruice in the vulgar toungue bicause in the Masse bookes here, he maye reade the like.M. Iewelles Argument. Nowe to laye forthe brefely M. Iewelles argument, vppon these places thus he reasoneth.
            
               S. Ambrose about the yeare of our Lorde thre hundred and foure score, and Leo about the yeare foure hundred and fourty do witnesse the people answered Amen to the Priest.
            
            
               Ergo the Constitution of Iustinian made aboute the yeare fiue hundred and four
                     •
                  y of the speaking alowde of the Prieste, or (as M. Iewell woulde haue it to seme) off the Vulgar Seruice tooke place in the Church of Rome.
            
            If suche argumentes maie serue, I graunte M. Iewell hath Replyed well. And then if M. Iewell had come before his Father, he might haue maried his Mother. Nowe let vs consider the other holy Fathers whiche M. Iewell alleageth to saye the like.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               
                  In psal. 45S. Augustine saieth of the Churche of Rome. Vnum psalmum cantamus.

Vnum Amen respondemus. We singe one psalme, and we awnswer one Amen.The .173. Vntruthe For S. Augustin saied not those wordes of the Churche of Rome.
            
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
               
                 
                  Psalm. 54S. Augustine saied not those wordes of the Churche off Rome, more then of anye other Churche. Nay he speaketh it properly of the Africanes, and of the Donatistes, which had separated them selues from the vnite of Christes Churche in Afrike. For expounding the wordes of the psalme, Veniat mors super illos, descendant in infernum viuentes. Let death come vpon them, and let them descende into hell aliue, making the Catholike to speake to the Donatiste, thus he writeth. Quid pateris frater &c. What ayle you Brother? We are brethern.
               
                  August. in Psal. 54. 
               We call vpon one God. We beleue in one Christ. We heare one ghospell. We singe one psalme. We answeare one, Amen. We sounde out one Halleluia. VVe celebrat one Easter. VVhy then are you withoute (the Churche) and I within? These are the wordes of S. Augustine bothe that goe before, and that folowe the wordes of M. Iewell alleaged. By all the whiche we see he spake those wordes especially of the Africanes in his owne Countre, and touched therein Rome, nomore then anye other Countre. Yet saieth M. Iewell. S, Augustin saieth of the Churche of Rome. Thus he hathe taken suche a custome to lie, that he careth not what he vtter. Againe what is there here touching the Constitution of Iustinian? We singe at this daye in all Christendom (all that remanye in the Catholique faithe) one psalme. We answer, one Amen. We sounde out one Halleluia. And so forthe. What is this to M. Iewelles Vulgar Seruice, whiche vpon Iustinians Constitution he woulde so faine builde? Last of all S. Augustin liuing in the time of S. Ambrose a full hundred yeares before Iustinians Constitution was made, howe can he possibly witnesse anye thinge for that lawe to take place in Rome? Where was M. Iewelles witt and remembrance when he wrote this? Will he euer forgett him selfe, like to Dauus? Let vs procede and see whether his next allegation be

any better.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 174. Vntruthe in falsifiing the wordes of S. Hierom as shal appeare. Tom. 2. & 7. contra Iulian. li. 2.S. Hierom saieth. Euen in Rome, at the ende of the praier, the people so sounded out Amen, as if it had bene a thunderclappe.
            
            This toucheth Rome in dede, and therefore is so muche better then the other. But when liued S. Hierom M. Iewell? Liued he not in the time of S. Ambrose and of S. Augustine more then a hundred yeares before Iustinian was Emperour? Are there not letters extant betwene him and S. Austen? And dothe not S. Augustine alleage his writinges against the Pelagians? What a forgetfull Dauus is M. Iewell? He hathe alleaged vs here foure Doctours to proue that Iustinians Constitution toke place in Rome, who all were dead and buried before Iustinian was borne. It is nowe sence Iustinian made that Constitution a full thousand yeares.The singular folie of M. Iewell. And in all this time amonge so many writers M. Iewell whiche spareth none, be he neuer so base, whiche alleageth scholemen, gloses, lawyers of al ages, with whom, Nicolaus de lyra, Thomas of Aquine, Durandus, Eckius, Hugo Cardinalis, Iohn Billet, Cusanus, Scotus, Innocentius the thirde, and all other late writers are currant, he can yet amonge them all finde not one in the space of a thousand yeres to testifie that Iustinians Constitution touched the Churche of Rome, but he is fayne to runne to Leo, to S. Augustine, S. Ambrose and S. Hierome and to make them speake a good worde for him that the lawe of Iustinian toke place in Rome, who all as I saied liued and died longe before that Constitution was made. Wherein he dealeth as if a man to proue the meaning of a lawe made in Quene Maries dayes would alleage the Iudgement of bishopp Warrham that dyed in kinge Henry the eightes dayes. Verelye this was a mighty Constitution that toke place in Rome a hundred yeres before it was made.
            Touching the place of S. Hierom, his whole wordes are

these. Vbi alibi tanto studio & frequentia, ad ecclesias & ad martyrum s
                     •
                  pulchra concurritur? Vbi sic ad similitudinem coelestis tonitrui, Amen reboat, & vacua idolorum templa quatiuntur? Non quòd aliam habent Romani fidem, nisi hant quam omnes Christi Ecclesiae:
                  In proaemio li. 2. Comment. in epist. ad Gal.
                
               sed quòd deuotie in eis maior sit, & simplicitas ad credendum. Where els are the Churches, and the Sepulchres of Martirs withe so feruent deuotion and withe so great cōpany resorted vnto? Where doth Amē geue so lowde a sounde like the thunderclappe out of the ayer, so as the tēples emptied of Idoles do shake with it? Not bicause the Romanes haue any other faith, then that whiche all the Churches of Christ haue, but bicause there is in them a greater deuotion, and simplicite to beleue. Thus farre S. Hierom. His intent in this place was to shewe that the faithe of the Romanes whiche the Apostle S. Paule commended, remayned still in the same feruour and zele, as it did from the beginning. For proufe whereof he bringeth in their frequenting of Martyrs toumes. How like you that deuotion M. Iewell? Then also their crying out Amen so lowde and so thicke in the Churche, that he compareth it to the noyse of a thunderclappe. Suche a noyse I haue heard in the Churches of Fraunce many times my selfe, and also at Rome in the Lent tyme. Yet I neuer heard there or otherwhere the Vulgar Seruice. If the crying out of Amen maye either prouethe Vulgar Seruice or the Constitution of Iustinian to be generall and to extende to Rome, then M. Iewell hath talked to the matter. If neither of these twayne, then what hathe he done but trifled and deluded the ignorant Reader, withe idle allegations, and shewe of lerning?
            To furder the matter, M. Iewell hathe the added to the wordes of S. Hierome, these wordes: At the ende of the praier. For those wordes are not to be founde in S. Hierom. Suche shifting and toyling is made to proue a Vulgar Seruice out of Iustinian, and yet it will not be. Let vs procede.
            
               Againe, if this Constitution serued onely for the Greke Churche, and only the priestes there spake alowde, and the others of the Latine Churche spake in silence,The .175. Vntruthe. For it is not denied that the Latine Churche spake aloude, at th
                     •
                   Common praiers. The .176. Vntruthe For it is not supposed by D. Hard. that S. August. in Afrike prayed in silēce, but that in Rome the Cōsecration was in silence. howe then doth M. Harding expounde this lawe by S. Augustine, who as he supposeth did the contrary, and was neuer subiect vnto that lawe? Or howe can he make contrarietes agree together? Hath he so soone forgotte him selfe? Or will he expoū
               de speaking by silence, or singing out, by whispering?
            The verye wordes of D. Harding being laied forthe will soone answer all this wondering of M. Iewell. His wordes in the texte are these. And thus he ordeined for the greke Churche onelye, and thereto onely it is to be referred, for that some thought the Sacrifice should be celebrated rather with silence, after the maner of the Churche of Rome, specially at the Consecration. In these wordes D. Harding reporteth the maner of the Churche of Rome specially at the Consecration time to haue bene, to speake in silence, where as the grekes vttered those wordes allwaies alowde. But the agreing of S. Augustins wordes withe the meaning of Iustinian is spoken of the Churche of Afrike not of the Churche of Rome. And againe of vttering the wordes before the Consecration, as Sursum corda and such like (as by the Conference of S. Cyprian alleaged by M. Iewell it appeareth) not of the very Canon of the Masse whiche in the Latin Churche hathe euer secretly bene pronounced. Thirdly the agreing is this, that neither Iustinian nor S. Augustine, do speake any thinge for the Vulgar Seruice, but only for the lowde speaking of the priest, whiche though it were vsed in Afrike, yet will it not folowe that it was vsed in Rome. Last of all though we graunted that bothe Afrike and also the Churche of Rome vsed suche lowde speaking of the priest at the Common Seruice in Saint Augustins time, yet it will hardly folowe that the same was done by the force of Iustinians Constitution made a full hundred yeares after, or that the Churche of Rome shoulde

therefore be subiect to that the lawe made so many yeares after. The expounding therefore of the sence and meaninge of Iustinians Constitution by the wordes of Saint Augustine bredeth no Contradiction in D. Hardinges Collection, vnlesse M. Iewell wil haue this Argument to stande for good.
            
               The Priestes in Afrike spake alowde in S. Augustins time according to the meaning of Iustinians Constitution,
               M. Iewelles Argument.
            
            
               Ergo the Churche of Rome a hundred yeares after was subiect to that Constitution.
            
            If M. Iewell will this to goe for an argument, then let him cōsider it better. Els it will proue I trow but a childish argumēt.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                To conclude Iustinian saieth, The Constitutions were generall.
               The .177 and .178. Vntruthes, as shall appeare. M. Harding alone saieth they were not generall.
            To conclude, Iustinian saied no such thinge either of all the Nouell Constitutions (of the which Contius confesseth many where 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , & locales, proper and peculiar for certaine places) either of this same Constitution of which we haue so long treated, which bothe the lawe proueth it was not generall, and by the reason of Contius alleaged, semeth to be a mere particular Constitution touchinge onely the Greke Churche. Therefore D. Hardinge not alone, but with the lawe and with Contius affirmeth this Constitution to be not generall.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Iustinian saieth, They toke place in all the VVorlde.
               The .179 and .180· Vntruthes, as shall appearel M. Harding alone saieth. They toke place only in Constantinople.
            
            In these wordes M. Iewell hath committed two manifeste Vntruthes. For neither Iustinian spake those wordes of these Nouell Constitutions of whiche this is one that nowe is in Controuersie, but he spake those wordes in the Code of other lawes comprised there: Neyther dyd D. Hardinge saye that this Constitution toke place only in Cōstantinople, but he saied, Only in the Greke Church: of the whiche Constantinople is but a parte.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               
               The .181. Vntruthe ioyned with an extreme folie. Stapletō.S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, S. Hierome, Leo, and others say. They were obserued in the Churche of Rome. M. Harding alone saieth. They were neuer obserued in the Church of Rome.
            
            Leo liued at the lest foure score yeares, S. Ambrose, S. Augustin and S. Hierome liued well nere two hundred yeares before these Nouell Constitutions of Iustinian were made, and therefore they could not possibly (except it were by Spirit of prophecy or reuelation) speake anye one worde off or on of these Constitutions of Iustinian whiche were so many yeares after made and writen. Beside, the Wordes of these Doctours, as hath before bene declared, haue no lyke matter to the Vulgar Seruice whiche M. Iewell would so faine picke out of this Cō
               stitution.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Iff he will thus deceiue vs in plaine thinges, howe may we thē trust him in doubtefull thinges?
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                Be it a bargaine M. Iewell. He that deceaueth in plaine thinges, let him neuer be trusted in doubtefull thinges. But what deceite can be more plaine, more euident, more manifest, then to alleage for the sence and meaning of a lawe, the witnesse off those men,M. Iewell is caste in his owne turne. who were dead and buried many a score of yeares before the lawe was made, yea before the man was borne that made the lawe? Howesaie you M. Iewell? Haue you not here deceiued youre Reader in a verye plaine and manifest matter? Haue you not alleaged to proue that Iustinians Constitution was obserued in the Churche of Rome, and that the Churche of Rome was subiect to that lawe, the testimony of foure Doctours, who all were dead so many yeares before the lawe was enacted? Can you denye that those foure Doctours lyued all and died (as I haue saied) many a score of yeares before Iustinian made that lawe? Do not all Histories, yea Carion, Pantaleon and your brethern of Magdeburge testifie the age of those Fathers all before Iustinian the Emperour? Then by your owne rule Master Iewell, You that haue deceiued youre Reader

in so playne a matter, let him not truste you in doubtefull matters.
            It is writen of an Enuious man, that to make his neighbour to lese one eye, he was content him selfe to lese bothe. Verely M. Iewel you haue euen in suche sorte dealed here. So that you might by some meanes bringe doctour Harding oute of some credit, you haue (as it maye seme) of purpo
                  •
               e made a playne Exception against your owne Credit for euer. Pate
                     •
                  e leg
                     •
                  m quā ipse tuleris.
            
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               It appeareth by Arnobius vppon the Psalmes, by Epiphanius writinge against Heresyes, and by S. Augustine in his bookes, De Doctrina Christiana, that by accompte off Antiquitye there were .72. Toungues in the VVorlde.
               
                  Psal. 104 Haeres. 39 in Tusc. q.
                
               Cicero sayeth, that they be in number infinite. Off them all (.78.) neither M. Iuell, nor anye one off his syde, is able to shewe, that the publike Seruice of the Church in any Natiō, was euer for space of six hundred yeres after Christ, in any other then in the Greke and Latin.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                The .78. Vntruthe.The .182 Vntruthe Slaunderous. For it shall appeare that we are able to shewe manifest Examples to the contrary.
            Nowe is the tyme and place come that M. Iewell will acquit him selfe of his Promise, made now Page. 
                     •
                  55 157.159. and .169. the fift time in this Article, that he will bringe forthe his Examples of such Countres that haue had their Church Seruice in a Vulgar knowē tounge beside Greke and Latin for the space of the first six hundred yeres after Christ. But marke here diligently good Reader, and for the better vnderstanding of M. Iewelles proufes,Fol. 61. b. turne backe to the .69. Vntruthe, and remembre that his Promise in that place is, not only to bringe Examples of the Church Seruice in some other toungue beside the Greke and Latin, (which is proper to this Vntruthe here noted) but also to bring Examples of

sundrye Nations of the East Church, namely of the lesser Asia, which had not their Seruice in the Greke tounge. For that before was by M. Iewell auoutched in the .69. Vntruthe. That he must proue in this Article. Or els his Assertion is ouerthrowen. As thou maiest (good Reader) clerely perceiue if thou turne backe to that we haue saied vpon the .69. and the .72. Vntruthes. But let vs nowe heare what M. Iewell saieth,Fol. 61. b. & fol. 66. a. and how manifeste Examples he can bringe, that sundry Nations of the Easte Church, namely of Asia the lesse, haue had their Church Seruice in the vulgar tounge beside Greke and Latin for the space of the first .600. yeres after Christ.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .183. Vntruthe For D. Harding altereth not the case, but foloweth it. StapletonM. Harding being required by me to shewe any one example that the people had their Common Seruice in a straunge toungue, and as it appeareth, not able to shewe any, he altereth conningly the whole case, and willeth me to shewe.
            No M. Iewell D. Harding willeth not to you shewe that any Countre had their Seruice in their Vulgar tounge, whiche you yet affirme all the Worlde had, and which he hauing Tradition with him for the Lerned tonge, might more reasonably require you to shewe an Example of your Vulgar tounge, then you require him for the Lerned, hauing an vniuersal Traditiō of the
                  •
               e 900. yeares by your owne confession against you, this I saye D. Harding requireth not of you, but (and Marke well good Ch
                  •
               istian Reader) whereas D. Hardinge hath proued abundantly that in the East or Greke Churche, many Christened Nations vnderstande not the Greke, and in the West or Latin Churche many Christened countres also vnderstoode not the latin, he affirming that all the Greke Churche had only the Greke Seruice, and all the latine Churche only the Latin Seruice (whereof it foloweth that many countres had their Seruice in a tonge whiche they vnderstode not) requireth you M. Iewell if you denye it, to geue him some instaunce or Exception of anye one Countre which had the publike Seruice any otherwise then in

the Greke or Latine toungue. This is no Alteration of the Case Master Iewell, but a right approued way of Reasoninge. For, to disproue an Vniuersall Affirmatyue, it behoueth by Order of Scholes to require an Instaunce in the particular. Therefore you haue no cause to complayne and to saye.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Whiche thinge notwithstanding I might iustlye refuse to doo by the order of anye Scholes,The .184. Vntruthe for by order of all Scholes 
                     •
                  ou are forced to geue an Instance, denying the vniuersall. yet I am well content to yelde to his request, bothe for the goodnesse and pregnancie of the cause, and also specially, good Christen Reader, for the better contentation of thy minde, not doubting, but of thee selfe, thou wilt be able to finde some distrust, and wante in M. Hardinges side. Who notwithstanding so many wordes, and so great vauntes yet is able to shew nothinge.
            On Gods name. Let M. Iewelles proufes trie what weakenes there is in D. Hardinges side, and what assuraunce in his own Vaunting Chalenge. He saieth.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                And, to auoide multitude of wordes, the case being plaine, Eckius saieth: The Indians had their Serui
                     •
                  e in the Indian tounge.
            
            But when, where, and how M. Iewell?The 185. 
                     ••
                  truthe in mangling the wor
                     •
                  es of 
                     •
                  ckius. Do yow remembre the state of the question? See good Reader that M. Iewell deceiue thee not. He must proue that within the first 600. yeares in all the East or West Church any other Seruice was vsed beside the Greke and Latin. And beholde forthe cometh Eckius a man lyuing in our dayes, whiche telleth vs of certaine Indians whiche at this present haue the Seruice in their Vulgar toung. But I will geue thee good Reader the whole wordes of Eckius, whereof M. Iewell hath snatched a piece to serue his turne, concealing from thee the whole circumstance bothe of time and of place, whereby the question is limited. The wordes of Eckius are these. Non negamus Indis Australibus permissum, vt in lingua sua rem diuinā faciant, quod clerus eorum hodie 
                     •
                  bseruat, vt vidimus & audiuimus ipsi. We confesse it is permitted to the South Indians to haue their Seruice in their

owne tounge. Whiche their clergie obserueth to this daye, as we haue our selues bothe sene and heard. In these wordes marke good Reader three conditions, whereby M. Iewelles assertion is vtterly ouerthrowen.  First Eckius saieth, they haue it by permission. This condemneth your late Alteration done without all permission or graunte of the 
                  〈◊〉
                the onelye right Iudge in all suche cases.  Secondarely 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  •
               peaketh of a matter of these dayes, as the whiche he bothe sawe and hearde him selfe. This is farre from the first 600. yeares after Christe.  Last of all. This is an example of the South Indians latelye conuerted to the faithe. This is no parte of the East or west Church. To be shorte, this is M. Iewelles reason.
            
               M. Iewels Argumēt
               The Indians of the South partes at this daie haue their Seruice in the Vulgar tongue.
            
            
               Ergo Sundry Nations of the East and VVest Church had their Seruice in a like maner a thousand yeares agoe.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .186 Vntruthe For Durandus speaketh not one worde of Iewes. De diuinis officijs lib. 4. cap. 1.Durandus saieth. The Iewes that were Christened had their Seruice in the Hebrew tounge.
            Durandus saieth. In primitiua Ecclesia diuina mysteria Hebraicé celebrabantur. The diuine mysteries were celebrated in the primitiue Churche in the Hebrewe tounge. But neither he nameth the Iewes that were Christened, neither speaketh of the Churche Seruice: Both whiche Master Iewell affirmeth him to saie.  And as it is probable that the Publike Seruice of the Churche at that time, was not so priuat, but that the gentiles and the Iewes newly Christened assembled together thereunto, of whom very fewe vnderstode the Hebrew tounge, so if this was a Publike seruice, it will well folowe thereof that the Seruice was then in a tounge whiche the hearers vnderstode not. And thus M. Iewell hathe brought Durandus against him selfe.  Againe this is yet no Vulgar tounge beside greke and Latine, of the whiche onelye D. Harding spake, and to the whiche M. Iewell in this place ought to directe his

proufes. For of the Seruice in some Vulgar tounge the question is, not of the lerned Hebrewe tounge, whiche of the common Iewes them selues howe litle in Christes time it was vnderstanded, it appeareth by theyr well vnderstandinge of Christes wordes vpon the Crosse, Eli Eli lamasabathani: My God, My God, why hast thou forsaken me. For they thought (as the ghospell witnesseth) that Christ had called vpon Elias &c.  Farder this was no order of Seruice vsed and continewed in Christes Churche. For Durandus immediatly vpon the wordes before alleaged, saieth. Sed tempore Adriani primi Imperatoris graecé in orientali ecclesia graecorum celebrari caeperunt. But in the time of Adrian the firste Emperour of that name (whiche was litle more then a hundred yeres after Christe) the mysteries beganne to be celebrated in greke in the East Churche of the grekes. This order of Seruice continewed, and of suche is the question.  Last of all this was not the publike Seruice of any Nation (of such is the question expressed) but as it maye seme a matter practised of certaine Iewes in certaine places dispersed among other Nations. For the Publike Seruice in Hierusalem it selfe, the Head off all Iury, was in greke, as it is euident by the greke Liturgie or Masse of S. Iames the Apostle the firste bishopp in that place, yet extant in greke. So properly M. Iewell hathe alleaged Durandus. A writer otherwise as muche estemed of M. Iewell, as one of the blacke garde. For so he calleth him in his Replie to D. Cole.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Yet was neither of these tounges neither Greke nor Latin.
                  Stapletō. 
               
            
            No truly. And so neither of your Examples serueth your turne. For the one is not within the first 600. yeres, but lacketh more then 900. thereof, the other is of no Vulgar tounge, nor of no Continewed publicke Seruice. So neither of them is of any nation in the Latin or greke Churche, but the one off South Indians, the other of Iewes, that I pitie yowe to haue sought so farre and yet missed of your purpose.
            
               Nicolaus Lyra, and Thomas of Aquine saye. The Common Seruice in the primitiue Churche was in the Common Vulgar tounge.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 187. Vntruthe for Thomas of Aquine saieth it with a Peraduenture, which worde M. Iewell. hath left oute. In 1. Cor. 14.It goeth harde with M. Iewell when he bringeth such doctours. He was wonte to call them, the Blacke Garde. Nowe they are Sadde witnesses and men of Authorite. And yet God wote, they make as muche for him, as dothe a Queste for the Guilty. The wordes of S. Thomas are these. Sed quare non dantur benedictiones in Vulgari, vt intelligantur a populo & cōforment se magis eis? Dicendum est quòd hoc forte fuit in Ecclesia primitiua, sed postquam fideles instructi sunt, & sciunt quae audiunt in Communi officio, fiunt benedictiones in Latino. Why are not the Benedictions (whiche S. Paule speaketh of) made nowe in the Vulguar tounge, that they maye be vnderstanded of the people, and they comforme them selues thereunto? I answere that in the primitiue Churche Peraduenture, it was so. But after that the faithefull people were ones instructed, and do knowe suche thinges as they heard in the Common Seruice, the Benedictions are made in Latin. Lo what a witnesse M. Iewell hath brought for him selfe. He auoucheth not the matter, but saieth. Peraduenture it was so. And then if it were so, he geueth a reason of it, which is: the Necessarye Instruction off the people at their first Receiuing of the faith: whereas nowe the faith being so longe Rooted in the hartes of men, and the People thouroughly instructed in all matters cōcerning their saluation, neither is it necessary that they vnderstande all thinges, neither do they missedoubt of any thing which the Priest saieth, but answereth vnto all Amen, and geueth their consent to his praiers without all scruple or curiosite to knowe what he saieth. What dothe all this helpe M. Iewelles Vulguar Seruice? Onlesse he will forme his reasons thus.
            
               M. Iewelles Argu
                  
                     •
                  ent.
               The people is allready sufficiently instructed.
            
            
               Ergo they must haue all t
                     •
                  inges in their vulgar language.
            
            Or thus.
            
               
               The praiers be made in Latin.
            
            
               Ergo the people must vnderstande them.
            
            Verely these are very Vulgar Argumentes. But nowe to his other doctour Nicolaus Lyra, His wordes are these. In primitiua Ecclesia Benedictiones & caetera communia fiebant in vulgari. Sed postquam populus multiplicatus fuit,
               
                  In 1. ad Cor. 14. 
               & consueuit se conformare Ministris Ecclesiae, vtpote stando quando dicitur Euangelium &c. Fiunt in Latino in Ecclesia Latina. Et sufficit quòd clericus respondeat pro toto populo. In the primitiue Church the Benedictions and other common thinges were done in the Vulgar. But after that the Christian people multiplied, and was ones accustomed to conforme thē selues to the Ministers of the Chirche, as in standing when the Ghospell is reade, and so forthe, thinges are done in Latin in the Latin Church. And it suffiseth that the clarke do answer for all the people. Nicolaus Lyra as in many other places, so here also foloweth S. Thomas. And that which he affirmed with a peraduenture, this man putteth out of peraduenture. Yet all this proueth not it was in any other language beside the Greke and Latin. For at that time the primitiue Church wrote all in Greke or Latin as it appeareth by the Scriptures of the new testaments and by the Fathers writinges: Which are al together in Greke or Latin, and none at al in any other vulgar toungue. Againe the Greke and the Latine were at that time and certain hundred yeares after vulgar tounges to many Nations, as it is euident and vndoubted to the lerned. Therefore this doctour helpeth the matter no more then the other did. Vnlesse M. Iewell thinke this reason good.
            
               The Latin and the Greke tounges were in the primitiue Churche Vulgar tounges.
               M. Iewelles Argument.
            
            
               Ergo the Seruice was neither in Latin nor Greke.
            
            If he conclude not thus, he concludeth nothing against D. Harding. And if he do conclude thus, you see how loosely it hangeth together. Euery childe maye see thourough it. Yet

he setteth much by it, and pronounceth it stoutely, saying.
            By these fewe it maye appeare, it was but a brauerie, that M. Harding saide.The .188. Vntruthe For D. Ha
                     •
                  ding added (for the space of 600. yeares) whiche M. Iuell left oute. Iewell. Stapletō. Neither M. Iuell nor anye one of that side is able to shewe that the publike Seruice was in anye other toungue then in Greke or Latine. For it is easy to be shewed, euen by the Doctours of his owne side.
            By these fewe it maye appeare, M. Iuell hath made but a simple brauerye in this forewarde of his doctours. And if the body and rerewarde serue him no better, he may wipe his bill and go to rouste. Let vs see what foloweth.
            But what if Doctour Harding him selfe haue in plaine wordes confessed the same?
            But what if he haue not? Then hath M. Iewell loste a good argument.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .189. Vntruthe ioyned with a slaunder. StapletonAlthough he haue wantonly denied Christ, yet, I trowe, he wil not denie him selfe.
            He denieth Christ wantonly, which forsaketh his olde religion that he was baptised in, and embraceth a wanton ghospel, planted by a wanton frier, yoked with a wanton Nonne, not he which forsaketh such wanton lewdenesse, to returne to his old and approued Faith.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Consider, good Reader, his owne wordes hereafter folowing in this selfe same Article, But S. Paule (saye they) requireth that the people geue assent, and conforme them selfe vnto the Priest, by answering Amen to his prayer made in the Congregation. Hereunto M. Harding answereth thus. Verely in the primitiue Churche this was necessary, when the Faithe was a learning and therefore the prayers were then made in a Common toungue knowen to the people. What can there be more plainely spoken?
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                Yes forsothe. If he had added, and that in neither greke nor Latin, then had it ben more plainely spoken, then had it bene contrary to him selfe. Now it is no more then S. Thomas and Nicolaus de Lyra saied before. And therefore as we haue proued before, their sainges to make nothing for M. Iewell, so doth not this of D. Hardinges neither. As they spake of no other vulgar

toungue but of Greke and Latin which then were Vulgar, soo doth here D. Harding speake of none other tonges but of greke and and latin also, which thē were Vulgar. What nedeth nowe all this myrthe and triumphe that M. Iewell maketh, saying?
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                M. Harding hath vtterly forgotten him selfe.The .190 Vntruth. For they stāde well together. Stapletō. His sayinges can not (190.) stande togeather, If he be true in one, in the other he must nedes be false.
            Put vp your pipes M. Iewell, and take your ease. D. Harding remembreth him selfe well enough. His sayinges do stande wel together, and bothe are true.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Yet good Christian Reader for thy better Satisfaction, it maie please thee to knowe, that in the primitiue Churche,The .191. Vntruthe For the whole Congregatiō did neuer the Office of the Minister. the Common Seruice was not ministred by one man alone, but by the Priest and whole Congregation alltogether, as maye appeare by the generall consent of the olde Fathers.
            M. Iewell speaketh faire. It is reason he be hearde, and beleued also if after such smothe wordes, he bringeth vs sounde and substantiall proufes. But if al this gaie talke wanteth matter, let him be knowen for an earnest trifler.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Clemens Alexandrinus saieth.
                  Clem. Alex. Strom. lib. 7. Stapleton The .192. and 193. Vntruthes committed in salsifying Clemens. 
               In orationibus v
                     •
                  luti vnam vocem habent communem & vnam mentem. In the (Common) praiers they haue all as it were one voice and one minde.
            M. Iewell hath in these fewe wordes vsed two feates of hys Arte. He hathe gelded the wordes of the doctour, and shifted in a worde of his owne, which vtterly altereth the doctours minde. The whole sentence of Clemens is thus. Est ergo quod est hic apud nos altare, terrestris congregatio eorum qui sunt dedicati orationibus, qui veluti vnam vocem habent communem & vnam mentem. The aultar therefore which we haue here (he talketh of the Sacrifice of praier) is an earthly congregation of those, whiche are dedicated to praiers, which haue as though it were one voice and one minde. He talketh of such as were dedicated to

praier, of the clergy or other religious men who praie altogeather with one voice and minde, not of the people. He talketh of their vsuall Seruice, not of the Common praier of the people. The Worde (Common.) M. Iewell hath added of him selfe more then he founde in the doctour. Now of the clergy or religiouse men dedicated to praier, that you maye not thinke I faine or fable, Clemens mencioneth in this same booke, within litle more then a leafe after this place, where he saieth. Nonnulli certas ac definitas horas constituunt orationi, vt tertiam, sextam, nonam. Many do appoint certaine set houres for praier, as the thirde houre, the sixt howre, and the ninth howre· But what if al this were spoken of the people, and that they all praied with the clergy? We knowe this Clemens was a preacher in Alexandria. And there the Seruice was in Greke. Therefore this helpeth not yet M. Iewell any whit except he minde to reason thus.
            
               M. Iewelles Argument.
               The people in Alexandria had their Common Seruice in Greke.
            
            
               Ergo they had it in no Vulgar tounge b
                     •
                  side the Greke.
            
            Such straunge Conclusions become wel this strange alteration of Gods Seruice.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                S. Chrysostom sayeth. Not only the Priest geueth tankes to God, but also all the People,
               The .194 Vntruthe in mangling the wordes of Chrysostome. 
               And what doest thou maruail to see the Priestes and people in prayers talke togeather.
            
            Surely M. Iewell, no maruaill at all. But a great maruaill it is, that a called bishopp as you be should blinde Gods people, First with suche patched sentences of the holy Fathers, then with such Betle arguments as you make. For the first, the whole wordes of Chrisostom are these. Againe in the same dreadfull mysteries, the Priest wisheth well to the people, and the people wisheth well to the Priest. For (with thy Spirit) is nothing els to say, then this, that al that belōgeth to thākes geuing, is cōmō. For not only the Priest geueth thankes but also al the people. For taking first their answer, and gathering them together that this Mysterie might be done worthely and rightly, he beginneth the Eucharist. And what doest thou

maruaill, if the people speaketh with the Priest? VVhereas also with Cherubin, and other heauenly powers, they sing those holy himnes in common. Al this is but the Accustomed answering of the people to the Priest, in the preface of the Masse, as to this day it is vsed. Which will easely appeare to the lerned and discrete Reader, d
                  •
               
               ligently cōsydering the whole place. Now touching the Argument these be M. Iewels reasons.
            
               The people prai
                     •
                  th withe the priest. And the priest praieth in Greke.
            
            
               Ergo the people had not their Seruice in Greke.
            
            Vnderstande good Reader. Chrisostome was bishopp of Constantinople a parte of the Greke Churche. His Masse or Liturgie is yet extant in Greke. He praied in Greke, and preached in Greke. Aske M. Iewell when thou metest him next, if all this be not true. And then if he graunte it, aske howe his Greke Masse can proue the Seruice was not in Greke. Truly he shall haue nothing to saie, vnlesse he saie that Greke is no Greke. Chrysostome is not Chrysostome. Nor Iewell is not Iewell.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                And here to leaue S. Augustine, S. Hierom S. Basile,The 195. Vntruthe For he leaueth not S. Hierō, nor S. Basill, but alleageth thē bot
                     •
                  e straightwaies for his matt
                     •
                  r. Nazianzenus, Dyonisius Areopagita, withe many other Fathers.
            Here is brought in a whole troupe of doctours in a ranke. Augustin, Hierom, Basile, Nazianzenus, Dyonisus Areopagita and many other Fathers. And who woulde not be afraide to see suche an armie come against him? Howbeit (gentle Reader) be of good 
                  •
               heare. All this is but a Camisado. These be but visardes, they be no faces. They are brought in like Mummers for a shewe, and say nothinge. That M. Iewell lacked in weight, he woulde nedes make vp in tale. But doubtelesse, if any greater weight had ben in these, then in the rest whiche come after, he woulde neuer haue forsaken S. Hierom. S, Augustin, S. Basill, and Nazianzenus, to alleage Isidorus,

Aeneas Syluius, Innocentius tertius, and Iohn Billet, or (as he hathe allready) Thomas of Aquine, Nicolaus Lyra, Durandus and Eckius. Vnlesse the gentlenesse of M. Iewell be suche, that he will reserue the best for himselfe, and geue to his Reader the worste. Nowithstanding this one thinge I will saye for M. Iewell in his behalfe and for the Readers comfort, that though here somewhat rigorously he spareth his copie, and will not parte (he saieth) from suche and suche, yet afterwarde, (so kindenesse ouercame him) he hathe beside his promis geuen vs two of his Doctours which here he saieth, he wil leaue. That is S. Hierom and S. Basill. But nowe bicause M. Iewell is in haste, and will leaue so many good authorites, let vs dispatche the rest that he bringeth. He saieth.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               
                  De ecclesi. off. cap. 10
               Isidorus describing the Order of the Church in his time, writeth thus. When they singe they must singe alltogether. When they praie, they must praie alltogether. And when the lesson is readde, silence being commaunded, they must heare alltogether.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               
                  Stapletō. 
                First Isidorus speaketh of the Quyer and the clergie, not of all the Common people. Then he speaketh of the Latine Seruice, not of anye Seruice in the Vulgar tounge beside the Latin. Last of all, if all this were spoken of the people, and of the Seruice in a Vulgar tounge beside Greke and Latin, yet hathe M. Iewell vtterly missereckened him selfe, and so gotten nothing. For this Isidorus was without the compasse of the first 600. yeres.
                  Vide Sigebertum de viris illustr. ca. 55. pag. 80. Euen about that time that Iohn the Almes geuer liued, whome M. Iewell reiecteth before for proufe of priuat Masse. Lo thou seest good Reader what stuffe M. Iewell hathe chosen, to leaue (as he saieth) S. Augustine, S. Hierom, S. Basill, Nazianzenus, Dyonisius Areopagita withe many other like Fathers.The .185. Vntruthe For all these exampl
                     •
                  s of the olde Fathers were of Seruice in the lerned toūge Let vs goe forthe and see the rest.
            It were very muche for M. Harding to saie. All these thinges were done in a lerned tounge, and that the Vulgar people in euery Coū
               tre vnderstoode either the Greke or the Latine.
            
               Truly that were very much in dede. But neither haue your examples ben of euery Countre, nor of all the Vulguar people, but of three Cities only: of Alexandria in Aegypt, of Constantinople in Thracia, and of Hispali in Spayne. And then partly not of the people at all but of the clergie, partly of suche people as vnderstode the lerned tounges Greke and Latine, in which ij. tounges only these mencioned countres had their Seruice. Alexandria and Constantinople in Greke, Spaine in Latin. Therefore as it is no nede to saie that the Vulgar people in euery countre, vnderstode, either the Greke or the Latin, so shall it be enough to saie, that all these thinges were done in a lerned tounge, and so shall all your authorites sufficiently be answered, vntell you proue it otherwise.
            Yet for that nothinge seemeth harde for him to saie let vs see what the olde Fathers will reporte in that behalfe.Iewes.
            
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                Hitherto it semeth M. Iewell hathe but dallyed and made as though it were but a flourish to the matter. Hitherto he hathe proued nothinge. Nowe he will saie somewhat. Hitherto he hathe talked at randon, now he will folowe the game more particularly. For hitherto (as yowe see) he hathe brought nothinge for the Common Seruice in any other tounge beside Greke and Latin within the first 600. yeres. Whiche is the matter that he ought to proue, yowe knowe. Nowe then by Gods grace, we shall haue somewhat worthe the bearing awaye.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                I haue allready shewed by Theodoretus, Sozomenus, and S. Hierom, that the Seruice was in the Syrian tounge.
                  
                     〈…〉
                   Vnt
                     •••
                  h
                     •
                   For th
                     •
                  t hathe not bene shewed, as it s
                     ••
                  ll now appeare.
            
            Yet more posting and delaying M. Iewell? Yowe knowe the pith and grounde of this Article lieth herein. And therefore you ransack al the corners of your rusty Rhetorike to beautifie the matter as well as maye be. First yowe brought newe Doctours, them D. Harding him selfe, after him olde Doctours

a couple. This done, you tell vs of your Copie whiche for haste yowe leaue: and yet Isidorus muste not be forgotte. Then you shuffle in a shifte to saue all that went before, if it might be, and so you renewe the battaill againe, and prouoke your Reader to farder expectation. Whiche before you come to perfourme, yowe put him in minde of your former feates, and stratagemes, thus to persuade him, before you bringe any thinge. But goe to. Let vs make the moste of it. Where haue you shewed allready in Theodoretus and Sozomenus, that the Seruice was in the Syriacall tounge? I remembre in this Article before, you alleage them bothe together for that purpose. These are your wordes in that place.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
                pag. 157. T
                        •
                     eodoret. lib. 4. cap. 29.
The .198 Vntruth. Ephrem made neither hymnes nor psalmes.If M. Harding thinke this coniecture to be weake, let him vnderstande further, that as Theodoretus reporteth, the same Ephrem made hymnes and psalmes in the Syrian tounge. And that, as Sozomenus saieth plainely, the same Hymnes and psalmes were songe in the Churches of S
                  •
               ria.
            M. Iewell woulde faine proue the Churche Seruice by singing of songes and sonnets. It seemeth he Vnderstandeth not that in the primitiue Churche there were beside the psalmes of Dauid songe in the Churche out of holye Scripture Vulgares psalmi, psalmes or songes made in the Vulgar tounge, whiche were made of priuat men of deuotion or of some other occasion (as it shall anon appeare) and were sometime songe in certain Churches.
                  Concil. Laodic. cap. 59. Of suche the Councell of Laodicea hathe a Canon in these wordes. Non oportet ab idiotis psalmos compositos & Vulgares in ecclesiis dici. Psalmes made off priuat men and in the Vulgar tounge shall not be saied in Churches.
                  Con. Cart. 3. Can. 47 This restrainte was made at that time bicause onely holy Scripture shoulde be read there, extept the liues of holye Martyrs whiche in their festes were readen. For of the Churche psalmes that all the people did not singe that listed, men wemen and boyes, as it is nowe in the deformed congregations,

but only such as were admitted thereunto, it appeareth by a Canon of the fourth Councell of Carthage holden in the yeare of our Lorde .436. Where we reade thus. Psalmista, id est,
               
                  Can. 10. 
               Cantor potest absque scientia Episcopi sola Iussione Praesbyteri officium suscipere cantandi, dicente sibi prae
                     •
                  sbytero: vide, vt quod ore cantas, corde credas, & quod corde credis, operibus comprobes. The Psalmiste or singing man maye take the office off singinge by the onely commaundement of the Priest withoute putting the bishoppe to knowleadge, the Priest sayinge vnto him thus. See that whiche thou singest with the mouthe, thou beleue it with thy harte. And that whiche thou beleuest in thy harte, thou perfourme it in thy Workes. Thus by Order he was admitted that songe Psalmes in the Churche, and thus the Vulgar Psalmes made of Priuate men as they were for a tyme suffred in some Churches, so we see by Order off Lawe they were at an other tyme forebidden the Churche.
            This being premised, let vs nowe come to those Hymnes and Psalmes, whiche Master Iewell saith, Ephrem made, and whiche he saieth, were songe in Churches in the Syrian tonge. Whereof he seemeth to frame this argument.
            
               Ephrem made songes in the Syrian tonge.
               M. Iewelles Argument.
            
            
               E
                     •
                  go the Seruice was in the Syrian tonge.
            
            Vnlesse he will haue this to goe for an argument, he hathe proued nothing.VVhat Ephrems Psalmes were. For the Psalmes and Hymnes whiche he speaketh of, were no parte of the Churche Seruice, but certayne songes contayning. Catholyke doctryne, whiche that good Deacon made, for the people to singe in place of other songes containing Hereticall doctryne, which one Harmonius an Heretike had made before, and infected the people withall. This was Ephrems songe, and this to be so Theodoretus in hys Ecclesiasticall History telleth vs, euen in that place whiche Master Iewell hathe alleaged. These are his Wordes.

               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               .
                  T
                        •
                     eodor. li. 4. ca. 5. Whereas one Harmonius the Sonne of Bardesanes of whose Heresy Epiphanius hath written, had lately made certain songes,
                  Tom. 1 lib 2. haeresi 56. and mingling wicked doctrine with the pleasant Harmony intised the hearers, and hunted after their corruptiō, this Ephrē folowing the note and melody of the other, made a godly dittye: and gaue to the hearers bothe a pleasaunt and a profitable Medicine. These songes also do yet to this daye make more royall the festes of the triumphant Martyrs. Here we see what Hymnes and Psalmes they are which M. Iewell speaketh off. They are by a straunge Metamorphosis turned into songes and sonnets, and vsed to displace songes off Heretykes. They are neither Hymnes nor Psalmes pertayning to the Churche Seruice, (whiche were onely taken out of holy Scripture) but godly songes made for the peoples instruction against Heresy and wicked doctrine. Now that these Syrian songes were songe at Martyrs festes, it proueth no more that the Seruice was in the Syrian toungue then Christmas carolles songe in English, Frenche, and Dutche do proue the Seruice at Christmas to be in English, Frenche, or Dutche:
            And thus M. Iewelles Syrian songe doth nothing, proue his Vulgar Seruice, except he minde to reason thus.
            
               M. Iewelles Argument.
               English Carolles were songe at Christmasse.
            
            
               Ergo the Seruice was in English.
            
            Now where M. Iewel addeth that Sozomenus saieth plainely that suche Hymnes and Psalmes (he shoulde saie songes and sonnets) were songe in the Churches of Syria, If the wordes be so plaine, he should haue alleaged them, or at the lest haue noted in the margin where they were to be founde. But no maruaill

if he noted not that, which he coulde no where finde. And yet is this Sozomenus at the least iiij. times auoutched in this Article, to be a witnesse of the Seruice in the Syrian toungue. But remembre your selfe M. Iewell. 
                  Iewell. 
               
               pag. 10.If Sozomenus beareth witnesse to your Vulgar Seruice, why speaketh he not? Why cometh he forth so dumbe? What? Hath he naught to saie in this behalfe? Or is his word not worthe the hearing? Or is he so olde that he can not speake? Or must we nedes beleue M. Iewell without euidence? And thus much of Theodoretus and Sozomenus, by whome M. Iewell saieth he hathe shewed that the Seruice was in the Syrian toungue. Hereunto he addeth S. Hierome. To the place of S. Hierom I haue answered before in the 68. Vntruthe. He did well to ioyne Theodoretus and S. Hierom together. For they speake bothe of Vulgar songes,Fol. 60. 
                     •
                  . not off the Psalmes songe in Churche Seruice, as I haue before declared. Nowe I trust M. Iewell will come to the matter directly; and bringe vs some clere Example of the Churche Seruice in some Vulgar tounge beside Greke and Latin for the space of the firste .600. yeares. He hathe tolde vs what he hath lefte, and what he hath saied, nowe I trust he will to the Matter. Let vs see.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Olde Father Origens wordes in my iudgement be verye playne.The .199. Vntruthe except he meane, they are very plaine beside the purpose.
            
            Blessed be that olde Father whiche speaketh so plainely for M. Iewell, to saue his poore honesty in this greate distresse. For nowe or neuer D. Hardinges Assertion shall be confounded.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Writing against one Celsus a wicked heathen, he sayeth thus. The Grekes name God in the greke toungue, and the Latines in the Latine toungue.
               
                  Lib. 8. contra Celsum
                
               And all seuerall Nations praye vnto God and prayse him in their owne naturall and mother toungue. For he that is Lorde off all tounges, heareth man praying in all toungues, none otherwise, then iff it were one voice pronounced by diuers tounges. For God that ruleth the whole VVorlde is not as some one man, that hathe gotten the Greke or 
               
                  Barbarā.
                
               Latin tounge, and knoweth none other.
            
            
               
               
                  Stapleton. 
                As I can easely yelde in parte that by this olde Fathers Testimony all toungues and Nations do praise and praie to God, so if M. Iewell can proue that this same Origen euer saied the Seruice in any tounge then the Greke,Pag. 35. or in any of all his workes once vsed the name of Seruice in a vulgar tounge, I will as gladly yelde to the whole. But if Origen neuer spake worde of Seruice in the vulgar tonge, howe is he here brought in to proue the Seruice in a vulgar toungue? 
                  Iewell. 
                Howbeit M. Iewell knoweth, it is an easy matter to mocke the ignoraunt with the glorious name of olde Fathers. Origen saieth, that all Nations and al tonges do praie vnto God. This thing neither is denied, neither in any point toucheth the publike Seruice of the Church. We confesse with Origen and S. Augustin to,
                  August. Epi. 178. that vna rogatur vt mis
                     •
                  reatur à cunctis Latinis & Barbaris vnius Dei natura, the one nature of God is praied vnto for mercy of al people bothe Latines and Barbarous. And yet we saye with S. Augustin also: Amen & Hallelulya, quod nec Latino nec Barbaro licet, in suam linguam transferre, Hebraeo cunctas gentes vocabulo decantare, that Amen and Halleluya (proper wordes of the Churche Seruice) are songe of all Nations in Hebrewe termes, which it is not laufull for neither the Latin or Barbarous to translate into theyr owne tounge. I thought good to accompany S. Augustin with Origen for the better vnderstanding of his meaning.
            Hereof M. Iewell semeth to reason thus.
            
               M. Iewelles Argument.
               All Nations do praie vnto God in their owne toungue.
            
            
               Ergo al Nations haue their Church Seruice in their own tonge.
            
            And then against S. Augustin thus.
            
               All Nations do praie vnto God.
            
            
               Ergo Amen, Halleluya, and such other partes off the Churche Seruice must be translated into the tounges of all Nations.
            
            This maketh well For M. Iewell: but this vtterly ouerthroweth the doctrine of S. Augustin.Iewell. Pag. 36. Litle thought that olde Father, that euer his wordes shoulde be thus vsed or so violently

forced to such Conclusions.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               
                  In 1. Cor. 14.
The. 200 Vntruthe In nipping of the last wordes of S. Ambrose. pag. 62.S. Ambrose speaking of the Iewes that were conuerted to Christ, saieth thus. These were Iewes, whiche in their Sermons and oblations, vsed sometime the Syrian tounge, and sometime the Hebrewe.
            
            M. Iewell findeth small force in olde Father Origen to proue that he seeketh for. And therefore he runneth to S. Ambrose for helpe. Howbeit for him, I muste nedes saie, he hathe taken wronge, and is ill vsed at M. Iewelles hande, as being by violence and perforce made bothe to suppresse that he woulde saye, and also to saye that he woulde not saye, and yet in the ende saieth not one worde for the Vulgar Seruice. S. Ambrose expounding the wordes of S. Paule, In the Churche or Congregation I will rather speake fiue wordes withe iudgement to instruct other, then ten thousand wordes in the tounge, saieth that the Apostles meaning is, that it is farre more profitable to speake a fewe wordes 
               In apertione sermonis. 
               in preaching that all maye vnderstande, then to vse a longe talke in an vnknowen language. And then he addeth, who they were that vsed suche longe talke in strange tounges, when the Christians were assembled to praye, and saieth. These were Iewes whiche at Sermons and Oblations, vsed sometime the Syrian tounge, sometime the hebrew 
               This M Iewell left quit
                     •
                   out ad Cōmendationē, for a vaine glorie, and commendation. For they gloried to be called H
                     •
                  brewes bicause of the merit of Abraham. These wordes of S. Ambrose as they proue nothinge that the Iewes had their Seruice, in the Hebrew or Syrian tounge, so it blameth openly the Iewes for vsing these tounges at the Seruice and oblation time. If M. Iewell had geuen thee (good Reader) the whole wordes and sentence of S. Ambrose, thou shouldest easely haue sene, howe litle they made for the Vulgar Seruice, vnlesse M. Iewell will reason thus.
            
               S. Paule blameth the Iewes for vsing the Hebrewe or Syrian tounge in the Seruice.
            
            
               
               Ergo the Seruice was in the Hebrewe or Syrian tounge.
            
            For of this premisse it will rather folowe.
            
               The Iewes are blamed for vsing the Hebrew and Syrian tounge in the Seruice.
               M. Iewelles Argument.
            
            
               Ergo the Iewes had not their Seruice in the Hebrewe and Syrian tounge.
            
            And thus M. Iewell hath brought S. Ambrose against him selfe, and hath not yet founde his Vulgar Seruice.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               
                  In epist. ad Clericos Neocaesarienses.
The 201. Vntruthe For the Commō people of Cappadocia vnderstode not the greke tounge as hathe bene before prouedS. Basill writing vnto the lerned men of Neocaesarea and shewing in what order the people vsed to resorte to the house of praier in the night season, and to singe psalmes in sides, and to praie together, towardes the ende thereof, hathe these wordes. As it were f
                     •
                  om one mouthe and from one harte, they offer vpp vnto the Lorde the psalme of confes
                     •
                  ion, and the wordes of repentaunce euery of them applieth parti
                     •
                  ularlye vnto him selfe. Hereby it is plaine that the people in S. Basiles time, songe the psalmes together, and vnderstode what they songe.
            Here M. Iewell remembreth him selfe better, and whereas he saied before he woulde leaue S. Augustine, S. Basill, S. Hierome, and other, (suche copie he pretended then to haue) nowe he alleageth notwithstanding S. Basill and S. Hierome bothe, declaring in this point, bothe his former brauery and his present wante.
            These wordes of S. Basill as they make nothing for the Seruice in the Vulguar tounge other then the greke, so do they verye well declare, the auncient custome of the primitiue Churche of the clergie rising at midnight, and singing psalmes together withe the people. But what will M. Iewell gather hereof? Will he reason thus?
            
               The people songe the psalmes together in the Greke tounge.
            
            
               M. Iewelles Argument.
               Ergo the s
                     •
                  ruice was in neither Greke nor Latine.
            
            Vnlesse he conclude thus, he concludeth nothinge against D. Harding. M. Iewell confesseth before that S. Basill preached in Greke and the Vulgar people vnderstode him.
               Iewel. pag. 161. And thinketh he by the Greke Seruice whiche the people (as he confesseth) vnderstode

(the Greke Seruice and the Greke sermons of S. Basill beinge both in like Greke as his Liturgie and homilies yet extant do testifie) to conclude that the Seruice was not in Greke? Thus by M. Iewelles reason Greke and not Greke, Vulgar and not Vulguar, somethinge and nothing shall be all one. But he felt him selfe the weakenes of this argument. And therefore he laboureth to adde some more force vnto it, and saieth.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                And least M. Hardinge should slippe awaye, as his wonte is and say, All this was done in the Greke tounge, and not in anye tongue barbarous, S. Basill hath allready preuented him.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                It is well that M. Iewell foresawe the Checke. I trust he will auoide the Matto.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                For immediatly he addeth further, as it foloweth. Iff ye fli
                     •
                   vs for thus singing and praying together, then muste ye flie the Aegyptians and bothe the countres of Lybia, and the Thebanes, and the Palestines, and the Arabians, and the Pheni
                     •
                  ians and the Sy
                     •
                  ians and the borderers of Euphrates, and generally ye muste flie all them that haue watchinges and praiers, and common psalmodie in estim
                     •
                  tion, I trowe M. Harding will not saie: All these nations spake Greke or Latine.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                No more trowe I neither. Yeat if he shoulde so saie M. Iewell withe all his learning is not able to proue the contrarye. But what if he saie that all those nations had their Seruice in Greke, allthough they spake not all Greke? What if all those countres be but a parte of the East Churche, whiche all had the Greke Seruice? Coulde they not singe and praie together onlesse they praied in their Vulguar knowen tounge? Or can not the deuoute applie particularly to him selfe the wordes of repētaunce, except he vnderstand the psalme that he singeth? This is but a Gheasse M. Iewell, that bicause the common psalmodie was practised in Aegypt and other countres, therefore all those countres vnderstode the psalmodie. Let vs consider the forme of your argument.
            
               
               In Aegypt Lybya, Syria and other countres common psalmodie was had in estimation.
               M. Iewelles Argument.
            
            
               Ergo the Seruice in all those countres was in the Vulgar tounge.
            
            Withe the like reason you might conclude against the Seruice whiche withe our owne eares we heare to be in Latin, that yet it were not in Latin. As thus.
            
               In Dutcheland Fraunce and Italy the common psalmodie i
                     •
                   bothe practised and highly estemed specially in monasteries.
            
            
               Ergo in Dutchelande Fraunce and Italye the Seruice is in the Vulgar tonge.
            
            We see and knowe the contrary of the conclusion. We see and knowe the premisse to be true also. Therefore we see and knowe the argument to be naught. And why? Forsothe bicause you conclude the whole by a parte, and the parte by a Surmise. As the whole Seruice yowe conclude of the psalmodie. And the psalmodie yowe Gheasse, was vnderstanded. Which yet if it were graunted, there remaineth for yowe yet to proue that they vnderstode nor Greke nor Latin, and then that the Seruice was in neither nother. Thus you see M. Iewell, howe Soone ye Conclude, and yet howe much yow lacke to make vp the Conclusion.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 202 Vntruthe For S. Hierome is not so muche as apparent.S. Hierom writing vnto Heliodorus, of the death of Nepotianus, seemeth to auouche the same.
            Yet haue yowe but a Gheasse then. Howbeit all that S. Hierom saieth, is not so much as a Seeming Gheasse to prou
                  •
                M. Iewelles purpose.
            These be his wordes. Nowe bothe the voices and letters off all nations do sounde out Christes passion and Resurrection. I leaue the Iewes, the Grekes and the Latines, whiche n
                     •
                  tions the Lorde hath dedicated withe the title of his C
                     •
                  osse. The sauage nature of the Bessians, and people that f
                     •
                  r their wildenesse go cladde in skinnes, whiche sometimes made sacrifices of mens bodies, haue turned their barbarous speache in to the swete harmonie of Christ. Christ is nowe the voice off the whole worlde.
            
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                It is nedelesse to answear such places as make no shew off

proufe. S. Hierom as M. Iewell well knoweth, hath neither here nor els where,Iewell. Pag. 64. either the name or the sence of anye Seruice in the Vulguar toungue. Onely he sayeth that all the worlde soundeth Christe, confesseth Christ, praiseth Christe. Nowe iff M. Iewell thinke he maye founde his vulgar Seruice vpon this place, he maye also presume the like vppon Dauids Psalme, that where he saide, In omnem terram exiuit sonus eorum, The Noyse of the Apostles preaching the Ghospell, went through out the whole earthe, he meant to erecte a Seruice in the Vulguar toungue, through oute the whole earthe. Or els vppon the wordes of saint Gregory, saying of our Forefathers, as saint Hierom sayed of the Bessians,
                  Exposit. in Iob. lib. 27 Cap. 6. 
               Beholde the toungue off Britanny which knewe nothing but to rore rudely, hathe of late begonne to singe the Hebrewe Alleluya, geuing praise to God, he maye also conclude, that Britanny had the Seruice in Hebrewe. Truly at this present Italy, Fraunce, Spayne, Portugal, Dutchelande, Burgundy, and diuers other Catholike countres do sounde oute Christes passion and resurrection, do turne their Barbarous speache into the swete Harmony of Christe, and Christ is the voice of them al. Yet no one of these Nations hath the Seruice in the Vulguar knowen toungue.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Aeneas Syluius saieth, that when Cyrillus and Methodius had conuerted the Sclauons vnto God, which was about the yeare of oure Lorde .860. and were suters that they might minister the Common prayers and other Seruice vnto them in their Common Sclauon toungue,In the ye
                     •
                  
                  re of oure Lorde .860. and greate staye was made therein by the Pope and hys Cardinalls a voyce was hearde, as it had bene from heauen. Let euerye Spirite prayse the Lorde, and let euerye toungue acknowleadge hym. And that thereuppon they were suffred to vse theyr owne language.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               pag. 75.This is the best proufe of all other. A shorte answer maye well serue it. For being but a litle vewed, it is able to answer it selfe.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
               
                It was done by the order of the Pope. And so maye it be done nowe.  The matter being so harde that a confirmation from heauen was necessarye, declareth verye well, that before, other

countres had it not so.  Last of all, it is farre withoute the compasse of the first 600. yeares. It was aboute the yeare of oure Lorde .860.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Touching this matter Innocentius the thirde hath decreed thu
                  •
               . and whether it make for the purpose or no, let M. Hardinge him selfe be iudge.
                  Extra. de Officio Iudicis ordinarij. Quoniam in plerisue.
                His wordes be these. Quoniam in pleris
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   partibus intra eandem Ciuitatem atque Diaecesim permisti sunt populi diuersarum linguarum, habentes sub vna fide varios ritus, & mores, districtè praecipimus vt pontifices huiuscemodi Ciuitatum & Diaecesum prouideant viros idoneos qui secundum diuersitatem rituum & linguarum diuina illis officia celebrent, & Ecclesiastica Sacramenta ministre
                     •
                  t.
               The .203 Vntruthe, Standing in the notorious and willfull falsyfying of the Author alleaged.  For so much as in many places with in one Citie and one Diocese there be Nation
                  •
                mingled together of many toungues hauing diuer
                  •
                orders and Customes vnder one Faith, we do therefore straightly commaunde that the bishoppes of such Cyties or Dioceses prouide meete men to minister the holy Seruice, According to their Diuersitye off maners and tounges.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
               
                Iewell. Pag. 81.Iff this serue not the turne, nothinge I trowe, will serue. The Authoritie of the Popes Canon or rather of the whole generall Councell of Laterane, wherein this decree was made, is so greate, the wordes so cleare, the Commaundement so straight. But two thinges only cōsidered, all this mighty Forte, will proue but a Paper walle. The one is the tyme and Circumstaunce of the decree. The other, the legerdemaine off M. Iewelles translation. Touching the first, this decree is farre benethe the firste six hundred yeares after Christe, as being made in the Councell of Laterane more then twise six hundred yeares after Christe. Therefore M. Iewell hathe herein maruailously missereckoned him selfe. Againe the decree is not made for Seruice in the vulguar toungue which at that tywe in all the West Churche was in Latin by the witnesse of S. Thomas of Aquine,
                  S. Thom. I
                        •
                     
                   1. Cor. 14. whome Master Iewell alleageth liuing aboute that very time. The meaning of the decree is, that whereas at that time the greate Cytye of Costantinople being subdued to the Latine Churche oute of the Grekes Dominion by the

Frenche men and the Venetians, so that in that one Cytie bothe the olde Grecians and the newe Latines inhabited, whereas also their Patriarche at that time was either of the Frenc
                  •
                mens appointement or of the Venetians, and so a Latin (for so it was agreed that when the Emperoure was Frenche,
                  Blondu
                        •
                      li. 6. dec. 2 the Patriarche was a Venetian: as at that tyme Balduin of Flaundres was the Emperoure and Maurocene the Venetian was the Patriarche) the Patriache (as I saied) being of the Latine Churche, the Grecians coueted to haue an other Bishoppe beside to serue their Churches according to their toungue and maner.
            The Councell therefore to auoyde this Inconuenience that one Cytye and one Diocese woulde haue two bishoppes, commaunded straightly that one Bishoppe being appointed, he shoulde prouide to haue Pastours and Curats vndernethe hym suche as might serue bothe the Latines and the Grekes, and againe euery seuerall Nation of the Latines and Grekes, with their owne accustomed Seruice and vsuall Administration off the Sacramentes, and that according to the Diuersitye of theyr toungues and maners. Not that euery Nation should haue the Seruice in their owne toungue; but that both, the Sacramentes shoulde be ministred to euery Nation in their owne toungues, and the Seruice celebrated to euery Nation, after their accustomed rites and Ceremonies. This to be the meaning of the decree, both the History of that time cōsidered, and the very construction of the wordes (which M. Iewell hath corrupted), dothe make manifest. And this is lo the Legerdemain of his false translation, whiche nowe shall be opened. The Latine hathe, Qui secundum diuersitates Rituum & Linguarum, diuina illis officia celebrent, & Ecclesiastica Sacramenta ministrent. The true English is this. VVhich (he speaketh of meete persons to be prouided by the Bishoppe in such Cytyes where diuers Nations do concurre) accordinge to their Diuersitye of their Rites or Ceremonies and toungues do celebrate to them Gods Seruice, and do minister

the Sacraments of the Church. Here by the order of al good Construction, the firste accusatiue case (Diuersite of Rites or Ceremonies) is to be referred to the first verbe (do celebrate Gods Seruice) and the seconde accusatiue case (Diuersity: of toungues) to the seconde verbe, Do minister the Sacramentes of the Churche. So that the literall meaning of the decree must be, that where diuers Nations do concurre in one Cytye or Diocese, eche Nation haue diuers Pastours and Ministers, partly to celebrate the Seruice according to their owne Rites, Ceremonies, maner and Facion (for in that point not only the Grekes and the Latines, but the very Latines amonge them selues do differ and varye in some Certaine Ceremonies and Rites) partly and that chiefely to minister the Sacramentes of the Churche: as Baptim, Confession, Matrimonye, and suche other to euery Nation in his owne toungue. For in suche Sacramentes the Vulguar toungue is vsed. Nowe Master Iewell knowinge right well that if he had put the whole Englishe with the Latine, euerye Childe woulde haue sene the true Construction and the true Relation of the accusatiue case with the verbe, he therefore hath vtterly left out one of the Verbes in his Englishe, whiche is, to minister the Sacramentes of the Churche. Thus he hathe beguiled the Englishe Reader, making him to beleue that the Decree spake onely of sayinge the Common Seruice, and nothinge at all of Ministring the Sacramentes off the Churche: vnto the whiche as I sayed, The Diuersyte off toungues must be referred. This is the playne dealing of ghospelling Bishoppes. Thus must an euill cause be defended. And thus is oure dere Countre abused by such as occupie the place of Reuerend bishoppes.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .240 Vntruthe or rather a bragging Lye.Here I might alleage much more out of diuers writers, euen oute of Abdias him selfe, whome M. H
                  •
               rdinge so muche estemeth.
            
               
               
                  Stapletō. 
                I finde no fault with M. Iewelles Rhetorike. But I trowe Rhetorike in this case maketh small proufe.Iewe.ll pag. 166. He will allwaies seme to haue muche store, and that he leaueth more behinde then he bringeth forthe. This is a great face sett vpon nothinge. M. Iewell will leaue Abdias a writer in the Apostles time, and whom trowe ye, will he alleage vs in his place? You shall see.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .205 Vntruthe For a Cō
                  plainte is no prous
                     •
                  
               But I will only note the complainte of one Iohn Billet concerning this case, and so make an ende.
            Alas, what toole is there so weake that M. Iewell will refuse to strike withall? To proue his imagined Vulgar Seruice, he leaueth Abdias, and (as he saied before) S. Augustine, Gregorius Nazianzenus, Dyonisius Areopagita and manye other Fathers; and bringeth vs forthe one Iohn Billet, a good honest man of late yeares. Well, you are well come home M. Iewell. Nowe youre Antiquites are spent, a poore mans tale maye be heard. But what saieth this honest man? Lett vs heare.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                His wordes be these. It w
                     •
                  s forbidden in the primitiue Churche,
               
                  In summa de Diuinis officiis.
                
               that no m
                     •
                  n shoulde speake with tongues, onlesse there were some present to expounde it. For what shoulde speaking auaile without vnderstanding? And hereof grewe a laudable custome that after the ghospell was read litterally, it shoulde straight way be expounded in the Vulguar tongue. But w
                     •
                  at shall we doo in our daies, when as there is none at all, or very seldom that rea
                     •
                  eth or heareth and vnderstandeth? It seemeth it were better nowe to holde their peace, then so to singe.
            
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                Lo yowe haue this weighty authorite placed last, that it might best be remembred, and brought in place of Abdias and diuers other writers. But truly what M. Iewell will gather thereof, I see not, onlesse he will frame his reasons thus.
            
               When the ghospell is reade in Latine,
               M. Iewelles Argument. 
               it muste be expounded in the Vulgar tounge.
            
            
               Ergo the Seruice was in nei
                     •
                  her Greke nor Latin within the first 600. yeres. Or thus.
            
               
               No man vnderstandeth the Seruice.
            
            
               Ergo it is in the Vulguar tounge.
            
            
               This is a very Vulguar Conclusion.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 207. Vntruthe For none of all these Fathers haue proued M. Iewelles purpose. The .208 Vntruthe For this hathe not yet bene shewed.Here haue I alleaged for prou
                  •
               e (207) of our purpose of the old Fathers, Clemens Alexādrinus, Origen, S. Basil, S. Hierō, Theodoretus, Sozomenus, and Isidorus: of the later writers, Aeneas Syluius, Innocentius tertius, Iohn Billet, Thomas of Aquine, Lyra, Durandus, and Eckius. Therfore I trust, M. Harding will no more denie but we (208) are able to shewe somewhat, that the Common Seruice in the primitiue Churche, was in some other tounge, and not onelye in Greke or Latine.
            Nowe the Battaill is fought. M. Iewell crieth a Retraict, and bloweth vpp the Victory. Yow see the Ranke of his Capitaines bothe younge and olde: you haue felte the dynte of their weapons. Some haue geuen drie blowes, Some haue striken neuer a stroke. Other came vtterly to late. Not one hath striken right downe. And all by the default of M. Iewell, shamefully Abusing so faithefull Captaines. Yet he reneweth the Challenge and saieth.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 209 Vntruthe For M. Iewell will neuer yel
                     ••
                  .If M. Harding be able to shewe any such sufficient example of his side. I will yelde according to promise.
            To the whiche thus I answer. M. Iewell hath brought nothinge. Lesse then nothinge M. Harding coulde not bringe. Ergo he hathe brought as sufficient examples as M. Iewell. And then: Ergo M. Iewell muste yelde according to promise. Againe M. Iewell hathe brought no example of anye other Seruice then in Greke and Latine in the firste 600. yeares. Ergo it is no Vntruthe to saie, that M. Iewell can bringe no suche thinge. Ergo In the primitiue Churche the Seruice was onely in Greke and Latine, Ergo manye countres of Asia the lesse whiche (as D. Harding hathe proued) vnderstode no Greke, Fraunce and great parte of Afrike whiche vnderstode no Latin, had their Seruice the one in Greke, the other in Latin, bothe in a tounge whiche they vnderstode not. Ergo Some

countres in the first 600. yeres had their Seruice in a strange tounge. Ergo ones againe M. Iewell of necessite must yelde and Subscribe.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               The people off Gallia or Fraunce had their Seruice then in Latin, as all the west Churche had.
            
            
               
                  Iewel. 
               
                The 210. Vntruthe slaunderous.The 79. Vntruthe. Boldely auoutched, but no waye proued.
            It is proued M. Iewell by the place whiche your selfe alleageth out of Sulpitius, especially if yowe had put in the whole wordes, and not broken it of in the middle, as if you had had the Choynecough. The whole place is this. At what time S. Martin should be created bishop of Tours in Fraūce, Sulpitius saieth.
                  Lib. 1. in vita S. Martini.
                
               Inter episcopos qui affuerant praecipué Defensor quidam nomine dicitur restitisse. Vnde animaduer sum est grauiter illum lectione prophetica tunt notatum. Amonge the bishops that were present, one whose name was Defensor, is reported to haue resisted aboue the rest. Whereof it was perceiued he was checked by the prophet, then readde. And then it foloweth which M. Iewell alleageth. Nam cum fortuitu lector, cui legendi eo die officium erat, interclusus a populo defuisset, turbatis ministris,
               pag. 184. 
               dum expectatur qui non aderat, vnus e circumstantibus sumpto psalterio quem primum versum inuenit, arripuit. Psalmus autem hic erat. Ex ore infantium & lactentium perfecisti laudem,
               The .211. Vntruthe In nipping of the last wordes of Sulpitius.
                
               propter inimicos tuos, vt destruas inimicum & Defensorem (these wordes M. Iewell brake of) quo l
                     •
                  cto clamor populi tollitur, pars aduersa confunditur. For whereas by chaunce the Reader, whose office was to reade in the Church that day, was shutte out by meane of the throunge, and the ministres were troubled, looking about for him that was not there, one of the companie tooke the psalter and readde that verse, that came nexte to hande. The verse of the psalme was this. Out of the mouthe of infantes and sucklinges thou hast wrought praise, to destroye the enemy and Defensor. Which being read (the name of Defensor

being heard) the people made a shoote, and the contrarye part was confounded.
                  Iewell. 
               
               
                  pag 184. 
               Here (saieth M. Iewell) whether it were in the Vulguar tounge or in the Latin, it was a tounge knowen to the people. To the whiche I awnswere, that whether the people vnderstode it or no, certaine it is the psalme was read in Latin. For the cause of the shoote that the people made was, the worde of the verse Defensorem, which is a Latine worde and no frenche. Bicause thereby they toke the bishopp (whose name was Defensor) to be noted in that verse. Nowe as I will not contende but that some of the people there present vnderstode that verse being read in Latin, so is it moste manifest that the common frenche people had their proper frenche tounge for their Vulguar tounge beside the Latine. This is euident not only by that which D. Harding alleageth in this Article, but by this same writer him selfe Sulpitius Seu
                     •
                  
                  rus, testifying that then at that time and in that countre where the Seruice was in Latin, as it is before manifest, the people spake yet Gallicé & Celticé the frenche tounge and the Celticall. For in this Dialogue of S. Martins life when the course came to Gallus to speake, excusing his rusticite of language, his felowe saied vnto him.
                  Lib. 3. 
               Tu vero, vel Celticé aut si mauis Gallicé loquaris, dummodo iam Martinum loquaris. Speake vnto vs either in the Celtes language, or if thou haddest rather, in the Galloes language, so that thou speake of Martin. And afterwarde he calleth sellulam rusticanam, a countre stoole, in the frenche tounge tripetiam which the lerned call tripodem. Thus in Sulpitius his time all moste xij.c. yeares past the Latin Seruice was vsed in Fraunce, and yet the Latin was not the Vulgar tounge. Whereof it must folowe that either all the people vnderstoode Latin beside their mother tounge, or els had their Seruice in a tounge whiche they vnderstoode not.
            
               
                  Sn
                        •
                     ygoudanus in praefat. in psal.
               For farder proufe of the Latin Seruice in Fraunce it is to be remembred that the Latin psalter whiche S. Hierom translated

at the request of Damasus is of the olde writers called Gallicanum exemplar, bicause the Churches of Gallia folowed that copie.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               The faithe hath continued in this lande amonge the Englishe people from the 14. yeare off the reigne off Mauritius the Emperour, allmost these .1000. yeares.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .211. Vntruthe Slaunderous.The 80. Vntruthe. His examples reache nothing so farre.
            Mauritius began his reigne in the yeare of our Lorde 582· In the xiiij. yeare of his reigne, Saint Augustin was sent to our countre to preache the faith. The History of Bede in the first booke the xxiij. chapter witnesseth so. Therefore it is no Vntruthe for D. Harding to saie so. Touching the firste coming in of the faith to vs Englishmen, when I come to the 91. Vntruthe, I shall speake at large.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               As concerning the order off Common prayers and publike Seruice in suche sorte as we haue nowe and that age had not, Sainte Paule mentioneth nothinge, neither speaketh one worde in that whole Chapter, but off the vse of the miraculous gifte as is saied before. And therefore his sayinges out of that chapter be not fittly alleaged of M. Iewell, and the rest of our aduersaries, against the maner of prayers, and Seruice off the Churche nowe receiued, and of longe tyme vsed.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 212. Vntruthe Slaunderous.
The 213. Vntruthe For no olde Doctours doThe 81. Vntruthe. For Sundrie Doctours bothe olde and new alleage these wordes to this selfe same purpose.
            This Vntruthe was well noted M. Iewell, if yowe be able as well to proue it. Consider good Readers, the whole Accusation whiche these disobedient Children of Gods Churche, haue layed in against their Mother for the publike Seruice in

the Latin tounge, the onelye Scripture, by whiche the
                  •
                charge all Christendome beside wi
                  •
               h the breache of Gods commaundement,
                  
                     〈…〉
                   w
                     •
                  rdes to that purpose. is the place of S. Paule in the fi
                  •
               ste epistle the xiiij. Chapter to the Corinthians. It behoueth therefore M. Iewell and his felowes openlye, plainelye, and abundantly to proue that the wordes of S. Paule in that Chapter do proue and Commaunde a Vulgar Seruice. Vpon this place of S. Paule lyeth the only Staye of all this Alteration of Gods Seruice. This therefore ought clerely, plentifully and without all ambiguite be proued and discussed. But (good Readers) suche is the weakenes of their groundes, that they can bringe no one olde Doctour expounding that place as a Cō
               maundement of the Seruice to be had in a Vulguar and knowen tounge to the Common people. This weakenesse, this feblenesse shall nowe appeare in M. Iewell who will seme to be able to saie as muche herein, as any of all the rest. For in all that he hathe Replied against this place of D. Harding, where this place of holy Scripture, is by him opened and declared, he hathe not brought one olde Doctour to expounde the place as he and his felowes dothe expounde it. Let vs consider M. Iewelles whole Replie to this place.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
                The .214. Vntruthe For by-this graunte your cause is muche hindred, as shall 
                     •
                  ppeare.We may safely graunte some parte of M. Hardinges longe talke, without (214) preiudice of our cause. In dede S. Paul in the place alleaged, spake of the gifte of tounges as it was a speciall miracle enduring onely for a while, not gotten by labour or study, but freelye inspired by the Sprite of God.
            Loe M. Iewell graunteth that S. Paule in that place to the Corinthians spake of the gifte of tounges &c. This gifte off tounges the Corinthians abused, whiles in Common assemblies not at praiers proper to the Christians, but at Prea
                  •
               hinges, to the whiche infidels and all other resorted, they talked in straunge tounges, whiche the assistants vnderstode not, and were not therefore edified thereby. This S. Paule founde

faulte withall, bicause in suche assemblies it was a time of homilies and exhortations, where the people ought to be edified. This then being graunted to be (as it is) the principall purpose of S. Paule in that place, let vs see howe M. Iewell can picke out his Vulguar Seruice out of the rest. He foloweth and saieth.
            
               
                  Iewel. 
               
               The .215. Vntruthe For D. 
                     •
                  . saied.
It is not by way of miracle. He saied not It is no
                        •
                      any Miracle at all. M. I
                     •
                  w
                     •
                  ll altered the wordes to make matter for a scoffe.
The .216. Vntruthe ioyned w
                     •
                  the a Slaunder and open Iniury to the Vniu
                     •
                  rs
                     •
                  ll C
                     •
                  urche of 
                     〈◊〉
                   manye h
                     •
                  n
                     •
                  r
                     •
                  d y
                     ••
                  r
                     •
                  s. 
                     
                        •
                     ipr. lib. 4. epi
                        •
                     t. 9.
               But the Latine tounge (saieth M. Harding) as it is nowe commonly vsed in the Romane Se
                     •
                  uice, is not geuen by any suche prompting of the holye Ghoste, nor is now (215) any Miracle at all. Therfore the place of S. Paule cānot be applied vnto i
                     •
                  . We graunte well, it is no miracle, as it is nowe vsed, nor any waie sauoureth of the Sprit of God. But this is a great miracle to see either any man so (216) wicked, that so will vse it: or so impudent that so will defende it, or so patiēt that so wil suffer it. This verely is a marueilous miracle.
            Nowe M. Iewelll dothe his kinde. Nowe he doeth his Father the diuell good Seruice. Nowe he plaieth the right Protestant. He chargeth the Churche of God with wickednesse, that hath vsed these xv.c. yeares the Latin Seruice in the Latin Churche. He calleth it an Impudency to defende the vniuersall practise of so many hundered yeres, and saieth they are very patient whiche can so suffer it. If it be wickednesse that hathe so longe and so vniuersally bene committed, then lett vs saye to yowe M. Iewell in defence of oure forefathers off xv.c. yeares, that whiche S. Cyprian saied to Pupianus the heretike in defence of six yeres only. Nisi apud te purgati fuerimus & sententiae tua absoluti, etiam sex annis nec fratern
                     ••
                  as habuerit episcopum nec plebs praepositum, nec grex pastorem, n
                     •
                  c eccl
                     •
                  sia gubernatorem, nec Christus antistitem, nec deus sacerdotem. Subueniat Pupianus & s
                     •
                  ntentiam dicat &c. Vnlesse we be iudged innocent of thee, and absolued by thy sentence (o Pupianus saied S. Cyprian, and o M. Iewell saye I) then not all these six yeares (I saie allmoste these sixtene hundr
                  •
               d yeres) neith
                  •
               r the brotherhood had a bishop, neither the people an oue
                  •
               seer, n
                  •
               ither the flocke a Pastour, nor the Church
                  •
                a gouuernour, nor

Christe a bishop, nor God a priest. Let then Pupianus come helpe and geue sentence &c. Let then M. Iewell of pitie sucour the poore departed Christians of fore time, whiche haue wickedly vsed the Latine Seruice, and none other. If it be impudency to defende suche an vniuersall and Continuall practise of Gods Churche, then what will M. Iewell pronounce of S. Augustine,
                  Ad 
                        •
                     anu
                        •
                     
                     rium 
                        •
                     pist. 18. who saieth, De hoc quod tota per orbem frequentat Eccl
                     •
                  sia, quin ita faciendum sit, disputare, insolentissimae insaniae est. To dispute or call in doubte that whiche the vniuersall Churche through out the worlde frequenteth, whether it ought to be done or no, it is the point of a moste arrogant madnesse. It is like that M. Iewell will saie that S. Augustine him selfe was impudent and madde to write so. Suche wickednesse we committ, (M. Iewell) that vse the Latine Seruice, and so impudent we are that defende the same. For we defende and practise herein that, whiche the whole Churche off God bothe East and weste, bothe Greke and Latine hath euer in the publike and approued Seruice vsed and obserued. As it hathe euidently appeared by that hitherto M. Iewell with all his labour, Conference, and helpe of his felowe protestants that haue writen before him, hath not yet alleaged one poore Countre that had the publike Seruice in anye other tounge then Greke and Latine, vnlesse he will take parte withe Schismatikes and heretikes. Thus M. Iewell by his Miracle, hathe proued him selfe a very Monster. For neuer was there a more Monstrous saying of anye Christen man, and one that beareth the roome of a bishop, then the wordes of M. Iewell lastly auouched.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 217. Vntruthe Slaundero
                     •
                  s. For D. Harding made no s
                     •
                  
                  c
                     •
                  e Argument.M. Harding hereof semeth to reason after this sorte. S. Paule forebadde the Corinthians to vse the spe
                     •
                  iall miracle and gif
                     •
                  e off God without pr
                     •
                  fiting the Congregati
                     •
                  n. Ergo, Nowe h
                     •
                  uing the Latine tou
                     •
                  ge without miracles, we may mini
                     •
                  ter the Seruice therein although the Congregation 
                     •
                  aue no profite by it. Thi
                  •
                reason is straunge and holdeth as simply as the reste.
            
               This reason is your owne M. Iewell, It is not D. Hardinges. It is straunge in dede, and holdeth as simply as the rest doe in this your Replie, all of your owne making, all slaunderously forged vppon Doctor Harding, all peuishely and childishly framed of youre selfe. Suche lewde shifting becometh Boyes and Children, or rather Cōtentious Sophistes in scholes. But of this youre Demeanour I trust you haue hearde more particularly in an other place. The reason of Doctour Hadinge is this.
            
               S. Paule in that Chapter to the Corinthians speaketh not one worde off the Publike Seruice but off the vse off theyr miraculouse Gifte.
               D. Har. Argumēt
            
            
               Ergo Master Iewell and his felowes haue not fittely alleaged those wordes off S. Pawle to proue the Vulguar Seruice.
            
            This is the Argument of D. Hardinge, as to him that will consider his wordes aboue alleaged it maye euidently appeare. To this Argument bicause. Master Iewell either woulde not or coulde not answere, therefore he thought good vtterly to dissemble it, and to make an other off hys owne in place thereof. Let vs procede with M. Iewelles text.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Yet hathe he geuen Speciall Aduertisement in the Margin, that this place of S. Paule, serueth nothinge to our purpose.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                This was not only his Note in the Margin, but his Conclusion in the text, if you had listed to marke. But what saie you to the Note?
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .218 Vntruthes. For no olde doctours take this place in M. Iewel les senc
                     •
                  .If this Note be so certaine, and so Authenticall as he woulde seme to make it, then were the Doctours bothe newe and olde that toke it otherwise, not well aduised.
            This is a small Absurdite in you M. Iewell, specially with your brother Calfhill, who setteth so litle by the doctours Iudgement vpon holy Scripture, that he appealeth from them, and protesteth to the Reader (full protestant like) that he will not

be bounde vnto them, as being able (he saieth) to charge all the Fathers euery one of them from Christes time hetherto with some grosse errour or other.In his answer to the firste Article of the Crosse. And your self Master Iewell when you were ones pressed with the vniuersall consent of all the Fathers, touching the Inuocation of Saintes, did you not answere these wordes. Est communis error Patrum, It is a Common Errour of the Fathers? Thus you answered then, yet nowe you will seme to holde sadly by them. Thus you laye on bothe sides, and like as the Stoikes of Athens before the people worshipped the Goddes and confessed a multitude, but at home in their houses disputed againste all suche vanityes, so in youre challēge and here you wil seme to Reuerēce the Fathers, but an other tyme when it shall like you, you set naught by them, and care not for them. And thus one of you saieth one thinge, another saieth an other thinge. In answearing to M. Iewell we must stand to the Fathers Iudgement, which we most gladly doe and euer haue done. In answering to Calfhill, we must proue the Fathers Iudgement to be good, and require him to stande to thē. But what are those Fathers which toke that place of S. Paule as you do, to proue a Vulguar Seruice thereby? You go forth and saie.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .219. Vntruin mangling the wordes of Lyra, as shall appeare.For Lyra writing vppon the same, saieth thus. Iff the people vnderstande the prayer off the Priest, t
                     •
                  ey are the better brought vnto God, and with greater Deuotion they answere Amen. Therefore S. Paule saieth. Iff thou being a P
                     •
                  ieste b
                     ••
                  sse with the Spirite and the people vnderstande thee not, what profite then hath the people being simple and not vnderstanding thee? Therefore in the primitiue Church, bothe the blessinges and all other thinges, were done in the Vulgar toungue. The vulgar toungue, saieth Lyra, was vsed in the Primitiue Churche, vpon occasion of these wordes of S. Paule.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                This was the Iudgement of Nicolaus de Lyra. You were wonte M. Iewell to saye, his name was Nicolas the Lyar, but afterwarde was called Nicolaus de Lyar. So muche you esteme this writer. This man was a grey Frier of S. Francisces Order,

he liued about about two hundred yeares agoe. He was lerned and is so accompted: but yet farre vnder the estimation of anye Doctour or Father of the Churche. To this place I haue before answered in the 78. Vntruthe, and haue there declared howe litle it maketh for the vulgar Seruice. But nowe to saye somewhat more therein,  firste it is to be noted that M. Iewell hathe mangled and falsifyed his Auhor. For when he asketh the question. VVhat profit hath the people being simple and not vnderstanding thee? It foloweth in Lyra (whiche M. Iewell thought good to nippe of quite in the middest) Nihil aut modicum: quia nescit se conformare tibi, qui es Minister Ecclesiae respondendo, Amen. Nothinge or litle. For he can not conforme him selfe vnto thee whiche arte the Minister of the Churche, by answering, Amen.  Againe whereas M. Iewell sayeth out of Lyra, the blessinges and all other thinges wer done in the Vulgar toungue, the wordes of Lyra are, Benedictiones & caetera communia. The blessinges and other Common thinges, not, and all other thinges were done in the Vulgar toungue.  Last of al Lyra in all these wordes dothe not gather or conclude, that the Seruice ought to be in the Vulgar tounge, as you and youre felowes doe M. Iewell. And therefore you haue brought yet no doctoure newe or olde that applieth this place of Saint Paule as you doe. For it is two thinges to saie. In that wordes S. Paule spake of the Seruice in the Vulgar toungue. And to saie. S. Paule in those wordes Commaunded the Seruice to be allwaies in the Vulgar toungue. For the first you haue alleaged Master Iewell no olde doctour, but onely Lyra and Iustinian as it shall anon appeare. For the laste you can alleage neyther olde nor newe. This is youre owne Singular Opinion and Heresye.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                In the Councell of Acon it is writen thus.
                  C
                        •
                     ncil. Aqu
                        •
                     sg
                        •
                     an. C
                        ••
                     . 132. 
               The voice and minde off thē that singe vnto the Lorde in the Churche, must agree together. The reason thereof is taken out of this place of S. Paule. I will singe with my Spiri
                     •
                  , I will singe

with my minde.
            
            
               The .220 Vntruthe This Coouncel of Acon dothe not applie this place of S. Paule to the Vulguar Seruice.This is a morall application, this is no literall Deduction. He that celebrateth the Seruice (and of such the Councell speaketh) and praieth for the whole flocke, ought to vnderstande that which he saieth, to the entent he maye praie with spirite and with mynde. But the ignorant laie people who are not bounde to celebrat the Seruice, but to assiste and geue theyr assent vnto it, and of whom that Councell in those wordes speaketh not, are not bounde particularly to vnderstande what is saied or done, being ones first instructed of the whole sufficiently. And therefore in the nexte Canon of the same Councell it is prouided who, and what men, and with what Moderation the Synginge in the Churche shoulde be vsed. The wordes are these. Tales ad legendum, cantandum, & psallendum in Ecclesia constituantur,
               
                  Can. 133. 
               qui non superbè sed humiliter, debitas Domino laudes per soluant: & suauitates Lectionis ac Melodiae & Doctos demulceant, & minus Doctos erudiant. Plusque velint in L
                     •
                  ctione vel cantu populi Aedificationem, quàm popular
                     •
                  m vanissimam Adulationem. Let such be appointed to Reade and to singe in the Churche, which may praise almighty God not vaine gloriously, but humbly: which with their swete Melody and softe reading, may bothe delight the lerned, and instructe the vnlerned, desyringe rather by their reading and singinge to Aedifie the people, then to seke after a vaine applause and Commendation of the people. By this it appeareth, the Councell applied the wordes of S. Paule not to proue a vulgar Seruice, as M. Iewell and his felowes doe, but to moue those whiche did singe and reade in the Churche, to doe that thinge from the harte not by mouthe onely. Wherein they did but renewe the auncient decree off the fourthe Councelll of Carthage, where the Priest appointing one that shoulde singe in the Churche,This was in the y
                     •
                  
                  re of oure Lorde 430. (for not euery one that lifted, songe at that time, as in your disordered Congregation Master Iewell, nowe they doe) sayeth vnto hym these wordes.

               Vide vt quod ore Cantas, Corde Credas, & quod corde credis, operibus comprobes. See that that whiche thou singest withe thy mouthe, thou beleue in harte, and that which thou beleuest in harte, thou perfourme in dedes.
            Chrisostom saieth, S. Paule driueth (221) the whole tenour of this matter vnto the profit of the hearers. These be his wordes.
                  Conc. Cart. 4. Can. 10 The 221. Vntruthe For Saint Paule dothe not by Chrysostoms minde driue the Celebrating off the Seruice to the profit of the hearers. 
               S. Paules saying standeth thus. Onlesse I vtter my wordes so as they maye clerely and plainely be perceiued of you, but onely shewe me selfe to haue the gifte of tounges, ye s
                     •
                  all haue 
                     •
                  o fruite of those thinges whiche you know not. For what profit can ye geate of a voice, that ye can not vnderstan
                     •
                  
               ?
            M. Iewell hathe sone done with his newe Doctours. Nowe he cometh in with his olde. And yet of all the Doctours, he alleageth only Chrysostom. And he is in dede an olde Doctour, but yet no olde Doctours. Now howe dothe Chrysostom applie this place of S. Paule to proue a Vulgar Seruice? Mary he saieth, that S. Paule driueth the whole tenour of this matter vnto the profit of the hearers. Of whiche Matter M. Iewell? Of celebrating the Churche Seruice? No M. Iewell. Yowe maie not so deceiue vs. Chrysostome expounding this fourtenth Chapter of S. Paule in the first to the Corinthians, declareth the purpose of the Aposte in the beginning of the Chapter to be thus. Comparat inter se dona,
               
                  Chrysost. In. 1. Cor. Homil. 35 
               extenuans illud linguarum, non inutile prorsus quidem, nec vtile tamen vehementer per sese ostendens. The Apostle compareth the giftes of the holye Ghoste betwene them selues, extenuating the gifte of tounges, shewing that it is not vtterly vnprofitable, yet by it selfe not very profitable. S. Paule persisting in this comparison, soone after the beginning of the Chapter, transferring the matter to him selfe saieth.1. Cor. 14. 
               Nowe brethern if I come to yowe my selfe speaking in tounges, what shall I profit you, vnlesse I speake vnto you either by reuelation, or by knowl
                     •
                  adge, or by prophecye, or by Doctrine? Vpon these wordes of the Apostle Chrysostome saied the wordes whiche Master Iewell hathe alleaged, 
                  •
               s expounding the literall meaninge off the Apostle, Saint

Paules saying standeth thus. vnlesse I vtter my wordes so that they maye clerely and plainely be perceiued of you, and so forthe, as they lye in the text of M. Iewell last alleaged. Nowe I woulde M. Iewell him selfe woulde Iudge whether these wordes either of the Apostle or of Chrysostome do speake or meane any thinge at all of celebrating the Churche Seruice. Here in this place, Donum linguarum, & prophetiae the gifte of tounges and of Interpretation are compared together. But prophetare, to haue that gifte of Interpretation, is (as the Apostle him selfe in that place expoundeth) hominibus loqui, ad 
                     •
                  dificationem, exhortation
                     •
                  m, consolationem. To speake vnto men, to aedifie them, to exhorte them, to comforte them. This is done in homilies and sermons, not in the Churche Seruice, not in publicke prayers and blessinges. If there be in this Chapter anye wordes spokē of the Church Seruice, they are the other which folowe many sentences after, where the Apostle saieth, If thou blesse in Spirit, howe shall he that supplieth the roome of the ignorant, answer Amen to thy thankes geuing? they are I saie these wordes, not the other aboue recited, vpon the whiche Chrysostome made that exposition whiche M. Iewell brought. Therefore these wordes of Chrysostome are by M. Iewell brought beside the purpose, as the whiche speaketh nothinge of the Vulgar Seruice, nor of applying the wordes of S. Paule thereto, as M. Iewell and his felowes doe applie them.
            
               
                  Iewel. 
               
                The .222. Vntruthe For this is S. Paules owne text, not the saying of Chrysostome.And againe the same Chrisostom saieth farther. Euen so you onlesse you geue a sounde that maye be knowen, as the prouerbe 
                     ••
                  , yowe shall throwe for the your wordes into the winde, that is to saie, 
                  
                     •
                  e shall speake to no man.
            
            Here M. Iewell notably betraieth him selfe, and openeth in some parte the great affected vanite whiche he vseth in this whole Replie to alleage And multyplie Doctours without purpose. For these wordes whiche are here layed forthe for a shewe of Chrysostoms wordes, are no wordes of Chrysostome at all: but they are the wordes of S. Paule and of that

text whiche Chrysostome there handleth. And M. Iewell straightwayes will alleage them for Saint Paules (as you shall heare) but presently he alleageth them solemnelye bothe in Latin and in English, as the wordes of Chrysostome to make a shewe (as I saied) of Doctours. This is but a parte of that vanite in the whiche he a bundeth through this whole Replie, as hathe bene in good parte declared and published to the world allready. Touching the matter they appertaine expressely to the wordes aboue alleaged, as to him whiche will consider but the text of the Apostle it is euident. They appertaine to that whiche the Apostle calleth Donum linguarum, the gifte off tounges, whiche except it be ioyned withe prophetia or Interpretation, whereby the Congregation maye be edified, exhorted and comforted, it auaileth litle to the Audience, but are as though it were wordes throwen to the winde. All this is spoken of preaching and opening the wordes,
                  In cōment. in 1. cor. 14. 
               Apertionem sermonis Saint Ambrose calleth it. For as he saieth vpon this place. Docere nemo poterit n
                     •
                  si intelligatur. No man can teache vnlesse he be vnderstanded of the hearers. And Chrysostome vpon this place inmediatly saieth.
                  Chrisost. ibidem.
                
               Ita nihil habere magnificū linguas vndique fere monstrauit. Thus he sheweth euery waye (meaning the similitudes of the Musicall instrument and of the Trumpet before alleaged) that the gifte of tounges is of no great value. And he compareth that gifte to a singer. For as if yowe plucke one finger awaye from the rest, it can doe you no more Seruice, so if they vsed the gifte of tounges, without prophetia, that is, the Interpretation of tounges, it were but a vaine and vnprofitable matter. This therefore that M. Iewell hathe hitherto alleaged, toucheth nothinge the Vulguar Seruice, nor is not anye whit by Chrysostome applied thereunto. And yet is Chrysostome the onelye Auncient Doctour that M. Iewell here alleageth, promising before to alleage Doctours bothe olde and newe.
            
               
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 223. Vntruthe For Iustinian applieth not this place to the Vulgar Seruice.So likewise the Emperour Iustinian, where he commaundeth all bishoppes and priestes to minister the Sacramentes and other praiers alowde, and withe open voice, he auoucheth the same by this place of S. Paule. For thus he saieth. So the Apostle saieth: If thou onely blisse or praie with thy Spirit, howe shall he that supplieth the roome off the vnlerned, saie, Amen, vnto thy blessing? For he knoweth not what thou saiest.
            
            Iustinian was an Emperour, he was no Doctour of the Churche suche as M. Iewell promiseth to bringe. And he applieth this Scripture not to the Vulguar Seruice, whiche he neuer knewe other then Greke in the Greke Churche, and Latin in the Latin Churche. But he applieth that place of S. Paule to the lowde speaking of the priest at Seruice time. Of the whiche matter we haue treated before at large in the 78. Vntruthe, where the meaning of this Constitution is expounded, by the like sayinges of S. Augustine and S. Cyprian. It maketh no more for the Vulgar Seruice (vnto the whiche M. Iewell and his felowes most impudently vpon their owne heads, without the Authorites of the Aunciēt Doctours do applie this place) then doth lowde speaking of the priest at this daye in the Masse, where the people also answereth Amen.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .224 Vntruthe For it appeareth neuer a whit so.It appeareth by these Authorities, notwithstandinge M. Hardinges note, that S. Paule maketh somewhat for our purpose.
            It appeareth not by anye of all these Authorities that the Seruice ought to be in the Englishe tounge (that was D. Hardinges note) or in any other Vulguar tounge. It appeareth by none of them all, that the place of S. Paule is applied to proue a Vulgar Seruice. It appeareth thereby M. Iewell can bringe not one olde Doctour to proue it. And so it appeareth that M. Iewell hathe noted a wronge Vntruthe, and that he and his felowes doe most Vntruly applie this place of S. Paule to proue their schismaticall alteration of Gods Seruice. But now M. Iewell bicause all Doctours doo faile him, bicause he can not builde vpon them, he saieth he wil builde vpon holy Scripture it selfe. For thus he foloweth the matter.
            
               
               A Burthē of Vntruthes. whiche particularly shall be noted in the Answer hereunto folowing.Howbeit we builde not our proufes vpon the Miracle and giftes of tounges, that lasted but for a while, but vpon these expresse and plaine wordes of S. Paule, which no man can denie. He that speaketh with tounge speaketh not vnto men, but vnto God. For no man heareth him. If the Trumpet geue an vncertaine voice, who shall prepare him selfe vnto the warre? Euen so you, onelesse ye vtter such wordes, as haue signification, howe shall it be knowen, what ye saie? For ye shall speake into the winde. I will praie with my Spirite, I will p
                     •
                  aie with my minde. I will singe with spirite, I will singe with my minde. If thou blisse with thy Spirit, howe shall the ignorant saie, Amen, vnto thy thankes geuinge? For he knoweth not what thou saiest. In the Churche I had leuer to speake fiue wordes with my minde, so that I maie instruct others, then a thousande wordes with my to
                     •
                  ge. Let al thinges be done to the profit of the people. These words be euident. The exposition of Lyra, of the Councell of Acon, of Chrysostom, and Iustinian is plaine. And yet must we vpon M. Hardinges warrant in the nedes beleue that all this maketh nothinge for the English Seruice in the Churche of Englande.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                There nedeth no more but this only place to proue you M. Iewel a wicked deceiuer of Gods people, a wilful Corrupter of Gods worde, and a most Impudent Forger of Notorious Vntruthes. This is a greuous Accusation, you will saye. Verely it is so. But if it be not a true and vpright Accusation, proclaime me for an open slaunderer, and neuer to be credited, at Paules Crosse or where els you list. I saie therefore. You haue in this place Corrupted Gods worde. In that Corruption you haue deceiued Gods people, and you haue committed diuers Notorious Vntruthes. All this I proue. He corrupteth Gods worde, which bringeth a parte thereof to persuade one waye, leauing out the other part which should persuade the contrary waie. So do you in this place M. Iewell. Ergo, &c. Your ende and intent in this place is to persuade your Reader that for the Seruice to be had in the Vulgar tounge, you haue the word of S. Paule to builde vpon, and to haue it in a Strange tounge, you haue the same wordes against vs. Is not this your intent and purpose in this place? Goe you not aboute in this place (as you did before out of Lyra, the Councel of Acon, Chrysostom and Iustinian, so nowe out of the wordes of S. Paule him selfe to proue that

the Seruice ought not to be in a straunge tounge? The Read
                  •
                which hath perused the whole issue which I ioyne with you in this Vntruthe can not be ignorant hereof. Then I saie you bringe certain wordes of S. Paule which may seme to leade that waye, and you leaue out other of his wordes which doe expressely declare that he meaneth no such matter.
            
               The .225. Vntruthe in guilefully leauing oure the wordes of the Apostle.As nowe to come to your wordes, first you alleage S. Paules wordes thus. He that speaketh with tounge, speaketh not vnto men, but vnto God, for no man heareth him. It foloweth immediatly which you leaue out, Spiritus autem loquitur mysteria. But the Spirit speaketh mysteries, or as the grekes do reade that text, Spiritu licet mysteria loquatur. Although he (which speaketh with tounge,) in the Spirit speaketh mysteries. I saie if you had added these wordes, it should haue appeared that S. Paule neither spake those wordes of vttering the Seruice in a straunge tounge, neither did vtterly discommende speaking with tonges.
                  Chrysost. et Theodoret. ibidem.
                For as Chrysostom and Theodoretus vpon this place do saie, those wordes are added, ne vel supernacaneum, vel inutile, temereque concessum put
                     •
                  mus. Lest we shoulde thinke the gifte of tounges to be superfluous, vnprofitable, or to be geuen of God without cause. And againe this being added (The Spirit speaketh mysteries, or, In the spirit he speaketh mysteries) the Reader might soone haue conceiued, that neither that speaking of tounges was vtterly to be discommended, neither that same dyd any thinge appertaine to the Seruice in the latine tounge, where euery man knoweth, there is no such speaking of mysteries in Spirit. These wordes therefore haue bene by you guilefully lefte out M. Iewel thereby to blinde the iudgement of the Reader, and to make him beleue that S. Paule had spoken those wordes, of speaking the Seruice in a straunge tounge. For to that purpose you alleaged those wordes. Now to omitt the long processe of S. Paule which here foloweth, as is by you with the like fraude vtterly left out M. Iewell, to omitte I saie the Comparison that S. Paule maketh betwene

               Loqui lingua and prophetare, to speake with tonge, and to Interpret, the one edifying him selfe only, the other edifying the whole Congregation, whereby also the former wordes shoulde the better haue bene vnderstanded of the English Reader, let vs consider that which you next immediatly alleage folowing in S. Paule not immediatly, but after manye sentences betwene. You alleage.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               Iff the Trumpet geue an vncertaine voice, who shall prepare him selfe vnto the warre? Euen so you vnlesse ye vtter such wordes, as haue such signification how shall it be knowen what ye saie? For ye shall spe
                     •
                  ke into the minde.
            
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                All this is spoken of the Apostle to shewe that the gifte of tonges,
                  Chrysost. ibid.
                is (as Chrysostome expoundeth) pulchrum necessariumque donum, sed tum si qui interpretari possit, accedat. A commendable and necessarye gifte, but then if one that can interprete the toungue be added also. Here therefore M. Iewell (I doe not saye, hathe corrupted the Scripture) but hathe deceiued the Reader. For all this by the Iugement of Chrysostome and Theodoret being spoken of the gifte of Interpretation to be ioyned with the gifte of toungues, what maketh it here against the Latin tonge in the Seruice of the Latin Church, for the which M. Iewell alleaged it?
            To procede with M. Iewells Allegation out of S. Paule,The .226 Vntruthe, in omittinge yet other word
                     •
                  s of the Apostle. beholde good Readers howe much he hath omitted, necessarely appertayning to the vnderstanding of S. Paules minde. For after these wordes the Apostle cōcludeth. Et ideo qui loquitur lingua oret vt interpretetur, And therefore he that speaketh with tonge (that is, he that hath that gifte) let him praie that he may Interpret. For (as saieth Chrysostom) si diligenter postulabit, potietur. If he aske it diligently, he shal obtaine it. And the reason why this gifte of Interpretatiō or vnderstanding is to be praied for, the Apostle addeth, saying. Nam si orem lingua, spiritus meus orat, mens autem mea sine fructu est. For if I praye in the Tonge, my Spirit prayeth, but my Mynde or vnderstanding is without fru
                  •
               e. What meaneth saint Paule hereby? Speaketh he of saying

the Seruice in the Latine or Greke tounge, whiche are bothe common toungues to the Latin or Greke Churche? Nothinge lesse. Chrysostom vppon this place saieth. There were off olde time many whiche had the gifte of praying and the gifte of tounges ioyned together,
               
                  Chrysost. ibidem.
                
               and they praied and founded out the Toungue, as the Persian or the Romaine toungue, but in Minde they vnderstode not what they sayed. Therefore (saieth the Apostle) if I praye with the toungue the Spirite praieth, that is the gifte whiche is geuen vnto me and whiche moueth my toungue: but the minde hathe no profit thereby. VVhat then is herein best to be done? VVhat ought we to aske off God? Forsothe to praye bothe with the Spirit and with the Minde. Thus farre Chrysostom.
                  In commentar. ibidē.
                Thus also Theodoretus, and S. Ambrose do expounde this place. All this therefore beinge so spoken of the miraculous gifte of tonges, not of the Seruice it selfe in any straunge toungue, M. Iewel (alleaging a longe the texte of S. Paule) vtterly lette oute. For as before the gifte of speaking with toungues, the Apostle called, Mysteria spiritu loqui, aedificare seipsum, to speake Mysteries in the Spirite, to speake to God, to aedifie him selfe, so nowe he calleth it Spiritu orare, to praye in the Spirite, Plena sine dubio Consolationis verba, al wordes full of Consolation vndoubtedly (as Chrysostome saieth), and all commending the speaking in toungues, though the gifte of Interpretation, be muche preferred before it. Bicause it edifieth more. Whiche edifying of the Congregation was the chefe and onely scope of the Apostle in this Chapter. This being so concluded of the Apostle, he goeth forthe, and sayeth. Quid ergo est?The .227. Vntruthe For addinge to the Apostle. The worde What then is it? Or, as you haue hearde Chrysostome before to expounde it, What is beste and moste profitable to be done.? The Apostle answereth. And here come in the wordes that Master Iewell alleageth.
            
               I will praie with 
               
                  My, is not in the texte of Sainte Paule. 
               my Spirite, I will praie with 
               
                  My, is not in the texte of Sainte Paule. 
               my Minde, I will singe with 
               
                  My, is not in the texte of Sainte Paule. 
               my Spirite, I will singe with 
               
                  My, is not in the texte of Sainte Paule. 
               my Minde. These words what they meane, you haue hearde before out of Chrysostome. Let vs goe forthe

with the text of S. Paule as M. Iewell alleageth it.
            
               Iff thou blisse with thy Spirit, howe shall the ignorant sue Amen vnto thy thankes geuing? For he knoweth not what thou saiest. In the Churche I had leuer &c.
            
            In these wordes Loe, M. Iewell hath wickedly corrupted and mangled S. Paule. First, where he saieth,The .228. Vntruthe in adding to holye Scripture 
               Iff thou blisse with thy Spirit· For the worde, Thy, is not in the text of the Apostle, but is presumptuosly added to holy Scripture by Master Iewell. For it is a matter that skilleth muche, and that altereth muche the meaning of the Apostle. The Apostle meaneth here B
                     •
                  nedicere Spiritu, to blesse in Spirit, as he meaned before, orare spiritu, to praie in Spirit. That is, as Chrysostome saieth, P
                     •
                  regrina lingua gratias agere. To blesse or geue thankes in a strange tounge, euen as before to praie in Spirit, was to vse the gifte of strange tounge in praier.  For the scope of the Apostle being in this place to debace the gifte of tounges, not vtterly, but in comparison of the gifte of Interpretation, bicause this edifieth the whole congregation, the other  not, as before he vsed the Comparison of the musical instrument, whiche vnlesse it be in tune, deliteth not the hearer, and  of a Trumpet, whiche vnlesse it be blowen after the certain and accustomed noyse, it dothe not instruct the souldyar, as the Apostle vseth also herein the comparison of familiar cō
               munication  wherein if I vnderstande not the partye withe whom I speake, nor he me, bothe I to him, and he to me is barbarous, straunge, and vnprofitable, as he vsed also the example of priuat praier done by the gifte of toungues in a  straunge language where he that so praieth, vnderstandeth not him selfe what he praieth, and so his minde is not edified thereby, though he praie in the Spirit and vseth well the gifte of God, so nowe last of all the Apostle maketh an other example off the Common praier, and saieth. Iff thou blesse or geue thankes by the gifte of tounges, which is to praie openly

in a tounge vtterlye straunge and vnknowen howe shall &c. This much for the worde Benedicere Spiritu, to blesse in Spirit, according to the meaning of Chrysostome. Nowe if the Apostle had saied (as Master Iewell alleageth him) If thou blesse in thy Spirit, it coulde not haue bene taken, for blessing by the gifte of tounges, as Chrysostom taketh it: For that gifte procedeth not of oure Spirit, but of the Spirit of God. And it is a kinde of blessing not in our Spirit, but in that Spirit, which as Chrysostome saieth, is Donum concessum lingua
                     •
                  que mouens. A gifte that is graunted, and that moueth the tounge. Verely a Miraculous gifte, geuen as Chrysostom saieth, Olim, in the olde time, in the very primitiue Churche, not geuen then in his time, or at any time sence.
            
               The 229. Vnthruthe A foule and wicked depriuatiō of holy ScriptureBut nowe to an other moste manifest corrupting of this text committed by M. Iewell: Iff thou blisse with thy Spirit, (saieth M. Iewell out of S. Paule) how shall the ignorant saie, Amen? Saint Paule hathe not so, but thus. The true wordes of S. Paule 
               Howe shall he that supplieth the roome off the ignorant, saye Amen? So haue all Copies bothe Greke and Latin, that are knowen to be extant. Beholde therefore good Reader, a moste manifest Corruption of holy Scripture by M. Iewell. It is greate skill whether we reade, the ignorant, or, he that supplieth the roome of the ignorant. Indoctum, saieth Chrysostome promiscuam plebem voca
                     •
                  .
               
                  Primasius in 1. Cor. 14. Idiota qui. Idio
                        •
                     a 
                        •
                     antū propriae linguae tenet. Se
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     ius in 1. Co. 14 By the ignorant the Apostle meaneth the Common people. But he that supplieth the roome of the ignorant, and of the Common people, he that (as Primasius saieth) pro idiota, id est pro ignaro respond
                     •
                  t, Amen, answereth Amen for the ignorant, he is him selfe no ignorant, but lerned. He is called Idiota, whiche hathe skille onelye of his proper and Mother tounge: But whosoeuer hathe lerned the Common lerned tounge beside, as the Greke in the Greke Churche, the Latin in the Latin Churche, he is no more Idiota, but accompted

amonge the lerned, and suche a one as maye supplie the roome of Idiota, and answer for the ignorant. Againe, Idiotam appellat eum, qui in laicorum ordine constitutus est. The Apostle (saieth Theodoretus) calleth that man Idiota, which is yet in the order of the laye people. But he that supplieth the roome of the Idiota,
               
                  Theodore
                     
                        •
                     u. in 1. Cor. 14. is or ought to be of the clergy. Thus much difference there is betwene the Ignorant, and him that supplieth the roome of the ignorant. Why therfore dothe M. Iewell thus wickedly corrupt the wordes of the Apostle? Why dothe he alleage, the ignorant, in stede off him that supplieth the roome of the ignorant? Is not this an euident and manifest Corruption of holye Scripture? Had it not bene much for the vauntage of M. Iewell to conceale those wordes of the Apostle, he woulde not so shamefully haue nipped them of, quite, in the middest. And who will trust yow nowe (M. Iewell) in doubtefull matters, whiche doe so deceiue vs in plaine thinges? In dede M. Iewell would haue S. Paule to saie that the Ignorant him selfe shoulde answere, Amen: whereby he thinketh he might conclude that they ought therefore to vnderstande the priest. But neither Saint Paule requireth the ignorant to answer, but him that supplieth the roome of the ignorant, neither dothe S. Paule speake here of the Seruice done in a Common lerned tounge, but in a strange tounge vsed by the waie of the miraculous gifte of tounges.
            For (and marke well gentle Reader) there was in the primitiue Churche in the Apostles time beside the Common praier and set Seruice of the Churche, a certain peculiar gifte of praying in a straunge tounge, of the whiche the Apostle here speaketh, and Chrysostome in an other place thus writeth. Vná cum his omnibus (Prophetiae, sanitatum, linguarum donum dicit) erat & precum donum,
               
                  In epist. ad 
                        •
                     om. Hen
                        ••
                     . 14 
               quod & ipsum Spiritus dicebatur. Quo qui praeditus erat, pro pl
                     •
                  be vniuersa preces fundebat.
               
Beside all other giftes (of prophecy, of healing, and of tounges) there was also a gifte of praier, whiche was called, the gifte of the Spirit. He that had this gifte, praied for the whole multitude. And he geueth hereof the reason, shewing also the maner in these wordes. For whereas not knowing what is good for vs, we aske many thinges of God that are not profitable for vs, this gifte of praier came vpon some one of them whiche then liued, who for suche thinges as might be profitable for the whole congregation, bothe stoode him selfe and praied for all the other, and also taught the other. The Apostle therefore
               In the v
                     ••
                  j. to the Romanes. 
               here calleth by the name of Spirit bothe suche a gifte, and also that soule which receiued such gifte, and praied vnto God and mourned. For he that was founde worthy of this gifte, standing vpp withe great compunction off minde, and also with much lamentation, such lamentation I saie, as from the harte lyeth prostrat before God, and praieth for all suche thinges as are behoofull for the congregation. Of the whiche maner, the deacon at this daye is a token praying for all the people. Thus farre Chrysostome. This praying by the waie of a miraculous gifte, was no sett, ordinary, and appointed Seruice, to be readen out of the booke, as nowe we haue it, and as in Chrysostoms time it was, but a maner of miraculous praying vpon the sooden, so as the Spirit moued. Againe he that had this gifte of praying, did not onely praye him selfe, but also alios edocebat, he taught and instructed other. To praie, it was not requisit he should be vnderstanded. For that was done gemitibus ijs qui ipsa quidem mente deo se prosternunt: by sighynges, suche as from the harte doo prostrat them selues before God. But to teache other, it was necessary that he shoulde be vnderstanded. Therefore when anye man vsed that gifte of prayer withe the gifte of tounges together, praying in a straunge tounge, without prophetia the gifte of vnderstanding added thereunto, he spake mysteries, he prayed to God, he edified him selfe, he prayed in Spirit. But he edified not the

hearers, he praied not (mente) in minde and vnderstanding. When he so praied, the lerned him selfe whiche supplied the roome of the ignorant did not vnderstande him, nor coulde not answer Amen to his praier. Why? Bicause he praied in a straunge tounge, bicause he vsed or rather abused (touching the edifying of other) the miraculous gifte of tounges.The .230 Vntruthe in leauing oute againe other wo
                     •
                  d
                     •
                  s of the Apostle Chrisost. hom. 35. In. 1. Cor. Theodoretus in. 1. Cor. 14. Oecumenius in. 1. Cor. 14.
            
            And therefore the Apostle immediatly sayeth (which wordes also M. Iewell hath quite in his text left out, and so deceuied ones againe his Reader.) For thou geuest thankes well, but the oth
                     •
                  r is not ed
                     •
                  fied. that is, as Chrisostom expoundeth, spiritu concitatus sonas, thou geuest out a sounde, being stirred vp with the Spirite: as Theodoretus expoundeth it. Thou prais
                     •
                  st God being moued with that diuine gifte, but he that heareth thee, is no whit edified. So Oecumenius saieth. The Apostle referring worthy praise to the gifte of tounges saieth, For thou geuest thankes well, &c. Thus by the minde of these lerned Fathers, all this geuing of thankes and blessing in the Spirit, or in a strange tounge, is a geuing of thankes or blessing by the waie of that miraculous gifte of tounges, not by vsing the sett and ordinary Seruice in any lerned or Common tounge knowen to the lerned that, supplieth the roome of the Ignorant. The Apostle in all this Chapter speaketh of no such Matter. You see therefore good Readers howe fittely and truly M. Iewell and his felowes do alleage this place of S. Paule against the Seruice in a common lerned tounge, suche as the Greke tounge is to the Greke Churche, and the Latin to the Latin Churche.
            But let vs graunte a while to M. Iewell that S. Paule hath all this while spoken of the Seruice in a lerned tounge vnknowen to the Common ignorant people, let vs I saie for a while graunte it against the exposition of so many lerned Fathers, and against the very euidence of S. Paules text. Yet S. Paule saieth of such a one as so praieth. Tu quidem bene gratias agis. Thou geuest thankes well, Nay, saieth M. Iewell, It is a maruailous

miracle that any man will be so wicked as so to vse it.M. Iewel calleth that thinge wicked of the whiche S. 
                     •
                  aule by his opi
                     •
                  ion speaking, sai
                     •
                  t
                     •
                   
                  was w
                        •
                     l do
                        •
                     e.
                These are your very wordes M. Iewell aboute the beginning of your text vpon this Vntruthe. Nowe I aske you M. Iewell.
            Did S. Paule speake in this place of praying in a straunge tounge by waie of the miraculous gifte, which the speaker him selfe sometime vnderstode not, and which was done by some one man moued thereunto vpon the soden? Did he speake it of praying in a lerned tounge though vnderstanded of the speaker him selfe, yet not vnderstanded of the Common people, and ordinarely vsed for the Seruice of the Churche? If the firste, then what maketh this for your vulgar Seruice? then why doe you bringe it here against the Seruice in a ler
                  •
               ed tounge? then why do you and your felowes all, so stoutely applie this place to proue that the Seruice ought to be in the Vulgar tounge?A. dilemma to M. Iew
                     •
                  l. Last of all then howe do you bringe that miraculous praying of some one man moued thereunto by the Spirit against the Ordinary sett Seruice of Gods Churche? If the seconde why do you call that wicked so to be vsed, and those men impudent which w
                     •
                  l
                     •
                   defena 
                     ••
                  , which the Apostle in expresse wordes saieth, was VVell done. Answer to this dilemma M. Iewell with all the shiftes, phrases, gloses, and euasions that you can possibly deuise. I thinke the best answer that you can make, is to prouide that our bookes be stayed at Grauesende, and the worlde may neuer see your nakednesse, wickednesse, and abominations.
            
               The .231. Vnt
                     ••
                  t
                     •
                  e in o
                     •
                  itti
                     •
                  g yet other 
                     •
                  orde o
                     •
                   the 
                     •
                  po
                     •
                  tle.Before I come to the rest of the wordes which you haue alleaged oute of S. Paule, I muste put the wordes whiche goe before, left out by you againe fraudulently M. Iewell. I saie, Fraudulently, bicause the concealing of them hathe hindered the truthe, as it shall nowe appeare. After that S. Paule had saied, Thou geuest well thankes but the other is not edified, it foloweth. I thanke God that I speake (my selfe also) with the tounge of you all.
               In cō
                  
                     ••
                  ē
                  tarijs I
                     •
                  id
                     •
                  m that is, as Chrysostom expoundeth it, Theodoretus also and Oecumenius, I haue the gifte of tounges more then any of you

all. But I had leuer (here beginneth M. Iewell,
                  The .232. Vntruthe For Saint Paule saieth not. with my tounge, but In lingua. In the tounge that is, by the gifte of straunge tounges.
                  The .233. Vntruthe in adding againe to S. Paules text.
                leauing out also the worde, But) to speake fiue wordes with my minde, so that I may instructe others, then tenne thousand wordes with my tounge, Then it foloweth after many sentences, which M. Iewell straight adioyneth, let all thinges be done to the ed
                     •
                  f
                     •
                  ing of the people. And yet the wordes, of the people, are not the wordes of S. Paule. Now what meaneth the Apostle in these wordes? Forsothe he prosecuteth the vsing of the miraculous gifte of tonges. I my selfe, saieth S. Paul, can speake in as many straunge tounges as anye of you all, or as the grekes do reade, Magis quàm omnes vos linguis loquor, I speake in tounges more then all yowe. Yet I do not affect this speaking, with tounges. I had rather speake fiue wordes to edifie other, then tenne thousand of wordes, (not with my tounge, as M. Iewell hathe falsely translated it, but) in lingua, in the tounge, that is, by the miraculous gifte of tounges alone, where the gifte of Interpretation is not also vsed, whereby the Congregation might be edified. Nowe who seeth not that all this discourse of the Apostle is farre wide from vttering the Ordinary Seruice of Gods Churche in any tounge knowen or vnknowen? Yet that the matter maye be more clere and euident euen to all men, let vs produce and prosecut yett farder the wordes of S. Paule which doe folowe: though not alleaged by M. Iewell at all, vntell we come to his laste wordes. Let all thinges be done to edifie.
            
            It foloweth in S. Paule.The .234. Vntruthe in o
                     •
                  itt
                     •
                  ng, 
                     〈…〉
                   of the Apostle. C
                        •
                     rysost. H
                        •
                     n. 36. i
                        •
                     
                   1. Cor.
                
               Brethern, be not like Children in vnderstanding. But in euill doinge be childern, in vnderstandinge be ye perf
                     •
                  ct. For (as Chrysostome vpon this place saieth) Childern vse to gape and wonder at small matters, but at weighty thinges in dede they wonder nothinge at all. Therefore seing th
                     •
                  se Corinthians hauing the gif
                     •
                  e of tounges thought th
                     •
                  y had thereby all thinges, allthough that were the v
                     •
                  ry lest of all the other gift
                     •
                  s, the Apostle sai
                     •
                  th vnto them. Be not like children &c. You see the Apostle prosecuteth the matter of the miraculous gifte of tounges, and

speaketh yet nothinge of the Common Sett Seruice. Let vs goe forthe withe the texte.
                  Esa. 28. 
               For it is writen in the lawe. For I will speake to this people in other tounges, and in other lippes: and yet they shall not so heare me neither, saieth the Lorde. All this is to debace the gifte of tonges when it is vsed by it selfe alone. The Apostle goeth forthe. Therefore tounges serue for a token not for the faith
                     •
                  full, but for the vnfaithefull. But prophecies (or interpretation) are not for the vnfaithefull but for the faithefull. Such a token or prouocation to admiration, the gifte of tounges was to the gentiles of Parthia,
               
                  Theodoretus ibidem.
                
               Media, Mesopotamia, and diuers other nations, when they hearde the Apostles to preache in all tounges vpon Whitsondaye. But prophecies, whiche consiste in interpretation or reuelation do serue for the faithefull, do moue and strik them. So by the gifte of prophecy Ananias and Saphira (saieth Chrysostom) were striken to deathe of S. Peter.
                  Chrisost. Homil. 36. Nowe to put an example of all this, the Apostle saieth. If therefore the whole Congregation come together, and all speake in tounges, and some infidels or ignorant men do enter, will they not saie, you are madde? For so, many of the infidels vpon Whitsondaye hearing the Apostles to speake in tonges mocked thē therewith, and saied, they were droncke. But many other also wondered thereat.
                  Ibidem.
                Therefore (as Chrisostom here saieth) Non signum, sed ruditas accusatur increduli: Not the signe of speaking withe tounges, but the rudenesse of the vnbeleuer is here blamed of the Apostle. Thus the speaking of tounges is allwaies debaced, but yet not vtterlye reproued. But if all do prophecy (that is, doe interpret or reuele that which is spoken in tonges) and then anye infidele or ignorant doe enter, he is conuinced of all men he is iudg
                     •
                  d of all men for the secrets of his harte are made open: and so falling on his face, he will adore God, and pronounce that ver
                     •
                  ly God is in yowe. All this is spoken, saieth Chrisostom, vt interpretem adiungere cogat, to force the Corinthians, to adde to the speaker in tonges, an Interpreter.

Nowe therefore the Apostle concludeth, and saieth. What is it then brethern? VVhen you come together, euerye on of you hath a psalme, hath doctrine, hathe reuelation, hathe the tonge, hathe Interpretation. Let all thinges be done to edifie. Thus farre the whole text of S. Paule from the beginning of M. Iewelles allegation to the ende thereof.
            The drifte of S. Paule is this. You come together, one of you hath the gifte of singing. For (as Chrisostom saieth) psallere sic quondam doni diuini fuit, sicut docere. In olde time, singing was of the gifte of God, euen as teaching was. An other hath the gifte of Reuelation, an other of speaking with tonges, an other of prophecy or Interpretation. But to be shorte. Non est longo donorum dis
                     •
                  rimine opus. Vna res est quam volo, quam quaero: vt proximus edificetur.
               
                  Chrisost. homil. 36. Ibidem.
                There nedeth not such a longe distinctiō of giftes. It is but one thing that I desir, that I seke for. That your neighbour may be edified. Loe here is according to the doctores Iudgementes, the whole issue, processe and discourse, of the blessed Apostle in that Chapter, whiche also in that which foloweth he prosecuteth yet more, geuing a particular order howe they shall speake with tounges, and howe they shall interpret one after an other, not talke confuselye without an interpretour. We see the whole drifte of the Apostle is that the Corinthians in vsing the gifte off tounges, shoulde adde also the Interpretation thereof vnto it, that the Audience might be edified. Here it may be obiected. If the Apostle require the Corinthians to haue an interpretation and exposition of that whiche was spoken in straunge tounges, at the time of Common Praier: doth not the same reason binde vs also to haue our Common praier either in no straunge tounge at all, or els to haue with all an Interpretation thereof, to the entent that the people nowe also maye be edified? To this I answer diuers waies. And Marke well gentle Reader our answer herein. First I saie the Apostle speaketh not of the

straunge tounges vsed at seruice time, at the Oblation time, at the time of celebrating and Ministring the holy mysteries, but at the time of preaching. Proue this you saie. Thus I proue it. First, the Apostle persuadeth in all this Chapter, the Corinthians not to affecte so much the gifte of tounges, as the gifte of Interpretation. And the reason he addeth, saying. He that speaketh in the tounge, speak
                     •
                  th not to men, but to God. For no Man heareth (that is, vnderstandeth) him. But in the sprit he speaketh mysteries. Nowe he that prophecyeth (that is, which interpreteth and expoundeth) he speaketh to men, he speaketh to edifie, to exhort and to conforte. Nowe who doubteth but this edifying, which consisteth in Exhortations, and in Counforte geuing, apperteineth properly to homilies, sermons, and preaching? In this case therefore it is necessary that the people vnderstande that which is saied. Nowe in the Oblation, and holy ministration, it is a time of praier, not of exhortation and preaching. This to be the ende, intent, ad drifte of the Apostle it appeareth by this entry and beginning which he maketh. To this purpose hath he alleaged all that before hath bene saied, as the comparisons of the musicall instrument, of the Trumpet, and so forthe. At the ende also of his disputation it appereth yet more euident. For thus he saieth. Si ergo conuenit vniuersa ecclesia, & omnes fore loquantur, intrent autem idiotae & infideles, nonne dicēt quòd insanitis? If there the whole Congregation doe mere together, and all speake with tounges, and then bothe ignorant men and infidels doe enter, will they not saye, that you are madde? Lo, that whiche the Corinthians did in these assembles, where they spake in tounges and so forthe, was so open, that infidels and all might enter and bothe haue and see what was done. But such might only come to Sermons, not be present at the holy ministration. Therefore that which the Corinthians did in those assemblies was no parte of the holy ministration or oblation, wherein the mysticall praiers were vttered.

The maior or first proposition of this argument is the expresse saying of the Apostle. The minor or second proposition is euident and manifest to all that are lerned and expert in the practise of the primitiue Churche. For as the Catechumins, so muche more all infidels departed out of the Church as soone as the sermon was done. To the sermons the very infidels came sometime, and to nothinge els. To certaine praiers also the Catechumins were admitted, but not to all. Whereof we read of Missa Catechumenorum,
               
                  August. fer. de 
                        •
                     ēp.
                the Masse or seruice of the Catechumins. Post sermonē
                (saieth S. Augustin) fiet Missa Catechumenis. The Sermon being ended the Catechumins are dimissed. By these therefore it is euident that this vsing off straunge tounges was not at the time of Prayer and oblation, but at the time of sermons and exhortations. And this be the first answer.
            Secondarely I make this answer. The Apostle in dede amonge other examples, as of the Musical instrument, of the Trumpet, of priuat comunication, of priuat praier, bringeth also for example, the Common praier vsed in a straunge tounge, when he sayethe: If thou blesse in spirit, howe shall he that supplieth the roome of ignorant, answer, Amen. That is, as hath bene before declared, if thou geue the Benediction in a straunge tounge, by that miraculous gifte of tounges, howe shall &c. But here (and marke well gentle Reader) it is to be vnderstanded, there are two sortes of straunge tounges. One is prorsus peregrina, vtterly straunge and foraine as well to the lerned as to the vnlerned, as well to him that supplieth the roome of the ignorant, as to the ignorant him selfe. So Chrisostom a greke Father, reakoneth vp for such straunge tounges, the Persian and the Romaine,
               
                  Homil. 35 in 1. Cor. 14. not the lerned greke tounge. which yet to the common people of grece was (no doubte) straunge and vnknowen. This kinde of straunge tounges was vsed of them whiche had that miraculous gifte, not only at the time of sermons, but also at the time

of praier. Of such S. Ambrose speaketh, qui aliquando Syra lingua, plerunque Hebraea in tractatibus aut oblationibus vtebantur ad commendationem,
               
                  Amb. in. 1 Cor. 14. which vsed sometime the Syrian tounge, oftē
               times the Hebrewe tounge bothe in their Sermons and in their Oblations, as well at praier time as at preaching for a vaine glorye. This kinde of straunge tounges vsed in Common praier, where the gifte of prophecye or interpretation is not added with all, the Apostle bringeth in for an example, to shewe howe absurde it is to vse the same in preaching. For as in the praier the lerned whiche supplieth the roome of the ignorant, can not answer, Amen, to that whiche he knoweth not: so in preaching much lesse can the people be edified when such straunge tounges are vsed without an Interpreter. An other kinde of straunge tounge is that, whiche to the ignorant only, is straunge. For to him euery tounge is straunge beside his naturall and mother tounge.
                  Sedulius. in. 1. Co. 14. For he is in S. Paule called idiota, an ignorant, whiche vnderstandeth no more then his owne tounge, such as are men of the Countre and handy cratftsmen, but he that supplieth the roome of the ignorant, he hathe knowleadge of more then his owne naturall tounge. For there is and allwaies hathe bene in the Churche of Christ a Common lerned tounge, which tounge, though to the ignorant it is straunge, yet to the Churche it is not straunge. That tounge in the whiche, the Scriptures, decrees, the lawes, the Councels, the Fathers writinges, and the publike praiers of the Churche are conteined, is the Common toung of the Churche, and is no straunge tounge to the Churche. Suche is the greke tounge to the greke Churche, and the latin tounge to the latin Churche.
                  Bessarion in epist. ad Graecos.
                
               Tertia enim dari non potest. For a thirde Churche beside these two can not be geuen, saieth Bessarian a lerned writer and a greke borne. Of the Common Greke tounge to all the Greke Churche, S. Hierom witnesseth,
                  In pr
                        •
                     emio 
                  
                     •
                  . ad Gal.
                saying that the Galathians, excepto sermone

Graeco, quo omnis Oriens loquitur propriam linguam eandem quam Treuires habuere, beside the Greke tounge the whiche all the East spake, had also their proper Mother tounge, the verye same, that the people of Treuires (a parte of olde Gallia) had. This was called the proper tounge of the Galathians, bicause the Greke, which the Galathians as the rest of the East Churche vsed, was not their proper and naturall tounge but a Cō
               mon tounge to all the East Church. Common to all, not particularly, but generally, not to euerye one of euerye parte of Grece, but to some of all partes thereof. Common gentium sapientibus, to the wise men of the gentiles,
                  Tractat. in Ioā. 117. for whose sake as S. Augustine saieth, the Greke tounge was so estemed, and made Common. Last of al the Greke was a common tounge to the East Churche, as the Latin tounge was to the Weast Church. Of the which Venerable Bede a lerned light of our Countre, writeth very notably, speaking of oure owne Countre of Englande.
                  Lib. 1. Histor. gentis Angl. ca. 1. 
               Hec in presenti quinque gentium linguis vnam eandemque veritatis scientiam scrutatur & confitetur, Anglorum videlicet, Britonū, Scotorum, Pictorum & Latinorum, quae meditatione scripturarum omnibus est facta Communis. This Ilande at this present withe fiue sondry languages, dothe study and sett forthe the knoweleadg of one perfect Truth, that is, with the language of the Englishe, of the Brittaines, off the Scottes, off the Peightes or Redshankes, and of the Latines, whiche Latine tounge by the study of holye Scripture is made Common to all the rest. Lo the Latine tounge was the Common tounge, and no straunge tounge to those people of diuers languages: and howe? by the study of holy Scriptures. For in that tounge they had their Scriptures, their Doctours, their Councelles, and their publike Seruice. Yea this lerned tounge was then so Common to vs Englishemen, that vnder Theodore that lerned Archebishop of Caunterbury aboute nine hundred yeres agoe,
                  Beda. li. 4. 
               they coulde speake the Latine tounge (as Venerable Bede

reporteth) yea and the Greke also as readely as their own mother tounge.
               
                  Cap 2. Histor. genis Anglor.
                And as this was in our owne Countre, so oute of all doubte it was through all the west Churche. I meane the Latin tounge was common and familiar to them all. This common tounge he that vnderstode not was called Idiota,
               
                  In 1. Cor. 14. the ignorant, saieth Sedulius. Vpon this distinction of straunge tounges it is euident that though the Apostle by the waye off an example, blameth the blessing at Common prayer made in a straunge tounge, that yet he meaneth not by that straunge tounge, that whiche is the Common lerned tounge of the Churche, and whiche he that supplieth the roome of the ignorant is acquaynted with all, though it be a tounge of the ignorant him selfe not vnderstanded, but that he meaneth therby such a straunge tounge, as was vsed by the miraculous gifte of speaking withe tounges, and whiche was so straunge, that neither the ignorant, nor he that supplied the roome of the ignorant vnderstode, yea and the whiche the Minister or priest him selfe vnderstode not. Therefore Chrysostome saieth. If thou geue thankes in a straunge tounge,
               
                  Hom. 35 in 1. Cor. 14 
               which n
                     •
                  ither thou doest vnderstande thy selfe, nor doest interpret vnto other (suche was not the Common lerned tounge, whiche euerye Minister in the Apostles time vnderstode right well) subijcere Amen plebis non potest. He that is of the people can not awnswere Amen, and when thou saiest, secula seculorum, which is the end of the praier, he that heareth thee, will not saye, Amen. For why? Thou talkest in a tounge vtterly straunge, whiche thy selfe vnderstandest not. This was not the Common lerned tounge, which bothe then and now euery priest vnderstandeth, but it was a straunge tonge, vsed by the miraculous gifte of the holy Ghoste. To awnswer therfore shortly to the obiection made, I saie. The Chiefe disputation of the Apostle in that Chapter is not of straunge tounges vsed at the Oblation and praier, but at the Sermons and preaching. Therfore his disputation in that place

toucheth nothing the Seruice of Christes Churche now vsed in the Common lerned tounge. Secondarely the Apostle though he speaketh by the waye of an example of the Common praier vsed in a straunge tounge, yet he meaneth that straunge tounge whiche was vsed by the waye of mirac
                  ••
               ous gifte, he meaneth not the Common lerned tounge, which to him that supplieth the roome of the ignorant (whose duty it is to awnswer Amen.) is not straunge, though to the ignorant him selfe it be perhappes straunge. that is, not vtterly vnknowen, but not distinctly vnderstanded. The thirde awnswere maye be, that the same blessing in Spirit in a straunge tounge (whiche the Apostle by the waye of example bringeth in) though it was done in the Cōmon praier, yet that blessing was no parte of the Common praier, sett in bookes, and ordinarely vsed (as we haue it nowe, and as in Chrysostomes time they had it) but it was a blessing or thankes geuing that some one of the Congregation vsed vpon the soden being moued and stirred thereunto by the Spirit, as we haue before out of Chrysostome proued at large. By all this it maye appeare that this fourtenth Chapter of the firste to the Corinthians, as of M. Iewell and all his felowes not onely vnfittely, but very grossely and ignorantly applied to proue their Vulgar Seruice.
            What will they saie, if it maye nowe be proued out of Saint Paule, that in the publicque praiers of the Church, as no strange tounge is to be vsed, which he that praieth or he that in stede of the ignorant dothe answer, can not vnderstande, so also no mere Vulgar tounge must be vsed? Let vs consider the rest of Saint Paules comparisons and examples in this place of the whiche B
                     •
                  nedicere Spiritu, to blesse or praie openlye in Spirit, that is, in a straunge miraculous tounge is one.  The musicall
instrument must haue a certain and proper time. But for whose sake? Forsothe only for his whiche hath skill in that arte, to whom euery light discorde is a great anoying. The

Trumpet geueth out a certaine, propre, and distincte sounde.  But to whom? To the souldyar which is acquaynted therwith, and who hathe lerned to guide him selfe thereafter. To other men the sounde of it signifieth nothing.  Againe if I speake or talke priuatly with one, I must speake to an English man in English, to a Frenche man in Frenche and so forthe. If my talke be to a Frenche man, though all that stande about be English, and vnderstande onely Englishe, yet I will speake Frenche only, bicause my talke is to none but to him.  Fourthly, if I praie priuatly to my selfe, and will praie (mente) in the minde my wordes muste be suche that I my selfe maye vnderstande. And then if I vnderstande Greke, Frenche or Latine: I maye praye in Greke, Frenche, or Latine: though an other perhaps shoulde not vnderstande that praier.  For why? I praie in this case by my selfe alone. Laste of all, to come to the last comparison which the Apostle vseth of publike praier, if I blesse or geue thankes in the publike Seruice, I must be vnderstanded. But of whom? Of all the people? That is not necessary. But of him or them whiche ought to make answer, and to whome I speake in that publike office. Who is that by the worde of the Apostle? Not idiota, but, qui supplet locum idiotae. Not the ignorant, suche as promiscu
                     •
                   pl
                     •
                  bs common people (saieth Sedulius) is, but it is he that supplieth the roome of the ignorant, which is lerned, whiche hath skill of the Common lerned tounge. He muste make awnswer, to him I speake in the publike praier. He therfore must vnderstande me. Nowe that he maye answer me and that he maye vnderstand me, I nede no more to vse the Vulgar tounge, then the Musicion, the Trumpetter, the talker, or the priuat praier, nede to applie his musike, to blowe his trumpet, to vtter his talke, and to praie after suche a sorte as all other maye vnderstande and take profit by. But only it suffiseth, that he which supplieth the roome of the ignorant, doe vnderstande

me, it suffiseth that I speake in the Common lerned tounge, which he is acquaynted withall, euen as the Musicion plaieth to please the skilfull, the Trumpetter bloweth to geue warning to the souldiar, and so forthe. Mary to preache, as I then direct my talke to the whole people, so it is nccessarye that I speake in such a language, as all the people maye vnderstande me. And so the Churche of Christe doth and allwaies hathe done, as well in the one as in the other. Thus the disputation of Sainte Paule in this place, not onelye helpeth nothing your Vulgar Seruice M. Iewell, but, I may saye to you, it geueth a greate cracke thereunto: Let nowe euerye indifferent Reader Iudge, whether the Latine Seruice be vsed in the Latine Churche withe the breache of S. Paules Doctrine, as you moste wickedly and fondle doe bable at Paules Crosse, and as yowe M. Iewell in this your facing Replie doo impudently bragge and crake.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .2
                     •
                  . Vntr
                     •••
                  . For not vpon D. Hardinges warrant, but vpon the Doctours of Christes churches warrant you muste so beleue.And yet must we vpon M. Hardinges warrant nedes beleue that all this maketh nothinge for the Englishe Seruice in the Church of England.
            Not vpon D. Hardinges warrant, but vpon the warrant off the holy Fathers, Sainte Chrysostome, Theodoretus, S. Ambrose, Primasius, Sedulius and Oecumenius aboue alleaged, yowe muste so beleue, if yowe will be a Childe of those Fathers, M. Iewell.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               And for as much as all the people can not heare the priestes praiers at the Aultar, (which hath frō the Apostles time hetherto euer ben a place to celebrat the oblation at) turning him selfe for the moste parte to the East, according to the Apostolike traditiō, in what tounge so euer they be vttered for distaunce of the place they remayne in, it is no incōuenience (suche admitted in to the Quire as haue better-vnderstanding

of that is saied or songe) that the rest re
                     •
                  a
                     •
                  
                  ne in semely wise in the neither parte of the Churche &c.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .236. Vntruthe. Slaunderous.The 82. Vntruthe. The Aultars or Common Tables stoode in the middes of the Churche, as shall appeare.
            No man saieth the contrary M. Iewell. We knowe in Auncient Churches, at Ments in Germany, and in diuers Cities in Italye, especially in Rome it selfe, diuers Aultars sto
                  •
               de at this daye towarde the middle of the Churche, so that the priest at Masse hath his face to the people, as we haue sene in those places. Neither doth D. Harding say that the Aultars stoode otherwise in the Apostles time. Only he saieth. Aultars haue bene euer sence the Apostles time. Nowe M. Iewell to shewe his good will to D. Harding, and to vtter some Copie of his knowleadg, maketh D. Harding to saie that he doth not saye, to make an vntruthe where none is, and to pro
                  •
               e that no man denieth. Therefore in repeting the wordes of D. Harding he altereth them in to sondry Frames and facions, to picke matter of quarelling, and to multiplie vntruthes, and saieth.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               There haue bene Aultars (saieth M. Harding) euen from the Apostles time.
            
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
                It is true he saieth so, and saieth it truly, as shall appeare.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .237. Vntruthe. In falsifying the text of D. Hardinge Iewell.
The 23
                     •
                  . Vntruthe. as before.
               And that as it is vsed nowe farre of from the Body of the Churche.
            
            That is not true. D. Harding saieth it not. His wordes may be sene before alleaged.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .239. Vntruthe.
               Neither could the people beneathe heare the priest standing aboue at the Aultar
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .240. Vntruthe.This is an other Vntruthe. D. Harding speaketh of no such maner in the Apostles time.
             
               Or vnderstande what he meant.
            
            This is the thirde Vntruthe touching the Astostles time.
            
               But only were instructed by holy reuerend Ceremonies.
            
            
               This is the fourth Vntruthe. Neither D. Harding saieth so, nor any mane
                  ••
               . For beside Ceremonies, the people by preaching is taught.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .241. Vntruthe in like maner.
               And gaue consent vnto all that was saied by the priest, and yet knewe not what be sayed.
            
            This maketh the fifte Vntruthe. D. Harding saieth no such matter. Nowe after that M. Iewell hathe charged D. Harding withe all these propositions, as if he had affirmed them eche one, printing them all in a distinct letter, as the wordes of D. Harding, then he crieth out and saieth.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 24
                     •
                  . Vntruthe ioyned with a Slaunder.This man coulde neuer vtter so many Vntruthes together without some speciall priuilege.
            O M. Iewell. You coulde neuer haue auouched so manye Vntruthes of your own, nor so vntruly haue charged D. Harding withe suche a Number, but that your booke was printed VVithe Special Priuilege. And now we vnderstande M. Iewell why your booke is come forthe, more then other bookes are, VVithe Speciall Priuilege. Forsothe (as it maye seme) bicause you might vtter your Vntruthes with some special priuilege. For without some speciall priuilege, you saie,The cause vvhy M. Ievvelles Replie is printed. VVith Speciall Priuilege.
                D. Harding coulde neuer haue vttered so many Vntruthes. You did well therfore M. Iewel to get you a Special Priuilege, For the better auouching of your so special and so many Vntruthes. Nowe touching Aultars which D. Harding saieth haue bene sence the Apostles time, and you denie, what haue you to the contrary? You saye.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                There were no Churches in the Apostles time. And shall we thinke that Aultars were builte before the Churches.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                This is a good Masons reason in dede. But it is no reason of a diuine, and much lesse of a bishopp, as 
                  •
               ou write your selfe.

For how saie you M. bishop? Your brethern of Frau
                  •
               ce, how minister they the Communion without Churches. With you (as you saie after) an aultar and a holy table is al one. How saie you then? Thinke you they minister without tables bicause they haue no Churches? Or if they haue holy tables without Churches bicause they haue a Communion, thinke you the Apostles had no Aultars, bicause they had no Churches, hauing yet a Sacrifice. You knowe M. Iewell. An aultar in greke is 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . as much English, as The place of a Sacrifice. Then to proue the Apostles had no aultars, if you will reason like a diuine, this is a good reason. They had no Sacrifice, ergo they had no aultars. But you knewe it was a harder matter to proue that they had Churches, then that they had a Sacrifice: And therfore you had rather to reason like a Mason, then like a diuine. How beit that there were Churches built euen in the Apostles time, certain olde Churches yet standing in Fraunce do beare witnesse. As at Orleans a Church called yet S. Pierre le vif. bicause it was builded S. Peter yet liuing. And an other at Paris called S. Estienne de gr
                     ••
                  s, bicause it was builded by S. Denys and his cōpanyons which were grekes, in the honour of S. Steuen. Verely of aultars in the Apostles time, Martialis, Dyonisius Areopagita, and Ignatius lyuing all with the Apostles do testifie.
                  In epist. ad Burdegal.
                Martialis saieth. Sacrificium deo creatori Offertur in ara, nō homini ne
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   Angelo. A Sacrifice is offred vnto God the Creatour vpō an Aultar,
                  
                     
                        •
                     pist. 6. not to mā nor to Angel. Ignatius saieth. Vnum est altare toti Ecclesiae. The whole Church hath one Aultar. Dyonisius Areopagita writeth of the bishopp going Doune frō the Aultar to the nether parte of the Church, with incense, ac rursum ad altare ipsum sacrificij consummandi causa reremeantem,
               
                  Hierarch. par. 3· ca. 3· and then returning vp againe to the Aultar to make an ende of the Sacrifice. That Origen and Arnobius (whom M. Iewell alleageth) affirmeth the Christians to haue neque

aras neque templae, neither aultars, nor churches, they meane the Christians had none such in honour of stockes and stones, not that they had none at al. Els by the same reason M. Iewel may plucke downe churches as he hath done aultars, bicause those doctours saie, the Christians had no churches. S. Augustin herein speaketh very notably saying.
                  Augus. Epis. 49. 
               They which vnderstande Christian letters of bothe testamentes, finde no faulte in the wicked rites of Paganes, they build Church
                     •
                  , ordaine priesthoods, and offer sacrifices, but for that they do these thinges in the honour of idolles and diuels.
            
            Last of all we confesse and knowe, the Aultar is commonly called the holy table amonge the Doctours, bicause of the heauēly banquet ministred therein. But an aultar or 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                it is called 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                for the very sacrifyce. Therfore the plucking doune of aultars is not hereticall bicause the stone is broken, but bicause the externall Sacrifice is denied,
                  Augu lib. 17 ca. 20. & lib. 10. c. 6. et 20 De Ciuit. Dei. Harding. the true proper and due worshippe of Allmighty God, as S. Augustin vehemently and at large proueth in his bookes de Ciuitate dei.
            
            
               For the priest vnderstandeth it for the better part, if he be lerned, and (83) the people be not vtterly ignorant. Bicause of often preaching, longe custome, solemne feastes and sundry Ceremonies.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .243. Vntr
                     •
                  uhe Sl
                     •
                  undero
                     ••
                  . Stapletō.The 83. Vntruthe. For the simple people vnderstandeth not one worde or syllable of the latine tounge.
            How hangeth this reason of youres M. Iewell? The people vnderstandeth no one Syllable of the latine tounge, Ergo neither by often preaching, nor by longe custom, nor by solemne festes, nor by Ceremonies they vnderstande not the Seruice. The fondnesse hererof wil easely appeare by the like. The people vnderstandeth not one worde or syllable of the latin tounge, Ergo by no preaching nor instruction they can vnderstande

the doctrine of S. Augustin, S. Hierom and other Fathers writen onely in the latin or greke tounge. Or thus, Ergo the people can not vnderstande a great parte of M. Iewelles Replie, which hath so much latin in it. Although the english be annexed straight, and the whole expounded vnto them. No doubt but the people bothe may and dothe vnderstande gre
                  •
               t parte of the Seruice, where the Curat doth his duetie. But if the Curats do not their dutye, or rather bicause in dede off longe they haue not herein done their duties, therefore God whippeth vs iustly with these your heresies and schismes M. Iewell. Howbeit we trust of his mercy, he will at lenght cast the rodde in the fire, and restore vs to vnite.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               And when we shal appeare before Christe in that dreadfull daie of iudgement (84) we shall not be required to geue an accompt of our vnderstanding, but faith presupposed, of our Charite.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .244 Vntruthe Slaunderous. Stapletō.The 84. Vnt
                  •
               uthe. For it is writen. He that knoweth not, shall not be knowen. 1. Cor. .14.
            It appeareth hereby M. Iewell, that either you haue smal diuinite or litle charite, either you are a petite doctour, or els a very malicious wrangler, and a pelting hicke scorner. For as touching this matter wherof you note here D. Harding as speking vntruly, you maye take your penne Master Iewell, and score it vpp also for vntruthe vpon holye Scripture whiche saieth that in the daye off iudgement God shall rewarde euery man according to his workes, not according to his knoweledge. And againe. opera illorum sequuntur illos. their workes do folowe them. And in the ghospel where our Sauiour describeth vnto vs the forme of his iudgement, he 
                  •
               aieth to our charge the lacke of good workes, as not visiting the sicke, not clothing the naked, not feeding the hungry, and such like. S.

Paule also after he had declared, that in the Churche were Apostles, prophets, teachers, the giftes of miracles, of healing the sicke, of speaking with tounges, of interpretation of tonges, yet he saieth adhuc excellentiorem viam vobis demonstro. I tell you yet of a more excellent waye. And that is Charite M. Iewell,
                  Matt. 2
                     •
                  . which S. Paule in the next chapter folowing commendeth aboue all knowleadg, all giftes, all speaking withe tounges, yea aboue faithe it selfe,1. Cor. 12, concluding at the ende of the chapter these wordes. Now therefore remaine these three. Faith, 
                     •
                  ope, Charite. But the greater of these is Charite.
               
                  Cap. 13. And is it nowe an Vntruthe M. Iewell to saye that we shall geue an accompt of our Charite (faith presupposed) and not of vnderstanding? You knowe S. Paule againe saieth knowleadge puffeth vp, but 
                     〈◊〉
                   edifi
                     •
                  th. And the inferiours are commaunden to obay their ouerseers, which watche and warde for their soules. But you alleage vs a text of S. Paule, where he saieth. 1 Cor. 14. 
               He that knoweth not, shall not be knowen. What knowleadg is that M. Iewell? Let S. Paule him selfe teache you. He saieth. I haue iudged my selfe to knowe nothinge amonge you, but Iesus Christ and him crucified. To knowe Christ is the sufficient knowleadg (for saluation) for euery Christian man, not called to the charge of others. And so according to the saying of S. Paule, he that knoweth not Christ, he that hath no faith, shal not be knowen of God. But faith presupposed, not knowleadg but Charite shall be required of the people.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               For as muche as the Seruice consisteth in maner altogether of the Scriptures.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .245. Vntruthe. Slaunderous two w
                     •
                  ie
                     •
                  .The 85. Vntruthe. In the Romish Seruice there are infinit vanities besides the Scriptures.
            This is but a slaunderous lie M. Iewell. I haue pervsed your whole text in this place, looking to haue founde some one of

these infinit vanities, noted by you. But I finde not one worde thereof. Therfore M. Iewel as it was soone saied, so, vntell you prou
                  •
               i
                  •
               , it will be thought to be a lie, as it is in dede, and a very slaunderous lie against the Church of God. Malice made you speake it. But Truthe choked you; not able to proue it.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               Though we vnderstande not the (86) wordes of the Scripture, whiche we vtter with oure mouthe, yet the heauenly powers and Angels (saieth Origen) vnderstand them, and thereby be inuited, and that with delite to helpe vs.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .246. Vntruthe. Slaunderous. The .86. Vntruthe. For Origen speaketh of the ignorance of the Allegorie, not of the wordes.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
                That Origen speaketh of the wordes and not of the Allegorie, it appeareth euidently by the similitude whiche he maketh in that place. His similitude is thus. As amonge the infidels (saieth Origen) the Cōtrary powers (he meaneth diuels) by such and such names in verses or enchantments, do serue and attends, and applie that, vnto which they are called by such and such names, perfo
                     •
                  rming at though it were their bounden dutie therein euen so and much more the heauenly powers and Angels of God, which ac
                     ••
                  mpanie vs (as our lorde in the gospell of the litle ones of the Church saieth, that their Angels do allwaies assiste in the sight of God beholding his face) do take it gratefully and gladly if we alwaies vtter out off our mouthe the wordes of holy Scripture, and the sounde of thes
                     •
                   names, like as certain verses and enchantments. For though we vnderstand not that which we vtter with our mouthe, yet those heauenly powers which assiste vs do vnderstande them, and are delighted, as inuited with a certain verse to helpe vs and succour vs. Thus farre Origen. By this similitude it is euident he meant of wordes and not of the allegorie first bicause the similitude consisteth in enchantmēts. These enchantmēts are done by bate wordes, not by any allegorie, and that when those wordes are not vnderstanded.

Then by Origens minde the Angels are also delighted to heare vs pronoūce the wordes of Scripture though we vnderstand them not. Secondarely Origen speaketh of the ignorance of that whiche we vtter withe our mouthe. But that are the wordes only, not any allegorie. Therefore he speaketh of the ignorance of the wordes not of the allegorie
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 247 Vntruthe For Origen spoke off the Scriptures reade in homilies and lessons, a part of the Seruice.Nowe whereas Master Iewell saieth, Origen his purpose was here to speke of reading the Scriptur
                  ••
               , not of the church Seruice, and noteth therefore bothe in the text and in the Margin very solemnely, that D. Harding wresteth Origen, hauing caste such a blott vpon him, he saieth it only and proueth it nothinge. But that Origen spake of the Scriptures read in the Seruice, it appereth probably firste for that the Scriptures were at that time in Alexandria first read in the Seruice as lessons, and after expounded by the waie of homilies: and also that Origen him selfe was at that time the Common and ordinary maker of suche homilies: and laste of all that these verye wordes of Origen are a parte of such an Homilie ordinarely made after the Seruice. Let nowe the truthe speake, whether D. Harding hathe wrested Origen, or M. Iewell slaundered D. Harding.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               If all praiers made in an vnknowen tounge be a mocking of God (as Beza saieth) then were the praiers vttered by miracle in the primitiue Churche with tounges, which the vtterers them selues vnderstode not (after the minde of Chrisostome) a mocking of God. For I see nothinge, whereby they are excluded from his (87) generall saying and vniuersall proposition.
            
            
               
                  Iewel. 
               
               The 248. Vntruthe Slaunderous and peuish.The 87. Vntruthe. This generall saying of Chrysostome is Vntruly reported.
            Here M. Iewell for lacke of better game, hunteth after letters

and rippeth vpp syllables. Vpon the terme (His) he woulde founde an Vntruthe, him selfe construing vntruly the saying of D. Harding. For D. Harding by these wordes (his generall saying) meant not any generall saying of Chrysostome, but the generall saying of Beza, whiche went but fewe lines before, and is this. VVhat Praiers so euer be made off any man in a tonge that he vnderstandeth not, they be to be taken for a mockery of God. From this generall saying off Beza M. Iewell, they are not excluded (saieth D. Harding) which in the primitiue Church vttered the praiers with tounges which the vtterers them selues (after the minde of Chrysostome) vnderstoode not. For euen these also by the generall saying of Beza were mockers of God. This is no bishoplike demeanour M. Iewell, but a childish behauiour: no sadde writinge, but a rascall wrangling: no shewe of honesty but a mere scurrilite, to fight vpon termes, and quarell aboute sillables, either contrary to your owne knowleadg and iudgegement, or els without all iudgement, with much ouersight, lightnes and rashenes.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               As the Vulgar Seruice pulleth their mindes frō priuat deuotion, to heare and not to praie, to litle benefit of knowleadge for the obscurite of it: so the Latine geuing them no such motion, they occupie them selues, whiles the priest praieth for all, and in the person of all, in their priuat prayers, all for all and euery one for him selfe.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 249 Vntruthe Slaunderous.The 88. Vntruthe. For the vulgar Seruice encreaseth deuotion, as by sundrie Authorities it shall appeare.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
                Whether vulgar Seruice encrease deuotion or plucke from deuotion, it is not the Authorite of lerned men, but the experience of the people that trieth it. Verely in our countre the

people it selfe confesseth, they are much distracted from their deuotion, by attending to the Minister reading the Seruice and not vnderstanding it. Yea do not your owne doinges M. Iewell confesse it? You haue taken order in certaine places of the realme (as we certainely vnderstande) that betwene your matins and the Communion there be a staye made of halfe an howre or so, to thentent the people in that meane while may attende to their priuat praier and priuat deuotion. Why is this order taken, but bicause at Seruice time the people is distracted from priuat praier, and priuat deuotion? And truly herein, whether the priuat deuotion of the people be not much more now distracted by harkening to there english Seruice which yet they vnderstande not alltogether, then it was att the latin Seruice, when they vnderstode nothing, I dare to make the people itt selfe iudge thereof. The reason M. Iewell, why you esteme the english Seruice to encrease deuotion, more then the latine, is bicause you imagin for certain that the people vnderstandeth it. As I will easely graunt they do sometimes vnderstande some part thereof: so that they do allwaies vnderstande the whole, though you would graunt, yet no wise man wil graunte it, and the people it selfe, I dere wel say, wil denie it. Verely I haue hearde of a Gentleman which reading the Booke of the Statutes in english, confessed he oftentimes vnderstoode not what the Statutes meaned. And doubtlesse Holy Scripture iff it were not much harder then the english Statutes are, so many lerned commentaries shoulde not haue ben made thereupon: so many heresies had not ben grounded vpon the doubtefull interpretation thereof. Brefely itt had not bene so many hundred yeares read only in the lerned tounges greke and latin. The Scripture therefore being not allwaies vnderstanded though in the mother tounge, no maruaill if the people be some times distracted. For when the Minister readeth on still, and the people Harkening thereunto knoweth not what it meaneth, what shall they

do? Shall they harken? It is to no profitt. Shall they let the Seruice goe and fal to priuat praier? Your order is against it, whereby if any harken not to the Seruice, he shall be taken for a papist. Thus by your vulgar Seruice the people oftētimes either is forced to be idle, or if he will be well occupied, incurrech displeasure. What is distraction from priuat deuotion, if this be not? Thoching your Authorites, the saying of Chrisostom (that praying together in the Church with our brethern, 
               
                  De incōprehensibili dei natura Hom. 3. 
               auaileth more then when we praie alone &c.) maketh directly against your first protestanticall doctrine off praying vnder headges and in chambers when you should come to Churche, but for common praier in a vulgar tounge itt maketh not so much, as for the priuat praier of eche one praying in the Churche eche by him selue, and all with the priest. Lyra saying that the people answereth Amen to the priest withe more deuotion when he vnderstandeth the praier, saieth truly touching the duty of answering.1. Cor. 14. But that (according to the Doctrine of S. Paul) stādeth not in the whole people, but in him qui supplet locū idiotae that supplieth the roome of the ignorant, which wordes M. Iewell in alleaging the whole place of S. Paul pag. 194. guilefully and fraudulently left out, to make the reader beleue that the whole people was bound to answer Amen. Iustinian speaketh of the lowde speaking of the prist, not of the Seruice to be vnderstāded as we haue before at large declared. In the 70. Vntruthe The saying of S. Augustin (how can he singe duly whiche knoweth not what he singeth?
               
                  In prologo super psal.
               ) pertaine euidently ad Psalmistas to such as were appointed by order of the priest to singe (as we haue before declared out of the 4. Coūcel of Carthage) not to al the people, whose duty it was to praie in the Churche, not to singe psalmes. The particular application of the psalmes which are songe to our owne selues (whereof S. Basill speaketh) maye as well be done of deuoute people in the latin Seruice as in the english.
                  Ad clericos Neocaesarienses.
                Certain it is the people of Cappadocia (of whom S. Basil there

speaketh) had not the greke for their vulgar tounge, as hath bene before proued in the 69 Vntruthe, and yet were these psalmes, (as all the other Seruice vnder S. Basill) songe and saied in the greke tounge, as appeareth by the praiers yet extant in greke in the Masse or liturgie of S. Basill. Then as the people of Cappadocia applied the greke seruice to them selues, so may the people of England applie the latine Seruice to them selues, if they will assiste deuoutely, geue their assent to the priest gods Minister, and lifte vpp their hartes to God with him. So hath the Church these many hundred yeres vsed. It is not now to lerne of you M. Iewell. She hath, and att all times hath had (marke this well M. Iewell) the holy Ghoste to prompte her, to guide her, and to assiste her, and shall so haue in aeternū
                for euer,
                  Ioan. 14. if Christ be true of his promise. Thus are your authorites answeared. Thus is the truthe auouched and proued M. Iewell: and you founde a slaunderer not so much of D. Harding, as of the Truthe, which shall at lenght confounde all that be against her.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               The nations that haue euer had their Seruice in the vulgar tounge, the people thereof haue continued in Scismes, errours, and certain Iudaicall obseruances, so as they haue not bene reakoned in the number of the Catholike Churche. As the Christians of Moscouia, of Armenia, of prester Ioan his lande in Aethiopia.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 250 Vntruthe Slaunderous, and peuis
                     •
                  .The 86. Vntruthe. For the Seruice in the Vulgar tounge neuer was cause of Schisme or heresy.
            D. Harding saieth not so much. Their Vulgar Seruice was not the cause of their Schisme. But there schisme and other heresies were the cause of their Vulgar Seruice. For hauing ones diuided thē selues frō the Church in Doctrine, they chose also that order of Seruice, which was cōtrary to the Church. I perceiue M.

Iewell. It is all one with you, whether a man bidde you drincke ere you goe, or goe ere you drincke.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               VVherefore to conclude, seeing in sixe hundred yeres after Christ the Seruice of the Church was not in any other, then in the greke and latine tounge, for that any man is able to shewe by good proufe, &c.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 251. Vntruthe Slaunderous.
The 252. Vntr
                     •
                  the For the Contrary hath not bene proued at all.The .90. Vntruthe. The Contrary is sufficiently proued in the 15. diuision of this Article.
            All M. Iewelles proufes are sufficiently and particulary att large disproued in the same diuision. See the answer to the 78. Vntruthe. So the conclusion of D. Harding is sure, and M. Iewell according to promise must subscribe.
            The heape of Vntruthes, which M. Iewel saieth in his margin are here laied together in the Conclusion, haue ben all before particulary examined and iustified.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               As the bolde assertion of M. Iewel is plainely disproued, so the olde order of the Latine Seruice in the latine Churche whereof Englande is a prouince, is not ráshely to be condemned: especially whereas (91.) being first committed to the Churches by the Apostles of our countrie, and the first preachers off the Faith here, it hath bene authorised by the continuance off allmost a thousand yeres without controll: &c.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 253. Vntruthe Slaunderous.
Capitain and Notorious. pag. 190.The 91. Vntruthe. For the first preachers off the Faith in this I
                  •
               elande we
                  •
               e grekes and Hebrewes, and not Latines.
            This hath ben told vs twyse or thrise before, and nowe to awnswere it fully, I thinke it good, bothe for Countrie sake, that the State of her touching the firste cummyng of Religion vnto her maie be knowen, and that Trueth also maie not be suppressed, by any alleaging of an other trueth. And

first, what M. Iewells discourse is abowt this mater we shall consider. After that, we will shortlye declare who were in deede the Englishemens first Apostles, withe defence of their honour and worthynes. Touching the first.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               190.Ghildas saieth, that Ioseph of Arimathea, that toke donne Christe from his Crosse, being sent hyther by Philipp the Apostle out of Fraū
               ce, began first to preache the Gospell in this Realme, in the tyme of Tyberius the Emperour.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                But what successe had it? How deepe roote toke it? How was it spreade abrode? How was it receiued? For, the cummyng of Ioseph hither, proueth not, that the whole countrie was conuerted, but that the Gospell was there preached. And an argument maie hereof be gathered, not that they openlye professed the Christian faithe, but that they had the waie shewed vnto them, by which they might come to the knowledge and loue of their Saluation. So that yow can not inferr, The whole State of Britaine was turned from their Idolatrie to the Christ by cummyng of Ioseph of Arimathea, but this you might saie, that euen in the vttermost partes of the world the sownde of the Gospell was heard immediatly after Christes Ascension, and that al the world might see his mercie and Saluation, and that al excuse was taken awaie from Idalotours, if they would not repent and beleue in the onelye and true and Almightie God.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Nicephorus saieth, that Simon Zelotes aboute the same tyme, came in to this Ileland and dyd the lyke.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                He came in dede as Nicephorus sayeth, but he came not lyke a Lieger, but lyke and Embassadour: not to tarye and couert the whole, but to doe a message for the whole in the hearing of a few.
                  Niceph. lib. 2. cap. 40. 
               For Simon Zelotes (saieth he) in preaching the Ghospell went thourough Aegypte, Cirene and Aphrica, and afterwarde, through Mauritania and all Lybia, and brought the same doctrine euen to the weast Occeane, and to the Iles of Britannie.
               
So that it appeereth he went a pace like a Cursor that telleth good newes, but he conuerted not (I trow) euerye countrie through which he went.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 253. Vntruthe For Theodoretus maketh no singular mention of S. Paule or the tyme of his cū
                  myng.Theodoretus saieth, that S. Paule Immediatly after his first delyuerie in Rome, vnder themperour Nero, preached the Gospell in this Ileland, and in other Countries of the weast.
            It is wonder that he should not heare, that Ioseph of Arimathea and Simon Zelotes had conuerted it alreadie: if, as yow imagine, Britanie receiued the Faith when they preached there. But doth Theodoretus saie, that S. Paule, by name, preached the Gospell there?
            I beseech the (gentle Reader) to consider in this place, how particularly and distinctly M. Iewell setteth furth vnto the, the cummyng of S. Paule in to Britannie. He nameth him singularly (S. Paule) he noteth the tyme (after his first delyuery in Rome) he setteth it furth by the name of the Emperour (vnder the Emperour Nero) and all this he dothe, to make the beleue, that Theodoretus speaketh so distinctly of S. Paules cū
               myng in to our countrie and preaching there, in his own person, that it were impossible to doubt thereof. Nowe, if Theodoretus saie so muche, then is M. Iewell discharged: if he doe not, what a bold and shameles felow is he that dareth so to make witnesses speake at his pleasure, and so to abuse the credulitie of the vnlerned. Theodoretus wordes are these. Nostri illi piscatores,
               
                  Lib. 9. de curat. Grecarū 
                     
                        •
                     ffect.
                
               ac Publicani, sutor
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ille noster, cunctis nationibus, leg
                     •
                   Euangelicam detulerunt &c. Those our fisshers, and Publicans, and that owr sower (of tentes) haue brought the law of the Gospell vnto all nations. And they haue persuaded, not onelye the Romanes, and them that lyue vnder the Romane Empire, but the Scythians also, and Sauromatas, and further, the Indians, the Aethiopians, the Persians, the Seres, the Hyrcanians, the Britanus, the Cymmerians and Germans, and (at one word) al man kinde, and al nations they haue persuaded, to take the Lawes of the Crucified, (Christe.) And

they haue not vsed herein harnesse or weapōs, nor infinite numbers of peeked shouldiars, nor Perficat and Barbarous Violence, but persuasion of wordes, declaring by them, the Vtilitie and Profitablin
                     •
                  sse off the lawe which they preached. Thus farre Theodoretus.
            And where now is here, that speciall cummyng of S. Paule in to Britannie. And that after His first delyuerie in Rome? Where is it M. Iewell? And being not here, why report yow it so, as though it were here? What singular thing here is attributed to S. Paule, which maie not be saied of euerie of the Apostles? And thinke you, that euery one off them, went through out and about the world, and that euery one of them preached personally in the Ile of Britannie?
            If yow had saied (as of Theodoretus Authorite) that all the Apostles came at the begynning to this Ileland, It woulde haue seemed incredible. For, there were more Countres (beside Britannie) to be gone vnto, and all the Apostles neither could nor woulde goe to euery place, nor it is likely they would al of them goe to one litle Ileland, so far from the most populouse nations of the world. But nowe, craftely, yow cul out S. Paule out from the rest, and to make it probable, that he shoulde haue tyme and leisure to doe it, you saie, that it was after his first delyuerie in Rome. That he came to Britannie. Yet not only S. Paule, but all the Apostles are mentioned by Theodoretus.
            But what to haue done? To haue gone personally ouer the world? No truly, but to haue instructed the worlde and to haue brought them vnto hym that was Crucified. And how thinke you, might not that be done without their presence. Who doubteth thereof, but he that hath no experience. For euen at this daie the Fishers and Publicanes and sowers of Tentes, whom Theodoretus speaketh of, which are S. Peter, S. Andrew, S. Iohn, S. Iames, and S. Matthew, And S. Paule, these doe instruct the world at this present. But how? By their successours

by their Gospels and Epistles by their Praiers, and not by personal and visible presence of bodye.
            See then how openly M. Iewell deceaueth thee (Christian Reader) by drawing that specially to S. Paule, which is spoken of all the Apostles generally. And by referring that to the Persons them selues, which is vnderstanded of their writinges only or their succession.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Tertullian saieth the Ileland off Britanie was subiecte vnto Christ in his tyme. And Origine witnesseth the lyke of the same Ileland in his tyme. At which tyme Lucius the kinge of this re
                  •
               lme was b
                  •
               ptized, and receiued the Ghospell and sent to Rome to Eleutherius the Bishopp there for his aduice touching the ordering of hi
                  •
                Church and Realme.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                Who was Elder, thinke you Origine or Lucius? It seemeth Lucius. For he was now at mans state when Eleutherius was Pope An. D. 181. And Origine was not then borne but somewhat after about the yere of our Lorde .190. Then further Eleutherius was Pope .xv. yeres, and of hym Lucius receiued the Ghospell, so that before Origine was .xv. yere old the Ileland of Britayne was conuerted. The testymonies therefore, which Tertullian and Origine geaue, of the Ghospell of Christ, vnto which the Ileland of Britayne shoulde be subiect, was not of the tyme before Lucius raigne, but of the state which it had after his receiuing of the faith from Rome.
            For, besides the manifest accompt of yeares, which will not suffer either Tertullian either Origene to haue bē hable to write vppon the Scriptures, or speake as in the place by you alleaged, they doe, before kinge Lucius receiued the faithe: howe vnreasonable and absurde were it, that (as you saie out of Tertullian and Origene) when the Ileland of Britaine was subiect vnto Christ, then should Lucius send to Rome and receiue the Ghospell.
            
            For what needed any sending to Rome, if the Realme were alreadye nowe subiected vnto Christe?
            Bu
                  •
                here also, your Craftines appeareth, that whereas the truth

is, that before Lucius raigne the Ghospell was not by publike Authorye receiued in the Ile of Britaine, you to make the matter lesse,Craft in placing of witnesses. sett Tertullian and Origine before to saie that it was subiect vnto Christe in their tyme. So that by alleaging of Lucius after them, it shoulde be thought, that his sen
                  •
               ing to Rome, was not for anye Ghospell to be planted in his Realme, but only for some certaine Aduise of Eleutherius bishoppe, touching the ordering of his Churche and Realme. So that, as muche as he can, M. Iewell seeketh alwayes, how to diminishe or take awaye the prayse, Thankes, Obedience, and Reuerence, that are due to the Bishops of Rome, for their labours taken in conuerting of Britaines and Saxons bothe.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Helen
                  •
                being an English woman, wife vnto Constantius the Emperoure, and mother vnto Constantinus, is notablie praised for here Faithe, and Religion, by S. Ambrose, by Eusebius, by Sozomenus and others.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                True it is, and so muche is proued hereby that there were Christian folckes in England, after that Fugatius and Damianus sent from Rome by Eleutherius, had established the Faith there, and before the Saxons had vtterly destroied it, by chasing away the Britaines.
            But note here (gentle Reader) what difference there is betwixt Protestant and Protestant, Ciuile and Frantike, sp
                  •
               aking by Authoritye or prating of his sense. I praise you in this place (M. Iewell) that you commende that Godly Emperesse Helena 
                  •
               o notably, and that you agree so well in that pointe, with Sainte Ambrose, Eusebius, Sez
                     •
                  menus and others. It is well done of you, to honour her with youre Testimonie, whome Sainte Ambrose and others, doe notablye praise for her Faith and Religion.. And what beast then must he be that calleth that A Tale,
               Calfe. arti. 3. pag. 86. whiche Sainte Ambrose and other, whome you alleage, doe not onelye take for a true Storye, but also worthye to be readen and regarded? The Storye I meane of her, goinge a pilgrimage

to Hierusalem. and seeking of the holy Crosse, and so deuoutly ordering it when she had founde it, & caet. Certaine it is (saieth he) Superstitius she was. Againe, She was a Concubine to Constance. As for her Superstition, it is to euident. O worse then beastlynes. to Obiect vnto anye person A faulte forgeauen. Small Grace surely is in that minde, whiche withoute cause will speake to the dishonoure of Excellent personnages, and depraue the good giftes of God in anye off hys Seruauntes, what shoulde a man saye to suche felowes as wyse as Calues or as wanton as Calues? A litle sope of the good milke, whiche you (Master Iewell) haue geauen in this place, woulde profite him muche. For, if he will be instructed off yow, then can you tell him of Sainte Ambrose, Eusebius, Sozomenus, how they prayse her notablie for her faith and Religiō. And if he wil not, it shal be knowen, I trust, how obedient the inferiour ministers are to their Superintendents. But you perchaunce your selfe wil plaie the shreude Cowes part, and kycke down with your heeles, this faire deal of prayses which you geaue here to Helena if yow shal be asked whether her pilgrimage to hierusalem, and seeking and honoring of the Croosse, were cōmendable. Wel, how so euer you esteeme of her in dede we denie not but she was an English woman and Christian, and that in her time the Faithe was there, as afterwarde also itt was in S. Chrisostomes tyme, whome for that purpose you alleage. The Conclusion ys: that as before Lucius time the Catholike faith was not openly receiued in England, so we wonder not if it remained there afterwarde, as you haue proued by Tertullian, Origene, Helena, and S. Chrisostome.
            But that it was not altogeather geauen to Idolatrie at the cummyng in of S. Augustine what saie you thereunto?
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Nowe let vs consider, in what state this Realme stoode, touching Religion, att the cummyng of Augustyne, att which tyme M. Harding

surmiseth the whole faithe was vtterly decaied.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                Yea mary let this be considered. And here prepare thy selfe (Gentle Reader) to see what A discourse M. Iewell will make.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                First Beda saieth there were among the Britaines, Seuen Bishoppes, and One Archebishoppe &c.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                Yow saie truthe. This was in wales, but you promised, to shew what state England was in, touching Religion att the cummyng of Augustine. To that point speake I praye you and shewe against D. Hardinge that the Faithe was not vtterly decaied.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                As touching the Englishe nation itt appeareth by Beda that the Queene her selfe was Christened, and had S. Martins Churche apointed vnto her, freely to praie in, withe her cumpanie.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                But where was she Christened? in England or Fraunce? In Fraunce truly. For she was the Frensch and Christian kinges daughter, and being maried to a Panyme, yet she obtained to vse (for her owne person and her companie) such religion as was in their owne countrie of Fraunce. By which it appeereth, that (as D. Harding saieth) the Faith was vtterly decaied in England, concerning the natural Inhabitours of the Coū
               trie, and the state thereof. And that you haue brought nothing to the contrarie, by telling vs of the Queenes Faith and Godlynes whiche was no English woman. Yet you reason and saie.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               
                  A Gheasse.
               VVhereof it maie be thought the king was no greate enemie vnto the Faithe.
            
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
                In dede he was no such enemie to it, but he did suffer his Queene to doe as she woulde, but what of that? dyd he hym selfe alow it? or went he to churche withe her? And this speciall priuilege graunted to her, dothe it not proue that the commō order and Seruice of the Realme was otherwise? but, goe ye furth.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                And therefore the lyke also maie wel be thought of a great number of the number of the people.
            
               
               
                  Stapleton 
                Be it so. As the king was, so were many of the people: but the kying suffred his best beloued to haue her church and Religion after her tradition, ergo many of the people also suffered it. Al this M. Iewell, is reasonnable. For the Panymes then were not so cruell and desperate as hugonotes and protestantes are at this present. For they hauing the gouernement in their handes coulde suffer Christians to folowe the faithe in which they were borne, but heretikes now are so Spritishe and Impatient, that where they haue no Iurisdiction at all, yet they dare to kyl Priestes, to chainge magistrates, and to sett forthe the Gospell with sword and terror. But what haue you with al this concluded? That Englishe men Fauored the Gospell at S. Augustines cumming? Nothing lesse. But only that the king with some other were no greate enemies vnto it: that is to saie, they loued it not themselues, yet they hated not the Queene the straunger and her cumpanie which loued it. And yet yow be not sure neither of this, but you saie as it maie be thought, Which argument is not grounded vpon any others Autho
                  •
               ite but a Gheasse of your owne. It foloweth.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               Thus much shortly of the first planting of the Religion
                     •
                   of Christ within this Ileland &c.
            
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                Surely then yow haue deceaued vs: For when yow moued attention, and prepared a waie to further mater, saieing, Now let vs consider in what state this R
                     •
                  alme Stoode touching Religion, at the cumming of Augustine: I thought yow would haue disproued D. Harding by good and substantial Recorde, and shewed thath in the Englishe Nation the Faithe was not vtterly decaied. But now, before you had well begonn, you haue sodanely made an ende; and can saie no more, but that, as it maie be thought, the Saxons were not enemies to the Gospell. By which it appeareth, that A short horse is soone curried, and that a Faint cause can not strongely be mainteyned.
            Thus then endeth M. Iewels discourse. He sheweth that

the Faith was emong the Britannes, from the begynning: but that is nothing to vs which speake of Englishemen and not of welchemen. he cummeth to the Englishemen, and geaueth a greate Gheasse at a matter nothing tending to any purpose, Concluding that as it maie be thought the Englishemen were not enemies to the Faith, because forsothe the Quene a stranger borne serued God after the Catholike and true maner: but when they were made frindes of God, and partakers of Christs Faith he saieth nothing. Let vs therefore now declare that, which M. Iewell is afraied to haue knowen and credited. And let vs shew, how the Faith hath come to vs Englishemen only from Rome, that the vnkynd and cruell Childerne against their only parents, maie in time, whiles Repentance will b
                  •
                taken; returne againe to the Obedience of that See, by whose Authoritie and prouision the Englishe were first conuerted vnto the Faithe. Which to make the more open, let vs shortly reherse in what State Religion was in Britannie before the cumming of the Saxons in to it.
            Of the cumming of Ioseph of Arimathea, of Simon Zelotes or of any other, in to this Ileland, there shall be no question betwene vs and M. Iewel. For who so euer came, and how so euer they came, The first open and knowen profession of the faithe in this Ilelande was by the preaching of Fugatius and Damianus, sent from Eleutherius then Pope of Rome, at th
                  •
                req
                  ••
               st of Lucius kinge of Britanny, as Polidore writeth.The faith openly profe
                     •
                  sed emong t
                     •
                  e Britans.
P
                        •
                     l
                        •
                     dorus lib. 2. For at the coming in of those ij. preachers, notwithstanding the faithe preached by Ioseph of Arimathea, there were in Britany at that preasent, eight and twenty Flamines of in
                  •
               idels and three Arche flamines, in whose roome Lucius the first Christē kinge of Britanny placed so many bishops and Archebishops. These three Archebishoprickes were of London, of Yorke and of Gloucester. This was done about the yeare of our Lord, Clxxxij.
            From this time the faith continued in Britanny vntell the

tyme or the raging persecution of Diocletian and Maximinian, which fell in the yeare of our Lorde three hundred and odde. In that persecution S. Albane with sundry other Brittaines suffred martyrdome,
                  Beda lib. 1. the 6. and 7. chap. The f
                     •
                  ith d
                     •
                  ca
                     •
                  eth amōg the Britannes Lib. 2. as Polydore, and Bede do witnesse. Through the rage and fury of that persecution (sayeth Polydore by the reporte of Gildas a Brittain him selfe) ita relegio refrixerat vt sit penè extincta, the religion waxed so fainte that it was well nere extinguished.
            After being receiued somewhat in the time of Constantin the great,
                  Beda lib. 1 the 8. and the 17. chap. it was much infected with heresies, first of the Arrians, and after of the Pelagians. The faith notwithstanding remained amonge a number of the Catholike Brittains, sounde in substaunce and perfitt. Before the infection of the Pelagian heresy, the Brittaines being forsaken of the Romaines, and ouerpressed with the inuasions of the Scottes and Peightes or Redshankes,The first booke, the xv. chapter. Britans dryuen owt of their Coū
                  trie. called to their succour out off the highe Germany, Saxons, English and Wites. For these three nations (as Bede calleth them) arriued in to Brittany out of Germany. This their arriuall fell in the yere CCCC. xxix. These peoples as they deliuered the Brittaines from the forrain inuasions of the Scottes and the Redshankes, so in short time, they draue away the Brittaines them selues in to the straightes off wales, whiche their posterite nowe occuieth, and possessed them selues all the rest of Brittanny, except Scotland,
            All these peoples that come out off Germany were vtterly heathens and infidels. The greatest number of them were Angli, English. they possessed for their share att the first spoyle, all that is nowe called Englande, except Kent, Essex and Sussex. Whiche the Saxons possessed, and except the ile of Wyte,England owt of th
                     •
                   knowledg of God. 150 yeres. Hampshere and parte off the westcountre, whiche the Vites or Wites possessed. In time the whole was called England and the people English. These peoples English or Saxxons

continewed heathen and infidels for the space of a hundred and fifty yeares. All which time the Brittain Christiās (as Gildas a countreman of their owne bitterly complaineth) neuer vouchesafed to preache the gospel of Christ vnto them. But the goodnes of God (saieth Venerable Bede) did not so forsake his people,
               The xxij. Chap. 
               whome be foreknew to be called to saluation. But prouided for the English people much more worthy preachers, to bringe them to the faith, then those vnmercifull Britaines were. And who were they M. Iewell? Were they Hebrewes or Grekes? It foloweth in the History of Venerable Bede a lerned and holy man by the verdit of all Christendom, these many hundred yeares, in the sorte. The yeare off the nation of our Lorde VC.lxxxij. Mauritius the 54.Bede the first booke, the xxiij. Chap. 
               Emperour after August reigned Emperour of Rome xxj. yeres. In the tenth yere of whose raigne, Gregory a man of the greatest vertu and lerninge of his time, was Bishop of the Romaine and Apostolike See, which he gouuerned xiij. yeres, vj. moneths and x. dais. This Gregory the xiiij. yere of the reigne of the said Emperour, and about the hundreth and fiftie yere of the coming in of the Englishe men in to Britanny, being moued by inspiratiō of god ther
                     •
                  ūto, sent the seruāt of God, Augustin, and certain otheer Monkes, which feared God, with him, to preach the word off God vnto the nation of the Englishmē. VVho obeying the bishops commaundement &c.
               The first conuersi
                     •
                   of englād to the Faith. (as in the History it selfe it may at large be sene in many Chapters folowing.) This man of God (as Bede oftentimes calleth him) Augustine, arriued into Brittanny then possessed for the most patt of the Saxons and englishmen our forefathers, he preached vnto Ethelbert then king of Kent, he conuerted him and all his people to the faith. His companions and scholers in fewe yeres after conuerted the whole nation. This Augustine with other monkes that accompained him, at their first coming, expressed (as Bede writeth) the very Apostolike order of liuing of the primitiue Churche, seruing God in cōtinual praier, watching and fasting, and preaching

the worde of life, to as many as they coulde, despising the commoditie of the worlde, as thinges non
                     •
                   off their owne. takinge off them whom they instructed, only so much as might serue their necessites,
               
                  A
                        ••
                     i. 8. fol. 151. 
               liuing them selues according to that they taught other and being ready to suffer bothe troubl
                     •
                  s, and death it self in d
                     •
                  fense of the truthe that th
                     •
                  y taught. By these means God so wrought, that (as I saied) the king and his people were conuerted and Christened.The 255. Vntruth. For he cō
                  uerted thousandes of infidels, but kylled no godly.
            
            
               This w
                     •
                  s a sh
                     •
                  rte Victory saeth M. Iewell Peter and Paule coulde neuer so easely conquer kingdomes. But this matter stood not so much in winning the vnfaithfull, as in kil
                     •
                  ing the godly.
            
            O impudent, shamelesse and blasphemous Iewell. I speake in Gods cause, in the quarell of our Apostle blessed S. Augustin, in the defence of all our forefathers the Christen inhabitants of the realme of England. The planting of that Christen faith, by the which, so many hundred yeres, the whole estat of England, the Noble Princes, the honourable Nobilite, the holy bishops, the lerned clergie, the deuoute people haue yelded their soules vnto God, the preaching of that faith which all Christendome beside, of Italy, Fraunce, Spaine, Portugall, Afrike, Germany, of all the Northecountres, of Grece it selfe in great part haue holden with vs and we with them, the planting and preaching I saie of that faithe, shall impudent and blasphemous Iewell, bringe out of credit, calling it, a killing of the Godly? Let here that impudent varlet answer, not worthy no more the name, either of English man or of Christen man, let him answer I saie, what godly did Augustin kille. Is the conuerting of infidels to the faith of Iesus Christ, a killing off the Godly▪ Is this the voice of a Christen man, of a preacher of Gods worde, of a bishop?
            Venerable Bede saieth of S. Gregory which sent this Augustine to preache the Faithe.
                  Lib. 2. ca. 1 
               VVe may well and are also bounde

to call him oure Apostle. For he being high bishoppe ouer the whole worlde (saieth Venerable Bede) made our Nation the Churche off Christe, whiche had ben euer vnto that tyme the bondslaue of Idolles. And howe was that (os impudens) but by the meanes of holy Augustine whome he sent to preache and to conuerte vs? Lett the Epitaphe written vppon the toume of that holye man testifye. Whiche (as S. Bede recordeth) was thus conceiued.
            Here lyeth Blessed Augustine,The .3. Chap. the first Archebisshoppe of Caunterbury, vvho vvas sent hither off holy Sainte Gregorye Bisshoppe of Rome, and strenghthened of God by vvorking of miracles. VVho conuerted kinge Elbert and his realme frō the vvorshipping of Idolles to the faith of Christ. Was this no winning of the vnfaithefull, was this a killing off the Godly? Who woulde so speake and write, but some infidell him selfe or Iewe, M. Iewell? Hathe heresye so rooted oute all shame and honesty from your harte, that the conuerting frō infidelitye and paganisme vnto Christ, and that of youre owne Countremen and Forefathers, you call the killing of the godly?
            Let vs I praie you, cōsider your scoffing Sprit. This was a short victory, saye you, Peter and Paule coulde neuer so easely conquer kingdomes. O Syr. Must the Spirit of God be measured with the wisedom of your braine? Must God worke at your leasure and appointement? Goe Syr and scoffe in like maner at S. Paule,
                  Rom. 15. that he (as he witnesseth him selfe) had filled all places with the ghospell of Christe, from Hierusalem as farre as Illyricum. An other Iewell may scoffe and saye here also: This was a shorte victory, & cet. But thinke you by the cancred malice of your scoffing Sprit, to blotte the Blessed memorye of oure Apostole, the signet of whose Apostoleship we are in oure Lorde, who thoughe not to other, yet to vs, is an Apostle: For by the Ghospell he begotte vs in Christe.
            
            
               
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               pag. 185.Is there nowe, after the continuaunce of that faith well nere a thousand yeres planted by him and his companions or scholers, vpstert one, and that in the roome of a bishop, in that selfe countre, and of that countre and nation, whiche writeth hym an Hypocrite, a superstitious man, cruell, Blowdye and proude aboue measure?
            
            Knowe you the wordes M. Iewel? Remembre you whose they are? They are the Cancred wordes of the Spirit that speaketh oute of you. The Spirit of Malice, Rancour and Contradictiō. They are your owne wordes M. Iewell. In the thirde Article, pag. 185. Thus you speake of Saint. Augustine our blessed Apostle.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
                The .256. Vntruthe. For none that knew him euer sa
                     •
                  ed so of him.
Galfrid. li. 8. cap. 4. He was a man, as it was iudged by them that saw him and knewe him, neither of Apostolike Spirite, nor anye waye worthy to be called a Sainte: But an Hypocrite, a superstitious man, Cruel, Bloudye, and proude aboue measure.
            
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
                If Seuerus that hereticall bishop of Antioche had his tounge cutt out of his heade, for his blasphemies that he vttered againste the holy Councell of Chalcedon, what you should deserue M. Iewell, if you mett with an other Iustinus, it is easy to be cō
               sidered. His blasphemy folowed of one hereticall opinion, your intolerable Malice procedeth against the whole cause of Christen Religion. He resisted the Catholike doctrine in one or two pointes only. You 
                  •
               aue against your Apostle, of whome you receiued Christ. It had ben your part (if any such Reporte had bene made of our Apostle) either to haue suspected the author, or to haue boulted out the Truthe by other writers, or att the leste to haue dissembled it. But you are one of them off whiche the Prophet saieth. 
                  
                     
                        •
                     s
                        •
                     i
                        •
                     . 1. 
               Filios enutriui & exaltaui: Ipsi autem spreuerunt me. I haue brought vp my Children, yea and I haue exalted thē to high vocations. but they haue despised me. What Englād hath done for you, and how much you are bounde to that coūtre, you know best your self, and we cā not be ignorāt. And haue you nowe for all rewarde, blased out the Apostle of that people, with these Charitable Titles: Hypocrite, Superstitious,

Cruel, Bloudie, and Proude aboue measure. You, you M. Iewel haue vttered this blasphemous Slaunder, and Slaunderous blasphemy, (against our blessed Apostle) A Blasphemy I saie, not to be comptrolled with the penne, but to be whipped whithe the Scourge. For they are (as I haue saied) your owne wordes. They are not the wordes of Galfride of Munmouthe, whom you allege in the Margin. He hath no such wordes. You belie Galfride and you slaunder our blessed Apostle. Galfrid off all his nine bookes wreten of the Actes of the kinges off Britanny, only in the eight booke the fourthe Chapter (the place by you quoted) speaketh of our Apostle S. Augustin.The 257. Vntruthe For Galfride hath no suche wordes as M. Iewel referreth vnto him Galfr. lib. 8. cap. 4. In that whole Chapter he hath no such wordes, nor any like or leading thereunto. Only he telleth. how Augustine was sent in to britanny by S. Gregorie, to preache the Gospell vnto the Englishmen, which were panymes at that tyme. And howe he required subiection of the Britones, and that they woulde togeather withe him, take the paines to preache the Gospel to the Englishmen: And how Edelbert kyng of Kent seeing their disdainefulnesse, stirred kinge Edelfride kinge off Northumberland, and other princes off the Saxons against them: And how the Britones where ouercummed and a greate number of monkes slaine. But to S. Augustine he geaueth not one Title good or badd, and muche lesse such cruell and bloudieones as M. Iewel alleageth.
            If Galfride had so reported beinge A Welcheman, and one that liued att the lest iiij. hundred yeares after the time of S. Augustines arryuing vnto Enlande, and being a writer otherwise, (I reporte me to Merlines prophecyes libr. 4. to kinge Arthures Conquestes againg the Emperour Leo, and his hoste of C C C C. and LX. thousand men, to the two Gyantes &c) so fabulous, vayne and poeticall,
                  lib. 7. that he resembleth more the Beuis of Hampton or Guy of Warrycke, then a graue or true historiographer, you might certainely without any partialyte,

haue iudged, that beinge of that Countre he speake of Affection, or liuing so longe after, might well misse the Truthe, or at lest, that he was not worthy to be a witnesse against Venerable Bede and holy S. Gregory, who bothe do highly commende our Apostle S. Augustin, as partly I haue before declared, partly shall strayte waies declare. But nowe seeing that Galfride, your alleaged Author sayeth no such thinge, of what a facing and desperat Sprit be you, so to Slaunder our Blessed Apostle, and then to father your Slaunder vpon an other.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               185.But it maketh you to be the more bolde to saie as you doe off S. Augustine, Because thei that saw him and knew him, Iudged him to be a man neither of Apostolike Sprite, nor any waie worthie to be called a Sainct. And what are their names I praie you then? Or from whence came they, or whither wil they? was Galfride one of them? It were hard for you so to saie, considering that he lyued iiij C yeres after S. Augustine the monke, and by reason therefore coulde not see him or know him. And if it were some other, why named ye him not in your text or the margine?
            Yet who so euer he were did he see him or know him better than Saint Gregorie, who choose him, who sent hym, who commended him, who honored him? If there were nothing in all S. Gregories workes to the praise off S. Augustine, yet, this being so wel testyfied, that himselfe first, (before he was Pope,) was mynded to goe in to Englande to conuert it, and that afterwardes he continued in his holy and mercifull and gracious intent in sending an other to doe that Office: who but vnsensible coulde Imagine, that so wise A man, woulde committ so greate a cause as the conuersion of a whole Coū
               trie ys, either to him whom he neuer sawe, or whom he dyd not know? Vndoubtedly therefore, If we had no other argument, yet this alone, that S. Gregorie trusted him in so great

a matter and so greately tendered of his holynesse, is sufficient inough to proue, that he knew S. Augusti
                  •
               eth right wel what he was. But we haue other Argumētes out of S. Gregorie hym selfe, by which it shall be perceaued not only thath he knew S. Augustine, but also lyked and praised him.
            For he commendeth hym to Desiderius and Sigarius bishoppes or Fraunce, by speciall letters,
                  Gregor. li. 5. ep. 54. requiring them to helpe and cumfort, Augustinum seruum dei, praesentium portitorem, cuius zelus & studium bene nobis est cognitum, Augustine the seruant of God, the bearer of these present leters, whose Zeale and good wil ys well knowen vnto vs. By the selfe same wordes he commendeth him also to Theodoricus and Theodebert kinges of Fraunce calling him The seruant of god:
               
                  lib. 5. epist. 58. 
               whose Zeale and good mind is well knowen vnto vs.
            
            Besides this, he calleth him, his brother Augustine,
               
                  lib. 7. epist. 5. ep. 30. And in an other place testifieth that he was A Monke of his Monasterie, and sent by him into England, which vnto that tyme continued wicked and naught, in cultu lignorum ac lapidum, in the worshipping of Stockes and Stones. And further, he testifieth that either Augustine himselfe, or they that were Sent with him, dyd shyne by so many miracles in that Countrie, that the notable thinges which they doe, maie seeme to folow and resemble the workes and Power of the Apostles. And againe. That at Christmassetyde, S. Augustine baptized more than ten thowsand Englishmen,
            
            He saieth further, to the praise of S. Augustine, that so grete a multitude of the Englishe nation was turned to the grace of the Christian Faithe,
                  Lib. 9. ep. 52. that he had neede to send more laborers thither, And in that epistle he calleth him,
                  epist. 58. 
               our most Reuerēt brother and felowbishope Augustine To be short, God so wrought by the handes of S. Augustine, to the conuersion of England,VVho would thinke that any man woulde dare thinke him Cruel, bloudy or proude aboue measure, whom God, cō
                  mendeth by gift of miracles and S. Gregorie by so many good wordes? that S. Gregorie thought it good to write vnto him, a most wyse and louing letter, least the greatnes of his giftes and miracles should extol him, For after he had wōdered at the mighte

Grace of God which had brought greate thinges to passe in England, by the meanes of simple and weake men: yet (saieth he) there is in this heauenly gift (most deere brother Augustine.) a thinge that with, greate wil, ought to be feared most vehemētly. For I know, that almightie God, hath shewed, by meanes of the greate wonders, towardes that Coūtrie which he would to be Chosen, Wherefore it is necessarie that of the self same heauenly gift thow bothe reioyce with feare, and be also afried with gladnes. I meane that thow shouldest be glad, because the sowles of Englishemen are drawen by the outward myracles vnto an inwarde grace, and that thow shouldest, feare least emong the signes and myracles which are wrought, the weake mynd should lift it selfe vp, with presumyng vpon it selfe
            
            Now least any peruerse interpretour, should thinke S. Gregorie, by this care ouer S. Augustine least he should be puffed with any vanie glorie, to signifie; that he was a proued and high minded felow, it foloweth in the same epistle. Haec autem dico &c? But I speake these thinges, because I would laie downe the mynde of my hearer vpon humilitie. As for thy humilitie (saieth he to S. Augustine) Let it haue her proper hope and trust, for Synner as I am, I hold this most Sure hope, that, by the grace of our almightie maker and redemer, God and lord Iesus Christ, thy synnes are already forgeauē, and that thow art an Elect and Chosen, to the end other mens Synnes might be forgeauen through thee. Thus far S. Gregorie.
            Let M. Iewell now come furth and shew, either that there is One which better saw and knew Augustine than S. Gregorie Or that S. Gregorie dyd euer compt him Superstitious, Cruell, Bloudie, or Proude aboue measure, Or that euer any man that knew S. Augustine hathe reported so wickedly, Cruelly and Proudly of him. Galfridus to whom only M. Iewell referreth vs could not know S. Augustine, and againe he hath no such wordes against him, as are obiected by M. Iewell. On the other syde S. Gregorie knew his cōuersatiō, alowed his behauyour, sent him of Trust in to England, Commended him to bishoppes and

kinges, wondereth at the workes that God shewed by him, calleth him seruant of God, most Reuerend felowbisshoppe, moste deere brother, and hopeth most certainly that he shall haue no accompt to be made after this life for anye fault or gyltines remaining. And dareth a wretched heretyke loden with Synnes, either to burden an holye and Vertuous Father withe Slaunders vnproued, either to refuse the testimonie of true and wel deserued praises geauen to S. Austen, by S. Gregory him selfe which knew him so well?
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               Pag. 186. The 
                     •
                  58. Vntruthe pregnant and full.Now that which M. Iewell alleageth out of the History of Beda, to bringe that holy man S. Augustine our Apostle out of credit, is withe passing impudency auoutched of him. I beseche thee (good Christen Reader) to haue recours to the History it selfe, it beinge nowe set forthe and published in the english tounge. If thow be lerned and missetrust the translation, conferre the latin therwith all. Reade the whole second Chapter of the seconde booke, out of whiche M. Iewell hathe culled a piece for his purpose, and thou shalt easelye see, that Venerable Bede in recordinge that Historye had a farre other iudgement in it, then the spiderlike venim of M. Iewell hathe sucked out. But one thinge I maye not presentlye omitte to warne thee of. M. Iewell alleageth out of Bede, that vpon the refusal of the Britains accorde with S. Augustin, Ethelbertus the kinge raised his power, and slewe great numbers of the Brittains, and a thousand and two hundred godly Religious men. For in this one sentence he hath couched three moste manifest Vntruthes. First that the same slaughter was made vpon the refusall of the Brittaines accorde. For longe before that slaughter the holy bishop Augustin departed this life,
                  Lib. 2. Cap. 2. as Bede in that Chapter recordeth. Wherby it is euident that. S. Austin was not the cause of that slaughter,Polidore also witne
                     •
                  seth the same Libro. 4. as M. Iewell woulde haue it to seme. Secondarely it was not Ethelbertus the kinge of Kent whom S. Austen had conuerted, who made that slaughter, but Ethelfridus the king of the North partes of England,

whom Bede in the last chapter of the first booke compareth to Saul for his great Victories. M. Iewell named for Ethelfridus the heathen, Ethelbertus the Christened kinge, that it might seme to haue bene done by S. Augustins procurement. Thirdly he calleth them godly Religiouse Men, who were in dede obstinate schismatikes, as the which being gently admonished of their schismatical Obseruatiōs, cōtinewed notwithstāding peruersely in the same,
                  Lib. 2. Cap. 2. as appeareth more largely in Bede.
            Thus much by occasiō of M. Iewelles blasphemyes I haue sayed in Defence of our Apostle blessed S. Austen, and of the faith first planted by him among vs Englishemen.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               She Seruice of Englande that now is, lacketh some thinges necessary, and hath some other thinges repugnant to the Faythe and custome off the Catholike Churche.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 259. Vntruthe Slaunderous.The 92. Vntruthe, ioyned with a slaunder. Oure Seruice conteineth nothinge contrary to the faithe.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
                As the Crede of the Arrians was iudged by the Fathers of the Nicene councell, contrarye to the faith, bicause it lacked the Consubstantialite or vnite of Substaunce of Christ with God the Father, though otherwise it had no wordes in it contrary to the faith:  so the English Seruice containeth in it, thinges repugnant to the faithe, in that it wanteth the Consecration and the oblation of the Holy Mysteries, as I haue before proued.  Also Prayer for the soules departed, Memories and inuocations of the blessed Sainctes,  All which the Catholike faithe beleueth and practiseth in the Churche seruice, though in the englishe Seruice, no worde were expressed contrary to the Catholike faith.
            But I praye you M. Iewell, are the homilies parte of your Church Seruice or no? You wil not denie but they are.  Then your homilies of only faith iustifying, are contrary to the faithe of S. Iames the Apostle, saying expressely, man is iustified

by workes not by faithe only. 
                Your homilie against Images is contrary to the faithe which the seuenth Generall Councell of Christendom established against the peuish heretikes Iconomachi, your forefathers.
                  Iacob. 3. 
                To be short the very Order of your Seruice being in the Mother tounge, contrary to the practise of all Christendom hetherto (as it hath in this Article appeared,) and of all the Catholike Church beside, at this present, is mere schismaticall, and damnable:  So is also the Ministration of your bread and wine in bothe kindes, by priuat authorite, and condemning withall, other Catholike Countres whiche vse the contrary.  So is in like maner the not mingling of your Communion Cuppe withe water: whiche the Catholique Churche bothe Greke and Latin hathe practised:
                  Fol. 12. & seq.
                as I haue before in the firste Article at large proued. In these manye pointes Master Iewell youre Seruice partelye lacketh some thinges necessary, partly hath some thinges repugnant to the Faithe and custome off the Catholike Churche, as D. Harding moste trulye saied. And thus M. Iewell you were slaundered with a Truth.
            Now good Christian Reader for the better contenting of thy minde, and for a full declaration that in Iustifying onely these Vntruthes, whiche it hathe pleased M. Iewell to score vpon D. Harding (most slaunderously, as nowe thou seest) the chiefe and principal pointes of this Article haue bene discussed, and M. Iewelles Replie in the most waightiest pointes answered, I beseche thee to looke backe and to consider the whole substaunce of these M. Iewelles Vntruthes in this Article,
                  Fol. 56. b. & 57. b. e
                        •
                      s
                        •
                     q. item fol. 100. 
                     •
                  
                and to remember what hath by occasion thereof bene saied. First it hath bene shewed and proued that not onely in our Countre from the first beginning of the faith among vs Englishmen, but also long before both in the greke Churche, and in the Latin namely in Rome, and Fraunce, the Seruice

was in the greke and Latin tounges, whiche the cōmon Vulgar people vnderstode not. And herein M. Iewell is forced if he will abide to his promise, to yelde and Subscribe. Next the Constitution of Iustinian which hath so longe serued M. Iewell and his felowes for a mighty and principall Achilles to fortifie their Vulgar Seruice withall,
                  Fol. 69. b. & seq.
                is proued at large to make nothinge therefore: and M. Iewelles long lying Replie in that behalfe at large confuted.
                  Fol. 86. et seq.
                Thirdly M. Iewelles Examples (as he calleth them) wherein he laboured to shewe that within the first 600. yeares some Countres had their Seruice in the Vulgar tounge, are all and euery one particularly answered, confuted, and proued no Examples of any Vulgar Seruice in that age. Whereby it remaineth, that no Vulgar Seruice in all that time in any one place appearing, the Only Seruice was then in the lerned tounges Greke and Latin, as it is now.
                  Fol. 101. & seq.
                Fourthely the Only place of holy Scripture that M. Iewell and his felowes haue to maintaine their Vulgar Seruice by, namely the fourtenth Chapter of the firste to the Corinth. is proued at large to make nothinge for the Vulgar Seruice, but rather to ouerthrowe the same. And M. Iewell in that place is founde ten times to haue corrupted the texte of S. Paule. Last of all the blessed memory of oure Apostle holy S. Austin the Monke sent by holy S. Gregory to preache the faith to vs Englishmen then Heathens and paynims, is defended and deliuered from the most impudent lies,
                  Fol. 122. & se. q.
                detestable Slaunders, and desperat Reproches, wherwith the tender harte of M. Iewell hath with passing Impudency charged him. Other Vntruthes as they were of lesse weight, so they are with lesse labour, sufficiētly yet and thouroughly, discharged. It is nowe thy parte, gentle Reader, indifferently to Consider the vprightnes of M. Iewell, and the Truthe of the Cause.
         
         
            
            THE FOVRTHE ARTICLE. Of the Supremacy of the B. of Rome.
            
               D. Hard. Diuis. 1.
               
                  THe Primacy of the Bishop of Rome, that is to saye, Supreme power, and auctoritie ouer and aboue all Bishoppes, and chiefe gouuernement of Christes flocke in matters pertaining to Faith and Christen Religion, was in the first six hundred yeares, acknowleadged and confessed.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                The .93. Vntruthe. For there was no such power confessed.Pag. 220
            
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
               
               The .260. Vntruthe Slaunderous.This power is confessed by S. Gregory a Bishop of Rome within the first six hundred yeres. I alleage him to you M. Iewell though he be a bishop of Rome him selfe, bicause you haue in this Article alleaged him so Plentifully and so stoutely against D. Harding, as if he had clerely condemned such Supreme Authorite him selfe. I will alleage and vrge the very place that D. Harding bringeth, and answer to all that you saie against it, that the Christen Reader may see with what Passing Impudencie you alleage S. Gregory against him selfe, and yet crie out with open mouthe against D. Hardinge, as though he had done so. The wordes of S. Gregory are these. Cunctis Euangelium scientibus liquet,
               Gregorius lib. 4. epist. 2. 
               quòd voce Dominica Sancto & omnium Apostolorum Petro Principi Apostolo totius Ecclesiae cura commissa est. Ipsi quippe dicitur: Petre amas me? pasce oues meas. Ipsi dicitur. Ecce Satanas expetiuit cribrare vos sicut triticum:Ioan. 21 Luce. 22 
               & ego pro te rogaui Petre, vt non deficiat fides tua: & tu aliquando conuersus confirma fratres tuos. Ipsi dicitur.
               Matth. 16 
               Tu es Petrus & super hanc petram aedíficabo Ecclesiam meam, & portae inferi non praeualebunt aduersus eam. Et tibi dabo claues regni coelorum &c. Ecce claues regni coelestis accepit, potestas ei ligandi & soluendi tribuitur. Cura ei totius Ecclesiae & principatus committitur. Et tamen vniuersalis Apostolus

non vocatur. It is euident to all (saieth S. Gregory) that knoweth the gospell, that the cure and charge of the whole Church hath bene committed by the wordes of our lorde to the holy Apostle Peter, Prince of all the Apostles. For to him it is saied. Peter louest thou mee? Fede my shepe. To him it is saide. Beholde Sathan hath desired to sifte you as it were wheate, and I haue praied for thee Peter that thy faithe faile not. And thou being once conuerted strengthen thy brethern. To him it is saide. Thou arte Peter and vpon this Rocke I will builde my Church: and the gates of hell shall nor preuaile against it. To thee I will geue the kaies of the kingdome of heauen: &c. Beholde he receiueth the keyes of the heauenly kingdome, the power of binding and loosing is geuen vnto him. The charge of the whole Churche and principalite is committed to him. Yet Peter is not called the Vniuersall Apostle. Thus farre Gregory. In whose wordes I beseche thee gentle Reader consider thre thinges.  First that the Charge of the VVhole Church and Principalite thereof is committed vnto Peter.  Secondarely that the Commission of that charge was made by our lorde and Sauiour him selfe to Peter by name, and that in three seuerall times in the gospell. In S. Matthew at his Confession of Christ. Before Christes passion, when the Apostles were in most daunger to falle, and after Christes passion for full confirmation of all that went before.  Last of all that not withstanding all that preeminēce of Peter, notwithstanding the Charge that he had of the VVhole Church, not withstanding he was Prince of all the Apostles, and had the Principalite of the whole Churche committed vnto him, notwithstanding I saye all this, yet by the name of an Vniuersall Apostle he was not called.
            Touching the first point, note the matter and pithe of this Article to be confessed, which is the chefe gouuernement of Christes flocke in the Bishop of Rome. For as Peter was Bishop of Rome, as the Churche to him committed endureth

for euer, as that Authorite was not geuen for Peter only, so are the Bishops of Rome his successours, so doth that commission endure for euer, and so doth that Authorite take place, force, and effect for all the Church of Christ, from that time forewarde for euermore. Therefore Chrisostom saieth expressely, that Christ did shead his bloud, vt pecudes eas acquireret,
               Lib. 2. de sacerdotio. 
               quarum curam tum Petro, tum Petri successoribus committ
                     •
                  bat to winne those shepe, the charge of whom he did committe bothe to Peter, and to the successours of Peter. Of the which charge in an other place he saieth. Ecclesiae Primatum gubernationemque Petro per vniuersum mundum tradidit,
               Homil. 1. de p
                     •
                  enitentia. Tom. 5. that Christ deliuered to Peter the Primacy and gouernement of the Church throughout the whole worlde. In which wordes we see M. Iewell the chiefe gouuernement in Christes flocke to be confessed in Peter the Bishop of Rome, and in his Successours.
            Touching the seconde point, that this chiefe gouuernemēt so cōfessed is grounded vpon the Scriptures, and Authorite of our Sauiour him selfe. For S. Gregory after he had affirmed this chiefe gouuernement in Peter, he added the reason thereof and saied. Ipsi quippe dicitur. For to him it is saied: Fede my shepe. Lo vpon this Commission of Christe geuen in holy Scripture to Peter Only, Gregory groundeth the Authorite of Peter. So doth also Chrysostom in the place aboue alleaged.
            Touching the last pointe, marke I beseche thee (good Reader) diligently, that though such principall Authorite ouer the whole Churche be graunted in Peter, yet he is not fo
                  •
                all that called an Vniuersall Apostle. The Power is confessed, the Name or Title is denied. Right so of any Bishop of Rome euer sence Peter, that title or name of Vniuersal Bishop, was neither desired nor vsurped. And yet the Authorite notwithstanding hath bene bothe confessed and practised. Neuer Pope more practised this vniuersall Authorite then Gregory him selfe. His writinges, decrees, and Epistles yet extant doe most euidently

declare it. Yet no man euer more abhorred the name then he. M. Iewell in all this Article hath not shewed One Pope that euer called or wrote him selfe Vniuersall Bishop. It is therefore a great vanitie and but a point of a cōtentious sprit in M. Iewell, to crie and call vpon the name of Vniuersall Bishop in the Pope, the power and Authorite vniuersall being confessed, the name also by the Pope him selfe neither desired, neither vsurped. For as S. Augustin most truly telleth you M. Iewel. Quid est contentiosius quàm vbi de re constat, certare de nomine? VVhat is more Contentious then to striue vpon the name,Epist. 174. when the thinge is cōfessed? Let vs see therefore what you answer to this place of S. Gregory alleaged by D. Harding. You saie.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               Pag. 225.
               The .261 Vntruthe Slaunderous.If S. Gregorie were now aliue, he would charge M. Harding with open iniurie, not only for altering his whole meaning, but also for mangling and maiming his very wordes.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                Here be two great faultes in dede M. Iewell. First to alter the meaning of S. Gregory, then to mangle and maime his wordes. But how proue you these two faultes to haue ben committed? Let vs see. You folowe and saie.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .262 Vntruthe as appereth.M. Harding to proue that the Bishop of Rome was called the vniuersall Bishop alleageth these wordes of S. Gregorie.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                Vntruthe M. Iewell. D. Harding doth not alleage them therefore. You belie him impudently. He saieth in the very beginning of this Article. 
                  Harding. 
               
               By what name so euer the Bishop of Rome was called &c. this is cleare, his Primacy and Supreme power is confessed. VVich thinge being so, whether then he were called by ether of these names (he meaneth of the Vniuersall Bishop, or Head of the Church) or no, it is not of great importance. And yet for the one of them (he meaneth the name of Vniuersal Bishop) somewhat, and for the other (of head of the Church) an infinit nūbre of good authorites may be alleaged. But thereof Hereafter. Harken M. Iewell. Of

these Names D. Harding saieth he will speake Herafter. What then will he proue now at this present? He telleth you. Now Concerning the chiefe point of this Article, which is the Primacie of the Pope Peters successour. First it hath bene sett vp and ordained by God. This, this, M. Iewell is the thinge that D. Hardinge first will proue. For this matter he alleaged before Anacletus, and now he alleageth Gregory. For this point I saie, to proue that the Popes supremacy was ordained by God, Gregory is alleaged. And we haue heard Gregory to proue it in Peter, whose successour the Pope is,The Shamelesse Impudency of M. Iewell. by no lesse then three seuerall authorites of holy Scripture. Here therefore I beseche thee (gentle Reader) consider and marke the shamelesse impudencie of M. Iewell. VVhich not being able to answer to the Matter it selfe of the Popes supreme Authorite, telleth thee that these wordes were alleaged to proue the Name and title. He deceiueth thee, he mocketh thee, he abuseth thy patience gentle Reader. He turneth thy minde away form the Matter, to make thee beholde only the Name. For thou shallt see that vpon this Name and against this Name he driueth all his talke that foloweth, vtterly beside the Purpose, and quite out of the Matter. For now he alleageth the wordes of S. Gregorie.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .263 Vntruthe Capitain and Notorious, in falsyf
                     •
                  ing. S. Gregory. Stapletō.
               Ecce Petrus claues regni coelorum accepit, & potestas ei ligandi soluendique tribuitur. Cura ei totius Ecclesiae & principatus committitur. Beholde, Peter receiueth the kayes of the kingdome of heauen. To him is geuen power bothe to binde and to loose. The charge and chiefe rule of the Church is committed to him.
            Here is an other notable and exceding legerdemain of M. Iewell. He hath left out in his English, the worde Totius VVhole. where he should haue saied, the charge and Chiefe rule of the VVhole Church, he turneth it, of the Churche, and leaueth out, VVhole. O M. Iewel may we not most iustly and truly turne ouer to you your owne wordes, bothe that whiche go before, and these which folowe now? If S. Gregorie were now aliue

he would charge M. Iewell with open iniurie, not only for altering his whole meaning, but also for mangling and maiming his very wordes. For in taking away the worde VVhole from the Church, you haue maimed his wordes, and altered his sence. Which was, that to Peter the Charge and chiefe rule Totius Ecclesiae of the whole Churche was committed by Christ him selfe. But now let vs heare forthe your wordes.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .264. Vntruthe Slaunderous and Scornefull.Thus farre Gregory, saieth M. Harding. And why no Farther? was he stayed with the Choynecough, and forced to breake of his tale in the middest? But marke well gentle Reader, and thou shalt see S. Gregory set to Schole, and kept in awe, and not suffred to vtter one word more, then M. Harding will geue him leaue.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
               
               Mutato nomine de te fabula narratur. Chaunge the name, and all ths tale is tolde of you M. Iewell. For when you Englishing the wordes of S. Gregorie, saied the charge of the Church, for, the charge of the VVhole chur
                  •
               h was committed to Peter, when you coulde not coughe out that worde VVhole, were you stayed with the Choynecough M. Iewell, and forced to breake of that worde in the middest? Haue we not sene S. Gregory set to Schole by M. Iewell, kepte in awe by M. Iewell, and not suffred to vtter one worde more then M. Iewell would geue him leaue? S. Gregory would fayne haue saied in English the whole Churche, as he saied in Latin, Totius Ecclesiae, but M. Iewell would not geue him leaue to saie so much. Thus M. Iewell, you haue tolde a good tale for your selfe. Now let vs see how you haue tolde it for D. Harding. It foloweth in your text.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                The nexte wordes that immediatly folowe in the same sentence are these. Tamen Petrus vniuersalis Aposto
                     •
                  us non vo
                     •
                  atur. Yet Peter is not called the vniuersal Apostle.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                It is true M. Iewell. They folowe in dede. And they are left out by D. Harding. What of that? Is not the sentence full ended before? Is not the Supreme authorite of Peter fully auouched before? Do these wordes any thinge derogat from that Supreme Authorite? If they do not, how is S. Gregory either maimed or māgled, when his whole sence and wordes are fully

reported, and nothinge concealed that might alter, weaken, or diminish the same? If they doe, then by like you will shew it. Let vs see how you folowe the matter.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .265. Vntruthe as appeareth.M Harding saieth, The Bishop of Rome was called the vniuersall bisshop.
            
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                Vntruthe againe M. Iewell. D. Harding in this place saieth no suche thinge. You euer shoote at a wronge marke.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                But S. Gregorye euen in the selfe same sentence, that M. Harding hath here so hastely broken of, saieth. Peter him selfe being the Apostle of Christ yet was not called the vniuersall Apostle.
            
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
               
               The .266. Vntruthe for D. Hard. hath not broken of any part of the Sentence alleaged.This dothe not derogate from the Power before confessed in Peter, but from the Name which is not the quaestion at this present.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .267. Vntruthe Slaunderous. These wordes do folowe: they were not in the middes. Concil Constantinopol. 8. 
                     •••
                  ione. 8. And woulde M. Harding haue the worlde beleue, that the Popes power is greater and more vniuersall then S. Peters?
             
               
                  Stapletō. 
                Lo, howe you runne from the Name to the thinge, from the Calling to the power. S. Gregorye confesseth the Power, but denieth that Name. You bicause he denieth the Name, would haue him to denie the Power. S. Gregorye confesseth the one and proueth it by Scripture, but yet denieth the other. You bicause he denieth one, would force him to denie bothe. Thus M. Iewell (not D. Harding) altereth and mangleth S. Gregory. We will not haue the worlde to beleue that the Popes power is greater then S. Peters, but that the Pope being successour of Peter hath the same power which Christ gaue to Peter, and not only to Peter, but to his successours, as we haue heard Chrisostom expressely saie.
            These wordes M. Harding thought good to nippe of in the middes. Such is his dealing in the allegation of the Auncient Fathers. If I liste to vse his owne termes, I might well call this Foysting or Cogging, or I know not what. Certainely the holye Fathers in the Councell off Constantinople saie thus. It is not meete for Catholike men thus to choppe and to pare the sayinges of the holy Fathers. It is rather the very property of heretikes.
            
            You teache vs still M. Iewell howe to answere your owne demeanour. This worde (Whole) wherein the effect of S. Gregories meaning stode, M. Iewell thought good to nippe of in the middes. Such is the dealing of M. Iewell in the allegation

of the Auncient Fathers: So he corrupted before Clemens Alexandrinus, S. Ambrose, Seuerus Sulpitius, S. Hierom and others. If I liste to vse M. Iewelles termes, I might saye he had the Choynecough &c. Certainly the holy Fathers in the Councell of Constantinople saie thus. It is not mete for Catholike men thus to choppe and to pare the sayinges of the holy Fathers. It is rather the very property of heretikes. Exore tuo te iudico serue nequam.
               
                  Luc. 19.
            
            As for the sentence which M. Iewell chargeth D. Harding to haue nipped of in the middes, neither was it in the middes, but a sentence folowing, neither did the omitting thereof any thinge derogat from the meaning of S. Gregory. M. Iewell therefore hath talked hetherto against him selfe pleasantly and largely, but to the matter he hath yet saied nothinge. Neither doth he say any thinge in many wordes after. He imagineth D. Harding to obiect that S. Gregory though he blamed the name of vniuersall B. in Iohn of Constantinople,A fayned obiection of M. Iewell. yet he claimed the same to him selfe, as a title only belonging to the See of Rome. Hereupon he heapeth vp a Mayn number of sayinges of S. Gregory against the title of Vniuersall bishop as well in him selfe, as in any other. All that is to no purpose. For it is not here defended by D. Harding. And it is not in this place at all disputed of, nor at al in any other place vpholded in that sence as S. Gregory blameth it. It is neither required nor vsed of any Pope. Therfore M. Iewell I may well call your labour therein Vanitas Vanitatum. For it is a great token of idlenesse to be so earnest and so copious in disprouing that thinge that no man affirmeth. And yet M. Iewell so forceth this matter, as if all the right of the cause lay vpon it. It is a lewde kinde of logicke so stoutely to disproue that no man defendeth, and to leaue that thinge vntouched, which only shoulde be answered. Therefore you conclude nothinge against D. Harding, when you saie.
            
               
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               Pag. 227By these it may appeare that S. Gregory being Bishop of Rome would not suffer the Name of Vniuersall Bishop to be geuen neither to any other Bishop nor to him selfe.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                All this is confessed. The Name of Vniuersall Bishop, as being the only Bishop for all, No Pope hath euer required, taken or vsed. But to the Authorite of the Pope S. Peters Successour what saie you? You answer at the length, and you saie.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .268 Vntruthe For S. Paule spake not in like Sence. 2. Cor. 11
The .269 Vntruthe in missereporting the Text of S. Paule.And whereas S Gregorie saieth: The char
                     •
                  e and chief
                     •
                  y of the whole Churche is committed vnto Peter, in the sense it is spoken in, we denie it not. S. Paule likewise saieth of him selfe in like sence. Incumbit mihi quotidiana cura omnium Ecclesiarum. There lieth vpon me the Daily charge of all Churches. And further saieth. I reken my selfe to be nothinge infe
                     •
                  iour in t
                     •
                  auail to the highest Apostles.
            
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                The wordes of S. Paule are not truly reported of you M. Iewell. You haue lefte the common Latin translation, and made an other of your owne. The Latin and the Greke also do reade thus. 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                
               Praeter ea quae extrinsecus sunt, instātia mea quotidiana, Sollicitudo omniū Ecclesiarū. Beside the forain troubles and aduersites, my daily occupatiō, the care of all cōgregations. And how? It foloweth. VVho is troubled, and I am not troubled, who is offended, and I am not offended?2. Cor. 11 In this sence M. Iewell euery good Bishop, and Priest, yea euery good Christē man hath a care of all the Churches in the worlde. But 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                is sollicitudo not cura & principatus, a hofulnesse and care, not a charge and Principall rule, such as is confessed in Peter. Againe if Paule being a chosen vessell, beside all the other Apostles, had also such a care and charge as Peter aboue the rest had, yet he had no Successour therereof, except at Rome, where it pleased God he should take the crowne of marrtyrdō with S. Peter.
                  Gregor. li. 1. Epist. 24. Petrus Authore Deo 
                        •
                     anctae Ecclesiae principatū 
                     
                        •
                     e
                        ••
                     ens.
                Wherefore that Authorite ether died in him, or if it had any Successi
                  •
               n after him, the See of Rome hath it. But M. Iewell that S. Gregory spake of a farre other charge and chiefty ouer the whole Chur
                  •
               he in Peter, then was in Paule or any other Apostle, (though other holy Fathers, as S. Hierom and S. Ciprian seme

to make all the Apostles equall) it appeareth euidently by an other Epistle of S. Gregory, which your selfe alleageth in this place.
                  Lib. 4 Epist. 38 Thus he saieth. Certe Petrus Apostolus primū membrū sanctae & vniuersalis Ecclesiae est. Paulus, Andreas, Ioannes, quid aliud quam singularium pl
                     •
                  bium sunt capita? Et tamen sub vno capite omnes membra sunt Ecclesiae. Truly the Apostle Peter is the chiefest membre (vnder Christ) of the holy and Vniuersall Church. Paule, Andrew and Iohn what other thinge are they then the heads of Particular flockes? And yet all are the membres of the Churche vnder one head, Christ. The charge therefore and Preeminence geuen to Peter by S. Gregories confession, is greater and more ample, then the charge of Paule, or ony other Apostle. Peter had the charge of the whole Churche, Paule and the other, of particular flockes. And dothe M. Iewell thinke to persuade the worlde that. S. Peter had the charge of the whole Churche, in the like sence, as S. Paule had the carefulnesse of all Churches? Or is it likely that M. Iewell knoweth S. Gregories minde better then euer S. Gregory knewe it him selfe? This shifte therefore can not serue M. Iewell. What other hath he? We shall see by his wordes.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .270 Vntruthe in forging a false Argument vpon D. Harding.And will M. Harding hereof reason thus, Peter had the charge of the whole Churche. Ergo the Pope is an vniuersal Bishop?
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                No M. Iewell. It becometh only your scoffiing sprit to reason so. D. Harding reasoneth thus. Peter is confessed by S. Gregory to haue the charge of the whole Churche committed vnto him, by Christ him selfe. Ergo the Primacy of Peter by the testimony of S. Gregory hath bene sett vp and ordained by God. Ergo the Pope Peters Successour, hath his Primacy Iure domino by Goddes lawe, not only by mans lawe. Ergo the power and Authorite ouer all Christes flocke is acknowleadged and confessed in the Bishop of Rome. And that not only by S. Gregory, but by Chrysostom also. Ergo then the Vntruthe which you noted, is no Vntruthe, but you M. Iewell stande

guilty thereof. Ergo whether the Name of Vniuersall Bishop were geuen or no, it is not of great importance, the Authorite and Power being confessed.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .271 Vntruthe Slaunderous.
For the Pope at this daye chalengeth no such title.Certeinely S. Gregorie saieth▪ Peter him selfe notwithstanding he receiued the whole charge, yet is he not called the Vniuersal Apostle. And can the Pope be that thinge, that S. Petre him selfe coulde not be? S. Gregorie dreueth his reason thus. If this title of Vniuer
                  •
               alite might belonge to any man, it shoulde ch
                  •
               f
                  •
               ly belonge vnto S. Peter, but it belong
                  •
               th not vnto S Peter. Therefore it can belonge to no mā Hereby it is plaine that the Bishop of Rome challengeth this day a title S Peter neuer had, that no holy, nor godly man would euer take vpon him, that S. Gregory vtterly refused and detested and called blasphemy.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                M. Iewell allwaies harpeth vpon a wronge stringe. By such idle talke his Replie is waxen to a great quantite. We answer M. Iewell. You talke of that no man affirmeth. You slaunder the Pope. You abuse the Reader. We call not the Pope Vniu
                  •
               rsall Bishop. The Pope writeth not him selfe so, but Seruum sernorum Dei. the seruant of the seruantes of God. D. Harding goeth not aboute to proue it. Therefore you fight with your owne shadowe.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                And yet will he seme to maintayne his estate by the Authorite of this holy Father.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                Yea forsothe the state of his Primacy is by this holy Fathers not only writinges, but much more doinges so maintained and established, that M. Iewell shall neuer auoide it, if (as he dothe here stoutely) he will stande to the Authorite of this holy Father. But the Name of Vniuersall Bishop, neither we, nor the Pope maintaineth by this, or by any other holy Father.
            And nowe bicause M. Iewell hath heaped out of the Epistles of S. Gregory a mayne number of allegations against the title of Vniuersal
                     •
                   B
                     •
                  shop, quoting them with such Ambition in the Margin, that one very allegation he quoteth Iewell. Pagina. 226, thus three times immediatly one after the other,
                  lib. 4. Epist. 39
               
                  lib. 4. Epist. 39 and in the same sentence two other allegations,
                  lib. 4 Epist. 39 as lib. 4. Epist. 32. and lib. 4. Epist. 38. he quoteth thrise also (eche of them) where as for these nine seuerall quotations

in the margin of bothe booke and Epistle, one only quotation of the booke and three seuerall quotations of the Epistles had bene sufficient, because I saie, he hath with such extreme Ambition so heaped and multiplied his Allegations against that Title, which (as it hath bene saied) is of no Bishop of Rome vsurped, required, or mayntayned in that sence as S. Gregory reprou
                  •
               th it, (that is, to be a Bishop Alone excluding all other) I will nowe (by Gods helpe) declare by the Epistles of S. Gregory him selfe, that notwithstanding he so abhorred that Name, calling it a puffe of arrogancie, a newe Name, a Rashe,
               
                  Grego. li 6 Epist. 2. & .24. Item li. 4 Epist. 32.38. & .39 
               a Foolish, a proude, a pompouse, a Peruerse, a Superstitious, an vngodly, and a wicked title, a Name of errour, a Name of singularite, a Name of vanite, a Name of Hypocrisie, and a Name of blasphemie, notwithstanding he saieth, that Whoso euer calleth himselfe Vniuersall Bishop,
               
                  Lib. 4. Epist. 38 
               or desireth so to be called, is in his pride the forerenner of Antichrist, last of all, notwithstanding, he vttertly refuse that Name, to be geuen either to any other Bishop or to him selfe, that yet I saie all this notwithstanding, he practised him selfe the Vniuersall Authorite ouer the whole Churche, and euery parte thereof, through out all Christendom, as occasion serued. M. Iewel saieth.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               Pag. 226 Grego. lib. 4. Epist. 38. The .
                     •
                  72 Vntruthe For the reason that S. Gregory forceth, serueth not against the Bishop of Rome.The reason that S. Gregory forceth against the Bishop of Constantinople, maye serue as well against the Bishop of Rome. For thus he saieth. VVhat answer wilt thou make vnto Christ, that in dede is the head of the Vniuersall Churche, at the triall of the last Iudgement, that thus goest aboute vnder the Name of Vniuersall Bishop to subdue all his membres vnto thee? This is the very definition of an Vniuersall Bis
                  •
               op. Thus the Bishop of Rome attempteth to subdue the whole Churche of God, and all the membres of Christ vnto him selfe. Therefore by S. Gregories iudgement he is the forerunner of Antichrist.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                The reason that S. Gregory forceth against Iohn of Constā
               tinople, can not be so forced against the bishop of Rome, neither is that reason only so forced as M. Iewell imagineth. For the first, touching the Subiection of the whole Churche of God to the B. of Rome, as mēbres vnto their head, and sh
                  •
               pe

vnto their Pastour, S. Gregory him selfe shall anon be witnesse sufficient, that it was so, and ought to be so. Though therefore Iohn of Constantinople, who was no head of the vniuersall Churche, might worthely be blamed of S. Gregory, for subduyng the whole Churche vnto him, vnder pretence of that proude and vnlawfull Title, yet the Bishop of Rome (whose Supremacy ouer all the Churche none more then S. Gregory him selfe practised) can not be blamed if he claime that vniuersall authorite. But this is not the chefe or only reason that S. Gregory forceth against Iohn of Constantinople for vsurping that Name of vniuersall Bishop, that thereby he woulde make him selfe head of the vniuersall Churche, but that thereby he would make him selfe, the Only Bishop of all the Churche, and all other no bishops at all. In this sence S. Gregory reproued that Name not only in Iohn of Constantinople, but also in him selfe or any other. Therefore writing to the Emperour Mauritius he vseth these wordes.
                  
                     Gregorious lib. 4. epis. 32.
                  This Nestorius and Macedonius were both Bishops of Constantinople.
                
               What man is this which against the commaundements of the gospell, and decrees of the Canons, presumeth to vsurpe to him selfe a new Name? Would God, the same man might well be one Bishop, without the hinderaunce of other, which desireth to be called the vniuersall 
                     •
                  ishopp. Certainely it is knowen that many bishops of Constantinople, haue fallen in to the whirlepoole of heresy, and not only bene heretik
                     •
                  s but also Archeher
                     •
                  tikes. For from thence came Nestorius, which teaching that Our Sauiour Christ was two persons, not beleuing that God coulde be made man in one person, fell euen to Iuish infidelite. From thence came Macedonius who denyed that the holy Ghoste was God consubstantiall with the Father and the Sonne. If therefore any man in that Churche (of Constantinople) do take that Name vnto him (of vniuersall bishop) what was the iudgement of all good men? Then forsothe the Vniuersall Churche loste her state and being (which God forbidde) when he which is called Vniuersall f
                     •
                  ll. But God kepe this blasphemous name from the hartes of all Christ
                     •
                  n men.

In the which the honour of all priestes is taken awaye while it is of one man arrogantly vsurped. Verely for the honour of S. Peter Prince of the Apostles that Name of Vniuersall bishopp was offred to the bishop of Rome by the Reuerent Councell of Chalcedon. But no bishop of Rome did eu
                     •
                  r take that Name of Singularite vnto him, or euer consented to vse it. And why so S. Gregory woulde none of your predecessours vse this Name or title? It foloweth immediatly. Ne dum priuatum aliquid daretur vni, honore d
                     •
                  bito sacerdotes priuarentur vniuersi. Lest that whiles any Singular thinge shoulde be geuen to one, all priestes should be defrauded of their dew honour. In this sence S. Gregory abhorred that Name, as it was a Name of Singularite, as a Singular title defrauding other of their right, as a name in the whiche the honour of all other priestes is taken awaye. For so did this Iohn of Constantinople affecte this Name of vniuersall bishop, as it signified the Name of one only bishop for all. Therefore S. Gregory in a letter writen at the same time to Constantia the Emperesse saieth thus.
                  Lib. 4. Epis. 34. 
               Triste valde est, vt patienter feratur, quatenus despectis omnibus praedictus frater & coepiscopus meus solus conetur appellari episcopus. It is a heauy hearing, that it shoulde be patiently tolerated, when the saied Iohn my brother and felowe bishop, coueteth to be called The only Bishop, setting all other at naught. And againe in an other epistle to this Io
                  •
               n him selfe of Constantinople he saieth.
                  Lib. eodem epis. 38. 
               Ad hoc quandoque perductus es, vt d
                     •
                  spectis fratribus episcopus appetas solus vocari. Thou art brought at length to this pointe that setting thy brethern at naught, thou couetest to be called the Only bishop. And in the same epistle againe. Generalis pater in mundo vocari appetis.
               
                  Lib. 7. epis. 69. Thou couetest to be called the Generall Father in the worlde, as desiring in dede to be the Father and Master of all alone. And to the Bishop of Thessalonica he writeth of Cyr
                  •
               acusthis Iohns Successour coueting in like maner that Title, Si vnus (vt putat) vniuersalis est, restat vt vos episcopi non sitis.
            
            
               If one (as he supposeth) be an vniuersall bishop, it remayneth that you be no bishops at all. In this sence that Name was so greuously abhorred of S. Gregory, and for that cause (bicause it emplied such a sence, as might doe iniury to all other bishops and rulers of the Churche) neuer vsed of S. Gregory, or of his predecessours, or of any Pope sithens, that M. Iewell is able to name. And therefore S. Gregory (geuing the same reason) saieth expressely in an other epistle to Eulogius the Patriarche of Alexandria, in this wise. Your holynesse knoweth,
               
                  Lib. 4. Epis. 36. 
               that by the holy Councell of Chalcedon this name of Vniuersalite was offred to me as bishop of the Apostolike See, But none of my predecessours euer consented to vse this prophane title: Bicause verely if one Patriarche be called vniuersall, other are made no Patriarches at all. Which reason also in the same epistle he repeteth yet againe,
                  
                     Patriarcharum nomen coeteris derogatur.
                  
                  
                     Honor patriarcharū omnium negatur.
                  
                as being in dede the chiefè and only cause why he and his predecessours other bishops of Rome, vtterly refused and abhorred that Title. Thus it appeareth that S. Gregory forced not that reason only or chiefely against the bishop of Constantinople, which M. Iewell imagineth, bicause by that Title he woulde become Head of all the Churche, but the reason which S. Gregory principally forceth against the bishop of Constantinople, and for the whiche he him selfe and his predecessours refused that Title, is, that by the same Title he would be the bishop Alone, the Patriarche Alone, the priest Alone. To Conclude. S. Gregory forceth two reasons against the bishop of Constantinople, why he may not be called the Vniuersall Bishop. And he geueth one reason why he and his predecessours haue refused that Name. The two reasons against the Bishop of Constantinople are these. First and principally bicause appetit solus episcopus vocari, he coueteth to be called the only Bishop: bicause by that Name, Patriarcharum nomen coeteris derogatur. Other Patriarches are made no Patriarches at all. This was a newe, a prophane, a blasphemous, and

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
an Antichristian attempt. The second reason is by a consequence. For so it woulde folowe that he woulde subdewe all the Churche to him, whose Churche is knowen to haue bene oftentimes the Ringleader and founder of wicked heresies: Which were the greatest absurdite that might de deuised. For thereof it woulde folowe that the whole Churche shoulde perish, the Vniuersall Bishop perishing. The one onely reason that S. Gregory geueth, why he and his predecessours, though by the whole generall Councell of Chalcedon Vniuersales oblato honore vocati sunt they were called Vniuersall Bishoppes that honour being offred them,
                  Lib. 4. epist. 38.
               VVhy the Pope is not called vniuersall. woulde yet neuer vse or enioy that title, is (not bicause he and his predecessours shoulde thereby become heades of the vniuersal Churche, as if that Authorite wer iniurious, but) lest that (as in foure seueral epistles he repeteth) si sibi in pontificatus gradu gloriā singularitatis arriperet,
               
                  Lib. 4. epist. 32.36. &. 38 & lib. 7. epist. 30. Meus honor est fratrum meorū solidas vigor.
                
               hanc omnibus fratribus denegasse videretur. if any of his predecessours shoulde take vnto him that singular preferment in the degree of bishopricke, he might seme to denie the same (preferment of bishopricke) to al his brethren, that is, the Pope by that meanes might seme to become the Onely Bishop ouer all Christen people, as that Iohn of Constantinople attempted to be. For this reason, for this inconuenience emplied in that Name, no bishop of Rome euer vsurped, or desired that name, though of other men before Saint 
                  •
               regories time they were so called, as it shal in the 
                  •
               .8. Vntruthe appeare. Nowe the other reason off being Heade ouer the vniuersall Churche of Christ, Saint Gregory fo
                  •
               ceth not against him selfe or his predecessours the bishops of Rome, bothe bicause the See of Rome fel neuer to heresy, but by the especial praier of Christ for Peter the first bishop therof is preserued, vt nunquam deficiat fides eius that their faithe maye neuer faile,
                  Luc. 22. as in the 108, Vntruthe we shall more particulary declare, (whereby the absurde consequence falling in the bishops of Constantinople

hath here no place) and also bicause S. Gregory him selfe as his predecessours before him, was in dede the Head gouuerner of the Vniuersall Churche of Christ, and practised that Headship and Iurisdiction in all partes of Christēdome, as occasion serued. Which nowe according to promise, out of the very Epistles of S. Gregory him selfe, I entend God willing to declare.
            To omitte the particular Iurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome in all Italy it selfe, where he is the Metropolitane, and where only at this present M. Iewell and his felowes woulde limit his Authorite, if at lest they will graunte him so muche (for by some of their iudgements he shoulde rule only his owne dyocese, and by some other not them neither, for such woulde haue no Bishops at all touching Order and Iurisdiction) but to omitte the practised Authorite of S. Gregory within the bondes of Italy it selfe where in Rome standeth, let vs consider howe the same was extended, as well ouer the Alpes to vs warde Northe and West, as ouer the sea to all the worlde beyonde, bothe southe and East.
            The Iurisdiction and Supreme Authorite of S. Gregory ouer the Realme of Fraunce appeareth euidently in one of his Epistles directed Vniue
                     •
                  sis Episcopis Galliarum,
               
                  Gregorius lib. 4. Epist 52 to all the Bishops of Fraunce. Where thus he writeth worde for worde. Bicause the place is longe,Fraunce. and the booke is common to be had, I leaue the L
                  ••
               ine, and geue thee (gentle Reader) the English thereof faithefully and sincerely translated. Bicause (saieth S. Gregory) eue
                     •
                  y duty is then semely perfourmed,
               1. S. Gr
                        •
                     
                     go
                        •
                     y the Pope hath his Legat in Fraunce.
                
               when there is one Ruler, to whom recourse may be had, we haue therefore thought it conu
                     •
                  nient to appoynte our brother Virgilius Bishop of Arles oure Legat according to the olde Custome, in those Churches which are subiect to our most Excell
                     •
                  nt Sonne Childebert the kinge (of Fraunce,2. According to the olde Custome.
               ) to the entent that bothe the right Catholike faithe (that is, such as by the foure generall Counc
                     •
                  ls is d
                     •
                  fined) maye with

hofull deuotion by Gods helpe be preserued, and also that if perhaps any contention arise among our brethern and felowe Priestes he may appease it by vertu of his Authorite, as occupying the roome of the See Apostolike, according to his discrete moderatiō. To whom also we haue enioyned that if such questions of certaine Matters do arise, for the discussing whereof the presence of many is ned
                     •
                  full, let him with a competent number of our brethern and felow Bisshops gathered together, discusse the matter with equite and according to the Canons vprightly determine it. But if any Contention or question arise touching the faith (which God forbidde) or a Matter springe vp that is of some waighty cōtrouersie, so that for the greatenes of it, the Iudgement of the See Apostolike semeth necessary, the truthe of the Matter being diligētly examined, let him by his owne relation bringe it to our knowleadg, to thentent that from vs it may with an agreable and vndoubted sentence be determined. Also because it is necessary that before oure Legat, as ofte as he shall thinke it behouefull, the Bisshops at conuenient times do appere, for conference to be had, we exhorte you, that none presume to disobey his cōmandements therein, neither slacke to be present at such Common assembles, except perhaps either bodely sickenesse, or some other iust impediment do staie him from thence. In which case who so euer is so absent, let him yet directe in his place some Priest or Deacon, to thentent that such thinges as by our Legat through Gods helpe shall be determined or decreed, may by faithefull relation come vnto him that is absent, by the party so sent, to be of him firmely and surely obserued. And let not the excuse of any occasion presume to violat such thinges as he shall decree. Thus farre S. Gregory to the Bishops of Fraunce, lib. 4. Epist. 52. How saye you nowe M. Iewell? Wonder I pray you no more hereafter, that D. Harding will maintayne the Popes estate by the Authorite of this holy Father.
               Iewell. Pag. 227 1. Here S. Gregory the Pope hath his Legat in Fraunce. 2. and that according to the olde custome. 3. to preserue the faithe. 4. to appease controuersies arising, either by him selfe, 5. or if they be more wayghty, by a number

of other Bishops, 6. or last of all if they touche the faithe, by referring vp the Matter to the Pope him selfe, 7. Finally all Bishops are commanded to obey his Legat. Such was the supreme and Vniuersall Authorite of S. Gregory being Bishop of Rome, ouer all the Bishops of Fraunce and their Churches though yet he woulde not be called, saluted, or intitled their Vniuersall Bishop. Other examples of his practised Supreme Authorite in the Realme of Fraunce,
                  Lib. 11. Epist. 8. &. 10. li. 7. Epist. 112. & 115. as of graunting Priuileges to Monasteries and Hospitals, of preferring Bishops, &c. are in other of his Epistles to be sene, which for breuities sake I omitte. That he had the like Authorite and Iurisdiction in Spayne, it appeareth also in his Epistles,Spayne. as well by the Palle (a Bishoply preferrement graunted only by the Pope) sent to Leander a Bishop of that Countre,
                  Lib. 7 Epist. 125 as also by his Commissioner Iohn sent thither with Instructions touching cases and controuersies to be determined amonge the clergy.
                  Lib. 11. Epist. 54. & 50. And namely of the restoring of one Ianuarius vnto his Bishopricke, who had appealed to the Pope being wrongefully deposed by a number of other Bishops and had one Steuen placed in his roome. S. Gregory by Iohn his Commissioner sent to Spayne for that Purpose, restoreth Ianuarius to his Bishoprike, inioyneth a halfe yeres penaunce to those Bishops which had presumed to Consecrat Steuen in his place, and the saied Steuen he commaundeth to be degraded, and so either to remaine a
                  •
                presonner to Ianuarius, or els to be sent to Rome.
                  Lib. 11. Epist. 53. Iohn the Commissioner executeth the Sentence. And the very tenour of the execution is yet to be sene in the Epistles of S. Gregory. Such Authorite practised S. Gregory ouer the membres of Gods Churche, and yet feared not to be any forerunner of Antichrist therein.
            To passe from Spayne to Afrike, the Authorite that S. Gregory practised ouer all the Bishops there,Afrike. is euident also in the Registre of his Epistles. Where as in Numidia certaine

which had bene Donatistes being promoted to Bishoprickes woulde also be Metropolitanes, he rebuketh and expressely forbiddeth that disorder: writing to all the Bishops of Numidia in this sorte. Peti
                     •
                  stis per Hilarium Cartularium nostrum, a Beatae memoriae decessore nostro, vt omnes vobis retro temporum consuetudines seruarentur, quas a beatae Petri Apostolorum principis ordinationum initijs hactenus vetustas longa seruauit.
               
                  Lib. 1. Epist. 75 
               Et nos quidem iuxta seriem relationis vestrae, consuetudinem, quae tamen contra fidem Catholicam nihil vsurpare dignoscitur, inuiolatam permanere concedimus, siue de primatibus constituendis, caeterissque capitulis, exceptis his qui ex Donatistis ad Epis opatum proueniunt, quos prouehi ad primatus dignitatē, etiam cum Ordo eos ad locum eundem deferat, modis omnibus prohibemus. You had required by Hilarius our Notary, of our Predecessour of blessed memory, that all your auncient Customes might be reserued, which from the beginning of the Constitutions of blessed Peter Prince of the Apostles, longe Antiquite had continewed. And we verely according to the tenour of your relation made vnto vs, do graunte that the Custome remaine inuiolated, except it be such as maye seme to vsurpe any thinge against the Catholike faithe, whether it be of making of Primates and Metropolitanes, or other matters, except such as from Donatistes come to be Bishops. For such we vtterly forbidde to be made Metropolitanes, yea though by order they were called to that degree. Let it suffise t
                     •
                  em to beare the charge of their owne flocke, and not to be preferred in obtayning the Metropolitanship, before those Bishops, which the Catholike faithe hath brought vp and instructed allwaies in the Churche. Thus farre Saint Gregory. In whose wordes it is easy to be sene, bothe what Authorite he practised him selfe ouer Numidia, and also what Orders his Predecessours, the See Apostolike from the beginning, had appoynted in that Countre. By vertu of the like Authorite whereas Paulinus the Bishop of Rhegium in the coastes of Afrike,

had committed symony in geuing of orders, and certain other outrages, as his clergy complained of him to the Pope, S. Gregory appointed Commissio
                  •
               ers ouer that bishop, Victor and Columbus bishops of Numidia, with Hil
                  •
               rius his notary, for Iustice to be done in that behalfe.
                  Grego. lib. 10. epist. 33. & 34. Againe whereas the primat of that Countre admitted boyes and Children to holye Orders,
                  Lib. 2. epi· 47. Indic. 11. he made this Columbus a bishop of Numidia his legat and Cōmissioner to see that disorder punished and corrected. The like also he did for the extirping of the Donatistes heresy, springing vp againe then in Afrike, willing this Columbus,
                  Lib. 3. epi. 35. lib. 2. epist. 33. Indict. 10. to sende vnto him to Rome, Paulus the bishopp of Rhegium, who semed to be a promoter of that matter, to be examined and corrected according to the Canons. Also to depose one Maximianus a bishop for committing symony. And whereas Bonifacius a noble man of Afrike tooke parte with heretikes, S. Gregory willeth him to come to Rome, there to be instructed, or at the lest in any wise to beware that he dye not out of the faithe of that See. His wordes be these.
                  Lib. eodem epist. 41. Matth. 16. 
               Hortor vt dum vitae spatium superest, ab eiusdem beati petri Ecclesia, cui claues R
                     •
                  gni caelestis commissae sunt, & ligandi ac solu
                     •
                  ndi potestas attributa, vestra anima non inueniatur diuisa, ne si hic beneficium eius despicitur, illic vitae aditum claudat. I warne you, that while your bodely life endureth, your soule be not founde separated from the Churche of S. Peter, to whom the kayes of the kingdome of heauen are committed, and the power of bi
                  •
               
               ding and loosing is geuen, lest that while here in this life, you despise his benefyt, in the life to come he shutt you out of life. So necessary is it (gentle Readers) by the iudgement of lerned and holy S. Gregory, to be ioyned and vnited to the Churche of Rome. Therfore he commendeth in an other place Dominicus the Metropolitane off Carthage for his diligent duty that he declared to the See Apostolike, writing thus vnto him.
                  Lib. 
                  
                     •
                  . epist. 
                  
                     •
                  2. Indict. 1. 
               You knowing very well from whence the beginning of priestly Order

hath spronge in Afrike, doe cōmendably, in that by tendering the See Apostolike, you haue recourse to the springe of your Office, by discrete remēbrance therof, and with laudable cōstancy doe pers
                     •
                  uere in the loue of it. For certainly, it is the encrease of your honour what soeu
                     •
                  r Reuerence and priestly deuotion you shewe to that See. For so you prouoke her to tēder you againe. Thus the Church of Afrike in like maner as Fraunce and Spayne was a childe of the mother Churche of Rome, was subiect to that holy See and directed by the Authorite thereof, vnder S. Gregory the Pope at that time. Neither feared S. Gregory notwitstāding such Subiection and obedience on their parte, or such Authorite and gouernemēt on his parte, to be a forrunner of Antichrist ouer them, as M. Iewell woulde make S. Gregory him selfe to saie and Iudge.
            Before we passe to the other side of Italye, and the East parte of the worlde, let vs consider what Authorite S. Gregory practised in the Ilandes lying aboute these Continent landes of Fraunce, Spayne, and Afrike. And first of our owne countre of Englande which vnder this blessed Pope and by his holy meanes was conuerted frō paganisme and infidelyte to the faithe and Christianite.
            The Supreme Authorite that S. Gregory practised ouer all that parte of Brittanny which is nowe called Englande,
                  In Interrogationi
                        ••
                     s B. Augustini Cap. 9. & Be
                        •
                     a lib. 1. ca. 27 appeareth by that he writeth to S. Augustin our blessed Apostle the first Archebishop of Caunterbury, in these wordes. Britanniarum omnes episcopos tuae fraternitati committimus, vt indocti doceantur, infirmi persuasione roborentur, peruersi authoritate corrigantur. All the Bishops of Britanny we commit to thy Brotherhood, to thentent the vnlerned may be instructed,Englā
                  de. the weake may by thy persuasion be strengthened, and the frowarde by Authorite be corrected. In these wordes the Archebishopp of Caunterbury is constituted and appointed by Pope Gregorye his Legat in the Churche of Englande,

and to occupy in all the prouinces of the same the place of the See Apostolike. And what childishnes were it for S. Gregory to appointe one that him liked, by whose Authorite other Bishops might be corrected, if he him selfe had no Authorite in the Countre, but were a mere forrain Bishop, as his successours nowe (after the quiet possession of so many hundred yeres), are called and estemed of such, as haue forsaken not only that obedience, but also that Faithe and religion, in the which we Englishmen were first made Christen men, and in the which we haue cōtinewed almost these thousand yeres?
            In Corsica and Sardinia two other Ilandes lying in this west parte of the worlde, betwene Italy and Afrike,Corsica. what Supreme Authorite S. Gregory practised, his epistles do witnesse. By vertu of this Authorite whereas the bishopricke of Sagon in the Ilande of Corsica had bene a longe time vacant, he chargeth Leo a bishop of that Countre to take charge of the same writing thus vnto him.
                  Lib. 1. Epist. 76. 
               Quoniam ecclesiam Sagonensem ante annos plurimos obeunte eius pontifice omnino destitutam agnouimus, fraternitati tuae visitationis eius operam duximus iniungendā. Bicause we vnderstande the Church of Sagon by the decease of the bishop, hath these many yeres bene vtterly desti
                  •
               uted, we thought good to enioyne to you the visitation therof. And in the next epistle folowing he transferreth Martinus bishop of an other dyocese in that Ilande to this bishoprike of Sagon in these wordes.
                  Lib. eodem Epist. 77. 
               In ecclesia Sagonensi quae iam diu pontificis auxilio destituta est, cardinalem te secundum petitionis tuae modum hac authoritate constituimus sine dubio sacerdotam. In the Churche of Sagon which hath this longe time lacked her bishop, we do appointe you by this Authorite according to your request the Chiefe priest, that is, bishop thereof. By the like Authorite in the same Ilande, whereas a certain bishop through infirmite was not able to doe his Office, he writeth to the fore saied bishop Leo, willing a newe election to be made,
                  Lib. 7. Epist. 50.
               
and then (saieth S. Gregory) ad nos veniat ordinandus. Let him come to vs here to be consecrated. The like he writeth to the same bishop of Corsica Leo, touching an other bishop vpon the like occasion in the Incumbents infirmity, to be newly elected,
                  Lib. eodem Epist. 51. of whom thus he writeth. Dum fuerit postulatus cū solemnitate decreti omnium subscriptionibus rōborati, vestrarum quoque testimonio literarum, huc sacrandus occurrat. When such a one shal be nominated by the solemne decree confirmed with the subscriptions of eche one, let him come hither to be consecrated, with the testimony also of your letters. Such Authorite practised S Gregory ouer the bishops of this Ilande of Corsica.
            In Sardinia to Felix a bishop thereof disobeying the Popes legat in those partes the Archebishop of Iustinianea,
                  Lib. 4. Epist. 7. S. Gregory writeth these wordes. It is come to our hearing that your brotherhood refuseth to obey according to the custome, Iohn oure brother,
               Sardinia. 
               bishop of Iustinianea the first, and that you will not subscribe n
                     •
                  yther to his decree, neither to the relation which he made vnto vs according to the Custome. If this be so, we are very sory to see such manifest token of pride in you. We exhorte you therefore that laying asyde this proude stoma
                     •
                  he,
               
                  Distri
                        •
                     tam canonicā
                     
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      disciplinae correctionē contumaciae tuae nos s
                        ••
                     to vlcisce
                        •
                     ter i
                        •
                     aponere.
                
               you cease not to obey and shewe your selfe lowly to our foresaied brother and felowe bishop, of whom you haue bene made bishop: so that both God may reioyse in the agreement of your brotherhood, and other also maye take good example of you. For if (which we mistrust not) you continewe in this pride, knowe you that we wi
                     •
                  l surely punish your stubbornes, according to the straight and Canonicall order of dis
                     •
                  ipline. It appeareth I trowe by these wordes, that S. Gregory in this Countre also of Sardinia exercised a Supreme Authorite, howesoeuer he mislyked the name and Title of vniuersall bishop. By the like Authorite whereas Ianuarius a bishop of this Countre had iniured Nere
                  •
               a a Noble woman, and she had complained thereof to the See Apostolike, S. Gregory writing to the bishop of those

complaintes and accusations made against him, hath these wordes vnto him. Hortamur vt aut pacifica (si fieri potest) ordinatione definias, aut certé ad deputatum a nobis iudicium personam instructam dirigere non omittas. We exhorte you either to ende the matter peasably betwene your selues, or els not to faile to direct some instucted party (in your behalfe) to the iudgement appoynted by vs.
                  Lib. 7. Epist. 55. 
               And for this purpose I haue directed Redemptu
                     •
                  , our Commissioner the bearer hereof, that he maye bothe call the parties to iudgement and by the vertue of his trauaille, put in execution the Sentence. Thus farre S. Gregory, and thus without feare of any Antichristian presumption he vsed a Supreme Authorite ouer the bishopps off Sardinia, as he did ouer other af all the west parte of the worlde, as it hath particulary in sondry prouinces appeared.
            To passe nowe to the other side of Italy, the next adioyning lande on the East parte, is Dalmatia and all the coastes of Illyricum.Dalmatia. In those partes what Supreme Authorite this lerned and holy Pope Saint Gregorye (whom Master Iewell imagineth to stande most against the Popes primacy, and wondereth that D. Harding will maintayne the same by this holy fathers authorite) vsed and practised him selfe, it shall nowe in like maner as before by his owne epistles commonly extant in his workes appeare. To all the Bishops of Dalmatia S. Gregory writeth concerning the disobedience of one Natalis a Bishop there, in promoting one Honoratus an Archedeacon to the Order of priesthood contrary to his minde and pleasure. For the which disobedience in his letters to the saied Bishops S. Gregory pronounceth this sentence against Natalis the disobedient bishopp, in these wordes.
                  Lib. 2. Epist. 15. Indict. 10. 
               We therefore haue thought good by the bearer of these presents to warne ones againe the saide Natalis bishop, being with so many letters warned allready and yet persisting obstinat, that he restore againe Honoratus the Archedeacon to his former roome at the presence of the bringer hereof.

Whom if he restore not, continuing in his contumacie, first we depriue him of the vse of the Palle (which by the graunte of this See he obtayned) for his former contumacie paste: But if after the losse of this dignite, he continewe yet in the same cō
                  
                     •
                  umacie, we commaunde him to be remoued from the Communion of oure Lord
                     •
                  s Body and bloude. The whiche his sentence in effecte he writeth to Natalis him selfe threatning him farder a depriuation from his Bishoprike,
                  Lib. eodem Epist. 14. if he obeyed not. By this one example it maie appeare what authorite S. Gregory being pope of Rome had and vsed ouer the Bishops of Dalmatia.
            To all the Bishops of the coaste of Illyricū he writeth sondry letters in whiche his Authorite ouer them is most clere and euident. Whereas aboute those partes certaine bishops by forrain inuasions of the Enemye had benespoyled of their Churches and all other liuelyhoods,Illyricum. he writeth to the Bishops of Illyricum, being commaunded by the Emperour, to receiue and harbour those desolat bishops, prouiding them victuals and all thinges necessarye, that yet they shoulde haue no Authoryte in their dyoceses, and saieth. Nullam eis nos in vestris ecclesijs Authoritatem tribuimus,
               
                  Lib. 1. Epist. 43 
               sed tamen eos vestris solatijs cōtineri summopere hortamur. We geue them no Authorite in your Churches. But yet we greatly exhorte you to relieue them. This had bene a very fonde fauour of S. Gregory, if he had had no power ouer them. But what the Authorite of S. Gregory was ouer the bisshops of Illyricum it may wel appeare by the cause of Maximus bishop of Salona,
                  Lib. 4. Epist. 34 Lib. 5. Epist. 25. whom for his disobediēce S. Gregory suspended, and excommunicated. Aboute whose excommunication when certaine of his Citye had communicated with him, S. Gregory blaming them therefore, saieth. Debuistis filij charissimi pensare ordines:
               
                  Epist. 26. 
               quem sedes Apostolica repellebat, repulsum iri cognoscere. You ought derely beloued children consider the orders (of the Churche.) You ought to knowe that whom the See Apostolike repelleth, he shal be repelled. But for most euident proufes

of his practised Authorite ouer the whole prouinces of Illyricum, Slauony, Dalmatia, Pannonia, Mysia and all the rest, it is to be considered howe farre the Archebishop of Iustinianea prima, the Metropolitane and primat of all those countres according to the appoyntment of Pope Vigilius in the dayes of Iustinian the Emperour, was subiect to S. Gregory. First whereas all the bishops of Illyricum had elected Iohn to be their Archebishop and Metropolitane of Iustinianea prima,
               
                  Authen. de Eccles. tit. Coll. 9. Ideo
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Sancimus.
                he confirmeth their election, writing vnto them in these wordes. Iuxta postulationis vestrae desiderium, praedictum fratrem & coepiscopum nostrum in eo in quo est sacerdotij ordine constitutus,
               
                  Lib. 4. Epist. 9 
               nostri assensus authoritate firmamus, ratam
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   nos eius consecrationem habere, dirigentes pallium, indicamus. According to your request we do Confirme by the Authorite of our Consent oure foresaied brother and felowe bisshopp (Iohn) in the order of priesthood in whiche he is placed, and sending vnto him the palle, we declare that we do ratefie and 
                  •
               llowe his Consecration. To the same Iohn also he writeth, sending him the Palle, and making him his legat in those countres as his predecessours had bene before made of other Popes.
                  Lib. eodem Epist. 15 
               Pallium ex more transmisimus, & vices vos Apostolicae sedis agere, iterata innouatione decernimus. We haue sent you the palle after the Custome. And we decree againe of newe that you shall occupie the roome of the See Apostolike. And whereas the same Iohn had vniustly deposed Adrianus a bishop of those quarters, Pope Gregory restored him, as he witnesseth in his epistles, where thus he writeth. Quia ab antefato Ioanne primae Iustinianeae Episcopo contra ius canonesqúe depositus honoris sui gradu carere non potuit,
               
                  Lib. 2. Epist. 7. Indict. 11. 
               in sua eum reformari ecclesia, at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   in propriae dignitatis ordine decreuimus reuocari. Bicause this Adrian being against right and order deposed of Iohn the Bishop of Iustinianaea, coulde not so lese his degree, we haue decreed that he be restored to his Church and to the degree of his former dignitie. In the same letter he willeth

that if any other matter can be layed against Adrian the Bishop accused, it be either tried by his Officers or sent ouer to him, saying. Vel per eos qui nostri sunt vel fuerint in vrbe regia responsales, si mediocris est questio cognoscatur, vel huc ad Apostolicam sedem si ardua est,
               
                  Ibidem.
                
               deducatur, quatenus nostrae audienciae sententia decidatur. Either let it be tried by our Officers that are or that shal here after be in the Cyte, if it be a meane question, or els if it be of some difficulty, let it be brought hither to the see Apostolike, by our Audience and Sentence to be decided. Thus all maner of waies, in Confirming of bishops newly elected, in restoring of bishops vniustly depriued, and in finall decision of matters of controuersie, the Authorite and Supreme Iurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome (whiche nowe is so muche abhorred of the disobedient children of Gods Churche), is by S. Gregory in all Countres practised. And yet will M. Iewell and his felowes by this holy Father goe aboute to ouerthrowe the Popes Primacy.
            
               Iurisdiction practised in the East. Churche.Hetherto of the West Churche, and of the Prouinces and Countres thereof, Fraunce, Spayne, Afrike, Illyricum, the Ilandes of Britanny, Corsica, and Sardinia, we haue out of the Epistles of S. Gregory treated, and declared the Supreme Authorite by him practised ouer them in Matters Ecclesiasticall. Now of the East Churche and of some partes thereof for examples sake,Corinthe. I purpose to doe the like, as farre as by the Registre of his Epistles I shal for this present be informed. S. Gregory writing to all the Bishops of Corinthe, touching Adrian a Bishop accused of certain Crimes, and sodenly dismissed by an agreement made with the party playntif, shewing him selfe nothinge pleased with that soddain Agreement commandeth the Matter to be farder examined, and sayeth in his letters vnto them these wordes.
                  Gregor. li. 2. Indict. 11. Epist. 38. 
               Quoniam ea quae dicta sunt, indiscussa remanere non patimur, Sedis nostrae Diaconum ad ea inuestiganda dirigimus, &c. Bicause we may not abide those thinges that are

saied, to remaine vndiscussed, we direct for the Examination thereof a Deacon of our See: And why? It foloweth. Bicause the qualite of the Crime signified vnto vs dothe vehemently moue vs not to dissemble that which we haue heard. And what neded S. Gregory to sende to Corinthe in Grece a Deacon from his See, to examin Matters a fresh, which had bene there agreed? Forsothe he sayeth. Cum accusatores & Accusatum inter se fecisse gratiam indicastis, hoc nobis necesse est subtilius perscrutari, ne fortasse eorum sit comparata concordia. Bicause you haue signified vnto vs that the Accused Bishop and the Accusers haue agreed betwene them selues, we must nedes serche this Matter more narrowly, lest perhaps this their Agreement be a wrought Matter. Why what if it be? What woulde you S. Gregory haue to doe there in those partes, being but a Bishop of Rome? We shall heare by his owne wordes immediatly folowyng. Quae si (quod absi
                     •
                  ) non ex charitate, sed ex praemio facta constiterit, maiori hoc emendatione plectendum est. If this Agreement shall be founde to haue proceded not of Charyte (which God forbidde) but of bribery, this is with more rigour to be punished. Yea. But who shall punish these Greke Bishops, or what pertayneth that to you? This lerned Father nothing doubted of this Authorite, And therefore he saieth farther. Nos qui Canonice reuelante Deo, mala si quidem verasunt resecare praecedentia festinamus, commissam postmodum culpam sine vindicta nulla ratione dimittimus. We which labour to cutt of the former mischiefs according to the Canons, God willing, if they be true, can in no wise suffer a trespasse after and a fresh committed to escape with out punishment. Thus farre S. Gregory writing Vniuersis Episcopis Corinthijs, to all the Bishops of Corinth. It appeareth hereby that the Pope at that time had a Supreme Authorite ouer those Bishops, more then M. Iewell woulde gladly he nowe had ouer him and his felowes, which beare them selues to for Bishops forsothe. With the like Authorite writing to Iohn the Bishop

of Corinthe of a Redresse to be had aboute the Simony that he and other vsed, he vttereth these wordes. Si quid tale aliquid deinceps fieri senserimus, iam non verbis, sed Canonica hoc vltione corrigemus. Et de vobis (quod non oportet) aliud incipiemus habere Iudicium.
               
                  Gregorius lib. 4. Epist. 55. If we shall perceiue any such thinge hereafter to be done, we shall correct it no more with wordes, but with such punishment as by the Canons is prescribed, and we shall beginne to conceiue of you an other Iudgement, which behoueth not. Such Authorite practised that holy and lerned bishop S. Gregory ouer the bishops of Grece, and yet feared not to be accō
               pted therefore an Antichrist ouer them. And therefore in his next epistle writing Vniuersis episcopis per Helledam prouinciam constitutis,
               
                  Lib. eodem Epist. 56. to all the bishops placed in the prouince of Grece, properly so called, aboute the same matters as he wrote before particularly to Iohn the Bishopp of Corinthe, he saieth vnto them these wordes. Si aliter factum denuo senserimus, districta ac Canonica illud noueritis vltione compesci. If we shall perceiue againe that you doe otherwise (then I haue willed you to doe) knowe ye, that it shall be punished straightly and according to the Canons.
            In like maner and about the very same matter of Simony and bribery committed aboute Spirituall preferments,Epirus. writing to the bishops of Epirus an other parte or Grece, S. Gregory after his exhortatyon, concludeth in this sorte. Si (quod nō credimus) fieri tale aliquid senserimus,
               
                  Gregori. li. 5. epist. 7. 
               Canonica illud (vt dignum est) seueritate corrigemus. If we shall perceiue that you committe any such matter (as we trust you will not) we shall (as it is mete) see it punished by the rigour of the Canons. Thus in Grece it selfe as well generally as particularly S. Gregory bishopp of Rome not only intermedled by waie of exhortation but also Gouuerned, Corrected, and Punished by waie of Authorite.
            What Authorite and Iurisdiction S. Gregory practised in Corcyra an Ilande adioyning to Grece and pertaining properly

to the Metropolitane of Nicopolis in Thessalia the determination of a longe Controuersie betwene the bishop of Corcyra and the bishop of Isauria touching the Iurisdiction of Cassiope a towne of that parte or Grece, may serue for a sufficient Example. For notwithstanding the determination of the Metropolitane,Corcyra. yet the Authorite of the bishop of Rome was required to Confirme the same. Therefore S. Gregory writing to Alcysonus the bishop of Corcyra, to whom the Metropolitane of Nicopolis had adiudged the Iurisdiction of Cassiope, confirmeth the Sentence of the Metropolitane in these wordes.
                  Grego
                        •
                     ius lib. 12. Indict. 7. epist. 2. 
               Quoniam Andreas venerabilis memoriae frater noster Nicopolitanus Metropolita, innitente quoque sibi Principali iussione, in quaei causae huius fuerat iniuncta cognitio, prolata (sicut nobis patuit) noscitur statuisse sententia, antefatum Cassiope Castrum sub Iurisdictione ecclesiae tuae (quemadmodum semper fuit) debere persistere, Formam eiusdem Sententiae comprobantes, Apostolicae Sedis Authoritate eam fauente Iustitia Comprobamus, Confirmamus, at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   per omnia robustam manere Decernimus. Whereas Andrewe our brother of Reuerent memory the Mètropolitane of Nicopolis, by vertu of the Princes letters, whereby he was sett in Commission ouer this matter, hat
                  •
               e determined by Solemne Sentence (according as we be informed) that the foresayde towne of Cassiope ought to remayne in the Iurisdiction of your Churche, (as it hath allwayes bene) we Allowyng the Forme of that Sentence, doe in regarde of Iustice by the Authorite of the See Apostolike Approue it, Confirme it, and doe determine that it remayne in his full force and vigour thourough out. And bicause Mauritius the Emperour had intermedled in this matter, more then the Canons woulde well beare, and bothe at the beginning vpon Misse information had pronounced against the bishopp of Corcyra,
                  Lib. e
                        •
                     dem epist. 3. 
               Nec iussio eius (quia contra leges & Canones Data fuerat) habuisset effectum, though yet his Sentence tooke no place,

bicause it was geuen against the lawes and the Canons, and also afterwarde had put the bishop of Isauria in possession of the towne, notwithstanding the Contrary Sentence of the Metropolitane of Nicopolis (whome yet the Emperour him selfe had put in Commission bothe to examine and to ende the matter) bicause I saie th
                  •
                Emperour Mauritius had thus farre intermedled against right and Order of the Church, this lerned and holy Father S. Gregory vsing a discrete and wise moderation, to thentent he might neither exasperat his Prince, neither yet let fall the Right of the Cause, woulde neither precipitat his Sentence against the Emperours commaundement in the behalfe of the bishop of Corcyra, lest (as he sayeth of him selfe) contra iussion
                     •
                  m clementissimi domini Imperatoris, vel (quod absit) in despectum eius al quid facere videamur,
               
                  Epist 3. lib. 12. He might seme to doe any thinge either contrary to the cōmaundement of his most gracious Lorde the Emperour, or (whiche God forefende) in contempt of him, neither yet woulde forsake either the Right of the party, or his owne Authorite. Therefore writing to Bonifacius a deacon of Constantinople, thus he willeth him to doe. Dil
                     •
                  ctio tua pietati eius cuncta diligenter insinuet,
               
                  Lib. & Epist. praenot.
                
               atque constanter astruat hoc omnino illicitum, omnino prauum, omnino iniustum & sacris esse valde Canonibus inimicum. Et ideo hoc peccatum temporibus suis introduci in eccl
                     •
                  siae praeiudicium non permittat. Sed quid de hoc iudicio iudicatum an tefati quondam Metropolitae iudicium contineat, vel a nohis qualiter ea quae ab illo decreta sunt, Confirmata fuerint, suggerat, at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   id agere studeat, vt cum eius iussione nostra illic s
                     •
                  ntentia transmit tatur. Quatenus & serenitati ipsius (si
                     •
                  ut dignum est) reseruasse, & rationabiliter correxisse quae malae presumpta sunt videamur. Qua in re omninodanda opera est, vt si fieri potest, etiam iussionem suam ipse tribuat, in qua ea quae a nobis definita sunt, s
                     •
                  ruari praecipiat. Doe you diligently signifie to his highnes all thinges, and declare vnto him boldly that this his doing is vtterly vnlaweful,

vtterly naught, vtterly vniust, and directly repugnant to the holy Canons. And that he suffer not therefore this offence to take place in his dayes, to the preiudice of the Churche. But put him in minde as well of the Iudgement passed by the foresaied Metropolitane of Nicopolis, as also of our Cōfirming of his sayde Sentence, and doe what you can that our Sentence with his commaundement maye take place. To thentent that it maye appeare, that bothe we haue reserued the matter to his highnesse (
                  •
               s mete is) and also that we haue with good reason and right corrected that which hathe bene done amisse. Wherein you must also labour to gett out (if it be possible) a commaundement from him, by the which he commaunde to be kept, that which we haue determined. By this dealing of that lerned Bishop of Rome, we see euidently what Authorite he had in the east Churche, in Grece it selfe, bothe to Correct, and to Confirme, and also to Moderat the vnaduised and wrongefull attempts of Mauritius, an Emperour more wilfull and busy against the Churche then many of his Predecessours were.
                  Abbas V
                        •
                     spergensis in Mauritio.
                For the which also (as it may seme) God punished him sharply at the ende, when his wife and all his children being murdered before his face, of one of his owne subiects, he was last murdered him selfe also.
            With the like Authorite he absolued Athanasius a Priest of a certain Monastery in Lycaonia (a parte of the lesser Asia) appealing to the See of Rome.Lycaonia. This Athanasius was accused of heresy, and bicause a certaine hereticall booke was founde aboute him, Iohn the Bishop of Constantinople his Patriarche was moued against him. Athanasius speeding him selfe to Rome and cleering him selfe there before the Pope, the booke also being sent from Iohn of Constantinople to S. Gregory, and information made, howe he had dealed therein against the saied Athanasius, all thinges debated and pondered,
                  Gregor. li. 
                  
                     •
                  . Epist. 64. the Pope absolued him in these wordes. Ab omni te Hereticae peruersitat
                     •
                  s

macula iuxta professionem tuam liberum esse decernimus, atque catholicum & sincerae fidei in omnibus professorem, atque sequacem (Christi Iesu Saluatoris gratia) claruisse pronunciamus. Liberam quoque tribuimus licentiam ad tuum Monasterium in tuo te loco vel ordine nihilominus remeare. We decree you (according to your professyon) to be free from all spotte of wicked heresy, and we pronounce you to be Catholike, and to professe in all pointes the right faithe, and to shewe your selfe to haue folowed the same by the grace of Christ Iesus our Sauiour. Also we geue you free liberty (notwithstanding this Accusation) to returne to your Monastery in your former place or Order. Thus S. Gregory the Pope Corrected in Corinthe and Epirus, Confirmed in Corcyra, and Absolued in Lycaonia (all East partes of the Churche) as occasion serued, with iust right and Authorite, not fearing to be accompted an Antichrist therefore, or to doe any iniury to the proper Iurisdiction of other Metropolitanes and Patriarches there.Thessalonica. In Thessalonica an other great Cytie of Grece what the Authorite of the Bishop of Rome was, and howe S. Gregory practised the same, it appeareth in sondry of his Epistles. In a place charging Eusebuis the Bishop thereof with diuers other Bishops of that Countre, howe they shoulde demeane them selues in a Synod which was called at Constantinople aboute the proude Attempte of Cyriacus the Patriarche there, and declaring vnto them particularly what they shoulde doe, and howe they shoulde deale therein,
                  Gregor. li. 7. Indict. 2. Epist. 60. he concludeth with them in these wordes. Vnde iterum coram Deo & sanctis ipsius admonemus, vt haec omnia summo studio, & tota mentis intentione seruetis. Nam si quis (quod non credimus) scripta praesentia aliqua ín parte neglexerit, a beati Petri Apostolorum Principis pace se nouerit segregatum. Wherefore yet ones againe we doe warne you before God and his Saintes, that with all endeuour and whole Intention of minde you kepe and obserue all these thinges. For if any man (which we trust

not) do neglect these present writinges in any parte, let him knowe, he is separated and cutt of from the Peace of S. Peter Prince of the Apostles. As much to saie, he is excommunicated. It had bene a greate folie, or rather an extreme impudencie for S. Gregory thus to haue threatned those Bishops of Grece, and so farre to charge them to obeye and obserue his Writinges, if his Authorite ouer them had bene no other, then M. Iewell woulde haue the worlde beleue, it was then, or ought nowe to be. In an other place charging the same Eusebius Bishop of Thessalonica to see corrected certain offenders of his clergy, he writeth thus vnto him. Hoec igitur frater charissime diligenter attende, & ita stude,
               
                  Gregor. li. 9. Indict. 4. Epist. 69. 
               vt filios vestros vnitos ac deuotos (sicut decet) habere possitis, & hac de causa denuo ad nos querela non redeat. These thinges therefore derely beloued Brother marke diligently, and take such hede, that you may kepe your children in peace and loue (as it becometh) and that of this Matter there come no more Complainte vnto vs. It had bene a great vanite for them which feeled them selues greued in Grece, hauing there their Metropolitanes and Patriarche, to runne and Complaine to Rome and to seke succour there against their owne Bishops of the Pope, if the Pope had no Authorite ouer their Bishops, or no power to see such Matters redressed.
            Here Perhaps it may be surmised of some that liketh no deale this practised Authoryte of the Bishop of Rome,An Obiection. exemplified in S. Gregory him selfe (who of all other Fathers semeth most to helpe M. Iewelles cause against the Popes Supremacy) in so many particular Countres and Prouinces, not only of the west Churche, but also of the East, and of Grece it selfe, that all this was but of other particular Bishops and Metropolitanes, and that the Bishop of Rome as a Patriarche had Authoryte to Correct, to Absolue, to Confirme, to Excommunicat and so forthe, but yet ouer the other Patriarches them selues, S. Gregory perhaps practised no such Authorite or Supreme

Gouuernement in Matters Ecclesiasticall. And therefore his Authorite was not Vniuersall, but they were equall to him, and he to them, and so he was not the Head of all. To this I answer, that all were it so, he practised no such Authorite ouer any Patriarche, yet his Authorite extending to other Bishops subiect to those Patriarches,The Answ
                     •
                  r. and at this daye, no other Patriarche of those foure Auncient Patriarches remayning but only the Bishop of Rome and such as he appoynteth, bothe it shoulde yet stande that S. Gregory practised an Authorite Vniuersall ouer all those Countres, and also the obiection for this present time shoulde nothing helpe M. Iewell and his felowes, all the Supreme Power resting in the only Patriarche of Rome at this daye.
            But that it maye Euidently and Clerely appeare that Saint Gregory practised an Vniuersall and Supreme Authoryte ouer all,Two thinges yet to be to
                     •
                  ched. None excepted, two thinges yet farder I will touche, and then returne to M. Iewell and his Replie.  First I will declare out of S. Gregories owne writinges as before, that the Patriarche of Constantinople, one aboue all other euermore disobedient to the See of Rome, was subiect to the Bishop of Rome, and then by generall testimonies, that ouer all Churches, the See of Rome hath the Primacy, Preeminence, and principall Authorite.
            
                It is not vnknowen to the lerned with what pride and Ambition Iohn the Patriarche of Constantinople bicause of the Imperiall Courte remayning there,Constantinople. coueted to be called the Vniuersall Bishop, and that in such a sence as being the Only Bishop ouer all and for all, as we haue before out of S. Gregory declared: who is to be thought neither to haue bene ignorant what meaning that Iohn had in that Name or Title, neither to haue bene so vnwise or vncharitable as to charge him with a wronge meaning, not intended by the Patriarche. For thereby bothe a great folie woulde haue appeared in him before

all other churches, which had that Matter in debate, and also he had but encreased the Emperour Mauritius his displeasure and indignation who bothe assisted and vpholded Iohn of Constantinople herein, and was otherwise all waies to S. Gregory a heauy Lorde. In this Matter therefore, in this proude vnlawefull attempt of the Patriarche of Constantinople, what did the Bishop of Rome, or howe demeaned he him selfe therein? We shall see. First Pelagius the Pope predecessour to S. Gregory vnder whom this Iohn of Constantinople attempted this Title, and assembled a Synod for the establyshing thereof, Directis literis ex Authoritate Sancti Petri Apostoli,
               
                  Gregor. lib. 4. Epist. 36. 
               eiusdem Synodi Acta cassauit, Directing his letters thither made vtterly voide the Actes of that Synode by the Authoryte of S. Peter the Apostle,Responsalis. and forbadde his Deacon which remained as Legat or depute of the See Apostolike at Constantinople not to kepe him company. This did Pelagius vnder whom that Ambitious Title of Iohn the Patriarche of Constantinople was first attempted. But what did Saint Gregorye his nexte Successour, a man of suche humilite and lowlynesse, that he woulde not suffer (as Master Iewell alleageth) the worde of Commaundement to be vsed to him? Did he thinke yowe (Master Iewell) not practise the like Authorite, as his predecessours did? Or bicause he was a holye and lerned Father, abhorred he (thinke yowe?) suche kinde of Superiorite and primacy ouer other? As the bishops of Rome, his predecessours vsed? Nay he saieth expressely, speaking of the proude disobedience of Maximus a bishop of Salona in Illyricum, who had in the open Cyte rent in pieces, the Popes letters, Ante paratus sum mori,
               
                  Gregori. li. 7. Indict. 1. epist. 1. 
               quàm beati Petri Ecclesiā meis diebus degenerare. I will rather suffer deathe it selfe, then that the Churche of blessed Peter shoulde degenerat in my dayes, meaning and writing expressely of the Authorite and obedience dewe to the same. Therefore in this Cause of Iohn of Constantinople,

wherin the Emperour Mauritius also (a heauy Lorde allwaies of S. Gregory) toke parte, and commaunded the Pope, Vt pro appellatione friuoli nominis inter eos scandalum generari nō debeat, that vpon the Title of a trifling Name there should arise no Offence betwene them,
                  Grego
                        •
                     ius lib. 6. epist. 30. Iohn the Patriarche and the Pope, as first he dealed with the Patriarche by all gentle meanes, so at the length he folowed the Sentence of his predecessour Pelagius. First he wrote to Iohn him selfe the Patriarche, a longe, lerned, and louing letter, labouring with him by al meanes possible, that he shoulde leaue that vaine and odious title, which so fondly and wickedly he attempted: Contra euangelicam sententiam,
               
                  Lib. 4. epist. 38. Lib. eodem Epist. 34. 
               contra beatum quoque Petrum Apostolum & contra omnes Ecclesias, contraque Canonum statuta. Against the Sentence of the ghospell (breaking humilite) against the blessed Apostle S. Peter (affecting vnlawefull Superiorite) and against all Churches (coueting to be a bishop Alone) and last of all against the decrees of the Canons. And of this his dealing thus he saieth. Ego per Responsales meos semel, & bis verbis humilibus hoc,
               
                  Lib. eodem Epist. 38. 
               quod in tota ecclesia peccatur, corripere studui. Nunc per me scribo. Quicquid facere humiliter debui, non omisi. I haue by my deputies ones, and by humble wordes twise, laboured to redresse this matter, wherein the whole Churche is offended. Nowe I write my selfe. Whatsoeuer I ought to haue done by the waie of humilite, I haue not omitted. And bicause the Emperour (as I saied before) bolstered vp this Iohn the Patriarche in his Attempt, and woulde not heare the Pope to the contrary, S. Gregory not making any accompte of his owne person, but hauing an eye to the place and roome that he occupied, writeth thus to Constantia the Emperesse. Haec in causa nequaquā me pietas vestra despiciat.
               
                  Gregorius lib. eodem. Epist. 34. 
               Quia etsi peccata Gregorij tanta sunt, vt pati talia debeat, Petri Apostoli peccata nulla sunt, vt vestris temporibus pati ista mereatur. Let not your godlynesse despise me in this matter. For allthough the sinnes of Gregory be so greate,

that they ought to suffer these thinges, yet the sinnes of the Apostle Peter are none at all, that in your dayes he shoulde so suffer. Thus that holye and meke Father dealed bothe withe Iohn the Patriarche him selfe, and with the Emperesse, at the first. Whereof also he writeth to the Emperour himselfe Mauritius these wordes.
                  Lib. 4 Epist. 32. 
               Ego dominorum iussionibus obedientiam praebens, praedicto consacerdoti meo & dulciter scripsi & humiliter. Vt ab hac inanis gloriae appetitione sese emēdet, admonui. Si igitur me audire voluerit, habet deuotū fratrē: Si vero in superbia persistit, iā quid assequatur aspicio. I obeying the Cōmaundements of my Lordes haue writen to my foresaied felowe priest both softely and humbly. I haue warned him to amende him selfe of this Ambytion and vaine glory. Therefore if he will heare, he shall haue me a louing brother. But if he continewe in his pride, I see what will become of him. Thus farre S. Gregory proceding with that Patriarke by the waie of gentlenesse and humilitie. But in fine what did he? Forsoth as his predecessour Pelagius had done before him, so he did. That is. Whereas after the deathe of this Iohn, Cyriacus his successour in Constantinople, had called a Synod vpon some other pretence, minding in coulour thereof, to establish this vaine Title of Vniuersall bishop, as being the One Only Bishop for all, S. Gregory writing therof to Eusebius the bishop of Thessalonica and many other bishops together, and signifying vnto them howe Pelagius his predecessour had condemned a former Synod called aboute the matter, forbidding his Legat to kepe companye with Iohn the Patriarche at that time, he saieth.
                  Gregor. lib. 
                  
                     •
                  . Epist. 69 Indict. 2. 
               Cuius rectitudinis zelo per omnia inhaerentes, statuta ipsius sine refragatione Deo protegente seruamus. Whose vpright zele we cleauing vnto in al poyntes, doe kepe also his determinatyons without deniall by Gods helpe. In which wordes he protesteth to doe as his predecessour had done. And therefore writing to Anianus a Deacon of Constantinople that he shoulde in no wise kepe company

withe Iohn the Patriarche there, according to the Sentence of his Predecessour, he saieth. Sicut tibi iam transactis epistolis scripsi, nunquam cum eo procedere praesumas. As I haue before in other letters passed betwene vs written vnto you, see that you neuer presume to come abrode in his company.
                  Lib. 4. Epist. 39. And bicause the Emperour Mauritius at the same time by the procurement of Iohn the Patriarche had written to S. Gregory to be at peace with the Patriarch, wherby this Anianus the Deacon for feare of the Emperours highe displeasure doubted what he might doe,
                  Ibidem.
                S. Gregory writeth thus vnto him. Tua dilectio in nullo trepidet. Omnia quae in hoc seculo videt alta esse contra veritatem, pro veritate despiciat: In omnipotentis Dei gratia atque B. Petri Apostoli adiutorio confidat. Vocem veritatis recolat Dicentis. Maior est qui in caelis est, quam qui in mundo. Et in hac causa quicquid agendum est,
               
                  Ioan. 14. 
               cum summa Authoritate agat. Feare not. All thinges that you see in this worlde to be lofty against the Truthe, for the Truthes sake despise it. Trust in the Grace of Allmighty God and of his blessed Apostle Peter. Remember what Truthe him selfe saied. He is greater which is in heauen, then which is in the worlde. Last of all whatsoeuer is to be done in this Matter, Doe it with Ful Authorite. It had bene more then a Vanite for S. Gregory thus to charge that Deacon of Constantinople not to kepe company with his owne Patriarche, but to deale with him with full Authorite, notwithstanding the high displeasure of the Emperour likelye thereof to ensewe, if he had not a power and Authorite ouer the Patriarche, and a good grounde to staye him selfe on, against 
                  •
               he Princes Indignation. Verely his grounde was the Supreme Authorite ouer the whole Churche graunted to S. Peter whose successour he was, and by vertu whereof this Holy and lerned Father knewe right well that the Churche off Constantinople was subiecte to the See of Rome. And so expressely this holy Father writeth in an other place, saying.

               De Cōstantinopolitana Ecclesia (quod dicunt) quis eam dubitet Sedi Apostolicae esse subiectā? Quod & dominus pijssimus Imperator, & frater noster Eusebius eiusdem Ciuitatis Episcopus assiduè profitentur. As touching that they saie of the Churche of Constantinople, who doubteth but she is subiect to the See Apostolike?
                  Gregor. li. 7. Epist. 63. Which thinge bothe our most Gracious Lorde the Emperour, and our brother Eusebius Bishop of the same Citie doe daily professe. So farre this Matter was confessed and vndoubted at that time. And to geue the, good Reader, a clere example hereof in fewe wordes, harken what S. Gregory writeth in the very next Epistle folowing. Thus he writeth to Iohn the Bishop of Syracusa, touching the Bishop of Constantinople, as the superscription and title of the Epistle lelleth vs.
                  Gregor. li. eodem. Epist. 64 
               In quodam Crimine Byzancenus primas fuerat accusatus, & pijssimus Imperator eum iuxta statuta Canonica per nos voluit iudicari. Sed acceptis decem auri libris tunc Theodorus Magister obstitit vt minime fieret. Tamen pijssimus Imperator admonuit vt transmitteremus, & quicquid esset Canonicum faceremus. The Primat of Byzance (otherwise called Constantinople) 
                  •
               ad bene accused of a certaine Crime. And the most vertuous Emperour willed him to be Iudged by vs according to the decrees of the Canons. But Theodorus the Master being brybed with ten pow
                  •
               des of golde found the meanes to staye the matter hetherto. Yet notwithstanding the most Vertuous Emperour warned me to sende ouer, and to doe whatsoeuer was agreable to the Canons. This is that which S. Gregory sayed, bothe the Emperour and the Bishop of that Citie acknowleadged the Church of Constantinople to be subiect to the Bishop of Rome.
            By reason of this Authoryte and Iurisdictiō the Bishop of Rome had customably a Legat remayning at Constantinople, to execut such Iustice, as thereunto appertayned. So S. Gregory him selfe in the dayes of his Predecessours was Legat at Constantinople, at which time he wrote his exposition vpon Iob,

as bothe he him selfe writing to Leander a holy Bishop of Spayne, and Venerable Bede in the History of our Countre recordeth. So also when Phocas came to the Empire violently and by outragious treason, and therefore not finding there a Legat from the See Apostolike, semed to be offended therewith,
                  In Epist. ad L
                        •
                     a idrum prefixa expos. in Iob.
                S. Gregory writeth vnto him thereof in this wise. Quod permanere in palatio iuxta antiquam consu
                     •
                  tudinem Apostolicae Sedis Diaconum vestra serenitas non inuenit, non hoc meae negligentiae, s
                     •
                  d grauissimae nec
                     •
                  ssitatis fuit. Whereas your highnes founde not in your Courte a Deacon of the See Apostolike according to the Auncient Custome there to remayne,
                  Beda lib. 2. Cap. 1 it proceded not of any my negligence,
                  Gregor. li. 11. Epist. 43. but of a most vrgent Necessite. Such was the Custome, and such was the Authorite of the Bishop of Rome in the time of S. Gregory and by him selfe Confessed, P
                  •
               actysed, and of his Auncetours Receiued. Authorite I saie not only ouer all chiefe Prouinces of the West and Latin Churche, but of the East and Greke Churche also: yea and ouer Constantinople it selfe, such an other Checke mate to Rome in Spir
                  •
               tuall Iurisdiction, as Carthage of Afrike was in Temporall Empire.
            Thus farre hitherto of particular Prouinces (a fewe for example) of the West and East Churche,Supreme I
                     ••••
                  dictiō ouer the w
                     •
                  ole Chu
                     •
                  
                  che. and of the Supreme Iurisdiction in Matters Ecclesiasticall, practised by the holy Father S. Gregory Bishop of Rome, ouer them. To come nowe to the last point, for a Clere and vndoubted witnesse of a Supreme Authorite ouer the whole Churche, let vs consider a fewe sayinges of this holy Father, as M. Iewell him selfe calleth him, and that often. First for receiuing Appe
                  •
               le from any other M
                  •
               tropolitane or Patriarche, in case that any su
                  •
               h wanted,
                  Gregor. li. 11. Epist. 54. he saieth. 
                  
                     •
                  i dictum fu
                     •
                  rit quia nec Metropolitam habuit, nec Patriarcham, dicand
                     •
                  m est, quia a Sede Apostolica, quae omniu
                     •
                   Eccl
                     •
                  siarum Caput est, causa audienda ac dirimenda fuerat. I
                  •
                it be saied that (the party accused) had not any Metropolitane or

Patriarche, it is to be saied, that the Cause ought to be hearde and determined of the See Apostolike, which is The Head of all Churches. Here lo by the waye M. Iewell you haue the Clere Sentence of One holy Father (by your selfe so confessed and called) and that with in your first 600. yeres which in plaine termes calleth the See Apostolike, The Head of all Churches, as much truly, as Head of the Vniuersall Churche.Head of all Churches. Wherefore you must, if you will stande to your promise twise repeted in Pulpit and more them twise sett forthe in printe, enen here Yelde and Subscribe. Or els saye plainely, that you stande vpon Termes, and seke not the Matter. So you shal proclaime your selfe an earnest trifler, and an open Mocker of Gods people. In an other Epistle writen to S. Gregory by Iohn a bishop, and registred amonge his Epistles, thus we reade.
                  Lib. 10 Epist. 56 
               Quibus ausibus ego sanctissimae illae Sedi, quoe vniuersali Ecclesiae 
                     •
                  ura sua transmittit praesumpserim obuiare? With what attempt shoulde I presume to withstande that most holy See (of Rome) whiche sendeth forthe her lawes to the vniuersall Churche? As muche to saie. Of whome the Vniuersall Churche of Christ is directed, instructed, and gouuerned. But let vs heare againe S. Gregorye him selfe speake. Thus he saieth. Ea quae semel Apostolicae Sedis Authoritate sancita sunt, nihil egēt firmitatis.
               
                  Gregor. li. 7. Epist. 115. Such thinges as are ones decreed by the Authoritye of the See Apostolike, nede no farder strength or Confirmation. In like maner in an other place, speaking of a Synod whiche the Patriarche off Constantinople woulde haue kept, with other Bishoppes, and writing thereof to certain Bishops that they shoulde in no wise consent thereunto, he saieth.
                  Gregor. li. 7. Epist. 69. 
               Sine Apostolicae Sedis Authoritate atque Consensu nullas quaecunque acta fuerint, vires habent. Whatso euer
thinges shall be done (or passe in that Synod) they are of no value or effect without the Authoryte and Consent off the See Apostolike. And to shewe that all Bishops (none excepted) were subiect to the bishop of Rome, when anye thinge was

committed against the Canons, for otherwise they were Brethern and equall, this One place of S. Gregory dothe sufficiently and expressely declare it. Writing of the Bishop of Constantinople, howe being accused of a certain crime, first by bribery he founde the meanes the Matter came not to the Popes hearing, but afterward he semed to submitte him selfe to iudgement, and to speake faire, S. Gregory writeth thereof in this sorte. Valde dubium est vtrum puré, an certe quia à coepiscopis suis impetitur,
               
                  Lib. eodē. Epist. 64 
               nobis modo talia loquatur. Nam quod se dicit Sedi Apostolicae subijci, si qua culpa in Episcopis inuenitur, n
                     •
                  scio quis 
                     •
                  i Episcopus subiectus non sit. Cum vero Culpa non exigit, omnes secundum rationem humilitatis aequales sunt. I doubte very much, whether he speake nowe thus vnto vs simply and truly, or els because he is driuen thereunto by his felowe Bishops. For as for that he saieth, he is subiect to the See Apostolike, verely if any Trespasse be founde in Bishops, I knowe no Bishop, but he is subiect vnto it. But as longe as no Trespasse committed requireth (such Subiection) all by the waie of humilite are equall. In these wordes S. Gregory teacheth vs three pointes all worthy to be noted in this great time of schisme and disobedience.Trhee thinges to be not
                     •
                  d.
                First, that the Bishop of Constantinople one of the chiefest Patriarches professed him selfe to be Subiect to the See of Rome.  Secondarely that all Bishops none excepted if they be founde faulty in any pointe, are also Subiect to that Chiefe and Principall See of Rome.  Thirdly and last that this is no seruitude (as M. Iewell otherwhere calleth it) or mere subiection as subiects are vnder their Prince, or the seruaunt vnder his Master. For not offending, all are equall, and that by the waie of humilite. Which (offence being committed) must be chaunged into rigour, and Authorite.
            Of this Authorite and principalite not only in Correcting that is amisse,
                  Grego
                        •
                     ius lib. 2. epist. 30. but also otherwise, S. Gregory in an other place thus writeth. Quanto Apostolica Sedes Deo Authore Cunctis praelata

constat Ecclesijs, tanto inter multiplices curas & illa nos valdé sollicitat, vbi ad consecrandum Antistitem nostrum expectatur arbitrium. As farre as the See Apostolike is well knowen to be sett ouer all Churches by the Appointment of God him selfe, so farre amonge other manifolde cares, this also maketh vs very ho
                  •
               full, when to the Consecrating of a bishop, our Arbitrement is attended. In this point therefore also of Confirming bishopps to be consecrated and ordayned, we see the Authorite of the bishopp of Rome was required, and that bicause Cunctis Deo Authore praelata constat ecclesiis, it is knowen to be sett ouer all Churches (without exception) by the order and appoyntment of God him selfe. Of the which we hearde before out of the wordes also of S. Gregory that in three seuerall places of holy scripture, Christ had so appoynted it:Before. fol. 1. b. making Peter head of the rest. These places of holy Scripture are of S. Gregory in an other epistle applied so againe, where thus he writeth.
                  Gregorius. Lib. 6. Epist. 37. 
               Quis nescit sanctam ecclesiam in Apostolorum Principis soliditate firmatam? Qui firmitatem mentis traxit in nomine: vt Petrus a Petra vocaretur? Cui veritatis voce dicitur. Tibi dabo claues regni caelorum. Cui rursus dicitur. Et tu aliquando conuersus confirma fratres tuos. I terumque, Simon Ioannis amas me? Pasce oues meas. Itaque cum multi sint Apostoli, pro ipso tam
                     •
                  n principatu sola Apostolorum principis Sedes in Authoritate conualuit. Quae in tribus locis vnius est. Ipse enim sublimauit sedem in qua eti
                     •
                  m quiescere, & praesentem vitam (agere) dignatus est. Ipse deco
                     •
                  auit sedem in qua euangelistam discipulum misit. Ipse firmauit s
                     •
                  dem, in qua septem annis quàmuis discessurus sedit. Who knoweth not that the Holy Church is strēghthened in the solidite and fastnesse of the Prince of the Apostles? Who the sure stedfastnesse that he had in minde, toke also in his Name, that he was called Peter of Petra, the Rocke. To whom by the Mouthe of Truthe it selfe it is saied. To thee I will geue the k
                     •
                  yes of th
                     •
                   kingdome of heauen. To whom againe it is saied.
                  M
                        •
                     th. 16. Lu
                        •
                     . 22. 
               And thou b
                     •
                  ing sometime

conuerted, Confirme thy Brethern. And againe. Sin on the Son of Iohn, louest thou me? F
                     •
                  de my shepe. Therefore whereas there are many Apostles, yet for the Principalite it selfe and Chiefty, Only the See of the Prince of the Apostles hath praeuailed in Authorite. Which See in three places is one persons. For he exalted the See of Rome wherein he Rested. He honoured the See of Alexandria, sending his disciple the Euangelist thither. He established the See of Antioche, remayning there him selfe 7. yeres, though to departe.
            To Conclude, euident it is by S. Gregory, that the See Apostolike (wherof he saieth,
                  Li
                        •
                     . 5. Epist. 64. Li
                        •
                     . 6. Epist. 37. Lib. 7. Epist. 64 Lib 11 Epist. 54. 
               Cui praesidemus in the which we doe Gouuerne) Pro ipso principatu sola in Authoritate cōualuit. Only praeuayled in Authorite, to haue the Chiefty and Principalite. To that See he saieth, All bishops are subiect, si qua culpa in ep
                     •
                  scopis inuenitur: if any faulte be founde in bishops. This See he calleth Caput omniū ecclesiarū
                the Head of all Churches, and Cunctis praelatam ecclesiis.
               
                  Li. 2. epist. 30. lib. 7. Epist. 115. Sett ouer all Churches. What soeuer this See doth determine, nihil egent firmitatis they nede no other strength, and without the Authorite of this See, Nullas quoecumque acta fuerint vires hab
                     •
                  nt,
               
                  Li 7. epist. 69. whatsoeuer dothe passe in Synod, shall haue no force. Of the which also (agreing with S. Gregory) S. Augustin saieth,
                  A
                        •
                      Honora
                        •
                     u
                        •
                     d
                        •
                      v
                        ••
                     lu. Cred. Cap. 17. 
               Cui primas dare nolle, vel summae prof
                     •
                  cto impi
                     •
                  tatis est, v
                     •
                  l praecipitis arrogantiae to the which not to geue and graunt the primacy, soothely it is a point either of most high wickednesse, or of headling arrogancie. And thus is in dede the estate of the See of Rome maintayned by the Authorite of this holy Father. Brefely thus much is D. Hardinge furthered by the Authorite of S. Gregory.
            And that euery English harte that any thinge regardeth the benefyt of his Faithe, that reioyseth in the profession of Christianyte, and that thinketh him selfe bounde to allmyghty God, that euer he and his forefathers were brought to the faythe of Iesus Christ, and to the knowleadg of a better life hereafter

after to come, that euery such I saie maie haue the better cause, the more to consider, the sooner to acknoweleadg, the gladlyer to embrace the Primacy of the bishopp of Rome so vniuersally practised of this holy and lerned Father S. Gregory, I beseche euery English Reader diligently to marke and beare away the testimony and witnesse, that Venerable Bede the most of lerned light that euer shined in our Countie, geueth to this holy Father, and howe muche by his Iudgement we are bounde and beholding vnto him aboue all other men. Thus Beda writeth of him in his ecclesiasticall History, whiche for the confort of my dere Countre in this storme of schisme I haue of late sett forthe in the English tounge.
                  B
                        •
                     l
                        ••
                     li. 2. Cap. 1. 
               Of this holy Pope Gregory it becometh me in this our history of the Churche of Englande more largely to speake. Bicause by his diligence he conuerted our nation, that is,
               S. 
                     •
                  regor
                     •
                   our Apostle. 
               the Englishmen from the powre of Satan to the faithe of Christe. VVhome we may well, and also must call oure Apostle. For as soone as he was highe Bishop ouer the whole worlde, and appointed gouuerner of the Churches lately conuerted to the faythe, he made our Natyon the Churche of Christe, whiche had bene euer vn
                     •
                  ill that tyme the bondslaue of Idols, So that we may lawfully pronounce of him the saying of the Apostle.
               1. Cor. 9. 
               That although he were not an Apostle to others, yet he was vnto vs. For the signet and token of his Apostl
                     •
                  ship we are in our Lo
                     •
                  de. Thus farre Venerable Beda. This is that holy Pope, our Apostle, whiche Practised this Vniuersall Authorite ouer all the partes of Christendom. Let vs neuer thinke (Christian english Reader) that an Antichrist (as the Pope for his vniuersall Supremacy is called) shoulde bringe vs Englishmen to the Faithe of Christ. Neither let vs doubte, but whose godly Foundations God hathe so manye hundred yeres prospered, his doctrine, Religion, and practised Authorite, was good and godly.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               pag. 227.If S. Gregorie were nowe aliu
                  •
               , he would crie out, as he did to the Emperour Mauritius. O tempora, o Mores. O what a time i
                  •
                this?

O what manners are these?
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                Verely if S. Gregorye were nowe aliue, he woulde crie out as he did to the Emperour Mauricius, nor against vs whiche continewe in the Catholike faith planted by holy Augustin, whom he sent to preache the faith vnto vs, whom he created the f
                  •
               rst Archebishop of Caunterbury,
                  Gregor. li. 5. e
                        •
                     ist. 54 59. l
                        •
                     b. 7. epist. 5.30.1
                     •
                  3. li. 9. epist. 52.58. lib. 12. epist. 31. whom he in his epistles commendeth and extolleth, not against vs which continewe in the obedience of the Apostolike See, whereof in his time he was the gouuernour through out all Christendome, as hath bene declared. Which celebrat the holy Sacrifice of the Masse, Praye for the soules departed, Call vpon the blessed Saints, Adore Christ in the blessed Sacrament, Acknowleadg the seuen Sacraments of Christes Churche, all which thinges holy S. Gregory practised him selfe, but he woulde crie out against you M. Iewell, whiche call the workes of oure Apostle whom he sent,Iewell. pag. 187. 
               the killing of the godly, which denie the greatest benefit that euer God gaue to our nation (the conuerting of vs from infidelite to the faith) to make your selues the Apostles of the same, which call that holy man S. Gregory him selfe an Antichrist, and all his successours downewarde for vsurping (not that name which bothe he abhorred, and no other Pope euer vsed) but the Authorite of supreme gouuernment ouer the whole Churche of Christ, of S. Gregory so clerely Practised, which being in the roome of a bishopp, do condemne all the bishops that euer sate in that roome before you, against you M. Iewell, which corrupt the sayinges of S. Gregory, which call his writinges Fables, which call him an obscure and a late Doctour other where, against you he would crie out, and might most iustly crie out,Iewell. pag. 420. 
               O tempora O Mores. O what a time is this, O what manners are these?
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Thus muche is Master Harding furthered by the authorite of S. Gregorye.
            
               
               
                  Stapletō. 
                And thus much is M. Iewell furthered by his longe staying vpon S. Gregory. Verely D. Harding is so much furthered by the Authorite of. S. Gregory, that if M. Iewell will stande to the same, euidence shall force him to confesse and acknoweleadg the Charge and principalite of the whole Churche to haue bene committed to Peter by Christ, and to haue bene practised by S. Gregory his Successour thourough out all Christendom. Thus much are we furthered M. Iewell by the Authorite of S. Gregory.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               Diuis. 5
               S. Ciprian declaring the contempt of the highe Priest Christes Vicar in earthe, to be cause of schismes and Heresies, writeth thus to Cornelius Pope and Martyr. Neyther haue Heresies or schismes risen of ony other occasion, then of that, the Priest of God is not obeied, and that one Priest for the time not be Churche, and one Iudge for the time, insteede of Christ is not thought vpon.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               Pag. 227 T
                     •
                  e .273 Vntruthe Slaunderous.The .94. Vntruthe. For S. Ciprian speaketh these wordes of euery seuerall Bishop, not only of the Bishop of Rome.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                If S. Ciprian speake not only of the Bishop of Rome as you confesse he doth M. Iewell, then he speaketh of the Bishop of Rome. D. Harding saieth no more in the wordes alleaged. Ergo it is no Vntruthe that he saied. Againe D. Harding meaned not, that this place of S. Ciprian should be spoken only of the Bishop of Rome, but that it is also well and truly vnderstanded of euery Seuerall Bishop in his owne Dyocesse, not only of of the Bishop of Rome. Therefore in this point D. Harding and M. Iewell do agree. And therefore it is no Vntruthe in the one, except it be in bothe.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               To whom if the whole brotherhood (that is, the whole number of Christian people which be brethern togeather and were so called in the primitiue Churche) woulde be obedient &c.
            
            
               
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .204 Vntruthe mere Slaunderous.The .95. Vntruthe. Standing in the manifest corruption and falsifying of S. Ciprian.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                Where probabilite and reason leadeth vs to the contrary there is no manifest corruption or falsifying of the writer. Manifest corruption importeth a wilfull and purposed guile. No such to haue bene in this place, if I talked with a Bishop of Sarrisbery, and not with M. Iewell, I durst to make him Iudge. For first if this place be meant not only of euery seuerall Bishop, but of the Bishop of Rome also, by M. Iewelles owne graunte, then being with vs Catholikes a sure and vndoubted truthe that the whole brotherhood subiect to the Bishop of Rome, is the whole number of Christian people, to interpret that whole brotherhood, as D. Harding doth for the whole number of Christen people, it is so farre from any manifest corruption or falsyfying, that it is no corruption o
                  •
                falsyfying at all. If M. Iewell will saye, that this presupposed opinion of the whole brotherhood, that is of the whole number of Christian people subiect to the Bishop of Rome, is a wronge and false opinion, he shall vnderstande our opinion herein is such as we haue lerned of the holy Fathers of Christes Churche. Chrysostom saieth,
                  Chrysost. lib. 2. de sacerdotio.
                
               Christ did shead his bloud, to redeme those shepe, the charge of whom he committed bothe to Peter, and to the successours of Peter. I trust M. Iewell will exclude no parte of Christen people from these shepe, which Christ with his bloud redemed. Then by Chrisostoms iudgement, are all Christen people the flocke not only of Peter but of Peters successours also, who are the Bishoppes of Rome. S. Ambrose speaking of the Church which S. Paule calleth the Piller and grounde of truthe, addeth, Cuius hodie Rector est Damasus.
               
                  Ambro. In Commentar. in 1. Timo. 3 The ruler of which Churche at this daye is Damasus, who then was Pope of Rome. This Church which is the piller and grounde of truthe, is no particular Churche, or parte of Christes flocke, but the Vniuersall Churche and the whole number of Christen people. Venerable

Bede calleth the Pope S. Gregory,
                  Beda lib. 2. cap. 1. Histor.
                
               praelatum Ecclesijs iamdudum ad fidem conuersis, gouuerner of the Churches lately conuerted to the faithe. From those Churches none are excluded. S. Hierom saithe that Christ made Peter the Master of his house,
               
                  Hieronymus in cap. Mar. 14 
               that vnder one shepheard there may be one faithe. In the house of Christ and vnder one shepeard is one brotherhood, the whole number of Christen people. Thus then to interpret the whole brotherhood subiect to the Bishop of Rome for the whole number of Christen people, as D. Hardinge doth is no Vntruthe at all, nor no falsyfying of S Ciprian at all, seing that by M. Iewelles owne graunt S. Ciprian speaketh there as wel of the Bishop of Rome, as of other Bishops.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               Diuis. 6
               Amonge the Canons made by the 318. Bishops at the Nicene Councel, which were in number 70. (96.) and all burnt by Heretikes in the East Churche saue xx. &c.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                The .96. Vntruthe ioyned with folie as shall appeare.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
               
               The .275 Vntruthe Slaunderous.If this be an Vntruthe, and that ioyned with a folie, then haue you your selfe M. Iewell vttered an Vntruthe, and that with a folie. For these are your owne wordes M. Iewell, in your text folowing.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               Pag. 234 The .276 Vntruthe For that Athanasius in that place saieth no such thinge.The true Athanasius, him selfe, of whom we make no doubte, saieth, that the Arrians of Alexandria, burnte the Catholike mens bookes and (276) therewithall the Canons of the Councell of Nice, in the time of the Emperour Constantius, Iulius being then Bishop of Rome.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                And for this purpose you quote vnto vs in the margin: Athanasius in Epist. ad Orthodoxos. Now M. Iewell though this be a manifest Vntruthe that you reporte of that Epistle of Athanasius, (for in that whole Epistle there is no one worde of the Canons of the Councell of Nice, reade and see the Epistle who list) yet it is a farre ouersight in you to note that for an Vntruthe in D. Harding which your selfe auoucheth afterwardes for certain and true. Thus we might shortly Returne vpon you this Vntruthe by your owne assertion affirming

the same. But bicause one Vntruthe is not well defended by an other Vntruthe, though the aduersary may so be answered, we tell you therefore againe that such Canons and in the number aboue mencioned were burnt in Alexandria, by the Arrians.  We bringe for witnesse thereof the Epistle of Athansius and other Bishops writing so to Marcus the Pope of Rome, and complaining thereof in their letter to him.  We bringe you also an Epistle of Iulius the Pope liuing at the very time of the Nicene Councel, writing to the Bishops of the East, such as had them selues bene at the Councell, and reporting in that Epistle to the number of .xxiiij. Canons beside the twenty which commonly are to be read in that Councell.  Beside all this, many other Canons are alleaged as of the Nicene Councell by diuerse of the Fathers, which are not at this present to be founde in the Nicene Councell.In the disproufe M. Nowelles Reproufe. Pag. 95. b Diuerse of which Canons are particularly mencioned, gathered together and sett forthe of late against M. Nowell. It shall not nede here to repete them. To that place I referre the Reader. Is not all this sufficient to proue that such Canons were loste? Is not Athanasius and Iulius sufficient to clere D. Harding of this Vntruthe? No. M. Iewell will finde a shifte for them bothe. What is that? First as touching the Epistle of Athanasius to Marcus, he saieth it is forged. But how doth he proue that? For sothe after that he had affirmed (as you hearde in his wordes before) that the true Athanasius writeth of the burning of these Canons to Iulius the Pope, he addeth.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .277 Vntruthe in Slaundering Athanasius.
The .278 Vntruthe For Marcus was Pope only. 2. yeres. Platina.
               But M. Hardinges Athanasius, is either so forgetfull or his (277.) lies or so impudent and carelesse what he saie, that he maketh piteous complainte of the same burning vnto Marcus, that was Bishop in Rome before Iulius and was dead (278.) at the left .ix. yeres before the Canons were burnte. By such Doctours M. Harding vpholdeth the state of Rome.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                Let vs suppose it were true that Athanasius wrote to Iulius, after the deathe of Marcus, of the burning of those Canons

of the Councell of Nice. Is it not possible that those Canons were twise burnte in two sondry Copies at two sondry times? Might they not be burned first in the dayes of Marcus, and then (hauing of him an other Copie of the Canons, as by his letters to him Athanasius required) that other Copie be burned in the dayes of Iulius? What Contradiction, or what Impossibilite is there in this matter? Or howe is M. Iewell euer able to proue that suche Canons were not burnte before the time of Iulius?
                  Socrates l
                        •
                     . 1 ca. 35.30. et seq.
                Certainely the heresy of the Arrians troubled the Churche of Alexandria where those Canons were burnte before the dayes of Pope Iulius, and Athanasius was banished in the reigne of Constantin the Greate, by the meanes of the Arrians, Eusebius, Theognis, Maris and other, hauing greuous and sondry accusatyons layed against him. It is not impossible nor incredible that those which founde the meanes to banishe the Bishop, were also able to spoyle his library, and to burne his bookes, especially those Canons, wherein their wicked heresy, was with most waighty Authorite condemned. Considered also, that in the Canons nowe extant of that Generall Councell of Nice, there is no one worde nor halfe worde against the Arrian heresy, against the which yet that Councell was principally and chiefly assembled. Thus though it were true that the Canons were burnte in the time of Iulius, and that Athanasius wrote thereof vnto Iulius, (as M. Iewell vntruly saieth, he did) yet were not Athanasius the
                  •
               fore a forgetfull lyar, impudent, or carelesse what he saye (as it pleaseth the graue head of M. Iewell to call him) but bothe sayinges might right well be true, and stande together, the troublous estate of the Churche of Alexandria considered as well in the dayes of Marcus, Constantin yet liuyng, as of Iulius in the reigne of Constantius his Son.
            But nowe seing Athanasius writeth no suche thinge of these Canons to Iulius, at the lest in the place by M. Iewell alleaged,

how forgetfull of his lyes, how impudent is M. Iewell, and howe carelesse what he saie, or what he write? And who will truste M. Iewell in doubtefull matters, which thus deceaueth vs in plaine thinges? What is Impudency, if this be not? For as I tolde you before M. Iewell, Athanasius in his epistle, Ad Orthodoxos, written in the time of Iulius successour of Marcus,
                  Athanasius moste Impudētly belyed of 
                     •
                  aster Iewell. hath no one worde of the Canons of that Councell of Nice. You reporte him vntruly. You deceiue your Reader. Or els you were deceiued by some other, whose eyes, not your owne, it maye seme yowe vsed in this matter. For Reade the Epistle. M. Iewell. And if Athanasius write any one worde of the Canons of the Councell of Nice, in all that Epistle, let me neuer be taken for Christen man more. He saieth in that Epistle. Ecclesiis & baptisteriis flammae iniectae. Fyre was caste vpon the Churches,
                  Athanasius in epis. ad Orthodoxos.
                and vpon the fountes. And againe. Sacros Scripturarum libros quos in Ecclesiis inueniebant comburere. That the heathen and infidels burned the bookes of holye Scripture, such as they founde in the Churches. Of any other burning or of the Canons of the Nicene Councell, there is not one worde, nor halfe worde. By suche Impudent Vntruthes M. Iewell will deface and bringe out of credit the wrytinges of the olde Fathers.
            Nowe whereas you saie farder that Marcus, which was bishop of Rome before Iulius, was dead at the lest ix. yeres before the Canons were burnte, if it were true that in the time of Iulius those Canons were burnt, yet it will ill folowe that it was jx. yeares after the deathe of Marcus. For by the best and moste exacte accomptes of Chronographers,
                  Damasus & Platina in Marco.
                euen of Henricus Pantaleō
                of Basill, this Marcus was Pope but two yeres, and 8. moneths. Which accompte is founde first in Damasus, and after in Platina, and diuers other. The Arrians therefore committing those outrages and spoyles aboue named in Alexandria, aboute the beginning of Pope Iulius in the dayes of Constantius,

if they had at that time also burned the Canons of the Nicene Councell (whiche yet Athanasius sayed not) it woulde well lacke the better halfe of jx. yeres after the deathe of Marcus, that those Canons were burnte. Yet you adde before to proue that in the dayes of Iulius the Canons were burnte.
            Which obseruation of time appeareth also by Socrates in his storie.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               pag. 234. T
                     •
                  e 279. Vntruthe There appeareth no suche thinge in Socrates.Yow quote in the margin of this place. Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 14. Nowe verely what obseruation you can picke out of this place, touching the burning of those Canons, the Reader shall see and Iudge. Bicause the Chapter is but shorte, I will alleage the whole as it lyeth. Thus lye the wordes of Socrates. Aboute this time the Arrians remoued Gregory (their Arrian bishopp) from Alexandria, as one odyous to the people bothe for the burning of a Churche, and also for that he was not earnest enough, in defence of their opinion. And in his roome they placed George, who came then from Cappadocia, one that helde the doctrine of their religion. This is the whole .14. Chapter of Socrates in that second booke. Of the Canons of Nice he speaketh no one worde. Of a Churche burned he speaketh. But what? Thinketh M. Iewell that the Canons of Nice were there burnte? In dede such lewde Gheasses are mete to mayntayne such a lying Religion as M. Iewell defendeth. But neither Socrates in any other place,
                  Ruff. lib. 1 cap. 19. Theodor. li. 2. cap. 4. neither Ruffinus, nor Theodoret nor Sozomenus all writing of this Arrian bishop Gregory and of his deposing do make any mention of such Canons burnte in his time. Only Sozomenus openeth a litle more this matter, and declareth more then any of all the other dothe, what Churche and what burning that was for the which this Gregory was of his owne felowes depriued. For first of the Churche whiche was burned thus he writeth. Gregorius sedem Alexandrinam inuasit.
               
                  Sozomenus lib. 4. ca. 6 
               Quod populus molesté ferens, ecclesiam quam Dyonisij vocant, qui episcopus illic fuerat, incendunt. Gregory inuaded the See of Alexandria.

Whiche thinge the people taking greuously they sett a fire a C
                  •
               urche called by the name of Denys, who had sometime bene bi
                  •
               hop there. This was the Churche which was burned by the intruding of that Arrian bishop, and for the which also he was afterwarde partly depriued. For of his depriuation thus the same Sozomenus writeth in the same booke.
                  Lib. eodem Cap. 7. 
               Interca Arriani dogma
                     •
                  is fautores &c. In the meane while the Arrians remoued Gregory (their bishop) as being but negligent in establishyng their doctrine, and one much hated of the Cytyzens of Alexandria, by reason of the mischiefs that happened to the Cyte at his entring in, and the burning of a Churche. This is all that is writen of these ecclesiasticall writers touching any losse done by fyre in the time of the Arrian bishop Gregory. What obseruation of time can M. Iewell finde here, to proue that in the dayes of Pope Iulius the Canons were burnte, and not in the dayes of Marcus, as Athanasius him selfe writing to Marcus reporteth? The wordes of Athanasius to Marcus are plaine. M. Iewell will proue the contrary by a Gheasse.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               And yet the whole number (of the 70. Canons) was kept diligently in the Church of Rome in the original it selfe sent to Syluester the bishop there from the Councell subscribed with the saide 318. Fathers handes.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 280 Vntruthe Slaunderous.The 97. Vntruthe: For there was no suche originall kepte in the Church
                  •
                of Rome.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
                M. Iewell, to iustifie this matter telleth the Reader a longe lying tale to proue the Pope a Forger, and blaseth out that matter in mighty great letters, but withe a number of mayne and most impudent Vntruthes. Touching the matter it selfe, that 70. Canons were made in the Councell of Nice,
                  Athanasius ad Ma
                        •
                     cum.
                copied out, and sent to Syluester Pope of Rome from the Councell by the handes of his legates, it is euident by the epistle of Athanasius vnto Marcus, where he and the other bishops of

Lybia, of Thebais, and of Aegypt do expressely confesse the same. Also the Epistle of Pope Iulius to the Bishops of the East reakoneth vp the .xviij. th. the .xix. the .xxi. the .xxiij. the xxvi. the .xxvij. the .xxviij. the .xxxiij. the .xl. the .xlv. the .xlvij. the .xlix. the .lj. the .lij. the .liij. the .liiij. the .lv. the .lvij. the .lviij. the .lix. the .lx. the .lxj. the .lxiij. and the .lxvj.Tom. 1. Con. Epist. ad Orient. Canons of the Councell of Nice, all at that time kept and reserued in the Originall Copie at Rome. This Iulius was aliue at the time of the Nicene Councell. He wrote this letter to the Bishops of the East Church, to many of them which were present at that very Councell. He rebuketh them in this letter for thrusting out of Athanasius from his Bishopricke. And by his Authorite he restored not only Athanasius, but also Paulus the Patriarche of Constantinople, Marcellus Bishop of Ancyra,Histor. tripart. li. 4. cap. 15 Socrates lib. 2. cap. 15. Asclepas Bishop of Gaza, and Lucius Bishop of Adrianopolis al expelled by the Arrians, vnto their Bishoprickes and Sees againe. And can M. Iewell persuade vs that the same Pope, to whom such holy Bishops appealled, (Athanasius, Paulus, Marcellus, Lucius and Asclepas) at that time and against those stubborne Arrians would alleage false forged Canons of his owne deuising, or belye the Councel of Nice, the Matter being yet so freshe in memorye? And what saieth M. Iewell against these so expresse witnesses, Athanasius and Iulius? What he saied to the Epistle of Athanasius you haue heard allready. By a mere manifest Vntruthe he woulde deface it. Other Matter he bringeth none but scoffes, as mocking at the Bishops for reducing the number of .lxxx. Canons to the number of .lxx. to represent the .lxx. disciples of Christ, or els the .lxx. tounges knowen to the worlde. To the which no other answer nedeth (for any thinge that it proueth) then that M. Iewell doth not well to measure the doinges of that auncient Councell with the light estimation of mans fansie. But to this Epistle of Iulius what doth M. Iewell answer? Forsothe whereas D. Harding saied, that 
                  Harding. 
               
               Diuis. 6
               these

Canons being mencioned by Iulius, writing to them which were present at the making of the Canons, might take away all suspicion of Vntruthe, M. Iewell answereth.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               Pag. 237This remouing of suspition, I know not howe, semeth somewhat to encrease suspition. If there were not a soare, what should it thus nede to be salued?
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                This it but a flourishe. What saye you to the Matter? Be it a soare there was, howe like you the salue? Be it that to put the Matter out of doubte touching these Canons not commonly extant (bicause of Caluin and such other, they haue bene before doubted of) the vndoubted Epistle of Iulius was alleaged? What then saie you to that Epistle?
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .281 Vntruthe Captayne and Notorious.In dede, Iulius alleageth a Canon: But M. Hardinges Canon he alleageth not.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                The Canon of the Nicene Councell which D. Harding alleageth out of Iulius is this. Non debere praeter sententiam Romani Pontificis vllo modo Concilia celebrari, nec Episcopos damnari. That without the Authorite of the Bishop of Rome, neither Councells ought to be kepte, neither Bishops be condemned. How saie you M. Iewell? Doth not Iulius alleage this Canon? Will you neuer leaue your Vntruthes?An. 1551 In the first tome of the Councelles, fol. 309. after the Collen print, you may reade that Canon if you liste.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               
                  Lib. 4. cap. 9. Hist. trip.
               It is also touched in the Ecclesiasticall History by Socrates. The other Canon of the Nicene Councell the .xliiij. in number,
                  Lib. 3. de Dogmat. Character.
                D. Harding alleaged not out of Iulius, but out of Franciscus Tirrianus, as he noted vnto you in the margin, who as he writeth sawe many thinges of the Nicene Councell which are not commonly extant,The .282 Vntruthe for that Note touched not this Canon. 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                
               Niceni Concilij, in the Ecclesiasticall Actes of the Nicene Councell. But let vs see how M. Iewell prosecuteth the Matter of the Canon of Iulius. He addeth.
            And the compiler of the Councelles gaue this Note in the margin (2
                  •
               2.) touching the same. This de
                     •
                  ree may only be reduced to the v. and si
                     •
                  t

chapter of the Councell of Nice. But expressely it is not founde. Such credit is to be geuen to this Iulius in his allegations.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                An other Vntruthe M. Iewell. For this note in the margin that you speake of is founde in the first Epistle of Iulius, to the Bishops of the East. But the Canon which D. Harding alleageth out of Iulius, is in the second Epistle of Iulius. Againe the note in the margin alleaged by you is of the Accusation and condemnation of Bishops not to be done without the knowleadg of the Bishop of Rome. But the Canon alleaged by D. Harding out of Iulius, and reported in the Ecclesiasticall history of Socrates, is of Councelles not to be called or holden without the consent of the Bishop of Rome.The Impudency of M. Iewell. Such credit is to be geuen to M. Iewell in his allegations. What passing impudency is this M. Iewell, first to go aboute to discredit the writinges of the Ancient Fathers, and then to do the same by open and manifest Vntruthes? Especially you which charge not only D. Harding, but in maner all sortes of writers, with Fables, Forgeries, Dreames, Vntruthes, and so forthe, when you can not answer to the Matter it selfe.
            To the whole Matter of the Popes Forgerie which M. Iewell here so blaseth out, and so impudently auoucheth, it is allready sufficiently answered: and proued against M. Nowell, and against the lying Centuries of the Magdeburgenses, whose steppes M. Iewell hath folowed euen at the harde heles, that Zosimus the Pope was no forger, that the Africanes laied no such thinge to his charge, that they renounced not their whole obedience vnto that See of Rome, but only stoode vpon the Matter of appellations, (wherein it semeth by the writinges of S. Cipriā, they had bene of olde time Priuileged) that many Canons are alleaged out of the Nicene Councell not only by the Popes, but by diuers others holy Fathers, as S. Ambrose, S. Hierō S. Augustin, Epiphanius and others without suspition of fayning or forgery, all this I saie is allready at large proued by M.

Dorman in his answer to M. Nowell. I beseche the reader to haue recourse to that place. Notwitstanding bicause M. Iewell, as he hath bene more large, so hath dealed herein also much more impudently then M. Nowell,In the disproufe of M. Nowelles Reproufe the .16. chap. fol. 92. I haue thought good somewhat to examine his Lying tale and to note his Vntruthes therein, for the better iustifying of this his Vntruthe scored vp here vpon D. Harding. Thus M. Iewell entreth his processe.
            Touching the forgerie of this Councell of Nice, the very beginning of the quarell and the whole storie standeth thus.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                If it were forged, the beginning could not be here. For the better vndetstanding wherof,Pag. 235 The .283 Vntruthe Capitain and Notorious. I will note to the Reader the names and times of the Popes that liued about this time, in which the forgerie is saied to be committed.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                The Councell of Nice was holden in the yere of our lorde .328. or as some other thinke .326. vnder Siluester then Pope of Rome, whose place his two Legates Vincentius and Victor occupied there. To this Siluester succeded Marcus and was Pope ij. yeres.Hist. tripart. lib. 1. cap. 8 Niceph. lib. 8. cap. 14. Vnto this Marcus Athanasius directed his letters aboue mentioned. To Marcus succeded Iulius, whose Epistle was before alleaged to the Bishops of the East, in defence of Athanasius, and other. Some write that this Iulius was at the Councell of Nice him selfe. Certain it is he was Pope in the later dayes of Constantin the great,
                  Platina.
                in whose reigne the Councell was holden. Iulius sate in the See of Rome .xvi. yeres. To him succeded Liberius,
               Hieronimus in Catal. who ruled partly in that Bishopricke, partly in banishment the space of .xvij. yeres, Felix in the meane time occupying the See one yere, vnder the banishment of Liberius. To Liberius succeded Damasus vnto whom S. Hierom wrote certain Epistles, and ruled the Churche .xviij. yeres. To Damasus succeded Siricius, and sate .xvj. yeres. To Siricius succeded Anastasius, who sate three yeres. To Anastasius succeded Innocontius, and sate in the Chaire of Peter .xv. yeres. To this Pope

               Chrysostom Appealed being in banishment, who thereupon excommunicated the Emperour Arcadius. To this Pope S. Augustin and the Bishops of Afrike in the condemnatiō of Celestius and Pelagius submitted their decrees.
                  Palladius in vitae Chryso. Nicephor. lib. 13. cap. 34. Aug. epist. 90. To this Innocentius succeded Zosimus, and ruled the Churche only one yere, who is the man that is accused here of M. Iewell for a Forger, of certain Canons of the Nicene Councell.  Now as I saied, if suche Canons were forged, the beginning hereof as M. Iewell saieth, coulde not be here.  Seing that bothe Athanasius writeth to Marcus for the copie of those 70. Canons, confessing that so many were made and sent to Rome to Siluester then Pope, and also that Iulius the Successour of Marcus alleageth a great number of suche Canons to the number of .xxiiij. more then are commonly read in the Councell of Nice, bothe whiche Popes liued at the lest fourescore yeares before this Zosimus.
               See those Canons in the disproufe of. M. Nowelles Reproufe. fol. 95. b. 
                Hereunto maye be added that S. Hierom and S. Ambrose who wrote in the time of Pope Damasus, that S. Augustin and Epiphanius in the time of Innocentius, do alleage certain Canons of the Nicene Councell not extant in the xx. Canons commonly readde. Therefore Zosimus who liued after all these Popes, if he were a Forger, yet was he not the first Forger. Now as it were to great impudencie for M. Iewell to charge S. Ambrose S. Hierom, S. Augustin and Epiphanius with Forgerie, though he hath gone about to deface the testimonies of Athanasius, but that with manifest Vntruthes, as you haue sene, so truly shall he neuer be able to proue Zosimus or anye other Pope a Forger. This therefore touching the beginning of the Forgerie (if there were any suche) is the first Vntruthe. Let vs goe forthe.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                One Apiarius a priest of the Churche of Sicca in Aphrica as it appeareth a very ill man, being iustly excommunicat bothe by his own bisshop, and also by a great number of other bisshoppes together in the Councell there, appealed frō them all vnto Zosimus then bisshop of Rome.
            
               All this is true. Let vs heare farder.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Zosimus without farther knowleadg of the cause, neuer hearing the other parte, pronounced Apiarius to be innocēt and restored him to the Communion.The 284. Vntruthe Boldly auouc
                     •
                  ed but no waie proued.
            
            This M. Iewell saieth of his owne head. There appeareth no suche thinge in the Actes of the Councels. This only appeareth, touching this Apia
                  •
               ius that after his Appeale to Rome, Zosimus sent his legat to the Councel of Aphrike, thē assembled, that he was restored to the Communion by the Africanes them selues, Zosimus in the meane while departing this worlde,
                  Cōcil. Car. 6. cap. 101 and Bonifacius succeding him. This is euident in the epistle of the Aphrican Councell sent to Bonifacius successour to Zosimus. That which M. Iewell telleth, not appearing in the Councell, may stande for an other Vntruthe, vntill it be iustified.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
                The 285. Vntruthe as appeareth.
StapletonAnd vnderstanding there was a Councell gathered in Africa touching the same.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
                An other vntruthe. For there appeareth no such Councell at all. The Councelles at that time gathered, in Africa were partly against the 
                  Cap. 76. Pelagians, 
                  Cap. 75. the Donatistes, and for the preseruation of the 
                  Cap. 1. Nicene Councell. But for the matter of Apiarius no Councell was gathered.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 286. A burthē of Vntruthes.Sent thither Faustinus the bisshop of Potentia, withe two other priestes of Rome, Philippus and Asellus, not only to see that the saied Apiarius without anye furder triall might be restored vnto his right, but also to make plea in the open Councell that it shoulde be lawfull for any priest to appeale from his owne ordinary or Metropolitane or Councell vnto the Apostolike See of Rome.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                All this is but a fardle of vntruthes and slaunders. M. Iewell auoucheth this onlye, but he neither quoteth nor noteth any Author therefore. The truthe is this. Zosimus sending his legates aboue mentioned to the Councell of Aphrica, gaue in commission amonge other thinges, that the Councell of Nice

shoulde be inuiolatly kept and obserued, in that parte of the worlde as it was other where. The Councell of Nice was readde in the Synod of the Aphricanes, and established by their whole consent and agrement thereunto.
                  Cocil. Car. 6. cap. 1. & 2. Faustinus the Popes Legat brought forth a write from Zosimus, contayning a decree touching Appellatiō, made in the Councel of Nice. That decree not being founde in the copies whiche the Africanes had, the Africanes desired a time of deliberation,
                  Cap. 3. before they subscribed thereunto. A deliberation was taken the Popes Legat consenting thereunto.
                  Cap. 4. They wrote to the Bishops of the East Churche, to see their copies. Thus farre haue we gone with M. Iewell, folowing the tenour of the Councell. Nowe that Apiarius shoulde be restored without farder triall, or that such plea shoulde be made as M. Iewell speaketh of, it is not mencioned in the Councell: it is a double and Pregnant Vntruthe of M. Iewell. Let vs go forthe.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                The bysshoppes of Aphrica answered there was no lawe it shoulde be so.The 287. Vntr
                     •
                  the For they made no s
                     •
                  che Answer.
            
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
                They answered, the decree of appellation to Rome was not founde in the Nicene Councell. They saied not it was not so by no lawe. So they shoulde haue saied vntruly. For in the Councell of Sardica where 300. bishoppes were assembled from all partes or Christendom before that time,
                  Concil. Sard. Cap. 7. the very same decree which Faustinus the Popes legat alleaged, was and is to be founde worde for worde. Though then they answered, it was not founde in the Nicene Councell, yet they answered not, there was no lawe it should be so. This therefore is a Facinge Vntruth on M. Iewelles parte.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 288. Vntruthe ioyned with a slaunder.Faustinus laied forthe this Canon of the Councell of Nice, not made by the Authorite of the bisshops there, but onlye deuised by the bisshop of Rome.
            This is a slaunderous vntruthe, to saie it was diuised at Rome. It was made long before in the Councell of Sardica. Therefore

the modesty of Iohn Caluin in this point is more, who confesseth that the Pope alleaged this decree of Sardica, as a decree of the Councell of Nice, and maketh it an errour of the Pope,
                  Instit. lib. 4. cap. 7. Sect. 9. not a diuising of his owne, as the modest sprit of M. Iewell hath deuised. Forthe M. Iewell. Perge Mentiri.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 289. Vntruthe sauouring of Malice. The bisshoppes there, amonge whom was S. Augustine that famous lerned Father, thought it was a forged Matter.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
                This is a malicious Vntruthe. There appeareth no suche thought or cogitation in the Actes of the Councell. And of what sprit is M. Iewell, that maketh suche good men to suspect a forgerie in the chiefest bishop of Christendom, geuing forthe no token of any such suspicion?
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 290. Vntruthe For not Therfore they sent &c. And therefore they sayde, they woulde sende vnto Alexandria, Antioche, and Constantinople for the verye Originall copies of the sayde Councell, and desired the bisshop of Rome to doe the same.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
                That all this they did, it is true. But that Therefore they did it, it is not true. And Therefore I can not excuse you here of an other Vntruthe.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 291. Vntruthe For they were not the true Authentike copies.
The 292. Vntruthe ioyned with a slaun
                     •
                  er.And saide, that in the meane while they woulde doo, as they had done before. Vpon this message and returne of the answer withe the (291) Authentike copies from Cyrillus the bisshopp of Alexandria, and Atticus the bisshopp of Constantinople, it appeared plainely to the worlde that the Canons were corrupted, and that the Pope had falsified the holy Councell.
            Here be two Vntruthes, and the one ioyned with a slaunder. The first is, that the true Authentike copies were sent from Alexandria and Constantinople. True it is, they sent the truest that they had. But that those were not the very Authentike copies, made and lefte by the Fathers of Nice, it is euident by many reasons.
            
                First, Iulius longe before that time alleaged against the bishoppes of the East, xxiiij. Canons of the Councell of Nice ouer and beside the xx. Canons of the copies sent from Alexandria

and Constantinople. Therefore the other that lacked so many could not be the Authētike and perfit number of the Canons.
            Secondarely betwene the tyme of the Nicene Councell and those bishoppes Cyrillus of Alexandria and Atticus of Constā
               tinople, certaine Arrians occupied those Sees,
                  That the Copies of the Nicene Councel sent from Alexandria and Constātinople were not the true Authentike Copies.
                  
                     Socrates. lib. 2. Sozom. lib. 4. Theodoret. lib. 2. Nicephor
                           ••
                         lib. 9. & 10.
                and therefore no maruail, if the Councell were corrupted.
            In the Churche of Alexandria, after Alexander, who was present at the Councell of Nice, succeded Athanasius. This Athanasius being often bannished, first Gregorius, then Georgius bothe Arrians ruled that See certain yeares. After Athanasius being restored and dying in his bishoprike, Petrus a good Catholike bishop succeded, who being expelled and flying to Rome, Lucius an Arrian was intruded, who occupyed the See many yeres vnder Valēs the Arrian Emperour. But vnder Theodosius and Gratian he was expelled, and Timotheus brother to that Peter succeded, after Timotheus, Theophilus, and after Theophilus, this Cyrillus was bishop of Alexandria. Thus vnder the three Arrian bishops Gregorius, Georgius, and Lucius, no maruaill if the Councelles were corrupted and destroyed. Especially whereas Athanasius, complaineth thereoff him selfe, in his epistle to Marcus, the Pope, whiche M. Iewell would disproue but he can not.
            In Constantinople after Alexander bishop therof in the time of the Nicene Councell,
                  Socrat. Sozom enus, Theodoret. & Niceph. vbi supra.
                Paulus a good Catholike bishop succeding was twise banished, and in the ende murdered. In the meane Eusebius the Arrian, and after him Macedonius, Eudoxius, and Demophilus all Arrians occupyed for the space off fourty yeares and more, during the Empire of Constantius, Iulian and Valens, the See of Cōstantinople. This Demophilus vnder Gratian was depriued, and Gregory Nazianzene by Theodosius made his successour, who not continuing in the See, Nectarius was chosen to whom succeded Chrysostome,

and to Chrysostome this Atticus here mentioned in the Africane Councell. Now in so longe a tyme of the Arrians Dominion, who doubteth but they corrupted the Councell of Nice being specially called againste them? Namely seing that in the Councell now extant,Note this Reason. there is no one Canon againste the Arrian heresy, For the which yet that Councel was expressely called and assembled.
            Hereunto maye be added that in Antiochia also, whither the bishops of Africa sent for the Copie of the Nicene Coūcel, certaine Arrians had ruled betwene the time of the Nicene Councell and the bishops then liuing. As Eustathius the Catholike being banished,
                  Histor. Ecclesiast. Nicephor. & tripart. per totum.
                Eulalius, Euphronius, Phlacitus, Stephanus, Leontius, Eudoxius, Euzoius, Theodorus Perinthius all Arrian Bishoppes: Whereas in all that time not one Arrian seate at Rome, but all Catholike and all defendinge the Nicene Councell.
            
               
                  Athanasius Apolog. 2.
                Thirdly the same Iulius in his vndoubted epistle recorded in the workes of Athanasius, alleaged a decree of Appeale, from one Synod to a greater, by vertu whereof he cyted those Arrian bishops to Rome, concluded in the Nicene Councell, whiche in the Copies sent to the Africane bishops appeareth not. These are the wordes of Iulius. Episcopi in magna Synodo Niceae congregati non sine Dei Consilio permiserunt, prioris Synodi Acta in alia Synodo examinari. The bishops assembled in the greate Councell of Nice permitted not without the will of God, that the actes of a former Synod, might be examined in an other Synode. Whiche Appeale from one Synod to an other that it was to Rome, appeareth well bothe by that Iulius by vertu thereoff called those Arrian bishops to appeare before him at Rome, and also by that longe after, Leo that holy and lerned Pope alleaged the very decree of the Nicene Coūcel by occasiō of an Appeale of Flauianus to Rom
                  •
               . For whereas in that outragious iniurie done to Flauianus in the pretensed Synode of Ephesus

the Popes legates (as Leo writeth) fideliter reclamarunt, & eisdem libellum Appellationis Flauianus Episcopus dedit. Did faithefully resist that iniurious decree, and to the saied legates Flauianus the Bishopp made a libell of Appeale,
                  Leo epist. 25. ad The odosium Augustū.
                Leo writeth thereof to Theodosius the Emperour, and chalengeth by vertu of the Nicene Councell a greater Synod after the Appeale made, in these wordes. Quàm autem post appellationem interpositam hoc necessarió postuletur, Canonum Niceae habitorum decreta testantur, quae a totius mundi sunt sacerdotibus constituta, quaeque subter annexa sunt. Howe necessarely we require nowe to haue a greater Synod, after the Appeale layed in, the decrees of the Nicene Canons do witnesse. Which haue bene made of all priestes in the worlde. And which are here vnder annexed. Iulius against the Arrians, yea suche of whom some had bene present them selues at the Nicene Councell, and Leo to the Emperour Theodosius alleageth a Canon of the Nicene Councell, yea and a Canon of Appeale, which those Aphricane Copies haue not, and yet shall we thinke (because M. Iewell saieth the worde) that those only were the true and Authentike Copies and that Zozimus was a Forger, bicause he alleaged a Canon, whiche they had not?
            Fourthely (as I noted before) diuers holy Fathers and Auncient writers haue alleaged in their lerned writinges yet extant and not doubted of, certain Canons of the Nicene Councell, which a
                  •
               e not extant at all in the Copies sent from Alexandria and Constantinople to the bishops of Africa. S. Ambrose saieth, it was decreed in the Nicene Councell, Ne bigamus in clerum asciscatur,
               
                  Ambrosius Epist. 82. that one twise maryed shoulde not be admitted to be of the Clergy. S. Augustin writeth it for a decree of the Nicene Councell, Ne episcopus sibi Successorem sufficiat,
               
                  Augustin. Epist. 110. that a Bishop yet lyuing shoulde not appoynte his Successour. And therefore he repenteth him that he was of Aurelius his predecessour made bishop, he yet lyuing, saying that at that time he

knewe not so much. S. Hierom writeth that the booke of Iudith was by the Nicene Councell decreed to be a parte of the holy Scripture. Last of all, all the Fathers of the seconde Generall Councell of Constantinople holden aboue thirty yeres before this Zosimus was Pope,
                  In prefat. Iudith. Theodoret. lib. 5. cap. 9. Histor. Ecclesiasti.
                do mention in their letters writen to the bishops of Italy Damasus and other, Veterem sanctionem & definitionem Nicaenorum patrum, an olde decree and determination of the Fathers at Nice, vt in vnaquaque prouincia, illius prouinciae cultores, assumptis etiam si videatur, finitimis, conferant ecclesiasticos honores ijs quos vtiliter gesturos esse confidunt, that in euery prouince the inhabitants thereof, taking vnto them (if they thought good) their neighbours also, might bestowe Spirituall promotions vpon suche as they thought worthy thereof. Not any one of all these matters appeareth in anye of the Canons, or any parte of the Actes of the Nicene Councell. What then? Shall we saie therefore according to the wisedome and Charyte of M. Iewell, that S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, S. Hierome, yea and all those Fathers of that seconde Generall Councell of Chrystendome, were all Forgers and Falsifyers of the Nicene Councell? Or shall we not rather saye that those Fathers, and that holy Councell spake truly, but those Copies sent to the Aphricanes, are not the ful and perfit Copies? Thoughe verely I thinke they were the best that those good bishops of Alexandria and Constantinople, Cyrillus and Atticus had at that time.
            Fiftely your owne Apologie of Englande M. Iewell alleageth a Canon of the Councell of Nice,5. The Apologie off England. touchinge the Sacrament, that we ought not to be humiliter intenti ad panem & vinum, ouer basely bent to breade and wine. If this be a true Canon of the Nicene Councel, shewe it in the Copies sent from Alexandria and Constantinople to the bishoppes of Africa. Ift it be not, then either confesse that you haue belied that Councell, or els that the Copies sent from the East were not the true

Authentike and originall Copies.
            
                Last of all certaine it is bothe by Eusebius and by Epiphanius, that the chiefest and most principall cause of the assembling of that Councell, was partly for repressing the Arrian heresy, partly for the vniforme obseruation of Easter.
                  Euseb. lib. 3. de vita Constantini Epiphanius lib. 3. 
                     
                        •
                     om. 2. heres. 70 Yet in these copies whiche M. Iewell calleth Authentique, there is not one Canon or halfe Canon either against the Arrians, or touching the obseruation of Easter. And thinketh M. Iewell against all these most euident reasons, with the onlye warrant of his mouthe to persuade the worlde that those Copies lacking so many Canons, and sent from suche suspicious places, are the true and Authentike copies of the Nicene Councell? I trust by these fewe euery wise and indifferent Reader is able to descrie this manifest Vntruthe of M. Iewell, and to marke withall the whole grounde of this pretensed Forgerie of the Pope to be ouerthrowen.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Now to your second Vntruthe M. Iewell couched in your laste wordes alleaged, where you saie, that by those authentike copies it appeared, that the Pope had falsified the holye Councell. This as I saied, is a Manifest Vntruthe ioyned with a slaūder. Vntruthe, bicause the Authentike copies, whereby you would proue the Pope a falsifier, are now proued to be no Authentike copies, but to wante manye of the assured Canons of that Councell. For if Zosimus be a Forger or falsifier of the Nicene Councell, bicause the Canon which he alleaged out of the Nicene Councell, was not founde in those copies sent from Alexandria and Constantinople, then is S. Hierō, S. Ambrose, S. Augustin, yea then is the Apologie of Englande a Forger and a falsifier of the holye Councell, whiche hathe alleaged a Canon out of the Nicene Councell not founde in the copies sent from Alexandria and Constantinople.
            A slaunderous Vntruthe it is, bicause M. Iewel hath no Author thereof but his felow protestants of Magdebourg and suche

like, and bicause it tendeth to the discredit not onlye of Pope Zosimus a man commended and reuerenced by the Africanes them selues, but also of the whole See Apostolike from that time hetherto.
                  Prosper, contra Collatorem cap. 10. & 41. 
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
                The 293. Vntruthe mere slaunderous And to thintent to auaunce his Apostolike See of Rome, had diuised priuileges and prerogatiues of his owne.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
               
               
                  Lib. 2. de Sacerdotio
               M. Iewell continueth his slaunderous reproches. But it appeareth allready by S. Gregory and Chrysostom, and it shall hereafter in this Article yet more appeare, that the prerogatiue of the See of Rome was geuen to Peter by Christ him selfe, and to his successours, as Chrisostom expressely confesseth. Truly touching this matter, neither did the Africanes here vtterly refuse the Authorite of the bishop of Rome, but only in this case of appellations, neither had Zosimus anye cause to faine a Councell for the prerogatiue of his See, hauing for the same beside expresse Scripture the great Councell of Sardica,
                  Cap. 7. and as Iustinian the Emperour confesseth the very Councell of Nice it selfe (beinge one of the foure firste Councelles) though not in that Canon,
                  Constitut. 131. yet in some other.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 294 Vntruthe In Nypping away a great pa
                     •
                  te of the Sē
                  t
                     •
                  nce.The bisshoppes in the Councell of Aphrica hauing thus throughly examined the truthe hereof, wrote vnto Caelestinus then bisshop of Rome in this wise. Decreta Nicena &c.
            
            If a man shoulde aske M. Iewell, why he beganne this his allegation out of the Aphricane Councell in the middes of a sentence, omitting all that went before, I thinke the best answer that he coulde make would be to saie he folowed therein the precepts of his Rhetorike, to bringe as muche as made for his purpose, and to omitte the rest that made against him. Well though his Rhetorike taught him that Arte, yet his Diuinite taught him not that Deceite. I will therfore note certaine sentences in the same epistle going before, and then procede with the wordes of M. Iewell alleaged. The Fathers of the Aphricane Councell declaring to Celestinus the Pope that though

Apiarius by the meanes of his legat had bene restored to his order of priesthood (from whence he had ben deposed) yet now againe for other notorious crimes by him confessed he was iustly excommunicated, do write thus vnto him.
                  In epist. Co
                        •
                     cil. Aphricani ad Caelest. Papam.
                
               Proefato itaque debitae salutationis officio &c. Our due commendations being remembred, we desire you earnestly that from hence for the you admitt not to your hearing ouer lightly such as come from hence, neither that you r
                     •
                  ceiue any more to your Communion such as are by vs excommunicated,
               
                  Nicen. Con. cap. 5. 
               bicause your Reuerentnes shall easely see that this is not d
                     •
                  fined by the Nicene Councell. For if it be there prouided for the infe
                     •
                  iour clergy or the laye, howe much more woulde it prouide for the bish
                     •
                  ps, that being suspended from the Communion in th
                     •
                  ir own provin
                     •
                  e, they should not looke to be restored of your holynes, either hastely or rashely or vniustly. Also let your holynes repell the wicked refuges of priestes and the other clergy (as it becometh you.) Bicause this priuilege is not denied to the Churche of Africa, and (Lo here beginneth the allegation of M. Iewell.) 
                  Iewell. 
                The decrees of the Nicene Councell haue committed bothe the inferiour clergie, and also the bisshoppes vnto their Metropolitanes.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                Before I procede in the allegation of the Councell (as it foloweth in M. Iewell) I beseche thee (gentle Reader) to consider the pithe of all those wordes so farre omitted by M. Iewel, as I haue before noted vnto thee.  First the whole maner of writing is not as to a Forger, a Foyster or a Cogger, as M. Iewell termeth here the Pope, but in all humilite and reuerentnes, as to a holy bishop and Reu
                  •
               rent Father.  Secondarely that they do not vtterly repell his Authorite, but only in the case of Appellation,
                  Ciprianus lib. 1. epist. 
                  
                     •
                  . wherein it semeth bothe then and longe before in S. Ciprians time the prouince of Aphrike wa
                  •
                priuileged. Last of all the appellation it selfe they do not vtterly denie, but desire the Pope that he will cutt away, Improba refugia, wicked refuges, of naughty men abusing the benefit of appellation, and againe they require him not in no case to

with such as they do excōmunicat, but they desire him, vt non facilius ad aures suas admittat, not to admitt them to his hearing ouer lightly, vt non praeproperé, non indebité restituat, that he restore them not rashely or vniustly, before the cause be thouroughly examined. And so in S. Ciprian it appeareth, the excommunicated persons fled from Afrike to Rome,
                  Ciprianus lib. 1. epist. 3. 
               quasi (saieth S. Ciprian) veritas post eos nauigare non posset quae mendaces linguas rei certae probatione conuinceret, as though the truthe coulde not saile after them, which by certain triall might conuince their lying tounges. Wherein it is euident, that appellation was made from Afrike to Rome, though the bishops them selues of Afrike, as S. Ciprian in that selfe epistle complaineth, were troubled and offended therewith. But all this M. Iewell, as I saied, folowing the precepts of his arte, hathe thought good to omitte, making the Reader to beleue, that the Councell of Aphrica vtterly abandonned at that time the Pope, and pronounced him guilty of manifest Forgerie. Hitherto you see how litle they charge him withall. Let vs procede with the wordes of the Councell euen as M. Iewell hathe alleaged them.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               
                  Epist. 3. li. 1. Cū statutū sit omnibus nobis &c.
               
               For it was discretely and rightly considered that all matters are to be determined in the pla
                     •
                  es where they beganne.
            
            These very wordes and reason S. Cyprian longe before the Nicene Councell was assembled, vseth, and that as a Canon, Statute, or Ordonnaunce. Whereby it semeth this determination of matters at home was an auncient priuilege of the Aphricane Churche, beside other countres of the west.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               Out of the Aphricane Coū
                  cell
               And that no prouince can lacke the holy ghoste, whereby the bisshoppes off Christe may be able, bothe wisely to see, and also constantly to mayntaine the right. And specially for that it is lawfull for euery man that shall mislike the discretion of his Iudges, to appeale either to a particular Councell within the same 
               Prouince.
The 295. Capitain and No. 
               realme or to a generall Councell. On lesse perchaunce some man will saie, God is able to inspire the triall of Iustice into one man Alone (bicause he is bisshop of Rome) and will not inspire the same in to a great number of bisshoppes meeting togeather in Councell.
            
               
               
                  Stapletō. 
                This latter sentence M. Iewell hathe printed with mighty mayne letters, as the whiche he would haue especially to be noted. And no maruaile. For they are his owne wordes a greate parte thereof, not the wordes of the Councell. And therefore also I haue printed the same sentence, as the wordes of M. Iewell with a distincte letter from the wordes of the Councell. The true wordes off the Councell are thus. Firste in Latine. Nisi forte quisquam est qui credat vni cuilibet posse Deum nostrum examinis inspirare iustitiam,
               M. Iewell taken in manifest Forgerie. 
               & innumerabilibus in Concilium sacerdotibus denegare. In English truly translated they are thus much. Vnlesse there be anye man that will thinke that one God is able to inspire the triall of Iustice to any one, and that he will denye it to a greate number of Bishoppes meeting together in Councell. Let vs nowe consider the manifest Forgerye of M. Iewell. His Forgerye is greate and standeth in these wordes. Into one man alone bicause he is Bis
                  •
               oppe off Rome.
            First for vni cuilibet, to any one, he hath put, into one man alone, and then to declare what one man, he addeth in a parenthesis, Bicause he is bishop of Rome. Which wordes are not at all in the Councell. And therefore he chaunged the wordes before, that they might seme to leade to such a sence. As though the Councell had expressely and namely spoken againste the iudgement of the bishop of Rome being One man alone. Whiche sence persuaded to the Reader vnder the glorious name of the Aphricane Councell he thought would make gaily against the One supreme gouuernemēt of Christes vicar on earthe. By such manifest Forgerye M. Iewell will proue the Pope a Forger. Let vs nowe procede with the wordes off the Councell.
            
               
                  Iewel. 
               
               out of the Aphricane Counc
                     •
                  l.
               And howe maye suche beyonde sea Iudgementes be thought good whereunto the personnes off the witnesses, which in triall off truthe are thought Necessary, either for that they be wemen, or for the Infirmitye off their age, or ffor many other incident lettes can not be brought?
            
               For such like cōsiderations the triall of certaine sutes out of the realme at the Courte of Rome were embarred, vnder the reigne of kinge Edward the thirde in oure owne countre, and yet neither the Popes authorite thereby disanulled,
                  Ed. 3 an. 27. neither any breache of vnite committed.
            
               
                  Iewel. 
               
               out of the Aphric. Councell. 
               Now that any shoulde be sent abrode, as it were from youre holynes side, we finde it not decreed in any Councell.
            
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                This was expressely decreed in the Councell of Sardica in the seuenth Canon, aboute fourescore yeares before the time of this Aphricane Councell,
                  Hist. tripa. lib. 4. cap. 23. & Theodoret. li. 2. cap. 7. as Socrates and Theodoretus bothe in theyr Ecclesiasticall Histories recorde. Thoughe here the Fathers of this Councell seme to haue no knowleadge thereof. And trulye as well they might misse the Canons of this Councell off Sardica, as they missed the Canons of the Nicene Councel, as it is already most euidently proued.
            
               
                  Iewel. 
               
               out of the Aphr. Coū.
               As for that you sent vs lately by our Brother Faustinus, as parte off the Nicene Councell, we must do you to witte that in the 
               
                  
                     Veriorib. truer.
                  The .296 vntruthe. False translation.
                
               true Councelles, which we receiued frō oure holy felowe bisshop Cyrillus of Alexandria, and the Reuerent Father Atticus the bisshoppe off Constantinople, taken oute off the verye originalles it can not be founde. And sende you not any your Clerkes hetherto execute Iustice 
               
                  Quibus
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      potentibus.
                
               at any mans requeste, lest we seme to bringe the smokie puffe off the worlde into the church off Christe. Thus farre the wordes of the Councell.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                Here M. Iewell hath placed in the margin, as the enseigne of Victorie, this posy. The Pope taken in manifest Forgerie. And by what wordes gathereth he that? Forsothe bicause the Canon which the Pope alleaged, was not founde in the Originall Copies sent from Alexandria and Constantinople. Then M. Iewell. Adde to your note. S. Augustine, Saint Hierome, S. Ambrose, Epiphanius, and Iustinian taken in Manifeste Forgerie, bicause (as I haue before shewed) all they do alleage certaine Canons of the Nicene Councell whiche are not to be founde in those Originalles. Then also adde to youre note, and cause it to be printed in the next edition of youre Englishe

Apologie (if euer for shame you will printe that lying libell any more). The Apologie of England taken in manifest Forgerie: Bicause you alleage there a Canon of the Nicene Councell, touching the blessed Sacrament, whiche is not to be founde in the Originalles sent from Alexādria and Constantinople. But M. Iewell, beside these absurdityes, I haue saied I trust sufficiently before, to proue these Originalles could not be, nor were not the very true and perfecte Originalles off the Nicene Councell. Though verely I thinke they were the best that those good bishops then had. This being so, M. Iewell hath stoutely saied but nothing yet proued, that the Pope is a Forger. Let vs see what foloweth.
            
               
                  Iewel. 
               
               The .297. Vntruthe Slaunderous, fonde, and Maliciouse.The Bishoppe of Rome when he sawe he was taken with the maner and founde an open falsarie, for that the Canons of his makinge disagreed from the very Originalles (297.) thought It good police, to saye the Originalles were burnt by the Arriās, and so no true copie remaining, but his onely.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                Here is a sadde Conclusion vpon a number of false premisses. From manifest Vntruthes M. Iewel procedeth to lewde and malicious coniectures. But to be shorte you knowe the rule. Vno absurdo dato sequitur quodiibet. Vpon a false grounde it is easy to builde Vntruthes apase. Howbeit yet we will see what they are. He saieth.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .298 Vntrut
                     •
                  e Slaunderous, fonde and Malicious.And therefore he (298) imagined a letter to be writen in the name of Athanasius, and other bishops of Aegypt, vnto Marcus the bisshop of Rome, wherein they besought him a Copie of the Nicene Coūcell for that all their bookes were vtterly destroied. But this shifte was to simple.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                Yea truly a very simple shifte, and much more simple was al the posteryte of the lerned of Christendom, which in so many hundred yeares space, could neuer perceaue this wily drifte off the Pope, but haue euer liued vnder his Commaundement, vntell now at length this Iewell of Englande had espied it. But deceiue not your selfe M. Iewell. Neither was all Christendome

so simple these many hundred yeares, neither are we at this present (thanked be God therefore) but we can descrie the clere light of Gods truthe from the misty cloudes of hereticall deuises. This Epistle of Athanasius to Marcus, was no deuised matter of the Pope M. Iewell, but the true epistle of Athanasius, for ought you can bring to the contrary. And for such it hath bene taken before you were borne, and shall be (doubt you not) after you are gone. Yet let vs heare the reason that you geue of this simple shifte. You saie.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                For it were harde for M. Harding, to shewe, what helpe Athanasius coulde haue founde in any of those Canons that are nowe presumed to be burnte,The .299 Vntruthe 
                     •
                  or M. Iew▪ him self saieth The Coū
                  cel of Nice were worthe the shewing. wherewith (.299.) either to relieue him selfe in that case, or els to molest or greue his aduersaries.
            Then the triall hereof (M. Iewell) standeth not in any thing that you can bringe for your selfe, but in the triall of your aduersaries might and abilite against you. You dispute against this Epistle of Athanasius, as if an infidell would dispute against S. Lukes Ghospel, not by any reason of his owne againste the ghospell, but by examining the Christian what reason he can bringe to proue it S. Lukes ghospell.M. Iewell reasoneth like an Infidell. Will Somer if he liued, by such meanes might dispute with the best Scholer in Englande. But M. Iewell for the authorite of that Epistle of Athanasius (it being allready receiued and allowed for his, by the consent of our elders) it is not to be tried by that which we can saie for it, who do trust herein our forefathers Iudgement, but by that which you can proue against it, if you will infringe the authority thereof. Howbeit you might of your selfe M. Iewell (were you not blinded with some corrupted affection) see easely a right good reason why Athanasius shoulde require of the Pope the Copie of the Nicene Councel, seing your selfe cōfesseth in this same article, that the Councell of Nice were well worthe the shewing.
            Though here M. Iewell haue ended all he can saye in effect

to proue the Pope a Forger, yet he interlaceth other thinges a great many to amplifie the matter, and to seme to the Reader to saie much. Therefore reprouing by the way Iulius and the Canon by him alleaged (to the which we haue before answered) he returneth to Athanasius, and repeteth againe his Vntruthes, as one that toke great pleasure in lying. For hauinge done with Iulius, thus he foloweth.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                As for M Hardinges Athanasius his tale is so simple that it will sone bewraye it selfe. For as I noted before,pag. 237. In epist ad Orthod. Socr. li. 2. cap. 14. The 300 Vntruth
                     •
                   as before. he writeth vnto Marcus the B. of Rome of the burning of the bookes, and yet Athanasius him selfe certainly knewe that Marcus was dead at the lest ix. yeres before that burning happened.
            This is but a repetition of the former Vntruthes. For (as it hath before bene declared) neither in Athanasius Ad Orthodoxos neither in Socrates any such thinge appeareth.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 301 Vntruthe ioyned with a slaunder and a folie.Euen so the vaine Forger of the Emperour Constantines Dotatiō, imagineth him to decree that the bisshop of Constantinople shoulde be subiect vnto the See of Rome. And yet neither was the Cytie off Constantinople at that time builte, nor anye such name yet knowen in the worlde, nor any bisshopricke there erected. A man might saie. Non satis commodeé diuisa sunt temporibus tibi Daue haec.
            
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
                Well exemplified, and well concluded. Who builte Const
                  •
               ntinople but Constantin that gaue that Dotation? And when is he reported to haue geuen it but aboute the ende of his Empire, that Cyte being allready builte and called by his name? Or at the lest when was that Storie writen but after the Cyte built, and so called? Haue you no better argument against that Dotation then this is, and can yowe no better exemplifye this matter? Certainely in the Tripartit History we reade of an epistle writen to Alexander where he is called the bishop of Constantinople, before the Nicene Counc
                  •
               ll was holden, and therefore of all lykelyhood, before Constantin had yet so called the Cyte of Byzance. As for the Matter,
                  Lib. 1. Cap. 14. S. Gregory saieth expressely of the Churche of Constantinople.

               Quis eam dubitet Sedi Apostolicae esse subiectam? Who doubteth but that Church is subiect to the See Apostolike?
            
               
                  Lib. 7. epist. 63. The 302 Vntruthe For both sayinges do agree.Againe the same Athanasius writing vnto Felix, saieth. The Arrians had falsified the Nicene Councell. But writing vnto Marcus of the same matter, as a man that had vtterly forgotten him selfe, he saieth. The Arri
                     •
                  ns had burnte the Councell of Nice. But if it were burnte, howe was it falsified? Yf it were falsified, howe was it burnte? These tales hange not well together.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                Yes forsothe M. Iewell, and you had bene a litle more mindefull then Dauus, you might soone haue sene howe bothe those sayinges do well agree. Athanasius wrote to Marcus aboue twenty yeares before he wrote to Felix. Vnder Marcus the Arrians had burned the Canons.
                  In epist. Marci. ad Athanasi
                        •
                     m.
                Athanasius wrote for an other Copie to Marcus, and as it appeareth by the letters off Marcus, Athanasius receiued them. Nowe Sir after him, Iulius was Pope and Liberius also. In whose times Constantius the Arrian Emperour afflicted Christendome, and the Arrians many yeres prospered, Athanasius all that time yet lyuing, and after,
                  Vide Chronologiam Henr Pantaleonis.
                vnder Iulian the Apostata restored to his bishopricke, aboute what time Felix was the B. of Rome. Neither was it impossible that in all that meane while the Arrians so longe prosperinge had falsified the better Copies sent from Rome to Alexandria, neither that Athanasius shoulde certifie the Pope thereof. Therefore a man might here most iustly saie to yow Sir Comptroller. Non satis commodé diuisa sunt temporibus tibi Daue haec.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                But for as much as M. Harding woulde so faine haue the Pope to holde by burnte euidence, if it may please thee (gentle Reader) discretely to weigh the whole circumstance of the matter, thou shalt soone finde that all this great adoo, was nothing els but a great fable.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                For Gods loue and thy owne (gentle Reader) vse thy selfe here discretely and but indifferētly. Weigh the whole circumstances before mentioned, the Truthe of M. Iewelles processe

hitherto, and the effect of that which foloweth. Thou shalt see, that when M. Iewell speaketh trulye, they are but bare Gheasses and sely Surmises. When his reason forceth, he speaketh beside the Truth. Thus it hath hitherto appered, and thus it shall hereafter appeare.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               
                  Theod. li. 1 ca. 9. et lib 2. cap. 8.
The 303 Vntruthe For in Theodoretus there appeareth no such thinge.
Lib· 2. The 304 Vntruthe For the Arasrine burned in dede the Canons, as is auouched.For first it appeareth by Theodoretus that the whole Actes and Copies of the Councell of Nice, were sent abrode vnto all bisshops that were awaye.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                In the first place quoted by M. Iewell the decrees of the Nicene Councell were sent onelye to suche bishops as were subiect to the Patriarche of Alexandria, not to all bishops that were awaye. In the seconde place Theodoretus writeth of the Councell of Sardica, and not of the Councell of Nice.
            And Marius Victorinus writing against Arius saieth that the same Actes were sent abrode into the whole worlde, and that many thousande bishops subscribed and agreed vnto them. Whiche thinge being vndoubtedly true, it were verye muche for M. Hardinge to saie that all these copies, in all partes of the worlde, coulde be destroyed vpon the sodayne. And that altogether in one place, and with one fyer and at one cōmaundement. The Arrianes neither were so mighty to atchieue it, nor so foolish to attempte it. Certainely the like neuer happened to any other Councell.
            Where be your wittes, and where is your remembraunce M. Iewell? Who saieth that these Canons were burnt in all partes of the worlde, altogether in one place, and so forthe? We talke only nowe of Canons burnte in Alexandria, in Antiochia and Constantinople, the three great Cities of the East Church, where the Arrians ruled all the roste first twenty yeres and more vnder Constantius, then vnder Valens allmoste twenty yeres more. In all this time they were bothe able and wise enough in malice to burne those Canons which directly and expressely condemned their heresy. This Amplifiyng of the matter proueth you a Fabler. The matter auouched is proued yet no Fable.
            
               But what nedeth wordes where the matter is plaine? The bisshop
                  •
                of Africa had the very Copies of these Canons.
            In dede this is to the matter. But this is starke false. They had not the full and perfit Copie of the Canons as it hathe bene before at large proued. Namely by many Canons of that Councell alleaged of most approued Fathers, not extant in these pretensed Copies of the Aphricanes.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               
                  Cōcil. Car. 6. cap. 4. The 306 Vntruthe in false tr
                     •
                  nslating.Alypius the bishop of T
                  •
               gasta in this Conference with Faustinus saied. A
                     ••
                  uet
                     •
                  men me mouet, quoniam cum i
                     •
                  spi
                     •
                  eremus greca exemplaria huius Synodi Ni enae, ista i
                     •
                  i
                     •
                  escio qua ratione non inuenimus. But this one thinge muche moueth me, that confer
                     •
                  ing and examining the greke exāples of this Nicene Counce
                     •
                  l, these matters (off the superiorite off the See off Rome that is alleaged) I knowe not howe we founde not there.
            
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                M. Iewell to doe allwaies his kinde, hathe infarced to his english translation these wordes, more then he founde in his latin, and hathe printed them with a seuerall letter as the wordes of the bishop of Tagasta, these wordes I saie: Of the Superiorite of the See of Rome, that is alleaged. This is the vntrue dealing of M. Iewell. For neither are those wordes in the latin, neither are they meaned of the Africane bishop. The Controuersie then was not vtterly to refuse all obedience to the See of Rome, but to haue no Appeales out of Afrike to Rome. Whiche thinge before they had decreed in the Milleuitane Councell:
                  Can. 22. August. epist. 90. &. 91. and Pope Innocentius had confirmed that Councell.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                And Cyrillus the bisshop of Alexandria being desired for triall of this matter to sende the true Originall of this Councell,pag. 238. C
                        •
                     ncil. Car
                        ••
                     ag. 6 can. 102. & 103. made awnswer in this sorte. I tho
                     •
                  ght it nedefull to sende vnto yowe the true examples off the ve
                     •
                  y A
                     ••
                  hentike Coun
                     •
                  el. Likewise Atticus the bisshopp of Constantinopl
                  •
                to the same request answereth thus. I haue sente vnto yowe the Canons in t
                     •
                  e whole, euen as they were made and ratified by the Fat
                     •
                  ers in the Ci
                  
                     •
                  ie of N
                     ••
                  e. Nowe if these Canons were quite burnte, as M. Harding saieth, howe were they afterwarde founde whole, as the godly Father Atticus and the l
                  •
               rned bisshop Cyrillus saieth? And if they were afterward founde whole, howe then were they quite burnt before?
            
               
               
                  Stapleton 
                All this longe Argument hath a shorte solution. Those bishops sent the best Copies that they had, and such as they toke for whole and perfyt. But that they were not in dede the full, perfyt, and Authentike Copies, it hath bene allready sufficiently proued. And to adde here one reason more thereunto, it is to be cōsidered that the Canons alleaged by Ruffinus, and in his Ecclesiasticall History recorded,
                  Ruffinus li. 1. ca. 6. Histor. eccles.
                do differ and vary frō the Canons alleaged by the bishops of the East bothe in number, and in order, and in the matter it selfe. As the lerned Reader maye easely see by conferring bothe together. Therefore againe, either those Copies were not perfyt, or the Ecclesiasticall History of Ruffinus must be condemned for a Forger as the Pope here is.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 307. Vntruthe Slaunderous.Or how is it, that no man, neither Africa, nor in Europa, nor in Asia, neither in the East Churche, neither in the weast was euer able to see these Canons, but onely the bishop of Rome, that so (307.) ambitiously claimeth by them?
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                This is an another figure of M. Iewelles Rhetorike, to Amplifie and exaggerat the matter. But all this proueth not those Copies of the Africanes to be the full and Perfit Copies, neither yet that the Pope in alleaging a Canon which they had not, was a Forger and falsefyer.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 308 Vntruth. For that is not auouched.And if he haue them in dede and that of suche Authentike recorde, vnder the handes of the three hundred and eyghtene bishops, (as it is boldly auouched) why a
                  •
               e they not shewed? Why haue they bene for the space of these thirtene hūdred yeares stil kept vnuisible? Verely the Councell of Nice were well worthe the s
                  •
               ewing.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                The force of M. Iewelles eloquence hath sett his witt quite out of order: and made him vtterly to forgett where aboute he goeth. Before he talked against Pope Zosimus, and would proue him a Forger. Now he raueth aboute the Pope now lyuing. But quyet your selfe M. Iewell. It is not auouched of any man that the Pope hath these Canons nowe, and hath kept them vnuisible these thirtene hundred yeres. But that Zosimus truly

alleaged them to the Africanes, and that he was no Forg
                  •
                him selfe therein, but had them in his Custody from his predecessours Siluester and other, to whom they were sent from Nice, this is auouched, and this you haue forgotten.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                All these thi
                  •
               ges rightly weighed, may seme sufficient to descrie a Forger.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                All these thinges rightly weighed, may seme sufficient to des
                  •
               rie a Slaunderer. All this maye euidently shewe, that M. Iewell is a hotte Rhetorician, a colde diuine, a great talker, a weake reasonner, full of wordes, voide of proufes. Remembre M. Iewell the saying of the wise man. Quid Stulti proprium? Non posse & velle Nocere.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Yet (gentle Reader) the better to satisfye thy minde, marke howe earnestly and with what Conninge M. Hardinges Athanasius forceth on his fable. He thought it not sufficient to saie, The Canons all were quite burnte, Which thinge he only saieth and no man els but bicause he sawe wise men would Replie, There were no such Canons euer made, therefore he tooke paynes furder to shewe the consideratyons and causes, and the whole order, and circūstance of the making, whereat, he saieth, he him selfe was present.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
                M. Iewell forsothe is the wise man that Replieth, There were no such Canons euer made. For it is nowe more then a thousand yeres that any mā replied so, befor the holy broode of f
                  •
               yer Luther amonge whom M. Iewel hath lerned this witte. And how wisely he hath Replied, it appeareth I trowe, by the Graue and True processe that he hath hitherto made. And shall yet better appeare by the Depe Consideration which foloweth.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               Foure score canons (saieth he) were diuised in the whole: whereof 40. were layde in Latine by the Latines, and 40. other in Greke by the Grecians. Off this whole number of Canons (sayeth he) the Fathers there toke of tenne Canons and diuided them as they might, moste handsomely amonge the rest, and so made vp onely the number of 70. Canons. thereby mystically to represent the 70. Disciples, or els the number of the. 70. tounges that be knowen in the worl
                     •
                  e. Thus of wholesome and godly Rules of Faithe and Maners, M. Hardinges Athanasius hath leasure to fansie preaty Mysteries.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                Now forso the reasoned like a prety diuine, and full Bishoplike. Athanasius telleth of threscore and tenne Canons

made to represent the three score and tenne disciples, or els the three score and tenne tounges that be knowen in the worlde, Ergo that was not the true Athanasius that wrote it, but some idle fansyer of preaty Mysteries. Howe truly saied S. Paule? Animalis homo non percipit ea quae sunt Spiritus dei.
               1. Cor. 2. 
               Stultitia enim est illi. The Sensuall man perceaueth not those thinges that are of the Spirit of God. For it soundeth to him as a folie. And againe, Sapientia Carnisinimica est deo.
               
                  Rom. 
                  
                     •
                  . The wisedom of the flesh is contrary to God. For were you in dede M. Iewell affectioned as it becometh a Bishop and sheapherd of Gods flocke to be, yea had you any portion of that holy Spirit directing your thoughtes and writinges, as but a sober Christen man ought to haue, you woulde n
                  •
               uer haue vttered such a lewde toye to discredit the writing of an Auncient and most lerned Father, such as Athanasius thourough out all Christendom is knowen to be. For by the like vaine of your singular witte and wisedom M. Iewell, you may discredit many a lerned worke of the best and most approued Fathers of Christes Churche. S. Ambrose in his lerned worke De fide ad Gratianum maketh a mystery of the number of the Fathers of the Nicene Councell (as Athanasius reporteth the Fathers them selues to haue made of the number of their Canons,) and compareth the .318. Fathers to the .318. fighting men vnder Abraham when he conquered the foure kinges, saying. De con
                  
                     •
                  ilijs id potissimum sequar,
               
                  Gen. 14. Ambros. de fide ad Gratianū li. 1. in Pr
                        •
                     
                     ̄
                     logo.
                
               quod trecenti decem & octo sacerdotes tā
                  quam Abrahae electi iudicio, consona fidei virtute victores velut trophaeū toto orbe subactis perfidis extulerunt. Vt mihi videatur hoc esse diuinū, quòd eodem numero in Concilijs fidei habemus oraculū, quo in historia pietatis exemplum. Of all councels I will folowe that chiefly which the three hundred and eightene Priestes as if they had bene chosen by the minde of Abraham (who with that number conquered the iiij. kinges) by the Agrement of faithe triumphed by conquest ouer all faithelesse folcke. That

it semeth to me this matter was by Gods prouidence, that we haue an Oracle of our Faithe in Councels vnder the same Number, as we haue an example of vertu in the Storie. This obseruation and likelyhood of Number semed to S. Ambrose, Diu
                     •
                  num, a Matter done by God, a Mystery, a Secret worke of the highest. And yet is he not therefore accompted a fancyer of prety Mysteries (as full pretely M. Iewel bableth) neither is therefore that lerned worke of his reiected or doubted of. In like m
                  •
               ner S. Hierom in his Apologie ad Pammachium, make
                  ••
                
               
                  •
                Mystery of these three numbers, thirty, three score, and a hundred, which our Sauiour in the ghospel speaketh, of the encrease that cometh of the sede falling vpon good earthe, and saieth of these nūbers.
                  I
                        •
                      Apologia a
                        •
                      Pammachium pro libris aduersus Iouinia.
                
               Triginta referuntur ad nuptias, Septuaginta vero ad viduas. Porro numerus centesimus exprimit vi
                     •
                  gin
                     •
                  tatis Coronam. Thirty are referred to Mariage. Three score to widowes state. And the numbre of a hundred representeth the garland of Virginite. What nowe? Will M. Iewell here either therefore denie this worke to be of S. Hieroms making, or els saie that of Gods holy worde he h
                  •
               d leasure to fansie preaty Mysteries? In like maner when S. Augustine maketh Mysteries not only of Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, and their so many wiues, but also of Lothes lying with his owne daughters, and of the fornication committed by Iudas with his daughter in Lawe Thamar,
                  Lib. 22. contra Faus
                        •
                     um Man
                        •
                     
                     chaeum. cap. 82. & 
                  
                     ••
                  . and such other matters against that heretike Faustus the Manichee, will M. Iewelles modesty serue him trowe we, to saie, that that lerned piece of worke is none of S. Augustines, but of some Fabler that had leasure vpon holy Scripture to fansie preaty Mysteries? Or shall we rather saie that all this graue and depe consideration of M. Iewell, which he bringeth, as he saieth, to satisfie his Readers minde, is but a lewde scoffe of his idle brayne against that holy Councell more mete truly for a Sir Iohn hicke Scorner, then for a my L. bishop. And for such I let it passe.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                But for better viewe hereof, I remembre Cardinall Cusanus touching

the famous donation of Constantine writeth thus. Euen in the writing of it, I haue founde manifest tokens of f
                     •
                  lsehood.
            
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
                This is well remembred surely. But were your faithe as good, as your memory is shrewde, I trowe you would haue remembred some better thinge, thē thus to haue trifled and toyed. Verely a litle remembrance will serue to remembre a number not tokens of falshood, but facing falshoods in dede, open Vntruthes and lewde Lyes all alonge your Replie, M. Iewell, and especially in this your wise discourse of the Popes Forgerie. Wherein, I trowe, you will at length conclude your selfe a Forger. How beit let vs see nowe what your good remembrance hath holpen you in this matter.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .309. Vntruthe Slaund. as shall appeare.The like may be saied of these M. Hardinges newe Canons. Euen in the very vtteraunce and writi
                     •
                  g of them we may finde plaine contrariete and therefore vndoubted tokens of Vntruthe.
            
            This like is vntruly saied of M. Iewell, except he proue it. And not only Vntruly, but also Slaunderously. Let then his proofes trie.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                For the former twenty Canons, whereof there is no question, were made in the Councell of Nice. But the rest, whereof S. Augustin and the bishops of Africa moued doubte, and whereby the Bishop of Rome woulde seme to claime, were diuised at Rome and not at Nice.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                This is a mere kinde of Sophistry, called Petitio Principij. For that is brought to proue a Conclusion, which ought it selfe to be proued and Concluded. M. Iewell will proue that the Canons were diuised by the Pope, bicause they were diuised by the Pope. As much to saie. Why is it so? Mary bicause it is so.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                This newe Canon here alleaged sayeth. The bishop of Rome hath the rule and Souerainte ouer all Patriarche
                     •
                  .
            
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                This was not alleaged of Zosimus,
                  Lib. 3 de cha
                        •
                     a
                        •
                     t dogma
                        •
                     .
                whom M. Iewell goeth aboute to proue a Forger. But it is alleaged of Franciscus Turrianus and out of him by D. Harding. Thus M. Iewel confoundeth

and iumbleth thinges together, But let vs see what he will inferre hereof.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               
                  Concil. Nicen. can. 6.But the very true and vndoubted Councell of Nice saieth farre otherwise. Antiqua consaetudo seruetur per Aegyptum, Lybiam & Pentapolim, vt Alexandrinus horum omnium habeat potestatem. Quia & vrbis Romae Episcopo parilis mos est. Let the Auncient cu
                     •
                  tome be kept through out Agypte, Lybia, and Pentapolis: that the bishop of Alexan
                     •
                  ria haue the gouernement of all these. For the bishop of the Citye of Rome hath the like order. By this Canon the B. of Rome hath (310) no Soueraynte ouer other Patriarches,The 310. Vntruthe as shall 
                     •
                  ppeare. As M. Harding fantasieth, but onely a felowship, and equalyte with the rest, to walke carefully with in his owne diuision, as others were bounde to doo within theirs.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                This Canon dothe importe a Souuerainte of the B. of Rome ouer other Patriarches. And therefore the contrary is vntruly auouched. Aske you howe that may appeare? Forsothe by these very wordes of the Canon alleaged. Quia & vrbis Romae episcopo parilis mos est. Bicause the bishop of Ro
                  •
               e hath the like order. The Canon Commaundeth not as a newe matter but as an Olde Custome that the bishop of Alexandria shall gouuerne all Aegypt, and Pentapolis. And why shall that olde Custom be kept? The Canon saieth. Quia & vrbis Romae Episcopo Parilis mos est. Bicause the Bishop of Rome hath the like Order.The Popes Primacy in the Nicene Councell. As much to saie, bicause the bishop of Rome hath so of longe time appoynted it and ordred it. Els the reason of the Decree were voide, and fonde. For a fonde thinge it were to alleage for a reason of the lawe the Custome, Maner and Order of an other, if his Order and Maner did not importe an Authorite, sufficient to Rule and direct the Lawe. That holy Councell therefore, alleaging expressely the Order before taken by the bishop of Rome, as a Reason why the other Patriarches shoulde be thus and thus limited, geueth vs to vnderstande, that such their limitation proceded of the Bishop of Romes former Order and appoyntment, and that the Decree of the Canon of that Councell was but a publike Testimony and Ratification of the Ancient Order before by

the Pope taken and vsed. And thus this Canon importeth a Souerainte of the B. of Rome ouer other Patriarches, as by whose Order the others Iurisdiction was limited and restrayned. Thus also the other Canon alleaged by Franciscus Turrianus and men
                  •
               ioned by D. Harding is not contrary to the true Copies or Canons of the Nicene Councell, but soundeth agreable to the same.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                And in this canon these two wordes Parilis mos are specially to be noted: which cannot (311.) otherwise be expounded,pag. 239. The 311. Vntruthe For these wordes. ought otherwise to be expounded. but only of like maner, order, and Authorite of Iurisdiction.
            So saieth M. Iewell. But then lett vs consider the reason of the Canon. The Canon saieth. The Patriarche of Alexandria shal haue Aegypt, lybia, and Pentapolis allotted to his Iurisdiction. And why? Forsothe by M. Iewelles reason, Bicause the bishop of Rome hath 
                  •
               he like maner, order, and authorite of Iurisdictiō. What? hath the bishop of Rome the like Iurisdiction ouer Aegypt, lybia, and Pentapolis, and shal therefore the Patriarke of Alexandria haue the same? Doe those two wordes Parilis mos necessarely inferre so much, and can they not otherwise be expounded? Then two seuerall Patriarches must haue one and the like Iurisdiction. Then which what cā be more absurde? What then? Shall therefore the bishop of Alexandria haue such and such Countres allotted vnto him, bicause the B. of Rome hath such and such other Countres? And what reason is this to make a Decree, I appeale to al men of reason and vnderstanding. This might perhaps serue for a like and similitude, as that the B. of Alexandria shoulde be the Patriarche ouer such Countres, Euen as the Bishop of Rome is the Patriarche ouer other Countres. But nowe the wordes of the Canon, are not Euen as the B. of Rome, and so forthe. But the wordes of the Canon are: Quia
                     •
                   & Episcopo parilis mos est. Bicause the Bishop of Rome hath the like Order. The like Order takē. by the bishop of Rome is geuen as a Cause and Reason

of the Decree. It is not brought as a Like or Similitude to exemplifie the decree. Therfore it can not be taken as M. Iewel fantasyeth, to signifie a like maner and Authorite of Iurisdiction in the bishop of Rome. But it must of necessite signifie a Superior Authorite of the B. of Rome. Verely such as the which was a sufficient warrāt and Reason to that Holy Councell, to establish the olde Accustomed Iurisdiction of the Patriarche of Alexandria, ouer Aegypt, Libia and Pentapolis. And thus farre doe the true Copies of the Nicene Councell agree with the other not commonly extant amonge the twenty, and confirme in like maner the Supreme Authorite of the bishop of Rome ouer the Patriarches them selues.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .312. Vntruthe as it shall anon appeare.M. Hardinges Canon saieth. S. Pete
                     •
                   was maister and ruler ouer all Christen Princes. And yet is not M. Hardinge able to proue that while S. Peter liued, there was any one prince Christened in the whole worlde.
            What a Manifest, Notorious, and Capitain Vntruthe this is, it shall anon appeare, in the Returning of the next Vntruthe fathered by M. Iewell vpon D. Harding. But nowe let vs consider how M. Iewell can Gheasse to the Contrary.
            
               
                  The 313. Vntruthe ioyned with a so lie.
                  
                     Homil. 1. de paeni
                           •
                        . Tom. 5. Primatum illi gubernationē
                        
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         per vniuersum mūdum tradidit.
                  
                  
                     Matth. 8.
               And if Peter had had power ouer kinges and Princes, it is not likely he woulde haue taken vp his lodging with Cornelius the poore Tanner.
            Well gheassed and wisely. As though S. Peters power committed to him by Christ, and the Primacy which he had (by Chrysostomes Iudgement) ouer the whole worlde, was to commaunde him selfe a lodging and such like temporall p
                  •
               eferments. Some foolish Iewe might reason as wise M. Iewell here dothe, and saie. If Christ was the Sonne of God and kinge of al, it is not likely he would haue liued in such sorte that he might saie (as he saied) of him selfe. Foxes haue their holes, and birdes haue their nestes. But the Son of man hath not where to reste his heade. By such godly Reasons M. Iewell f
                  ••
               eth Gods people. But S. Paule soluteth well this whole matter,1. Cor. 9. saying. VVhat is my

rewarde? For sothe that preaching the ghospell, I may deliuer the ghospell without coste. That I maye not abuse my Power in the Gospell. So dealed the Apostles at the beginning, and so they planted the ghospell, not yet leesing therefore their Spiritual Iurisdiction.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                In the ende he concludeth with a Terrour. Iff any man repine against this Statute, accursed be he.
            
            In dede to all heretikes,
                  Sorom. li. 3. cap. 8. Cōc. Chal. Act. 3. Optatus. li. 1. a Terrour it is to obey their Superiours: and specially to be subiect to the See of Rome. So the Arrians defyed Pope Iulius, the Eutychiā Dioscorus presumed to excommunicat Pope Leo, the Donatistes would not stande to the Iudgement of Pope Melciades. And so to M. Iewell the Statute of the Nicene Councel confirming the Popes Supremacy is a Terrour.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Wherein he doth great wronge bothe to S. Augustine,The .314 Vntruthe For the Africanes neuer sawe this Canon. and also to all the Bishoppes of Aphrical, Numidia, Mauritania, Pentapolis and Byzancena. Who not only repined (.314.) openly against this Canō, but also saied, It was falsifyed, and rebuked the Pope of Pride and Ambition for the same.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                Of what Metle is M. Iewel made that this outfaceth Matters? For S. Augustine and all those bishops neuer sawe this Canō. This Canon I saie alleaged by D. Harding out of Turrianus against the which M. Iewell hath so longe talked, which confesseth the Pope to be ouer al Patriarches, which saith, that S. Peter was Master and ruler ouer al Princes, and the which (as M. Iewel saieth) concludeth with a terrour, this Canō the Africane bishoppes neuer sawe. But it is one of those Canōs which Franciscus Turrianus a lerned man of our daies hath founde out. Is there any regarde of shame or honesty in M. Iewell that multiplieth Vntruthes, and droppeth lies, so faste?
            To be shorte, what leadeth M. Harding thus to saie?The 315. Vntruth Slaund. For D. Harding saied not so. 
               The bishop off Rome hath these three score and ten Canons in safe keeping. VVhy dothe he thus dissemble and mocke the worlde?
            And Alas. What leadeth M. Iewel thus to belye D. Harding? why dothe he thus dissemble and mocke the world? What shal

he hope to winne or gett hereby, but if it be to haue the VVhetstone? The wordes which D. Harding saieth of those three score and tenne Canons kept in Rome, are these.
             
               
                  Harding. 
               
               diuis. 6. pag. 232. in M. Iewelles Replie.
               Among the Canons made by the .318. bishops at the Nicene Councell, which were in number 70. and all burnt by heretikes in the East Church saue xx. and yet the whole number vvas kept diligently in the Churche of Rome in the Originall it selfe, Sent to Syluester the Bishop there from the Councell subscribed with the saide .318. Fathers hādes etc? In these wordes D. Harding saied, the whole number, VVas kept. And howe? Sent to Syluester by the Councell it selfe, but that the bishop of Rome nowe hath them, as M. Iewel maketh him to saie, he saieth not at all. Who so beleueth not me herein, let him peruse the whole wordes of D. Harding in this place in the very text inserted in M. Iewelles Replie, and if he finde it otherwise, let me neuer more be credited. Now M. Iewell with more impudency then cā well be expressed,
                  Dist. 16. viginti.
                reasoneth very sadly out of the decrees, and proueth that many a yere agoe, the Pope had but twenty Canons of that Councell: and thus he concludeth.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 316. Vntruthe As beforeThe Pope saieth there are but twenty Canon extant, M. Harding saieth (316.) 
                  •
               here are three score and tenne Canons. I trowe, 
                  〈◊〉
                no reason, we shoulde beleue M. Harding, and leaue the Pope.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                No truly. But it were more reason that you woulde ones speake more truly, and not so vily abuse the Patience of your Reader with such grosse, shamelesse, and Slaunderous Vntruthes.
            After this holesome and frutefull Processe M. Iewell hath a flinge againe at an other Epistle of Anathasius to Felix. All out of season, and all beside the purpose. Leaning therefore his Vntrue allegatiōs of certain doctours, about that matter of (the which his vntrue dealing he shall yet heare by some other, God

willing, er it be longe) let vs consider M. Iewelles Conclusion and winding vp of this greate Processe of the Popes forgerie.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .317. Vntruth. peuish. Nowe, gentle Reader, shortely and simply, to laie all the effect hereof before thine eyes: M. Hardings Canons were burnte before they were euer made.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
                This is one Manifest Vntruth to beguile the Reader. Now foloweth a Scoffe to abuse the Reader.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                They were burnte, and yet were they falsified, They were falsified and yet were they burnt to.
            
               
                  Stapletō 
               
               The .318. Vntruthe peuish.So the fielde was wonne, and the fielde was loste. The fielde was lost, and yet it was wonne. But twenty yeres came betwene.
            This Athanasius informeth Marcus the Bishop of Rome of the burning of them, nine yeres before the fire was made.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                They were burnte in the dayes of Marcus, saieth Athanasius. A second fire M. Iewell woulde fayne proue. But to proue that Vntruthe he is driuen to make bothe Athanasius and Socrates to saie that they neuer sayed.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                The Pope is found in most manifest Forgerie,The .319. Vntruthe
                     •
                   Slaunderous. and that by the witnesse of the Patriarkes of Cōstantinople, and Antioche, and off all the bishoppes, and the whole Councell of Affrica, S. Augustin him selfe being present.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                This is founde all to be a manifest fable full of Vntruthes, Slaunderous, lewde, and lying. Of the Aphricanes dealing we shall saye more anon.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                M. Harding saieth.The .320 Vntruthe Slaund. as before. The Pope hath the custody of these Inuisible Canons. The Pope him selfe saieth, he hath none of them.
            D. Harding saied not so. But euen as that Pope Steuen sayed, that they were all at Rome to the number of .70. and sent thither by the Councell it selfe to Pope Syluester..
            These Canons be plaine Contrary not onely to the olde Catholike Fathers but also to other Canons of the same Councell.The .321. Vntruthe as appeareth.
            
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                The Canons of the same Councell are not contrary to these alleaged, as hath bene proued. As for Fathers contrary to these Canons M. Iewell hath alleaged none.
            
               The bishoppes in the Councell of Africa openly mislike the Popes attempte in this behalfe, and call it worldly pride and vaine Ambition.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                Howe they misliked it, and howe well they did in it, it hath before appeared, and shall yet anon more appeare.
            
               
                  Iewell 
                Such warrant hath M. Harding to auaunce the state of the see of Rome.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                Such proofes hath M. Iewell against the See of Rome. And thus by a number of manifest Vntruthes, by sleightes and open Forgerie M. Iewell hath thought good to proue the Pope a Forger, and to blase in the title of these fiue pages, The Pope a Forger: The Pope a Forger. For the which I see no cause, but we may most iustly saie and publish to the worlde. Ievvell a Forger. Ievvell a Forger. And not only that, but Ievvel a Slaunderer. Ievvel a Slaūderer. And againe. Open Vntruthes of Ievvel: Open Vntruthes of Ievvell. For thus deserueth he with all men to be estemed, which heapeth Vntruthes vpō other mens backes most Vntruly, and chargeth that blessed Pope Zosimus, with Forgery and Falsifying, Blased out in great letters, but Proued with no Reason.
            Nowe for a surplussage, bicause M. Iewell with all the helpe of the lying Centuries, patched vp by his brethern of Magdeburge, with all his studie and conference with his frendes, hath not yet bene able to fasten any Forgerye vpon Pope Zosimus, but the more he hath talked therein, the moe Vntruthes he hath multiplied, let vs cōsider howe the Africanes them selues after the deathe of this Zosimus (who was Pope but one yere) spake and reported of him, whether as of a Forger and Falsyfyer, as the impudent face of M. Iewell had blased it out, or otherwise. First the whole Councel of the Africane bishops in their letter to Bonifacius the next Successour of this Zosimus,

euen talking of this matter of appealing to Rome, and of the Nicene Canon alleaged by Zosimus therefore, do call him Beatae memoriae Zosimum. Zosimus of blessed memory. And againe Venerabilis memoriae Zosimum,
               
                  Con il. Aph
                        •
                     ic in epist. ad Bonifaciū.
                Zosimus of Reuerent memory. If these Africane bishops had (as M. Iewell most lewdely lyeth) descried such a Forgery of the holy Councell of Nice in Zosimus, and if they had also bene of the Sprit, that this ghospelling Prelatis of, they woulde I trowe, haue blased him oute in their letter thus. Zosimus the Forger, Zosimus the Falsyfyer of the holy Councell. Zosimus of infamous memory. But we see in these Fathers bothe an other opinion and an other Spirit, then appereth in these wicked Chams, whose whole glory and pleasure is to Accuse their Fathers, holy and lerned bishops of Christes Churche before them.
            S. Augustin one of the Africane bishops that was present when Faustinus legate to this Pope Zosimus alleaged the same Canon of the Nicene Councell, let vs consider howe after the deathe of Zosimus, he reporteth of him in his lerned writinges against the Pelagians, condēned especially by this lerned Pope Zosimus. He saieth of Celestius the Pelagian heretike, In vrbe Roma libellum dedit beatissimo Papae Zosimo.
               
                  De Gratia Christili. 2. cap. 2. Cap. 6. In the Citie of Rome he gaue vp a libel (of his faithe and belefe) to the Most holy Pope Zosimus. And bicause this lerned Pope Zosimus did not D
                     •
                  strictam ferre sententiam pronounce a straight Sentēce against this Pelagyan heretike, but suis interrogationibus & illius responsionibus furentem colligare, donec (si fieri posset) resipisceret, moderat the fury of the heretike by his questyons and the others answers, vntil, if it were possible, he might amē
               de, bicause I saie the Pope Zosimus thus dealed with him, S. Augustin calleth him Multū misericordē Apostolicae Sedis Antistitē, A very mercifull bishop of the See Apostolike. In the next Chapter folowing he calleth him Venerabilis Papa Zosimus
               
The Reuerent Pope Zosimus. And in the next after Beatissimus Papa Zosimus. The most Blessed Pope Zosimus.
                  Cap. 7. Cap. 8. And againe in the same Chapter. Venerabili Papae Zosimo Synodus Africana respondit. The Africane Councell answered to the Reuerent Pope Zosimus. In fewe Chapters after, recording howe Pelagius went aboute ad fallendum etiam Apostolicae Sedis Epis
                     •
                  opale iudicium, to deceiue the bishoply Iudgement euen of the See Apostolike, he telleth of letters which Pelagius sent to Innocentius, but Quoniam eum in corpore non inuenerunt,
               
                  Cap. 17. 
               Sancto Papae Zosimo datae sunt Bicause they founde not Innocentius then lyuing, they were deliuered to The Holy Pope Zosimus. These and such like Titles gaue that holy and lerned Father S. Augustin, one of the Africane bishops in whose presence that Canon of the Nicene Counce was alleaged, to Pope Zosimus. He calleth him A Holy Pope, A most Blessed pope. A Reuerēt Pope, a very mercifully Bishop, and so forthe, but by the name of Forger,
                  
                     Contra duas episto
                        
                           •
                        as Pelagianorum lib. 1.
                  
                     Cap. 4. & Contra Iulianum saepe.
                  
                Falsyfyer, or any such like termes he calleth him not. Had he bene guilty of such a haynous Crime, as M. Iewell and his felowes do laye against him, he woulde not so reuerently haue spoken of him, and that so ofte. Allmost as ofte as he nameth him.
            Nowe bicause M. Iewell fantasieth a Forgerie descried in the Pope by the Africanes and by the East Churches, let vs a litle cōsider their dealing therein. First the Aphricanes sent to al the three Churches of the East,
                  In epist. ad Bonifaciū Cap. 101. Alexandria, Antioche, and Cōstā
               tinople. Frō Alexādria and Cōstātinople they receiued Copies. From Antioche they receyued none. Or at the lest in the Aphricane Councel there appeareth no Copie sent from thence. Howe chaunced that trowe we? Were there not to be sounde any in that Churche, but destroyed by heretikes, or

was there a Copie sent, but not published by the Aphricanes? If the first, as likely were the other to haue the Copies corrupted and imperfect, as that Patriarkeship vtterly to lese them. If the seconde, then dealed not the Aphricanes so vprightly as they might haue done. Verely the Aphricanes them selues in their letters to Caelestinus the Pope, certifying him of the receyte of those Copies from Alexandria and from Constantinople, do not auouche them for the absolute true and only Copies, but do call them Concilia veriora, the truer Copies of the Nicene Councel,
                  Concil. Aphricanum Cap. 104. geuing vs to vnderstande that other copies there were, whiche to them semed not so true. Els iff other Copies had not then bene extant, they shoulde not haue called them Veriora the truer: but absolutely Vera, the True Copies,Before in the leafe. 37. B. as M. Iewell in dede before turned the same worde, declaring his good will, howe he woulde haue had them writen.
            Againe the Copie sent from Cyrillus of Alexandria referreth it selfe to the Ecclesiasticall history. For there it is saied. Quae et in ecclesiastica historia requirentes inuenietis. Which Canons ye shall finde also in the Ecclesiasticall history.
                  Consil Aphr. Cap. 102. Nowe no Ecclesiasticall history hath any such Canons of the Nicene Councell, but the history of Ruffinus. But those Canons by him mentioned, and the Copie of Cyrillus do varie not a litle. Ruffinus, beside the order and placing of the Canons is not like, hath also xxij. Canons. The Copie sent by Cyrillus hath but xx.
                  
                     Ruffinus. lib. 1. Cap. 6.
                  
                     Tom. 1. Cō
                        cil. fol. 498.
                Therefore either Cyrillus was ouersene in referring the Africanes to that history, or els the very letter of Cyrillus is but for
                  •
               ed or at the lest his Copie not perfect.
            Againe Marcus the bishop of Ephesus, one that of all other forceth most this dealing of the Aphricanes against the See of Rome, affirmeth that the Aphricanes sent not to Cyrillus and Atticus, but to Cyrillus and Proclus. And that the Cōtrouersie betwene the Africanes and the Pope was not aboute Appeales,

but whether the Pope might be called vniuersall bishopp. Thus these Greciās agree not in their tales. And thus we might saie according to the good remembraunce of M. Iewell, as Nicolaus Cusanus saied,
                  Vide Conc. Florent. Sess. 20. 
               Euen in the very vtterance of the matter we may finde manifest tokens of falshood.
            
            To ende this matter of the Aphricane bishops demeanour towarde the See of Rome, though it was at this present done (as it may seme) without breache of Charyte, or of their whole obedience to the See of Rome, standing only vpon the case of Appeale, yet that all was not wel on their parte, the Successe, which is Gods iudgement (as S. Augustin noteth) Declared. For euen immediatly after (S. Augustin yet liuing) the Wandals ouerpressed the Countre,
                  Victor. lib. 1. de persecut. Vandalorum.
                the Arrians vsed extreme persecution (as the history of Victor particulary expresseth) and the whole estate of Christianite for the space of a hundred yeres was in that Countre miserably afflicted, and persecuted. After which time a Generall Submission and Reconciliation was made off the Africane Bishops,
                  Tom 1. Cō
                     cil in Bonifacio 2. by Eulalius the Archebishop of Carthage, vnto the See of Rome Bonifacius the second then sitting in the Chayre of Peter. Againe whether the Pope was a Forger, and his so longe after continued Authorite grounded thereupon (as M. Iewel of his brethern of Magdeburg hath lerned to saie) or the Africanes to be blamed in that Contention, to leaue other triall, we see God hath geuen the Sentence. The Moores and Infidels possesse Afrike. Christians and Catholikes liue yet at Rone. And haue so done without interruption euer sithens.
            
               
                  Hard. 
               
               As Peter Christes vicare at the beginning being sette in Authorite ouer religion, ouer the Churches, and ouer al thinges pertaining to Christ, was Master and Ruler of Christian Princes, Prouinces, and al nations &c.
            
            The 98. Vntruthe. For there was no Prince or prouince Christened

in S. Peters time.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
               
               The 322. Vntruthe Slaunderous.
The .323. Vntruthe For there was One prince and prouince Christened in S. Peters time, at the lest. Nicepoh. li. 2. Cap. 7.
Homi. 55. in Matth. Hierem.
               It is written in the Ecclesiasticall historie. Augarus Edessenorum princeps in initio, Thaddeo vno ex septuaginta veniente fidem cum tota illa regione recepit. Augarus the Prince of Edessa receiued the faith with all that prouince, euen att the beginning by the preaching of Thaddeus one of the 70. disciples. Lo here is One prouince Christened in S. Peters time. Thus by a manifest Vntruthe M. Iewell hath noted Vntruthe vpon others. And how saie you M. Iewell? Doth not the psalme saie of the Apostles, Constitutes eos principes super omnem terram. Thou shal make thē rulers ouer the whol earthe? And yet you knowe the whole earthe was not Christened in their time. Againe Chrisostom saieth of Peter by name that Christ made him gouerner of the whole world. These are his wordes. God the Father saied vnto Hieremie the prophet. I haue sett the as a piller of yron, and as a brasen walle. But God the father did sett this prophet ouer one natiō onely (of the Iewes) but Christ set Peter gouuerner ouer the whole worlde. And this preeminence of Peter Chrisostom in that place doth prosecut, to proue, that the Authorite and Power of Christe is no lesse, then of God the Father. Now then as Peter is truly called gouuerner ouer the whole worlde, though the whole worlde were not Christened (his gouuernement yet extending to Christians only, for off those which are without, we iudge not,1. Cor. 5. saieth S. Paule) so is Peter truly called the Master and ruler of Princes, though in his time fewe princes were Christened.
            Againe as Peter was truly and by right the Gouerner of the whole world by Christs appointment, although not he in person, but his successours in time haue so gouerned the whole worlde, and shall (before the ende come) gouuerne through out euery corner thereof, donec impleatur plenitudo gentium, vntil the fulnesse of gentiles be accomplished, so Peter is truly called the Master of all Christen Princes, bicause though not he in

person, yet his successours had and shal haue the spirituall gouuernement of all Princes in the worlde.
            Last of all what letteth that the Councell of Nice might not call the number of conuerted Christians and Countres in S. Peters time (who were not I trowe all beggers or of base degree) but some Potences some Nobiles,
               1. Cor. 1. some mē of power and nobilite, by the name of Princes and prouinces, as S. Peter called Herode and Pilate persecuting the Christians, by the names of Princes and Kinges, when he saied the prophecy was fulfilled in them spoken by Dauid, where it is writen: Kinges of the Earthe and Princes haue risen together against the Lorde and his annoyn
                     •
                  ed.
               
                  Act. 4. Psal. 2. Neither Herode was Kinge, neither Pilat was Prince in respect of the Iewes, which professed and saied, VVe haue no kinge but Caesar,
               
                  Ioan. 19. and yet they are called without Vntruthe in generall termes Kinges and princes.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               The Christen Princes that ratified and confirmed with their proclamations and edictes, the decrees of the Canons concerning the Popes primacie and gaue not him first that authorite (as the aduersaries doo vntruly reporte) were Iustinian and Phocas the Emperours.
            
            
               
                  The .324 Vntruthe Slaund.
                  The 325. Vntrut
                        •
                     e Captain and 
                        •
                     mpudent.
                  
                     Cod. de Summ
                           •
                         Tria. & fid. Cath. Tit. 1. No Red
                           •
                        en
                           •
                        es. Au
                           •
                        hē vt Eccles. R
                           •
                        
                        c
                           •
                        nt 
                           〈◊〉
                        . ga
                           •
                        . pri
                           •
                        i.
                  
               The 99. Vntruthe. Phocas gaue this Title to the bishop of Rome, but Iustinian gaue it neuer.
            M. Iewell is not contented to auouche an Vntruthe vpon D. Harding, but he addeth also a manifest and Captain Vntruthe of his owne making beside. For first Iustinian the Emperour writing to Iohn the seconde Pope of that name calleth his holynes by these very wordes: Caput omnium sanctarum ecclesiarum: The head of all holy Churches. And in an other Constitution he saieth expressely. Vt legum originem anterior Roma sontita est, ita & Summi Pontificatus Apicem apud eam esse 
                     •
                  emo est qui dubitet. Vnde & nos necessarium duximus Patriam legum, fontem Sacerdotij, speciali nostri Numinis lege illustrare.
               
As from Olde Rome the lawes haue spronge forth, so the very Topp of the highest bishoprike to be in that Citie there is none that doubteth. Therfore we also thought it necessary to honour the Mother of our Lawes, and the Wel 
                  •
               pringe of Priesthood with some special lawe of our highnes. In those two places Iustinian first calleth the Pope of Rome Head of all Holy Churches: and then confesseth him to occupie the Toppe of the highest Bishoprike, and that not as any Priuilege by him or his predecessours graunted, but as a matter that no Christen man doubted of. This therefore is one most Manifest, most Impudent and Captain Vntruthe of M. Iewell to saie so peremptorely and so facingly Iustinian gaue this Title neuer. For here is bothe the Title, and the Authorite of the Title expressely confessed. Againe the very wordes of Iustinian are plaine alleaged here by D. Harding. Which are these. Sancimus secundum Canonem d
                     •
                  finitiones, Sanctissimum Senioris Romae Papā, primū esse omnium Sacerdotum. We ordaine according to the determination of the Canons, that the most holy Pope of the elder Rome, be formest and chiefe of al Priests. How saie you M. Iewel? Is not here the chiefty or Primacy of the Pope ouer al priests cōfirmed by the Emperours edict? Is it not true that the Emperour geueth him that Title, and calleth him Primum omnium Sacerdotum, the chiefest of all Priestes? And that not by his owne authorite or commaundement, but Secundum Canonum definitiōes. Acco
                  •
               ding to the determinatiōs of the Canōs. What saie you to this place? This is within the compasse of your six hundred yeres, six times farder then Phocas is out of tha
                  •
                compasse, whose testimony you reiect therefore. No no, You will neuer yelde, You must with often impudency defende, that which was ones impudently spokē. Let vs see what you saie.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                This priuilege graunted to the bishop of Rome to be the first of a
                  •
               l

priestes, was not to beare the whole sway and to ouer rule all the worlde.
            S. Gregory and Chrysostom haue auoutched no lesse of S-Peter and his Successours (as it hat bene allready declared) Ergo this is one Manifest Vntruthe to beginne withall.
                  The .326 Vntru
                        •
                     he For touching Sp
                        •
                     
                     ritu
                        •
                     ll go
                        •
                     uerne
                        •
                     ent his priuileg
                        •
                      w
                        •
                     s s
                        ••
                     h.
                  
                     Lib. 4. ep. 3
                        •
                      
                     lib. 2. d. s
                           •
                        cerd. 
                     
                        〈…〉
                      55 in M
                           ••
                        th.
                  
                  T
                        •
                     e .327. 
                        〈…〉
                     . Si quis seruo, Col. de furtis.
                  
                Now to an other.
            But onely in generall meetinges and Councelles to sitte in place aboue all other, and for auoiding of confusion to direct and order them in their doinges.
            This is an other Vntruthe. Iustinian referreth his edict to the constitution of the Canons. Therefore as the Canons do expoūde this chiefty or Primacy, so must the edict of Iustinian be interpreted. For the lerned lawyer Baldus saieth, that the lawe must be vnderstanded, secundū rationem expr
                     •
                  ssam &c according to the reason expressed in the lawe. Now as touching the Canons, vnto the which the lawe is expressely referred first by the Canons of the 
                  Can. 21. & 3 in ep. Iulij.
                Nicene Councell not only by that which Zosimus alleaged to the Aphricane bishops, but also by the Canons alleaged by Iulius to the bishops of the East, it is euident that all causes might be referred out of all countres to the Pope of Rome for the time.
                  Can. 7. The Councell of Sardica decreeth the same touching appellations in criminal causes. The Canons of Councelles (as the 
                  Lib. 4. cap. 9. Hist. tripar.
                Ecclesiastical history witnesseth) haue ordeined that without the Authorite of the bishop of Rome, no Councell should be called. And for that cause the Councell of Antioche (being assembled without the agreement of Iulius the Pope) was disanulled. In the Coūcel of Chalcedō the Po
                  •
               es legat was president, and subscribed in these termes. Paschasinus epis
                     •
                  opus,
               
                  Concil. Chalced. Act. 3. 
               vice domini mei beatissimi atque Apostolici vniuersae 
                     •
                  cclesiae P
                     •
                  pae vrbis R
                     •
                  mae Leonis, synodo praesidens, statui, consensi & subscripsi. I Paschasinus bishop, being President ouer the Councell in the place of my most blessed Lorde, and the Apostolike Pope of the vniuersall Churche, Leo of the Citie of Rome, haue decreed, haue agreed, and haue subscribed. In like maner and

termes, Lucentius bishop, and Bonifacius priest, bothe legates of the Pope subscribed before the Patriarche of Constantinople and all the rest. This was in the great Generall Councell of Chalcedon, holden in the yere of our Lorde foure hundred and odde, in the assemblie of six hundred bishops, meeting there from all partes of Christendom in the presence of Martianus the Emperour. This was all before Iustinians time. The meaning therefore of Iustinians Edict hauing relation to the Canons of the former Councelles, doe geue a farre other preeminence to the Pope, then M. Iewell will yelde.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  Sacrosa
                        ••
                     lis Eccl
                        •••
                     . d
                        •
                     c
                        •
                     rnimus The 328. Vn
                     •••
                  t
                     •
                  e For those word
                     •
                  s of themperour are 
                     •
                  ot spok
                     •
                  n 
                     •
                  f the Pop
                     •
                  .Themperours wordes be plaine. Praerogati
                     •
                  a in Epis
                     •
                  oporum Concilio vel extra Cō
                  
                     •••
                  um ante altos resiaen
                     •
                  i. A prerogatiue in the Councel of bishops or without the Councell to sit in order aboue others. This prerogatiue in greke is called 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , that is, the priuilege of the fi
                     •
                  st p
                     ••
                  ce.
            
            Here M. Iewell notably betrayeth him selfe, laying forthe For a Countenaunce a fewe of themperours wordes, and that nothinge to the purpose, beginning in the middes of a Sentence, leauing out the principall verbe, brefely hewing and mangling them as him listeth best. Soothely, good Reader, if it had lyked M. Iewell to haue geuen the leaue to reade the next lynes going immediatly before, or to haue layed out before thee but the whole and full sentence of the Constitution, thou mightest easely haue sene, that all this pertaineth nothinge in the worlde to the bishop of Rome, nor to the Decree of Iustinian touching the Popes Primacy before mentioned. For first this Constitution is not of Iustinians making, but was made threscore yeres before him, by Leo and Anthemius, as in the Code it is easy to be sene. Againe the wordes of the decree speake not at all of the bishop of Rome. For thus they stan
                  •
               e. Dece
                     •
                  nimus vt antiquatis ac infirmatis fund
                     ••
                  us que contra ipsam orth
                     •
                  doxae religionis d
                     •
                  um quodammodo facta sunt in integrum 
                     ••
                  s
                     •••
                  uantur vniuersa: & ad suum ordinem reuocentur,
               Cod 
                     •
                  e Sacr
                     •
                   a
                     •
                   is 
                     〈…〉
                  
                
               qu
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  nte proj
                     •
                  ct
                     •
                  one nostrae mansu
                     •
                  tudinis de orthodoxae religionis fid
                     •
                   & sanctiss m
                     ••
                  ū
                  
ecclesiarum & martyriorum statu firmíter obtinebant. Hijs quae contra hoc tempore tyrannidis innouata sunt, tam contra venerabil
                     •
                  s ecclesias quarum sace
                     •
                  dotium gerit beatissimus & religiosissimus Patriarcha nostrae pietat
                     •
                  s pater Achattus, quàm contra caeteras, quae per diuersas prouinci
                     •
                  s collocatae sunt, nec non & reuerendissimos 
                     •
                  arum Antistites s
                     •
                  u de iure sacerdotalium creationum seu de expulsione cuiusque episcopi a quolibet illis temporibus facta seu de * Praerogatiua in episcoporum con
                  •
               i
                  •
               o vel extra concilium ante alios residendi, vel priuilegio metropolitano vel Patriarchico, sub ijsdem temporibus penitus antiquandis. We ordaine and decree (saye those Emperous Leo of the East and Anthemius of the west) that all such thinges being broken and disanulled, which haue bene commited as though it were against God him selfe, all thinges be a newe restored, and brought to their former Order, which did take place before our coming as well touching the Catholike faithe, as touching the most holy Churches and Chappels. All those thinges to be vtterly repealed which against this, in the time of Tyranny were altered, as wel against the Reuerent Curches subiect to the most holy Patriarche oure Father Achatius, as against other Churches placed in diuerse prouinces, and also against the most Reuerent Bishoppes of those Churches, whether it be of the right of making priestes, or of the depriuation of any bishop in that time committed, Or of Here beginne the word
                     •
                  s that 
                     •
                  . Iewell 
                     •
                  ath picked out. a p
                     •
                  erogatiue in the Coun
                     ••
                  ll of bis
                     •
                  oppes or without the Councell, to sitt in order abo
                     •
                  e others, or of the priuilege of any Metropolitane, or patriarche, in those times. Thus farre the Constitution, not of Iustinian (of whose lawe the matter is nowe in question) but of Leo and Anthemius, who reigned three score yeres and more before Iustinian. And in all this Constitution the bishop of Rome is not mentioned, nor any worde spoken of his Priuilege or Prerogatiue. But the Prerogatiue of sitting in order aboue others (as M. Iew
                  •
               ll turneth praesidendi, puting for it in his latin, residendi, and so ones againe falsifying

the very decree,) is here spoken of other bishoppes, and that by the waie, not expounding what that Prerogatiue was, or to whom it belonged. Yet M. Iewell with his accustomed modesty and shamefastnesse, telleth vs: This priuilege graunted to the bishopp of Rome, to be the first of all priestes (which are the wordes off themperour Iustinian) was onely in generall meetinges and Councelles to sitte in place aboue all others. And to proue that he inferreth stoutely. Themperours wordes be plaine. As though he h
                  •
               d a
                  •
               leaged the wordes of Iustinian themperour, and as though those wordes had bene expressely spoken of the Popes Prerogatiue, and Primacy. Thus with out all shame and regarde what he saieth, he alleageth either he careth not what, or els, he can not tell what.
            Now whereas M. Iewell to proue this Prerogatiue of place in councelles, bringeth his greke phrases, herein truly his greciā helpeth him no more, then did before his lawyer. For this edict must nedes be refered to the Canons off former Councelles which the edict expressely nameth saying, Secundum Canonum definitiones, according to the determinations of the Canons. And this M. Iewell perceiuing him selfe very wel, woulde not staie vpon these poore shiftes of his patched piece of lawe, and his gr
                  •
               ke phrases, But hath added an other tricke of his owne accustomed Diuinite, cutting quite away, those wordes of the Edict, Secundum Canonum definitiones, according to the determinations of the Canons, and folowing his purpose this.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                And that the Emperour Iustinian meant onely thus,The .329 Vntruthe For the contrary is manifest. and none otherwise it is (329.) manifest euen by the selfe same place that M. Harding hath here alleaged.
            That were gaie in dede. But doe it cleanly M. Iewell, and I will saie you are your Craftes master. Lett vs beholde your plaie.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                His wordes stande thus. Sancimus &c.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                Why &c? Cough out M. Iewell. What? Had you here the Choynecough that you were faine to breake of your tale in the

the middes? To it ones againe.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 330. Vntruthe in nipping twise the word
                     •
                  s of 
                     ••
                  stinian.
               Sanctmus 
                     •
                  c. Senioris Romae Papā, primū esse omnium Sa
                     •
                  erdotum, beatiss
                     •
                  mū aute
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   Con
                     •
                  tantinopoleos nowe Romae secundum habere locum. we ord
                  ••
               ie that the Pope.
            Where is now &c. M. Iewell? You did put it in the latin, confessing that some what lacked, and as though it were somewhat staying your false plaie in the beginning, but now being ones entred, you goe away roundely in youre english, as though all were smothe a borde. Wel forthe then. Let vs heare your english.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   the first. The 
                     •
                  31. Vntruthe standing in fal
                     ••
                   tr
                     •
                  nslation.
               VVe orde
                     ••
                  e that the Pope of the elder Rome, shall be the first of all priestes, and that the most holy Archebis
                     •
                  op of Constantinople which is named newe Rome, haue the se
                     •
                  ond pla
                     •
                  e. Hereby it is plaine that this priuilege standeth onely in placing the b
                  •
               shop of Rome in the first seate aboue others.
            Hereby it is plaine that Danus wil alwaies de Danus, and Iewell wil alwaies be Iewel. For where is 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   the first. The 
                     •
                  31. Vntruthe standing in fal
                     ••
                   tr
                     •
                  nslation. 
               Secundum Canonum definitiones, according to the determinations of the Canons. Where is The wordes omitted by M. Iewell in the place alleaged. 
               Sanctissimum the most holy? Shewe al on Gods name, and plaie aboue borde. Why shuf
                  •
               lle you those wordes out of the text, and yett as though your plaie had bene faire and good, tell vs saddely, His wordes stande thus? Here was a faire face, but your fingers be to quicke. I auise thee, good Reader looke better vnto them. Who wil truste you now M. Iewel in your pulpit talke, in your priuat Doctrine, yea in worldly affaires and communication, if in your printed workes, in your doctrine so published to all your Countre, and that in the cause and state of soule health, in the questiō of our due obedience to such as God hath sette ouer vs, whom as ofte as we despise, so ofte we despise Christ him selfe in this I saie so weighty a matter, do deale so doubly, do iuggle so falsely and deceiue your Reader so perniciously? You knewe these wordes (According to the determinations of the Canons) did vtterly ouerthrowe this childish priuilege off only places in Councelles, which you imagine, as I haue before proued vnto

you. You knewe those wordes imported a farre other preferment then of places, and therefore falsely, deceitefully, and wickedly you omitted them. Againe you loue the Pope so well, that though the Emperour called him Sanctissimum, Most Holy, not for the person then sitting, but for the roome that he occupied, yet M. Iewell will not call him so. Yet the Title of the archebishop of Constātinople, Beatissimum, where the Turke now raigneth, M. Iewell coulde gladly keepe. What? Were those foure wordes either so cumbrous for you to write out, or so troublous to your printer, that nedes for hast they must be left out? Or did they importe more, then you were gladde to expresse? Thus the Pope and the Emperour, S. Gregory and Iustinian be sett to Schoole, kept in awe, and not suffred to speake one worde more, thē M. Iewel will geue thē leaue. Last of al for esse primum omnium Sacerdotum, that the Pope is the chiefest of all Priestes, you turne it, shall be the first, &c, as though befor he were not so, but only by that Decree of Iustinian had bene made so. Thus by leauing out of some wordes and altering other, by nipping and wronge translating, by false and Vntrue dealing you thinke to bringe all the worlde a slepe, to abuse and deceiue your Reader. Let vs yet see whether you will hereafter amende it. Thus you saie.
            But I beseche thee gentle Reader,
                  The 332. Vntruthe Slaund.
                  The .333. Vntruthe For the contrary appear
                        •
                     th 
                        •
                     y that which folow
                        •
                     th 
                        〈…〉
                     .
                weigh well the wordes that folow in the same lawe, and thou shalt see, bothe that M. Hardinges dealing (.332.) herein is not vpright, and also that the bishopp of Rome was then (.333.) excluded by plaine wordes from that vniuersall power, which he now 
                  •
               o deepely dreameth of.
            And I beseeche thee also gentle Reader to doe the same, assuring thee herin, thou shalt see bothe that D. Hardings dealing herein hath not bene faulty at all, (vnlesse for a man to omit his own aduantage it be a faulte) and also that 
                  〈◊〉
                B
                  •
               shop of Rome by this place which M. Iewell with 
                  〈…〉
                Supreme Iurisdiction euidētly testified aboue a thou
                  •
               and yeres

past, not as a matter lately dreamed of.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .334 Vntruth. For it 
                     •
                  oloweth immediatly. According as the Holy Pope Vigilius h
                        •
                     th appoint
                        •
                     d.
               It foloweth immediatly. VVe ordaine that the most holy Arche
                     •
                  ishop of Iusti
                     •
                  iana the f
                     ••
                  st, whi
                     •
                  h is our count
                     •
                  e shall haue for euer vnder his Iurisdiction, the bishoppe
                     •
                   off the p
                     •
                  ouinces of Da
                     •
                  i
                     •
                  , Dan
                     •
                  a, D
                     •
                  rdania, Mysia and Pannonia, and that they shall be inuested by him, and 
                     •
                  e onely by his owne Councell, and that he in the Prouinces subiect vnto him shall haue the place of the Apostolike See off Rome.
            
            These be the wordes of Iustinian. What wil M. Iewel gather hereof? He saieth.
            Here we see, The bishop of Iustiniana set in (.335.) as high Authorite, and power within his owne Iurisdiction, as the Bishop of Rome within his.
            
               The .335. Vntruth. For the B. of Iu
                     ••
                  iniana had his Authorite from the B. of Rome.Yea M. Iewell. But how came he by that Authorite? Whose place occupied he in that Authorite? Doth not the Decree say, He shall haue the place of the Apostolike See of Rome? And yet farder? Secundum ea quae sanctus Papa Vigilius Constituit? According as the holy Pope Vigilius hath appoynted? These wordes M. Iewell your stomache coulde not beare. And therefore, you vsed a sleight of your faculty, to nippe them from the whole decree, being yet the cause and reason of the whole decree. For those wordes M. Iewel do teach vs that not the Emperour, but the Pope gaue that Iurisdiction to the Bishop of Iustiniana, ouer the Prouinces aboue mētioned. And againe that this Decree of the Emperour was but to confirme the Popes appointment,M. Iewell hath twise nipped Iustinia. euē as his former Decree, Sancimus &c, was to confirme the Canōs. But M. Iewel bothe in that decree and in this (such is his dealing) hath nipped of the principal words of the decree to make all the matter to appeare a Laye constitution, not a lawe of the Churche. And yet will this man seme to holde of the Churche. Now touching the matter. Vnderstande you not what all this meaneth M. Iewell? Euery Archebishop of Caū
               terbury duly called to that roome hath the same Authorite in

Englande as the bishop of Iustinianea had in the prouinces aboue named. Euery Archebishop of Caunterbury is and hath bene allmost these thousand yeres Legatus Natus (as they call it) the Popes Legat by the right of his dignite. S. Gregory the bishop of Rome, by whose fatherly zele the Christen faith was first brought to vs Englishmen, gaue the same Authorite to S. Augustin our Apostle, the first Archebishop of Caunterbury. So Venerable Bede recordeth in the History of our Countre. These are the wordes of the Pope vnto him. Britanniarum omnes episcopos tuae frat
                     •
                  rnitati committimus, vt indocti doceantur, infirmi persuasione roborentur, peruersi authoritate corrigantur.
               
                  Lib. 1. Cap. 27. All the bishoppes of Britanny we committe to your brotherhood, that the vnlerned by wholesome doctrine may be instructed, the weake by good persuasions may be strenghthened, the froward by iust authorite may be corrected. After this sorte in the late reign of Quene Marie the Reuerend father of blessed memorie Cardinall Poole had in our countre the place of the Apostolike See of Rome. And thinke you M. Iewell that either that authorite of the Bishop of Iustiniana, in the prouinces aboue mencioned, or the Authorite of the Bishop of Caunterbury in our countre, bothe occupying the place of the See Apostolike and bothe hauing that Authorite by the Popes appoyntment, doth any thinge empaire the Supreme and vniuersall authorite of the Pope? And what dothe more confirme or establish the same? Verely I feare me M. Iewell, some of your brethern will take you here for a doubl
                  •
                
               
                  •
               aced Proctour, as a man pleading for the cause which you seme to impugne. For beholde M. Iewel hath brought vs the witnesse or Iustiniā the Emperour raigning aboue a thousand yeres past for the authorite of the Popes legat in the prouinces of Mysia, Dacia, Dardania, and Pannonia. Euery legat in all prouinces from the Popes, haue the place of the Apostolike See of Rome. And what coulde that place auaile them if the See Apostolike had no

place there? The effect of M. Iewelles argument is this.
            
               Th
                     •
                   bishop of Iustiniana occupied the place of the See Apostolike in such and such prouin
                     •
                  es.
               M. Iew
                     •
                  lles Arg
                     •
                  
                  me
                     •
                  t.
            
            
               Ergo the S
                     •
                  e Apostolike had no authorite in th
                     •
                  se places.
            
            The Iewdenesse of this argument will easely appeare by the like.
            
               The Quenes Maiesties Lieutenant in Ireland occupieth the place of h
                     •
                  r Highnes in that countre.
            
            
               Ergo the Qu
                     •
                  nes Maiestie hath no authorite there. This is a rebelles argumēt against his Liege Souuerain. And the other is the heretikes argument against his lawful Pastour. By such Argumentes M. Iewell maintaineth his Schisme and Disobedience.
            In like sorte the Emperour Iustinian saieth. The Churche off the Cyte of Constantinop
                     •
                  e enioyeth Nowe the praerogatiue of Rome the elder.
            
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
                Hereof M. Iewel formeth an argument as good as the other.
            
               Constantinople enioyeth the priuilege of Rome.
            
            
               Ergo Constantinople is as of good Authorite as Rome.
            
            By such Argumētes euery Peculiar would be as good as his Bishop,M. Iewelles Arguments. euery priuileged Colledge, as the Founder by whom the priuilege came, euery Liberty as good as the Prince which graunted it. By such argumentes also, the free Denyson in Englande, hauing the priuilege of a Naturall borne Englishman, will be in all poyntes as free as he, yea though the lawe binde him to paie a double subsidy to the Prince, when the naturall subiect payeth but halfe as much. By such lewde reasons an euill cause must be mayntayned.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .336. Vntruthe For the lawe sp
                     •
                  aketh not of 
                     •
                  ll prerogatiues.Now if the bishop of Iustiniana and the bishop of Rome, in their seuerall diuisions haue their like authoritie, and if the Churche of Constantinople in (.336.) all prerogatiues, and priuileges be made equall with the Citie of Rome, then is not the bishop of Romes pow
                  •
               r vniuersall, neither can he iustly be called the head of the vnuersall Churche.
            Yea M. Iewel, if the Skie fal, we may happe to catche Larkes.

But now M. Iewell, if the bishop of Iustiniana and the bishop of Rome, in their Seuerall diuisions haue not their like Authorite, but the one hath it of the other, the one occupieth the place of the other, and that by the appoyntement of the other, that is of the B. of Rome (as the decree expressely saieth) and if againe the Church of Constantinople, be not made equall with the Citie of Rome in All prerog
                  •
               tiues 
                  •
               nd priuileges (as M Iewell saieth) but do enioye only a priuilege of Rome, as the decree saieth, then neither is the bishop of Romes Vniuersall Power empaired, but so farre the more defended, neither then any thinge letteth why he may not be called the Head of the Vniuersal Churche. Last of all then M. Iewel hath loste a couple of good arguments.
            Verely Iustiniā him selfe writing vnto Epiphanius the bishop of Constantinople, calleth him the Vniuersall Patriarche,The .337. Vntruth. For t
                     •
                  at Title in a s
                     •
                  nce might belonge to bothe. which thinge he would not haue done, (337) if he had thought that Title of right had belong
                  •
               d to the bishop of Rome.
            Neither dothe the bishop of Rome challenge that Title, neither was it commended in any bishop, though it was vsed not only to the Pope, but to diuerse other, some time of custome, sometime for honour and reuerence to the party. It seemeth the worde 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                was taken for 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , vniuersall, for Catholike: As you your selfe expounde that worde afterwarde,pag. 299. and as all true bishoppes are called.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
               
               Th
                     •
                   .338. V
                     ••
                  r
                     •
                  t
                     •
                  e m
                     •
                  re Slaund. a
                     •
                  d 
                     •
                  eui
                     •
                  h.The argument that M. Harding gathereth of Iustinians wordes is this. The bis
                     •
                  op of Rome had the first place in generall Councels, Ergo he was an vniuersall bishop. VVhich argument what weight it beareth, I leaue to M. Harding to consider.
            Vntruthe M. Iewel. For D. Harding gathereth no such argument: But the argument of Hardinge is this. Iustinian by that decree or edict ratified that chiefty or primacy in the bishop of Rome, which the Canons had determined.
               D. Harding
                     •
                  s argu
                     •
                  ent. 
               Ergo th
                     •
                   Emperour confirmed the Popes Primacy. To this purpose he alleaged

the Decree of Iustinian and the Ordonnaunce of Phocas. This argument beareth such weight, that all which M. Iewell hath wrote and persuaded to the contrary, is not able to beare it downe. For it containeth a double proufe of the Popes Primacy: The determinations of the Canons, and the Confirmation of the Emperour. Al within the compasse of M. Iewelles .600. yeares.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               Hilarius speaking much to the extolling of Peter and his Successours in that See, saieth: Supereminentem fidei suae confefsione locum promeruit: that for the Consession of his blessed faith, he deserued a place of preeminence aboue all other.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 339. Vntruthe Slaund.The .100. Vntruthe. For Hilarie speaketh not one worde of Peters successour.
            Though S. Hilarie speake not of Peters successour, nor of the See of Rome, yet that which is spokē to the extolling of Peter, may truly be saied to be spoken also to the extolling of his Successour. So Chrysostom saieth, that Christ committed his shepe Tum Petro, tum Petri successoribus. Bothe to Peter, and to the Successours of Peter,
                  Lib. 2. de sacerdo. io. In epist. ad Dam.
                when he saied to Peter, only, Fede my shepe. So S. Hierom calleth Damasus the Pope, the chaire of Peter, vpon the which he confesseth the Church to be builded. And so Hilarie extolling Peter and confessing a preeminence aboue other in him, is not Vntruly saied to confesse the same in his Successours. Especially seing that Christ builded a Church not to remaine in Peter only, but for euer. Nowe whereas M. Iewell saieth Hilarie only commendeth the faith of Peter, he committeth a great Vntruthe against S. Hilarie. For in the same booke he confesseth that vpon Peter him selfe Christ builded his Churche,
                  De Trinita te lib. 6. where he saieth. Post sacramenti confessionem, Beatus Simon aedificationi ecclesiae subiacens. Blessed Simon after the cōfession of the mysterie, lying vnder the building

of the Churche. For what meaneth Hilarie, to make Peter lye vnder the building of the Church, but that he is the rocke and foūdatiō vpō which it pleased God to buylde and erect his Church? And so of S Ciprian. S. Hierom, S. Augustin, and other fathers, Peter is called Fundamentum Ecclesiae, the foundacion of the Churche, not to exclude the only principall foundacion which is Christ, but to confesse and signifie a strength and power neuer to faile, in him and his successours. It is not therfore only the Faith of Peter, but, also the Person of him which Hilary extolleth, which also is no lesse sure then his faith, bicause Christ hath praied and no doubt obtained,
                  Luc. 22. 
               Vt fides eius non deficiat, that his faithe may not faile.
            
               
                  Hard. 
                Locum supereminentem.Hard. A place of preeminence aboue all other.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .340. Vntr
                     •
                  the Slaunderous.The .101. Vntruthe standing in false translation. For M. Harding addeth of his owne: aboue all other.
            
            
               
                  Stapl. 
                Aboue whom then M. Iewell is that place of preeminence which Peter had? Aboue some, or aboue none, or aboue al? If aboue some only, you must shewe which some those are, and the reason why aboue those only. If aboue none, it is no preeminence at all. Truly the worde Supereminentia importeth a Preeminence not meane nor common, butt aboue all other. And herein I dare to make any grammarian Iudge. How be it what so euer the grammarian saie herein, the Diuinite teacheth vs plainely so. Chrisostom saieth. God the Father sett Hieremie ouer one nation.
               
                  Homi 55. in Matth.
                
               But Christ made Peter gouernour ouer the whole worlde. Which proposition he taketh to be so true, that here of he maketh an argument, to proue the Equalite of the Godhead of Christ, with God the Father. And Gregorie saieth. Cura ei totius Ecclesiae & principatus committitur. The charge and chiefty of the whole Churche is committed vnto him. And all writers bothe grekes and latin do call Peter,
                  Lib. 4. epist. 32. the Prince, Head, and chiefe of the Apostles. If he were ouer the Apostles,

no doubt but he was ouer all the rest of the Churche beside. And so the Diuinite is true, and the translation not Vntrue, which geueth a true sence to the latine worde, no more then the worde, it selfe beareth.
            
               
                  Hard. 
               
               The same S. Augustine speaking to Bonifacius bishop of Rome, This care (saieth he) is common to vs all that haue the office of a bishoppe: albeit therein thou thy selfe hast the preminence ouer all being on the toppe of the pastorall watchetoure.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
                The .341 Vntruthe Slaunderous.The 102. Vntruthe. standing in the false translation, and corruption, of S. Augustines wordes.
            I perceiue M. Iewel, we must go to cōstruing, we must leaue our diuinite, and go to our grammer a while. Goe to then. Let vs first put our latine, and then see what construction may be made of it. And let vs take the wordes, as M. Iewell alleageth them. He saieth thus.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                S. Augustines wordes be these. Communis est nobis omnibus, qui fungimur epis
                     •
                  opatus offi
                     •
                  io, quamuis ipse in eo praeemineas celsiore fastigio, specula pastoralis.
            
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                Our bookes of Paris print reade not so M. Iewell. Yow shoulde haue tolde vs what copie you folowed herein. Truly your wordes which folowe, doe containe a slaunderous vntruthe, where you saie.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
                T
                     ••
                   .342 Vntruthe m
                     •
                  re Slaunderou
                     •
                  .VVhich wordes M. H
                  •
               rding by wilfull deprauation hath altered thus, Ce
                     •
                  siore f
                     •
                  s
                     •••
                  io speculae pasto
                     •
                  alis.
            
            This is a wilful and cancred vntruthe M. Iewel. You knowe your selfe right well that all the editions of Paris print, do reade those Very wordes in that very sorte, letter for letter, and sillable for sillable, as you haue in this place put them, and as you saie D. Harding hath altered them. And what shamelesse, Ruffianlike impudency is this in you, to saie that M. Harding h
                  •
               th altered them, and that by wilfu
                  •
               l d
                  •
               prauat
                  •
               on? O M. Iewell why do you so deceiue, abuse, and mocke the vnlerned

Reader? Is it not possible to maintaine your hainous heresyes without such manifest and cancred Vntruthes?You procede in your Vntruthes, and saie.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .343. A Burthē of Vntruthes al slaunderous. And so hath lefte the Adiectiue Communis, without a substantiue, and the principall verbe without a nominatiue case. And to serue his turne hath caused S. Augustin to speake false latine.
            In these three sentences, you haue made three Vntruthes. For all were it true touching the wordes of S. Augustin, that there lacked a nowne substantiue, and a nominatiue case, and that S. Austen is made to speake false latin, yet not D. Harding, but the printes of Paris haue done all this. Thus you haue trifled and multiplied vntruthes vpon your selfe, no vntruthe yet appearing in D. Harding, who hath done no more then folowed his booke. Let vs nowe come to the matter, and see how you will english this place, and whether in your owne translation, the matter which we seke for may not be founde: that so it may appeare what a wrangler you are to fall a scanning off your tenses, to rippe vp sillables, to hunte after letters, to trifle vpon termes, the matter it selfe remayning sounde.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 344 Vntruthe standing in false translation.This place of S. Augustine may thus be englished, The pastorall watche towre is common to vs all, that beare the office of bishops, albeit thy preeminence is greater, as sitting in the higher roome.
            
            Nay M. Iewell though I am contented to take your owne construction, and to reade Specula pastoralis. for speculae pastoralis, as our bookes of paris print do reade, yet I may not suffer you by your false translation to leaue out the pithe of the sentence. For you leaue out (in eo sc. epis
                     •
                  opatus officio) in the s
                  •
               me bishoply office. And thus S. Augustin saieth, to folowe your owne construction. The pastorall watche towre is common to vs all, that beare the office of bishops, quamuis ipse in eo praeemineas Celsiore fastigio, albeit in that Office thy praeeminence is greater, as sitting in the higher 
                  •
               oome. In which wordes S. Augustin acknowledgeth the Pope to haue a praeeminē
               ce

aboue other in the office of a bishop, and to sitt in a higher roome. What is this but to haue a Primacy or superiorite ouer other bishops? Thus the matter which was here sought for (the Popes primacy) is by S. Augustin witnessed and confessed. Nowe if M. Iewell will allwaies wrangle and saye.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 345. Vntruth. Slaund. These wordes (ouer all) are not founde in S. Augustine, but onely diuised at pleasure by M. Harding.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
                I must answer, that praeeminere Celsiore fastigio may truly signify to haue a preeminence ouer all. If there be no more herin thē his Nay, and my Yea, then let a Queste of grāmarians be called to decide the construction. Howbeit for the matter it self there nedeth no queste of diuines. S. Augustin being a Doctour within the first 600. yeres is a sufficiēt Iudge in this plea, by the yelding of M. Iewell him selfe. And if this place be not clere enough, let vs take the other, which here M. Iewell hath vtterly drowned in silence, and not answered one worde or halfe worde thereunto. The place is this. VVhat shall we doubte (saieth S. Augustin) to repose our selues in the lappe off that Churche,
               
                  Lib. de vt litate cre-i dendi. Cap. 17. 
               which (though heretikes barke at it in vaine rounde about, condemned partly by the iudgement of the people them selues, partly by the grauite of Councelles, and partly by the Maiesty of miracles euen to the confession of mankinde) which (Church I say) from the See Apostolike by succession of bishops, hath obteined the Toppe or highest degree of authorite? Vnto the which Churche (continuing by Succession of bishops in the Apostolike See) if we will not geue and graunte the Primacy, soothely it is a point either of most high wickednes (note M. Iewell) or of hedlonge arrogancie. Here is a Primacy, here is Culmen authoritatis, the toppe of authorite, here is expounded Celsiore fastigio, the higher Roome (which in Pope Boniface he confessed) and that in. eo sc. episcopatus officio, in that Office of a bishop, the toppe of Bishoplicke

Authorite is here cōfessed. Here is Primas dare. Your Iudge M. Iewel, a Lerned Father of the first 600. yeres, hath pronounced Sentence against you. To this place you haue not saied one worde or halfe worde. And why, but conscientia imbecillitatis, bicause you knewe nothinge coulde be saied? No shift of construction, no comparison of Phrases, no sleight of your Rhetorike, no glose of schoolemen coulde here be had. Trifle now no more vpon wordes and sillables. Answer to the matter if you can. Truly bicause you can not, therefore you do not. Thus the worlde may see the weakenesse of your side. It may see your most high wickednesse and hedlong arrogancie (as S. Augustin telleth you, not we M. Iewell) which will not yelde to the See Apostolike and to that succession off bishops, the Primacy, the Preeminēce in bishoply office, and the Very Toppe or highest degree of Authorite. Thus they may See and Beware hereafter of you, which tender more their soule healthe, then their new conceiued opinions. I wish al my dere countremen (none excepted) they may do so.
            
               
                  Harding 
               
               The safetie of the Churche hangeth of the worship of the high Priest (he meaneth the Pope Peters successour) to whom if there be not geuen a power peerelesse, and surmoū
                  ting all others, in the Churches we shall haue so many schismes as there be Priestes.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                The 103. Vntruthe. S. Hierom meaneth not the Pope but any other seuerall bishop.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                If D. Harding saie here that. S. Hierom in this sentence meaneth directly and expressely the Pope, I leaue it for an Vntruthe. And this is the first, (hauing passed now more then a hundred) which by some ouersight may stāde for an Vntruth. But if D. Harding speake this by the way of consequence, considering the reason which folowed, he spake no Vntruth. The reason why there ought to be one high priest in the Church, who

should haue peerelesse authorite ouer others, is the auoiding of schismes. If this reason do force that euery seuerall Dyocesse must haue one head bishop, it forceth a great deale more that the whole Churche, being the greater in numbre, and the more in danger of Diuision, haue also one Head bishop. Which in no man els appearing but in the bishop of Rome, to whom the Scriptures, the Councelles, the Emperours, and the Fathers haue graunted the Primacy, it maketh (as I saide) by a right good consequence, for the supreme Authorite of the Pope. Thus S. Hierom, by the force of his reason maye meane the Pope, though in his wordes he speake not of the Pope.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               To ordeine and appoint the vicaire of Christ, it pertaineth to none other then to Christ.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 346 Vntruthe Slaund.
The 347. Vntruthe For Christe appointed such a vicaire.The 104. Vntruthe. For Christ neuer appointed any such vicaire.
            First this, For, foloweth not. The consequence I saie is Vntrue. Christ appointed no vicaire. Ergo it perteineth not vnto him to do so. As by the like it shall appeare. The kinge of Englād neuer appointed any high Constable, or general Lieutenant ouer the whole Realme of England. Ergo it perteineth not vnto him to do so. This hangeth very loosely: He neuer did it, ergo he can not or ought not
to do it. Especially when we talke of God who can do all that him pleaseth.
            Againe the proposition of M. Iewell is an other most manifest and wicked Vntruthe. Which for Truthes sake I wil nowe by Gods helpe,That Christ appointed a Vicaire Generall. Ephes. 1. euidently proue. That Christ him selfe was the Head of all the Churche appointed by God the Father, the Apostle saieth plainely. God gaue him (to be) the Head ouer all the Churche, which is his Body. That Christ gaue the same authorite or Headship ouer all the Churche vnto Peter, I proue. Christ saied to Peter. Thou art Peter, and vpon this rocke I will builde

my Churche: and hell gates shall not preuaile against it. Vpon this place thus I reason.
            To be the Foundation of the whole Vniuersall Churche, vnder Christ is to haue the pow
                  ••
                and strength of Christ ouer it, is to be in Curistes place, is to be his Vniuersall Vicair. But Peter is the Foundation of the whole Vniuersall Church, Ergo Peter was made Christes Vniuersall Vicaire. The Maior or first proposition thus I proue. Christ is Head of the whole Churche bicause he is the foundatiō thereof, bicause he fedeth the whole flocke, bicause he vpholdeth the whole house: Ergo to whom Christ geueth all this, that is, whom he maketh the foundation of the whole Churche,
                  Mat. 16. Ioan. 21. Luc. 22. whom he setteth to be the feder of al his Churche, whō he strengtheneth to Cōfirme the Apostles and Bishops them selues, he hath Christes place and power, he is his Vicaire. The minor or secōd propositiō I proue by the wordes of the ghospell alleaged, which wordes to haue ben properly spoken to Peter I proue by the expositions of the Fathers vpon that place.
            That the Person of Peter was made the foundatiō and Rocke of the whole Churche, by those wordes of Christ, Chrysostom expressely teacheth vs. His wordes are these vpon that place. Quae deus concedere solus potest &c.
               
                  Homilia 55. in Mattheum.
                
               Those thinges which God only can graunte, as the power to forgeue sinnes, and that the Churche might remaine immoueable, notwithstanding so many and so great whaues beating against it, and that a poore fisher man might be made stronger thē any Rocke, though al the worlde striued against him, these thinges I saye which only God cā geue, Christ promis
                     •
                  th in this place that he will geue.
               
                  Hierem. 1. 
               Euen so God the Father saied to Hieremy the prophet, I haue set thee as an yron piller, and as a brasen walle. But God the Father sett him ouer one natiō only, but Christ sett Peter ouer the whole worlde. Thus farre Chrysostom expounding that place of S. Matthew. In whose wordes we see Peter to be sett ouer the whole worlde: and the poore fisher man to be made stronger

and more durable against all storme of the worlde then any Rocke against the whaues.
                  Homil. 1. de penitentia.
                Againe in an other place he saieth of Peter, Ecclesiae primatum gubernationemque sibi per vniuersum mundum tradidit. Christ gaue vnto him the primacy and gouuernement of the Church throught out the whole worlde. What is to be Christes vniuersall vicaire if this be not? Hilarie expounding also this place of S. Mathewe, Thou art Peter: &c. where Christ first gaue him that name (for before he was called only Simon Bar Iona) vseth this exclamation, to Peter. O in nuncupatione Noui Nominis faelix Ecclesiae fundamentum &c.
                  Hilarius in Matth. Can. 16. 
               O happy foundation of the Churche in the Title of that newe name, O worthy Rocke of that building, which dissolued the lawes of hel, the gates of the Diuel, and al the bōdes of death. O Blessed porter of heauē gates, to whose arbitrement the kayes of the euerlasting entry are cōmitted, whose iudgement on earthe is a preiudicated Authorite in heauē
               ? Thus S. Hilarie acknowledgeth the person of Peter to be that foundation and Rocke vpon the which Christ builded his Church.
                  In Matth. can. 6. And therefore this lerned writer, as he calleth Christ, the Rocke of the Church, and Validum excelsi aedificij fundamē
                  tum,
               
                  De Trinitate lib. 6. the stronge fundation of that highe buildyng, so in an other place he calleth Peter also, Aedificationi ecclesiae subiacens, one that laye vnder the building of the Churche, that is, as one vpon whom the Churche is builded.
                  Lib. 2. de Spir. Sancto.
                Which also S. Basill confesseth of Peter euen in the very same wordes in effect as S. Hylarie dothe. Al which is no more to saie then that Peter was in the Churche in Christes place and roome, to holde vp the Churche, to builde it, and to staye it. In like maner S. Ambrose by this place of S. Matthew declareth Peter to be the Rocke of the Church, thoughe differently from Christ, when he writeth thus of Peter.
                  Serm 67. Tom. 3. 
               Pro soliditate deuotionis ecclesiarum Petra dicitur &c. He is called the Rocke of Churches bicause of his stronge deuotion, as our Lorde Saieth. Thou art Peter and vpon this Rocke I will builde my Churche. For a Rocke he is called bicause

he firste layed the foundation off the faithe amonge the gentils, and bicause he holdeth together the whole frame and buyldinge off Christen religion, like vnto a Rocke that can not be shaken. So Peter for the fortitude off deuotion is called a Rocke: and our Lorde for his Power and might is called a Rocke. Thus farre S. Ambrose. Thus bothe Christ and Peter are called the Rocke of the Church by S. Ambrose his iudgemēt, but Peter through Christ, and for Christ. For (as it foloweth in S. Ambrose) Recte consortium meretur nomínis, qui consortium meretur & operis. He is well ioyned in felowship of the name, which is also ioyned in the felowship of the worke. S. Hierom vpon this place of S. Matthew expoundeth Peter to be the Rocke vpon the which Christ builded his Churche, saying. Sicut ipse lumen Apostolis donauit &c. As Christ gaue all the Apostles light,
               
                  Comme
                        •
                     
                     tar. in Matth. 16. 
               that they might be called the light of the worlde, and had their other names of Christ: so vnto Simon, which beleued in Christ the Rocke, he gaue the name of Peter. And by the metaphore of a Rocke, it is well saied of Christ vnto him. I will builde my Churche vpon thee. And how many Fathers may be here alleaged, which all with one mouthe do confesse that vpon Peter, not only vpon the faithe or Confession of him, the Churche is builded? Tertulliam saieth. Latuitne aliquid Petrum aedificandae ecclesiae petram dictum? Was there any thinge kept hidde from Peter which was called the rocke of the Church to be builded?
                  In praescript.
                S. Cipriā almost as ofte as he speaketh of Peter, so ofte he calleth him the foundatiō of the Churche. Petrus, saieth he, super quem aedificata ab eodem domino fuerat Ecclesia &c.
               
                  lib. 1. epist. 3. lib. 4. epist. 9. Peter vpon whom our lorde builded his Churche. And againe. Loquitur illic Petrus, super quem aedificanda fuerat Ecclesia. Peter speaketh there, vpon whom the Churche should be buylded. 
                  •
               xpounding also the Authorite which Christ gaue to Peter in this place of S. Matthewe, he sayeth: that although the Apostles had aequal power, yet, vt vnitatē manifestaret,
               
                  De simpliprela
                        •
                     .
                
               vnitatis eiusdem origin
                     •
                  m ab vno incipientem

sua authoritate disposuit, to expresse an Vnite in the Churche, Christ by his Authorite disposed that the fountaine and springe of that Vnite shoulde procede of One, which was Peter. Therefore also in the disceptation of Peter with Paule touching circuncision, S. Ciprian Commending the humilite of S. Peter towarde S. Paule, saieth. Nec Petrus quem primum Dominus elegit,
               
                  In epist. ad Quintinū.
                
               & super quem aedificauit Ecclesiam suam se vindicauit &c. Neither did Peter whom God chose to be the chefest,
                  Orig. li. 5. Cap. 6. In epist ad Rom.
                and vpon whom he builded his Church, reuenge him selfe etc. Olde Fater Origens wordes in this matter seme very plaine. Thus he saieth. Petro cum summa rerum de pascendis ouibus traderetur, & super ipsum velut super terram Fundaretur Ecclesia, nullius confessio Virtutis alterius ab eo, nisi Charitatis exigitur. When the chiefe gouernement of feeding Christes flocke was committed to Peter, and the Church was builded vpon him, like as vpon earthe, the profession of no other Vertu is required of him, but Charite. For after Christ had three times asked him, Peter louest thou me, yea and ones, Diligis me plus his?
                  Ioan. 21. Doest thou loue me more then these other doe? and to euery question Peter had answered Yea, Christ concluded with him and saied, Pasce oues meas. Fede my shepe. In these demaundes only loue was required of him. And at this time saieth Origen, Summa rerum de pascendis Ouibus traditur: The chiefe and principall gouernement of feding Christes shepe, was deliuered vp vnto him, and Super ipsum velut super terram fundata est Ecclesia. The Church was builded or founded vpō him, vpon Peter him selfe, euen as vpō earthe. That earthe truly which our Sauiour called a Rocke, and made it by his special praier for him, that his Faith should not faile, strōger and stedfaster then any Rocke or Quarre of what euer stone it be. Therefore Cyrillus an other greke Father saied expressely. Nulli alij quàm Petro Christus quod suum est plenum,
               
                  Lib. 12. in Iohan. Cap. 64. 
               sed ipsi soli dedit. Christ gaue his whole ful power to none other then to Peter.

But to him only he gaue it. And what is to be Vicair of Christ if this be not? If he haue Summam rerum traditam, the Chiefe gouuernement and Authorite left vnto him, as Origen saieth, if Christ gaue to him ful power, and to none other, as Cyrillus sayth, if vpō him the Church was builded, as so many Fathers doe witnesse not only S. Hilary, S. Cipriā, S. Ambrose, S. Hierō, and Tertullian of the West Church, but also S. Chrysost,
                  Epiphā. in anchora
                        •
                     o. et 2.1.56 & 2. 
                     •
                  8. S. Basill, Origen, and Epiphanius of the East Churche, how can it be doubted but that Peter succeded to Christ (by his owne most blessed appointment) in full power and Authorite, and was therefore his true Vicaire?
            It will here be saied. Many other Fathers, yea and some of these alleaged do expound this place of Matthewe in such sorte, that not vpon the person of Peter,An Obi
                     •
                  
                  ction. but vpon the faith of Peter, the Church is builded. To this I answer, that bothe is true. And that I declare by two causes. First by most euidēt reason, next by Authorite. The reason is this. The Churche is builded vpō the faith of Peter,The Answer. and yet vpō the person of Peter bicause the person of Peter, touching his faithe is no fraile mortal creature, but is a strōg vnshakeable Rocke, as the faith it self is. And why so? Forsothe bicause to the person of Peter it is promised, that his faith shal not faile. Christ sayd. I haue praied for thee Peter, that thy faith may not faile. We beleue this praier is obtained.
                  Luc. 22. How the Churche is builded vpon Peters person, and yet vpon the faith of Peter. And therefore vpon this warrant of Christes praier the person of Peter and his faithe shall neuer be seuered. Thus the fathers calling sometimes the faith of Peter, sometimes Peter him self the Rocke of the Churche, do meane one selfe thinge. By Authorite thus it is proued. No writer doth more often and more earnestly interpret that place of the faith of Peter or of Christ him selfe, and call that faith and cōfession of his and sometime Christ him self the Rocke vpon the which Christ builded his Church then doth S. Augustin.
                  Lib. 1. retract at. 
                  
                     •
                   21. Yeat the same lerned Father in his Retractations, remembring that he had also expounded the

same of Peter him selfe, quod in eo tanquam in petra fundata sit Ecclesia that the Churche was builded in Peter as vpon the Rocke,
                  Cōtra epistolam Donati.
                which sence also he saieth was songe by many in the hymnes of S. Ambrose, where it is saide of the cocke, hoc ipsa petra ecclesiae canente culpam diluit, At the crowing of the cocke, the Rocke of the Churche (Peter) lamented his faulte, he concludeth the whole matter of those two expositions, either off Peter to be the Rocke, either of Christ, with these wordes. Harum duarum sententiarum quae sit probabilior eligat lector. Of these ij. sentences which is the more probable. I leaue it to the Readers choyse. Wherein as he condēneth none, so he alloweth bothe. And thus much out of the lerned Fathers for confirmation of the Minor or second proportion of my former Argument that the wordes of Christ in S. Matthew, were properly spoken to Peter, and that he was made by Christ the foundation and Rocke of the whole vniuersall Churche. Which with the Maior or proposition being thus proued, the Conclusion I trust will well folowe, that Christ hath lefte and appointed in his Churche a Vicair vniuersal, and that S. Peter. And so farre is the rashe assertion of M. Iewell ouerthrowen and proued vtterly Vntrue, where he sayd that Christ had neuer appointed any such Vicaire. Last of al thus farre a Truth is proued sufficiēt to destroie the principall assertiō of M. Iewell in this Article, fighting against the vniuersal and Supreme authorite of the bishop of Rome S. Peters successour. For Christ leauing Peter his Vicaire,
                  Lib. 2. de sacerdotio. Homil. 1. de paenitentia.
                committed not only to him, but to his Successours also (as Chrysostom expressely saieth) the shepe which he had redemed with his bloud, the Vniuersall Churche through out the worlde, as you haue heard also Chrysostom to affirme.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               But because our aduersaries do wrethe and wrest the Scriptures, (be they neuer so plaine) by their priuat and strange

constructions, to an vnderstanding quite contrary to the sense of the Catholike Churche, &c.
            
            
               The .348 Vntruthe Slaund. and Facinge.The 105. Vntruthe ioyned with a slaunder.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
                By such slaunders, robbers are called theues, and protestants are called heretikes. For how large a scope M. Iewell might I here take to proue you wresters and wrethers of Gods holy worde, as it is here most truly noted of you? I will note a fewe in stede of many sufficient to iustifie this Vntruthe and to clere the slaunder. What is more plaine in holy Scripture,
                  Scriptures vvrested by Protestants. Luc. 22. then the wordes of Christ in his last Supper, Take and eate. This is my Body: And againe: Drinke ye all of this. This is my my bloud of the newe testament? And yet how is it wrested and wrethed off you? The Lutheran saieth, This Bread is my Body and maketh Hoc, (this) the neuter gender to agree with Panis (bread) the Masculin gender, confessing yet a reall presence. The Sacramentary, of Zurich will haue est is to stande for significat, Dothe signifiee. Bicause he will haue a signe only off the Body in Sacrament, The Sacramentatary off Geneua will haue the verbe est is, to stand for, is in value, not, is in substance, and so (est) must not be a verbe substantiue, but a verbe valuatiue, inuenting a newe grammer to maintaine their newe diuinite. Likewise in the wordes of Christ. This is my bloud, they make false greke, ioyning 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                with 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               : false latin ioyning hic, with vinum, to make at the length false english, and to driue Christ to saie. This wine is my Bloud,pag. 
                     •
                  26. which were a repugnaunce in nature as M. Iewell him selfe confesseth. Againe to speake of M. Iewelles dealing herein, first he saieth we construe datu
                     •
                  
                for dabitur, is geuen for shall be geuen,Ibidem M. Iewell Contrary to him selfe pag. 561. and yet afterwarde, quite contrary to him selfe, crieth out at D. Harding for pressing the worde datur, is geuen, (calling it scanning of tenses, ripping vp of syllables, and hunting after letters) and goeth aboute to proue that it shoulde be dabitur, not datur, the

future, tense, not the present tense. Thus he choppeth and changeth his minde to wreste and wrethe Scriptures at his pleasure. But to procede to other examples, what is more plaine for the Sacrament of extreme Vnction, then the wordes of S. Iames. Is any sicke amonge You? Let him cause the priestes of the Churche to come in to him,
               
                  Iacob. 5. 
               annoynting him with oyle, in the name of our Lorde? What is more plaine for absolution of the priest in the Sacrament of penaōce, then the wordes of Christ in the ghospel, whose sinnes ye forgeue,
               
                  Ioa
                        •
                     . 20. 
               they are forgeuen to them, whose ye retayne, th
                     •
                  y are reteyned? What can be writen more plainely against the Iustification which you teache by faithe only, then the saying of S. Iames, Man is iustified by workes, not by faith only? What can more plainely ouerthrowe the certainty of grace and saluation which you teache euery Christen man to haue,
                  Iac. 2. then that which S. Paule saieth,
                  Philipp. 2. 
               With feare and trembling worke your saluation? What doth more manifestly proue that by the Sacrament of baptim sinnes are taken away (which Caluin and his scholers expressely denie) then the wordes of S. Peter in holy Scripture,
                  Act. 2. 
               Let euery one of you be baptised in the name of Iesus Christ, to remission of sinnes? What can be more expressely spoken for the authorite of vnwriten traditions,2. Thess. 2. then the cōmaundement of S. Paule, kepe ye the traditions which ye haue receiued either by mouthe or by lettre? What can more plainely proue the Sacrament of holy Order, that is, that in geuing holy Orders, to the signe of imposition of handes grace is annexed, which thinges (the signe and the grace) make a Sacrament,2. Tim. 4. then the wordes of S. Paule, Neglect not the grace which is in thee, which was geuē thee through prophecy, with the laying on of hādes of priesthood?1. Petr. 4. What other thinge meaneth the Apostle, when he saieth, Charite couereth the multitude of sinnes, thē to teache vs that good workes done by Charite do redeme sinne, and are meritorious? And yet M. Iewel haue not you and your felowes abolished Extreme Vnction? Do you not vtterly denie the Absolution by the

priest? Teache you not Only faithe to iustifie? Preache you not that a mā may be assured without al doubte of his saluatiō? Cō
               mende you not the blasphemous doctrine of Caluin touching Baptim, setting forthe his Institutions in the english tounge by publike authorite,
                  Cap. 17. in fine.
                wherein this pestilent doctrine against the necessite of baptim is maintayned and sett forthe? Refuse you not vnwriten traditions, cleauing onely as you protest, to the writen text of Gods worde? Doe you not vtterly denie the Sacrament of holy Orders, publishing in your last Conuocation only two Sacramentes, Baptisme, and the Supper of our Lorde? Last of al doe you not impudently declaime against the doctrine of Merit calling it a Pelagian heresy? And howe doe you all these thinges so expressely and directly against holy Scripture, but by manifest wrething and wresting of holy Scripture to your owne priuat Interpretation, from the Catholike sence and meaning? If I woulde procede after this maner in the rest of your manifolde absurde and wicked heresies, what a large scope might I here take to discourse vpō the whole rable of your ragged and wretched wrestinges of Gods holy worde?
            But good Sir, you that so facingly vpholde the matter, noting it so solemnely for an Vntruthe that you shoulde be called the wresters of holy Scripture, you that startle and wince so at it, was your kybed hele touched, or are your selfe cleane and not guilty of any such matter? I assure thee good Reader it woulde make a iust treatise it selfe alone, the only discouering of such infamous wrestinges of holy Scripture, as this honest man, innocent forsothe, and true in all pointes, hath vsed. And that I maye not seme to saie this only of affection or otherwise then truthe, beholde gentle Reader for a taste of his whole lewde Replie,Scriptures wrested by M. Iewell in this 4. Article. what a number of textes of holy Scripture in this one Article which we nowe haue in hande, M. Iewel hath wrested and wrethed by his priuat and strange Construction, to an vnderstanding quite contrary to the Catholike Churche.

There is no greate occasion in this question of the Supremacie (the discussing whereof standeth most vpon the history and practise of the Churche) either to vse or to abuse any Scripture. Yet by occasion howe many M. Iewell hath abused, it shall nowe in parte appeare.
            
               2. Cor. 11.First, these wordes of S. Paule, Sollicitudo omnium ecclesiarum, the hofulnesse of all Churches, howe violently you haue wrested it, to proue a Chiefty and power ouer all Churches in the like sence,Iewell pag. 227. as the same is in S. Peter confessed by S. Gregory, you haue heard before towarde the ende of the first Vntruthe of this Article.
                  sol. 5. A.
                In the same place you alleage to the like sence these wordes of the Apostle. I recken me selfe to be no thinge inferiour in trauail to the highest Apostles.
               The 349 Vntruthe in wresting of Holy Scripture 
                     •
                  . Corinth. 11. Nowe what is wresting of holy Scripture if this be not? S. Paule trauailed as muche as any off the Apostles, ergo he had Chiefty, Power, Iurisdiction ouer the whole Churche, no lesse then S. Peter had. By the like reason M. Iewell may proue that S. Paule was Heade and Chiefe ouer S. Peter him selfe, contrary to al holy Fathers and lerned writers which haue euer called S. Peter the Head, the Chiefe, and the Prince of the Apostles, which also is by M. Iewell him selfe in this Article otherwhere confessed. For S. Paule saieth speaking of him selfe and of the Apostles,Iewell. pag. 302. 1. Corint. 15. 
               abundantius illis omnibus laboraui. I haue trauailed more then al they. But as S. Paule though he trauailed more then all the Apostles, yet he was not therefore the Head or chiefe ouer them all, so muche lesse it will folowe, that he had the Chiefty or the Charge off the whole Churche bicause he trauailed as much as the other Apostles.Iewell. pag. 233. The .350 Vntruthe in w
                     •
                  
                  sting. of Holy Scripture Esa. 2. If trauail and paynes may proue a Iurisdiction, perhaps some busy Minister in Englande might claime to the bishoprike that M. Iewell occupieth.
            With the like vaine of witt M. Iewell to disproue the epistle of Athanasius vnto Felix, bicause he saied, that from Rome the Churches receiued the first preaching of the ghospell, alleageth

the saying of the prophet Esaie. From Sion the lawe shall procede, and the worde of the Lorde from Hierusalem. Howe vnfittely this place is wrested of M. Iewell to proue it false, that many Countres receiued the faithe of Christ from Rome,
                  Esa. 2. it hath bene before declared in the third Article, vpon the 73.
                  fol. 67. B.
                Vntruthe. Immediatly and properly many Churches (as allmost all the west parte of the worlde) receiued their faithe from Rome, though Rome it selfe receiued it of S. Peter who preached first off all in Hierusalem.
            In the same page M. Iewell wresteth two other places off holy Scripture at one time, thus S. Paule saieth,The .351. Vntruthe and .352. in wresting at ones two places of holy Scripture Iew
                     •
                  ll. pag. 233. 1. Corinth. 3. 
               Other foundation none can be layed but only that which is layed already which is Christ Iesus. And findeth great faute with the Corinthians that saide, I holde of Apollo, I holde of Paule, I holde of Peter. but M. Hardinges Athanasius saieth, Thou art Peter, and vpon thy foundation the pillers of the Church, which are the Bishopps, are surely sette, and thus he deuise than other foundatiō besides Christ, and Contrary to S. Paules doctrine would haue al the bishoppes of the world to holde of Peter. Thus farre M. Iewel. Wilt thou see good Reader, how ignorātly and grossely these places of holy Sripture are wrested and abused of M. Iewel? S. Paule in the first place speaketh of the principall foundatiō, which only is Christ. Peter is called of Athanasius not the principall and absolut foundation of him selfe, but such a foundation as is layde by Christ. Els the worthy wisedome of M. Iewel maye comptroll S. Paule and proue him contrary to him selfe, whiche in an other place saieth, that the Ephesians were superaedificati super fundamentum Apostolorum & prophetarum, builded vpon the foundation of the Apostles and the prophets. Of the which also S. Iohn in his Reuelation saieth, the holy Citie of God had fundamenta duodecim,
               
                  Ephes. 2. Apoc. 2
                     •
                  . 
               & in ipsis nomina duodecim Apostolorum, twelue foundatyons, and in those foundations the names of the twelue Apostles. Thus vnlesse M. Iewell will admitt the distinction of a principall foundation, and of a secondary foundation, not only Athanasius but S. Paule him selfe, and S. Iohn also may be accused of M. Iewell

to haue deuised an other foundation besides Christ. In like maner also maye be accused of M. Iewell, S. Hilary, S. Ambrose, S. Ciprian, S. Hierom, S. Augustine, S. Chrysostom, Epiphanius, Origen and Tertullian, who all (as you heard in the next Vnthe before) do call Peter the Rocke vpon the which Christ builded his Churche. Neither is S. Peter layde as any other foundation beside Christ, bicause he was layed and made so off Christ him selfe, as all the sayed holy Fathers haue witnessed.
            In the second place alleaged by M. Iewell out of S. Paule he not only wresteth S. Paule to a contrary meaning,M. Iewel. falsifieth S. Paule. but he falsifieth him also. For those wordes I holde of Peter, are not in S. Paule. And if they were, it made no more against the saying off Athanasius callinge Peter the foundatyon off the Churche, then it maketh against all the other Fathers whiche did so call him, or then it maketh against the Authorite and Iurisdiction either off laye princes and lordes, either of spirituall pastours and Curats. For as the subiect holdeth of his Prince, and the Tenent of his lorde, as the dyocese is subiect to his bishopp, and the parish to the vicair by S. Paules Doctrine,
                  Hebr. 13. commanding vs to obey our ouerseers, and to be subiect to those which haue charge of our soules, and yet neither the subiect, nor the dyocese so holdeth either of Prince or of bishop, as S. Paule rebuked the Corinthians to holde of Apollo, and of Paule, so neither Athanasius nor the olde Fathers calling Peter the foundation of the Churche, and confessing thereby the Authorite of Peter ouer the Churche, do make (as M. Iewell saieth) contrary S. Paules Doctrine all the bishoppes of the worlde to holde of Peter, as the Corinthians helde of Apollo and of Paule. For the Corinthians made a schisme in the Churche, and such as were baptised of Apollo, they helde of Apollo, such as were baptised of Paul, they would holde and craof Paule. This schisme and diuision S. Paule rebuked, as bothe

in the text it shall euidently appeare, to him that will but reade it ouer diligently, and also as S. Augustin expoundeth that text. This text therefore M. Iewel you might better haue applied to your selfe and your brethern,
                  In expositione in Math. ser. 13. & in Psa. 54. which do holde some of you of Luther, some of Zuinglius, some of other, euen as S. Augustin applied it to the Donatistes, who helde some of Donatus, some of Rogatus, some of Primianus, some of Maximianus, all Donatistes, but yet diuided amonge them selues as protestants are at this day, into Lutherās, Sacramentaries, Anabaptistes, Suenckfeldians, Osiandrins and so forthe. Peter is the foundation and Rocke that Christe builded his Churche vpon, as sett to gouerne and direct the same vnder Christ, by Christ, and through Christ. Al Christendō holdeth by him, not as a sect by his patrone, but as the flock by their Pastour, vt sit vnus Pastor & vnum ouile, that there may be one Pastour, and one flocke, and as S. Hierom saieth,
                  Ioan. 10. Li. 1. Cō
                     
                        •
                     . Ionini
                        •
                     .
                
               vt schismatis tollatur occasio, that schisme might be auoided.
            In like maner, where it was alleaged out of Irenaeus, that to the Church of Rome all the Churche, that is to saye,
               
                  Lib. 3.1.3. 
               all that be faithefull any where, oughte to repaire Propter potentiorem Principalitatem; For the mightier principalite of the same, M. Iewell here saieth.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               pag. 244 The .353. Vntruthe in wresting. holy Script
                     •
                  re. Math. 20.Of these wordes groweth their errour. They dreame of a kingdome and Principalite. But Christ saieth to his disciples. The kinges of Nations rule ouer them. Vos autem non sic. But you may not s
                     •
                  .
            
            Beholde howe shamefully Christes holy worde is abused. In that place of the gospel the Apostles not yet replenished with the holy Ghoste, thought that Christ should haue a temporall reygne, and therefore when they heard that Iohn and Iames the sonnes of Zebedee sued to sit the one of 
                  〈◊〉
                right hād the other on the leafte, Indignati sunt it de duobus 
                     〈◊〉
                  . They toke an Indignatiō against those two brethern.
                  
                     
                        ••
                     th. 20 The Christ calling

them vnto him saied the wordes alleaged, signifying vnto them that they shoulde not looke for any temporal honour, rule or preferment, such as Kinges of the Nations exercised, but who so woulde be greatest amonge them should be their seruaunt. Nowe Ireneus speaketh of a Principalite in the Churche off Rome (not temporall or Ciuill as full grossely M. Iewell imagineth, folowing therein that rude ghospeller Andreas Smidelinus) but a Spirituall Iurisdiction,
                  Contra Hosium in d
                        •
                     fens. prologum Bre
                        •
                     tij.
                such as all the Churche (not all the worlde) and all faithefull (not all pagans and infidels then subiect to the Romaine Empire) ought to repaire vnto. The humilite that Christ commaunded his Apostles in that place, taketh not away the Spirituall Authorite and Iurisdiction of Prelats in Christes Churche. The Bishop off Rome ruleth the Churche of God,
                  Act. 20. as S. Paule saied of such as he had appointed Regere ecclesiam Dei, to rule the Churche of God as 
                  In 1. Timoth. 3. S. Ambrose saied that Damasus was the Ruler of Gods house, as 
                  Hom. 1. de paenit.
                Chrisostom saieth that to Peter Christ gaue Primatum guber nationeque per vniuersum mundum. The primacy and gouuernement thourough out the whole worlde: as, 
                  Li. 4. epist. 34. S. Gregory saieth that to Peter, The charge and Principalite of the whole Church was cōmitted. All this is not to rule as Kinges of Nations rule ouer them,
               
                  Hebr. 13. 
               but as such to whom we must obedire & subiacere tanquam rationem reddituris pro animabus nostris obeye and be subiect,
                  Math. 20. as vnto such which shal geue accōpt for our soules, but they them selues must be Sicut ministri as seruauntes, not in subiection, but in humilite. And thus bothe Scriptures must stande together. M. Iewell must not ouerthrowe one Truthe by an other, neither wrest that to Spiritual Iurisdictiō, which was expressely spoken of the temporall and ciuill.
            
               
                  De vocat· Gent. lib. 2 Ca. 6. With the like vprightnes and sincerite, whereas D. Harding alleaged the saying of S. Ambrose, that Rome was more aduaunced Per Apostolici Sacerdotij Principatum: By the Chiefty of the Apostolike Priesthood in the Tower of Religion

then in the Throne of temporall power, M. Iewell for answer hereunto wresteth a place off holy Scripture, and saieth.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               
                  
                     •
                  ap. 248Peters whole power in Rome was Spiritual, and stode onely in the preaching of the Ghospell, with which armour God is able to pull downe kinges and Princes to the obedience of his Christ. Thus saieth God vnto Hieremie. I haue sett thee ouer Nations and kyngdomes.
               The .354 Vntruthe in false trāslating S Peter, and false aplication also.  And S. Peter speaking generally to all Christen people saieth. Vos estis Regale Sacerdotum. You are the Kingely priesthoode. This principalite and Towre of Religion was not onely in Rome, but also in euery place where the Name of Christ was receiued.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
               
               1. Pet. 2.In this later place, out of S. Peter M. Iewell hath falsely translated the text. For where the Latin hath, Vos estis regale sacerdotium. and the greke 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                a kingely priesthood without the Article, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                that or illud, M. Iewell to make it serue his turne, hath translated the wordes thus. You are that Kingely Priestood. And so hath put in the word That more then he founde in the Text. And vpon the vehemēcy of the word That he inferreth, This principalite and Tower of Religiō was not only in Rome, but also in euery place, where the Name of Christ was receiued. But false translation maketh no proufe. S. Peter in that place after the minde of S. 
                  Serm. 2. de bapt. ca. 8.    Basill and 
                   lib. 20. de ciuit. dei. Ca. 10.  S. Augustine (who are to be thought to haue vnderstanded the text as well as M. Iewell) calleth all Christen men Regale Sacerdotium, A kingely Priesthood, bicause as of the mysticall vnction we be all called Christians, so as the membres of Christ, the true and euerlasting priest, we be all Priestes. S. 
                   Contra. Luciferianos.
                Hierom calleth this generall and Common priesthood of all Christen men, Baptim: expounding shortly that which the other Fathers spake by circumstances. Againe as S. Peter calleth here Christen men Regale S
                     •
                  cerdotium, a kingely priesthood, so S. Iohn in his Reuelation saieth. Fecisti nos deo nostro Regnum & Sacerdotes,
               
                  Apocal. 
                  
                     •
                  . 
               & regnabimus super terram. Thou hast made vs a kingdome, and Priestes to our God, and we shall reigne ouer the earthe.
                  Exod. 19. And in the olde

lawe the like was saied to the Iewes. You shall be to me priestly kingdome, and a holy Nation. But as it will not folowe therefore that euery Christen man is a kinge, and all Christē men rule and raigne alike, nor that euery Iewe was as rightly a priest, as was the Tribe of Leui, no more it wil folow that euery Christē man is a priest in one kind and maner of priestood, or that the Principalite of Priesthood is in euery man alike. Thirdly albeit al Christen men in respect of the internall Sacrifice of a Contrite harte, be priestes, yet in respect of the Apostolike priesthood, and of the externall Sacrifice of Christes Church, none are priestes but such as are Ordred thereunto. And of such Apostolike Priestes, the B. of Rome by S. Ambroses Iudgement had the Principalite. And by that Principalite Rome was more glorious then euer it was by the Imperiall Throne. Last of al because at Rome by S. Ambrose his Iudgement was the principalite of Apostolike priesthood, and Rome for that was more glorious then for the Imperiall Throne, it foloweth that as the Empire of the Romaines was through out the worlde, but the Chiefe Rule and Authorite thereof came from Rome, so the faithe of the Romaines was preached through out the worlde (as S. Paule saieth) but the Principalite of Apostolike priesthood,
                  Rom. 1. the rule and Authorite came from thence. This is the comparison of S. Ambrose in that place, and this he noteth as a Speciall and principall prerogatiue of that Churche. Wherefore M. Iewell doth bothe great wronge to that holy Father so to debace his saying, and much more villany to this holy Scripture so to racke it and wreste it.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               pag. 25
                     •
                  . 2. Thess. 
                  
                     •
                  . The 355. Vntruthe bothe fonde and wicked.For an other example of your lewde wresting of holy Scriptures (M. Iewell) let vs consider what Scripture you bringe to proue that Christ lefte no Vniuersall Vicaire ouer his Churche. Thus you saie.
            Other Vniuersall Vicaire of Christ, there is none in the Scriptures, onlesse it be he, of whom S. Paule forewarne
                  •
               h v
                  •
               . Homo ille s
                     •
                  eleratus, filius

perditus, &c. That wicked man, that Childe of perdition that setteth him selfe vp against God, and that so farre forthe, that he will sitte in the Temple of God, and shewe him selfe as if he were God. But this Vicaire Christ shal destroie with the spirite of his mouthe.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                It had ben enoughe, M. Iewell, for the younge Iannizzers of your Secte thus to talke. You that beare your selfe for a Bassa amonge them, shoulde nowe leaue suche grosse shiftes, to other that haue yet lerned no farder. This place of S. Paule hath in dede semed a gaye place to a number of your faction to proue the Pope an Antichrist. Yea and a lerned man forsothe of the brotherhod of Zurich hath made a booke only of that Argument, whereof this place is bothe the beginning and chiefe foundation. Which booke also hath bene set forthe in english,The Antichrist. and is, I trowe, not a litle estemed of a greate many. But Gods name be blissed. Though your gaie glistering Inuentyons dafeled the eyes of a greate many at the first (you stealing vpon vs in our deade slepe, and ouermuche reste) yet nowe we being waked with your heresies, and stirred vp to a nerer consideration of matters by you called in doubte, we haue (thanked be God) easely discouered, the vanite of them.
            For, as touching this place of S. Paule, the very text laied forthe and considered, openeth your lewde and wrested interpretation thereof, and sheweth to the eye, that it procedeth vtterly either of grosse ignorance or els of wilfull Malice. S. Paule saieth thus.2. Thes. 2. 
               VVe beseche you brethern by the coming of our Lorde Iesus Christ, and of our meeting with him, that you be not lightly caried awaye from your vnderstanding, nor conceiue any feare, either by reuelation of Spirit, or by worde of mouthe, or by any letter as sent from vs, that the daye of the Lorde should be at hande. Let noman deceiue you in any wise. For vnlesse the defection come first, and that wicked man be reueled, that Childe of perdition, that setteth him selfe vp against God, and is exalted aboue all that is called God, or that is worshipped, so that be s
                     •••
                  eth in the temple of God, shewing him selfe

as God. Remembre you not, that when I was yet with you, I tolde you of these matters? And nowe what doth staye it, you knowe, that it may be reueled in dewe time. For the mystery of iniquite worketh euen nowe, only that he which holdeth nowe maye holde, vntill it be out of the waye. And then that wicked man shall be reueled, whom our Lorde Iesus shal kil with the Spirit of his m
                     •
                  uthe, and destroye him in the brightnes of his coming. Him I saie whose coming is in all power, in Signes and false miracles by the working of the diuel. Thus farre the Apostle. All this to be spoken of Antichrist most men do agree. S. Ambrose is expressely of that minde. And so woulde you also and your felowes M. Iewell haue it to be meante.
                  Ambros. in Commē
                     tar. ibidē.
                Herein therefore we vary not. But who is nowe this Antichrist that shall come, that shall worke such false miracles, that shall proclaime him selfe God, and that shall at length be destroyed at the glorious coming of our Sauiour? It is the Pope saye you. It is he that beareth him selfe for the Vniuersall Vicaire of Christ. Answer then M. Iewell to these fewe reasons, which I bringe to the Contrary.
            
                First this Antichrist is but one Person, he hath no Succession,That the Pope is not AntiChrist. on Cōtinuance. Therefore the Apostle speaketh of One wicked man, and of One Childe of perdition. The Pope in this Vniuersall Supremacy hath had a Continuance and Succession of many hundred yeres, euen from the time of S. Gregory at the lest, who practised such Authorite of Vniuersal vicaire through out all Christendom, as hath bene before particulary declared. Therefore the Pope can not be the Antichrist that S. Paule speaketh of.
            
                Againe before this Antichrist come, there must (as S. Paule saieth) a defection come first. This defection S. Ambrose expoundeth to be of the Romaine Empire. That is when the Romaine Empire is vtterly lost and gone, then or shortly after (at the lest not before) the Antichrist shall be reueled. The Romaine Empire standeth yet, and without an Emperour

descending from the first Romain Emperour the Churche hath not yet bene at any time. Therefore this Antichrist is not yet come. And so it can not be the Pope that came so many a daye a goe.
            
                Thirdly that wicked man must be reueled, saieth the Apostle. Shewe then M. Iewell when that was. That is. When this Anchrist the Pope beganne to plaie the Antichrist. What Pope it was. When he liued, and howe he was reueled. This can not be shewen, therefore the Pope can not be he.
            
                Fourthly he shal shewe him selfe as God, and shall be exalted aboue al that is called God, or worshipped for God. Such honour was neuer practised by any Pope, geuē to any Pope, or so much as attempted or coueted of any Pope. Therefore he can not be that Antichrist, that the Apostle speaketh of.
            
                Fiftely this Antichrist shal worke signes and miracles by the diuell. The first Pope that practised this vniuersall vicaireship, whom so euer you name M. Iewel, whither it be Zosimus, S. Gregory, Leo, or Bonifacius the 8. you can shewe no such false miracles wrought. Therefore the Pope is nott this Antichrist.
            
                Sixtely this Antichrist shall be destroyed at Christes coming. The first Antichrist of the Popes (if any such were) haue not bene so destroyed. Therefore no Pope hath bene that Antichrist. Or thus. Therefore that Antichrist is not yet come, whom Christ shall so destroye.
            
                Last of all this Antichrist, if the Pope be he, hath Gouerned and Ruled the vniuersall Churche of Christ these thousand yeres and vpwarde. The whole Church hath folowed his Doctrine, hath obserued his Decrees, hath obeyed his Authorite. But that the vniuersall Church of Christ shoulde be guided by an Antichrist, in such a Cōtinuance of time, yea at any time at al, it is expresse contrary to Gods promises in the Prophets, in the Psalmes, and in the ghospell: as I haue otherwhere

at large proued. Therefore it is by no meanes possible, that the Pope shoulde be Antichrist. Yea it is a most hainous and horrible blasphemy so to thinke, teache, or write. So well and truly, so godly and clerckly hath M. Iewell applied this place of holy Scripture. Nowe to an other.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                M. Hardinge saieth. The See of Rome can neuer faile in Faithe. For Christ saied vnto Peter.
                  pag. 275. Luc. 22. The 356 Vntruthe in wresting the Prophets wordes. Mich 3. I haue praied for thee that thy faith not maye saile. The like confidence and trust in them selues the Priestes had in the olde times, as it may appeare by these wordes of the prophet Micheas: The priestes taught for hiere. and the Prophets prophesied for mony, and yet they rested them selues vpon the Lorde, and saied. Is not the Lorde in the middest emongest vs?
            
            It foloweth immediatly in the Prophet. Non venient super nos mala &c. There shall no harme befalle vnto vs. Therefore for your sake Sion shall be plowed like the filde and Ierusalem shal be turned into a heape of stones: and the hill of the temple, into a highe wodde. These wordes if M. Iewel had added, and not broken of so vpon the sodain, it would haue appeared in what sence the Priestes craked of the Lorde amonge them, and what their confidence and trust was. Their confidence and trust was, that, did they neuer so ill, yet God woulde not punishe them. The trust whiche we haue vpon the See off Rome is, that it shall not faile in the faithe, grounded vpon the wordes off oure Sauiour, spoken particularly to Peter in the presence of all the rest. It is of the Faithe to continewe. It is not of any temporall confidence of escape harmelesse in iniquite. Therefore you saied vntruly, The like confidence and truste &c. and therefore also you haue to a wronge, and contrary sence wrested the saying of the Prophet.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .357. Vntruthe as before.With like confidence the priestes saied, as it is writen in the prophet Hieremie. The Lawe shall not decaye in the Priest, nor Counsell in the Elder.
            
            With like confidence or rather impudency M. Iewell hath bothe wrested to a contrary meaning, and also pared the very wordes of the Prophet Hieremy, as he nipped before the wordes

of Micheas. For thus stande the wordes of Hieremy. Et dixerunt, Venite & cogitemus contra Hieremiam cogitationes (nō enim peribit lex a Sacerdote, neque Consilium a Sapiente, nec sermo a propheta) venite & percutiamus eum lingua & non attendamus ad vniuersos sermones eius. And the Iewes sayed. Come. Let vs deuise deuises against Hieremy (for the lawe shal not decaye in the Priest, nor the Counsell in the wise, no the worde in the Prophet) Come and let vs strike him with our tonge, and let vs geue no eare to all his sayinges. These are the whole wordes of Hieremy in that place, wherof M. Iewell hath picked out a piece only, and that which stode in a parenthesis, to persuade a sence which the whole place being opened, confuteth it selfe. For those wordes are not spoken as of the Priestes only, but as of all the Iewes. As the whole drifte of the Chapter declareth. Againe the Prophet in this place rebuketh not their belefe or doctrine, but expresseth their wicked conspiracy to destroye him, which had rebuked their euill life and had foretold them of Gods vengeaunce to come vpon them. He speaketh not of any Councell touching the obseruation of Moyses lawe. Last of all bicause the Priestes vpō a confidē
               ce of Gods promise made vnto them, that all ambiguites and questions betwene bloud and bloud, Cause and Cause,
               
                  Deute. 17. 
               Lepre and not Lepre shoulde be determined by them, thought therefore that in all other thinges their Iudgement and Councell should stande in like maner, bicause I saye they abused this Authorite of deciding questions of the Lawe, to liue and doe in maners what them listed, therefore the prophet Ieremy vsed those wordes against them. If in like maner any Pope for the defence of his Lewde life woulde alleage the promise made to S. Peter that his Faith should not faile, then were the Confidence and trust of such a Pope in such a case like to the Confidence and trust, that those Iuish Priestes had. But nowe seing the life and behauiour of Popes is not desended to

be innocēt, but their faithe is defended to be Sure and not able to faile in determining matters touching Faithe, therefore we trust truly to the promise of Christ, that Peters faithe shall not faile, therefore the confidence of vs is not like to that vaine cō
               fidence of the Priestes that Hieremy speaketh of, and therfore you M. Iewel haue lewdely and wickedly wrested this place of holy Scripture, as you haue done the others.
            But God answereth them farre otherwise. Ye shall 
                     •
                  aue darke night in stede of Vision,
               The .358 Vntruthe as before. 
               and ye shall haue dark
                     •
                  esse in steede off Prophecye.
            
            In this prophecy the Prophet foretolde the Iewes of the fall of their Synagoge, and of the blindnesse that they should be in at the coming of the Messias. The Church of Christ is contrary wise promised to haue the holy Ghoste for 
                     •
                  uer to remaine with it,
               
                  Ioan· 14. Math. vlt.
                and Christ hath saied. I will be with you all day
                     •
                  s euen to the ende of the worlde. Therefore this i
                  •
                wrongefully applied to the Rulers of Christ
                  •
               s Churche, whose faithe shall no more faile, then the Churche it selfe. And therefore ones againe you haue wrested the holy Scripture.
            In like maner M. Iewell hauing alleaged a number of gloses out of the Canō law that the Pope can not erre, for a b
                  •
               iefe solutiō to them al he abuseth a place or two of holy Sc
                  •
               ipture, and so concludeth that matter thus.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               pag. 276. The .359 Vntruthe as b
                     •
                  fore.Thus 
                  •
               hey feast and chere them selues, and smoth the world with vaine talke. But S. Ihon saieth. No
                     •
                  ite a
                     •
                   e
                     •
                  e, Pat
                     •
                  em habemus Abraham. Neuer saye (Peter or) Abraham was our Father.
            
            See we not here what a smothe Solution M. Iewel hath made,
                  Math. 3. and howe feately he hath glosed S. Iohns Text? S. Iohn sayd to the Iewes. Crake not of your Father Abraham. Therefore we must thinke that the Popes faithe may fayle. For that is the matter which M. Iewell laboureth to proue in that place, and which the gloses immediatly befor recited, do witnesse. Againe M. Iewel to fournish the matter shufleth betwene S. Iohns wordes (Peter or) as though S. Iohn had spoken or meaned there of

Peter also. By such glosing as M. Iewel teacheth vs, we may saie, S. Iohn saieth. Neuer saye (this man, or that man, or) Abraham was our Father. And so by this glose of M. Iewel, the Child shal be taught to denie his Father. Certainely S. Paule who is to be thought to haue vnderstanded S. Iohns meaning no lesse then M. Iewel, not withstanding those wordes, saieth to the Corinthians. Though ye haue tenne thousand of Masters in Christ, yet ye haue not many Fathers.
               1. Cor. 4. 
               For in Ch
                     •
                  ist Iesus I begotte you by the ghosp
                     •
                  ll. In which wordes he feareth not to be taken for their Father, though the Iewes by S. Ihon were forebidden to crake of their Father Abrahā. So properly and sincerely M. Iewel alleageth the Scriptures. It foloweth in the same place of his text immediatly.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               
                  Acto. 20. The .360 Vntruthe as shall appeare.S. Paule speaking of his successours, saieth thus. I knewe that after my departure from you, there shall rauening wolues come amongest you that shall not spare the flo
                     •
                  ke.
            
            This was spokē to the clergy of Ephesus. This maketh nothinge to the Succession of Peter in the See of Rome. Againe they were not properly his successours. For at Ephesus though S. Paule taught and preached, yet he remained not there, he had not his proper See and abode there.
                  Euseb. lib. 3. cap. 31. S. Iohn the Euangelist is reakoned of the Auncient writers to be the First Bishop there. Therefore this place is bothe Vntruly wrested against the Succession of S. Peter and Vntruly reported touching S. Paules successours. If S. Paul had any Successiō, it was at Rome where he preached the ghospell also: and beside, suffred there the Crowne of Martyrdom.
            These fewe maye suffice to Iustifie the Vntruthe noted by you (M. Iewel) vpon D. Harding, to proue you in dede a wreaste
                  •
                of Gods holy word, as your felowes are, and to satisfie also your expectation, where you saie.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               pag. 292.Where as it liketh M. Harding to saie, that we wreathe and wreaste he Scriptures, if it woulde haue pleased him also particularly to shewe

howe and wherein, he might haue had the more credit, But it is commōly sayed. Dolosus versatur in generalibus. He that walketh in generalites, meaneth not plainely.
            You haue some nowe particularly shewed, not only by your doctrine generally committed, but also by you in this your Fourth Article, vnaduisedly auouched. If you thinke these to fewe, take one more. You graunte that Peter was head of the Apostles. Then you aske what is in the Pope that was in Peter, whereby he shoulde be the head of others. And seing well what might be answered, you saie of D. Harding.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               pag. 304 Matth. 23. Stapleton Matth. 23.He will saie Succession, and sitting in Peters chaire, which is in Rome. A man maye answer. The Scribes and Pharisees sate in Moyses Cha
                     •
                  re.
            
            A man may Replie. Quae dicunt facite, que autē faciūt nolite facere. Doe what they saie vnto you, but doe not as you see them doe. And then what doth this Answer helpe you? Nay, dothe not this Answer make quite againste you? Dothe it not cleane ouerthrowe you? For if the Scribes and Pharisees, so naughty men sate yet in Moyses Chaire, and their sayinges and precepts were to be obserued, kept, and obeyed, though their doinges and life was not to be folowed, is not trowe you the Successour of S. Peter, sitting in his Chayre, that is, occupying his Office, place, and dignitie, to be obeyed, though he lacke the Qualites of S. Peter? So properly you alleage the Scripture euen against your owne selfe. For you bring a piece of a Sentence, for the Answer, wherof the other piece, maketh a perfyt Replie or Solution. What is to wreaste Scriptures, if this be not?
            Nowe that you labour by certaine gloses, and by the sayinges of two certaine men in their declayming Oratiōs to shewe some Scriptures otherwise applied then their literal meaning geueth, to that I answer. First they conclude nothing against the faithe, or against Truthe: and so they are not wrested. Secōdarely they are not so vsed in the waie of doctrine, but by allusion so applied as not properly, so neither wickedly. Last of all you

knowe M. Iewell the lawe saieth. Retorsione Criminum non probatur Innocentia. To proue an other guilty, proueth not your selfe Innocent.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               diuis. 20.
               The bishops of euery Nation haue made their Appeales in their weighty affaires to the Pope, and alwaies haue sued to the See Apostolike, as well for succour and helpe against violence, iniuries, and oppressions, as for redresse of all other disordres.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               pag. 261. The .361. Vntruthe Slaund.The .106. Vntruthe, As it shall afterwarde appeare.
            Here you geue me occasion M. Iewell, to open a Number of your most manifest and impudent Vntruthes, touching the matter of Appeales, which in the next Diuision you handle at large, and to the which you referre the proufe of this .106. Vntruthe. Goe to then. Let vs see the proufes that you bringe. You saie.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                First I must shewe,pag. 265. that there lay no such ordinarie Appeale from al countres of the worlde, to the bishop of Rome, and that therefore the same is by M. Harding vntruly auouched. That done, I trust, it shall not be harde to answer these places of Chrysostom, Athanasius and Theodoretus here alleaged.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                Truly it shal be very easye, if you can perfourme that you promise. But if when you haue all saied, you haue proued nothinge, then the Reader may vnderstande, that neither you haue, neither you are able to answer to those places alleaged of Chrysostom, Athanasius, and Theodoretus, and of eche their Appeales to Rome.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                And that there laye not any such Appeale to Rome,The 362. Vntruthe threefolde, as shal appeare. it is plaine by the consent of Generall Councelles, by the Authorite of holy Fathers and by the lawes and Ordonaunces of Emperours and Princes. By which groundes it is easie, to to vnderstande the Practise, and order of the Churche in those daies.
            Three proufes against Appeales to Rome, M. Iewell in these wordes hath auoutched. 
                  Stapleton 
               
                First, The Consent of Generall Councelles.  Seconde. The Authorite of Holy Fa
                  •
               hers.  Thirde.

The lawes and Ordonaunces of Emperours and Princes. But M. Iewell hath not brought any one of all these three proufes truly and sincerely, as it shall afterwarde appeare. Therefore he hath auouched here three manifest Vntruthes.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               
                  Cap. 5. The 363. Vntruthe For they stande bothe wel together.In the Councell of Nice it is decreed thus. Ab alijs excommunicati ab alijs ad Comniunionem ne reciptantur. Let not them that stande excommunicat by one bishop, be receiued againe to communion by an other. M. Hardinges Appeales and these wordes (363.) can not stande well together.
            Yes forsothe M. Iewell, if you vnderstande them well. For first he that Appealeth, the Appellation yet hanging, doth not stande excōmunicat. Therefore this decree being made of such as stāde excommunicat, doth not speake of such as do Appeale. And thus D. Hardinges Appeales (as you call them) and the wordes of this decree may stande well together. Therefore you adde more force to the argument and saie.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                But he will saie: The bishop either of ignoraunce, either of malice may excommunicat the partie wrongfully.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                Yea Mary. Here is now the case of Appellation. What saie you to that?
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               
                  Concil. Nic. c
                        •
                     n. 5. The .364 Vntruthe False Translation.In this case the same Councell hath prouided remedie of Appeale, not vnto the bishop of Rome, but vnto a prouinciall Synod within the Countre. These be the wordes. Therefo
                     •
                  e that these thinges may be well examined, it is wel prouided, that euery yere in euery prouince at 
                     •
                  wo seueral times there be holden a Councell of bis
                     •
                  ops, that they meeting togeather out of all partes of the prouince, maye 
               
                  huiusmo di que
                        •
                     tiones examinent.
                
               Heare and determine such complaintes.
            
            You adde in the ende one worde more then the Decree hath. That is the worde, Determine. The Decree speaketh not of Determination but of Examination and enquiry vpō such complaintes. Howbeit let vs graunte that the prouinciall Synod might determine the complaintes of their clergy? Is it not so at this day in all Catholike countres, where no Appellation is made? Your parte is to shewe M. Iewell that by the Councell of Nice no Appellation shoulde be made from the bishopp or from the prouinciall Synod to Rome. Thinke you the argument

good? They speake of Appeales only to a Synod. Ergo they forbidde Appeales to Rome? This is a Gheasse. This is no proufe.
            Againe this Decree referringe the Appeale to the Synod, doth referre it also to the bishop of Rome. And why? Bicause no Synod cā be holdē without the Authorite of the Bishop of Rome. Iulius the B. of Rome,Appeales to Rome decreed in the Nicene Coū
                  cell. who liued at the time of the Nicene Concel, writing to the Bishops of the East, who also were present at the Nicene Councel, reprouing thē for condemning of Athanasius and other Catholike bishops, in a Synod holden at Antioche in Syria, without the sentence and agreement of Iulius the Pope, chargeth them withe the breache of this very Canon and decree, with these wordes. Praeuidentes Sancti patres insidias et altercationes vnanimiter in Nicena Synodo statuerunt,
               
                  Epist. 1. ad Orientales.
                
               vt nullus Episcopus n
                     •
                  si in legitima Synodo, & suo tempore Apostolica authoritate conuocata, super qu
                     •
                  busdam criminationibus pulsatus audiatur, id est, iudicetur vel damnetur. The holy Fathers foreseing the deceites and altercations, did decree with one assent in the Nicene Councell, that no bishop being accused of certain crimes should be heard, that is shoulde be iudged or condemned, but in a lawfull Synode called together in due time by the Apostolike Authorite. It is noted in the margin of this epistle, that this decree though it be not expressely in the Nicene Councel, yet it may be reduced to the fifte Canon thereof, which is the Canon by M. Iewell alleaged.
            Againe in the seconde epistle of the same Iulius it is writen thus,
                  In rescripto ad Orientales.
                
               Canonibus in Nicena Synodo iubentibus non debere praeter s
                     •
                  ntentiam Romani Pontificis, Concilia celebrari, nec episcopos damnari. Whereas the Canons of the Nicene Councell do commaunde that without the Authorite of the Bishopp of Rome neither Councells ought to be holden, neither bishops be condemned. Where againe it is noted that this decree may be reduced to that 5. Canon aboue alleaged. Nowe if M. Iewel wil

except and saie, this Canon, and the whole epistle of Iulius is a forged matter, let him remembre that the ecclesiasticall history of Socrates, describing this schysmaticall Synode off the Arrians in Antioche of Syria where Athanasius was excommunicated, maketh mencion of this Canon or decree, that no Synod may be kepte without the Authorite of the bishop of Rome. These are the wordes. Sed neque Iulius affuit maximae Romae praeful,
               
                  Histor. trip. lib. 4. cap. 9. 
               neque in locum suum aliquem destinauit, cum vtique ecclesiastica regula iubeat non oportere praeter sententiam Romani Pontificis concilia celebrari. Neither was Iulius the bishop off Rome present at that Synode, neither was any sent thither in his place, whereas yett the ecclesiasticall decree dothe commaunde, that no Synodes ought to be holden, without the cō
               sent of the Bishop of Rome. The Appeales then in the Nicene Councell being referred to the Synodes of the Prouince, and no Synode in any prouince being good and lawfull without the authorite of the bishop of Rome, are they hereby remoued from the iudgement of the bishop of Rome? Nay are they not expressely submitted and put vnder the same? And thus M. Iewell hath brought a decree of the Nicene Councell by a good consequence against him selfe, and by no coulour or reason making for him selfe. He hath brought that against Appeales to Rome, which dothe necessarely inferre Appeales to Rome.
            For farder proufe out of the Nicene Councell that Appeales laye to Rome, I might here alleage certaine Canons of the same Councell, auouched by Iulius the Pope in his epistle to the Arrian bishops of the East, who were them selues present at the Councell of Nice, and who (if the Pope had beelyed the Councell) would not haue lett to haue tolde him of it, expressely decreing Appeales from all other bishops to the bishop of Rome. But M. Iewell denieth this to be the Epistle of Iulius. This is the extreme and last refuge, when all others shiftes do

faile. But by what reason doth he denie it Forsothe bicause it is not the same which Athanasius in his workes talketh of. 
                  Iewell. 
               
               pag. 264.For (saieth he) They ought to be all one without difference. And why so M. Iewell? May not Iulius write two or three sundry epistles, and that to the bishops of East, and those of different matters, except your good mastership allowe it? As well might you quarel, and say: The epistle to the Hebrewes is not S. Pauls, bicause it cōtaineth no like matter, nor beareth not the like stile to his epistle to the Romains. Such reasōs vphold your religiō.
            In that Epistle then of Iulius, among other Canōs of the Nicene Coūcel there reackoned vp, this is one. Vt omnes Episco
                     •
                  i qui in quibusdā grauioribus pulsantur vel criminātur causis, quoties necesse fuerit,
               
                  
                     In rescripto ad Oriētales
                  
                  
                     Tō. 1· Cōc.
                  
                
               liberè Apostolicam appell
                     •
                  nt sedem atque ad eam quasi ad matrem confugiant, vt ab ea (sicut semper fuit) piè fulciantur, d
                     •
                  f
                     •
                  ndantur & liberentur. That al bishops, which are conuented and accused, of certain greuouser crimes, may freely Appeale to the Apostolike See, and flye to hi
                  •
               , as to their Mother, that they may by it be succoured, defended, and deliuered, as it hath allwaies bene: Lo an expresse decree of Appeale to Rome in the Nicene Councell, which though it be not amonge the twenty Canons commonly extant in that Councell, yet it ought not therefore to be thought a fained or forged decree, no more thē a number of other Canons and decrees of this Nicene Councell alleaged by S. Hierom, S. Ambro
                  •
               e, S. Augustin, Epiphanius and other, are to be estemed for forged and fained decrees, bicause those also are not to be founde among the twenty now commonly extant.
            Beside that, bothe this Iulius in his vndoubted Epistle recorded in the wo
                  •
               kes of Athanasius,
                  See before.
                  Fol. 33. B. and 34. A.
                mencioneth a decree of Appeale from one Synod to a greater, made in the Nicene Councell, by vertu whereof he cited the Bishoppes of the East to Rome, and also Leo by vertu of a decree made in the Nicene Councell, requireth expressely vpon the Appeale of Flauianus,

a newe Synod to be assembled, as hath before bene declared.
            But touching this matter of Appeale from al bishoppes to Rome, we haue a most expresse Decree in the great Councell of Sardica holden within fewe yeres after the Nicene Coū
               cell, holden for the renewing and confirming of the Nicene Coūcel, which at that time was by the Arrians impugned, holden by the assemblie of three hundred bishops from all partes of Christēdom except the Arrians of the East, who also came at first to that Councell to the number of 76. bishops, but seing them selues so fewe in number, they departed, pretending the presence of Athanasius and Paulus two Catholike bishops,
                  Historia tripart. lib. 4. cap. 23. whom they had excommunicated, and would therefore haue had them and all theirs thrust out of the Councel. Other of the East which came not pretended, some infirmite, some lacke of leasure to come to the Councell, and blaming therefore the Pope Iulius for not summoning them in time, though yet (as the ecclesiastical History witnesseth) they had a yere and a halfe warning thereof. Thus beside those Arrians, and the other which drewe backe, there were at that Councel assembled .300. bishops out of these partes of the worlde, (as the epistle of that Councell yet extant in the ecclesiasticall History of Theodoretus doth witnesse) out of Rome,
                  Theodoret. li. 2. ca. 8. Hist.
                of Spayne, off Fraunce, of Italy, of Campania, Calabria, Aphrica, Sardinia, Pannonia, Mysia, Dacia, the other Dacia, Macedonia, Thessalia, Achaia, Epiros, Thracia, Asia, Caria, Bythynia, Hellespontus, Phrygia, Pisidia, Cappadocia, Ponto, Cilicia, the other Phygia, Pamphylia, Lydia, off the Ilandes Cyclades, off Aegypt, Thebais, Lybia, Galatia, Palestina, and Arabia. In this great Councel so assembled from all partes, except of the Arrians, we reade this Decree. Placuit vt si episcopus accusatus fu
                     •
                  rit,
               
                  Concil. Sard. Cap. 7. 
               & iudicauerint congregati episcopi regionis ipsius & de gradu suo eum deiecerint, si appellauerit qui deiectus est & cōfugerit ad episcopum

Romanae Ecclesiae & voluerit se audiri, & iustum putauerit, vt renouetur iudi
                     •
                  ium vel discussionis examen, scribere his Ep
                     •
                  scop
                     •
                  s dignetur, qui in finitima prouincia sunt, vt ipsi diligenter omnia inquirant & iuxta fidem veritatis definiant. Quod fi is qui rogat causam suam iterum audiri, deprecatione sua mouerit epis
                     •
                  opum Romanum vt e latere suo praesbyteros m
                     •
                  ttat, erit in potestate ipsius episcopi quid velit & quid estimet. Et si decreuerit mittendos esse, qui praes
                     •
                  ntes cum episcopis iudicent, habentes eius authoritatem a quo destinati sunt, erit in suo arbitrio: Si vero crediderit episcopos comprouinciales sufficere, vt negotio terminum imponant, faciet quod sapientissi
                     •
                  o consil o suo iudicauerit. It hath semed vs good to Decree that if a Bishop be accused, if the bishops of the prouince being gathered together haue iudged the matter, and haue depriued him, if the party dep
                  •
               iued or deposed do Appeale, and flie to the Bishop of Rome, if the Bishop will haue his cause to be heard, and thinke it good to renewe the Iudgement, or the trial of the matter againe, let him vouchesafe to write to the bishops of the nexte prouince, that they may enquire more diligently off the matter and determine it. But iff the party accused desiring his cause to be hearde ones againe, do intreate the Bishop off Rome to send legates from his side, it shall be in the power off the Bishopp to doe as he shall thinke good. And if the Pope determine to sende such as may iudge the matter with other bishops, hauing his Authorite from whom they are sente, that also shall be at his arbitrement. Last of all if he shall iudge that the bishops of the same prouince with the party accused, may suffice to ende the matter, he shall do, whatsoeuer by his most wise Councell he shall thinke good. Thus farre the decree of the great Councel of Sardica made anon after the Nicene Councell, for the establishing and confirming of the same, by the consent of 300. Catholike bishops of well here all partes of Christendom. In this decre, we see the other Canon mentioned by you M. Iewel out of those imperfect copies

which are extant, to be expoūded and extēded to that sence of Appeale, which we gathered before by the decree mentioned by Iulius, and the ecclesiasticall history, where it is saied that no Synod may be holdē without the Authorite of the bishop of Rome. In this Decre we see a plaine and large Appeale to the See of Rome, to determine the matter either by his owne Legates, either by such other iudgement as he shal appointe. This decree of so great a Councell, holden so shortly after the Nicene Councell ought to be of more weight and authorite to expounde vnto vs the meaning of the Nicene Councell, then the bare negatiue argument of M. Iewell, when he gathereth thus.
            
               M. Iewelles baren Argumēt
               That decree mencioneth of an Appeale to the Synod.
            
            
               Ergo it excludeth all Appeales to Rome.
            
            For nowe we see bothe that the Synod it selfe can not be good without the Authorite of the bishop of Rome, and therefore the Appeale to the Synod emplieth an Appeale to the bishop of Rome, and also that from the Synod the party plaintif may appeale to the bishop of Rome expressely and particularly, that also by the iudgement of the saide Bishop the matter shal be determined. And thus much of that Decree. Let vs now see the rest of the Generall Councells, which M. Iewel promised he woulde alleage.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
                The 365. Vntruthe For in that Councell appeareth no suche decree.
The 366. Vntruthe False translation.The bishoppes in the Councell holden at Tela in Spayne ordeined thus, Presbyteri & clericine appellēt nisi ad Africana Concilia. Let it not be lawfull for priestes and clerkes to Appeale (to Rome) but only to the Councelles holden in Africa.
            The first of M. Iewelles three Vntruthes which I noted before doth now appeare. For whereas he promised to alleage against Appeales to Rome, the decrees of Generall Coūcels, he made an Vntruthe in the number to amase the Reader withal, and alleageth only One, and that also to no purpose as you haue sene. Now for lacke of Generall Councelles he telleth vs of

particular Synods in particular prouinces. And yet all that he bringeth is only out of the Coūtre of Afrike. This that he alleageth of Tela in Spayne, is a great and manifest Vntruthe. In that Councel there is no such decree, but only a Rescript to an epistle of Siricus, speaking not one worde of appeales of or on. Againe he hath added in his english more then is in the latin,
                  Vide tomom. 1. Concil. pag. 420. and so committed an other Vntruthe in false translation. For the wordes (to Rome) are not mencioned or signified in the wordes alleaged. As touching the Decree it selfe, when you tel vs M. Iewell where it is to be founde, and lie not, then we shall shape you an answer accordingly.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                So in the Mileuitane Councell, Si ab Episcopis &c. So likewise in the Councell, of Aphrica, S
                     •
                   fuerit prouocatum, &c. And againe in the same Councell, Non p
                     •
                  ouocent, &c. But what can be so plaine as the Epistle of the 217. bishoppes in the Councell of Africa &c.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                All these foure dishes make but one Seruice. It is but a dishe of tounges brought for lacke of other store to fournishe the table. It is of onely Afrike, and but one decree often repeted aboute one very time, and of the selfe fame men. To the whole matter as it hath bene before alleaged of M. Iewell, so haue we answered it before at large in the 97. Vntruthe.
                  Fol. 36. & s
                        •
                     q.
                Though M. Iewell to enlarge his Replie hath thought good to repete it, yet I thinke it not good to abuse the Reader with the often and idle repeting of one thinge. Yet this one thinge more then hitherto hath bene saied I wil note to the Reader by the waye. This Councell of Milleuitum,
                  Aug. epist. 90.91.92.93.95.96. Celest. ep. 1 ad gal. episc. Cap. 3. and the Councell of Carthage in Afrike were bothe allowed and Confirmed by Pope Innocentius, as it appeareth in S. Augustin. And all the Aphricane Counceles were confirmed of the See Apostolike, as Celestinus the B. of Rome at that very time witnesseth. Which matter shall at large appeare hereafter, when I come to the .112. Vntruthe, touching the Confirmation of Councelles by the Pope. These Coūcelles therefore being Confirmed by the Pope, though

they Restraine Appeales from that One Prouince to Rome, yet neither it is against Appeales out of other Countres to Rome, neither dothe it mayntaine their owne Restrainte with out the Authorite of the See of Rome, but rather confirmeth the Popes Authorite aboute Appeales to Rome. And here lo endeth all that M. Iewell alleageth out of Councelles against Appeales to Rome. This is all the stuffe that with so much conference of his brethern, of so many Councelles holden in all places of the worlde, and of so solemne a protestation made before, hath issued. Mountaines haue crackt, and a Mouse hath crept forthe.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                The bishops of the East parte of the worlde being Arrians, writing vnto Iulius the bishopp off Rome, tooke it greuousely that he woulde presume to ouer rule them, and shewed him, It was not lawfull for him by any sleight or coulour of appeale, to vndoe that thinge that they had done.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                Yea Marry M. Iewell thus it behoueth you to reason. It behoueth an heretike to alleage heretikes, to bringe the examples of heretikes, to defende their doinges by heretikes. These be your auncient Fathers (M. Iewell) which next after Councelles,The passing Impudency of M. Iewell. you promised to alleage. Out vpon this impudent Forehead off the Harlot Heresy your dame and maistresse M. Iewel. Haue you no shame, no respect, no conscience? You cō
               fesse these are Arrians (for you saie of them, being Arrians,) and yet you shame not, you blushe not, you feare not to bringe their schismaticall disobedience for a president of your schismaticall disobedience. Haue you no better proufes then Arrians, then cursed and detestable heretikes? Be these youre Fathers, your Doctours, your Masters? Be it then proclaimed and knowen to all the worlde, that M. Iewell is a childe of the Arrians, a folower of the Arrians, a scholer of the Arrians. The Fathers and Bishoppes of the Councell of Sardica assembled out of al the west Church and of a great part of Grece, do cō
               demne

these very Arrian bishoppes for disobeying Iulius the bishop of Rome. M. Iewell a protestant prelat commendeth them therefore, and alleageth their doing as a Sadde testimony against Appeales to the bishop of Rome. The wordes of those Fathers and bishops of the Councell of Sardica, writen in their General epistle to all other bishops and priestes not present at that Councell, and declaring the Actes off that Councell against those Arrian bishops of the East are these,
                  Theodor.
                as Theodoret in his ecclesiasticall history recordeth them. Quum vtique euocati a charissimo & consacerdote Iulio & non occurrentes (sicut scriptis eiusdem episcopi Iulij comprobatur) aperte videantur calumniatores existere.
               
                  lib. 2. cap. 5. Whereas being cited off our most dere and felowe priest Iulius, and not appearing (as by the letters of the saied bishop Iulius it is euident) they shewe them selues manifestly to be Slaunderers.
            The Councell proueth them Slaunderers off Athanasius, Paulus, and other good Catholike bishops whom they had excommunicated bicause being cited by the Pope they woulde not appeare. M. Iewell alleageth for a Sadde and Substantiall proufe their disobedience, not only refusing to appeare, but checking also the Pope for receiuing againe to Communion those good Fathers Athanasius, Paulus, Marcellus, and other, which being by the Arrians excōmunicated and expelled, had Appealed to Rome. Thus M. Iewel taketh parte with the Arrians, that he may haue a weapō against the Pope, and letteth goe al the Catholike bishops for taking parte with the Pope. Thus did heretikes then, and thus do heretiks now. The Arrians thē, M. Iewell nowe. Such Mates M. Iewel hath picked out to disproue his Appeales to Rome.The 367. Vntruthe In Nipping awaye the first wordes of S. Cyprian. These be his Fathers and Doctours that he promised to bringe forthe.
            S. Cipirian finding faulte with such running to Rome, and defeating of Iustice, writeth vnto Cornelius the bishop there in this sorte. Seeing it is mete and right that euery mans cause be heard there, where the faulte was

committed, and seeing that euery bishopp hath a portion of the flo
                     •
                  ke alloted vnto him, which he must rule and gouuerne, and yelde accompte vnto the Lorde for the same, therefore it is not meete that they whom we are appointed to ouersee doo thus run
                     •
                  e aboute (with their appeales) and so with their suttle and deceitefull rashewe
                     •
                   break
                     •
                   that concorde and consent off bishoppes,
               
                  Ciprianus lib. 1. epist. 5. 
               but there they ought to pleade their cause, where they may haue bothe accusers and witnesses of the faul
                     •
                  e. Or lesse perhap
                     •
                   a fewe desperate and lewde felowes thinke the authorite off the bishoppes 
                     •
                  f affrica, w
                     •
                  i
                     •
                  h haue all ready iudged and condemned them to be lesse, then is the Authori
                     •
                  e of other bishoppes. Hereby it is cleare, that the godly Fathers and B
                  •
               shops in olde time misliked much this shifting of matters to Rome, for that they sawe it was the hinderaunce of right,The 358. and 359. Vntruthe with the vauntage as shall. appeare. the increase of ambition, and the open breache of the holy Canons.
            Before I open the Vntruthes off M. Iewell in these fewe wordes alleaged, Let vs first consider (gentle Reader) the matter a parte by it felfe. M. Iewell must proue, there laye no Appeale to Rome. For this purpose he alleageth S. Ciprian complayning of the rashe and ofte running to Rome about Appeales. And what other thing doth al this proue, thē that at the same time appeales laye to Rome, but S. Cyprian was offended therewith? Thus M. Iewell telleth vs that Appeales laye to Rome, and yet saieth he will proue that none laie to Rome. Againe S. Ciprian was offended, not with the Appeales it selfe simply and absolutely, But (as his wordes do expressely saie) with their sutle and deceitfull rashenes aboute Appeales. And 
                  •
               o was S. Bernarde in his time (as we shall anone heare) offended with Appeales, and yet no man more expressely witnesseth the Authorite of Appeales to Rome then he. So at this daye the late Generall councell of Trident hath cutt of a number off Appeales frō Rome,
                  Sess. 22. Cap 8. &. 10. and committed to the bishoppes the de
                  •
               ermination of most matters, not yet for all that abolishing all Appeales to that See. Thus also S. Cyprian who liued longe before the Nicene councell in a tyme of persecution, when lesse cause of contention was offred, was worthely offended with the rashe and vnruly behauiour off cer
                  ••
               ine which ranne to Rome, and abused the good Pope Cornelius with false and deceitefull tales, as in this epistle S. Ciprian mentioneth. Againe

this semed to be a decree amonge the Africanes euen in S. Ciprians time, that no suche Appeale should be made out off their countre. For so dothe S. Ciprian beginne this sentence, Cum statutum sit omnibut nobis, aequumque ac iustum sit &c. Seing it is decreed amonge vs all,M. Iewelles true dealing. and is also meete and right that the cause shoulde there be hearde where the faulte is committed. etc.  Now M. Iewell hath omitted those first wordes of the sentence, and committed a wilfull Vntruthe, to make the Reader beleue that S. Ciprian spake and reasoned generally against all Appeales, not of any Statute or decree touching the coūtre of Aphrica.  Againe whereas he concludeth of godly Fathers and Bishoppes in olde time, he hath made an Vntrutbe. For he hath brought but one godly Father and Bishop, S. Ciprian by name. The other were Arrian heretikes, no godly Fathers.  Thirdly where he saieth that therefore the Appeales to Rome were misliked, bicause it was the increase of ambitiō, and the open breache of the holy Canons, it is the thirde and that a double Vntruthe. For S. Ciprian which is the only Father here alleaged, speaketh neither off ambition, neither off the breache of any holy Canon.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .370. Vntruthe Slaund.And therefore the Emperour Iustinian foreseing the disorders, that herof might grow, to bridle this ambitious outrages, thought it necessary for his subiectes to prouide a straight lawe in this wise to the contrary· If any of the most holy 
                     •
                  ishoppe, being of one Synode haue any matter off doubte or question amonge them selues, whether it be for ecclesiasticall right,
               
                  Authē. de Sanctiss. episc. Coll. 9. Si quis vero.
                
               or any other matters, first let their Me
                     •
                  ropo
                     •
                  itane wi
                     •
                  h other bishoppes of the same Synod examine and Iudge the cause. But if bothe the parties stande not to this and their iudgements, then let the most holy Patriarche of the same prouince heare and determine their matter accordinge to the Ecclesiasticall lawes and Canons. And neither of the parties may withst
                     •
                  nde his determination.
               The .371. Vntruth. For the Contrary shal now appeare. And immediatly after. Let the Patriarche accor
                     •
                  i
                     •
                  g to the lawes and Canons, make an ende. By these wordes (.371.) al Aappeales be quite cutte of from the See off Rome.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                By these wordes M. Iewell hath made an Vntrue Conclusion.  For first the Pope is one of the foure Patriarches,

and that the chiefest, as your selfe M. Iewell hath allready confessed out of Iustinian. The Pope also is Patriarche to all the west, and at this day is the only Patriarche in respect of the other three Patriarches of Constantinople, Antioche and Aleandria, which now are vnder the Dominon of the Turkes, Therfore by these wordes (M. Iewel) al Appeales are brought to the See of Rome. And thus your Conclusion is quite cutt of.
            
                Againe the decree of the Emperour, referreth the finall iudgement of the Patriarche to the Ecclesiasticall lawes and Canons, as the expresse wordes of the Decree do saie. Now the ecclesiasticall lawes and Canons not only of the Nicene Councell but also of the great Councell of Sardica, bothe holden longe before the time off Iustiniā the Emperour, do allowe an Appellatiō frō al bishops and Patriarches to the See of Rome, as it hath bene before declared. And therefore by the wordes of this Decree, (referring it selfe to the ecclesiasticall lawes and Canons) Appeales are not quite cutt from the See of Rome, but are expressely emplied to the See of Rome.
            
                But for euident proufe, that this Nouell Constitution off Iustinian maketh nothinge at all against Appeales to Rome, let S. Gregory one of the foure Doctours 
                  •
               f Christes Church, and a Father by you M. Iewell against the Title of Vniuersal Bishop, plētifully alleaged, be an Vmper betwene vs. It is to be thought that he vnderstod this Cōstitutiō as wel as M. Iewel. And it is not to be feared that he will vsurpe a more Vniuersal Authorite then was dewe to the See of Rome, who did so much inueigh and was so earnestly bente against the Name or Title of Vniuersal bishop. S. Gregory therefore alleaging this very Nouell Constitution of Iustinian, that Patriarcha secundum Canones & leges Causae proebeat finem, the Patriarche according to the lawes and Canons make an ende of the matter,
                  Lib. 11. Epist. 54. he addeth and saieth. Contra haec si dictum fuerit, quia nec Metropolitam

habuit nec Patriarcham, dicendum est quia a Sede Apostolica, quae Caput est omnium Ecclesiarum, causa audienda ac dirimenda fuerat, sicut & praedictus episcopus peri
                     •
                  sse dignoscitur, qui episcopos alieni Concilij habuit omnino suspectos. If it be here obiected, that the bishop had neither Metropolitane nor Patriarche it is to be saied that the Cause ought to haue bene heard and determined of the See Apostolike, which is the Head of al Churches, euen as also the foresaied Bishop is knowen to haue required, suspecting the iudgment of other Bishops which had no iurisdiction ouer him. Thus farre S. Gregory. By whose iudgement it is euident that though the lawe of Iustinian do saye, that the Patriarche shall ende the matter, yett in the case that the Churche lacketh a Patriarche, as either the Patriarche being dead, or the Churche it selfe exempted and being some peculiar, in that case I saye, the Appeale is to be made to the bishop of Rome, yea from the territory or countre off any other Patriarche. It is to be thought that S. Gregory vnderstode this Nouel Constitution of Iustinian as well as M. Iewell dothe. And verely though S. Gregory had not expressed that case, wherein the decision of the matter ought to be ended before the bishop of Rome, notwithstanding the lawe of Iustinian commaunded that the Patriarche shoulde ende it, yet other lawes teache vs that such a case being omitted, the commō lawe leseth not therefore her force. Therefore the lawe saieth.
                  L. si extraneus ff. d. condict. caus. dat. & l. com. modissin
                        •
                     è ff. d. lib. & posth
                        •
                     mis.
                
               Casus omissus relinquitur in dispositione Iuris communis. The Case that is omitted is lefte to be disposed by the Common lawe. Nowe the Common lawe of the Churche being such (as by the Canons of the Coūcel of Nice, and of Sardica it hath before bene proued) that Appeales from all countres might be made to Rome, though Iustinian after made a lawe that the Patriache shoulde ende the matter, yet in case that there is at that time no Patriarche (which case S. Gregory putteth) or that the party will yet

farder Appeale to the See of Rome (as also in the case of S. Gregory, praedictus episcopus petijsse dignoscitur the foresaied bishop is knowē to haue required) in these cases I saie, that particular lawe of Iustiniā taketh not awaye the Cōmon lawe of the whole Churche enacted in Generall Councelles. As for example. Frō al Courtes of the Realme in ciuil matters, Appeales maye be made to the Common Place. And in that Courte such matters shall be ended. Yet see we not that from thence such matters are remoued to the Kinges Benche? Yea and frō the kinges Benche to a Parliament? But nowe. Shal the particular lawe of the one, take away the Common lawe of the other? Or shall it not therefore be lawefull to Appeale from the Common Place to the Kinges Benche? Or bicause you maye App
                  •
               ale to the Kinges Benche, be therefore all Appeales quite cutte of from the Parliament?
            To conclude therefore, though the lawe of Iustinian saied, Let the Patriarche according to the lawes and Canons make an ende, yet S. Gregory alleaging that very lawe and wordes of Iustinian, affirmeth that in a Case, a Sede Apostolica causa audienda ac dirimenda fuerat: the cause ought to haue bene hearde and determined of the See Apostolike. And thus much is M. Iewell furdered by this lawe. M. Iewell saieth that Iustinian by this decree prouided a straight lawe against Appeales to Rome. S. Gregory saieth, notwithstanding this lawe, the matt
                     •
                  r ought to be hearde and determined of the See Apostolike. M. Iewell saieth by these wordes all Appeales be quite cutt of from the see of Rome.
               The .372. Vntruthe For this lawe speaketh not of Ecclesiasticall matters. C
                        •
                     d. de Satr
                        •
                     sanctis Ecclesijs omni.
                S. Gregory saieth of that See, notwitstanding these wordes: Which is Head of all Churches. So properly M. Iewell alleageth his lawes, and so well he vnderstandeth them.
            Likewise the Emperours Honorius and Theodosius haue taken Appeales awaye from the bishoppes of Rome, and haue commaunded the same to be entred before the bishop and Synode of Cōstātinople. The lawe is written thus. All innouation set a parte, we commaunde that the olde

order and auncient ecclesiasticall Canons which hitherto haue holden be kepte still through all the prouinces of Illiricum, 
                     •
                  hat if any matter of doubte happen to arise, it be putt ouer to be determ
                     •
                  ned by the holy iudgement, and assemblie of bishoppes, not without the discretion of 
                     •
                  he most Reuerende the bishop of the Citie of Constantinople, which Citie * Nowe enioyeth the prerogatiue of Olde Rome.
               The .373. Vntruthe In falsyfying the text of the lawe.
            
            If you will be tried by the lawe M. Iewell, vnderstande the lawe, as the lawyers doe, and then this lawe shall make nothinge against Appeales to Rome but rather confirme the same. The lawe saieth, All this is spoken of ciuil matters and not of Churche matters. For whereas in the next title before,
                  Glosa in verbo: Prae rogat. Cod. d
                        •
                      summa T
                        •
                     init. e
                        •
                      fid Cath. N
                        •
                     s reddentes.
                Rome is called by the Emperour Caput omnium ecclesiarum, the Head of all Churches, the glose maketh argument here, how then Constantinople hath the prerogatiue of Rome. His answer is. Ibi in eccl
                     •
                  sia quòd subsit: Hic in ciuitate quòd non subsit. There the lawe saieth in matters of the Churche it is subiect to Rome, here the lawe saieth, in matters of the Citie it is n
                  •
               t subiect. And to this purpose he alleageth diuers lawes, which I leaue to the lawyers to examine. Truly Chrysostom who was bishop of Constantinople in the time of this Honorius, appealed to the bishop of Rome, as it shall anon appeare.
            Here M. Harding may not forgeate,The 374. Vntruthe For the Churche of Cōstā
                  tinople is not in Al Respectes of preeminence &c. that the Churche of Constantinople had as great prerogatiue in al respectes of praeeminence, Superiorite, and vniuersalitie of charge, as euer had the Churche of Rome. Wherefore if the bishopp of Rome were Head of the vniuersall Churche, it must needes folowe, that the bishop of Constantinople was likewise Head of the Vniuersall Churche.
            Here M. Iewell may not forgeate, that as before (pag. 242) so nowe againe he deceaueth his reader with a generall conclusion vpon a particular proufe. The lawe speaketh of A prerogatiue, and that as the glosse expoundeth in ciuill matters only. M. Iewell concludeth All respectes off praeeminence, Superiorite and vniuersalite off Charge. The lawe speaketh in the singular numbre, M. Iewell concludeth a pluralite. The lawe speaketh of 
                  Vid, glosam in verbo, vetu
                     
                        •
                     tatem, v
                     
                        •
                     bi supra.
                speciall priuilege. M. Iewell concludeth an absolute and equall authorite.

By such false weightes falshood woulde beare downe Truthe.
            Againe M. Iewel may not here forgeate that in this sentence of the prerogatiue of Constantinople, he hath shifted in the worde Nowe, more then is in the lawe to make the Reader beleue, that such prerogatiue was then geuen presently by that decree of the Emperours, whereas contrarely the whole Lawe tendeth only, ad vetustatem & canones pristinos ecclesiasticos seruandos, that the olde priuileges (for so the glose expoundeth Vetustatem,) and auncient Canons of the Church might be kept. Thus M. Iewel by multiplying Vntruthes deceiueth his Reader, and maintaineth his heresies.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               
                  Cod. de episcopis & cler. Omnes.
               And againe the Emperour Leo in plaine wordes. All that be or hereafter shall be Priestes or clerkes of the Catholike Faieth of what degree so euer they be, Monkes also, let them not in any 
               
                  Ciuile Actions. 
                
               Ciuile Actions be drawen forthe to forren Iudgemente by the summon or commaundement of any Iudge more or lesse: neither let them be d
                     •
                  iuen to come forthe of either the prouince, or the Countre w
                     •
                  ere they dwell.
            
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
                What thought M. Iewell when he wrote this? Thought he that none but fooles or his frendes woulde reade it, none but either such as coulde not perceiue the matter, or such as seing it well enough would yet winke at it? Thought he that his sayinges and allegations, should neuer be examined? For what dothe this lawe make against Appeales to Rome? Reade ouer the lawe gentle Reader. Thou shalt see, it speaketh only of immunites and liberties of the clergy in ciuill matters. And will M. Iewell reason thus?
            
               The Emperour enacted liberties for the clergy in ciuill matters: Ergo he forebadde vtterly all appeales to Rome in ecclesiasticall matters? If he woulde reason thus, he neded not to haue sought so farre as to the Empire of this Leo for a lawe, he might haue foūde lawes enough at home in our owne countre for such immunites and liberties of the clergy, and yet no embarring of Appeales to Rome. Wherefore when he concludeth vpon this

lawe so saddely and stoutely, saying:
            Thus, whether the Action were ecclesiasticall or Ciuil, the partie was to be hearde within his owne prouince,The .375. Vntruthe For the lawe speak
                     •
                  th only of Ciuill actions. and coulde not be forced to a 
                  •
               eare abrode,
            He telleth vs the waye to London by his potte ful of plommes that hange at his saddle bowe. For the lawe telleth him of Ciuill matters: and he telleth vs of Ecclesiasticall matters. Yet M. Iewell with his halting arguments limpeth on, and saieth.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Certainely what good liking S. Bernarde had herein, it appeareth by his wordes. For thus he writeth to Eugenius the bishop of Rome.
                  Bernard ad Eugenium de Considerat. lib. 3. 
               VVhen wil
                     •
                   thy consideration aw
                     •
                  ke to beholde this so greate confusion of appeales? Ambition and pride striueth 
                     •
                  hrough thee to reigne in the Churche. These Appeales be made beside all 
                     •
                  awe and Right, beside all maner and good order. It was a
                     •
                  uised for a remedie. It is founde turned to deathe. That was triakle, is chaunged in to poyson. I speake off the murmuring and common complaint
                     •
                  s off the Churches. They cō
                  plaine they be maimed and dismembred. There be either no Churches or very fewe, but either smarte at this plage or stande in feare off it.
            
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                This argument halteth downe right in dede. S. Bernarde complaineth of the abuse of Appeales to Rome. Ergo there lay no Appeales to Rome. What? Hath M. Iewel forgot where aboute he went? Or thinketh he by Appeales to Rome, to conclude no Appeales to Rome? Or if it do not this conclude, what maketh it here? Vnlesse he be so beside him selfe in this passion of contradiction, that Appeales and no Appeales, a thinge and no thinge is all one. Certainely what good liking Saint. Bernard had in the Authorite of the See of Rome and off Appeales to be made thither, it shall appeare by his wordes, which are these, writen to Pope Innocentius. 
               
                  Bernard
                        •
                     s Epist. 190 
               Oportet ad v
                     •
                  st
                     •
                  um referri Apostolatum pericula quaeque & scandal a eme
                     •
                  gentia in regno dei, ea praesertim quae de fide cōtingunt. Dignum namque arbitror ibi potissimum res
                     •
                  r
                     •
                  iri Damna fidei, vbi non possit fides sentire defectū. Haec quippe huius praerogatiua Sedis. Al dangers

and offenses rising in the kingdome of God must be referred to your Apostleship, those especially which concerne the Faithe. For there doe I thinke it meete, that the decaie of faithe be amended, where the faithe it selfe can not faile. For that is the prerogatiue of this See. Nowe if matters of faithe must all be brought to the Iudgement of the Pope by S. Bernardes minde, thinke you that Appeales to that See, be thought by him vnlawfull? Againe the wordes whiche M. Iewell alleageth. Repertum ad remedium reperitur ad mortem. That whiche was found for a remedie, is founde turned to deathe, doe they not declare the right of Appeales, but blame the Abuse thereof? No we vpon this Abuse M. Iewel concludeth thus.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 376. Vntruthe as shall appeare.This is that worthy grounde whereupon M. Harding hath layed the first foundation of his Supremacie.
            Vntruthe. For his first foundation was vpon holy Scripture, interpreted by the holy Fathers, namely S. Gregory, to whose place you haue not answered M. Iewell, as I haue before proued. Now forthe with your Vntrue Conclusion.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .377.378. and diuers other Vntruthes as shall appeare.A confusion, a deathe, a poyson, a terrour, a dismembring of the Churches, p
                  •
               actis
                  •
               d against Lawe against right, against manner, and against good order: misliked by the holy Fathers, disallowed by godly Councelles: and vtterly abrogated by sundrie worthy and noble princes. This is M. Hardinges principal foundation of his Primacie.
            Here is a heape of Great, Mighty, Maine, Huge wordes to Amase the Reader: But in dede a Fardle of Open, Clere, and Manifest Vntruthes to Deceiue the Reader. For the Confusion, the Death, the Poyson, the Terrour, the Dismembring of the Churches (that S. Bernarde speaketh of) is all of the Abuses in Appeales, not off the Lawfull and dewe Appeales. Againe Appeales were not practised Against lawe, Against right, Against manner, and against good order, as M. Iewell saieth, but Beside Lawe and right, Beside all manner and good order, as S. Bernarde

saieth. Nowe as M. Iewelles Philosophie can teach him that many thinges are done Beside Nature which yet are not Against Nature, as the Course off the Planetes from the East to the West, the Bringing forthe of Monsters, and such like thinges, so Daily Experience teacheth vs that many thinges are done Beside the lawe, which yet are not Ag
                  •
               inst the lawes: as when good lawes are ill abused. Last of all it hath bene proued that Appeales absolutely and generally haue not bene misliked by holy Fathers (vnlesse Arrians be holy Fathers) neither dissallowed by general Councelles, but rather approued and commaunded by the same, and lest of all abrogated and abolished by any Princes that M. Iewel hath yet named. Thus vpon a number of Vntrue Premisses, no maruall if he inferre a number of Vntrue Conclusions. Now where he saieth last of al. This is M. Hardinges principall foū
                  dation of his Primacie, I must tell him againe. This is a principal Vntruthe twise repeted in one conclusion, as hath bene before shewed. Thus farre hath M. Iewel ranged aboute Appeales, and we for Iustifying of the general Vntruth noted hereupō, haue folowed the Course, and founde oute the Foxe. Verely a deceiteful and wily Foxe, ful of lies and Vntruthes. Now he cometh to the Allegations off D. Hardinge for Appeales. And here lettinge slippe the Appeales of Theodoretus to Leo the Pope, and of Athanasius to Pope Iulius, noting thereupon none Vntruthe, where no Colour of Vntruthe could be pretended, he teaseth the Appeale of Chrysostom to Innocentius, bicause he founde a hole in the euid
                  •
               nce, as he thought. But first let vs see the wordes of D. Harding.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               In the cause and defence of Iohn Chrysostome, these bishops came from Constantinople to Innocentius the Pope, Pansophus bishop of Pisidia, Pappus of Syria, Demetrius of the seconde Galatia, and Eugonius of Phrygia. These

were suters of Chrysostome. He him selfe treated his matter with Innocentius by writing. In his Epistle amonge other thinges he writeth thus. Least this outragious confusion runne ouerall, and beare rule euery vvhere, vvrite (I pray you) and determine by your Authorite, suche vvicked actes done in our absence, and vvhen vve vvithdrevve not oure selues from iudgement, to be of no force, as by their ovvne nature truly they be voide, and vtterly none. Furthermore, vvho haue committed these euills (107) put you them vnder the censure of the Churche. And as for vs, sithe that vve are innocent, neither conuicte, neither founde in any defaulte, nor proued guilty of any crime, geue commaundemēt that vve be restored to our Churches againe, that vve may enioie the accustomed charite, and peace vvith our brethern. Innocentius after that he vnderstode the whole matter, pronounced and decreed the iudgment of Theophilus, that was against Chrysostome, to be voide and of no force. This whole tragedie is at large sett forthe by Palladius bishop of Helenopolis, In vita Ioannis Chrysostomi, who liued at that time.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                The .107. Vntruthe. S. Chrysostomes wordes Vntruly reported.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                The lewdenesse of M. Iewell is such (gentle Reader) in this Vntruthe, that no wordes can sufficiently expresse it. This to be so, thy selfe shalt Iudge, if thou but marke the text of D. Harding aboue alleaged, and the demeanour of M. Iewell, in

his text touching this Vntruthe, which (after his generall discourse against Appeales before answered and discussed) foloweth in this wise.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .380 Vntruth. For not out of Chrysostomes own workes, as M. Iewell supposeth.But it is most certaine and out of all question, that Chrysostome Appealed to Innocentius. For M. Harding hath here alleaged (380.) his owne wordes.
            Marke gentle Reader how M. Iewel euen at the beginning deceiueth thee. For vnderstande, that D. Harding alleageth not Chrysostomes owne wordes, out of Chrysostomes owne workes, but out off Palladius bishop of Helenopolis in vita Ioannis Chrisostomi, writing the life of Chrysostom, and reporting in his life the wordes which D. Harding alleaged. And thinke not that this is a shift to auoide an incōuenience, or that M. Iewel knewe not so much. For D. Harding hauing alleaged the wordes of Chrysostome and the whole maner of his Appeale to Rome, he nameth expressely his Author from whence he toke it, in these wordes. This whole tragedie is at large sett forthe by Palladius bishop of Helenopolis, In vita Ioannis Chrysostomi, who liued at that time. In these wordes (as I saied) D. Harding expressed his Author to be Palladius in the life of Chrysostom, not the Epistle of Chrysostom him selfe, commonly extant in his workes. This being so expressed of D. Harding, what cause had M. Iewell to note an Vntruthe in the Margin, and to declaime so against him in his text, noting it also there again in the Margin, M. Harding falsifieth, and vntruly translateth S. Chrysostom, what cause, I saie, had he to doe so,The .381. Vntruthe Slaunderous. but that either very malice pricked him so depely to dissemble, or at the lest, very grosse and rashe ignoraunce made him so fondely to talke? For beholde howe earnestly and saddely he prosecuteth the matter.
            I graunte M. Harding hath here alleaged Chrysostome,A Truth of M, Iewell. but in suche faithefull and trusty sorte, as Pope Zosimus sometimes alleaged

the Councell of Nice.
            This is well exemplified M. Iewell. For euen as you haue villainously slaundred that holy Pope Zosimus (for so S. Augustin him selfe called him oftentimes after he was dead, being one of those Africane bishops, which you imagine to haue taken him in open forgerie,
                  August. de G
                        •
                     a
                        ••
                     a Ch
                        •
                     isti. lib. 2. cap. 2.6 7.8. 
                     〈◊〉
                   17. In epist. ad Bonifaciū.
                and the Africane bishops in their letters to Bonifacius next successour to this Zosimus do call him Beatae memoriae Zosimum Zosimus of blessed memory, and Venerabilis memoriae Zosimum Zosimus of Reuerent memorie) euen as I saie you haue villainously slaundred this holy Pope Zosimus of blessed and Reuerent memory, folowing therein your blinde guides of Magdeburge (as hath before bene declared) so you haue in this place manifestly and wilfully slaundered D. Harding.In the .97 Vntruthe For he in this place alleaged not any wordes out of Crysostomes workes, but he alleaged the facte and wordes of Chrysostom out of Palladius (as he tolde you expressely M. Iewell) which wrote his life. Out of your owne wordes therefore M. Iewel this is a clere Cōclusion to proue you and all your felowes notorious slaūderous of that holy Pope Zosimus in that infamous matter of the Popes Forgerie. D. Harding hath here faithefully and truly alleaged Chrysostome, e
                  •
               go Zosimus faithefully and truly alleaged the Councell of Nice.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Good Christiā Reader, if thou haue Chrysostome, peruse this place and weigh well his wordes. If thou h
                  •
               ue him not, yet be not ouerhastie of belefe.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                Good Christian Reader if thou haue D. Hardinges booke or M. Iewelles either, weigh well his wordes, If thou haue them not, yet consider the wordes of D. Harding, as I haue before wholy and thouroughly alleaged them, and be not ouer hastie of belefe. For thou shallt finde that D. Harding alleaged no wordes out of Chrysostōs workes. But he alleaged the letters of Chrysostom as it is recorded by Palladius in vita Ioannis Chrysostomi, in the life of Chrysostom.
            
               M. Hardinges dealing with thee herein is not plaine.
            M. Iewelles dealing with thee herein is a very plaine mockerie.The .382. Vntruthe Slaunderous. Epist. Chrysost. ad Innocentium Tom. 5.
            
            The very wordes of Chrysostome in latine stande Thus. Ne confusio haec omnem quae sub caelo est nationem inuadat, obsecro vt scribas quòd hec tam inique facta & absentibus nobis, & non declinantibus iudicium, non habeant ro
                     •
                  ur. Si ut neque natura sua hab
                     •
                  nt. Illi 
                     •
                  utem qui iniqué egeru
                     •
                  , paenae ecclesiasticorum legum 
                     •
                  u
                     ••
                  aceant, No
                     •
                  is vero qui nec con
                     ••••
                  , nec redarguti nec hab
                     ••
                   vt rei sumus, lite
                     •
                  i
                     •
                   vestr
                     •
                  s & charitate vestra, a
                     ••
                  orumque omnium quarum ante societate f
                     •
                  uebamur, 
                     〈◊〉
                  . which wordes into english maye truly be translated thus, Lest this Confusion ouerrunne all nations vnder heauen, I praye thee write (The .383. Vntruthe in false translating, as it shalanō appeare. 
               or signifie) vnto them, that these thinges so vniustely done, I being absent, and yet not f
                     ••
                  eing Iudgement, b
                     •
                   of no force, as in dede of their owne nature they be of none. an
                     •
                   (write) that they that haue done these thinges so wrongefully, be punished by the lawes of the Churche. And graunt you, that we that are neither conuicted, nor reproued, nor founde guilty, may enioy your letters and your loue, and likewise the letters an
                     •
                   loue of al others, whose feloweship we enioyed before. In these fewe wordes M. Harding hath notably falsyfyed three places, quite altering the wordes that he founde, and shuffling in and interlacing other wordes of his owne. For these wordes in M. Hardinges translation, that seme to signifie Authorite in the bishop of Rome, and to importe the appeale,
                  The .384 Vntruthe Slaunderous three wayes.
                  The 385. Vntruthe For these wordes are oll to be founde in Chrysostom.
                  The .386 Vntruthe Slaunderous.
               
            
            
               VVrite and determine by your Authoritie: Put you them vnder the Censure off the Churche. Geue Commaundement that we be restored to our Churches,
            
            M. Hardinge falsyfieth and vntruly translateth Sainte Chrysostome.
            These wordes I saye, are (385.) not founde in Chrysostom, neither in the Greke, nor in the Latine, but only are pretely conueyed in by M. Hardinge the better to fournish and fashion vp his Appeale. He (386) seeth wel, this matter wil not stād vpright, without the manifeste Corruption and falsyfying of the doctours. This therfore is M. Hardings Appeale, and not Chrysostōs.
            Loe: you haue good Readers the whole and longe processe of M. Iewelles Accusation against D. Harding, with his Note in the Margin, whereby he geueth the Sentence, and pronoūceth the party Guilty. You haue the whole texte of Chrysostom as M. Iewell auoucheth D. Hardinge to alleage him. You haue sene the three places noted in the whiche he saieth, D. Harding Hathe quite al
                     •
                  ered the wordes that he founde, and hathe shuffled

and interlaced other wordes off his owne. Beholde then now gentle Readers the words of Chrysostom in Latine as they do lye in Palladius writing the life of Chrysostom, whom Doctor Harding Namely and Expressely alleaged for his Authour in this matter, as we haue often saied. The wordes alleaged by M. Iewell in Latin, are translated of Erasmus or some such late Writer of our daies. The wordes whiche nowe we will alleage, are translated out of Chrysostomes Greke Epistle to Pope Innocentius, by Palladius sometimes the scholer off Chrysostome him selfe, and a lerned Bishoppe off Helenopolis. Whereby it is easy to be iudged, whiche translation is worthy of more credit. Palladius therefore writing the whole life of Chrysostom his master, and cōprising in that the story of his great trouble, and banishmēt, in the which he Appealed to Pope Innocētius, recordeth the very letter that Chrysostō sent to Innocentius,
                  Palladius in vita Ioan. Chrysostom. Et extat in Aloysio Lipoma no. Tom. 2. lib. 3. par. 2. and saieth. Erat autem epistolae Ioannis eiusmodi series. The tenour of the epistle that Chrysostom wrote was thus. Thē foloweth the whole epistle, euen as it is in his workes cōmonly set forth, though in a translation somewhat diuerse. The wordes that pertaine to this matter alleaged by D. Harding in english, doe stande thus in the Latin. Ne igitur immanis ista Confusio cuncta percurrat, & vbique dominetur, scribite precor, & authoritate vestra decernite, huiusmodi iniqué gesta nobis absentibus & iudicium nō declinantibus, nullius esse roboris, sicut per suam naturam sunt profecto & irrita & nulla. Porro qui talia gessere, eos ecclesiasticae censurae subijcite. Nos autem insontes neque conuictos, neque deprehensos, neque vllius criminis reos comprobatos, Ecclesijs nostris iubete restitui, vt charitate frui, ac pace cum fratribus nostis consuetae possimus. The whole and perfit english of this latin is in the text of D. Harding aboue alleaged, placed in the beginning of this Vntruthe. Nowe in this text of Palladius, the wordes which by M. Iewelles owne iudgement do se
                     •
                  e to importe the Appeale, the wordes which he saieth D. Harding hath quite altered, and shuffled, and

interlaced other wordes off his owne, these wordes I saie,. VVrite and determine by your Authorite. 2. Put you them vnder the Censure of the Churche, Geue commaundement that we be restored to our Churches, are euidently and manifestly to be founde. For the first. Scribite & authoritate vestra decernite: is in plaine english: VVrite and determine by your Authorite. For the seconde,
                  M. Iewelles Vntruthes particulary layed forthe. 
               Eos ecclesiasticae Censurae subijcite, is likewise in plaine grāmarian english. Put you thē vnder the Cēsure of the Church. For the third and laste, Ecclesijs nostris iubete restitui, is in right good english. Geue commaundement that we be restored to our Churches. Therefore where M. Iewell saieth, In these fewe wordes M. Harding hath notably falsified three places, it is nowe euident, he hath not falsified one, but M. Iewel hath made a slaunderous and triple Lie.  Where he saieth of D. Harding quite altering the wordes that he founde, it appeareth nowe, he hath altered not one, but englished them al truly and faithefully as he founde them, euen as truly as Zosimus alleaged the Councll of Nice.  Where he saieth of D. Harding: shuffling in and interlacing other wordes of his owne, euery man seeth nowe he hath neither shuffled nor interlaced any one worde more then is in the epistle of Chrysostom, as Palladius his named and expressed Author reporteth it.  Where he saieth, that these wordes are not to be founde in Chrisostom, we see nowe they are founde there by one of his owne scholers, Palladius bishopd of Helenopolis.  Where he saieth, But onely are pretely conueyed in by M. Hardinge, the Reader seeth nowe, they are truly alleaged out of Palladius, not by him conueyed att all.  Last of all where as M. Iewell hath blased in his margin, this note. M. Harding falsifieth, and vntruly translateth S. Chrysostom, the cōtrary doth nowe appeare, and M. Iewel is founde falsely, and vntruly to charge D. Harding and to haue auouched therein  six Manifest, Notorious, and Slaunderous Vntruthes.
            But nowe that D. Harding is thus clerely discharged, let vs cō
               sider M. Iewelles owne translation of Chrysostomes wordes,

whether he haue not played a lewde parte him selfe therein, the better to disprouue the Appeale of Chrysostom. Whereas the latin of Chrysostom hath, Obsecro vt sc
                     •
                  ibas, M. Iewell translaieth it thus. I praye thee write (or signifie) v
                     •
                  to them. In whiche translation he putteth his glose to Chrysostomes text and expoundeth the Writing that Chrisostom requireth, to be a Signification, whiche Palladius Chrysostomes owne scholer translateth, Scribite & authoritate vestra decernite: write and determine by your Authorite, expounding that Writing to be a determination by the Popes Authorite. And thus M. Iewell by his wronge translation hath 
                  •
               ltered the meaninge of Chrysostom m
                  •
               king that to be a Signification to the offenders, whiche the Author would haue to be A determination and decision by waie of Authorite ouer and against the offenders. And that this was the very meaning of Chrysostom, and that he Appealed in dede to Innocentius the Pope, not only by the wordes of his epistle (as Palladius reciteth them) it is euidēt, but much more by the whole Processe, and issue of the matter, as it shall nowe appeare.
            It is euidēt by the Ecclesiastical History and by other wordes of this Epistle,That S. Chrisostome Patriar
                     •
                  he of Constantinople Appealed to Pope Innocentius. that Chrysostom being bishopp of Constantinople and wrongfully depriued by Theophilus of Alexandria, and other bishops of Aegypt, appealed in this Case to Innocentius the Pope of Rome, and desired his letters not for Signification of the euill facte, as M. Iewell woulde haue it to seme, but for a Determination and Sentence Iudicial against the offenders, as D. Harding hath alleaged it. First that he Appealed to Innocentius being nowe the second time banished and depriued, it appeareth by his owne wordes in this epistle. Quia non satis est plangere,
               
                  Chrysostomus in epist. 1. a
                        •
                      Innocenti
                        •
                     
                     ̄ 
                     
                        •
                     om. 5. 
               sed opus etiam vt cura geratu et spectetur qua ratione, & quo consilio grauissima illa tempes
                     •
                  as sedetur, proinde necessarium esse duximus vt persuadeatur Demetrio, Pāsophio, Pappo, & Eugonio, Dominis meis maximé venerabilibus, pijsque episcopis,

relictis negocijs proprijs, pelagose committere, susceptaque longinqua peregrinatione, ad vestrā properare charitatē de omnibus vos manifesté docētes, quo quātocyus rebus succurratur. Bicause it is not inough to lamēt, but it is nedeful also to labour and cōsider how and by what meanes, this most greauous storm may be alayed, therfore we haue thought it Necessary to intreate Demetrius, Pansophius, Pappus and Eugonius my most Reuerent Lords and godly bishops, that leauing their own affaires they wil take the seas and this longe trauail to come spedely to your goodnesse, certifying you at large of the whole matter, to thē
               tent these matters may the sooner be redressed. Here we see Chrysostom being wrongfully depriued of his bishoprike (for these letters he wrote in banishment,
                  Nicephorus li. 13. ca. 19 as appeareth well by Nicephorus) sendeth foure of his bishops to the Pope to instruct him off the whole matter concerning his depriuation, and to haue his speedy helpe and succour, for the Redresse of the same. And therefore he repeteth his request againe and saieth. Sicut prius dixi, ea quae perperam fiunt, non solum deploranda, sed & corrigenda sunt, & ideo charitatem vestrā obsecro, vt prouocetur ad condolendum faciendumque omnia quo mala haec sistantur. As I saied before, faultes committed are not only to be lamēted but to be Corrected. And therefore I beseche your goodnesse, to be moued hereat, bothe to lamente with vs, and also to doe all such thinges, whereby these trobles may be appaised. Lo Chrisostom writeth not to the Pope only to haue him lament the matter, and to Signify only to the offenders, that they had very euil done but also to Cor
                  •
               ect and amende the matter, and so to alaie the trouble of the Church. He wrote not to the Pope desiring his letters of Cōplaint only, as that he should write to Theophilus and the other Bishops of Aegypt which iniuriously had expelled Chrysostō, after this sorte. I vnderstande you haue done this and this, I am very sory for it. I pray you amend

it: this is not wel done. This doth not become you: your doinges be wrongeful, I tell you so and put you to knowledge thereof. This was not all M. Iewel, as you would make it.  1. The sending of those foure bishops to Rome. 2. Their longe and dā
               gerous trauail.  3. The letters of Chrysostom. 4. The suite also of the whole clergy of Cōstātinople by their priuat letters, and of.  5. Fourty other bishops by their letters (as Nicephorus reporteth) writen and sent to this Innocentius Pope of Rome, was not all for such a bare significatiō as M. Iewel imagineth, but (as Chrysostom him selfe saieth) vt quantocyus rebus succurr
                     •
                  tur, that the matters might haue a sp
                  •
               edy redresse: and againe Vt corrigantur ea quae perperam fiunt: that the faultes and trespasses might be Corrected, that the breache of the Canons, which Chrysostom 
                  C
                        •
                     nt
                        ••
                      omnes Can
                        ••
                     es & l
                        •
                     ge
                        •
                     . And 
                     
                        •
                     ont
                        •
                     a to
                        •
                      ac 
                        〈◊〉
                      can
                        •
                     nes.
                twise in that epistle repeteth, might be punished. This Chrysostom wrote and desired by these letters, as it shall yet better appeare by that which ensued hereoff.
            The Pope Innocentius at the sight of those letters of Chrysostom and of the other bishops and clergy of Constantinople,
                  Nicephosrus lib. 13· cap. 32. cap 33. first wrote backe to Chrysostom and to his clergy letters of comforte and exhortation off patience in that trouble. Forthewith he called a Synod, and hauing made a determination of the matter, sent the same to Constantinople, by the handes of Aemylius bishop of Beneuentum, of Cathegius, and Gaudentius, Valentius and Bonifacius priestes, the Popes legates in that behalfe to the Emperour Arcadius, by whose meanes Chrysostome was expelled.
                  Li. 8. cap vlt.
                Sozomene mencioneth fiue bishops and two Priests to haue gone in this legacy to the Emperour. These men going on their iourney were stayed in Grece by a Tribune there by the commaundement of Eudoxia the wicked Emperesse who had bene al the cause of Chrysostomes trouble,
                  Leo epist. 
                  
                     ••
                  . and not suffred to passe by Thessalonica, to deliuer the Popes letters to Anysius the bishop of that place the

Popes Ordinary legat in that part of the East Church. After this sorte being shifted by that Officier in to two shippes, they were brought to Cōstantinople, and in one of the suburbes of that cytye cast in preson: where after they were racked and greuously tormented, to force them to geue vp their letters brought from the Pope. Which when they vtterly refused to doe, saying they would not deliuer the letters but to the Emperours owne handes, to whome they were sent, at the last one of the Emperours Courte, Valerius by name, to gratifie (as he thought) the Prince, wronge out of the good bishops handes by fine force the letters, breaking also the thomme of him which helde them, taking away withall certaine plate of siluer, and other their necessary prouisions: hoping to force them by extreme necessite to yelde to the Emperesse. This being done, and they yet refusing to yelde, the next day after certain other came to these poore emprisonned bishops, sent partly from the Emperesse Eudoxia, partly from Atticus who occupied the roome of Chrysostom, ostering them three thousand pieces of mony for a bribe, vpon the condition they would communicate with Atticus and forsake Chrysostom. All which they yet refusing to doe, and seing no other remedy, intreating they might be dismissed and suffred to returne to Rome, the foresaied Courtyar Valerius, shifting them out of preson in to an olde filthy and broken vessell, sett them so on the seas, to returne to Rome or to perish by the waye. After foure moneths trauaill and sayling, they returned nothwithstanding, safe to Rome, and declared to the Pope the whole tragedie of their trouble, the whole maner and order thereof.
                  Li: 
                     •
                  3. cap. 32. & 33. Thus Farre out of Nicephorus in his Ecclesiasticall History allmost worde for worde.
            Let vs now consider I beseche you M. Iewel what maner of letters these were, that,  1. Chrysostō.  2. his clergy, and . 3. other fourty bishops first sente to the Pope .4. that caused those foure

bishops sent with the letters to trauail frō Cōstātinople to Rome  5. that made a Synod to be called in Rome,  6. and the decree of that Synod to be sēt by solēne legats to Cōstātinople,  7. such waite laied in the waie to stop the Popes answer,  8. suche violē
               ce vsed against his legates to force thē,  9. suche greate bribery to tempt thē, whether al these matters I saie concurred, either to obtaine a letter of Signification from the Pope or to stoppe a letter of Signification sent by the Pope, as you M. Iewel woulde haue it only to seme. If al these Circumstaunces and the very wordes of Chrysostōs epistle aboue alleaged be not sufficiēt to proue an Appeale, let vs consider yet farder what folowed after all this turmoyle and tossing. What thinke we did Chrysostom him selfe remayning all this time in banishment, after he vnderstode of this outrage committed? What did the Pope Innocentius him selfe? You shall heare M. Iewel, and by that you shall iudge your selfe (if any truthe or indifferency be in you) whether this were but a matter of Signification only, and not a Iust and right Appeal.  10. Chrysostom vnderstanding of these matters wrote a seconde letter to the Pope Innocentius: In the which he hath these wordes. Quantum in vestra pietate fitum fuit &c.
               
                  In epist. 2. ad Innocentium 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . 5. 
               As much as laie in your goodnesse, all thinges had nowe ben appaised and amended, and all offences had bene taken away, and the Churches had bene in quyet, all thinges had prospered, lawes had not ben despised, nor the decrees of the Fathers violated. But th
                     •
                  y yet procede in their wicked dedes, and as thoughe they had hithe
                     •
                   to offended nothing, so they labour to passe their former faultes with newe mischiefes. But I will not particularly re
                     •
                  ken vp such thinges as they haue in this meane while committed. For so I should passe not only the bōdes of a letter, but also the measure of an history. Howbeit I beseche your diligence, that although they haue dealed troublesomly, and haue procured to them selues incurable deseases, scant able to be cured by p
                     •
                  naunce, that yet notwithstanding, if they will receiue medicine, they be not fard
                     •
                  r vexed, 
               
                  Neque cae
                        •
                     uabij
                     
                        •
                     iantur.
                
               nor excommunicated, considering

the greatnesse and amplenesse of the worke. For this matter toucheth all most the whole worlde. Thus farre Chrysostom commending first his Fatherly diligence (as you haue hearde) and yet beseching him not to vse the extremitie, with the offenders, being in dede so many in numbre, and great of Authorite. For not only Theophilus the Patriarche of Alexandria, and a great number of bishops of Aegypt and otherwhere, but also the Emperour and Empresse with a great parte of the whole Courte and Citie of Constātinople were intangled in this crime of dissension and outrage.
            And truly Innocentius the Pope as longe as Chrysostom liued in banishment (which was for the space of three yer
                  •
               s and more) vsed no such extremite, but folowed the aduise of Chrysostom, seeking by faire meanes to quyet the matter.
                  Nicephorus li. 13. Cap. 30. But after that Chrysostom by the anguish and misery of his banishement departed this life, and all the good people of Constātinople that fauoured Chrysostom, by sharpe edictes of the Emperour and other meanes continewed in great trouble and vexation, Innocentius the Pope vsed the .11. Finall Sentence of the Appeale, and excommunicated bothe the Emperour and his wife, and also Theophilus of Alexandria with certaine other bishops. The tenour of the Popes letter cōtayning the excommunication beginneth thus.
                  Idem li. 13. Cap. 34. 
               Vox sanguinis fratris mei Ioannis clamat ad deum contra te, o Imperator, sicut quondam A bell ius
                     •
                  i contra parricidam Cain: & is modis omnibus vindicabitur. The Noyse of the bloude of my brother Iohn Chrysostom crieth vnto God against thee, ò Emperour, as of olde time the bloud of the Iuste Abel cried against Cain the murderer: And this Bloud shall by all meanes be reuenged. After this the Pope declaring him more particularly the outrage and iniury cōmitted against that blessed and lerned Father Chrysostom, he cometh to the wordes of excommunication, and saieth. Itaque ego minimus & peccator, cui thronus Magni Apostoli Petri cr
                     •
                  ditus 
                     •
                  st,
               
                  Ibidem
               
               
               segrego & reijcio te & illam &c. Therefore I the lest of all men and a sinner, hauing yet the Seate of 
                     •
                  he great Apostle Peter committed vnto me, doe separat and remoue thee and her (he meaneth the Emperesse) from the receiuing of the imaculat Mysteries of Christ our God. Also euery bishop or any other of the clergy, which shal pr
                     •
                  sume to minister or geue vnto you thos
                     •
                   holy Mysteries after the time that you haue read the letters of my Bonde, I pronounce him or them voide of his dignite or office. If now
                     •
                  , as persons of power you force any man vnto it, and do violat the Canōs 
                     •
                  n
                     •
                   decrees d
                     •
                  liu
                     •
                  red vnto you from Christ our Sauiour, by his holy Apostles, knowe ye, it shal be no small trespasse in that dread
                     •
                  ful day of Iudg
                     •
                  m
                     •
                  nt, when the Honour or Dignite of this life shal helpe no mā, but the secrets of al hartes shal be opened and sett before the eyes of eue
                     •
                  y on
                     •
                  . A
                     •
                  s
                     •
                  cius which you placed in the bishoply throne in the roome of Ch
                     •
                  ysostom, thoughe he be dead, 
               
                  Ex
                        •
                     uthoramus
                
               we depose, and commaunde that his name be not writen in the rolle of bishops. In like maner we depose all o
                     •
                  her bishops which 
               Consultò 
               of purpos
                     •
                  d aduise haue com
                     •
                  unicated wth him. To the deposing of Theopilus (bishop of Alexandria) we adde excommunication, anathematisation, and a depriuation of all felowship or societe of Christi
                     •
                  nite. Thus farre the wordes of Innocencius the Pope in his letter to Arcadius the Emperour, as Nicephorus in his ecclesiastical history recordeth. And was al this M. Iewel a Signification only from the Pope, was it not a Determinatiō, and finall Sentence of the Pope?
            
                The holy and lerned Father Chrysostom, Patriarche off Constantinople sent his legates being foure bishopps to the Pope with his letters.  2. In that letters he desireth the Pope that the matters may be redressed, Item that the faultes be cor
                     •
                  ect
                     •
                  d, Last of all that he will write that such thinges as had pass
                     •
                  d betwene him and Theophilus might be of no force. 
                3. His whole clergy beside writeth.  4. Fourty other bishops do also writer.  5. A Synod is called vpon the matter. 6. The Pope sendeth his legates backe to Constantinople with an answer.  7. The legates are by all

meanes foule, and faire, by force and flattery, by violence and brybery moued to yelde.  8. Chrisostom intreateth the Pope not to vse the rigour of Excommunication vpon them.  9. Last off all the Pope after longe bearing and sufferaunce, excommunicateth the Emperour, and cōdemneth the malefactours. And what can proue an Appeale, if all this doe not? What can more vnuincibly proue the Supreme Authorite of the bishop of Rome? The Patriarche of Constantinople appealeth to Rome. The Patriarche of Alexandria is condemned by vertue of that Appeale. The Emperour of the East (an other Emperour Honorius by name then ruling in the west) is excommunicated of the Pope. By all this it may euidently appeare that the translation of M. Iewell: Write or signifie vnto them, is a mere Vntrue translation, as the which diminisheth and weakeneth the true meaning of the Author. And thus muche of M. Iewelles wronge translation, and of the Matter it selfe concerning the Appeale. Let vs nowe see what M. Iewell saieth to proue al this to be no Appeale. He saieth.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                For the true vnderstanding hereof it shal be necessary to consider the state that these godly Fathers then stoode in,
                  pag. 268. Epist. 2. ad Innocentium.
                and the miserable confusion of the East parte of the worlde in those daies. Chrysostom there of writeth thus. It is the contention of the whole worl
                     •
                  e. The Churche is brought v
                     •
                  on her knees: the people is s
                     •
                  atte
                     •
                  ed, the ministerie is oppressed. The bishops are banished: the Constitutions of our Fathers ar
                     •
                   broken.
               Clerus
            
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                Gentle Reader M. Iewell in this discourse, dothe shamefully and impudently abuse thy patience, if thou be l
                  •
               rned, abuse thy ignorance iff thou be vnlerned. These wordes off Chrysostom are writen in his seconde epistle to Innocentius the Pope. They do folowe immediatly the wordes which we alleaged euen nowe last out of Chrysostom, where he desireth the Pope not to vse the extremite against tkose bishops which had deposed him and vexed his whole prouince. They are spoken of the great troubles raised not in the whole East parte of the woulde, but in Aegypt and Thracia, betwene the faction

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
of Theophilus of Alexandria, and the faithefull people cleauing to Chrysostom in Cōstantinople. Of those particular men it is spoken, and not off the whole East parte off the worlde. Now let vs see howe M. Iewell procedeth and what he will conclude hereof. It foloweth in his text immediatly.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               
                  Socr
                        •
                     tes li. 2. c
                        •
                     p. 11. Sozom lib. 3. cap. 6. Athanasius in epist. ad solitariam vitamagentes. Theodoretus lib. 2. cap. 14.The Emperours captain with a bande of souldiars beset the Churche, where Athanasius was praying. Of the people that was with him, some were spoiled and banished, some trodden vnder the souldiours feete, some slaine where they went, Paulus the bishop of Constantinople was hanged, Marcellus the Bishopp of Ancyra was depriued. Lucius the bishop of Adrianopolis died in preson, Theodulus and Olimpius two bishops of thracia, were commaunded to be murthered. The Emperour had commaunded Athanasius to be brought ynto him either dead or aliue.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Here is a great bulke, but no Corne. If emptie wordes might make proufe, then had we here proufe sufficient. But what? (will M. Iewell saie) cal you these wordes empty which which are full of histories, and variety? Yea truly M. Iewell in this place they are but empty wordes. For though they containe matter enough, yet to your purpose they containe no matter at all.
                  pag. 151. And greate vessels (you knowe M. Iewell) the emptyer they be, the more they sounde. The wise Reader wil be weighed mith reason and not with talke. Let vs see therefore to what issue you driue all these allegations. If in the ende they proue nothing,The .387. Vntruthe For these Fathers, Athanasius Chirsostom and Theoret. were in no parte of these miseries mentioned, w
                     •
                  en they Appealed to Rome. then haue you but dased your Reader with greate lookes, and faced him out with a carde often. You procede and saye.
            These godly Fathers being thus (387.) in extreme miserie, and seeing their whole Churche in the East parte so desolate were forced to seeke for comforte, where so euer they had hope to finde any: and specially they sought to the Churche of Rome, which then bothe for multitude of people, and for puritie of Religion, and Constancie in the same, and also for healping of the afflicted, and intreating for them, was most famous aboue all others.
            Now your Iuggling and deceauing of the Reader shal appeare

M. Iewell. For where you saie, these holy Fathers being thus in extreme miserie &c. You meane and speake of Chrysostom, Athanasius and Theodoret. As touching Chrysostom and Theodoret they liued at the lest the one a hundred and more, the other al most two hundred yeres after those troubles and miseries happened in the East Church. Those troubles aboue mentioned happened al in the reigne of Constantius the Arrian Emperour, and towarde the ende of his Empire. Chrysostom liued vnder Arcadius and Honorius, Theodoretus vnder Theodosius the second, sonne to Arcadius. Nowe betwene Constā
               tius the Arriā and Arcadius were Emperours Iulian, Iouinian, Valens, and Theodosius the first, the time almost of a hundred and fifty yeres. Vnder Arcadius those troubles of the East Churche mentioned by M. Iewel vtterly ceased. Now to alleage those troubles so longe before passed and appaised, to be the cause of Chrysostoms, and of Thedorets Appeales to Rome which so longe after folowed, who seeth not that it was impertinently and impudētly alleaged? Touching the troubles in the East in Chrysostomes time, we haue saied somwhat before, but shal saie more anō, when we come to M. Iewelles cōclusion vpon this place. It remaineth therefore that al this must serue to beare out the Appeale of Athanasius, who liued in the time of those troubles, or els M. Iewell (as I saied before) shall be founde to haue proued nothing, but vtterly to haue dased the Reader with empty wordes.
            Touching the Appeale of Athanasius,The Appeale of Athanasius though it be not our principall matter, hauing now in hande chefely the Appeale of Chrysostom, yet bicause M. Iewell hath so confounded all these three diuers Appeales and of diuers ages all together, trusting by one general answer to defeate them al, for Truthes sake which nowe I defende, I will shewe also that al this proueth nothinge against the Appeale of Athanasius to the Pope brought in by D. Harding for a clere example of the Popes

Primacy then at that time and of so lerned a man acknowledged and confessed.
            It is to be knowen therefore that all those troubles of the East Churche mentioned before by M. Iewel, happened after the Appeale of Athanasius to Rome, and therefore coulde not be the cause of that which before was passed. This to be so I will euidently proue (God willing) by the orderly course and drifte of the ecclesiasticall History.
            The Ecclesiasticall History reporteth that at the beginning of the reigne of Constantius the Emperour (vnder whose reigne,
                  Histor trip. lib. 4. Cap. 1 and towarde the ende of whose raigne the aboue mē
               tioned troubles happened, as it shall anon appeare) many bishops of the East (which in the life of Constantinus father to this Constantius, a good Catholike Emperour had dissembled, and appeared for Catholikes) begāne then openly to professe the Arrian heresy,
                  Cap. 2. and to condēne the great general Coū
               cell of Nice holden not longe before. At that time Athanasius (being banished before by Constātinus through the deceite of Arrius and his felowes) returned to his bishoprike by the meanes of Constantinus brother to Constantius Emperour of the west.
                  Cap. 5.The Arrian bishoppes, Eusebius, Theogonius, Theodorus Perinthius and other, intending then as I saied, to publish the Arrian heresy (hauing all ready corrupted the Prince as the history declareth) seing this Athanasius the Patriarche off Alexandria, to be a great blocke in their waye, as being a right lerned Father and a most stoute defender of the Nicene Coū
               cel, laboured by al meanes to remoue him frō that place, and to depriue him of his bishoprike. For this purpose they accused him to the Emperour,
                  Cap. 6. as one that had by vniust meanes returned to his bishopricke. Athanasius hauing intelligence of their doing, and of the Princes minde bent against him fledd in to the west partes of Christendom. But Eusebius and his felowes the Arrian bishopps nott contented herewith thinking to

worke sure in the matter, wrote also to Iulius the Bishopp off Rome, accused him to the Pope, and hoped by that meanes to haue him vtterly depriued. The Pope (as the history saieth) ecclesiasticam sequens legem, etiam ipsos Romam venire praecepit, & venerabilem Athanasium ad iudicium regulariter euocauit, folowing the lawe of the Churche, commaunded them also to come to Rome, and called forthe the Reuerent Athanasius to Iudgement after the order of the Canons.
            Here woulde I by the waie lerne of M. Iewell what lawe of the Churche it was, that the Pope folowed, when he commaūded the bishops of the East to appeare at Rome, and cited also Athanasius the Patriarche of Alexādria to iudgemēt at Rome, and that Regulariter 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , by order of the Canōs.
                  In Rescrip to Iulij ad Orientales. Concil. Sard. ca. 7. What lawe, what Canōs cā he name, but the lawes and Canōs of the Nicene Coūcel, the only Councel General holden before that time, and confirmed afterwarde by the great Councel of Sardica holden somewhat after that time? Well: Forthe with the History.
            Athanasius obeying the Summoning came. But his Accusers came not, scientes facile suum capi posse mendacium, knowing that their lying tale should sone be discouered. What did they then? Forsothe (the history saieth) seing the shepeheard away from his flocke, they thruste in a wolfe in his place: Gregorius by name an Arriā bishop. Vnder this Arrian Gregorius began the troubles which M. Iewell before mentioned.
                  Cap. 11. As the besetting of the Churche of Alexandria with souldyars, the murder and spoyle of the people. For whereas Athanasius after he had appeared at Rome,
                  Cap. 7. by the meanes of the Emperours letters of the west, Constans brother to Constantius, had recouered againe his bishoprike, the Arrians persuaded the other Emperour Constantius the Arrian to intrude this Arrian Gregoririus by force and violence.
                  Cap. 11. Vpon which Athanasius fled the second time to Rome,
                  Cap. 12. and Eusebius the Archearrian sent after

him a legacy to the Pope, to accuse Athanasius. At this second coming to Rome, Athanasius founde there Paulus the bishop of Constantinople, Marcellus bishop of Ancyra, Asclepas bishop of Gaza,
                  Cap. 15. Lucianus bishop of Adrianopolis, all complaining in like maner to the Pope for iniuries done vnto them by the Arrians. Nowe first let vs consider that the first flight of Athanasius to Rome was before the troubles mentioned by M. Iewel: and that therein (as I saied) he hath deceiued his Reader, making that to be the cause of Athanasius flight which happened after his flight. Secondarely that he bringeth of Paulus the bishop of Constantinople that he was hanged, you perceiue I trust already, that therein also he hath brought that for a cause which happened after the effect. Vnlesse M. Iewel wil saie that Paulus was hāged of the Arriās, before he came to Rome to cōplaine of the Arrians. Likewise that he telleth vs of Lucius otherwise Lucianus bishop of Adrianopolis that he died in preson, it must nedes be after the first coming of Athanasius to Rome, seing that in his secōd coming he foū
               de the same Lucius or Lucianus at Rome. Marcellus also of Ancyra whō he founde at Rome at the same second coming could not be the cause of Athanasius first coming to Rome. Now that which foloweth in M. Iewelles allegations of Theodulus and Olympius commaunded to be murthered, and of the Emperours fury against Athanasius commaunding him to be brought aliue or dead,
                  Cap. 38. all this happened after the third flight of Athanasius, and a great many yeres after his first flight to Rome, of the which only D. Harding here mentioned, and against the which M. Iewell would driue all these troubles of the East hetherto alleaged, all befalling (as you see) longe after the same. Thus you see how that all these alllegations proue nothing against the matter alleaged, and therefor were brought in by M. Iewel only to Dase and Amase his Reader for the time, that after he might worke his feate at pleasure.

For now, where it foloweth in M. Iewel, as we haue before tolde you his wordes, These godly Fathers being thus in extreme miserie, &c. sought to the Churche of Rome, you see neither Chrysostom nor Theodoret (who liued so many yeres after all these troubles appeased) neither Athanasius whose flying to Rome talked of in this place, happened before all these troubles, can be any of these godly Fathers that M. Iewell concludeth of. But only these godly Fathers Chrysostom, Theodoret and Athanasius are alleaged here to haue sought to Rome. Ergo all this hath bene brought vtterly beside the purpose, only to deceiue and abuse the well meaning Reader. This is the sincerite of M. Iewell, when he semeth to talke most lernedly.
            To shewe farder that Athanasius in his second flight to Rome, that Paulus of Constantinople, Marcellus of Ancyra,Paulus of Constannople and diuers othe Bishops of the East Appealed to Rome. Asclepas of Gaza, Lucius of Adrianople all lerned and Catholike bishops of the East Churche (who mett there at that time all together) fled not thither (as M. Iewell imagineth) bicause they knewe not whether els to flie, but to be restored againe to their bishopprickes by the Popes authorite, that therefore I saie, they fled and for no other cause, let vs consider shortly what the ecclesiasticall history reporteth herein. The history writeth thus. Cognoscens ergo Romanus Episcopus &c. The bishop of Rome therefor hearing the accusations and complaintes of eche one,
               
                  Hist. trip. lib. 4. cap. 15. 
               and finding them al to agree to the Nicene Councel, receiued them in to Communion, as hauing charge of them al, through the dignite and praerogatiue of his owne See, and restored to euery one their Churches: He wrote also to the bishops of the east, that they had not wel vsed innocent mē driuing them from their Churches, that also they kept not the constitutions of the Nicene Councell. Some of them also he commaūded to appeare before him at a certaine daie, that they might knowe he had pronounced a iust determination of them. He tolde them also he woulde not from hence forthe suffer them, onlesse they leaued such disorder and innouations in the Church. Thus wrote

the Pope. And Athanasius and Paulus sending the Popes letters to the bishopps of the East, recouered eche one againe their bishopprickes. Thus farre the Tripartite Hstory out of Sozomenus. Whether all this declare not a Supreme Authorite in the See of Rome ouer the East Churche no lesse then ouer the west, I leaue it to the discretion off euery wise Reader to considre. Let vs now returne to the discourse of M. Iewell and see how he procedeth herein.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .388 Vntruthe For Flauianus Appealed to Pope Leo, not to the Emperour.In like sorte sometimes they fledde for helpe vnto the Emperour. So Athanasius being condemned in the Councell at Tyrus, fledde to Constantinus the Emperour. Flauianus vnto the Emperours Theodosius and Valentinianus. Donatus a casis nigris, vnto Constantinus. And the Emp
                  •
               rours sometimes called the parties, and heard the matter them selues. Sometimes they wrote fauourable letters in their behalfe.
            Muche of this, is true: but nothing truly applied. Athanasius in dede (as Socrates writeth) in refellendis calumnijs contra Macharium productis, legalibus vsus est paragraphis. in refelling the slaunders layed to the charge of Macharius his priest,Socrates. lib. 1. cap. 31. pleaded with his aduersaries by the lawe. Therefore he refused, according to the lawe, their iudgements who were knowen to be his enemyes. Neither woulde suffer that Theoguis, Maris, and such other Arrians should haue the examination of his priestes matter Macharius, Ischyras his aduersarye being sett att liberty and keping company with the Iudges, while Macharius his Priest was layed fast in Chaynes. Last of all protesting to the whole Synod, and Dyonisius the Emperours officer there, that he had iniury, and hauing no remedy thereof,
                  Cap. 32. 
               clanculum discessit, he departed awaye priuely saieth Socrates. And a litle after. Secessione facta ad Imperatorem fugit. After his departure he fled to the Emperour. All this was ex legalibus paragraphis folowing the order of the lawe. Afterwarde he was accused to the Emperour of a Ciuill matter, as that he had stopped the passage of Corne which was

wonte ordinarely to be sent from Alexandria to Constantinople. Here was no question of Faithe or Religion decided by the Emperour.
            Flauianus was by the heretike Dioscorus deposed.Flauianus Appealed to Pope Leo. He Appealed to Pope Leo, not to the Emperou
                  •
                as M. Iewell saieth. For proufe hereof, we haue the letters of Valentinian the Emperour him selfe. These are his wordes, to Theodosius the second them Emperour in the East.
                  Epist valent. ad Theodos. tom. 1. Con. pag. 731. 
               Fidem a nostris Maioribus traditam debemus cum omni competenti deuotione defendere, & dignitatem propriae venerationis Beato Apostolo Petro intemeratam & in nostris temporibus conseruare: quatenus beatissimus Romanae Ciuitatis Episcopus, cui principatum sacerdotij super omnes Antiquitas cōtulit locū habeat ac facultatē de fide & Sacerdotibus iudicare. Hac enim gratia secundū solemnitatem Cōciliorū & Constātinopolitanus Episcopus eum per libellos appellauit, propter contentionem quae orta est de fide. The faith deliuered vnto vs from our forefathers (most honorable Father and Reuerent Emperour) we ought with al cōpetent deuotion defende, and preserue also in our time vnuiolated to the blessed Apostle Peter the dignite of his dewe Reuerence: so as the most holy bishop of Rome, To vvhō Antiquite hath geuē the Principalite of Priesthood aboue all, maye conueniently iudge off the faithe, and of Priestes. For, hereupon the bishop of Constantinople (Flauianus) after the accustomed maner of Councelles hath appealed to him by libels, vpon a certaine question moued touching the Faithe. In like maner also Galla Placidia Mother to Theodosius wrote at that time, saying of Flauianus, that Libellum ad Apostolicam Sedem mis
                     •
                  rit,
               
                  Ibidem.
                he sent a libel off Appeale to the See Apostolike. Thus as Athanasius appealed to Iulius in matters ecclesiasticall, so did also Flauianus to Leo. And as Athanasius fled for succour against heretikes to the Emperour, so might also Flauianus seeke succour of the Emperour Theodosius. But neither of them fled in like sorte

to the Emperours, as they Appealed to the Pope. Donatus a Casis nigris was an heretike. Of him we shall speake more anon. Touching matters mere ecclesiasticall, the Catholike Emperours neuer iudged and determined such matters, they neuer restored byshops by their owne absolut Authorite, as we haue heard euen nowe the Pope restored Athanasius and Paulus.Emperours neuer iudged ouer bishops in matters of Faithe. This to be so without farder particular triall, Let the testimony of S. Ambrose be a sufficient witnesse in this matter who liued after and in the time of all the cases alleaged by M. Iewell, and who was (no doubte) muche more skilfull in these matters then is M. Iewell or any man that liueth nowe. At what time Valentinian the younge Emperour would haue called Saint Ambrose in iudgement before him, as M. Iewell would here persuade the reader that Emperours of olde time did, he saieth vnto the Emperour. Quando audisti clementissime Imperator in causa fidei laicos de episcopis iudicasse?
                  Lib. 5. epist. 32. When diddest thou euer here most gracious Emperour, that laye men haue iudged ouer bishops, in any cause pertaining to the faithe? This was after the time of Constantius, of Theodosius, and of Valentinianus the elder alleaged before by M. Iewell to haue had ecclesiastical matters before them, in like sorte as the Pope had, which is to haue iudged and determined other them. Then if M. Iewell had bene by S. Ambrose when he wrote those wordes to the Emperour, and had bene of the minde that he is nowe of, he would perhaps haue corrected S. Ambrose, and saied. No Sir? Neuer hearde you that Athanasius fledd to Constantinus, that Flauianus to this mans Father Valentinian the first, that Donatus also to Constantinus, neuer heard you that the Emperours called sometime the parties, and heard the matters themselues, and that in like sorte, as the Pope determined the causes of Athanasius and Paulus? Hearde you neuer of al this? If you did, how then saie you to the Emperour. VVh
                     •
                  n heard you &c? If you did not, then yet lerne of me that you haue

misse informed the Emperour. This M. Iewell might haue as well instructed S. Ambrose then, as auouched it so stoutely nowe. But. What trowe we would S. Ambrose haue answered here to this painted prelat, ouerthwarting so such a lerned Bishop? Truly S. Ambrose notwithstanding all those examples alleaged by M. Iewell, notwithstanding the wordes of Constantinus Coram me, euen before me, which M. Iewell maketh so much of, which he blaseth so forthe with great letters bothe in the text and in the Margin, notwithstanding I saie all, that either Constantinus or Theodosius or Valentinian did or had done before that time, he woulde haue saied to M. Iewell farder as he wrote then to the Emperour, these wordes. Certè si vel scripturarum seriem diuinarum, vel vetera tempora retract
                     •
                  mus, quis est qui abnua
                     •
                   in causa fidei, in causa inquam fidei episcopos solere d
                     •
                   Imp
                     •
                  ratoribus Christianis, non Imperatores de episcopis iudicare. In good sothe (M. Iewell) if we call to minde the whole course of holy Scripture, or the practise of auncient time passed, none I trowe will denie but that in matters touching faithe, in matters I saie (M. Iewell) touching faith, bishops are wōte to Iudge ouer Christē Emperours, Emperours are not wonte to Iudge o
                  ••
               r bishops. Thus S. Ambrose hath answered you M. Iewel. And this his answer that you may the better like and contente your selfe withall, I wishe you to remembre what your olde Master Iohn Caluin hath writen of this very answer of S. Ambrose to the Emperour. He saieth these wordes.
                  Institut. li. 
                  
                     •
                  . cap. 11. fere in 
                        ••
                     ne.
                
               Worthely do al men prais his c
                     •
                  nstancy in this b
                     •
                  halfe. Then you M. Iewell I truste, will not dispraise it. Then you will yelde to the lerning of S. Ambrose, who telleth you in good earnest, that neither by holy Scripture, neither by any practise of the Churche Emperours haue iudged ouer bishops in matters of the faithe.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                The Emperour Constans wrote vnto his brother Const
                  •
               ntius to call before him the bishoppes of the East parte to yelde a re
                  •
               ckening

of their doinges against Athanasius.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                Of this Matter we shall speake more when we come to the 113. Vntruthe. Yet presently this maye suffise to note, that Constans wrote to his brother he shoulde in any wise restore Athanasius and Paulus,
                  Socrates. li. 2 c. 22. Theodor. lib. 2. ca. 8 partly bicause of Pope Iulius his letters writen in that behalfe, partly bicause by the whole Councell of Sardica they were Iudged Innocent. The Emperour herein did but execut the Popes request, and the Determination of the Councell.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .389 Vntruthe ioyned with a folie.The Emperour Honorius gaue his endeuour, that Athanasiu
                  •
                might be restored.
            M. Iewell, talketh he can not tell what him selfe. Athanasius was dead and buried at the lest twenty yeres before Honorius was Emperour. His endeuour at that time coulde stande Athanasius in small stede.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Constantinus the Emperour vpon Athanasius complainte, commaunded the bishoppes of the Councell of Tyrus to appeare before him.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
               
               
                  Socrates. lib. 1· cap. 26.27.28.
Ibidem ca. 34.35. Theodoret. lib. 1. cap. 31.He did so, animo commodandi ecclesiae nolens illā discerpi, as Socrates writeth, vpon the desire he had to helpe the Churche, and to bringe it to Vnite. So he restored Arrius him selfe to Alexandria. So he threatned Athanasius to depose him, if he receiued not Arrius. So he called those bishops before him. And so in fine he banished that good Catholike Father Athanasius. But in the ende he repented him, and commaunded in his last will that Athanasius shoulde be restored. These thinges don
                  •
                of Zele beside right, cā be no preiudice to that, which is right. Let vs nowe see what M. Iewell will conclude hereof.The .390 Vntruthe The Conclusion foloweth not. Namely in Chryso
                  
                     ••
                  om.
            
            Thus holie men being in distresse, sought healpe, wheresoeuer they had hope to finde it. This seeking of remedy by waie of complainte, a
                  •
                it declareth their miserie, so is it not sufficient to proue an ordinarie Appeale.
            If your former talke had bene true and to the purpose, this conclusion might haue had some likelyhood. Nowe it is euident

by that which hath bene brought, that all this seeking to Rome, was not by waie of complainte only, but by waie of Appeale, especially in Chrisostō, and Athanasius as we haue declared. And touching Chrysostō, vpō whose wordes we haue bene occasioned to entre so farre with M. Iewell, this shifte of seeking to Rome by waie of complainte, is most ignorantly, or els very deceitefully alleaged of M. Iewel. For what a poore shifte were this, to seeke for succour in distresse at his hande, who was him selfe in more distresse then the party that sought for succour? And so was it with Innocentius when Chrysostom being banished wrote and sent his legates vnto him. For at that very time the Gothes wasted and spoiled Italy in most miserable sorte, first vnder Rhadagaisus, and next vnder Alaricus,
                  Orosius 
                        ••
                     . 7. cap. 37. & 39. who Innocentius yet liuing, sacked Rome it selfe, and afflicted al that coste most cruelly. At that time the Wādales and Hunnes inuaded the west Empire, the Frenche men entred in to Gallia, now called of them Fraunce, and the miserable Emperour Honorius lurked at Rauenna, so carelesse and negligent of all these matters,
                  Baptist
                        •
                      Egnatius lib. 1. Rom. Prin.
                that when worde was brought vnto him that Rome was vndone, what, saied he, is Rome my Cocke slaine which fought while here so lustely? thinking it had bene spoken of a cocke that he had so called, and hauing more minde of his cockefight game, then of the great Citie of Rome. And in all these miseries of the west parte, of all Italy, of Rome it selfe, will M. Iewel persuade vs that Chrisostom sent thither for succour only and redresse of his owne priuat mysery?Iewell. pag. 237. A man may here saye to M. Iewel, as M. Iewel saieth in this article to an other: Non satis commodé diuisa sunt temporibus tibi Daue haec. These matters hange not well together M. Iewel. And this you knewe your selfe wel enoughe.The .391. Vntruthe For this wil neuer appeare. And therefore you adde more matter hereunto and saie.
            That Chrysostome made no such Appeale to the bishop of Rome it may sufficiently (391) appeare, both by Chrysostomes owne Epistles and by the bishop of Romes dealing herein, and by the ende, and conclusion

of the cause.
            It behoueth thee here (gentle 
                  •
               eader) to call to minde, what we haue saied before of this matter. We haue before declared by the two epistles of Chrysostom to Innocentius, by the dealing of the bishop of Rome therein (calling a Synod, and sending his legates to Constantinople aboute the matter) Last of al by the ende and conclusion of the cause, to wit, by the finall excommunicatiō of the Emperour, and the other bishops guilty of those troubles, by Innocentius the Pope, that Chrysostom made a iuste Appeale. Nowe M. Iewell saieth he will proue the contrary by those very three diuers meanes againe. That were gaye. Let vs see.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Touching Chrysostom him selfe he maketh no mention off any Appeale.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                Why M. Iewell? Can not a man eate his meate, but he must talke of eating, and tell his felowes? Lo I eate meate. Can not Chrysostom make an Appeale, but he must saie: Reuerent Father I appeale to you? We haue shewed before by his letters and many other circunstances that an Appeale was made. And shall the lacke of naming the matter marre all?
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Nor desireth the Parties to be cited to Rome.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                No. But he desireth the parties may be punished. He desireth the Pope to write and determine the matter by his Authorite. He desireth to be restored to his Churche againe. All this I haue shewed before out of Chrysostomes first epistle. Againe the Pope sent his legates to the parties, and therefore neded not to cite the parties.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Nor taketh Innocentius for the bishop of the whole Churche or for the vniuersall Iudge of al the worlde.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                Yet more negatiue argumentes M. Iewell? Wil you neuer leaue this lewde logicke? But I pray you how proue you your

negatiue?
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                But onely saluteth him thus. Iohn to Innocentius bishop of Rome sendeth greeting.
            
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                This is a slender Erasmian argument, M Iewell, taken of the title and superscription of a letter. How many men write to M. Iewell with this superscription, To the Right Reuerent Father in God &c? And yet M. Iewell knoweth him selfe, he is no bishop at all, and therefore no Reuerente Fathet, for the which respect he is so called. The Pope neither intitleth him selfe, nor euer did, the bishop of the whole worlde or the vniuersall Iudge of all the worlde but he intitleth him selfe, The seruant of the seruants of God. Yet if titles might make proufe,
                  
                     Gregor. li. 4. epist. 38
                  
                     Vniuersales obla
                           •
                        o honore v
                           •
                         ca
                           •
                        i sunt.
                  
                we could bringe the Authorite not of one only bishop (as Chrysostom was) but of sixe hundred bishops assembled in a generall Councell from all partes of Christendom which called Leo then Pope of Rome, an Vniuersall Bishop. But of this we shall haue occasion to speake more hereafter, in the 118. Vntruthe. Let vs nowe procede with M. Iewelles allegations out of Chrysostomes epistles, as he saieth. Hitherto he hathe argumented of the title and superscription. Now off like he will bringe some weighty matter out of the epis
                  •
               le it selfe.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                And againe in the same Epistle he vtterly auoideth all such forrain iudgementes,The .392 Vntruthe as appeareth. according to the determinations of the Councelles off Carthage, Milleuet and Afrike.
            
               
                  Staplet. 
                Vntruthe. For those Councelles were made only for Afrike and touched nothinge Constantinople or Thracia, where Chrysostom liued.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                These be his wordes. It is not meete that they that be in Aegypt should be Iudges ouer them, that be in Thracia.
            
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                This is M. Iewelles Argument. Chrysostom a bishopp in Thracia refuseth the iudgement of the bishops of Aegypt. Ergo he refuseth the Iudgement of the bishopp of Rome. The

lewdenesse off this argument will appeare by the like. Th
                     •
                   bishop of London refuseth to be iudged of the bishopps of Fraunce. Ergo he will not be iudged by his metropolitane the Archebishopp off Caunterbury. For as rightfully maye the Pope be Iudge ouer all Metropolitanes; as euery Metropolitane ouer the bishopps of his prouince. Which Superiorite of the Metropolitane ouer his bishoppes, though your religion in very dede (as it semeth) no more acknowledgeth then the Supremacy of the Pope ouer all, yet you M. Iewel through out this article, do earnestly defende the Superiorite off Patriarches, Primates and Metropolitanes eche in their prouinces, to ouerthrowe thereby the Supreme Authorite of the Pope ouer all. And this is all M. Iewell which you haue brought of Chrysostomes epistles to proue (as you saied) that he made no such Appeale to Rome. Which now being layed abrode, is so bare and naked a proufe, that your selfe I thinke, if any shame be in you, dothe blushe thereat for very shame. But goe to. Though the epistles of Chrysostom can not helpe you, yet perhaps the bishop of Rones dealing therein, and the ende of the cause will helpe you. For by these two waies more, you promised to proue that Chrysostom made no Appeale. Let vs then see, what the bishop of Romes dealing herein was.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 393. Vntruthe boldly auouched but no waye proued.Neither doo the Bishop of Rome his owne wordes, importe any Appeale, but rather the (393) Contrary.
            This is stoutely saied. I trust you will proue it as well.
            For (394) he vseth not his familiar wordes off bidding or cōmaunding, but onely in gentle and frendly maner exhorteth them to appeare, and that not before him selfe, but onely before the Councell of sundry bisshoppes summoned specially for that purpose.The 394 Vntruthe This For, forceth not. It was not so in the cause of Chrysostome.
            
            Let this proufe stande for good. The Pope gaue them faire wordes, and desired them to Appeare before a Synod. Ergo his wordes do importe no Appeale but rather the contrary.

Yow knowe M. Iewell by the like argument: A Prince writing gently at a time to stubborne rebelles, and willing them to appere before his Councell not before him, might be proued no Prince or Souuerain, bicause in that case he doth not exercise his Authorite. But as I saied let the proufe stande for good, being in it selfe ouer weake and feble. Forthe to the matter.
            For thus Iulius writeth vnto the bisshoppes of the East.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .395. Vntruthe as last before.Why, where be you M. Iewell? Haue you forgott your selfe? You promised to tell vs of Chrysostomes Appeale, and of the wordes of Innocentius to whome he appealed. And do yowe tell vs nowe of Iulius and the bishopps of the East? Yow knowe Iulius and these bishops were dead and buried more then a hundred yeares before this Appeale or complainte (call it as you list) of Chrysostome to Innocentius. And will yowe proue that Chrysostome did not Appeale to Innocentius, bicause Iulius spake faire to the rebellious Arrians of the East? But thus it is gentle Reader. M. Iewell maketh large offers, promiseth muche, speaketh great, but he yeldeth nothinge, he perfourmeth as much, and proueth as litle. As for Innocentius his wordes (who was the Pope to whome Chrysostom Appealled) and by whose wordes he promised to proue that Chrysostom made no Appeale, he hathe not brought so much as one syllable or letter thereof. And as touching the ende and Conclusion of the cause, which was an other meanes by the which he promised to proue that Chrisostom made no Appeale he hath brought touching Chrysostom nor worde nor halfe worde. Onely hauing talked somewhat of Iulius the Pope that he wrote faire to the Arrians, and that he tried the matter by a Synode, whiche two thinges M. Iewell taketh for a great derogation of the Popes authorite, whereas all wise men beside will, I

thinke, rather muche commende the moderation and discretion of the Pope therefore, as neither vsing roughe wordes, neither doing all of him selfe, but with the aduise and consent of other, as the Popes at this daye doe, and allwaies haue done, M. Iewell I saie hauing somewhat enlarged those matters, at the length speaketh onely these wordes touching the Appealle of Chrysostome to Innocentius, which folowe.
            
               
                  Iewel. 
               
               
                   pag. 270. The .396 Vntruthe Innocentius prosec
                        •
                     ted the Appeale by his own Authorite, as hathe b
                        •
                     fore bene proued.
                  The 397. Vntruthe For he pro
                        •
                     ounced hi
                        •
                      selfe the Finall Sē
                     tence of Excom. against the offenders.
               So likewise Innocentius the bisshop of Rome, being very d
                  •
               sirous to restore Chrysostome, and to recouer the vnitie of the Ch
                  •
               rche, not of him selfe or by his owne Authorite, but by the dec
                  •
               ee and consent of a Councell holden in Italie sent messingers in to the East. And sitting withe others in the Councell, he tooke not vpon him that 
                  •
               niuersall power that nowe is imagined, but had 
                  •
               is voice (396) equall withe his brethern.
            If yow had loued the truthe, and had bene a faithefull instructer of your R
                  •
               ader, M. Iewell, yow would not thus haue tolde a piece, and concealed the reste, wherby the Authorite of the Pope might c
                  •
               erely haue appeared aboue the Synode. Of this Synode, and of the decree thereof sent from Rome to Constantinople not by messengers M. Iewell (as yo
                  •
                terme them) but by bishoppes and priestes, by legates of th
                  •
                S
                  •
               e Apostolike, by the Pope not by the whole Synode, we haue signified and talked before. But this was not all M. Iewell. This was not the ende and Conclusion of the cause, by the whiche yowe promised (guilefully and vntruly) to proue. Chrysostome made no Appeale. The ende and Conclusion was (as we haue before shewed) that the Legates of Innocentius being euill treated, robbed, emprisonned, and ignominiously sent backe, rather to perish by the waye then to returne home, those legates also neither by force of threates, neither by waye of bribery made to yelde or communicat with the Emperesse, the ende an
                  •
                Conclusion I saie was, that Innocentius the Pope of Rome he him selfe by his own Absolut Authorite as he p
                  •
               otesteth, did excommunicat not onlye

Theophilus and the other malefactours the bishopps off Aegypt, but also the Emperour him selfe, and the Empe
                  •
               esse. Thi
                  •
                was the ende, this was the Conclusion M. Iewell.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 398 Vntruthe touching 
                     •
                  eltiades.Yet (saieth M. Iewell) the Pope had but his voice equall with his bretherne. And that he proueth thus.
            As it appeareth by Meltiades bisshop of Rome, that sate with three bis
                  •
               hoppes of Gallia, and xiiij. other bisshoppes of Italy to determine the controuersie betwene Cecilianus and Donatus.
            M. Iewell endeth this matter withe a manifeste Vntruthe. Innocentius (saieth he) had but his equall voice withe his bretherne in the Synode. And why? Bicause Miltiades the Pope had the like in the Iudgement of Donatus. Nowe that Miltiades had but his equall voice, it is a manifest Vntruthe. Optatus saieth. Miltiadis sententia Iudicium clausum est.
               
                  Optatu
                        •
                      lib. 1. By the sentence or verdit of Meltiades the Iudgement was ended. Ergo his sentence was more then the sentence off hys felowe bishoppes. Ergo M. Iewell hath made an Vntruthe to saye, that his sentence was equall withe the rest. Ergo he hathe made an vntrue collection that the sentence also Innocentius was but equall with his bretherne. Ergo againe he hathe brought nothing to disproue the Appeale of Chrysostome to Innocentius the Pope. Ergo an Appeale is proued and that of a Patriarche of Constantinople, a most holy and lerned Father, S. Chrysostome by name. M. Iewell though he haue ended here withe Chrysostome, yet he hathe not ended withe the matter of Appeales. Let vs consider for Truthes sake the remnant of his longe processe aboute this matter.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Now to come to the prosecution of the matter,The 399 Vntruthe 
                     •
                  . Harding knoweth wel the contrary, as it s
                     •
                  all i
                     •
                  
                M. Harding knoweth that the Bisshoppes of the East vnderstode not this singular Authorite, or prer
                  •
               gatiue off the bishop off Rome, and t
                  •
               erefore being called, obeied not the Summon, as it is many wai
                  •
               s easy to be sene.
            What Authorite and prerogatiue the bishoppes of the E
                  •
               st Vnderstode to be in the Churche off Rome, and how well D.

Harding knoweth it to be so, it hath well appered by the Appeales of Chrysostome and Athanasius two the Chiefeste Pat
                  •
               iarches in the East, the one of C
                  •
               nstantinople, the other of Alexandria to the Bishops of Rome, and shall yet better appeare, in the 109. Vntruthe noted by you M. Iewell, where this matter is at large and of purpose treated. Nowe l
                  •
               t vs consider, by howe many wayes (for so you speak
                  •
               ) you will proue the contrary.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               
                  C
                        •
                     ncil. T
                        •
                     m. 1.Therefore they returned vnto Iulius this answer. Iff you will agree to ou
                     •
                   o
                     ••
                  er
                     •
                  , we will haue 
                     〈◊〉
                   Commu
                     •
                  i
                     •
                  n wi
                     •
                  h you, 
                     •
                  ut if you will otherwise doe, a
                     •
                  d rather 
                     ••
                  ree vnto our a
                     •
                  uer
                     •
                  a
                     •
                  ies, then vnto vs, the
                     •
                   we 
                     〈…〉
                   the con
                     •
                  rary. And hence 
                     •
                  orthe 
                     •
                  eith
                     ••
                   wi
                     •
                  l we 
                     〈…〉
                   Coun
                     •
                  e
                     •
                  l with you, no
                     •
                   obey yowe, nei
                     •
                  her beare good will 
                     •
                  i
                     •
                  her to you or to any of youres.
            
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                These were good charitabl
                  •
                children in dede. These were Arrian heretikes. Their aduersaries, whose parte Pope Iulius tooke, were the most lerned and Catholike Fathers, Athan
                  •
               
               sius, Paulus, Marcellus, Lucius, and other holy bishops, all defending the Nicene Councell, and for so doing all persecut
                  •
               d of these Arrians. Suche examples M. Iewell hathe to folowe. He is driue
                  •
                to forsake Athanasius, Paulus, S. Chrysostome, Theodoret,
                  Concil. Chalced. Act. 11. Flauianus (whome the generall Councell off Chalcedon called Martyr) and diuers other Catholique bisshops who all appealed to the Popes of Rome, and to ioyne elbowe with the wicked Arrians, deadly enemies to the Nicene Councell, and detestable denyers of the Godhead of oure Sauiour Iesus Christ. Thus M Iewell so he stande against the Pope, h
                  •
                will choose to st
                  •
               n
                  •
               e against moste Catholike and lerned Fath
                  •
               rs,The .400 Vntruthe For in this doing, there was no weakenesse on the Popes parte. ag
                  •
               inst the N
                  •
               c
                  •
               ne Councell, and ag
                  •
               inst the blessed Trinite it selfe.
            This Imperfectiō and weakenesse of their owne doinges, the bishoppes of Rome thē selues vnderstoode, 
                  •
               nd cōfessed. (400) For thus Innocētius writeth vnto S. Augustine, Alypius, and others in Africa touching Pelagius. If he con
                     •
                  inewe still i
                     •
                   one mi
                     ••
                  e, k
                     •
                  owing th
                     •
                  t I wil pron
                     ••••
                  e against him, as what request of letters, or when will he 
                     •
                  ommute him selfe to our Iudgement?

Is it be good, he were called to make answer, it were better some other called him, that are neare at hande: &c.
            
            The Africane bishops S. Augustine, Alypius and others wrote to Innocentius the Pope that, whereas the heresy of Pelagius multiplied secretly in many places, either he shoulde sende for him out of the East where then he liued,
                  August. e
                        •
                     ist. 95. Innocent. epist. 27. and was saied to haue purged him selfe, or els to write vnto him to knowe the truthe thereof. Innocentius answered. Si confidit, nouitque non nostra a dignum esse damnation
                     •
                   quod dicat, aut iam hoc totum s
                     •••
                  fut
                     •
                  sse quòd dix
                     •
                  rat, non a nobis acce
                     •
                  siri, s
                     •
                  d ipse debet potius f
                     •
                  stinar
                     •
                  , v
                     •••
                  ssit absolui. Nam si adhuc taliter sentit, quan
                     •
                  o se nostro Iudicio, quibusue acceptis l
                     •
                  teris, quum sciat se damnandum esse, committ
                     •
                  t? If Pelagius do trust, and knoweth his saying deserueth not to haue Sentence pronounced against him, or that he hath recanted that which he saied before, he nedeth not to be sent for of vs, but he him selfe ought to 
                  •
               pede hither to be absolued. But if he continewe still in his former opinion, when will he committe him selfe to our Iudgement, or with what letters will he come, being sure that he shall haue Sentence pronounced against him? Thus farre innocentius. There appeareth here no weakenesse in the Pope, but a stubbornesse in the heretike. If Pelagius had recanted, and had bene 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                Catholike man ought to be, the Pope doubted not, but he would gl
                  •
               dly come, and that with spede, to be absolued for his former naughty doct
                  •
               ine. But if he continewed in his opinion, in his heresy, and wicked doctrine, being sure that he shoulde be at Rome condemned therefore, no maruail if th
                  •
                Pope doubted of his not appearing to any Summō of lett
                  •
               rs or otherwise. This declareth the ordinary and vsual obedience of Catholikes in those dayes. And this representeth to vs the present stubbornesse of heretikes nowe a dayes. If the Pope should presently cite M. I
                  •
               well to Rome, woulde he appeare trowe we? But what th
                  •
               n? Is not the Pope therefore in his full Authorite, bicause

M. Iewell will not obeye? Or was Innocentius of lesse power, bicause Pelagius was stubborne? Or bicause many of the Iewes beleued not, was therefore Gods promise weakened? Nun quid illorum incredulitas fidem dei euacuauit?
                  Rom. 3. 
               Absit. God forbidde, saieth the Apostle. This declareth a great Imperfection and weakenesse in your doctrine M. Iewell, not in the Popes Iurisdiction, which can bringe no better Argumentes against the same. For thus you force your reason.
            
               M. Iewelles Arguments.
               Pelagius continewing in his heresy and being sure to be cast woulde not appeare b
                     •
                  fore the Pope.
            
            
               Ergo the Popes Iurisdiction was weake and imperfect.
            
            If some Catholike man of the Church had so resisted, your argument had bene the better. Els let this goe for good also.
            
               Thousandes of Iewes beleued not in the Messias.
            
            
               Ergo Gods promise made to Abraham and his sede was weake and Imperfect.
            
            This is not only a weake argument but a wicked also. Let vs procede.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               
                  Sozom. lib. 3. cap. 10. The .401 Vntruthe For not the Popes infirmite, b
                     •
                  t the st
                     •
                  bbornesse of the heretikes was the Cause h
                     •
                  reof. E
                        •
                     seb. lib. 7. c
                        •
                     p. 30. Niceph li. 6. cap. 39.And therefore Iulius the bishop of Rome, finding (401) his owne infirmitie herein, wrote vnto the Emperour Constans, and opened vnto him the whole matter, and 
                  •
               esought him to write vnto his brother Constantin
                  •
               , that it might please him to sende the bis
                  •
               oppes of the East to make answer to that, they had done against Athanasius.
            This was euen nowe before alleaged. It hath before bene answered vnto. Yet againe I saie the stubbornesse of the Arrian bishop and the Arrian Emperour Constantius caused the Pope thus to doe. In like maner Paulus Samosatenus being condemned by a great Councell of bishops at sundry times and yet not obeying thereunto, but continuing still in his bishopricke, the matter was referred by the bishops them selues to Aurelianus then Emperour being a heathen and infidell. The extreme stubbornesse of that heretike forced those bishops so

to doe. Yet it is not therefore to be concluded that either bisshops ought not to Iudge vpon heretikes, or that the Prince especially being vtterly an heathen and infidell, ought to take that Iudgement vpon him. Againe if the Pope at this daye vse the secular Arme to the repressing of heresies, it is an argument of the misery and wickednesse of our time, it is no argument against the Popes Supreme Authorite or Iurisdiction.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               
                   
                     Conc. Constant. 5. Act. 1.
                  The 402. Vntruthe For the Popes Supremacy was knowen notwithstan
                        •
                     ing these Cō
                     plaintes. Niceph. lib. 17. cap. 2.
               Euen so the clergy of the Citie of Antioche in the like case of trouble and spoile, wrote vnto Iohn the Patriarke of Constātinople, to intreate the Emperour in their behalfe. It appeareth hereby that this Infinite Authorite, and Prerogatiue power ouer all the worlde, in those due (402) was not knowen.
            This example is like the other, and cōcludeth as wel. Seuerus the Eutychian heretike and bishop of Antioche, who defyed the Councell of Chalcedon, and had therefore afterwarde his tounge cutt out of his heade by the Emperour Iustines commaundement, who had spoyled the Churches of Antioche, banished the bishops and vsed much Villany against the whole clergy, was for these excessiue outrages accused to a Synod assembled, and ayde required against him with the Emperours assistance and helpe, therefore the Pope had not then the Supreme Iurisdiction. If such argumentes maye goe for good, then bicause the frenche bishoppes at the late Tridentime Councell complained of their troubles and spoyles committed by heretikes against their Churches, an
                  •
                required the Councell to intreate their Prince, that some redresse might be had, the Pope at this present lost his Iurisdiction &c. B
                  •
               t the Ordinary suite in a quiet state, and the extreme refuges of nec
                  ••
               site are diuerse. Againe the redresse of temporall lostes, and spoile, and the decision of matters of Faithe are two thinges. In the one the temporall power and succour hath ben
                  •
                sought. In the other the Spirituall Iurisdiction hath euer concluded.
            
               
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               
                  The 403 Vntruthe This hath not yet be
                        •
                     ee proued.
                  The .404. Vntruthe. Nothing hat
                        •
                      be
                        •
                      brought of themperour Martian.
               I thinke it hereby plainely, and sufficiently proued, first that the Bishopp of Rome had no Authorite to receiue Appeales from al partes of the worlde, and that by the Councelles of Nice, of 
                  •
               ele, 
                  •
               nd of Afrika: by S. Cyprian, and by the Emperours Martian and Iustinian.
            It hath appeared plainely and sufficiently, first that the B. of Rome had Authorite to receaue Appeales from al partes of the worlde, and that from the greatest Patriarches them selues, as from Athanasius of Alexandria, of S. Chrysostom an
                  •
                Flauianus of Constantinople, and that by the Councelles of Nice and of Sardica, by S. Cyprian, S. Gregory and S. Be
                  •
               narde, by the Emperours Iustinian, Leo, and Theodo
                  •
               ius, and that none but heretikes, as Arrians, Donatistes, and Pelagians repined at the same.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
                
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  , o
                     •
                   V
                     ••
                  ruthe mer
                     •
                   Sla
                  
                     ••
                  derousNexte that M Hardinge the better to fournish his matter, hath notoriously falsefied Chrysostoms w
                  •
               rdes three times in one p
                  •
               ace.
            It appeareth that M. Iewell hath notoriously slaundered D. Harding therein, and that more then three times in one place.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 405. Vntruthe: For Chrysostom m
                     •
                  de a 
                     •
                  uit Appeale.Thirdely that Chrysostomes letter vnto Innocentius contained matter of complainte but no Appeale which thinge is also proued by the very wordes and tenour of the letter, by the bishopp off Romes owne Confession, and by the imperfection and weakenesse off their doinges.
            It hathe bene proued by the very wordes and tenour off Chrysostomes letter, b
                  •
                the legacy sent from him to Rome, by the letters off his whole clergy, and of fourty bishops beside to the Pope, by the Synod holden of the Pope, aboute that matter,B
                     •
                  fore in th
                     •
                   lea
                  
                     •
                  es. 85.8
                     •
                  
                  ▪ 87. and 
                     •
                  8. by his legates sent to Constantinople, by the greate meanes foule and faire shewed vnto them, to winne their consent, by the second letters of Chrysostom to the Pope, and last of all by the finall Sentence of Ex
                  ••
               mmunication from the Pope, not only to the bishops that had offended therein, but

also to the Emperour him selfe for bearinge them out, that Chrysostome made a Iust and full Appeale to the Pope, and that neither the bishop of Romes owne Confession, neither h
                  •
               s doinges doo importe any Imperfection or weakenesse on his side, but rather the contrary. And thus is appeareth M. Iewell hath yet concluded nothinge against Appeales. Therefore he seketh yet other shiftes, and saieth yet farder.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 407 Vntruthe This waye of Cō
                  promisse is but a Fable. In Ap
                        •
                     lo. 2. Athanas.
               In d
                  •
               de by waie of compromisse, and agreement of the parties, matters were sometimes brought to be hearde, and ended by the bishopp of Rome, as also by other bishoppes, but not by any ordinary processe or courte of lawe. And so it appeareth this matter betwene Athanasius and the Arrians was first brought vnto Iulius, for that the Arrians willing
                  •
               ly desired him, for triall thereof to cal a Councell. For thus Iulius him selfe writeth vnto the bishoppes of the East, as it is before al
                  •
               eaged. If I had geuen aduise vnto (your messengers) Macarius and H
                     ••
                  ych
                     ••
                  es, that t
                     •
                  ey that had u
                     ••
                  en vnto me, might be called to a Councell, and th
                     •
                  t inco
                     •
                  si
                     •
                  er
                     •
                  tion of our brethe
                     •
                  n, which complai
                     •
                  ed, they suffie
                     •
                   wrong, although ne
                     •
                  t
                     •
                  er of t
                     •
                  em had desired the same, yet had mine a
                     •
                  uise 
                     •
                  en voyde of 
                     〈◊〉
                  . But nowe seeing the same men, w
                     •
                  om you toke to be graue, and worthy of cre
                     •
                  it, haue made 
                     〈◊〉
                   vnto me, that I shoulde call you, verely, you shoulde not take it in ill parte. Hereby it is plaine that Iulius toke vpon him to call those parties,
                  The 408. For 
                        •
                     ulius cited t
                        •
                     ose parties, and Athanasius bothe.
                  That Pope Iulius I
                        •
                     dg
                        •
                     d not in the Cause off 
                        •
                     thanasius by way
                        •
                      of 
                        •
                     o
                        •
                     promi
                        •
                     e but by Authorite. Hist. tripa
                           •
                        t. lib. 4 Cap. 6.
                not by any such vniuersall Iurisdiction as M. Harding fansyeth, but only by the consent and request of bothe parties.
            If it had pleased M. Iewell to haue vprightly and indifferently considered the rest of this Epistle of Iulius recorded in the workes of Athanasius, of the which he hath here picked out a morsell for his owne tothe, he shoulde easely haue sene, but if partialite and faction haue vtterly blinded him, that this Citation and Summon of the bishopps of the East to Rome, the Appearing of Athanasius there, and the whole dealing of Iulius the Pope therein, was not by consent of bothe parties or by the waie of Compromisse, as M. Iewel fan
                  •
               yeth, but euen according to the lawe and by waie of Authorite. It is euident (as we 
                  •
               aue before declared out of the tripartit history) that th
                  •
                bishopps of the East first accused Athanasius vnto Pope

Iulius, desyring his Consent to his depriuation and expulsion. The Pope thereupon Magnum Athanasium euocauit * regulariter,
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Nic
                        •
                     ph
                        •
                     li. 9. Cap. 6. called forthe, cited or summoned Athanasius the Great according to the Canons. And commaunded also the bishoppes his aduer
                  •
               aries to appeare at their answer. Eusebius the ringleader and chiefe of them sent his legates to the Pope to haue the matter decided there though against his will, as Nicephorus recordeth. But he sone departing this life, the other Arrian bishoppes woulde not appeare. Iulius the Pope in the meane restored Athanasius and Paulus with the other banished bishopps,
                  Sozom. li. 3. Cap. 8. 
               tanquam omnium curam gerens propter prop
                     •
                  iae sedis dignitat
                     •
                  m, as one that had care of them all for the prerog
                  •
               
               tiue of his owne See, saieth the Ecclesiasticall history: He sent with al letters to the Arrian bishops reprouing them for their iniuries committed against the Catholike bishoppes Athanasius and other, as also that they had assembled a Councel at Antioche beside his aduise. The bishops of the East exaspered herewithe, and perceauing the Pope wholy bent to take their aduersaries parte,
                  Socrat. li. 2. Cap. 15. wrote againe, sharpe letters to the Pope, off the which M. Iewell hath alleaged certaine pieces, as Sadde Authorites against the Popes Iurisdiction. To this their sharpe answer Iulius the Pope maketh replie in these letters, out off the which the last wordes of M. Iewel are alleaged. In the beginning he writeth with greate humilite and submission, shewing them indede that they them selues had first moued him therein, wherefore they had lesse cause to grudge, if he were earnest in the matter. But after all those so gentle and faire wordes, which M. Iewell maketh so much of, he writeth that al that was spoken only in respect of their quarelling and vniust complaintes. For thus he saieth. Let these be spoken to satisfie the quarelling and vniust complain
                     •
                  es of your men against vs.
               
                  In epist. I
                        •
                     
                     li
                        •
                     . In Apolog. 2. A
                     
                        •
                     haa
                        •
                     si
                        •
                     .
                After this prosecuting the whol
                  •
                matter off Athanasius and the other Catholike bishops by them expelled, he declareth

that bothe they and Athanasius, had bene cited of him by his letters, by vertu of the which Athanasius appeared, but the other woulde not. The Catholike and lerned bishops did, the heretikes and Arrian bishops did not.
                  Vos per li
                     
                        •
                     eras Citauimus. Lib. 4. Cap. 6. hist. tripa. In epist. I
                        •
                      lij, vbi supra.
                All which the ecclesiasticall history in like maner recordeth. At the ende of the epistle, the Pope expresselye telleth them their duty, and what they ought to haue done, if Athanasius and the other bishoppes had bene culpable and faulty in dede. For thus he saieth. If, as you saie, they had bene faulty, you ought to haue done according to the Canon, and not after this facyon. Yowe ought to haue writen to all vs, that so the right might haue bene tried of vs all. Was there no subiection nowe trowe you M. Iewell dewe off the East bishoppes to the See of Rome? Was there not a Canon or decree that had so appoynted, that matters shoulde be remoued out of the East to Rome it selfe? Let vs yet go farder in this same Epistle. The Pope saieth farder to the bishops of the East. Why woulde yowe not write vnto vs specially of the Citie of Alexandria? Are you ignorant, that this is the custome,
               
                  Vt pri
                        ••
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      nobis scribatur, vt hinc quod iustum est, definiti posset.
                
               that first of all you should write vnto vs, that from hence the right might be determined. Therefore if you had had there any quarell against any bisshop, you ought to haue referred it hither to our Church. Now these men not putting vs to knowleadge, when they haue done what them pleased, require vs to approue their damnation which we haue not bene made preuy vnto, These are not the decrees of Saint Paule. The Fathers haue not so taught vs. But this is a puffing pride and a nouelty. I beseche you harken to me gladly. I write you these thinges for the Common quyet. I signifie vnto you suche thinges as we haue receiued from the blessed Apostle Peter, neither woulde haue writen to you these thinges, whiche you knowe allready, but that your doinges had troubled vs. I beseche you leaue these matters. Thus farre Pope Iulius in those letters to the bishoppes of the East. In these wordes it appeareth that he cited them, that by order of lawe and Custome they ought to referre their matters

to him and his Churche, that there also a definition or determination ought to be sought for. After all this these Arrians not obeying the greate Councell of Sardica was assembled, in the which by three hundred bishops out of al partes of Christendom well nere, it was pronounced against them, that bicause being Cited and called by the letters of Iulius they had not appeared, they declared them selues to be mere slaunderers, and iniurious oppressers of those Catholike bishops Athanasius and other. These thinges considered, let vs viewe, what token or shewe of Compromisse may appeare in this matter, as M. Iewell fansyeth, there was no other thinge in all this doing.
            
               
                  L. statutis. d. sentent. & breuicul. recit.
               First Athanasius was cited to Rome, not hauing put vp his matter thither, but being accused by his aduersaries, whereupon he appeared. In a compromisse or arbitrement betwene dayesmen, no party can be cited, but they must appeare voluntarely.
            
               
                  L. inter stipul § si. slichin. ff. d. verb. oblig.
               Againe Iulius forced the bishoppes of the East to receaue againe Athanasius, and restore him to his bishopricke, with other, as appeareth in the tripartit history. This was a Iudgement by waye of Athoritie not by waie of comprimisse, and forcing the aduersary against his will, which in a Compromisse can not be, as the lawe declareeh.
            
               
                  L. non di
                     
                        •
                     ing. §. nō cegitur. ff. de recept. arb. & l. diē proferre. §. fi. ibidem. L. 1. ff. d. Arbitr.
               Thirdly bicause they appeared not to Iulius cited, the Councell pronounced against them. But in a Compromisse the Arbiter can not punish, nor any other in the Arbiters behalfe. Therefore being condemned of the Councell for not appearing to Iulius, declareth that Iulius was their Iudge, not an Arbiter.
            Last of all the Arbiter or Compromissary hath no Iurisdiction. But the Iudge hath. And such Iulius chalenged ouer them by vertu of a Canō and Custome of the Churche. Theefore Iulius the Pope was their Iudge not an Arbiter, and dealed

with them by waie of Authorite and Iudgement, not by waie of Compromisse.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 409. Vntruthe For not therefore that is not vpon a Compromisse made, but being accused, he cited himAnd therefore Iulius saieth. He caused Athanasius to be cited Regulariter that is, according to order: for the order of iudgement is, that a man be first called, and then accused, and last of all condemned.
            Lo M. Iewell confesseth Athanasius was cited by order of Iudgement, but in a Compromisse no party can be cited, as hath before bene proued, and as the lawe expressely teacheth, therefore by M. Iewelles owde Confession this was no Compromisse, or agreement of the parties. For such do meete together voluntarely, not cited.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .410 Vntruthe For he meaned so.But he meaneth nor thereby the order of Canons, as M. Harding expoundeth it.
            Iulius him selfe alleaged a Canon therefore, as his wordes last alleaged declare. Therefore he meaneth by the order of Canons. This also hath before bene proued. It is nedelesse here to repete it.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .411. Vntruthe as appeareth.For touching Appeales to Rome there was no Canon yet prouided.
            Vntruthe. For in the Nicene Councell such a Canon was prouided, as it hath before bene declared bothe out of the epistles of Iulius, and of Leo, and also by the testimony of Zosimus, who is nowe proued no Forger.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                The Couterfeite epistle of Athanasius to Felix is answered before.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
               
               The .412. Vntruthe For his wordes to leo are certain testimonies of his Iudgement.There is more to be answered then that Epistle M. Iewell, if you will defende this vntruthe, as hath abundantly before appeared.
            Theodoretus was deposed, and banished, and cruelly intreated, as it appeareth by his letters vnto Renatus, and therefore the wordes that he vseth, are rather tokens of his miseries, and wante of helpe, then certain testimonies of his iudgement. For euery man is naturally inclined to extolle him, and to auaunce his power, at whose hande he seketh helpe.
            
               This is the thirde example of Appeale alleaged by D. Harding.Theodoretus Appealed to Pope leo. The two other of Athanasius, and of Chrysostom, are nowe proued to haue bene iust and right appeales. To proue the like in Theodoretus that lerned Father of Christes Churche it is easy notwithstanding M. Iewelles gheasse to the Contrary. His wordes in his owne letters to Pope Leo be plaine. And the whole generall Councell of Chalcedon doth witnes this Restitution made vpon his Appeale. Thus he writeteth to Pope Leo, hauing first declared the iniuries done vnto him &c. Beholde after all this sweate and trauail, I am condemned being not so much as accused.
               
                  In epist. prefixa ō
                     mentar. in Paulum.
                
               But I looke for the Sentence of your Apostolike See. And I beseche and require your holynesse to ayde me in this case, Iustum vestrum & rectum Appellanti Iudicium. Appealing to your right and iust Iudgement, and commaunde me to come before you, and to shewe that my doctrine and belefe foloweth your Apostolike steppes. In these wordes being condēned by Dioscorus the Patriarche of Alexandria, and of the Patriarche also of Antioche Maximus, his owne Ordinary, yet he Appealeth expressely to Pope leo. And he saieth farder. Before all thinges I beseche you I maye knowe from you whether I ought to stande to this wrongefull Iugement, or no. For I looke for your Sentence. Si iudicatis me stare iusseritis, stabo. And if you shall commaunde me te Abide the iudgement, I will abide it, and neuer trouble man here aboute any more: but abide the iust Iudgement of my God and Sauiour Christ Iesus. These wordes I trowe declare sufficiently, plainely and expressely that Theodoretus appealed to the Pope, and rested vpon his Finall Sentence, as the Supreme Iudge in earthe. By this Pope Leo he was restored to his bishopricke, and sett amonge other bishoppes in the Councell of Chalcedon,
                  Act. 1. & Act. 8. as in the Actes thereof it is euident. These are certaine testimonies of his Iudgement, M. Iewell, and vndoubted Arguments of his Appeale. What haue you

yet more to saie against Appeales? This practised Authorite troubled much M. Iewel, And therefore he laboured longe and many waies howe to auoide it. His escapes yet hitherto are founde to be weake, insufficient and Vntrue. Let vs now consider the remnant.
                  The .413. Vntruthe For Ostiensis saieth not so, as M. Iewel fancyeth Extrad. Appell in. Sexto. 
                           •
                        om. Eccles. in Glosa.
                  
                  The .414 Vntruthe For by all lawe an Appeale importeth a Superiorite. Stapletō. That Appeales doe importe a Superiorite. L. q. §. si. quis. ff. d. Appellat.
               
            
            But if it were graunted, it was laufull then for the bishop of Rome to receiue all maner Appeales, in such order, as it is pretended, yet can not M. Hardinge thereof necessarely conclude, that the Bishop of Rome was Head of the Vniuersall Churche. For Ostiensis saieth. Appeales may be made not only from the lower Iudge vnto the higher, but also from equall to equal. And in this order, as it shall afterwarde be shewed more at large, Donatus a Casis nigris, was by the Emperour lawfully remoued frō the Bishop of Rome, to the bishop of Arle in Fraunce. Ostiensis wordes be these. Non nocebit error, si appelletur ad Maiorem quàm debuerit, vel ad parem. The errour shall not hurte, if the Appeale be made either to a higher Iudge then was mete, or to an equall. Where also it is thus noted in the margin. Appellari potest ad parem si de hoc sit consuetudo. Appeale may be made vnto the equall, if there be a custome of it. Hereby it is plaine that the right of Appeale by fine force of lawe, concludeth not any necessary Superiorite, much lesse this infinite power ouer the whole vniuersall Churche.
            Well pleaded, and lyke a lawyer. But Lyke diuinite, lyke lawe. For shame vnderstande your lawes, better before you alleage them, Or els folowe the Paynters Councell Ne sutor vltra crepidam The wordes of the lawe vpon which Ostiensis groundeth, are these. Si quis ergo vel parē, vel maiorem Iudicem apellauerit, alium tamen pro alio, in ea causa est vt error ei non noceat sed si minorem, nocebit. If any man therefore do Appeale to an equall Iudge, or to a higher then he shoulde, as yet mistaking one for the other, the errour shall not hurte, but if he Appeale to an inferiour Iudge, it shall hurte. As in a Case. Iohn being cast by the Archedeacon, Appealed to the Archebishop, where as he should first haue appealed to the bishopp, as to a nerer Superiour. But this errour doth not hurte, bicause he appealed to a higher Iudge. The same Iohn from the Archedeacō
               
appealed to the Officiall of Caūterbury, where as he shoulde haue Appealed to the Iudge of the Prerogatiue Courte. This errour hurteth not neither, bicause he Appealed to a Iudge equall and off like Authorite to that Iudge to whom he ought to haue Appealed. Therefore his Appeale shal procede before the Iudge to whom he should haue Appealed, notwithstanding the errour committed in meaning an other Iudge, being his equall. In the thierde Case Iohn Appealed from his bishop to an other bishop, where as he should haue Appealed to the Archebishopp. In this case he looseth the benefyt of Appeale. Bicause he hath appealed to a Iudge, neither higher, neither equall to that Iudge to whom he ought to haue Appealed, that is to the Archebishop, butt to an inferiour Iudge. For the bishop to whom he Appealed, though he be equall to the Iudge who before had geuen the Sentence, yet he is inferiour to the Iudge to whom the Appeale ought to be made. In this case therefore the Appeale is voide. The wordes therefore of Ostiensis and of the glose saying that the errour hurteth not when the Appeale is made to an equal Iudge, doe not meane,The true meaning of Ostiensis his wordes. a Iudge equall to the party Appealing, or equall to the Iudge from whom the Appeale is made, but they meane a Iudge equall to him to whom of right the Appeale shoulde haue bene made. It is therefore a manifest Vntruthe, contrary to al lawe and reason that M. Iewell saieth. Appeales maye be made not only from the lower Iudge to the higher but from equal to equal And to saie that Ostiensis or the lawe so saieth, it is a double Vntruthe.
                  L. in p. ff. d. Appellat.
                  
                     L. ille quo §. tempestinum. ff. ad Trebel. & L. nam magistrat. ff. de arb. hart. L. 1. n. p ff. d. appellat L. §. sic
                           ••
                        is d. appelat.
                  
                The lawe is plaine to the Contrary both Ciuil and Canon. which is easy to be proued. Appeales were admitted (saieth the lawe) to correct and amende the iniquite, rigour or errour of a former Iudgement. But no Inferiour or equal can correct the Iudgement of his superiour or equall, bicause he hath no rule ouer such. Therefore no Inferiour or equall can take an Appeale from his Superiour or equall. Againe the

lerned lawyers define an Appeale thus. Appellatio est ius quo interim primasententia extinguitur, & iterum causae cognitio ad Iudicem superiorem deuoluitur. Appeale is a lawe by the which the former Sentence is for the time made voide, and the triall off the matter is remoued to a Superiour Iudge. So that the Superiorite of Iudgement is off the very nature of an Appeale. And therefore that euery Appeale ought to be to a Superieur, it is proued saieth Bartolus by infinit lawes: And one lawe expressely saieth,
                  L. minor. magistr. ff. de. minori. gl. ibidem.
                
               Minor magistratus contra sententiam maioris non restituet. The inferiour Iudge or Magistrat shall not acquitte against the Sentence of an higher Iudge. Nor shall not sit vpon any Appeale so made. And against al Appeales to equall Iudges the Authentikes speake expressely. The wordes are these. Cum non oportet ad compares Iudices appellationes referri,
               
                  In antent d. apell. et intr. que temp § illo col. 4. 
               sed a minore iudicio in maius tribunal ascendere.
            
            Whereas Appeales maye not be remoued to equall Iudges, but they ought allwaies from an inferiour Iudgement, remoue to a higher benche. Finally as certaine a principle it is in the lawe, that euery Appeale is to a Superiour, as it is in diuinite, that al that do swere, do sweare by their letter, as the Apostle saieth.
                  Hebr. 6. Therefore the Canon lawe admitteth Appeales but only to a Superiour, where it saieth.29. q. 6. c. Omnis opp
                        •
                     essus &c. placuit.
                
               Placuit vt si a quibuscunque ecclesiasticis iudicibus ad alios Iudices ecclesiasticos, vbi est maior Authoritas, prouocatum fuerit, audientia non negetur. It hath semed good, that if Appeale be made from any ecclesiasticall Iudge to other ecclesiastical Iudges which be of a higher Authorite, that Audience be geuen. This shifte therefore neither of Ostiensis and the glose, Neither of any other lawe Ciuil or Canon helping any whit against the Authorite of Appeales: what other conuayaunce hith M. Iewell to dasel the Readers eyes withall, or to blancke his euident and most assured Argument of the bishop of Romes Supremacy ouer all bishops, as being one to whom all other, the chiefest Patriarches them selues haue appealed?

You see howe many waies he had laboured against it, and what paines and trauail he hath bestowed thereon, and yet hath brought no Argument, but such as if it were true, it was of no force, if it was of force, it was not true. Lest al his labour therefore shoulde be lost, he dilateth yet the matter one waye more and beginneth as if it were a freshe, thus.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .415 416. and 417. Vntruthes, as shall particulary appeare.But M. Harding might soo haue foreseene, that this his first principle of Appeale would easely be turned against him 
                  •••
               fe. First for that it is well knowen, that Appeales then euen in the Ecclesiasticall cause
                  •
                were made vnto the Emperours and ciuile Princes. Secondely for that the bishop of Rome determined such cases of Appeale, by warrant, and Commission from the Emperour. Thirdly for that matters being once hearde, and determined by the bishop of Rome, haue bene by Appeale from him remoued furder vnto others.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                Here be three? but if. M. Iewell thryue with any one, let him take all.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .418 Vntruthe For the contrary appeareth in S. Augustin Iewell.As touching the first, that Appeales in Ecclesiasticall causes were lawefully made to the Prince, it is clere by Eusebius, by Socrates, by Nicephorus, and by S. Augustine in sundrie places.
            Al these foure Authours, are brought aboute one selfe matter. And that is this.
            Donatus being condemned by three score and tenne bishops in Africa, appealed vnto the Emperour Constantinus and was receiued.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                That heretike Donatus appealed in dede, and was receiued. but knowe you, howe he was receiued M. Iewell? Optatus an Africane bishop and liuing in the heate off that tragedy him selfe, writeth thus. Lectis literis, Constantinus pleno liuore respondit. In qua responsione et eorum preces prodidit, dum ait. Petitis a me in s
                     •
                  culo iudicium, cum ego ipse Christi Iudicium expectem. Et tamen dati sunt Iudices &c. The Supplications of the Donatistes appealing from their owne bishopps to the Emperour being read, the Emperour answered in a great

chafe, (in the which awnswer also he betraied their request) saying. You aske Iudgement of me here in this worlde, whiche doe looke for the Iudgement of Christe my selfe. Yet he appoynted them Iudges. It appeareth by this, Donatus with his felowes were receiued, as M. Iewell saieth, but with what contentation of the Emperour they were receiued, and howe wel he liked their dealing therein, it appeareth by his Answer.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                S. Augustin saieth.
                  Contra epist parm. lib. 1. cap. 5. Contra Crost. lib. 3. ca. 71. 
               Parmenianus willingly suffred his felowes to goe vnto the Emperour Constantinus. Againe he saieth. Here I bringe in the wordes off Constantine, out of his own letters, wherein he confesseth, that he hearde the parties, and founde Coecilianus to be innocent.
            
            This was done of Constantin as S. Augustine immediatly after declareth, quum ad iudicium eius post episcopalia iudicia partes perductae fuerant,
               Stapleton
               
                  August. ibidem
                when the partes were brought to his Iudgement after the bishopps Iudgement had passed vpon them. But howe well he toke that, and howe he repented him after thereof, it shall anon appeare.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Likewise he saieth, VVhat,
               
                  Contra epi. Parm. lib. 1. ca. 7. 
               is it not lawfull for the Emperour or such as shall be sent by the Emperour, to pronounce Sentence of Religion? VVherefore then came your Embassadours to the Emperour? And so Likewise againe, Iff Emperours haue nothinge to commaunde in these cases, or if 
               He speaketh there of punishing heretikes 
               this matter nothinge touche a Christian Emperours charge, who then forced your predecessours to remoue Caecilianus matter vnto the Emperour?
            
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
                All this S. Augustin spake against those stubborne Donatistes of whom Parmenianus was one, which complained,
                  Aug. vbi supra.
                
               quod eos Constantinus ad campum, id est, ad supplicium duei iussit, that Constantin called them forth to the cāpe, that is to punishmēt. He reasoned I saie against the Donatist, by his owne doinge. Not as allowing the Donatiste in appealing to the Emperour, but as prouing him vnreasonable, which for their vauntage woulde appeale to him, and then when he pronounced against them, and badde them be punished, woulde striue and repine at his commaundement, and say he dyd them wronge, and ought not being a temporall prince to punishe bishoops.

For in like maner when a Donatiste obiected to S. Augustin, of one Felix a Catholike bishop, saying. Non debuit Episcopus proconsulari iudicio purgari.
               
                  Augustin. epis. 162. A bishop ought not to make his purgation before a temporall Magistrat, S. Augustine in like maner answered, as he did here to Parmenianus. Si culpandus est quem Iudex ter
                     •
                  enus absoluit, cum ipse sibi hoc non poscisset, quanto magis culpandi sunt, qui terrenū regem, suae causae Iudicem esse voluerunt? If that bishop Felix be to be blamed, bicause he was absolued of a temporall Iudge, whereas he him selfe sought not so to be absolued or examined, howe muche more are they to be blamed, whiche desired them selues the temporall Prince to be Iudge in their Cause? In bothe these places S. Augustin confuteth the Donatistes by their own doinges, which is a kinde of answer quoad hominem sufficient.The App
                     ••••
                   of 
                     〈◊〉
                   is to the Emperour mislyked. But howe in dede bothe the Emperour liked that Appealing of the Donatistes to him, and what S. Augustine him selfe hathe iudged thereof, it shall nowe shortly appere. That the Donatistes Appealed M. Iewell hathe proued. And it is not denied. But how well they did in it, he saieth nothinge. Beholde therefore gentle Reader howe well it was liked, and Iudge thereby what a grounded example M. Iewell hathe brought to builde this Principle vpon, that Appeales in ecclesiasticall causes were made to Emperours and Ciuil Princes. Optatus writeth thereof thus.
                  Optatus lib. 1. contr. Parmenianum.
                
               Donatus appellandum esse ab Episcopis credidit, & reliqua. Ad quam Appellationem Constantinus Imperator sic respondit. O rabida furoris audacia. Sicut in causis gentilium fieri solet appellationem interposuerunt. Donatus thought good to Appeale from the bishops and so forthe. Vnto the which Appeale the Emperour answered thus. O desperat rage and fury. As in the suites of heathen and Pagans, so these men put vpp their Appeale. So well the Emperour liked their doing therein howe well S. Augustin liked it, and howe well the Emperour receiued the Appeale of those vnruly and furious Donatistes,

it shall nowe appeare by his owne wordes, whiche I beseche thee, gentle Reader, diligently to consider and beare awaye. These are his wordes. Dedit ille aliud Arelatense iudicium aliorum scilicet episcoporum, non quia iam necesse erat,
               
                  August. epist. 162. 
               sed eorum peru
                     •
                  rsitatibus cedens, & omnimodo cupiens tantam impudentiam cohibere. Neque enim ausus est Christianus Imperator sic eorum tumultuosas & fallaces querelas suscipere, vt de iudicio Episcoporum qui Romae sed
                     •
                  rant ipse iudicaret, sed alios, vt dixi, Episcoposdedit a quibus tamen illi ad ipsum ru
                     •
                  sum Imperatorem prouocare maluerunt. Qua in re illos quemadmodum detestetur audistis: Atque vtinam saltem ipsius iudicio insanissimis animositatibus suis finem posuissent, atque vt eis ipse cessit, (vt de illa causa post episcopos iudicaret, a sanctis Antistibus postea veniam petiturus, tamen illi quod vlterius dicerent non haberent, si eius sententiae non obtemperarent ad quem ipsi prouocauerunt) sic & illi aliquando cederent veritati. Constantin the Emperour (saieth S. Augustine) gaue to the Donatistes (after they had bene ones cast by Meltiades the Pope with other bishops) an other Iudgement at Arles in Fraunce, of other bishops: Not bicause it was nowe nedefull, but bicause he yelded to their stubbornesse, and desired by all meanes possible to ouercome their outragyousnesse. For that Christian Emperour durst not so to admitte their seditious and fayned complaintes, that he woulde him selfe sit Iudge vpon the Sentence of those bishops whiche had decided and determined the matter at Rome, but he appointed them as I saied, other bishops: From whome yet ones againe these felowes Appealed to the Emperour him selfe. Wherein howe he detested them, you haue In the wordes 
                     •
                  f Epitatus last alleaged. hearde. And woulde God that vpon Iudgement and determination, they had ones ended their most outragious stubbornesse, and as he yelded vnto them (so farre that he toke vpon him to Iudge of that Matter after the Bishops, minding yet to aske pardon thereof of the holy bishops, so that at length yet they might haue no more to saie, if

they would not yelde to his Sentence, to whō they had thēselues Appealed) as he I saie yelded to them, so they woulde ones to the Truthe. Thus farre that holy and lerned Father S. Augustin. In whose wordes I answer to you and to your whole Argument M. Iewell thus. Woulde God M. Iewell (and from the bottom of my harte I wish it) that as that good and vertuous Emperour Constantin the greate, yelded so farre to those outragyous vnruly, and furious Donatistes, that being condemned in their owne Countre by three score ad tenne bishops he gaue them yet (appealing to him beside all lawe and order of the Churche) two other Iudgements of bishops one in Italy an other in Fraunce) which last was more then nede as S. Augustin expressely saieth) only to stoppe, if it were possible, their outragions clamours and seditious complaintes, as he at the lenght was content to heare their matter him selfe, after the Iudgement of so many bishops, whereof he woulde afterwarde aske them pardon, as hauing in dede passed therein the boundes of his Iurisdiction, as this good Emperour I saie did all this, not as by lawfull Authoryte, but as yelding to the Donatistes vnruly appetit, so that you also M. Iewell woulde ones yelde to the Truthe, that you woulde no more bringe this and such like examples (deceiued herein vndoubtedly by the writers of Germany especially those of Magdeburge) for the Authorite of Ciuill Princes in Causes ecclesiastical, whereas by the clere verdit of S. Ambrose neither by practise of the Churche,
               
                  Ambros. lib. 5. Epist. 32. 
               neither by the doctrine of holy Scriptures, Emperours did euer Iudge ouer bishops in matters of the Faithe. And thus I leaue your example of Donatus, whose example beside cā make no lawe, he being an heretike, and for mayntenaunce of his heresy seeking all helpe and succour, by right and by wronge, by order and beside order, by meanes good and badde. Nowe to that which foloweth.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Therefore the Emperour Constantius summoned the Bishops of

the East that had bene in the Coūcel of Tyrus, to appeare before him, and to rendre accompte of their doinges. His wordes be these. I will you to make your appearaunce, and to shewe in dede howe sincerely and iustly ye haue delte, and that euen before me.
            
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                Howe this was done and vpon what occasion, and in what a cause, and what ensewed thereof, I haue declared. To that place I remit the Reader, Let vs nowe consider your Conclusion.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 419. Vntruthe For by these examples such Iurisdiction in the Prince appeareth not.By these fewe examples it may well appeare that Appeales in ecclesiasticall causes in these daies were made vnto the Prince, and that it was thought lawefull then for the Prince to haue the hearing of the same. Yet was not the Prince therefore the head of the Vniuersall Churche.
            Your examples haue bene but two. And bothe of one Emperour and Prince Constantin by name. And with what conscience he toke vpon him to Iudge of matters decided before by bishops, you haue heard S. Augustin tell you M. Iewell. He did the first to pacifie those outregious Donatistes, and 
                  •
               he asked pardon thereof afterwarde of the bishoppes. He did the latter to pacifie likewise the Arrians, and in a matter not mere ecclesiasticall, as hath before bene declared. Of the Issue whereof he repented him at lenght also. These be your examples M. Iewel that in the time of so many Christen Emperours and Princes you haue chosen out as most worthy and especiall. One more you recite euen after your Conclusiō made, which is this.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Certainely S. Gregorie thought it not amisse to committe a Spiritual matter, touching the purgation of a bishop to Brunichi
                     •
                  da th
                  •
                Frenche Quene, Notwithstanding it be noted thus in the glose. Fuit tamen 
                     〈◊〉
                   nim
                     ••
                  m papaliter disp
                     •
                  nsatum.
            
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
               
               S. Gregory committed a Spiritual Matter to the Quene of Fraunce. Ergo Appeales may be made to the laye Prince. Thus M. Iewelles reason procedeth. But doth not the Cōtrary directly Conclude? The Pope committed a Spiritual matter to the

laye Prince. Ergo the laye Prince was but the Popes Commissioner. Verely the Commissioner is euer Inferiour to him that geueth forthe the Commission. And thus M. Iewelles reason ronneth roundely against him. As touching this Commission S. Gregory had a reason for his so doing. But what his minde was for any Appeale to be made to Ciuill Princes in Ecclesiasticall matters, or for their intermedling there withall, it may appere well bothe by the vniuersall Supremacy that he practised ouer all Christendome, as hath before bene declared, and also by these wordes of his to Mauritius the Emperour. Sacerdotibus autem non extrema potestate dominus noster citius indignetur,
               
                  Lib. 4. epist. 21. In the Fortresse fol. 145. Ang. epist. 166. Greg orat. ad subl
                        •
                     tim. Ambros. lib. 5. epist. 32. 
               sed excellenti consideratione propter eum cuius serui sunt eis ita dominetur, vt etiam debitam reuerentian impendat. Let not my Soueraine for his worldly power conceiue quicke Indignation against the priestes, but by a worthy and Princely consideration, for his sake, whose seruaūtes they are, let him se rule ouer them, that yet he yelde them also dewe and Bounden Reuerence. Of this matter, howe in Spirituall causes the Christian Princes are subiecte to their spirituall Pastours and bisshoppes, I haue otherwhere out of S. Augustin, S. Ambrose and Gregory Nazianzen, ye out of Caluin him selfe and the right or Zelous Lutherās of Germany, Illyricus and his felowes declared. But bicause M. Iewell putteth it here for a principale that Princes receaued Appeales in Causes ecclesiasticall, and all his examples haue failed him, let vs consider what may be farder yet brought to the Contrary. Athanasius that lerned Father saieth of the Arrians.
                  Apolog. 2. 
               Qua fronte comentum Synodi appellare audent, Cui Comes praecedit. Howe dare they call that an assembly of a Synode, where the Princes Officier was president?
                  Epist. ad so litariam vitam agentes.
                And in an other place he saieth. Quando a condito aeuo auditū est quód iudi
                     •
                  ium Ecclesiae authoritatem suam ab Imperatore accepit, aut quando hoc pro iudicio agnitum est? When was it euer heard that an Ecclesiasticall Iudgement toke his Authorite

of the Emperour? Or when was that taken for any Iudgement. Beholde M. Iewell howe contrary this is to your Appeales to Ciuil Princes in Causes ecclesiasticall. Yet beholde an other. The Fathers of the Millenitane Councel in Africa whose Authorite so ofte and so gredely you haue alleaged, decreed in this sorte.
                  Concil. Mill
                        •
                     nit. Cap. 19. 
               Placuit vt quicunque ab Imperrtore cognitionem Iudiciorum publicorum petierit, honore proprio priuetur. Si autem Episcopale iudicium ab Imperatore postulauerit, nihil ei obsit. It hath semed good vnto vs, that if any sue to the Emperour to haue him heare and determine publike Iudgementes, that he be depriued therefore of his dignite. But if he require of the Emperour a Iudgement of bishopps, it shalll not hurte him. Semblably to these holy Fathers, the bishops in the Coū
               cell of Aquileia dealed. For whereas Palsadius the heretike required the laye men of worship to come in to the Councell, and to heare the matters debated, saying. Sunt hic honorati multi. Here be many men of worship,
                  Ingesiis Conc. Aquil
                        •
                     iensis. tom. 1. Concil. fol. 402. S. Ambrose one of the lerned bishops of that Councell saied. Sacerdotes de laicis iudicare debent, non laici de sacerdotibus. Priestes ought to Iudge of the laye, not the laye of the Priestes. And bicause that heretike Palladius persisted yet in his request, that the laye men off worship shoulde enter and be a parte of the Councell, S. Ambrose without any farder busynes, pronounced out of hande the Sentence against him (whiche the whole Councell folowed) in these wordes. Though Palladius hath bene taken in many faultes, y
                     •
                  t this m
                     •
                  k
                     •
                  th vs ashamed that he which goeth for a Priest, shoulde seme to be condemned of the laye? And ther
                     •
                  fore bicause euen for this pointe he is to be condemn
                     •
                  d, that looketh for the Iudgement or S
                     •
                  ntence of the Laye men, whereas rather Priestes ought to Iudge ouer the Laye, according to those thinges as we haue hearde this daye Palladius to speake, and for other thinges whiche he woulde not reuoke, I pronounce him vnworthy of priesthood, and to be deposed, and that some Catholike man be Ordred in his place. Thus

the lerned and godly Fathers in those dayes dealed with such which woulde from bishops appeale to the Ciuill magistrat. In like maner Dioscorus the Eutychian required in the Chalcedon Councell, to haue the temporall magistrat to be a parte of the Councell at their Examinations. but Cecropius a Catholike bishop answered him for the Councell in these wordes: Quando quaedam regularia examinatur, neque Iudices neque alios aliquos laicos interesse oportet, nisi tantummodo tuam sanctitatem que in propria persona accusatur. When any thinges touching the Canons are examined, neither Iudges neither any other of the laye ought to be present, but only your holynesse, whose proper person is here accused. Thus in matter mere ecclesiasticall the Godly Fathers and Catholike bishops of those dayes admitted not att any time the laye Prince or Magistrat to the hearing and determining thereof. Only heretikes, the donatistes, the Arrians, the Eutichians and such like haue so done. Beware M. Iewell left in defending this your absurde Principle so iust concurring with the humour off olde heretikes, and so directly repugnant to the Catholike and lerned Fathers, S. Augustin, S. Ambrose, Athanasius, S. Gregory, and the Fathers of the Councelles of Millenitum, of Aquileia, and of Chalcedon, you proue your selfe to be of a cousynage to the one, and no true childe off the other. Thus much of your first principle. Nowe to your seconde.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 420 Vnttruthe Capitain, Infamous and Notorious. Hi
                        •
                     t. trip. lib. 4. Niceph. li. cap.
               As touching the Bishopp of Romes power herein, it is certain, he hearde such matters of Appeale by warrant of the Emperours Commission, and not as hauing Authorite of him selfe.
            This is certainely a lewde and a lowde lie. Athanasius, Paulus Asclepas, Marcellus, Lucius and diuers other godly bishops Appealed to Iulius the bishop of Rome, and yet had al of them the Emperour Constantius expressely against them, Chrysostom appealed to Innocentius the Pope, and yet had Arcadius then Emperour directly against him, so that the Pope

was driuen att the length to excommunicat that Emperour. Flauianus an other Patriarche of Constantinople appealed to Pope Leo, though Theodosius toke the parte of Dioscorus his aduersary. Theodoretus in like maner to the same Pope appealed, though the Emperour of the East vpholded the faction of Dioscorus and Maximus of Antioche by whom that lerned Father was iniured.
                  Leo epist. 24. et valentin. in epist. ad Theodos. In epist. ad Leonem. Liberatus Cap. 18. Iohn Talaida the Patriarke of Alexandria being remoued from his bishopricke by Zeno the Emperour, and Petrus Moggus intruded in his place Romanum Pontificem Simplicium appellauit, sicut & beatus fecit Athanasius, ppealed vnto Simplicius bishop of Rome, as his predecessour blessed Athanasius had done before him saieth Liberatus. These many therefore of the greatest Patriarches and of right lerned Fathers Athanasius, S. Chrysostom, and Theodoretus appealing all to the bishop of Rome not only beside the Emperours warrant, but euen directly against the Emperours wil and pleasure: how can M. Iewelles principle possibly be true, that bishops of Rome hearde such matters of Appeale by warrant of the Emperours Commission? Yet let vs beholde his proufes.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                S. Augustine opening the Contention betwene Caecilianus and Donatus a Casis nigris, vttereth this matter it large in wise. But should not the bishop of Rome Meltiades &c.
            
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                This is al in the worlde that M. Iewel hath to proue his General Principle true, this one only example I saie of that rude and outragious heretike Donatus. How is so doing was liked of S. Augustin and of Optatus, and with what confidence that good Emperour dealed therein, it hath euen nowe bene declared. Were M, Iewelles cause good he would bringe better examples and more copie of them. But as Vna hirundo non facit ver, so one example maketh no lawe. Againe al that being done only to satisfie and quyet, if it were possible, the most outragious and harebrayne stomaches of the Donatistes, only

               Bono Pacis, for the loue and Zeale of Vnite of that godly and zelous Emperour Constantin, it must not be drawen to make a generall rule and Principle, but with such as wil take presidēt of heretikes doinges. If you do soe M. Iewell, I can but wishe you a better minde. Verely the examples of Catholike bishops aboue named, so many, so lerned, of such great Authorite in the Churche of Christ, which practised the Contrary, which appealed to the bishops of Rome not only beside the warrant, but euen against the Emperours will and pleasure: may and ought with much more reason serue to builde a contrary rule and Principle vpon. Yet you vpon this Only beggarly example of that Outragious heretike so much misliked of the Emperour him selfe, of the lerned Fathers Optatus and S. Augustin, and of all the Posterite sence, as the like thereof hath not bene Practised but by heretikes and schismatikes, cō
               clude solemnely and saie.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .421 Vntruthe past all shame and honesty. Stapletō.Here is euident to be sene that bishopp of Rome was the Emperours delegate, and in Ecclesiasticall Iurisdiction had his Authorite, not from S. Peter, but from the Emperour.
            With what face speake you this M. Iewell, or speake you it with any Face at all? Howe woulde you Conclude and Triū
               phe if you had copie of examples, and that of Catholike bishops, yea and the most lerned Fathers of Christes Churche (such as I haue brought you to the contrary) which do so mightely conclude and so royally triumphe, of One wretched example, done by One desperat Heretike, myslyked by the Emperour him selfe, and by other godly Fathers beside, Optatus and S. Augustin by name? But bolde affeueration maketh no proufe. And you knowe M. Iewell, greate vessels be not alwaies full: but the emptyer they be, the more they soūde. The wise and discrete Reader will be weighed with Reason, and not with talke. And it must sone be concluded, that can but lightly be proued. Your Reporte of Pope Clemens, bicause you

speake it without booke, only vpō Reporte, I let passe. Eadem facilitate negatur, qua asseritur.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Neither was the Bishoppe of Romes determination of such force, The .422 Vntruth. For that was neuer laweful
                     •
                  .   but that it was lawfull then for the party greued, to refuse his Iudgement, and to Appeale further.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                This is M. Iewelles thirde Principle. Beholde how substantially he proueth it.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .423 Vntruth. For not therefore j. not bicause it was lawfull, donatus his Appeale was admitted.And therefore Donatus being condemned before Meltiades appealed from him, and vpon his complainte vnto the Emperour, w
                  •
               s put ouer vnto the bishop off Arle in Fraunce, and to certain others. And in Conclusion, vnderstanding, that iudgement there would passe against him, last of all he appealed to the Emperours owne person. And the Emperour him selfe confesseth by his letters that he sate in Iudgement and hearde bothe parties.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                Phy on heresy, phy vpon wilfull blindnesse. One desperat Acte of One furious heretike Donatus by name must serue M. Iewell to builde Three Greate Conclusions and Principles vpon. Donatus did all this. But the Emperour called it Rabidamfurioris Audaciam. A desperat Rage and Fury. M. Iewell calleth it a Lawfull Appeale.
                  Optatus lib. 1. After the bishop of Romes Iudgement, the Emperour graunted to Donatus yet an other, S. Angustin saieth. Non quia iam nec
                     •
                  sse erat,
               
                  August. epist. 
                  
                     •
                  6
                     •
                  . 
               sed eorum peruersitatibus cedens & omnimodo cupiens tantam impudentiam cohibere. Not bicause that was nedefull, but bicause that the good Emperour yelded to their extreme frowardnesse, and desired by al meanes to ouercome their passing outragyousnesse. M. Iewell buildeth vpon this fact a Principle that all men might lawfully Appeale from the Pope to the Emperour. Constantin satt in Iudgement, and heard bothe parties him self. S. Augustin saieth A Sāctis Antistibus postea veniam petiturus, Minding to aske pardō therfor afterward of the holy bishops. M. Iewel saith it was well and Lawfully done, and so it should be. And this is he forsoth, which wil yelde to any One Sentēce of any One Father or Doctour, in a nūber of Articles, O M. Iewel. If you meane

plainly, if you will in dede yelde to the Fathers, why make you a grounde of Doctrine vpon such a facte as by their Iudgement is so detested and abhorred? You offred your Reader a Feast of three faire dishes. But all is moued to a Calues tounge, diuersly dreste. All is the desperat fact of one outragyous heretike. Your Arte is good. But Alas you w
                  •
               nte Matter, For beholde, Of so weake proufe, what a stronge Conclusion you make.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 424 Vntruthe Facing. and extreme Impudent.Nowe if receiuing Appeales necessarely importe this Vniuersall Power, then was the Emperours powre Vniuersall. For he receiued All appeales, out of all Countres vvithout exception, and that euen in Causes ecclesiasticall.
            Loe. Of one desperat facte, Of One Rabida furoris Audacia, One presumptuous fury, M. Iewell concludeth All Appeales out of all Countres vvithout exception. I can saye no more. But a whetston, a whetston for you.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .425 Vntruthe As before.Againe, then was the bishop of Romes power not Vniuersall, for it was lawfull then to refuse him, and to Appeale to some other.
            Lese nothinge I pray you, Conclude apase and as mightely as you can. What M, Iewell? Thinke you to outface vs with ioyly bragges and greate vauntes, as if ye were playing at poste, and shoulde winne all by vyeing? No M. Iewell. You maye not so dor vs. Iewell. pag. 302.Your single solde facte of One desperat heretike, maye not conclude a Threefolde Principle and an Vniuersall Proufe for all Catholikes to folowe. If you like such presidents, folowe them. we like them not, we defye them. They are the enemies of Gods peace, the Cancre of Christen common welthes, the poyson of our soules. We haue better presidents, lerned Fathers, Catholike bishops and holy Councels to folowe bothe in making Appeales to Rome, and in refusing of all Appeales to the Ciuill magistrat, as it hath in this Conflict at large bene proued, Nowe you make an ende.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 426 Vntruthe Slaund.And this M. Hardinges reasons renne roundely against him.
            
               Thus M. Iewelles proufes haue all failed him. His threefolde Assaulte in Conclusion hath proued but single solde.
            Hitherto of Appeales from the chiefest Patriarkes of the worlde to the See of Rome, whereby the Superiorite and Primacy of that See ouer all Churches is vnuincibly proued. All that M. Iewell coulde possibly deuise to saie against it, is answered, I trust, sufficiently. God graunte my small labour may edifye, and helpe to bringe vs to the dewe Obedience of Christes vicair here on earthe, without the which we shall neuer see ende of heresyes, schismes, and dissension.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               The speciall grace and singular priuilege (of the Churche of Rome neuer to faile in the faithe) is to be imputed vnto the praier of Christ, by which he obteined of God for Peter and his successours (108) that their faith shoulde not faile.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .427 Vntruthe Slaund.The .108. Vntruthe. For many Popes haue erred faithe as shal appeare.
            Then it behoueth vs to answer to the reasons, and argumentes, by which you will persuade that it will so appeare. First you alleage three places out of the prophets, wickedly and notoriously wrested and wrethed, as it hath before bene declared in the 105. Vntruthe, where you drawe vs to this common place of holy scriptures by you wrested and wrethed from their due and right meaning. And truly to this purpose they make nothinge: Vnlesse M. Iewell will frame his reasons after this sorte. Micheas saied that the priestes and Prophetes being wicked rested them selues vpon the Lorde. Hieremy saieth of the priestes and of the elders that they had a confidence in their Councell and lawe as though it shoulde neuer faile. Item Micheas againe saieth, that the priestes of the Iewes should haue night and darkenesse in stede of their visions and prophecies. Ergo many Popes haue erred in the faithe.

Who euer made any such argumentes in any schole? what, will M. Iewell make folcke beleue that Micheas and Hieremy the prophets haue writen in their prophecies that many Popes haue erred in the saithe?
                  Iewell. 
               
               pag. 6. Or doth M. Iewell thinke that these reasons must be taken bicause he speaketh the worde? But he will saie. Micheas an hieremy do tell vs that the priestes did amisse, and yet craked that they coulde not be deceiued. We denie it not. But did they speake any thinge of the Popes of Rome, did they testifie so longe before that they should erre in the faithe? why maie we not thinke rather that Micheas rebuked the proude priestes, and foretolde of the fall of their Synagoge, and of their blindnesse they should be in at the coming of the Messias. And that Hieremy rebuked their vices, not their belefe,
                  Hierem. 18. their conspiracy to destroye him (as he did in dede) not any Councell of theirs touching the obseruation of Moyses lawes? Thus M. Iewell wresteth and wretheth holy Scripture at his preasure.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Certainely the very glose vpon the decretalles putteth this Matter vtterly out of doubte. These be the wordes: It is certaine that the pope may erre. And Alphonsus saieth. Euery man may erre in the faith, yea although it be the Pope.
            
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                You knowe well, M. Iewell, it is not auouched by D. Hardinge, neither defended by the Catholikes, that the Pope in his owne person, and as a priuat man, can not possibly erre. For so we saie with the decretalles and with Alphonsus to,In what sence it is auouched, that the Pope can not erre. that the Pope may erre and hath erred bothe in faithe and in maners, touching his owne priuat person. But the thinge which is here auouched by D. Harding and which is by vs defended, is that the Pope as the Head of the Churche can neuer erre, that is, he can neuer decree any thinge erroneous or contrary to the faythe, he can neuer deliuer any false doctrine to the Churche contrary to the faithe. You knowe M. Iewell by the debating of this controuersie amonge the lerned of this

age, as well on your side, as amonge the Catholikes, this to be the State of the question. For so the faithe of Peter was prayed for not only for the person of Peter (in whom it was very weake, when he denied Christ, euen after that praier made) but for the whole Churche committed to Peter. This is the State of the question. Now to your Proufes.
            
               Alphonsus de Castro saieth. It is certain that Liberius was an Arrian.
               
                  Iew
                        •
                     ll. C
                           •
                        n
                           •
                        r. haer. li. 1. cap. 4. Stapleton. Lib. 2. cap. 17.
                  
                     In epist. ad solitariam vitam agē
                        tes.
                  
               
            
            By Theodoretus and Athanasius better Authors then is Alphonsus, it is certain he was banished two yeres for nott yelding to the Arrians and resisted also the Emperour Constantius face to face in defence of the Catholike faithe, against the Arrian heresy. Of h
                  •
               s yelding afterwarde though Athanasius do mention, yet he excuseth him expressely for no Arrrian. And certain it is he neuer decreed for the Arrian heresy.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Pope Honorius was an heretike,
                  Concil. Cō
                     stant. 6. Act. 13. off the secte of them which were called Monothelite, condemned for the same in the sixt Councel holden at Constantinople.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
                That Councell in dede as it is nowe sette forthe, Dothe recken Honorius the Pope of Rome amonge other bishopps condemned for that heresy. But Bloudus, Aeneas Syluius, Sabellicus Platina do reporte that this Pope Honorius was the first that condemned the same heresy. That also by the meanes of this Pope, Heraclius the Emperour being fallen in to that heresy was reduced to the Catholike faithe, and persuaded to bannish one Pyrrhus by whom he had ben seduced into Africa. Therefore as this very sixte Councell of Constantinople confesseth that the Actes of the fifte general councel had bene corrupted by heretikes, yea and epistles forged in the name of Vigilius the Pope vnto Menna the bishop of Constantinople and againe of Menna to Vigilius, in defence of that same heresy of the Monothelites: so it may seme this sixt Councell hath bene by the grecians corrupted 
                  •
               nd the name of Honorius the Pope thrust in among other bishops. And this to haue

ben the maner of the grecians to faine writinges of Popes off Rome, or to corrupt thē with heresies, it appeareth wel by the complainte off Pope Nicolas the first in his 
                  Tom. 1. Conc. fol. 748. epistle to Michael the Emperour, of 
                  In praefat.
                Athanasius in the 8. Synod. of 
                  Epist. 82. leo the first in his letters to the bishopp of Palestina, and in 
                  Lib. 5. Epist. 14. S. Gregory. in his letters to Narses. But an vnuincible argument that Honorius the Pope was no heretike nor condemned in that Councell, are the wordes of Agatho the Pope, whose legates were president att that Councell, the wordes I saie off his epistle sent to the Councel, and read in the Councel, where he hath these wordes.
                  Actione. 4 
               Hec est verae fidei regula, quam & in prosperis & aduersis viuaciter tenuit Apostolica Christi ecclesia, que per Dei gratiam a tramite Apostolicae traditionis nunquam errasse probabitur nec hereticis nouitatibus deprauata succubuit, quia dictum est Petro.
               
                  L
                        •
                     cae. 22. 
               Ego pro te rogaui vt non deficiat fides tua: & tu aliquando conuersus confirma fratres tuos. Hic dominus fidem Petri non defuturam promisit, & confirmare eum fratres suos admonuit, quod Apostolicos pontifices meae exiguitatis predecessores confidenter fecisse semper cunctis est cognitum.
            
            This is the rule of the right faithe, whiche the Apostolike Churche of Christ hath earnestly defended bothe in prosperite and in aduersite, which also by the grace of God shall neuer be found to straie from the pathe of Apostolike tradition, neither hath yet yelded to hereticall nouelties. Bicause it was saied to Peter.
                  Lucae. 22. 
               I haue praied for thee Peter, that thy faithe shall not faile. And thou being sometime conuerted Confirme they bretherne. Here our lorde hath promised that the faithe of Peter shoulde not faile, and our Lorde here commaunded him to confirme his bretherne. Which the Apostolike bishops my predecessours to haue allwaies earnestly done, it is knowen to all men. Thus Farre Agatho the Pope in that epistle sent to the Sixt generall Councell, read in that Councell,

and allowed by their commom consent all crying, in ea per Agathonem Petrum loqui, that Peter speake in that letter by the mouthe of Agatho. Nowe howe is it possible that Honorius the Pope who liued not three score yeares before that tyme,
                  Actor. 4. shoulde there presently haue bene condemned for an heretike, and yet the epistle of Agatho then Pope, auouching constantly that none of his predecessours euer were heretikes, be allowed for Catholike. Therefore vndoubtedly either that Councell is nowe corrupted, as the fifte general Councell was by heretikes, or els Honorius was condemned not as Pope, nor as decreeing and defending that heresy by publike authorite, but as holding that hereticall opinion by him selfe, and as vttering the same in his letters to Sergius of Constantinople. And then Honorius was in dede condemned there for an heretike, but not the Pope: Els Pope Agatho had most impudētly abused the Councell, and the Councel no lesse wickedly dissembled his falshood, when bothe he auouched that none of his predecessours had bene heretikes, and that his auouching the Councel allowed. Hereunto may be added that Photius the bishop of Constantinople, writing of the seuen generall Councelles, and reakoning vp al that were in those Councelles condemned, maketh no mencion at all of this Honorius Pope off Rome.
                  In epist. ad Michaelem Bulgariae principem.
                And thus farre it appeareth that the example of Honorius dothe nothinge weaken the praier off Christ, praying for Peters faithe neuer to faile, either in him or his successours.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Pope Marcellinus openly made Sacrifice vnto an Idole.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                So S. Peter denied Christ, euen after Christ had praied for him that his faithe should not faile. But as Peter notwithstanding suffred after Martyrdome for Christes name, so did this Marcellinus also suffer Martyrdome euen by that Emperour Diocletian, by whom he had bene before constrayned for feare of deathe to commit Idolatry. And againe S. Peter is not

saied to haue erred in the faithe, or to haue loste his degree of Apostleship bicause for feare of deathe he denyed Christ, and by penaunce recouered againe, so neither can Marcellius be saied to haue erred in the faithe or to haue corrupted the succession of Christes Vicaires, seing he repented of his wickednesse and suffred afterwarde Martyrdome in that cause. But suche is the good will of M. Iewell to the See of Rome, from which we englishmen receiued our first faithe and baptisme, that he omitteth no one Pope that did amisse, that so he may disgrace that successyon. And truly if such exceptions may be heard, M. Iewell may proue that S. Peter also lost his Apostleship, and erred in the faithe.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               middot; The .428 Vntruthe Slaunderous.Pope Iohn the .22. helde a wicked heresie against the immortalite of the soule.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                This is a wicked blasphemy of Iohn Iewell against Pope Iohn, of a protestant against Christes Vicaire, of an heretike superintendent, against a Catholike bishop. He helde no opinion against the immortalite of the soule. It is a slaunderous lie. He helde opinion (and that before he was Pope) that the soules of the iust see not God vntill the daye of Iudgement.
                  Melchior Canus lib. 6. de locis cō. cap. 8. Benedictus 11. in sua extrauag.
                This opinion was holden of diuers lerned men, as of Ireneus, Chrysostom and S. Bernarde before the matter was defined to the contrary, and yet were not accompted therefore heretikes. Neither did Pope Iohn euer decree that matter, but before he coulde bringe it to passe, was preuented by deathe. But if that opinion M. Iewel be a wicked heresy touching the immortalite of the soule, how many your brethern do preache at this day a wicked heresy in our countre, while they preache openly that the soule slepeth vntill the daye off general Iudgement. That is a wicked heresy in dede M. Iewel, not of Pope Iohn, but of Protestant preachers.
            
               
                  
                     •
                  ewell.Pope Syluester the .2. was a sorcerer, and had familiar conference with the Diuell, and by his procurement was made Pope.
            
               
               
                  Stapleton 
                Then was he a naughty man. But what is this to the faithe of the Churche? Luther had familiar conference with the Diuell, and by his procurement was made an enemy to the Masse, and so became the Pope off protestants. This is no fable M. Iewell. Luthers owne booke yet extant entituled De Missa angulari & vnctione sacerdotali reporteth it. And wil you pronounce Luther an heretike? Truly iff you will saie with your Saramentary brethern off Zurich, you must not only pronounce him an heretike, but also an Archeheretike, yea and saie also that the Diuell spake in Luther. For so they saie and write to.
                  Platina in Siluestro. 2 Touching Syluester as he was a naughty man, so he repented at the ende. It is writen off him that in his laste will he commaunded his body to be layed in a Coche and to be buryed there, where so euer the horses should carye it: beseching God thereby to shewe some signe thereby off his state after this life. It was so done as he willed. The horses of their owne accorde caryed his body in to the great Churche off S. Iohn Lateran, where it lyeth buried at this Day, as his toumbe there yet to be sene witnesseth. And the Author hereof Platina, is of a good credit as Holcot the schooleman whom M. Iewell alleageth.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Pope Athanasius communicated with Photinus the heretike,The 439. Vntruthe Slaund.  and therefore was foresaken of his clergy.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                This is a fable of Gratian, grounded vpon no good authorite or truthe. He saieth also in the same place that he would haue restored to the Churche Acacius the heretike before condemned. But all this to be false, his epistle to Anastasius the Emperour conuincethe, in the which he willeth expressely that Acacius be not so much as named of Christen people. He that condemned Acacius the bishop, woulde he trowe we cōmunicate with Photinus the deacon being of the same heresy that Acacius was, and communicating with Acacius? M. Iewell to proue suche weighty matters, shoulde bringe more

weighty proufes, and not so hunte like a wanton Spanyel, and range at ryot, and beate vp butterflies.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 430 Vntruthe For priestes mariages haue allwaies bene forebidden in Christes Churche.Pope H
                  •
               ldebrande that first of all others in these countries forebadde the lawfull mariages of priestes &c.
            I thinke it be natural for M. Iewel allwaies to reporte thinges v
                  •
               truly. As for mariage of priestes, being priesstes and after holy orders taken, it was neuer laufull neither before Hildebrandes time neither sithons in the Churche of Christ. You shoulde haue made that one of your Articles M. Iewell, and so haue tried what coulde haue bene saied therein. Nowe for you to droppe lies by the waie, and to saie so only, it shall be enoughe to answer you with saying the contrary, and by the waie to note you a lyer. Howbeit what may be saied herein I haue somewhat touched otherwhere. But what was this Pope Hildebrande? M. Iewell saieth.
            
               
                  The .431. Vntruthe There was n
                        •
                      such Councel holden.
                  The 432. Vntruthe Cancred and Slaunderous
               Bothe for his life and also for his Religion he is set out at large in a (431.) Councell holden at Brixia, where he is called and published to
the worlde, to be a vitious man, a burner of houses, a Robber of Churches,
a maintainer of murders and periuries, an (432.) heretike against
the Apostolike doctrine, the olde disciple of Berengarius.
            Then M. Iewell is an heretike against the Apostolike doctrine for he is a disciple of Berengarius, and defendeth stoutely the opinion of Berengarius in this his Replie, the fifte Article.
            
               The .433 Vntruthe Slaund.A Sorcerer, a Necromancer, a man possest with the diuel, and therefore out of the Catholike faith.
            This Councell of Brixia that M. Iewell alleageth, is not to be founde in the tomes of the Councelles. It was a conuēticle of some such as he is him selfe, conspyring against the Pope to flatter the Emperour.
                  Platina in Greg. 7. Truly this Hildebrande is described of Platina to be a man of great vertue and wisedome. He was chosen Pope by the consent of all good men. He resisted stoutely the wicked attemptes of Harry the fourthe Emperour.

He drewe the clergy of Germany especially of Ments frō their concubines and Harlots. For these causes he was much hated and much euill spoken of by such as were naught them selues, and flattered the euill Emperour. Who yet notwithstanding at the lenght repenting his former wickednesse humbled him selfe to this Pope, and was by him absolued. As for heresy or any such cancred matter as M. Iewell hath here heaped vp, no approued Author chargeth him withall.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                The Fathers in the Councell of Basile saye. We reade that many bishoppes of Rome haue fallen in to errours and heresyes.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                Yet those Fathers saye not that euer any Pope decreed any heresy. Their office not their person, their publicke decrees not their priuat opinions are defended. But it is well that M. Iewell now calleth them Fathers, when they make for him, then they shall be his Fathers and he will be their childe. But when they make against him, then they are ignorant men and lead a way with the blindnesse of that age, and then he will rather be a bastard of Luthers broode, then a childe of the Catholike Fathers. So Bernarde shall be holy S. Bernarde when he declaimeth against the vices of Rome: but when he calleth the Pope for powre Peter,fol. 420. he calleth S. Gregory an obscure and late doctour. for his annoynting Christ the pastour of all pastours, and one to whom alone the whole flocke
                  •
               s is committed, then he is Bernard the Abbat. Likewise S. Gregory, when he rebuketh the proude title of Vniuersall bishop in Iohn of Constantinople, then he is holy S. Gregory. But when he writeth of Saintes liues, and of purgatory, then he is Father Gregory the dreamer. So Origen must be Olde Father Origen when he speaketh for M. Iew. but when he speaketh for the Catholike faithe,The 434 Vntruthe For the bishop of Rome saieth not those wordes. then Origen hath many errours and heresyes. And thus M. Iewell maketh Fathers and Saintes, when and whom it pleaseth him.
            And the Bishop of Rome him selfe saieth. Notwithstanding the Pope 
                     〈◊〉
                  

                  
innumerable comp
                     •
                  ines of people by heapes with him in to hell, yet let no mortall m
                     •
                  n once dare to rep
                     •
                  oue him, onlesse it be founde that he straye fr
                     •
                  m the faithe.
            
            This is a flatte lye. The Bishoppe of Rome saieth no suche thinge. They are not the wordes of the Pope. M. Iewell thinketh what so euer is writen in the lying libell of one of his bretherne intituled. The Protestation off the Pope. That it is cocke sure, and vndoubtedly true. But if M. Iewell had loued the truthe, and tendred his readers Instruction, he woulde haue looked to the originall and haue seene the wordes bothe whose they were, and what they were. The wordes that M. Iewell alleageth are in the decrees, and in the place by him noted. But they are there reported to be the wordes not of anye Bishop of Rome, but of Bonifacius the Martyr. And the wordes do not saye (as M. Iewell reporteth them) Lett no mortall man once dare to reproue him,
               
                  Dist. 40. Si Papa.
                but: huius culpas istic redarguere praesumit mortalium nullus. No mortall men dothe presume to 
                  •
               eproue his faultes here. declaring thereby rather the obedience of Christen people towarde their Superiour, then commaunding all Christen people to holde their peace. And the reason foloweth. Bicause he must Iudge all men, but he is not to be iudged off any. Which saying of that holy Martyr, if it seme to M. Iewel ouer proude or vniuste, he maye remembre that the whole Councell of 3000. bishoppes in Sinuessa in the yeare of our Lorde .300. presumed not to condemne Marcellius the pope hauing sacrificed to Idolles, and being conuicted thereof by the Testimony of .72. witnesses, but after he had condemned him selfe before them all,
                  Tom. 1. Cō
                     cil. in condemnat Marcellini.
                they confirmed it and saied. I ustè ore suo condemnatus est. Nemo enim vnquam iudicauit Pontificem nec Praesul Sacerdotem suum: quoniam prima sedes non iudicabitur à quoquam. He is condemned iustly by his owne mouthe. For no man at any time iudged the bishoppe, nor the bishoppe his (high) priest. For the chiefe See shall be iudged of no man. Nowe where Bonifacius saieth that he may not be reproued onlesse

he be founde to straye from the faith, that dothe importe that a case may happen, when the Pope may erre, but not that the Pope may decree any errour or establish any thing contrary to the faithe.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                To conclude. Nicolaus Lyra is driuen to saie. VVe finde that many Popes haue forsaken the faithe.
            
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                This was a very simple Conclusion that hath no better Authour, then Lyras a frier of late yeares. Let it be true that many Popes haue forsaken the faithe, yea and Christe to, because of their wicked liues, and hainous dedes. Be it true, that some of them haue had wrounge opinions. Yet M. Iewell hath shewed none that euer decreed any errour or heresy. This is that is auouched by Catholikes. This the Reader looked for. And this M. Iewell shoulde haue proued. Gods name be blissed. M. Iewell hath snott his poison against that holy See, and in the succession of fiftene hundred yeares and vpwarde, amō
               ge the number of two hundred and thirty Popes he hathe not founde one for all his prying and searching that euer decreed any errour or heresy, or that euer deliuered to the Church any doctrine, contrarye to the Faithe. Thus we see: Christes prayer hathe had his effecte, notwithstandinge all the malyce of M. Iewell, and of all other his masters and teachers, against S. Peters chaire.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               That the Bishoppe of Rome had allwaies cure and rule ouer all other Bishoppes (109.) specially them of the Easte (for touching them of the VVest Churche it is generally confessed) beside a hundred other euident Argumentes, this is one verye suffieient, that he had in the Easte to doo his stede three delegates or vicaires, nowe commonly they be nam
                     •
                  d Legates. The one was the Bishoppe off Constantinople as

we finde it mentioned In Epistola Simplicij ad Achatium Constantinopolitanum. The seconde was the Bishoppe of Alexandria, as the Epistle of Bonifacius the seconde to Eulalius recordeth. The thirde was the Bishoppe off Thessalonica as it is at large declared in the 82. epistle of Leo, Ad Anastasium Thessalonicensem. By perusing these Epistles euerye man maye see that all the Bisshoppes off Grece, Asia, Syria, Aegypte, and to be shorte off all the Orient, rendred obedience to the Bishoppe of Rome, & caet.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 435 Vntruthe Slaunderous.The .109. Vntruthe. For the bishoppes of the East neuer yelded suche subiection to the Pope.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
                What saie you then M. Iewell to three legates of the Pope placed in the Easte. mencioned by D. Hardinge? Did not they yelde subiection to the pope? Are not the Authorityes true and good. The Epistles or Simplicius to the Bishoppe of Constantinople, of Bonifacius the seconde to Eulalius of Alexandria, of Leo that lerned Father to Anastasius of Thessalonica, are they not true Epistles? Are they not incorporated to the volumes of the Councels? Are they not all within the compasse of your first 600. yeares? What saye you to them? Why answere you not? Will you euer plaie Aristoteles Asse: Will you euer denie more then Aristotle can proue? Good Reader looke vpon M. Iewelles text vpon this place. Thou shalt see, he answereth nothing to the places. But like an impudēt asse of the countre standeth vpon his deniall, and saieth.
            It is not only vntrue, but also vtterly without any shadow or colour of the truthe.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 436 Vntruthe 
                     •
                  acinge.This is boldely auouched. But if M. Iewel bringe any one worde to p
                  •
               o
                  •
               e these allegations vntrue, that lett him

be Aristotle, and not the Asse. For you shall see what foloweth.
            These Authorites of Leo, Symmachus and Bonifacius,The 437. Vntruthe For Bonifacius cō
                  demned not S. Augustin. for as much as they are alleaged without wordes, may likewise be past ouer without answer.
            If they be vntrue, why proue you it not? If they be true, why passe you them ouer without answer? All that you answer is this that foloweth.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 438.439. and 440. Vntruthes, as it shall particularly appeare.Howbeit this Bonifacius the seconde in defence of this quarel is forced to saye, that (.437.) S. Augustin that godly Father, and all other the bishoppes of Aphrica, Numidia, Pentapolis, and other countres adioyning, that withstoode the (.438.) proude attempt of the bishops off Rome, and founde (.439.) out their open forgerie and falsifying the Nicene Councell, were (.440.) altogether inflamed and lead by the diuell.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
                Let vs suppose all this were true. Yet is all this nothinge to the Popes legat in Alexandria, the bishop thereof, as in the epistle of Bonifacius it is mencioned. Vnlesse M. Iewell will reason thus.
            
               Bonifacius condemned the Bishops of Carthage wrongfully,
               M. Iewelles Argument.
            
            
               Ergo the Bishop of Alexandria was not his legate.
            
            But now let vs see how many Vntruthes are couched in the former fewe wordes of M. Iewell.  First S. Augustin was none of them which wrote the last epistle of the Aphricane Councell to Celestinus, vpon which M. Iewel groundeth the discouering of the Popes forgerie. His name and subscription is not there. Though in the other epistle to Bonifacius it be. Neither should his name haue bene left out, being the legat for the whole prouince of Numidia, if he had bene there present.  Againe there was no proude attempt of the bishop of Rome, but chalenging of that right which bothe the Councell of Nice, and the Councel of Sardica had decreed before.  Thirdly he committed no forgerie, nor falsified the Nicene Councell, as hath bene before proued.  Last off all Bonifacius saieth not off

the Aphricane bishops, that they were alltogether inflamed and lead by the diuell, these be the cancred wordes of M. Iewells tendre harte. Only he saieth instigante diabolo. The Diuell pricking them and mouing them thereto. Thus with a messe of Vntruthes and a heape of cancred malitiouslies M. Iewel thinketh to answer the places alleaged and to proue them Vntrue, yea and as he saieth, Vtterly without any shadowe or colour off truthe. Which to be a most impudent, shamelesse and desperat outfacing lie, let the wordes them selues proue. Pope Leo writeth thus to Athanasius the bishop of Thessalonica. As my predecessours to your predecessours,
               
                  Epist. 82. Vices mei mo
                        •
                     eraminis delegaui.
                
               so I vnto you (folowing their examples) delegated my roome and Authorite, to thentent that you after the example of our discretion might helpe that which we owe vnto all Churches principally by Gods institution, and that you might supplie the presence of our visitation in the prouinces farre distant from vs. Bicause you being there at hande may readely knowe, what thinges may by your selfes be ended, and what things to our iudgement may be reserued. These be the wordes of that lerned and most holy Father Leo so much commended and reuerenced in the fourthe Councell of Chalcedon. By these it appeareth that not only by Leo but by his predecessours before the Bishop of Thessalonica was the Popes delegat in that parte of the East Churche, and in the prouinces adioyning. And therefore the great Councell of Sardica longe before the time off Leo, for the greate resorte off Priestes and Deacons to Thessalonica aboute such suites to the Popes legat,
                  Act 6. Concil. Sard. Can. 20. made a decree that suche Priestes and Deacons shoulde make no longe abode in that Citie. In like maner Simplicius writeth to Achatius of Constantinople, wondering that he had not yet certified him of the state of the Churche of Alexandria,
                  Tom 1. Conciliorū.
                being bothe required Vt participata sollicitudine literas apud principem prosequeretur, & instituti veteris memor in orthodoxorum defensionem semper incumberet, that taking parte

of his care and charge he would promote his letters to the Prince, and also remembring his olde office, should emplie him self allwaies to the defence of the Catholikes. Bonifacius the second certifying Eulalius bishop of Alexandria of the reconciliation of the Aphricanes saieth. Vota nostra charitatem tuam latere nolumus, ne qui particeps fuit sollicitudinis, gaudiorum fructus reddatur extorris. We will not conceale from you our good tydinges, lest that he which taketh part of our charge, may seme to lacke parte off our ioye and coumfort. Thus as Leo calleth Anastasius his legat in Thessalonica, a helper off his vniuersall charge, so Simplicius and Bonifacius do call the bishoppes off Alexandria and Constantinople Sollicitudinis particepes the partakners off their Vniuersall charge, as being their legates in that parte of the worlde.
            And thus farre it is proued that the bishoppes of the East were subiect vnto the Bishoppe of Rome. Whiche also by that which before hath bene saied, touching the Appeales of Athanasius bishop of Alexandria, of S. Chrysostom bishop of Constantinople, and of Theodoret bishop of Cyrus. Also of Flauianus an other patriarche of Constantinople, of Iohn Talaida a Patriarche of Alexandria, of Paulus, Marcellus, Asclepas, Lucianus and diuers others, al bishops in the East Church, dothe appeare clerely and sufficiently proued. Yet M. Iewell euer better able to appose and make obiections against a truthe, then to answere to the proufes brought for the truthe, that is, as one that is full off doubtes, but resolued in nothinge, euer lerning (as S. Paule saieth) but neuer attaining to knowleadge,1 Timo. 3. and more expert in reprouing the Catholikes, then in confirming his owne positiue opinion, (as S. Augustin noteth of the Manichees) though he coulde not answere to the place alleaged,
                  Lib. de vti litate credē
                     di. cap. 1. yet he can saie somewhat against the position. Thus he saieth.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                What dutye the Bishoppes off the Easte parte owed to the bishopp

off Rome, whosoeuer hathe reade and considered the storye and the practise off the tymes, maye soone perceiue. First the Councell of Nice, appointed euerye off the three Patriarches his seuerall charge, none of them to interrupte or trouble the other. And willed the Bishoppe off Rome as Ruffinus reporteth the storye, to ouersee Ecclesias suburbanas, whiche were the Churches within his prouince.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
               
               Fol. 51.Howe this is to be vnderstanded, I haue before spoken in parte, but more largely you may reade in the Confutation off your Apologie. Such common obiections must haue a cōmon solution.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                And therefore Athanasius calleth Rome the chiefe or mother Churche of Romain Iurisdiction.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
               
               
                  In e
                        •
                     ist. ad soli
                        •
                     artā vitā agentes.
               This therefore foloweth not. Athanasius in that place talking of the persecution of pope Liberius by the Arrians, exaggerating their wickednesse saieth. Th
                     •
                  y spared not so muche as Liberius the Bishoppe of Rome, hauing no reuerence of him, n
                     •
                  ith
                     •
                  r as it was the Apostolicall See, nor b
                     •
                  cause Rome was the chiefe Citie off the Romain Iurisdiction. By this disiunctiue proposition, making a distinction betwene the Apostolicall See, and the Citie of Rome, it semeth Athanasius tooke not there the worde Metropolis, for Mother Churche as M. Iewell hath translated, but for the chiefe or head Citie. Otherwise if M. Iewel wil in good earnest haue Rome to be the chiefe and Mother Churche off the Romain Iurisdiction by the verdit of Athanasius, then not only the Romain Dyocese or prouince, but all Aegypte, and Grece, all the East Church, being at that tyme of the Romain Iurisdiction, as all subiect to the Emperour of Rome Constantius, shall be subiect to the See of Rome as being the Chiefe and Mother Churche of them all by Athanasius his witnesse and by the Confession of M. Iewell.
                  Hist. trip. lib. 4. ca. 6 Cap. 15. And truly that Athanasius bishoppe of Alexandria in Aegypt was subiect to the bisshoppe of Rome, it appeareth well bothe by that Athanasius being cited thither by Iulius the Pope appeared there and pleaded

his cause, and was restored by the Popes letters vnto hys bishopricke, and also by his Appeale to Rome the second time, through the often persecutions of the Arrians.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
                The 441. Vntruthe ioyned with a Folye, as shall appeare.
Ioa
                        •
                     . 20. And for that cause the Bisshoppes of the Easte in their Epistle vnto Iulius call hym theyr felowe Seru
                  •
               unte, And Cyrillus the Bisshop of Alexandria, writing vnto Celestinus, calleth him his brother. Felowes and Brothers be titles (.441.) off equalite, and not of subiection.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
                Well reasoned and like a diuine. Christe our Sauiour in the gospell calleth the Apostles his brethern, euen after his Resurrection and Glorification. But what then M. Iewell? Was not Christ therefore their head? See what blasphemies your maner of reasoning inferreth. Agayine you are driuen in the ende off this Article to confesse, that Peter was head of the Apostles. Yet Christ saied to him: Thou being conuerted confirme thy bretherne. By this example of Christ our Sauiour, the pope bothe then and now writing vnto all bishops, calleth them, Fratres, Collegas, Consacerdotes, brethern, felowe bishops, felowe pristes. The Metropolitane writing to a bishop of his prouince, the bishop writing to a priest, vseth the same title. And all this according to the commaundement of Christ. He that is greatest amonge you, shall be as the lest. The meanest priest and the Pope him selfe in office of Priesthood are equall. In Iurisdiction the one is subiect to the other. Therefor of the Office they are called brethern, felowe priestes, felowe bishops and so forth. Saint Augustine, writing to S. Hierom a priest, calleth him brother. What then? Be Bishoppes and Priestes equall in Iurisdiction and authoritye? Celestinus writing to Cyrillus calleth hym brother, and yet was Cyrillus his legat in the Ephesine Councell. A thousand suche examples might be brought. Lo
                  •
               ke in all Councelles, in al the Epistles of Bishoppes to their Metropolitanes, or to their priestes of theyr Dyoceses, you sh
                  •
               ll finde them all called brethern. And yet one is vnder the other

and an order is to be kepte accordinge to the Canons. You Master Iewell when you write to any prieste off Salisbery Dyocese, where you beare youre selfe for a Bishoppe, cal you not them brethern? If you do not, then write you more stately then true bishops doe or euer haue done: if you do, is not therefore the priest vnder his bishop? I am ashamed to stande so longe vpon such balde peuish argumentes of M. Iewels. But it is easy to be sene what store of good proufes he hath which vseth so ofte such a begarly shifte.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 442 Vntruthe Slaund. F
                     •
                  cing, and impudent.Certaine it is that (442) sundrie the bishops of Rome beganne very rathe to seke this preeminence, euen with manifest forgerie, and corruption of councels, as is already proued, but the bishops of other countries neuer yelded to them, nor vnderstode these vaine titles.
            Certaine it is that M. Iewell hath slaundred the bishops of Rome, farre within his first .600. yeres, euen of the primitiue Churche, most impudently, as it hath ben already proued. Certaine it is that all other countries hath yelded to the See of Rome not vpon titles or termes, but of true obedience as to Christes Vicaire in causes of weighty importaunce.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 443 Vntr
                     •
                  the For th
                     •
                  y saied not so muc
                     •
                  e.The bishops of the East writing vnto Iulius, allege that the faithe that then was in Rome came first from them.
            They were Arrians, they lyed in so saying. And M. Iewell hath encreased there lie, by saying (the faiethe that then was) for no such wordes are in their epistle.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
                
                  Lib. 5. cap. 8. lib. 2. Cap. 15. And that the
                  •
               r Churches (as Sozomenus writeth) ought not to be accompted in
                     •
                  e
                     •
                  iour to t
                     •
                  e Churche of Rome: and as Socrates further reporteth, that thy ought not to be o
                     •
                  d
                     •
                  ed by the Roma
                     ••
                   bishop.
            
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
                You doe the deuill good seruice M. Iewell. You take part with the Arrian heretikes, cursed and detestable blasphemers of the godhead of our Sauiour Iesus Christ. You forsake that lerned and holy Father Athanasius of Alexandria, Paulus of Constantinople, Marcellus of Ancyra, Asclepas of Gaza, Lucius

of Adrianopolis, that famous father Osius of Corduba, and an infinit number of other Catholike bishops of Thracia, Celosyria, Phenicia, Palestina, which all fled to Rome, were subiecte to the Pope, acknowledged his supreme authorite, (quoniam (as Sozomenus writeth) propter Sedis dignitatē, omnium ad ipsum cura pertinebat. Bicause for the prerogatiue of his See,
                  Hist. trip. lib. 4. cap. 7.8. & 9. the Charge of them all appertayned to him) and they all were persecuted by the Arrians, were thrust out of their bishopprickes: all these you forsake vtterly, and ioyne to those wicked and detestable Arrians, who beside their blasphemous heresies expelled all good Catholike bishops, and defyed the Pope for taking part and vpholding the Catholike bishops. You haue an eye to the wicked doinges of heretikes, you builde vpon the disobedience of the Donatistes, who appealed from the Pope to the Emperour, and make thereof an argument (o passing impudency) that the Emperour was aboue the Pope:
                  Lib. 3. cap. 8. whereas yet the Emperour extremely offended with that barbarous fury of those Donatistes, when they appealed to him cried out in a great rage. O rabida furoris audacia,
               
                  Optatus lib. 1. 
               sicut in causis gentilium fierit solet appellationem interposuerunt. O desperat and furious rage. They appeale to me, like as Pagans and infidelles do. To these barbarous Donatistes, to these heathenish Appeales, to these blasphemous Arrians M. Iewel casteth his eye, their doinges he beholdeth, them he liketh, them he embraceth. Their furious disobedience he taketh for a paterne of right. But what did Iulius the Pope answer to that impudent and hereticall disobedience of theirs? I wishe thee gentle Reader if thou be lerned to peruse the answer of Pope Iulius as it is reported of Athanasius him selfe in his seconde Apologie. He answereth with faire wordes, with great hūblenesse, lernedly, mekely, and with such and so farre yelding, that M. Iewell hath gone about with certain of his sentences picked out of that epistle, to proue by the Popes owne wordes that he had no authorite

ouer the bishops of 
                  •
               he East. The wordes thou hast sene before alleaged by M. Iewell, and by other wordes of that Epistle in that place answered. Thither I referre thee gentle Reader for better consideration of his whole demeanour of the Arrian Bishops of the East with Pope Iulius. Verely there thou shalt see, that notwithstanding the proude disobedience of the Arrians, whose part M. Iewell taketh, that yet the See of Rome bothe by custome and by Canon or decree chalenged them of their duty, which the Catholike bishops of the East, Athanasius and his felowes, gladly yelded to and acknowleadged. I can saie no more herein M. Iewel, but if you wil nedes claime by heretikes, that you be taken for such.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 444 Vntruthe False Trā
                  slation.Gennadius the bishop of Constantinople together with the Councel there, thus writeth vnto the bishop of Rome. Cu
                     •
                  et sanctitas tua Vniuersas custo
                     •
                  ias tuas, 
                     •
                  ibique su
                     •
                  iectos Epis
                     •
                  opos. Let thy holynesse see vnto thine owne charge, and vnto the bishops appointed vnto the.
            
            Gennadius speaketh not as M. Iewel maketh him to speake. He is by M. Iewell vntruly translated. Thus stande his wordes Let your holynesse see vnto all your charges, and the bishops which are subiect vnto you. The worde vniuersas, all, M. Iewell omitted, and for subiectos (subiect) he readeth appointed, to enduce a certain limitation of the bishop of Romes Iurisdiction. Thus much we see of M. Iewelles iuggling by his false translation only, but if it had pleased him to haue quoted the place, and to haue tolde vs what Councell it was, or when this Gennadius liued, I doubt not but the very circunstance of the place would haue answered it selfe, and the weakenesse of M. Iewelles proufes woulde the more haue appeared. As for Gennadius, for the space of the first 600. yeres, there was but one of that name bisshop of Cōstantinople, soone after the time of the Chalcedon Coūcell,
                  Nicephorus lib. 15. cap. 13. Trithem. in scriptor.
                successour to Anatolius, and predecessour to Acacius a man of great vertu, lerning, and holynesse, as it appeareth in Nicephorus and Trithemius. Of him there appeareth no such

writing, neither any Councel to be holden by him or in his time. If this Gennad
                  ••
               s therefore be a later writer, he beareth no Authorite in this matter, bicause as all the lerned do knowe, the Churche of Constātinople hath remained in schisme these certain hundred yeres not only for disobedience to the See of Rome but for diuers other particular heresies,
                  Actor. 4. as for denying the proceding of the holy Ghoste from the Sonne, and such other. Beside the Churche of Constantinople as it hath bene twelue times reconciled to the Churche of Rome, so hath it longe and many yeres continewed in schisme vnreconciled. It was therefore necessary and conuenient that M. Iewell alleaging the testimony of so suspicious a place, shoulde haue tolde vs when and in what age that Councel was holdē, and where it might be founde. Certainly Chrysostom a lerned and holy Bishopp of Constantinople farre within the first 600. yeres, confesseth that to Peter and to the successours of Peter Christ committed those shepe which he had redemed with his bloud, also that Peter had the primacy ouer the whole worlde. And for proufe of Supreme Authorite, he appealed him selfe (being one of the greatest Patriarches) to Innocentius the Pope of Rome, as hath before bene declared. So did Flauianus a holy Martyr and Patriarche of Constantinople Appeale to Leo the first.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
                
                  Ruffinus lib. 1. cap. 29.30. 
                     
                        ••
                     
                   31.
The 445 446. and 447. Vntruthes, as it shall particularly appeare.The Councell of Alexandria committed the visitation and reforming of all Churches in the East vnto Asterius. And of all the Churches in the west vnto Eusebius the bishop of Vercellae. By Authorite of which Commission Eusebius togeather with Hilarius visited and corrected all the Churches of Illyricum, Fraunce and Italy. A man might saie where was then the Vniuersall power of the bishop of Rome.
            Nay a man might saie more, if your tale were true M. Iewell, where was then the bishop of Rome him selfe? Where was his priuat iurisdiction, where was his dyocese? Euen now you confessed that bothe by the Nicene Councell and by the testimony of Athanasius, Rome was the fourthe Patriarche

of the worlde, and the Chiefe Church of all the Romain I
                  •
               risdiction. Now what was vnder the bishopp of Romes Iurisdiction, if Italy it selfe were not in the which Rome standeth. pag. 283. Illi
                  •
               ycum you confesse afterwarde M. Iewell and proue by the Authorite of Damasus that it was a parte of the bishop of Romes iurisdiction. Fraunce if it were not vnde
                  •
                the Patriarche of Rome, shewe vnder what Patriarche it was. This then if neither Illyricum nor Fraunce, nor Italy it selfe be founde to be s
                  •
               biect to the See of Rome, if this tale of youres be true M. Iewel, then not only a man might saie where was the vniuersal power of the bishop of Rome then, but also a man might saie where was the power at all? And so M. Iewell to disproue the Vniuersall Authorite of the bishop of Rome, hath nowe founde a knacke to proue him no bishop at all, no not of Rome it selfe. And verely as well he may conclude the one as the other. But it is not possible for M. Iewell to leaue his lying. For  first the
                  •
               e was no commission geuen in that Councell to Correct the Churches: that is the f
                  •
               irst Vntruthe.  Againe that which Hilarius dyd, was not by vertue of that Councell, but of his owne zele and authorite.  Thirdly all this matter was no reformation by waie of commaundement, but a voluntary zele to call home to the Churche, such as by the storme of the Arrians persecution had yelded. These many lies M. Iewell hath committed in so fewe wordes, as it shall now appeare by Ruffinus whom M. Iewell alleageth. At what time Constantius the Arrian Emperour being dead,
                  Ruffinus li. 1. ca. 27. Iulianus succeding in the Empire not of zele to the faithe, but for ouerthwarting the decrees of Constantius, had called home the bishops from banishment, a number of the good bishops meeting together forthewith (before they returned to their owne Churches) at Alexandria, tooke counsell and aduise together, what order were best to be taken touching such as in their absence had yelded and subscribed to the Arrians. Some thought good that none of the clergy

should be receiued again to their offices which had subscribed. Other thought better to remoue only the chiefe authors and promoters of the heresy, and to receiue againe all other which would abiure the Arrian heresy and submitt them selues to the decrees of the Fathers. This sentence preuailed, straight waye,
                  Cap. 28. 
               ex concilij decreto Asterio caeterisque qui cum eo erant Orientis iniungitur p
                     •
                  ocuratio, Occid
                     •
                  ntis verò Eus
                     •
                  bio decernitur. by the decree of the Councell, Asterius and his felowes were commaunded to see vnto the East, and Eusebius to see vnto the west. Now what this commission was, whether it were to Correct by waie of Authorite or no, you shall heare by the wordes of the History in the next chapter folowing.
                  Cap. 30. 
               Eusebius circuiens O
                     •
                  i
                     •
                  ntem atque Italiam, medici pariter & sacerdotis fungebatur officio. Singulas quasque ecclesias abiurata infidelitate ad sanitate recte fid
                     •
                  i reuocabat. maximè quòd Hilariū regr
                     •
                  ssum iā & in Italia positum hec eadem erga instaurandas ecclesias sedemque patrum reparandam reperit molientem. Eusebius (saieth Ruffinus) going aboute all the East and Italy, did the office bothe of a Physitian and of a priest. He called backe euery Churche to the holsome right Faithe, all infidelite being vtterly abiured. Especialy finding Hilarius who was now returned from bannishement and was in Italy labouring in that same matter to the restoring againe of the Churches and of the Catholik faithe. This is all that Ruffinus telleth of them. They laboured to reduce men to the Catholike Faithe. They founde Hilarius so doing of his owne heade without any commission. Here was no correcting or visiting by waie of authoritye, but only a zelous labour towarde a reformation, such as Hilarius tooke vpon him without any commission or commaundement, and such as manye a good man woulde perhaps take in our owne countre, if a tyme of reformation were graunted, without any breache or diminishing of euery bishops Authorite in his owne Dyocese, or of the Popes primacy ouer all. Thus M. Iewell

by falsifying and wronge applying of histories will establish his schismaticall disobedience towarde the See off Rome.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               
                  Epist. 48. The 448 Vntruthe in falsifiing S. Basiles text S. Basill saieth. The state and safetye of the Churche of Antioche dependeth off Athanasius the Bishoppe off Alexandria, and not (as M. Hardinge here sayeth) of the Bishoppe off Rome. And therefore he desireth Athanatius to see vnto it.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
                Not one Sentence of any weight or Authority can be alleaged of M. Iewell without some manifest and notorius Vntruthe. The later wordes of his sentence alleaged out of S. Basill and printed with a diuers letter, and the wordes of S. Basill, these wordes I saie, and not off the Bishoppe off Rome. are not in that place of S. Basill, neither in the Latin nor in the Greke, but are conueyed in pretely by M. Iewell, to fournish and fashion vp his Vntruthe, that the Bishops of the East yelded no subiection to the Bishop of Rome. The wordes of S. Basill are these.
                  Basil. epist. 48. 
               Ad reliquas equidem Orientis res componendas fortassis ampliore auxilio tibi opus est, & necesse est expectare Occidentales. Antiochensis vero Ecclesiae O
                     •
                  dinatio palam ex pietate tua dependet, vt alios gubernes, alios quietos reddas, Ecclesiae vero robur per concordiam reddas. For the quieting of other troubles of the East, it shall be perhaps nedeful for you to looke for some greater helpe, and it is necessary to tarye for the bishoppes of the Weste, but the ordering or state of the Churche of Antiochia dependeth manifestly of you, that you may rule some, pacifie other, and finally restore to the Churche her strenght by vnite and concorde. The meaning of S. Basill is to desyre Athanasius being then a man of greate authorite, for his longe and manifold troubles suffred for the Churche, and for his olde age, to take the charge for the tyme of other Churches beinge then by the persecution off Valens pitefully mangled by the Arrians. He desired him before to sende some men of his owne Churche lerned and discrete to the bishops of the West, to

vnto thē their troubles and aduersities. But bicause Antioche was (as S. Basil there saith) the head and principall parte of the East, he desireth in the meane while Athanasius to looke vnto that Church especially. This is al that S. Basil there requireth of Athanasius,
                  Dimit
                        •
                     e aliquos exsacta Ec
                        •
                     lesia tua v
                        •
                     
                     ros ad occidentis ep
                        •
                     
                     scopos. Basil. epist. 53. not as though he had any iurisdiction ouer Antioche, but bicause as a man in that time of more Autorite and yeres then any other, he might do much good (as he writeth in an other epistle to Athanasius) alloquendo, admonendo▪ scribendo, mittendo semper aliquos qui optima suggerat. by talking withe them, by admonishing them of their duty, by writing, by sending allwaies some to instructe them. Now bicause M. Iewell will gather hereof a negatiue argument, yea and to make it beare the more authorite, wil make S. Basil himselfe to saie that of Athanasius, and not of the bishop of Rome the state of Antioche dependeth, let vs see what S. Basill saieth about the quieting of these selfe same troubles of the East, and writing thereof to this very same Athanasius, thus he writeth to Athanasius. not longe after the fourmer epistle writen as it may seme by the placing of his epistles in his workes, and also by the matter it selfe. Visum est nobis &c.
               
                  Basil. ad Athanas. epi. 52. 
               We haue tought good to write to the bishop of Rome, that he wil consider the matters in these partes, and pointe vs a Councell, to the entent that bicause it is hard to haue some sent from thence by a common decree of any Synod, that he will geue authorite to the matter choosing some sufficient men able to beare the paynes of trauail, and able by gentle demeanour and vpright behauiour to correct the frowarde among vs, who also may skilfully gouerne and instruct vs, and bringe with them all that was done at Ariminum for the dissoluing and vndoing thereof? Thus farre S. Basil a bishop of the East Church acknowleadging as it well appereth the authorite of the bishop of Rome ouer the East partes, more then M. Iewell would gladly he had done. So farre is it that S. Basil by desiring Athanasius to looke to the Church of Antioche, would therefore exclude the bishop

of Romes Authorite, as M. Iewell not only would gather thereof, but also hath vntruly made S. Basil to saie, shifting in those wordes (and not of the bishop of Rome) into the text of S. Basill, which S. Basil neuer spake.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               T
                     •
                  e 449 Vntruthe As befor
                     •
                  .
Cod. de S
                        •
                     
                     cro San
                        •
                     tis eccles. lege 6.The Emperours Honorius and Theo
                  •
               osus appointed ouer all matters of doubte arising within the countre of Illyricum to be heard 
                  •
               nd ended before the bishop of Constantinople, and not before the bisshop of Rome. The Emperours wordes be these. The Church of Constantinople enioyeth nowe the prerogatiue of the olde Rome.
            This notorious and manifest Vntruthe hath before ben auouched and answered. Now it is brought againe to make vp matter, and to bolster vp an other Vntruthe which is this.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 450 Vntrut
                     •
                  e 
                     •
                  or the Glose there expound
                     •
                  th not that s
                     ••
                  e l
                     •
                  we D
                        •
                     st. 22. Re
                        •
                     ou
                        ••
                     
                     tes: in glosa.
               And the very Glose vpon the decrees expounding that same lawe of Honorius, and Theodosius hath these wordes. The Emperour s
                     ••
                  eth, the patriche of Constan
                     •
                  inople hath the same authorite ouer the people of his prouince, that the Pope hath ouer his.
            
            I knowe not whether M. Iewell when he wrote his Replie intended to Winne the whetstome for euer, and to passe al the worlde in lying, but truly he so plyeth that game, that it maye seme he was not a litle bent that waye. The glose in that place expoūdeth not this lawe of Honorius and Theodosius, but expoundeth the decrees of Popes and Councelles, which are no Emperours lawes pardye. And in that, note though the glose applie a lawe of the Emperour to the decree, yet he meaneth not there this lawe, or these Emperours. But he meaneth an other lawe of an other Emperour. He mean
                  •
               th the Authentikes not the Cod
                  •
               , 
                  •
                lawe of Iustinian not of Honorius and Theodosus. For so he quoteth his note: vt in authen. d
                     •
                   eccl. tit. §. 1. 
                  
                     •
                  c
                     •
                  lat. 9. And thus muche touching the vntrue applying of M. Iewel
                  •
               es glose to the lawe Honorius and Theodosius. Nowe what the glose mea
                  •
               eth 
                  •
               et the text trie. The text saieth out of the Sixt Synod.
                  Di
                        •
                     t. 2
                     •
                  . Ren
                        •
                     uā
                     
                        ••
                     s.
                
               Renouantes Sancti Constantinopolitani d
                     •
                  cr
                     •
                  tae Concil
                     •
                  j poti
                     •
                  us vt Constantinopolitana sed
                     •
                  s sim
                     •
                  lia

priuil
                     •
                  gia que inferior Roma habet ac
                     •
                  ipiat: n
                     •
                  n tamen in 
                     •
                  cclesiasticis r
                     •
                  bus magnificetur vt illa, s
                     •
                  d hec s
                     •
                  cunda 
                     •
                  ost illam 
                     •
                  xistens 
                     •
                  rius quam Al
                     •
                  xandria numeretur. Renewing the decrees of the holy Councell of Constantinople, we desire that the See of Constantinople haue the like priuileges, which the lower Rome hath. Not yet that in ecclesiasticall matters she be prefered as Rome, but that being the second after Rome, she may be placed before the See of Alexandria. This is the text M. Iewell.
                  Ibid
                        •
                     m 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . Vpon this text the glose declareth that Constantinople simile habet priuilegium in quibusdam. hath in certaine thinges the like priuilege that Rome hath. As that bishops may immediatly appeale thither, that it may depose bishops, and last of all that vpon her owne subiects she hath the same power and Authorite as Rome hath in her subiects. Notwithstanding all this Rome is preferred and Iustinian him selfe (who made the same lawe which the gloser alleageth) call it Caput omnium sanctarum ecclesia
                     •
                  um, The head of all holy Churches.
                  Cod. de summa T
                        •
                     in. & fi. Cath Nos Reddentes.
                And thus M. Iewelles lawes, decrees, and gloses, renne roundely against him.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               
                  Gregor. li. 1. epi. 24 & 
                  
                     •
                  5. & lib. 6. epist 5.
The 451. Vntrut
                     •
                  e Manifest and vnfallible, as shall appeare.And therefore for more profe hereof, whensoeuer any Patriarche, in any of these foure principall Sees, was newly chosen, he wrote letters of Conference and frendship vnto the other Patriaches, wherein 
                  •
               uery of them declared vnto other their Religion and consent of faithe. Thus did the bishop of Rome vnto others, and thus did others vnto him. This is an (451.) Vnfallible token that their authori
                  •
               e was equall, and none of them had power and gouernement ouer his folowes,
            If this be an infallible token, it is bicause M. Iewell saieth so. For truly if any other man had made such reasons, all had ben but a Gheasse, a Surmise, a likelyhood, a Coniecture. Such are all D. Hardinges proofes to M. Iewell, be they neuer so clere and manifest. But nowe euery gheasse that he bringeth must be an vnfallible token. For how saie you M. Iewell? Be these letters of Conference an vnfallyble token of equalite? And where

finde you that letters of Conference, and betwene whom? You finde them in S. Gregory: For him only you note in the Margin. And you finde suche letters of him to the bishops of Constantinople, Alexandria, and Antiochia. How then if S. Gregory him selfe which wrote such letters of Conference to the bishop of Constantinople, dothe yet expressely saie the Churche of Constantinople to be subiect to the churche of Rome: Shal not then M. Iewelles vnfallible tokē proue an vnfallible Vntruthe? Vnlesse to iustifie M. Iewelles wordes, we must make S. Gregory cōtrary to him selfe and to saue his Vntruthe, make S. Gregory a lyar. Let vs then heare what S. Gregory saieth.
                  Gregor. epist. 63. lib. 7.
            
            These are his wordes. Nam de Constantinopolitana Ecclesia quod dicunt, quis eam dubitet sedi Apostolicae esse subiectam? For as touching tha
                  •
                they tel vs of the Churche of Constantinople, who doubteh but that she is subiect to the See Apostolike. Which also our most godly Emperour and our Brother Eusebius bishop of that Cite do continually professe. Yet if she or any other Churche haue any good thinge to be folowed, I am ready to folowe my inferiours in good thinges, whom I forbidde from vnlawfull thinges. For he is vnwise which thinketh him selfe therefore to be chiefe, that he may neglect to lerne the good that he seeth. Thus farre holy S. Gregory. In whom we see notwithstanding he wrote letters of conference to the bishop of Constantinople, and calleth him here his brother, yet he calleth him his inferiour, and dissembleth not that his Churche is subiect vnto him. And in the next epistle he writeth of the bishopp of Constantinople, that being accused of a certaine crime, the Iudgement was referred vnto him of the Emperour iuxta statutae Canonica According to the statutes of the Canons, not by the mere will or commission of the Emperour. Now if M. Iewell do maruaill how such letters of conference, such titles of brethern should passe betwene S. Gregory

and the other Patriaches, and yet they notwithstanding be subiect vnto him, S. Gregory wil tel him soone the cause hereof, in these wordes. Cum culpa non exit, omnes secundū rationē humilitattis aequales sunt. Where no faulte is committed,
                  Epist. 64. lib. 7. all by the reason of humilite are aequall. And in that sence S. Paule saieth. VVilt thou not feare the higher power? Do well.
               
                  Rom. 13. 
               And he will praise thee. For he is the minister of God to doe the good. But if thou do euil, then feare him. Thus S. Gregory was brother to al other bishops, wrote familiarly and frendly vnto them vntell they offended. Then he woulde vse and shewe his power ouer them, euen ouer the bishop of Constantinople him sefe, the chiefest of all the Patriarches after the Pope. So he excommunicated Iohn of Constantinople: so he iudge ouer Eusebius bishop of the same See: and so he expressely professeth and putteth it out of doubte that the Church of Constantinople is subiect to the bishop of Rome. And thus M. Iewelles vnfallible token is not founde to be so much as a bare gheasse. But voide of al truthe and weight. By such false sleightes and seely surmises M. Iewell maintaineth his schismaticall disobedience against Christes Vicaire, and draweth other to the snare of his schisme.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .452. Vntruthe. For not therefore S. Gregory wrote so hūbly. Lib. 7. epist 30. And (.452.) therefore when Eulogius bishop off Alexandria, had written thus vnto Gregory being then bishop of Rome, S
                     •
                  utiusfistis as ye commaunded, Gregorie vtterly shunned and refused that kinde of writing, for thus he answereth him. I pray you, haue aw
                     •
                  y this worde of Commaunding from my hearing. For I knowe bothe what I am and also what you are. Touching your place, you are my brethern, tou
                     •
                  hing mane
                     •
                  s, are my Fathers. Therefore I commaunded you not, but only shewed I what 
                     •
                  hought good.
            
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
               
               
                  Lib 7. epist. 54.Tis declareth the great humilite of holy S. Gregory. This proueth true that which he saied before: Cum culpa no
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  x
                     •
                  git, omnes secundum rationē humilitatis aequales sunt. Where 
                  •
               o faulte is committed, all by the reason of humilite be equal. And thus the saying of the Apostle is verefied. Iusto 
                     •
                  on est lex

posita. The lawe is not made for the righteous. All this is true that all bishops and Priestes are brethern, the one commaundeth not the other when nothinge is amisse. If I offende not the lawe, the magistrat hath nought to doe with me. He can not commaunde me. But the Master may commaunde his seruaunt, do he well or euill. The Pope is not so primat ouer other bishops that he hath them at commaundement as seruauntes. But if they breake the Canons he commaundeth them and forceth thē to their duity, or els remoueth thē from their Authoryte. So S. Gregory him selfe which shunned the worde of commaunding, yet he putteh it out of doubte that the See of Constantinople who was not inferiour to the See of Alexandria was subiect to the See of Rome. So Athanasius bishop of Alexandria being cited to the Churche of Rome, appeared there as to his superiour, So Cyrillus bishop also of Alexandria, was legat to Pope Celestinus in the thirde Generall Councell of Ephesus. Yet as S. Gregory would not commaunde Eulogius: so neither Iulius commaundeth Athanasius, nor Celestinus in the thirde General Councell of Ephes
                  •
               s commaundeth Cyrillus. Thus M. Iewell for lacke of matter and weight, hunteth after termes and phrases, to builde vp his schismaticall disobedience to our mother Churche the holy See of Rome.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .453. Vntruthe. For not that only or principally.
Paulus Aemilius in Histor. gallorum lib. 8.Fi
                  •
               ally (453.) for that Michael Palaeologus The Emperour of the East partes, in the Councell holden at Lyons, aboute the yere of our Lord
                  •
                .1442. after great intreatie made vnto him by the bishop of Rome, hid acknowleadged the bishops of the East to be subiect vnto him, after he returned home againe in to his Empire and was dead, his Cle
                  •
               gie vvoulde not suffer him to be buried. Yet, saieth M. Harding, Al the bishops of Grecia, Asia, Syria, Aegypte, and to be short. all the Orient, read and exhibited their humble obedience to the See off Rom
                  •
               .
            M. Iewell is miserably forced for the maitenaunce off his schisne not only to falsefie coūcels, to take parte with the

Arrians and withe Donatistes olde condemned heretikes of the primitiue Churche, to gather gheasses and coniectures vpon titles and phrases, to falsifye S. Basill, to misalleage the decrees, but nowe at the laste (to suche miserable shiftes he is driuen) the poore creature is forced to claime by the late schismatikes and blasphemous heretikes of grece against the Proceding of the Holy Ghoste.
                  Paulus Aemil. li. 7 For in that Councell holden at Lyons M. Iewell in the presence of Michael Paleologus the Emperour, about the yeare of our Lorde .1280. (you came shorte in your rekening of allmoste two hundred yeares) the grekes wholy reconciled to the latines not only touching the bishop of Romes supremacy, but also touching the proceding of the holy Ghost from the Father and the Sonne.
                  Blondu
                        •
                      Decad. 2. lib. 8. For this reconciliatiō (as Blondus reporteth) not only for acknowleadging the Popes primacy, the Emperour after his deathe was so vsed of the schismaticall clergy. Nowe M. Iewell if you will nedes holde by schismatikes, as you claime by their example in the one, so may you in the other, so maye you multiply your heresies and schismes, so maye you forsake the latines and become Grecians, so maye yowe at lenght come to Mahomets lawe, and be Turkes as many of grecians are become at this day. Our Lorde sende our countre a better minde, and geue thē all grace to beware in time of such perilous teachers, wh
                  •
                can not defende their doctrine but by heretikes and schism
                  •
               
               tikes, by lies and Vntruthes, by manifest and open corruptio.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               For the Popes Authorite concerning Confirmation of 
                     •
                  e Ordinations and elections off all bishoppes, many exam
                     •
                  les might easely be alleaged, as the request made to Iulius by 
                     •
                  he 90. Arrian bishoppes assembled in Councell at Anti
                     •
                  che against Athanasius that he woulde vouchesaue to cons
                     •
                  me those that they had chosen in place off Athanasius, Pa
                     •
                  lus,

Marcellus and others whome they had condemned and depriued.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 454. Vntruthe. Slaunderous.The 110. Vntruthe. For the Bishop of Rome confirmed the bishoppes of his owne prouince: but not all bishoppes thourough out the worlde.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
                Then M. Iewell can name vs some bishopp, that the Pope confirmed not, and stode yet for a true and Catholike bishop. Peruse his text who list, he shall finde that M. Iewell nameth not one. And yet muste his negatiue stande for good, bicause he saieth it? D. Harding hath alleaged the examples of the Arrian bishops, who though they were heretikes, coueted yet to haue the Popes confirmation for the bishops by them placed in the Romes of Athanasius, Paulus, Marcellus and others. He hath alleaged the Confirmation of Leo for the bishop of Alexandria,
                  Hi
                        ••
                     . trip. li. 4 ca. 6. and of S. Gregory for the bishop of Salona in Illyricum. And yet shall it be sufficient for M. Iewell to plaie still Aristotles Asse and to denie all? Is it not mete he geue an Instaunce or Exception in some particular, if he wil destroye the vniuersall? The order of scoles and reason require so. But M. Iewell for lacke of good arguments, hunteth after his gheasses, and hauing nothinge to bringe, woulde disproufe 
                  •
               hat is brought. You shall heare what he saieth.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                That the bishop of Rome ordered and admitted all the bishoppes t
                  •
               roughe out the worlde it hath no possibilite, and may easely be rep
                  •
               oued.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                Why M. Iewell? Is the winde at that doore? We talke off co
                  •
               firmation of such as are ordered, and you tell vs of orderi
                  ••
                and admitting, as though D. Harding had saied that the Po
                  •
               e did consecrat all bishoppes of the wourld with his owne ha
                  ••
               es. For so you bringe vs in sadly and solemnely the exam
                  ••
               e of Agapetus the Pope, who aboute the yeare of oure lord
                  •
                40. ordered with his own handes Memna Archebishop of C
                  •
               nstantinople, auouching withall that from the time off

Peter the Apostle, the East Church neuer receaued any other bishop consecrated by the handes of the Pope, whereas yet Leo almost a hundred yeares before this Agapetus had confirmed the bishop of Alexandria Proterius, and the bishop of Constantinople Anatoleus. You knowe this is not to the purpose, and therefore you adde to excuse the matter.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .455. Vntruthe. For D. Hardinge semeth not so to doe.Let not M. Harding finde faulte that I place the ordering of bisshops in stede of their Confirmation, for he him selfe (.455.) seemeth to make Confirmation and Ordering bothe one thinge. or at least to ioyne them bothe together. These be his wordes. Leo woulde not in any wise Order and Confirme Anatolius.
            
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                What a trifler is this? M. Iewell placeth Ordering in stede of Confirmation. Why? Bicause M. Harding seemeth to make them one. If he do but Seme to doe it, why doe you it in good earnest, and so solemnely? Yet M. Iewell sawe that was not true, and therefore he correcteth him selfe and saieth: At the least to ioyne them together. Loe bicause they are ioyned together in one sentence, M. Iewell wil disproufe one by the other. Then if I put chalke and chese together in a sentence, M. Iewell will proue I can eate no chese bicause I can eate no chalke. Againe though D. Harding talke of ordering, yet he speaketh not of ordering with the Popes owne handes: suche as the example by M. Iewell alleaged is. Thus he toyeth and trifleth, that he may seme to saie somewhat.
            Here foloweth an other toye of S. Markes Cloke, out of Liberatus, as muche to the matter, as if one woulde proue that the Mayer of London hath no authorite from the kinge bicause he is chosen in the gilde hall, not in the Courte.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .456. Vntruthe. A manifest Corruptiō off the whole history.And S. Ciprian writeth vnto the bishoppes of Spayne, that Sabinus, whom they had lawfully chosen bishop, should so continue still, yea not withstāding Cornelius being then bishop of Rome, misliked him and would not Confirme him.
            This is vtterly vntrue, false, and forged. Cornelius was dead

when Sainte Cyprian wrote this epistle. It was Steuen the Pope (who was Pope after Cornelius) whiche had confirmed Basilides in stede of Sabinus, moued thereto by wronge information. This is the case. Basilides being bishop of Euerite in Spaine was deposed for committing idolatry in the time of persecution. Sabinus was orderly and lawfully chosen in his place. Basilides after this sued to Rome to be restored, and by wronge information gotte the Popes letters for the recouery of his bishoprike. The clergy complained to the bishoppes of Afrike, vnto whome at that time appeales were made, as M. Iewell before confesseth ex Consilio Telenci. This vntrue dealing of Basilides Sainte Cyprian an Africane bishopp misliked,
                  Lib. 1. epist. 4. and therefore he saieth. It can not dissolue the lawfull ordering of Sabinus, that Basilides after the detecting of his fa
                     •
                  ltes euen by his owne confession, going to Rome, hathe deceiued our folowe bishop Steuen dwelling farre of, and being ignorant off thecase and truthe, coueting so to be vnlawfully restored to his bishopricke, from the whiche he was lawfully deposed. These do proue that the faultes off Basilides are not so much wiped away as encreased, adding to his former offences, the crime off deceit and wronge information. For he is not so much to be blamed, whiche was stolen vpon by negligence, as he is to be abhorred that guilefully did steale vpon him. Thus farre S. Cyprian. Whose wordes M. Iewell, do euidently confirme the Popes authorite in Confirmation of bishops. For seing the sentence of Pope Steuen in the behalfe of Basilides, was vniust for no other cause, but bicause the suggestion was vntrue: it foloweth that if it had bene true, the sentence had bene good, and he lawfully restored. Otherwise if the Pope had no authorite to restore Basilides, it might haue serued for a quicke exception, to saie as no doubte M. Iewell (had he ben here in S. Cyprians place) would haue saied: Pope Steuen hath no authorite in this matter. He hath naught to doe here to restore or confirme any bishops. But nowe the faulte

is layed not vpon the Popes restoring, but vpon Basilides his wronge information. And this Sabinus continued bishop not contrary to the confirmation of Pope Cornelius, but contrary to the restitution of Pope Steuen. And yet not bicause Pope Steuen restored Basilides, but bicause Basilides had misse informed Pope Steuen. Thus M. Iewell altereth and falsifyeth stories, choppeth and mangleth S. Cyprian, and yet can name no one bishop whom the Pope confirmed not. Nowe foloweth a decree of Anacletus touching the ordering of bishops, and the question is of confirming bishoppes either allready ordered or to be ordered. And here endeth all M. Iewelles proufes for this matter. But he wil disproue the allegations of D. Harding, and so establish his negatiue proposition, off not all bishoppes confirmed by the Pope. First he answereth to the place of S. Gregory complayning to Constantia the Emperesse, that the bishop off Solom was ordered, neither he,
               
                  Gregor. Li. 4. epis. 34. 
               nor his deputie being made priuie vnto it, and saying farder, Herein that thinge hathe bene done whiche neuer happened in the time of anye Princes before our daies, and saieth.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 457. Vntruthe. He meant of more then his ovvne charge, as M. Ievvell taketh the Popes Charge to be.That Gregorie meant this not of all bishoppes but only of the bisshoppes within his owne charge, it is euident by his wordes.  For thus he writeth. My bishops, being Bishops within my cure.
            
            S. Gregory saieth well M. Iewel, he calleth his bishops and the bishops of his Cure, not only the bishops of his owne prouince as he was bishop of Rome, but also of his Patriarkship as Illyricum and all the West, whereof he was Patriarche, and so are we of England (specially brought to the faithe by him) subiect thereunto. What haue ye now gotte M. Iewell? Will you that England be subiect to Rome, as Illyricum was? Or will you breake the order of the first 600. yeres?
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .458. Vntruthe For it vvas more then a generall allovvance, as shall appeare.VVhere as it is alleaged that the bishop of Rome was required to ratifie the election of Flauianus, Anatholius, and of the Arrian bishops, that was meant of a generall allowance, such as was common to al bishoppes,

specially to the foure principall patriarches, and not only to the bishop of Rome.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                Yes only to the bishop of Rome of necessite, for ought that you M. Iewel haue shewed to the contrary. And for you to saie thinges without proufes, being now taken in so many Vntruthes, when you seme to proue most, it is no time M. Iewell, Your credit is not such. Certainely the Confirmation of the Arrian bishoppes denied by Pope Iulius, restored againe Athanasius, Paulus and his felowes to their bisshopprickes, and declared thereby the necessite of his Authorite. This before hath bene declared in the matter of Appeales. The Confirmation also of Anatholius and of Proterius was so necessary, that the Emperours Theodosius, and Martianus wrote therefore. And to Theodosius, requiring of Leo the Pope the Confirmation of Anatholius in the Patriarkeship of Constantinople, Leo writeth this answer. De ordinatione eius qui Constantinopolitanae caepit ecclesiae praesidere,
               
                  Hist. trip li. 4. ca 6. Leo ad Theodosiū Epist. 33. 
               
                  
                     •
                  i
                     •
                  il interim in alterutram partem temere rescribendum putaui, non dilectionem negans, sed manifestationem Catholicae veritatis expectant As touching the Ordering of him, which hath begonne to gouuerne the Churche of Constantinople, I haue thought it good as yet to make no certaine answer thereunto, not denying vnto him my good will, but looking for a declaration of the Catholike Truthe. And the reason hereof he specifieth in an other letter where he saieth.
                  Leo epist. 34. ad diuersos
                
               Et ipse Constantinopolitanus Episcopus, & qui eundem consecr
                     ••
                  ant, preter id quod ad ordinationem noui Antistitis pertiuebat, nihil nobis de compressis vel abdicatis erroribus indicarunt. Bothe the bishop him selfe of Constantinople (Anatholius,) and those which had consecrated him, beside that which appertained to the Ordering of the newe bishop, haue signified nothinge vnto vs of the wrōge opinions in doctrine layed aside or cōdemned. This was the Cause why the Pope would not out of hande Cōfirme him, before

he knewe he was a man of a Catholike and right beleue. And therefore in his letters to the Emperour Theodosius, he willeth this Athanasius to reade ouer and peruse certaine writinges of Cyrilius against the heresy of Nestorius, and his owne epistle writen to Flauianus against the heresy of Eutyches. Ita sinceram Cummunis fidei Confession
                     •
                  m, absolutissima Subscriptione coram omni Clero & vniu
                     •
                  rsae plebe declaret Apostolicae Sedi,
               
                  Leo. epi. 3
                     •
                  
                
               & vniuersis domini Saecerdotibus & Ecclesi
                     •
                  s publicandam So that he pronounce before all the Clergy and the people, the right Cōfessiō of Cōmon belefe, with a most exacte Subscription, which after might be published to the See Apostolike, and to the Priestes and Churches of God. Moreouer in the same epistle, he desireth the Emperour thus. Agat clemētiae vestrae d
                     •
                  uotissimae fides & c
                     •
                  . Let the most holy faith of your Clemēcy bringe to passe, that the letters of the B. of Constantinople, as it b
                     •
                  cometh a Catholike and approued bishop to write, be sent vnto vs,
               
                  A pert
                        •
                      a
                        •
                     que dil
                        ••
                     
                     c
                        •
                     de pr
                        •
                     testantia.
                
               opē
                  ly and playnely protesting, that if any man doe beleue or tache any other thinge tou
                     •
                  hing the Incarnation of Christe, our God,
               
                  Quàm Catholicurum omnium et mea 
                        ••
                     
                     fessi
                        •
                      p
                        •
                     ot
                        •
                     statur.
                
               th
                     •
                  n al Catholikes and I doe professe, I
                     •
                   doe exclude him vtterly frō his Cō
                  munion, that so we may rightfully bestow vpon him our brotherly Charite in Christe. Vpō such cōditiōs and no otherwise woulde that lerned and holy Pope Leo Confirme this Anatholius, though the Emperour, the bishop him selfe, and the other which had consecrated him, had written to the Pope the
                  •
               fore. So necessary and of such importaunce semed at that time the Confirmation of the Pope, euen for the Patriarche him selfe of Constantinople, as light a matter as M. Iewell would haue the worlde to thinke it. Therefore also this Anatholius hauing at lenght vnder Ma
                  •
               tianus that Catholike and Zelous Emperour (of whose vertue and Zele Theodosius the second his predecessour lacked much) subscribed to the Catholike faithe according to the ple
                  ••
               ure of the See Apostolike, Leo the Pope confirmeth his doinges in an other letter writen to

the same Anatholius, where he saieth these wordes. Societatem tuae dilectionis amplectimur, & gestorum quae sampsimu
                     •
                   seriē, necessarijs (sicut oportuit) munitā Subscriptionibus approbamus. We embrace the felowship of your, and the whole processe of your doinges,
                  Eco. epist. 40. ad Anatholiū.
                which we haue receiued, witnessed with the Subscriptions requisit thereunto, as it behoued, we doe approue and allowe. And that this Approbation off the Pope was in dede the Confirmation off this Anatholius in this bishopricke, it appeareth otherwhere. For at what time the Generall Councell of Chalcedon being ended, this Anatholius Patriarche of Constantinople by the persuasion of certaine had taken vpon him the next preeminence after the bishop of Rome ouer other Metropolitanes, contrary to the-Order taken in the first Councell of Nice, and contrary to the Popes legates consent in the Councell of Chalcedon; this lerned and holy Pope Leo writing to the Emperour Martianus thereof,
                  Can. 5. bothe dissalloweth that vnlawefull attempt, and putteth him in minde of the former benefit, saying. Nos v
                     •
                  
                  strae fidei & interuentionis habentes intuitum,
               
                  Leo epist. 54. ad Martianū.
                
               cum secundum su
                     •
                   Consecrationis Authores eius initia our baren
                     •
                  , benigniores circa ipsum quam instiores esse voluimus. We at the contemplation of your promise and intercession (saieth Leo the Pope to the Emperour Martianus) though the beginning of his bishoprike was out of order, touching those which did consecrat him, vsed yet more fauour and Clemency, then rigour or iustice towarde him. And a litle after in the same letter he saieth. Sati
                     •
                   sit, quòd praedicto vestrae pietatis auxilio & mei fauoris assensu, Episcopatum tantae vrbis obtinuit. Let it suffice that by the helpe of your goodnesse, and the Consent of my good will he hath attayned to the bishopricke of so great a Cyte. And at the same time in an other letter to Pulcheria the Emperesse thus he writeth.
                  Leo epist. 55. ad pulcheriā.
                
               My brother and felowe bishopp Anatholius hath litle considered, with what a greate benefy
                     •
                  
                  
off your Clemancy, and 
               
                  Et 
                        〈◊〉
                      fauori
                        •
                      assensu.
                
               Consente of my good will 
                     •
                  e hath obtayned the Bishopricke of Constantinople. Thus loe these Emperours Theodosius and Martianus his successour had intreated Pope Leo for Confirming of this Anatholius, (bicause as Leo in an other place writeth. Ordinationis eius non inculpa
                     •
                  a erant Inicia, the beginning of his Consecrating bishop had bene somewhat aginst Order) the Pope prescribed him bothe to professe openly the Catholike faithe, and to sende his Subscription thereunto to Rome, Anatholius did as the Pope had prescribed him. The Pope thereupon confirmed him. And afterwarde (when he behaued him selfe ambitiously) did put him in minde off the former fauour shewed vnto him, and what is a Confirmation by way of Authorite, if this be not? Or when shall the practise off so many hundred yeres paste be sufficiently proued, if this be not? Againe this principall Patriarche of the East Churche, being so Confirmed by the Pope of Rome, who doubteth but muche more al other inferiour Bishoppes, (especially if they had not bene ordered according to the Canons) were also necessarely to be confirmed of the Pope? Yet saieth M. Iewell.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 459. Vntruthe as before.Neither was the bishop of Romes admission thought so necessary, a
                  •
                if 
                  •
               e only had a voyce negatiue, to make in and to put out whom he lifted, but only of Congruite and Consent, that it might appeare, there was no bishop in the Church, but was liked and allowed of his bretherne.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                How chaunced it then M. Iewell that you and your felowes bearing your selfes for bishops, haue not so much as this Congruite and consent, I will not saie of the Pope, but of any Christē bishop at al through out all Christendom, neither are liked and allowed of any one of them al, but haue taken vpon you that office, without any Imposition of handes, without all ecclesiasticall Authorite, without all order of Canons and righ
                  •
               ? I aske not who gaue you bishoprikes, but who made you bishops. Howbeit it appeareth wel M. Iewel that this Answer

of Cons
                     •
                  nt and Congruite was but a shifte for the present: But your Doctrine of Luthers teaching, it is a plaine discorde and disordre, that any bishopp or priest 
                  •
               houlde be admitted or approued off others. And therefore you plaie the bishopps your selues, without any regarde or respect to the allowance of any other Christen bishopps in the whole worlde. Verely it appeareth by this example of Anatholius his Cōfirmation, that it was more then of Consent and Congruite, and that it was bothe necessary, and obtained by longe and speciall sute.
            Yet you will proue it was but of consent and congruite, and of no necessite you saie.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               
                  S
                        •
                     z
                        ••
                      li. 3. Ca. 8.For otherwise the bishoppes of the East wrote thus vnto Iulius. If you will 
                     •
                  llo
                     •
                  e the bishoppes that we haue ordred, we will be at peace and 
                     •
                  om
                     •
                  uni
                     •
                  at with you? Iff not we will pr
                     ••
                  laime the contra
                     •
                  y.
            
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                These Arrian bishoppes haue done you much good stede in this Article. It is mere that protestants make muche of heretikes. And it is well that for lacke of Catholike examples, you claime by heretikes. Suche plea becometh you very well. To the matter we haue answered before at large,
                  Hist. trip. li. 4. Ca. 6 and presently do saie thus much. At the first they accused Athanasius, Paulus, Marcellus and other Catholike bishops to Pope Iulius, desiring him to confirme such Arrians as they had placed in their roomes,
                  Sozun. li. 3. 
                     〈…〉
                  . declaring thereby how gladd they woulde haue ben to haue had his Confirmation. After, when they sawe they coulde not spede, they defied the Pope and the Nicene Councell bothe, and maintained openly the Arrian heresy. The like example may be sene in Luther. First he wrote to Pope Leo the x and submitted himselfe vnto him,
                  Pontanu
                        •
                      gal li. 1. pag 10 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  exposit. Art. ad Leo non. An̄
                   15. 
                     •
                   
                  
                     
                        •
                     ib. eodem pa 15. hoping the
                  •
                that for the matter off pardous, whiche only yet he hath called in controuersy, that he should be hearde and haue fauour. But a yere after seing by Caietane the Popes legat that the Pope was 
                  ••
               holy bent against him, and minded to procede with him according to the 
                  〈◊〉
               , then 
                  •
               o he defied the Pope, as all th
                  •
               
               
worlde knoweth. This did the Arrians, and thus did Luther. M. Iewell taketh parte with bothe.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
                The 460 and .461. Vntruthe as shall appeares. Sozom. li. 7. ca. 8.And the Emperour Gratian made Nectarius bishop of Constantinople contrarie to the mindes of the most parte of the bishoppes.
            M. Iewel ouerreacheth his author Sozomenus. For he saieth not so much as M. Iewell reporteth him to saie, these are his wordes. 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . The Emperour vnderstanding that the same Nect
                  •
               rius (whom before he had pricked, being first named of certain the bishops) was not yet baptised, yet he continued in his minde, many of the bishops again saying it. But after when al the bishops agreed and accorded to the Emperours mind, he was baptised, and hauing yet his baptisme cote vpon him, by the common voice and consent of the Synode, he was created bishop of Cō
               stantinople. In these wordes we see first, that Nectarius was not bishop at all contrary to the mindes of the most parte off the bishops, as M. Iewell fableth, but by the Common consent and agreement of them all. Then also, that at the first not the most parte, as M. Iewell maketh Sozomenus to saie, but many of the bishops resisted it which yet all afterward agreed, and then by them so agreing and all their voices, he was made bishop. And this to be so, the bishops them selues in that Councell doe expressely witnesse in their letters to Damasus then Pope of Rome. where thus they say. 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
                  Theodore
                        •
                     . li. 5. ca. 9. 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               The most reuerent and most godly Nectarius we haue Consecrated bishopp, in the generall Councell withe Common agreement. This was not then against their mindes as M. Iewell fableth and faineth. Neither was all this done in the presence of Gratian as M. Iewel ignorantly bableth, but as tho
                  •
               e bi
                  •
               hops do reporte to Damasus 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
               
                  Ibidem.
               
               
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . in the presence of the most godly Emperour Theodosius. But what is all this against the Pope off whose only Authorite the question is here, not off other bishoppes? Verely this whole Councell of Constantinople certified Damasus the Pope of this their doing,
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Leo epi. 34 and of other bishops whom they had at that time also consecrated and desired his consent thereunto, Euen as those which cōsecrated Anatholius certified Pope Leo of the same, and required his Confirmation. And Gratian him selfe (whom M. Iewel alleageth) acknowleadgeth so muche the Authoritye of the Pope, that for a shorte ending of all controuersies, he enacted by a publike decree, that all the worlde shoulde folowe that faith and Religion, which had continewed from S. Peter the Apostle in the See of Rome, and which Damasus then Pope held and professed. And thus farre is M. Iewel aided by Gratian.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               The ecclesiasticall rule (as we reade in the tripatit storie) commaundeth that no Councell be celebrated and kepte, without the aduise and the Authorite of the Pope.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 462. Vntruthe Slaunderous. The .iii. Vntruthe. Standing in wilfull falsyfying of the text.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
                Had M. Iewell Loued the Truthe, tendred the instruction of his Reader, and bene of that Ciuilite and gentle demeanour as his outwarde behauiour pretendeth, truly he woulde neuer thus haue dealed. Thou shalt see, gentle Reader, M. Iewelles proufes in the text, by the which he is moued to charge D. Harding not only with falsefying, but also with willfull falsyfying. He saieth,
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .463. Vntruthe pregnant For D. Hard. hathe auouched no such Vntruthe.
The 464 Vntruthe For Cassiodorus made no such translatiō but Epiphanius.Here H. Harding hath auouched two great Vntruthes. The one in his translation in the english: the other in the allegation of the storie. Touching the first Cassiodorus in his latin translation writeth thus. Canonesiubent, extra Romannū nhil decerni pontificē, Socrates in the greke, out of which the latine was taken, writeth thus 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                The englishe hereof i
                  •
               
               
this. It is pro
                     •
                  ided by the Canons, that rules to binde the Churche be not made with
                  
                     •
                  ut the consent of the bishop of Rome.
            
            Let your traslation stande for good M. Iewell a while. Let nihil decerni, be truly englished, that no rules be made to binde the Churche, without the consent of the Pope. Haue you not saied as muche for the Popes authorite, as the translation of D. Harding saieth? What difference is there in effect betwene the celebrating of a Councell, and betwene making of Canons that binde the Churche: whereas such Canons are made only in Councel. Vnlesse you be such a Papiste, that the Pope alone without a Councell, may make Canons, to binde the Churche. If we had so largely translated the worde decerni, off like you would haue crowed mightely. But let vs now see the faultes which you finde in the translatiō vsed by D. Harding, supposing he had translated, these wordes which you alleage. For the contrary shall anon appeare.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 465. Vntruthe facing and impudent as it shal appeare. StapletonVVherein M. Harding hath purposely corrupted and falsified altogether both the greke and the latine, not reporting one worde that h
                  •
                found in the Original. 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                or decernere, he englisheth to kepe, or as he termeth it, to celebrat a Councell.
            Yet that is better transsated then did your frend Wolfgrā
               gus Musculus, who turned the worde 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                
               Ecclesias consecrare, to consecrat Churches. Howbeit touching D. Hardinges translation, if we take the whole sentence of the place, we shall see his translation may stande for true and good. The whole place is this. Iulius rescripsit eis qui fuerant in Antiochia congregati, culpās eos primum de iniurijs literarum,
               
                  Hist. trip. lib. 4· cap. 19. 
               deinde cur se ad Synodum suam non vocassent, canonibus nimirum iubentibus pieter Romanum nihil decerni Pontificem. Iulius (the Pope) wrote backe to the bishops of the East assembled together in Antioche, blaming them first of their iniurious letters, thē bicause they called him not to their Councell. Whereas the Canons

do commaunde, that nothinge be determined beside the bisshop of Romes sentence.
            The story mentioneth, that the Pope blamed the bishoppes of the East whiche called a Councell,
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . not making him preuy thereunto. And what was the reason why the Pope so blamed them? The story saieth. Canonibus nimirum iubentibus &c. Bicause the Canons do commaunde that nothinge be determined (howe, but in Concell?) without the aduise of the Pope. And is not this as much in effect, as to saie. Without the aduise of the Pope no Councell can be summoned? But we shall see anon that the very translatour of the Greke Epiphanius hathe translated in an other place this very Greke, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . Concilia celebrare, to kepe and celebrat Councells, euen as D. Hardinge hathe englished it. But nowe lett vs procede withe M. Iewells corrections.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , whiche is praeter sententiam, or as Cassiodorus turnet
                  •
                it, extra, he englisheth: without the Aduise and Autho
                     •
                  ite..
            
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
                Not Cassiodorus M. Iewell, but Epiphanius turned that Greke, It appeareth you trust not allwaies your owne eyes in these matters. But to the purpose. First for praeter and ext
                     •
                  a, you turne it your selfe M. Iewell, in your owne translation without. And why I beseche you, may not D. Harding so turne it? Is there such partialite in the kinde hart of M. Iewell, that he maye translate 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                
               without, and D. Harding may not translate it so? Then for the worde 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               : sententia, whiche D. Harding turneth Aduise and Authorite, M. Iewell turneth consent, for that I remitt it to the Grammarians. I am right 
                  •
               ure that the dictionaries bothe greke and latine do confesse that 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                in Greke, and sententia in Latine, dothe rather, more ofte
                  •
               ,The .436. Vntruthe. ioyned with mere folye. and more properly betoken Adu
                     •
                  se and Authorite, then Consent. Let vs procede.
            No, he woulde not suffer, no not him in whose quarell he thus fighteth, to passe without a venwe. 
                  •
               or where he sawe 
                  •
               im named 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  ••
               e

Greke, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , and in the Latine Romanum Pontificem, the Romain bishop, he thought it beste to l
                  •
               aue bothe the Creke and the Latine, and to call him the Pope.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                See what heresy and malice is. Did euer any man, I will not saie lerned as a diuine, but conuersant in common grammer, so wrangle, so trifle, so quarel aboute nothinge. I remembre at the last Marte of Franckforde, the brethern of Wittenberge and Lipse had pointed Flaccus Illyricus ryding vpō a gote and the Diuell drawing him in to hell, with this posy aboute him in verses, Certans de lana caprina. Beholde a man that fighteth for gotes wolle. This picture and posy may from Flaccus Illyricus be most rightly deriued to M. Iewell. For I beseche you M. Iewell what difference is there betwene the Romain bishop, and the bishop of Rome? And then againe betwene the bishop of Rome and the Pope. Is there any other bishop of Rome, then the Pope? Or is there any other Pope, then the bishop of Rome? Other bishops haue sometime ben called Popes. But the bishop of Rome allwaies hath ben so called. And these certain hundred yeares none but the bishop of Rome. And is this a willfull falsifying of the text, to call the Bishop of Rome, the Pope. O what a precise felow M. Iewell is? These be the hypocriticall Pharisees, which strayning a gnatte, do deuoure vp camels. fighting and quarelling vpon termes, do lett slippe the matter. And yet he concludeth as though he had fought a great battaill, and killed God haue mercy on his soule.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .467 Vntruth: For t
                     •
                  ere hath no such falsifing b
                     •
                  ne cō
                  mitted.And thus to increase the Popes Authorite, he had altered the whole place, and not translated one worde as he founde it.
            Thus saieth M. Iewell. But thou seest nowe gentle Reader, that euen taking the wordes bothe of the Latin and of the greke as he hath alleaged them, and withall the whole sentence of the place, which M. Iewell thought good vtterly to dissemble, there is no falshood nor Vntruthe committed, but euen that sence and English deliuered there which latin and greke bothe do beare. But nowe what if M. Iewell all this while hath

harped vpon a wrong stringe? What if the latin which he alleageth is not the text of that place that D. Harding meaneth? What if the same very greke be so translated of the very same writer in the very same booke as D. Harding hath englished it? Hath he not then all this while sponne vs a faire threede? Truly so is it gentle Reader. But yet I will not therefore charge M. Iewell with any Vntruthe or falshood. Only as I saied in the beginning of this place so I saie now, if he had loued in dede the truthe, tendred sincerely and vprightly his readers instruction, and bene of that Ciuilite and gentle demeanour, as he semeth to men to be, he woulde not thus haue dealed, he woulde not in such sorte haue stormed and quarelled for a litle errour in the quotation: but, as his lerning serued him, would soone haue espied what text and place of that history it was which D. Harding alleaged. For thus it is gentle Reader. The quotation of that place in D. Hardinges Answer is thus. lib. 4. Cap. 19. It should haue bene lib. 4. cap. 9. It was the same very booke of the tripartit History, and the 19. Chapter in stede of the 9. It was only the errour of one iota. Neither coulde M. Iewell Vndoubtedly hauing read and sene so much, be ignorant hereof. But in dede either bicause he would not be a knowen of the place to the which he coulde not answer, or els bicause he owed but litle good will to D. Harding, more carefull howe to deface his aduersary, then howe to trie the truthe, he tooke the aduauntage as he found it, and seing the weapon out of his place, layed loode on, spared no parte, but vsed his force to euery worde and sillable of it. And that so farre, that Romanus Pontifex must not be translated the Pope. This kinde of plaie as in worldly combats it is but the parte of a coward, and dastardly wretch, so in Diuine matters, to deale after such sorte, and that for a man of ripe yeares, a man of lerning and knowleadg, a man that beareth him selfe for a bishop, I knowe not who would do so, but M. Iewell. The place it selfe

which D. Hard. there meaned, in the greke of Socrates is thus. 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . word for worde as the Greke by M. Iewell alleaged.
                  Lib. 1. Cap. 8. Trix. Hist. lib. 4. ca. 9 The latin of Epiphanius the tranlatour not of Cassiodorus (as M. Iewell ignorantly calleth it) is thus. Cum vtique regula ecclesiastica iubeat nō oportere praeter sententiā Romani Pontificis Concilia celebrari. In english thus much, euen as D. Harding hath most truly translated it. The ecclesiasticall rule comundeth that no Councell be celebrated or kept without the aduise and authorite of the Pope. The greke of Socrates in this place, and his greke in the other place alleaged by M. Iewell is all one (as I saied) Word for word. The translatour Epiphanius in this place of the .9. Chapter, hath translated 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , Concilia celebrari, which is in english Councels to be kept or celebrated. The same translatour in the 19. Chapter quoted by D. Harding hath translated those very wordes 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , Nihil decerni, nothinge determined in Councel, for of a Coūcel there he speaketh holdē in the East beside the bishop of Romes knowleadg. And how is it nowe true that D. Harding hath forsaken both the Greke and the latin, which hath englished the greke, euen with the same words in english, as the translatour Epiphanius hath done in latin, as well in the Chapter quoted according to the sence, as in the other chapter meaned according to the very letter.
            Thus farre the lewde trifling or M. Iewell, hath forced vs to trifle touching the translation: wherein though he said before that D. Harding had VVilfully falsifyed the texte, it appeareth nowe euidently that Master Iewell hathe VVilfully mocked and abused hys Reader. Now to the story it selfe.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               The Councells holden at Ariminum, at Sileucia, at Sirmium, att Antiochia, and the seconde tyme at Ephesus,

for that they were not summoned nor approued by the Bisshop off Rome, haue not ben accompted for lauful Councells, but as well for that reiected, as for their hereticall determinations.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .468 Vntruthe Slaunderous.The .112. Vntruthe. For in those daies the Bishop of Rome had no Authorite to summon Councells.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
                What saie you then to the examples alleaged M. Iewell? What 
                  •
               aye you then to the testimony of the Ecclesiasticall story twise repeted by Socrates, and before alleaged? Let vs repete the whole wordes more at large. The ecclesiasticall storye writeth thus.
                  Hist. tripa. lib. 4. ca. 9 
               Egit Eusebius vt in Antiochia Syriae Synodus fieret, sub occasione quidem dedicationis Ecclesiae quam pater Augustorum fabricare coeperat, & post eius obitum Constantius decimo anno eam à fundationis tempore expleuerat, in veritate autem ad subuersionem atque destructionem Niceni Concilij: Ad quam Synodum conuenerunt ex ciuitatibus diuersis episcopi nonaginta. Maximus tamen Hierosolymitanus Macarij Successor non affuit, cogitans quòd ipsi posset subripi, vt in damnationem subscriberet Athanasij. Sed neque Iulius interfuit maximae Romae praesul, neque in locum suum aliquem destinauit. Cum vtique regula Ecclesiastica iubeat, non oportere praeter sententiam Romani Pontificis Concilia celebrari. In English thus. Eusebius (the Arrian intruded bishop of Constantinople) caused a Synod to be helde in Antiochia of Syria, vnder the pretēce of dedicating of a Church which Cōstantin the Great had begonne to builde,Dedication of Chir
                     •
                  hes in the yere of oure Lorde. and Constantius his sonne in the tenth yeare after the first foundation layed had finished, but in dede for the ouerthrowing and vndoing of the Nicene Councell. To this Synod there were assembled out of diuerse Cities the number of fourscore and ten bishoppes. Yet Maximus bishoppe of Hierusalem and successour to Macarius, was not present thereat, fearing that he might be forced by some

guile, to subscribe to the condemnation of Athanasius. No neither Iulius the Bishoppe of the greatest Rome, was present, neither h
                  •
               d sent anye legate in his place. VVhereas yet the Ecclesiasticall Rule dothe commaunde, that besyde the Authoritye off the Bishoppe of
                  •
                Rome, no Councelles ought to be celebrated. Lo M. Iewell. A Councell holden of fourescore and ten bisshops, a Concell holden in Syria in the East Church, wel nere twise furder from Rome then England, holden in the yeare of our Lorde .346. more then twelue hundred yeares sence, and in that same Councell holden of so many bishops, so farre from Rome, so many hundred yeres sence, the Authorite of the bisshop of Rome, by commaundement of an Ecclesiasticall rule or Canon, required. If his Authority was required thereunto and that by the vertu of an ecclesiasticall Rule or Canon, shall it be yet vntrue that the Pope had then Authorite to summon and approue Councels? Is not this argument good M. Iewell?
            
               No parliament can be holdem, without the authorite of the Quenes Maiesty.
            
            
               Ergo the Quenes Maiesty hath Authority to call a parliament.
            
            And then is not this as good.
            
               No Councel ought to be celebrated without the Authorite of 
                     •
                  he bishop of Rome.
            
            
               Ergo the bishoppe off Rome hathe Authoritye to call a Councell.
            
            Vnlesse M. Iewell will saie that though he haue Authoryte to celebrat, yet he hath no authoryte to Summon it: the summo
                  •
               ing being lesse then the celebrating, and the authorite off celebrating without the authorite of summoning being none at all. Els what a mockery were this? The Prince hath authority to holde a parliament: but he may not call a parliament except it please the subiects. Such rebelles argumentes may helpe

M. Iewell. Other helpe or shifte here he hathe none. Againe to put more force to this matter, the history sayeth, that the Ecclesiasticall rule or Canon dothe commaunde that no Councelles be holden withoute the Authoritye of the Pope.
               
                  Li. 4. Ca. 9. His
                        •
                     or. tripa
                        •
                     ttiae.
                I aske M. Iewell. Where was this ecclesiasticall rule or Canon decreed? There was no general Councell before that time but the first Nicene Councell. The great Councell of Sardica was helde certaine yeares after, though in the time of this Iulius, as it appeareth euidently by the auncient stories, and by the new Chronographies. It coulde be no Canon of any prouinciall Councell, that should make such a generall decree, to binde Syria it selfe and al the East to the Authorite of the bishop of Rome. I aske M. Iewell then by the waie, where was that Canon decreed? Let him scoure out his note bookes, let him examine the Centuries of the Magdeburgenses, let him looke to the common approued tomes of the Councell, he shall finde it no where decreed before that tyme, but in the Nicene Councell, and in the Nicene Councell he shall finde it decreed, not in the imperfect copies commonly extant, nor in the corrupted authentikes alleaged of the Africanes against pope Zosimus: But he shall finde it in the epistle of Iulius this same Pope here mentioned, to these same Arrian Bishoppes of the Easte. For in that epistle complayning of their schismaticall Synod, and blaming them therefore, that neither he nor any in his place was present thereat, he geueth the reason saying, Canonibus quippe in Nicena Synodo iubentibus, &c. Seing the Canons in the Nicene Councell do commaunde, that without the Authorite of the bishopp of Rome, Councells in any wise ought not to be celebrated, nor bishops be condemned. Nowe to this testimony of the ecclesiastical storie and to the Canon or decree off the Nicene Councell (as it nowe appeareth to be) alleaged, what answereth M. Iewel? He putteth it for an Vntruthe, that the Pope had no such Authorite. But what doth he

answer then to the examples alleaged by D. Harding, and namely to this testimony of the Ecclesiasticall story? Vndoubtedly this testimony went euen to the hart of M. Iewell. And being not able otherwise to answer it, he stormed and tooke on about the translation off it as you haue hearde,
                  Tom. 1. Conciliorū epist. 1. but to the story it selfe what saieth he nowe?
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Touching the storie, he saieth. The Arrians Councels were not allowed, for that they were not Summoned by the Pope.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                Yea M. Iewel, D. Harding saieth so in dede: but that is not all that he saieth. He saieth, Not summoned, nor approued. Not forcing so much the formall summoning, but the materiall approuing. Well. Howe proue you the contrary? Howe proue you that the Arrians Councels were not disanulled for lacke of the Popes authorite? Howe proue you the Vntruthe which you haue noted. Thus you proue it.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 469 Vntruth
                     •
                   it was principally his part so t
                     •
                   doe.Yet, he knoweth right wel, it was no part of the Popes office in those daies, to Sumon Councelles.
            Must D. Hardinges knowleadge be M. Iewelles proufe? Answer to the point M. Iewell. Answer to the testimony off the ecclesiastical story. Proue the examples alleaged to be false. You tolde the readers before that D. Harding hath committed two Vntruthes. The one in his translation in the english, the other in the allegation of the Storie. The Reader see now that you haue mocked him before in the one. And will you mocke him so nowe in the other? Verely you deale herein as weake reasoners, and simple logicioners do in scoles. Whē they are not able to answer to the argument, they will make argumentes of their owne to the contrary and tell a longe tale for the part they defende, and so seme to answer. But the great philosopher Aristotle in his rules off reasoning hath taught you M. Iewell, that contra opponere, non est respondere. To make argument of the contrary, is not to answer. Yet let vs see what

you can bringe to the contrary. And the lawe saieth. Retorsione criminum non probatur innocentia. By recharging the Aduersary, a mans owne innocency is not proued.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 470 Vntruthe for not he allone did so.  
               
                  •
               o
                  •
                it is euident by the police and practise of that time, that Constantinus t
                  •
               e Emperour summoned the Councel of Nice.
            Not he alone, nor by his only Authorite, but as Ruffinus writeth, ex sententia sacerdotum, by the aduise and Authorite off the bishoppes.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
                
                  Ru
                        •
                     fi
                        •
                     us li. 2 Cap. 1.
Th
                     •
                   47
                     •
                   Vntruthe as s
                     •
                  all appeare. Theodor. li 5 Cap. 
                  
                     •
                  
               Theodosius the first, the Councell of Constantinople.
            The bishops of that Councell auouche the contrary. For thus they write to Damasus the Pope. 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . We assembled our selues to Constantinople by the late letters off your honour sent vnto the most godly Emperour Theodosius. In these wordes they cōfesse they were Summoned by the letters off Damasus the Pope to the Councell. M. Iewell saiethe the Emperour did Summon them, not the Pope. Let the Reader consider, who is more to be credited.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Theodosius the second, the Councell of Ephesus.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
                Euagrius writeth, that whereas Nestorius the heretike woulde not obey neither Cyrillus the lerned bishop of Alexādria nor Celestinus then Pope of Rome,
                  lib. 1. ca.. 2 hist. scolast.
                
               merito oportuit Theodosij Iunioris nutu tunc sceptra tenentis Orientalis Imperij, primam in Epheso Synodum congregari &c. It behoued very much that the first Synod of Ephesus should be assembled at the commaundement off Theodosius the Seconde, then Emperour off the East. And it foloweth that he directed his letters to the bishops, and appoynted them a daye to mete together. The like writeth Socrates. But what of that? The Emperour then was of best abilite to bestowe suche charges, as in summoning bishops from all partes of the worlde are requisit. But the question of the Popes Authorite standeth not so much in summoning,
                  In epist. Ephes. Cō. ad Nesior
                        ••••
                     .
                as in ruling, directing, and confirming a Councel. In this first Councell of Ephesus, Celestinus the Pope was president

as the Epistle of the whole Ephesine Councel professeth, Cyrillus the bishop of Alexandria being his legat there, and Nestorius the hereticall bishop of Constantinople was deposed by the Councell,
                  
                     In epist. Ephes. Con. ad Nesiorium.
                  
                  
                     Conc. Chel. Act. 1. Cyrillus epist. 11. & 12. Euagrius li. 1. cap. 2.
                
               iuxta dilationem literis praefinitam sanctissimi & reuerendissimi consacerdotis nostri Romanae praesulis Ecclesiae Caelestini, according to the delaye and time appointed him by the letters of our most holy (saieth the Councell) and most reuerēt felowe priest Caelestinus bishop of the Churche of Rome. Of the which terme appointed by the Pope, Cyrillus also maketh mencion, in the letter of excommunication which he sent to Nestorius. And the Pope him selfe Caelestinus in his letters to Cyrillus writeth thus. Adiuncta tibi sedis nostrae authorite,
               
                  Cyrillus Epist. 10. & 11. Caelest inter epist. Cirilli. epist. 12. 
               & vicis nostra successione & potestate vsus, istam exacta cum seueritate exequeris sententiam, vt nisi intra decem dies ab huius admonitionis die numeratos prauas suas predicationes scripta confessione anathematisauerit, & han
                     •
                   se de Christi & dei nostri generatione fidem retinere affirmauerit, quā & Romana & tuae sanctitatis & vniuersalis regio predicat, conf
                     •
                  ssini sanctitas tua Ecclesiae illius prouideat, vt sciat se quou
                     •
                  s modo a nostro esse corpore remouendum. Taking vnto you the Authorite of our See, and occupying our place and power, you shall execut (vpon Nestorius the hereticall Patriarche of Constantinople) this sentence exactly and straightly, that Vnlesse within tenne dayes, reakoning from the daye that he shall be warned, he doe anathematise and accurse by Confession in writing his wicked preaching and doctrine, cō
               fessing him selfe to haue the same faithe touching the Incarnation of Christ and our God, which the Religion of Rome, of your holynes, and of the Vniuersall Churche dothe teache, let your holynesse out of hande prouide for his Churche (off Constantinople) and let him knowe that he is vtterly to be cut of from our bodye. Thus the Pope executed the finall sentence in the Councell ouer the Patriarche of Constantinople, the whole Councell folowed the determination of the

and Cyrillus the Patriarche of Alexandria was the Popes legat in that behalfe. And that lerned Father Cyrillus thought the Authorite of the Pope herein so necessary, that notwithstanding by his lerning he knewe Nestorius to holde an hereticall doctrine, and was as he protesteth in letters to the Pope, Paratus synodicis id literis manifestum reddere ready to proue it by letters of Conference (as the maner then was amonge bishops) yet he durst not to refraine from communicating with Nestorius or to condemne him,
                  Cyrillus Epi. 18. therefore he wrote thus vnto Celestinus the Pope in the same letter. Veruntamen nos ipsi ab illius communione cum fiducia non eximimus, donec ista pietati tuae communicemus. Quapropter quid videatur exprimere dignare, an aliquando debeamus illi cōmunicare, aut in posterū confidenter edicere quod talia & sentiēti & docēti nemo nostrū Cōmunicet. Neuertheles we haue not bene so bolde as to withdrawe ourselues from his Communion, vntell we did certifie your holynesse of these thinges. Wherefore vouchesafe to signifie what is your pleasure, whether we may at any time communicat with him, or els boldely pronounce that from hence forthe none of vs doe communicat with him hauing such opinion and teaching such thinges. Thus farre Cyrillus. Againe whereas the bishops of the East and specially of Macedonia did seme to consent to the wicked heresy of Nestorius, Cyrillus writeth also to the Pope, that his pleasure also might be knowen to them, how they ought to deale with Nestorius. For thus he writeth immediatly after the wordes which went before. Scopum vero integritatis tuae perspicuū oportebit fieri per liter as etiā religiogis simis qui per Macedoniam sunt episcopis,
               
                  Cryillus Ep. 5. inter Epist. Syn
                        •
                     dal.
                
               & simul omnibus per Oriē
                  tem. The intent also of your meaning must be knowen in like maner by your letters to the most holy bishops of Macedonia, and through ought the whole East. Such was the Authorite of the Pope in that Ephesine Councel
                  •
               , and to Cyrillus the Head and President of that Councell vnder the Pope,

nothwithstanding the summoning made by the Emperour. Neither did the Emperour Theodosius in that Councell take vpon him the approuing or determining any matter in the Councell, but referreth the whole to the Canons and to the Councell. For thus it appeareth in the Imperiall letters off Theodosius writen vnto Cyrillus, where the Emperour saieth thus. Sunt exemplaria a nostra Maiestate de praedicta sanctissima Synodo deo dilectis per vniuersas Metropoles Episcopis scripta,
               
                  Inter epist. Crylli, tomo 4. epist. 17. 
               vt hoc facto & perturbatio quae ex controuersijs istis accidit, secundum ecclesiasticos Canones dissoluatur, & quae indecēter committūtur corrigantur, sitque & pietati erga deū, & publicis rebus cōmoda firmi tudo, nec aliquid quacūque in re ante sanctissimā Synodū & futurā illius communē sententiā, a quoquā separatim innouetur. The copies of our letters writē to the godly bishops from our Maiesty thorough out al prouinces are extāt touching this holy Synod (holdē at Ephesus) that hereby both the trouble which by these Cō
               trouersies hath risen may be ended and determined according to the ecclesiasticall Canons, and such things as are done amisse, may be corrected: that so bothe God may duly be serued, and the Cōmon welth furdered, nor any thing of any mā priuatly be altered or chaūged before the most holy coūcel and the vniform sentēce and determinatiō that shal be made by the same. By these it is euident, that the Emperour intermedled not defining and determyning anye matter in the Councell, or in approuing the decrees of the same. And therefore the same holy Councell, at what time one of the Emperours Nobilitie,
                  Ioannes C
                        •
                     ntes.
                Iohn by name, went aboute to bringe Iohn the Patriarche off Antioche with his adherents in to the Councell, from whence for taking parte with Nestorius the heretike they were excluded: the Councell woulde none of it, not suffring the laye magistrat to intermedle therewith, but tolde the same Iohn the Emperours highe Officer these wordes. Non opus est Regi vt fidem discat, cum hanc sciat, inque illa baptisatus sit.
               
                  Cyril. epist. 22. tom. 4 The Emperour

nedeth not to lerne his Faithe, knowing it well enoughe already, as in the whiche he hath bene baptised. By whiche it appeareth that this Theodosius the seconde thoughe he summoned the bishoppes and appointed the place where they might conueniently be assembled, yet he approued not, nor confirmed the decrees off the Councell in lyke Authoritye as Cael
                  •
               stinus the Bishoppe of Rome then did whose legate in that Councell Cyrillus that lerned Patriarche of Alexandria was, and who in the same Councell was the whole President and chiefe doer, as hath before bene proued, and as the Grekes them selues Marcus of Ephesus and Bessarion of Nice in the eight generall Councell confessed.
                  Co
                        •
                     e. Flor. Sess. 5. Marcus Ephesius. Sess. 8. Bessar. Nicen. Episc.
                And as Caelestinus by his Legat and Vicegerent Cirillus directed that Councell, appointed the ten daies of delaye to Nestorius the Bishoppe off Constantinople, and confirmed the decrees of the same: so Sixtus successour to this Caelestinus in the See Apostolike, confirmed and approued that Councell also, of whome Cyrillus thus writeth.
                  Cyrillus Epi. 29. Tom. 4. 
               Scripsit Consona Sanctae Synodo, & omnia illius gesta confirmauit, ac nobiscum consentit. He wrote agreably to the holy Synod, and confirmed all the doinges thereof, and consenteth with vs. Of such Confirming and approuing Councels the question nowe is, not of only summoning bishops to a Councell.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 472 Vntruth. And Marcianus the Councell off Chalcedon.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                Martianus summoned not that Councell by his owne Authorite only, but by the authorite of Leo also Pope at that tyme, as it shall anon appeare.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               
                  Socra. li. 5 in proaemio
               And Socrates in his Storie saieth thus. Therefore I haue comprised the Emperours within my Storie, for that sythence they beganne to be Christened, the state of the Church dependeth of them and the greatest Councelles haue ben kepte and be still kept by their Aduise.
            
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                Who doubteth but that the state of the Church depended

much then and doth also now of good Emperours? And that generall Councelles are kept by their Aduise? But what is this to the purpose? The Emperours helpe then dothe no more exclude the Popes Authorite at that time, then the late helpe and Aduise of all Christened Catholike Princes. namely of the most Catholike Emperours, Charles the fifte, and Ferdinandus his brother, in and aboute the late generall Councell of Trent, dothe exclude the Popes Authorite at this tyme. But touching the state of the Churche dependinge of the Emperours as Socrates writeth, Iohn Caluin him selfe will tell you M. Iewell that the same taketh not awaye the ecclesiasticall Iurisdict
                  •
               on of the Churche. For he speaking of the Ecclesiasticall Authorite to binde and to lose sinners saieth thus. Whereas many thinke that those thinges endured but for a tyme when the Magistrats were yet straungers from the profession of our Religion:Iohn Caluin in his I
                     •
                  stitutions, lib. 4 ca. 11. par. 3 
               they are deceiued in this that they considre not, how great difference and what maner of vnlikenesse there is of the Ecclesiasticall and Ciuill power. And a litle after in the next paragraphe he saieth. When Emperours and Magistrats began to professe Christ, the spirituall Iurisdiction was not by and by abolished, but only so ordered, that it should diminish nothing of the Ciuill Iurisdiction, or be confounded with it. It semeth here by Caluins iudgement that the state of the Church depended not so of Emperours after they were Christened, that the Ecclesiasticall Iurisdiction was thereby either abolished or confounded.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                And the bishops in the Councell of Constantinople witnesse that they were summoned to the Romaine Councell by Damasus the B. of Rome: But they adde withall. By warrant of the Emperours letters:The .473 Vntrut
                     •
                  e as shall appeare. Theodoret. lib. 5. ca. 9  Not by any his owne Authorite.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
                These last wordes, not by any his owne Authorite, are auouched of M. Iewell only of his owne Authorite, beside the minde and true reporte of his Author which he hath quoted in the Margin. The whole wordes of Theodoret or rather of the bisshops

in the Concel of Cōstātinople mēcioned in Theodoret, whereof M. Iewell hath snatched a piece, and in that piece hath saied more to, thē was in his author, are these. Whereas you (saie those bishops to Damasus the Pope) declaring your brotherly loue toward vs,
               
                  T
                        •
                     eodoret. lib. 5. ca. 9 
               assembling a councel in Rome by the pleasure of God. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , haue also summoned vs as your proper membres, by the letters of the most godly Emperour, to the entent that whereas before we only haue abiden the smarte (of the persecution vnder Valens the Arrian) nowe in the godly Consent of th Emperours, (Thedosius the first and Gratian) you might not raingne or reioyst without vs, but according to the saying of the apostle we might raigne and reioyse with you,
               2. Cor. 1. 2. Tim. 2. 
               we desired verely, if it had bene possible, all of vs at ones to haue lefte our Churches, and to gratifie this profitable requeste.
               
                  Psal. 54. 
               For who will geue vs winges like pigeons (as the Prophet speaketh) that we might flie and rest with you? But seing by these meanes our Churches should be lefte naked, matters being but newely sett in order, and bicause the thinge semed to many impossible, for we had assembled our selues but lately at Cōstantinople by the late letters of your honour sent after the Councell holden in Aquileia to the most godly Emperour Theodosius &c. For these and many other causes which staied our coming, we haue done yet that was next to be done, bothe for the effect of this purpose, and for declaration off your loue toward vs. That is, we haue sent our most Reuerent and holy brethers and felowe priestes, Cyriacus, Eusebius and Priscanus bishops, by whom you maye knowe our mind and accorde in al thinges.
            
            After this they make a profession of their faith in those letters, they declare what was decreed and determined in the Councell holden at Constantinople, they signifie of Nectarius ordered bishop off Constantinople, off Flauianus made bishop of Antioche in Syria, off Cyrillus made bishop in Hierualem, and such like matters. After all which they desire the assent

of Damasus thereto. Nowe touching this present matter, the bishops here do witnesse, that to that Councell off Rome the Pope called them, by the letters of the Emperour, not as a warrant (they haue no such worde) but rather as a meanes,
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Concil. chalced. Actione. 3. For they witnesse he called them as his proper membres, in like maner truly as the bishops of the great General Councell in Chalcedon in their letters to Leo the Pope do agnise, that he was ouer them as the Head ouer the Membres, by his legates. whereby it appeareth he called them by his own Authorite as he being their Head, and they his membres. Therefore also they excused so diligently the cause of their not coming to the Councell, therefore they sent him a profession of their faithe, and certified him of all other particular thinges done in that Councell, vnto the whiche by his owne letters, they confesse also they had bene lately before summoned. The sending forthe of the Emperours letters to summon them proueth no more M. Iewelles negatiue illation, and not by his owne authorite, then the late edict off Charles the Frenche kinge made in Paris in the yere of our lorde 1562. in the moneth of Ianuary, whereby he commaunded the bishops off Fraunce to repaire to Trent to the Generall Councell there, may inferre also, that the same Councell was summoned Not by the Popes owne authorite, but by the warrant of the French kinges letters. For as Damasus the Pope summoned the bishops of the East then to the Romain Councell, by the meanes of the Emperours letters: so Pius the fourthe summoned the bishops of Fraunce to the late Councell of Trent by the meanes off Charles the Frenche kinge at this present. And as the Frenche kinges letters nowe make no argument against the Authorite of Pius the fourthe ouer the late Councell off Trent: no more did the Emperours letters then make any argument against the Popes authorite att that time ouer the Romaine Councell. Especially

for that, not the Emperour him selfe, but the Pope by his letters summoned those bishops to the Councell.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                And likewise in th
                  •
               ir epistle to the Emperour Theodosius, they write thus.The 474 Vntruthe for no Theo
                     •
                  osius w
                     •
                  s the Emperour.
Intera
                        •
                     t
                        •
                      Conc. Cōst .5. 
               Your Maiestie hath honoured the Churche by the letters, wherewith ye summoned vs together.
            
            For this place M. Iewell hath quoted vnto vs the Actes of the fifte Councell of Constantinople. But in that Councell not Theodosius or any of that name was Emperour but Iustinian, well nere a hundred yeres after bothe the Theodosiuses. Theodosius the first was Emperour in dede in the first Councel of Constantinople, but in al the Actes of that Coūcell, there appeareth not in the volume off the Councelles any suche letters of the bishopps to the Emperour, or any suche wordes as are here alleaged any other where. Vnder Theodosius the seconde no Councel was holden att Constantinople, but only att Ephesus, beside a prouinciall Councell, whiche Flauianus helde there against Eutyches, off the whiche no Actes are extant. And thus M. Iewell must correct his booke, or els it will be thought he hath forged the matter him selfe, except he haue some preuy store off Councelles in his poore library, which al the worlde beside knoweth not of.
            Touching the place it selfe where euer it be foūde, the wordes importe no more then that the Emperour Theodosius summoned the Councel, which, as I saied before, doth no more disproue the Authorite off the Pope in Approuing and Confirming General Councelles (especially in suche sorte as the Ecclesiasticall Canon mentioned by Socrates dothe reporte, saying that without the Authorite off the bishopp off Rome no Councell ought to be holden) then dothe the late summoning of the Frenche bishopps by Charles their kinge to the Generall Councell off Trent, Disproue or destroye the Souerain Authorite of the Bishop off Rome that then was ouer the Generall

Councell then holden and celebrated. For notwithstanding they were summoned by their kinge, yet were they before summoned and also principally by the Authorite and will of the Pope that then was Pius the fourthe of blessed memorye.
            The particular proufes of M. Iewell nowe fayling he gathereth generall coniectures vpon the Popes weakenesse in those daies of the primitiue Churche. And for proufe hereof he alleageth S. Gregory. Accompting him nowe in this place for a bishop of Rome of the primitiue Churche, though he were well nere 600. yeres after Christ,pag. 420. and though he call him in an other place of this Replie, a late and obscure Doctour.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Gregorius being bishop of Rome, coulde not cause the bishop of Salona being but one man to come before him.
                  li. 4. ep. 34 The .475 Vntruth. For herein is declared his Authorite no weak
                     •
                  
                  nesse. Thus he writeth by waye of complainte vnto the Emperesse Constantia. He despised me, and sett me at naught, and would not come vnto me, according to my lordes the Emperours commaundement.
            
            Gentle Reader if it had liked M. Iewell to haue geuen the leaue to reade the whole place of S. Gregory and not to haue nipped of the middle of the sentēce, concealing also the whole circumstance both before and after, thou shouldest haue sene a very weake proofe in this place of the Popes weakenesse, and a great argument of his Authorite. His whole complainte to the Emperesse Cōstantia is this. Salonitanae ciuitatis episcopus &c.
               
                  Gregorius i. 4. ep. 34 
               The Bishop of Salona hath bene Ordered without my knowledge or my deputies. And that thinge is done, which neuer happened in the time of any my predecessours. I hauing vnderstanding hereof sent forthewith to the offender, which without order had bene so ordred, that he shoulde not in any wise presume to saye Masse, vnlesse I had first vnderstoode by my Lordes the Emperours, that they had so commaunded him. And this I commaunded vpon paine of excommunication. But he despysing me and setting me at naught
               
                  In audaci
                        ••
                      quorund
                        •
                      seculari
                        ••
                      hominum.
                
               being vpholded by certain secular men, which are saied to haue great flyses

out of his Churche, presumeth yet to saie Masse, and woulde not come vnto me according to my Lordes the Emperours commaundement. Notwithstanding I obeying to their commaundement, haue so released that Maximus, so vnlaufully made bishop, without my knowleadg or my deputies, the faulte of his vnlauefull ordinatione, so sincerely as if he had bene by my Authorite ordained. But his other offenses and bodely mish
                     •
                  fes, which I haue vnderstode, of him, as that he was by symonie choson, and that he presumed to saie Masse being excōmunicated, I can not for Gods quarel leaue vntried. But I do wish and pray our Lorde, that none of th
                     •
                  se thinges be founde true in him of the which he is accused, and that without the perill of my soule, his cause may be ended. Now wheras my gracious Soueraines haue sent cōmaundement, that before the trial of these matters, I should receiue him honourably coming hither, truly it is a heauy case that a man so infamous, and accused of such great crimes, should be honoured before his triall and purgation. And if the questions of the bishops cō
                  mitted to my charge be in the disposition of my good lordes the Emperoures by the sute of other men, I vnhappy man what make I here in this Churche? Verely that my owne bishops do thus despise me, and do finde refuges againste me at the handes of secular Iudges, I thanke allmighty God, my sinnes are the cause thereof. Howbeit to be short, this muche I signifie to your highnes. I will tary for him fo
                     •
                   a time, if he make long d
                     •
                  laies to come at me,
               
                  In eo E
                        •
                     erce redi
                        •
                     t icti
                        •
                     nem Canonicā null
                        •
                      modo Cessabo.
                
               I will not faile to excute vpō him 
                     •
                  xtremite of law. This is the whole cōplainte of holy S. Gregory to the Emperesse Cōstātia, and thus it endeth. Such was the Popes weakenesse, that notwithstanding he complaineth that he was despised of his owne bishop, a bishop of Salone in Illyricum, and vpholden by certain secular men which obtained the Emperours letters for him to the Pope, notwithstanding the commaundement of the Emperour, his weakenesse was such, that he auouched stoutely, that he will not faile to execute the lawe vpon him. Thus by peeced and patched sent
                  •
               nces out of the olde Fathers, M. Iewell would p
                  •
               o
                  ••
                the

thinge which the whole place considered vtterly ouerthroweth. Thus he deludeth his Reader and maketh him beleue he hath store of Authorites and doctours, bicause he can alleage apase, and lye apase, and corrupt cleanly. For beholde here foloweth immediatly an other.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               
                  Leo epi. 23 Liberat. Cap. 12. T
                     •
                  e 476 and 477. vntruthe cōmitted in allegation of Liberatus StapletonTherefore Leo finding this weakenesse in him selfe, wrote vnto the cle
                  •
               gie and people of Cōstantinople, and willed th
                  •
               m to craue a gene
                  •
               ll Councell at the Emperours hande Ex pos
                     •
                  ite vt petitio
                     •
                  i n
                     •
                  strae 
                     •
                  ua plena
                     •
                  i 
                     〈◊〉
                   Syno
                     ••
                  m 
                     •
                  ostula
                     •
                  us, 
                     •
                  lemen
                     •
                  is
                     •
                  imus Imperator dignetur an
                  
                     ••
                  ere. M
                  •
               ke your request, that the Emperours Maiesty would vouchesafe, to graunte my humble petition, wherein I besought him to Summon a Generall Councell. Liberatus saieth that Leo the Bis
                  •
               op of Rome, with other moe bishops of Italie f
                  •
               ll vpon there knees, and d
                  •
               sired the Emperour Val
                  •
               ntinian, and the Emp
                  •
               resse Eudoxia to appointe a Councell, and yet coulde not obtaine it.
            In this alleagation out of Liberatus two Vntruthes are committed by M. Iewel. For neither Leo the Pope s
                  •
               ll on his knees to the Emperour Valentinian, neither did they desire him to appointe a Councell, but to write to Theodosius the Emperour of the East, aboute it. The wo
                  •
               des of Liberatus are these:
                  Liberat. Cap. 12. 
               Fortissimus Leo audiens l
                     •
                  gatorum suorū suggestionem & Theodoreti querelas suscipiens, literis Theodosium Impe
                     •
                  atorem & Pulcheriam Augustam rogat, vt fieret intra Italiam g
                     •
                  n
                     •
                  rale Con
                  
                     •
                  lium, vt aboleretur error fidei per violentiam Dioscori factus. Valëtinianum autem imperatorem & Eudoxiam vxor
                     •
                  m cius, ad memoriam beati Petri, cum multis episcoporum genibus prouolutis, Romanus Pontifex deprecatus est Imperatorē vt Theodosiū hortaretur, aliā fieri Synodū, ad retractandū illa quae a Dioscoro male acta at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   perpetrata fuerāt in dānationē Flauiani Episcopi, & orthodoxrū depositiōe. Leo the stout hearing the repotte of his legats, and receauinge the complaintes of Theodoretus (the lerned B. of Cyrus) desireth by his letters Theodosius the Emperour and Pulcheria the Empresse, that a generall Councell might be helde within Italy, to vndoe the heresye which Dioscorus by violence had wrought: Also the Bishoppe of Rome beseched

Valentiniam the Emperour and Eudoxia his wife, at Sainte Peters Churche, with many of the bishoppes kneeling on their knees, to require the Emperoure Theodosius, that an other Synod might be called to reuoke those things which Dioscorus (the heretike bishoppe of Alexandria) had concluded in the condemnation of Flauianus the Catholike bishoppe of Constantinople, and in the deposing of the Catholikes. Thus farre the wordes of Liberatus. Where he sayeth not that Leo the Pope fell on his knees to the Emperour as Master Iewell fableth, but that Leo intreated him with many of the bishopps falling on their knees. Againe they intreate not Valentinian to appointe a Councell, but to exhorte and persuade the Emperour Theodosius thereunto. Thus Master Iewell foloweth his naturall humour euer to reporte thinges vntrulye, and to make worse of the matter, then his Author will suffer hym. Touching the matter it selfe, we shall anon speake at large. Let vs first consider the remnant of M. Iewelles gheasses againste the authorite of the Pope, in approuing summoning and authorising Councelles most clerely witnessed by the ecclesiasticall Story.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Afterwarde he desyred the Emperoure Theodosius that he woulde call a Councell to some place in Italy. And the Emperoure contrarye to the Bisshoppe of Romes petition,
                  Leo epis. 11 appointed it to be holden at Ephesus.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
               
               
                  Leo. epi. 51 43. et 46 Non iudidicio sed la trocinio. Liberatus 
                        ••
                     p. 12.So did the same Emperoure Theodosius maintayne the heretike Dioscorus in that conspiracy (not Councell) at Ephesus (as Leo calleth it) and vpholded (as Liberatus writeth) the condemnation of Flauianus: Theodo
                  •
               etus and other Catholike bishoppes not suffring (as the Pope required) an other Councell to be called for the dissolution thereof. Thus M. Iewell is driuen againe to take parte with heretikes, and suche as vpholde them.
            
               
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               
                  Leo epist. 13.50.44.58. The 478 Vntruthe For there was no suche decaye of the popes vniuersall power.After that he made the same requeste to the Emperoure Martianus. And the Emperoure lykewise contrary to the Bisshoppes humble requeste commaunded the Councell to be kepte att Chalcedon. And whereas Leo had besought bothe these Emperours that it might please them to take a longer daie for the Councell, for that the tyme of the Summon semed very shorte, and the waies were laied with emyes, and therefore daungerouse for the Bishoppes to trauaill, yet woulde neuer of them alter one daye, but charged eche man to appeare as they were summoned. And Leo the B. of Rome withall his vniuersal power, was faine to yelde.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
                No no M. Iewell: The vniuersall power of the bishoppe of Rome stoode vprighte notwihstandinge all that you haue brought to the contrary. And for triall hereof, youre owne authorityes M. Iewell, the Epistles of Leo shall euidently speake. For as they report in dede that by the aduise of the Emperour contrary to the Popes request the generall Councell was helde at Chalcedon and not in Italy, so they also expressely reporte that all was done, without preiudice of the Popes authorite therein. The wordes of Leo the bishop of Rome written to the whole Synod of Chalcedon are these.
                  Leo epist. 47. 
               I had wished in dede most derelie beloued that all the Priestes of God did agree in one profession off the Catholike faithe, and that none woulde so be corrupted either by fauour and by feare of the secular power, that he should thereby swarue from the truthe: But bicause many thinges are oftē done of the which we after repent, and the Mercy of God passeth the offences of men, who forbeareth to reuenge that we maye haue leasure to amende, the religious Aduise of our moste gracious Emperour is to be embraced, mouing your holy brotherhood to meate and assemble your selues together for the ouerthrowing of Sathans sl
                     •
                  ightes, and reforming of vnite in the Churche, 
               
                  Beatissimi Petri Apostoli sedis iure atque honor
                        •
                      se
                        •
                     uat
                        •
                     .
                
               the honour and right off the See of S. Peter the most blessed Apostle pres
                     •
                  rued, inuiting also vs by his letters to assiste in person at this reuerent Councell, which yet neither the Necessite of this time, neither any custome coulde permitte. Howbeit in oure brethern Paschasius and Lucentius Bishoppes,

Bon
                     •
                  facius and Basilius Priestes, youre brotherhood hath me Pr
                     •
                  sident in your Synode: Neither may you thinke me absent, which in my legat
                     •
                  s am Present, and in the setting forthe of the Catholike faithe, 
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  i
                        •
                      v
                        •
                     st
                        •
                     a 
                        •••
                     
                     te
                        •
                     nitis ex istinet p
                        •
                     aesidere.
                
               haue not this longe time ben absent. Thus farre Leo. Whose whole wordes as they lye in his Epistle I haue alleaged, to the entent you may see M. Iewell that notwihstanding Martianus had appointed the Councell to be kept at Chalcedon, yet it was done Apostolicae sedis iure atque honore seruato, withoute anye preiudice to the right and honour of the Apostolike See. Which right the ecclesiasticall history confesseth to be,
                  Li 4. Ca. 9. Hist
                        •
                     r triparti
                        •
                     ae.
                that without it no Councell coulde be helden or celebrated, and that longe before this Leo in the time of Iulius. And therefore Leo geueth his expresse consent to the Emperours calling and hastening vnto the Councell (which he would gladly for a time haue differed) writing vnto him in these wordes. I required in dede of your most glorious clemency,
               
                  Leo ad Mar
                        •
                     i
                        •••
                     
                     ̄ Augustiepi
                        •
                     t. 43. 
               that the Synod which you thought necessary to be assembled, as we also required, for restoryng of vnite in the East Church, might be for a time differed, that the mindes of men being more settled, those bishops whiche for feare off enemies are staied at home, might also meete. But bicause you do zelously preferre gods cause, before the affaires off men, and are wisely and godly persuaded that it shall furder the welth of your empire to haue the priestes off God in vnite, and the ghospell preached without dissension, Ego etiam vestris dispositionibus non renitor. I also do not witstande your order herein, wis
                     •
                  ing that the Catholike faithe, whiche can possibly be but one, may be strenghthened in the hartes of all men. Thus farre Pope Leo to the Emperour Martianus, wherein we see he was not forced of the Emperour against his wil, but b
                  •
                good considerations was moued to consent and agree to that, which the Emperour of zeloe and piety thought best to be done. But bicause M. Iewell imagineth here a generall shipwrake of the Popes vniuersall power, for so he calleth the authoritie off Christes chiefe vicaire ouer all

Christen men, I will geue to the Reader a note or two out of the epistles of Leo that may sufficiently declare the supreme Authorite of the Pope ouer that generall Councell of Chalcedon. First that his legates were president thereat, it is euident by the wordes of Leo before alleaged out of his letters to the whole Councell,
                  Leo. epist. 47. and also by the tenour of his legates subscription to the Councel, as we haue before alleaged. Secondarely bicause in that Councel, many bishops of the East, which had yelded before to Dioscorus the heretike, were partly to be reconciled, partl
                  •
               e punished, the ordering hereoff was all in the handes of the Popes legates, as Leo in his letters bothe to the Emperour Martinus and to Anatholius bishop of Constantinople dothe expresse. His wordes to the Emperour are these. To the entent that they which wil amende, may neither be ouermuch delaied, neither ouer easely and without discretion remitted:
               
                  Leo epist. 44. ad Martianū. Augustum
                
               it is enioyned to the legates of the See Apostolike, taking also with them the aduise of the bishop off Constantinople, to see that neither the contagious parties be admitted, nor the whole and sounde repelled. In his letters to Anatholius bishop of Constantinople appointing him his legat with Lucentius and Basilius whom he sent at that time to the councel, he writeth thus.
                  Leo epist. 46. ad Anatholium.
                As touching those which haue offended more greuously in this matter (he meaneth in the schismaticall conuenticle of Ephesus) and therefore chal
                     •
                  ng
                     •
                  d to them selues a superiour place in that vnhappy Synode, oppressing by their ambitious pride the humilite of th
                     •
                  ir simple b
                     •
                  ethern: if perhappes th
                     •
                  y do rep
                     •
                  nt and do confesse their owne wickednesse, if th
                     •
                  ir satisfaction do s
                     •
                  me according, let it be res
                     •
                  rued to s
                     •
                  me riper Councell
                     •
                  s of th
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   Apostolike, to thentent that all thinges b
                     •
                  ing 
                     ••
                  i
                     •
                  d and examined, iu
                     •
                  g
                     •
                  ment may be geu
                     •
                  n what ought to b
                     •
                   d
                     •
                  t
                     •
                  rmined vpon their confessions. And a litle after. If it b
                     •
                  n d
                     ••
                  u
                     •
                  l in some c
                     •
                  s
                     •
                   to haue a fa
                     •
                  d
                     •
                  r deliberation, l
                     •
                  t me besped
                     •
                  ly in
                     •
                  o
                     •••
                  d th
                     •••
                  of, t
                     •
                  at the con
                     •
                  i
                     •
                  ion and cas
                     •
                   b
                     •
                  ing 
                     •
                  xamin
                     •
                  d, we may d
                     •••
                  rmine, what is to be d
                     •
                  ne. T
                  •
               us fa
                  •
               re Leo. In all which wordes we s
                  •
               e M. I
                  •
               we
                  •
               l a

supreme Authorite of the Pope and his legates ouer the whole Coūcel, in pardoning and punishing such bishops as had before offended, notwitstanding the place and time of the Coū
               cell was after the Emperours minde and pleasure. Thirdly whereas Martianus being Emperour of the East, required the Councell to be helden in the East partes, not in Italy, that all that was done by the authorite and consent off the Pope, not by any such rigorous force and absolut commaundement of the Emperour as M. Iewell vntruly reporteth, it shal appeare by these letters of the Emperour him selfe vnto Leo. Martianus at the beginning of his Empire writeth to Pope leo in this sorte. Being called by the prouidence of allmighty God to the empire,
               
                  Tom. 1. Conc. in proleg. Chalcedon. Syn.
                
               &c. We for the reuerent and Catholike religion of the Christen faithe, by the helpe and maintenaunce whereof, we do trust the power of our Empire to be strēghthened, haue thought good in the beginning hereof, to speake by our letters to your holynes, whiche occupieth the principalite in the bishoprike charge of godes faithe,
               
                  Tuam sanctitatem principatū in episcopatu diuinae fidei possidentem. per celebrā
                     dam synodum te authore.
                
               prouoking and requiring your holynes to remembre the good estate off our Empire in your praiers, and that also for the extirping of all wicked errour, we maye fully purpose and determine, to restore vnite and concorde amonge all Catholike bishops, By celebrating a Councell, by your Authorite. Thus much the Emperour Martianus to Leo the Pope for the calling and summoning of a Councell. Wherein you see, howe farre he is from any forceable meane, and howe litle he vseth therein his owne Authorite, but referreth the matter expressely to the Pope, whom also he confesseth to beare the principalite and chiefty in the bishoply office, that is, among al bishops. Nowe touching the place where the Councel might be holden, in an other letter to the Pope, thus the Emperour Martianus writeth.
                  Alia epsi: Martiani Ibidem.
                
               It remaineth, that if it shall please your holynesse to come in to these partes, and to celebrat the Councell: you wil vachesafe so te doe. Truly herein your holines shall satisfie our desire, and shall determine profitably for the furderance of godly religion.

But if this be burdenous for you to come hether, let your holynesse signifie the same vnto vs by your letters, to the entent we may directe our commaundement to all the East, in to Thracia and to Illyricum to summon all the most holy bishops into some determinat place, where it shall please vs,
               
                  Sicut sanctitas tua secundum ecclesiasticas regulas dis
                        •
                     
                     niuerit.
                
               that they maye so by their disposition sett suche thinges as concerne the furderance of Christen Religion and the Catholike faithe, euen as your holynesse shall determine according to Ecclesiasticall Canons. In like maner the Emperesse Pulcheria writeth to Leo the Pope aboute the calling and summoning off this Councell off Chalcedon: Propterea tua reuerentia quocunque modo prospexit,
               
                  Epist. Palcherie ad Leonē ibid.
                
               significare dignetur. Therefore lett your Reuerentnes voutchesafe to signifie vnto vs, after what maner so euer it shall thinke good, that we maye summon the bishopps to a Councell, vt de episcopis qui ante hoc segregati sunt, sicut fides & Christiana pietas exigit, te authore deceruant, to determine by your Authorite of such bishops as haue before this time bene separated, euen as the faithe and Christen piety requireth. Thus muche wrote the Emperours to Leo, and thus wrote Leo to them. Here was no decaie or shipwracke of the Popes vniuersall power, but here was a most clere and euident demonstration of his supreme Authorite in approuing, and ordering a generall Councell, practised by his legates, confessed by the Emperours, and not dissembled by lerned Leo him selfe. More yet of the Popes authorite in this generall Councell of Chalcedon, we shall haue occasion hereafter to speake in the 118. Vntruthe.
                  In Epist. ad Episcopos Dardaniae. The 474 Vntruthe slaunderous againste Pope Gelasius. Now let vs see what M. Iewell will conclude of all the allegations out of Liberatus and the epistles of Leo. He saieth.
            Hereby we may soone coniecture, howe true it is, either that Pope Gelasius writeth, That onely the Apostolike See of Rome decreed by her Authorite, that the Councell shoulde be summoned, or els that M. Hardinge woulde haue vs beleue, That all Councelles were summoned by the Pope.
            
            
               Hereby we may soone coniecture how truly and faithfully M. Iewell meaned when he offred to yelde and subscribe to any olde father or Councell of the first 600. yeres, whiche nowe so litle estemeth the Authorite of Gelasius a lerned Father of lesse then 500. yeres after Christe, that he taketh vpon him to comptrolle him and to proue him a lyar. So that nowe the question is no more betwene vs whether the lerned Fathers do write so, teache so, or witnesse so: but whether their writinges, their doctrine, their witnesses be true, or no. And whom shal we beleue, if we beleue not such auncient writers, so many hundred yeres before vs, so longe taken for lerned Fathers, bishoppes of Christes Churche in their life time? Shall we leaue Gelasius, and beleue Iewell? This impudent arrogancy must nedes procede of Lucifer the first creature that sinned in pride. If this be admitted, what doe we professe a Christen faithe any longer? What do we talke of Fathers and Councelles, if when Fathers and Councelles are brought, we must yet proue farder that the Fathers speake truly, and that the Councelles saye well. This is not to be tried by the Fathers: but it is to trie and examine the Fathers them selues. And then they are not our Fathers, but our scholers. This is the righte waye to paganisme and infydelite, and to the vtter abolishment off all Christianite. To suche issue these newe altercations haue brought matters. Iff we be Christen men, lett vs abhorre these enormites: If we be no Christen men, what talke we of Christ and the ghospell? To this digression the impudency off M. Iewell hath forced me. Touching the saying of Gelasius, which M. Iewell malapertly comptrolleth, first Gelasius talketh not of summoning but of holding and making the Councell. His wordes are. Authoritate,
               
                  In epist. ad 
                        •
                     pisc. Dar
                     
                        ••
                     . T
                        •
                     m. 1. Cō.
                
               vt Synodus Ghalcedonensis fieret, sola decernit. Onely the See Apostolike by her Authority decreed, that the

Councell of Chalcedon shoulde be holden. And this to be true, it appeareth euidently by the letters of the Emperoure Martianus and the Emperesse Pulcheria to Leo the Pope, and by the letters of Leo to the Councell it selfe, as we haue before declared. Againe this Gelasius wrote those wordes litle more then fifty yeres after the Councel of Chalcedon was finished. It is credible he knewe as well what was done there, as M. Iewell doth. Thirdly what doth all this conclude against the allegations of D. Hardinge? What maketh it against the expresse and most manifest testimony of the Ecclesiasticall Storye witnessing expressely, that without the Authorite of the bishopp of Rome no Councels coulde be helde, and that by the vertue of the Ecclesiasticall Canon. What is all this to the Councelles of the Arrians, disproued and disanulled for lacke of the bishoppe of Romes Authorite? Forsothe M. Iewell concludeth that Hereby it may appeare that all Councells were summoned by the Pope. D. Hardinge saied not so muche. But that all Councelles must be approued by the Pope, euen as the ecclesiasticall history witnesseth. And that certaine namely those of the Arrians were not accompted for lawfull Councelles, bicause they were not summoned nor approued by the Pope. Against this Master Iewell hathe nothing concluded, vnlesse he will reason thus.
            
               The Pope Leo approued and summoned the Councell of Chalcedon, and graunted to the Emperours pleasure touchinge the place.
            
            
               Ergo, the Pope hath no Authorite to summon or approue Concell
                     •
                  s.
            
            Or thus.
            
               Gelasius saied truly that only by the Authorite of the Pop
                     •
                   th
                     •
                   councell of Chalcedon was helde.
            
            
               Ergo the Pope hath not Authority to approue the Councelles.
            
            These are weake reasons, God wotteth. And yet so he must reason, if of the premisses he will conclude to the purpose.

And if it be not to the purpose what maketh it here?
            M. Iewell goeth forthe and multiplieth Vntruthes. He sayeth.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 480 Vntruthe extreme facing.Neither was the Bishop of Rome, nor his legate in his absence euer more the President or Chiefe of the Councell.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
                The contrarye before hath expressely bene shewed out off the Epistles of Leo, and the Actes of the Councell of Chalcedon touching the Councell there kept. And oute of the Epistles of Cyrillus touching the Councell of Ephesus.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 481. manifeste Vntruth.For it is knowen that in the Counell of Nice Eustathius the Patriarke of Antioche was the President, and the Bishoppe off Romes legates Vitus and Vincentius sate in the fourthe Roome beneathe.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                This is knowen to be a manifeste Vntruthe. Osius, Vitus and Vincentius were the firste of all that subscribed, according to the Order mencioned in the volumes of the Councelles.
                  Tom. 1. pagin. 257.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .482 Vntruthe For not he alone. Actor. 1.In the Councell of Constantinople Menna was the chiefe.
            This Menna was not the president of the Councell alone. Sabinus, Epiphanius, Asterius, Leo, Rusticus bishoppes, Theophanes and Pelagius Deacons, sent from the Apostolike See of Rome, considebant illi coadiutores, did sitt in the like and aequall Authorite with him, as the Actes of the Councel do expressely declare.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               
                  Dist. 26. Sexta sy
                     
                        •
                     odus.
The .483 Vntruthe For this osius was the popes legate.
.In the Councell of Sardica, Osius and Corduba in Spaine.
            This Osius of Corduba, with Vincentius of Capua, Ianuarius of Beneuentum, and Calepodius of Naples bishoppes, were the legates of the See Apostolike, and were all presidents in that Councell.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                In the Councell of Aquileia, S. Ambrose of Millaine,
            In the Councell of Carthage, Aurelius the B. there.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                These were prouinciall Councelles, not generall. And yet bothe the Africanes sent the Actes of their Councells

to Innocentius to be confirmed as appeareth in S. Augustin, and Celestinus witnesseth that they were confirmed by the See Apostolike. As for the Councell of Aquileia we haue it not perfectly sett forthe, as by the ende of it is easy to be seme.
                  
                     August epist. 90. Caelest. pp. in epist gal. cap. 3. Tom. 1. Concil.
                  
                  The 404 Vntruthe for only by waye of authorite.
               
            
            In the Councell of Chalcedon Leo the bishop off Romes Legate had chiefe roome, but by waie of intreaty only, and by the Emperours speciall graunte, and not of dew right, or vniuersall Authorite.
            Beholde the lying impudencie of M. Iewell. before he saied. Neither was the Bishop of Rome, nor his legate in his absence, 
                     •
                  uermore the president or Chiefe of the Councell. Nowe he confesseth that in the Councel of Chalcedon Leo the bishop of Romes legate had the chiefe Roome. Wherein he proueth him selfe in the former to haue made a manifest lie. But nowe he spiceth the matter withe an other Notorious and lewde lie only auouched, but no waye proued, that the Popes Legat had there th
                     •
                   Chiefe Rome by waie of intreaty only &c. It shoulde haue behoued M. Iewell to haue proued this. verely he hath bene so often taken in lying, that for any credit to be geuen him in suche matters, he may nowe stande for banckeroute. Certainely Leo notwithstanding Martianus summoned the Councell of Chalcedon, yet he saieth that was done Apostolicae Sedis iure atque honore seruato,
               
                  Leo epist. 47. the Right and the honour off the Apostolike See reserued. And in the same Councell it is openly auouched without any Cōtradiction, notwithstanding M. Iewelles Nay here,
                  Concil. Chalcedon Actio. 11. that Missi Apostolici semper in Synodis prius loqui & confirmare soliti sunt, the legates of the See Apostolike were wonte in Councels allwaies to speake first, and to cōfirme first. This loe was the right of the See Apostolike, this was not by waie of Intreaty. And therefor the Emperour him selfe Martianus writinge to Pope Leo about the assembling of this councell affirmeth eius sanctitatem principatum in episcopatu diuinae fidei possidere that his holynesse occupieth the
                  Tom. 1. Con. in prolegō. Chalced, Conc.
               
               
Chiefty or principal roome in the bishoply charge of Gods faithe, and inuiteth him therfore ad celebrandam Synodū eo Authore, that a coūcel may be celebrated by his Authorite. In like maner writeth Pulcheria the Emperesse vnto Leo the Pope of Rome aboute the same time as it hathe before bene declared. Here is an Authorite confessed not only of Leo the Pope, and the Coūcel, but of the Emperour him selfe in gouuerning and directing the Councel. Here is no intreaty or special graunt made or required, M. Iewel would faine it were so, but withe al his shiftes he shall neuer be all to proue it so.
            But, saieth M. Harding, the bishop of Rome allowed all Councels. This is not denied.
            If it be not denied, why haue you so longe striued against it?
            So did others, not only patriarches or bishoppes but also Ciuill princes.
            Gentle Reader. Eye M. Iewel wel. Vnlesse thou take good hede, he will steale from thee. He saieth not only the bishopp of Rome allowed all Counc
                     •
                  lles, but also (saieth M. I
                  •
               well) So did others. Then he must proue that other allowed all Councels, and that with suche and like authorite, as the Pope did. Nowe the Authorite of the Pope was such, that without it (as the ecclesiasticall story reporteth) No councelles might be held. Then M. Iewell must proue that nott only Patriarches and other bishops, but also Ciuil Princes, had such authorite in approuing Councelles, that without their Authorite they mignt not be helde. Such authorite M. Iewell must proue. Els, his so did others, will not folowe. Nowe let vs see howe he proueth it.
            In the Councell of Calcedon it is writen thus. Theodosius the Emperour of godly memorie hath confirmed all thinges by a general law
                     •
                  , that were determined in the vniuersall Councell. So likewise the Emperour Martianus. by the holy edicte of our Maiest
                     •
                   we confirme that Reuerend Councel. So Eusebius witnesseth that the Emperperour Constantius confirmed the determinations of the Councel of Nice. So the bishoppes in the Councell of Constātinople wrote to the Emperour Theodosius. wee desire by your fauour by your highnes letters to ratifie and confirme the

decree of the Councell.
            You might haue added here M. Iewell, so in the late generall Councell of Trent, the Oratours of the Emperour and euery Catholike prince there present, confirmed the decrees of the Councell. And yet neither the other examples nor this late example is any thinge like to the confirming of the bishop of Rome, The bishop of Romes confirmation is so necessary that without it, (as the Canons do commaunde) no Councell can be kept. No bishop nor prince hath such a confirmation. As for example, Theodosius which you alleaged first, confirmed the Councell of Ephesus. And yet that Councell was after and euer sence accompted for no lawfull Councel bicause the legates of Pope Leo were not admitted, but by violence of the heretike dioscorus iniured.
                  Vide act. 1. Concil. Chal.
                Therefore as all your other examples do proue a godly zele in these good Catholike Emperours, and do shewe howe necessary it is that the secular power do aide the spirituall, yet no Emperour or laie prince euer confirmed any Councell, as the Iudge and president hereof. To be shorte. The bishop of Rome hath in all Councelles a negatiue voice, as without whose, none can be approued: for so doth the Canon, mencioned in the Ecclesiasticall history, expressely witnesse. Such a negatiue voice, such an absolute and supreme Authorite in approuing Councelles no Prince nor Patriarche hathe, but only the bishop of Rome successour to Peter chiefe of the Apostles.
            For why? The Emperour or laye Prince, as he hath no absolute authorite to iudge in matter of 
                  •
               he faithe, so hath he none to approue Councelles, when matters of the faithe only are handled. Therefore Gregory Nazianzen being a bishop, calleth the Emperour, Ouem sui gregis, a shepe of his flocke.
                  In orat. ad subditos. Epist. 
                  
                     •
                  2. ad 
                        〈…〉
                     . lib 4. cap. 11. para. 4 So S. Ambrose saieth. What is more honorable for the Emperour, then to be called the sonne of the Churche, for a good Emperour is within the Churche, not aboue the Churche. So Iohn Caluin in his Institions

directly against M. Iewell, and according to the minde of S. Ambrose saieth. The Magistrat if he be godly, will not exempt him selfe from the common subiection of the Children of God. Wherefore it is not the least parte to submitte himselfe to the Churche iudging by the worde of God. And therefore Constantin the great in the first Coūcel of Nice, as Sozomenus recordeth, entred in to the Concell house after all the bissops,
               
                  lib. 
                  
                     •
                  . cap. 5. hist. tripar.
                
               had his seate and place benethe thē all, neither woulde sitt Downe before the bishops had commaunded him. And in that Councell, he protested plainely that it was not his parte to iudge ouer the bishops. Whose example the vertuous Emperour Martianus expressely folowing in the Councel of Chalcedon, in his oration made to the whole Synod speaketh thus. Nos ad confirmandam fidem, non ad ostendendam virtutem exemplo Cōstantini Imperatoris adesse Synodo cogitauimus.
               
                  Chalcedon Conc. Act. 1. We after the example of Constantine haue thought good to be present at this Councell, not to shewe our power therein, but to confirme the faithe.
                  Ibidem.
                And a litle after he saieth, Our endeuour must be to applie the people to the one and right Churche, being first persuaded the true and holy doctrine. And therefore let your Re
                     •
                  
                  uerentnesse expound and declare the true and Catholike faithe according to the doctrine of the Fathers, in al vnite and cōcorde. Thus this vertuous Martianus folowing the steppes of Constantinus, though he confirmed the faithe of the Concell, yet he iudged not in the Councell, he commited the triall and iudgement of doctrine to the bishops, he made his people to obey it. Thus did Emperours and Ciuill princes behaue them selues in Councelles, such as were Catholikes, and defenders of the Catholike faithe. This helpeth not hindereth, this strengtheneth not ouerthroweth the spirituall Iurisdiction.
                  Vide inter epist. Ciril li tom. 4. epist. 17. And thus much of the Ciuill princes, and namely of Martianus and Constantinus alleaged by M. Iewell. As for Theodosius the seconde, whom he alleageth also, in the first Councel of Ephesus holden vnder him, he behaued him selfe as other Catholike Emperours did before

him, submitting all matters to the determination of the Councell, as in Cyrillus aboue alleaged it appeareth. But afterwarde as he toke vpon him more then becomed his estate: so he maintayned the blasphemous heresy of Eutyches,
                  Vide Chalced. Concil. Act. 1. so he defended the schismaticall synode of Dioscorus the heretike, so he consented to the deathe of the blessed bishop of Constantinople Flauianus called therefore a Martyr in the Chalcedō Coū
               cell, so most iniuriously in that conuenticle of Ephesus, he would not suffer Flauianus, Eusebius, and other Catholike bishops which had deposed the heretike Eutyches, to sit in Iudgement, but to stande as partyes accused, to answer to the wicked heretike Eutyches.
                  Act. 11. Leo epist. 24. & 26 & 26. Leo. epist. 44. But as that cōuēticle of Ephesus which that Emperour so much maintained, was and is to this daye condemned for heretical, as Martianus sucessour to this Theodosius the second brought to Cōstantinople the relikes of the Martyr Flauianus, as the heresy of Eutyches by that Emperour defended was by the generall Councell of Chalcedon, and by the consent of Christendom hetherto, condemned and detested: so the doinges of that Emperour are not preiudiciall to the Catholike faithe, either in not admitting the Popes legates at the conuenticle of Ephesus, either in not suffring a Councell to be called for redresse of the Eutychian heresy at the Popes most earnest sute and request. Finally as M. Iewell findeth most helpe for his cause, in heretikes and maintayners off heretikes, in Arrians, Donatistes and Eutychians: so the cause which the Catholikes defende, is euidently furdered by the behauyour and doinges of Catholike bishops, Athanasius, Chrisostom, Theodoretus and other, and by Catholike Princes Constantinus and Martianus.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Now seing it is lawfull for Princes and Ciuile gouuernours to confirme the decrees and determinatiōs of Councels, how can we doubte, but it was lawfull for bishops also to doe the same? Therefore Theodoretus saieth. The Conclusions of the Councell of Nice were sent abrode to the other bishoppes that were away.
            
            
               So were the Conclusions of the Councelles of Trent sent to all Catholike Churches in Europe. This is but mere deluding and mocking of the Reader.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               
                  Lib. 2.And Victorius saieth. That many thousandes of bishoppes allowed that same Councell and agreed vnto it.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                And we saie that infinit Millions of bishoppes haue allowed not only the Councell of Nice, but all generall Councelles beside, yea we say farder that whosoeuer alloweth them not, is an heretike. What will this trifler conclude of all this?
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Aboue all others, the Subscription and Confirmation of the foure principall Patriarches was specially required, for that both their charge and also their Countenaunce and Credit was greater then others. Emonge wh
                  •
               ch foure, the bishop of Rome was euer the first, and therefore his consent semed to beare greatest weight.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                In these wordes M. Iewell hath fully concluded against him selfe. For he saieth. The bishop of Rome was euer the first of the foure Patriarches. Of the which graunte of M. Iewell thus I reason. The Patriarches had in their iurisdiction al the Churche of Christ, and all bishops of the Churche. But the bishop of Rome was euer the first of all the Prtriarches.
            
               Ergo, the bishop of Rome was euer the first of all other bishops. The first proposition is euident by the distribution of prouinces made in the Nicene Councell, and by the confession of M. Iewell out of the letter of Damasus to the bishops of Illyricum,
                  Can. 5. who were as M. Iewell proueth a parte of the bishop of Romes prouince, being in orbe Romano. in the Romane Iurisdiction as M. Iewell turneth it.pag. 283. And so was all the west parte of the worlde: Fraunce, Spaine, Afrike, Britanny and Italy, as well as Illyricum. The second proposition is here by M. Iewell in expresse wordes confessed and auouched. Then the Conclusion foloweth directly. Then if the Pope hath euer bene first of al bishops, he hath euer had the primacy ouer all bishops. If euer, then now at this day also. If ouer all bishops, then ouer all the rest of the Churche also. For as the Prince being

head of the Nobles is head ouer all the communaultye: so the bishop of Rome being first of all Patriarches, is first of all bishops, and first of all Christen people vndernethe bishoppes. Being first, he hath the Primacy, he is Head and chiefe of all.Craft in placing of witnesses. This is so true that M. Iewell not only auouchet it, but also proueth it. For this it foloweth in his text.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               
                   The 487. Vnthruthe For it was a full cō
                     firmation Leo. epist. 60.
                And for that cause the Emperour Martianus required Leo the Bisshoppe of Rome to writte vnto the Councell of Chalcedon, and to declare that he gaue 
                     •
                  is Consent to the Rule off Faithe that there was determined.
            
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
               
               
                  Quibus, quae illic fidei sunt regula definita, firmarem.
               
               For that cause, saieth M. Iewell, that is, bicause he was euer the first of the foure Patriarches, the Bishoppe of Rome is required of the Emperoure, to geue his consent saieth Master Iewel. to confirme, saie the wordes of Leo his Epistle to the Concell of Chalcedon. Lo the Pope is so truly the first of all other, that in respect of that primacy, he is required to confirme the determinations of all other. The other Patriarches had before subscribed to the decrees of the Councell. Maximus of Antioche, Iuuenalis of Hierusalem, and Anatolius of Constantinople. Yet the bishop of Rome must sende his letters to confirme their doinges. Gods name be blissed. The force of Trut
                  •
               e is suche, that euen at the mouthe of the enemy thereof it breaketh out. This I trow, helpeth M. Iewell but a litle. Let vs see howe he procedeth.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 488. Vntruthe. For not in like sorte. And in like sorte the Emperoure Theodosius required all Bisshoppes to subscribe and to geue theyr assente to the Councell off Nice.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                Not in like sorte M: Iewell. The Councell of Nice was ended and fully confirmed more then a hundred yeares before this Theodosius. And he required them to assent to the Councell of Nice, not so much for a confirmation thereof, as for the better establishing of the Eutychian heresye, whiche bicause it was not expressely condemned or moued in that Councell of

Nice, this Emperoure and Dioscorus the chiefe doer in this matter, cried for a confirmation of the Councell of Nice, and commaunded other matters not there discussed, to be at the iudgement of that conuenticle of Ephesus guided and ruled all by the force and violence of Dioscorus the heretike. All whiche he did to disanulle thereby the Synode of Flauianus helde a litle before in Constantinople against the heresye off Eutyches. For this cause the Emperoure Theodosius so longe after the Nicene Councell caused the bishoppes a freshe to subscribe to the same. This was not like to the Confirmation off the Chalcedon Councell required by the Emperour Martianus of Leo the bishop of Rome. For his Confirmation was of suche force and Authoritye that for wante of that, the Conuenticle of Ephesus vnder Dioscorus the heretike, was vtterly disanulled and condemned. Therefore in the Councell off Chalcedon, Lucentius one of the Popes legates chargeth expressely Dioscorus,
                  Concil. Chalcedon. Act. 1. non longe a principio.
                
               quòd Synodum ausus est facere fine Authoritate sedis Apostolicae, quod nunquam rite factum est nec fieri licuit. That he presumed to holde a Councell (at Ephesus) withoute the Authorite of the See Apostolike, which at no tyme was euer done, or laufull to doe. Therefore also when the Actes off this Ephesine conuenticle were read in the Councel of Chalcedon, being mencioned in the reading thereof that Iulianus Leo the Popes legat was present thereat, (for so the heretike Dioscorus fained then for the better cloking of his wicked attemptes in restoring the heretike Eutyches) the bishops of the East cried out: Eiectus est, Nullus suscepit nomen Leonis. The popes legat was thrust out. The name of Leo was not admitted. And a litle after, when it was read oute of the Actes of the Ephesine conuenticle, that the letters of Pope Leo directed thither were reade in the Synod, the bishops of the East cried out againe. Non est nobis lecta epistola, si enim lecta fuisset per omnia, & contineretur per omnia. The Popes letters were not readde vnto

vs For if they had ben readen thouroughly, they had ben thoroughly kept. And hereupon Dioscorus the Patriarche of Aleandria, Iuuenalis the Patriarche of Hierusalem, and Thalassius the Archebishop of Cesarea in Cappadocia, were particularly examined in the Councell of Chalcedon, why and vpon what occasion they had not reade, the Popes letters sent vnto them. And euery one excused them selues thereof as well as they coulde. Of suche force and of suche Authoritye was the bisshop of Rome aboue other bishoppes and Patriarches in those dayes.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                For it is a rule agreable vnto lawe a reason. The thinge that toucheth all, ought to be allowed by all.
            
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                It ought to be allowed of all, by waie of obedience, not by way of Authorite. Els by this Rule of M. Iewelles, no superiour can make a lawe to binde the inferiour, witheout the Authorite of his Inferiour. The Prince shall not rule his subiect, nor the bishop his clergy, vnlesse the subiect confirme the law of the Prince, and the clergy allowe the decree of the bishop. By such Rules rebelles and heretikes do claime against the Magistrat and Pastor.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 489 Vnthruthe for this, Therefore, foloweth not as it appeareth in the true interpretation of M. Iewels Regula Iuris.And therefore Iulius being bishop of Rome pronounced that all the Actes of the Councel of Antioche were voide and of no force, for that he being one of the foure patriarches was not called thither as well as others.
            Lo nowe at lenght M. Iewel hauing hetherto shot at rouers and ranged at ryot, aymeth now at the Marke it selfe, and draweth to the matter. This example of ths Councell of Antioche was alleaged of D. Hardinge for the Popes authorite, as being voide and of no force, bicause neither the Pope was att it, neither his legate. This story M. Iewell saied before that D. Harding had vntruly alleaged. And taking vpon him to proue it, sodenly he turned away from the matter proposed, and hath talked at Randon as you haue heard.  First how Emperours

haue summoned Councelles.  Then the Popes weakenesse in that behalfe.  After, that no legat off the Pope was euer president in any Councell.  Fourth by that all princes and bishops allowed Councels as wel as the Pope.  And nowe last of al that patriarches had most to doe in this matter.  And that bicause off Regula iuris, a rule off the lawe whiche he alleaged. And this hauing longe sought where and howe to pitche, hauing dased his Reader, with a longe variable tale from the purpose, sodenly he concludeth: And therefore Iulius: &c. But what? Is therefore the story vntruly alleaged of D. Harding? Is it therefore proued that the Pope had no authorite to Summon Councelles? Is this M. Iewelles Reason? The Confirmatiō of the Patriarches is specially required to allowe Coū
               cels, The Pope is the first off the foure-Patriarches, Ergo the Pope hath no authorite to summon Councelles? Or. Ergo D. Harding hath falsified the story off the Councell off Antioche? For this is the Conclusion whiche M. Iewell tooke vpon him to proue. This is the vntruthe, which he noted. And yet nowe, M. Iewel after longe roning and wandering vtterly forgetting what he shoulde doe and where aboute he went, telleth vs that the story is true, and al is wel alleaged: but an other faulte there is. And that is this. In dede the Councell off Antioche was voide and of no force for lack of the Popes Authorite, M. Iewel confesseth. But that was, not as he was Pope, but as he was one of the Patriarches. This is a prety cōuayance in dede. But M. Iewel should proue it to be so. Verely he hath such a custome to lie, that his bare worde hath but smal credit. Then let vs consider his proufes. He saieth.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                For it appeareth by Eusebius, Theodoretus, and others, that to al generall Councelles all primates and Metropolitanes were specially summoned.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                This is true that all were summoned. But is it true, that iff any one were absent, the whole Councell shoulde be voide as

it is proued of the bishopp of Rome? This is not true, and this M. Iewell is neuer able to proue. Againe this Councell off Antioche was no generall Councell, but a Councell off the East Churche only. Thirdely this difference and praerogatiue off the bishopp off Rome in approuing Councelles aboue other patriaches appeareth most euidently in this very example off the Councell off Antioche. For not only Iulius the bishopp off Rome, but Maximus the bishopp off Hierusalem, another off the Patriarches, was absent from that Councell of Antioche. And yet the ecclesiasticall history making mention thereof, geueth no token of disanulling the Councell by reason of his absence, as vndoubtedly it woulde, had his presence bene of such necessite. But the same history making mentiō of the bishop of Romes absence, geueth out forthewith a reason, why the Coūcel should be voide saying. VVhereas yet the Ecclesiastical rule dothe Cōmaunde, that without the bishop of Romes Authorite no Councells ought to be held. Such an Ecclesiasticall rule disallowing Councelles for wante of the Authorite of any other Patriache or metropolitane can not be shewed. And therefore the second Councell at Ephesus was disanulled, bicause the Popes legat was repelled, though all the patriarches beside were present. Dioscorus of Alexandria, Iuuenalis of Hierusalem, Flauianus of Constantinople, And thus though all the Patriarches were summoned, yet the absence of no one Patriarche, but of the bishop of Rome only, did disanull any Councell. This is the thinge that proueth a superiorite in the bishop of Rome aboue all other bishops. This M. Iewel should haue disproued. But with all that he had saied, he is not able. Wherefore his Conclusion folowing must nedes hange very loosely, where he saieth.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 490 Vntruthe for this is not t
                     •
                  e Canon.And this seemeth to be the Canon that Iulius alleaged, that it was not lawfull to make rules and orders for the whole Churche, without the Consent of the bishop of Rome. being one of the fourte chiefe Patriarches

and hauing in his prouince one great portion of the Churche.
            All this longe talke is driuen but to a gheasse. This semeth to be the Canon, saieth M. Iewell. But how litle it semeth, or can seme to be so, it hath already sufficiētly bene declared. And therefore M. Iewell perceauing very wel that all which hether to hath bene saied, proueth nothinge, spetting in his handes and taking better holdefast, goeth to the matter yet ones againe, and laboureth it more. So depely did this auncient Canon mentioned by the ecclesiasticall history lye at his harte That no Councelles ought to be helde without the Authorite of the bishop of Rome. Therefore he cometh in with a rerewarde and reneweth the battaille, with these wordes.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               Iewell. Leo. epist. 61.
Leo. epist. 59.
The 491. Vntruthe false translation.And therefore Leo Bishop of Rome testifieth his consent to the Councell of Chalcedon with these wordes. Your brotherhood knoweth that I haue embraced with my whole harte the determinatiō of that holy coūcel. And likewise vnto the Emperour Martianus he writeth thus. Constitutionious Synodalibus libens adieci sententiam meam vnto these constitutions of the Councell, I haue gladly geuen my assent.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
                It was more then an assent M. Iewell. You haue not truly translated the wordes, Thus Leo saieth. Vnto the constitutions of the Councell, which haue pleased me bothe for the confirmation of the Catholike faithe, and for the condemnation of the heretikes, I haue added my verdit, And this verdit or sentence was not a bare consent but a Confirmation of the Councell. For so he writeth expressely in his letters sent at the same time and aboute the same matter to Pulcheria the Emperesse, saying. Whereas the most godly Emperour hath willed me to direct my letters to the bishops present at the Councell of Chalcedon, quibus qu
                     •
                  e illic de fidei sunt regula definita firmarem,
               
                  Leo. epist. 69. by the which I should confirme such thinges as haue bene there defined touching the Rule of faithe, I haue gladly fulfilled his request. And he addeth the reason immediatly: Ne fallax cuiusquam simulatio sententiam meam haberi vellet incertam. To thintent that no man

by any deceitfull dissembling may take my sentence or verdit herein vncertaine. Thus though the whole Councell had before most certainely confirmed the Catholike doctrine, against the heretike Eutiches, yet the cofirmation of the bishop of Rome in expresse letters was required, and that to thende no man might any more dissemble or wrangle, as though the See Apostolike had not plainly vttered her minde therein. Yet saieth M. Iewell.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 492 Vntruthe for not ratified by him and others.The ende hereof was not to shewe his Soueraine powers aboue all others, but that the decrees so ratified by him and others, might be had in more estimation
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
                Why saie you M. Iewell, by him and others? No mans ratification or Confirmation was required but the Popes. And that was expressely required, though his legates were present at the Councell, and hath subscribed, Iudged and determined in his name. Why adde you then and others? The place which you alleage for this purpose speaketh only of the Bishopp of Rome and not of Others. For thus you folowe the matter.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                So Leo him selfe writeth.
                  Le
                        •
                      epist. 59. 
               Your highnes thinketh this euill wi
                     •
                  l the rather be suppressed, iff it be declared throughout all Churches, the deci
                     •
                  es of the h
                     •
                  ly Councell be well liked of the Apostolike See.
            
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                Here is a ratification of the Apostolike See, but not off Others. And therfore this in dede doth shew a Souerain power of the See Apostolike aboue all other. Els the whole Councel hauing nowe determined the matter, the sixe hundred and thirty bishops hauing subscribed, the Popes leg
                  •
               tes also present in that Councell, hauing defined and Iudged with the rest, what neded there now a Solemne Ratification by the Popes owne letters to Confirme the Councel, but in dede a Soueraine power of the See Apostolike aboue all other particular Bishoppes, Therefore the Emperour was persuaded, that the heresy would the rather be suppressed, if all the Churches

of Christendom might vnderstande that the determination of the Councel had bene allowed, ratified and Confirmed, by the expresse letters of the See Apostolike. Therefore Rome especially is called bothe of the Grecians and of the Latines, Sedes Apostolica.
               
                  Athanasius ad solit. vitā agentes. Aug. cōtra. 2. ep. Pela. ca. 2. & 3. lib. 2. The Apostolike See. As where especially the Apostolike prerogatiue hath succeded. Therefore also the Africane bishops hauing discussed the heresy of Pelagius and Caelestinus, sent their definition therein to the See Apostolike, to be confirmed. So was the Nicene Councel confirmed of Siluester, and the Councel of Constantinople of Damasus, the Councel of Ephesus of Caelestinus, as it is in the text off D. Harding noted. To the which Authorites M. Iewel neuer cometh nere by a great way, but rangeth about other matters not replying to D. Harding (as the title of his booke protesteth) but apposing of his own obiections, such as h
                  •
               m liketh. And therefore he falleth againe to opposinge and saieth.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 493 Vntruth. For that wil neu
                     •
                  r be prouedBut that the whole ratification of Councell
                  •
                depended not only of the bishop of Rome, but also of others no lesse the
                  •
                of him, it is easy to be proued.
            Being a matter so easy, I trust you will proue it substantially. Let vs see.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 494 Vntruthe false trā
                  slation. S
                        •
                     zom. lib. 6. cap. 23·The bis
                  •
               op in the Romaine Coun
                  •
               ell in the time of Damasus condemned the Councell of the Arians h
                  •
               lden at Ariminum for that, neitheir the Bishop of Rome, whose minde should h
                     •
                  ue bene knowen before all others, nor Vincentius, nor any of the rest had agreed vnto it.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                There is no place passeth M. Iewelles handes without a venewe, when he alleageth Authorites against the Bishopp off Rome. For as before he turned Consent, for Confirmation or Authorite, and shifted in Others with the Bishop of Rome, more then his allegation tolde him: so here the greatest and 
                  •
               hiefe parte of the sentence he hath quite altered, wherein th
                  •
                bishop of Romes Authorite did most euidētly appeare.

For these wordes, whose minde shoulde haue bene knowen before all others (whereby Master Iewell, woulde linke the consent of others with the popes minde, as though bothe were of lyke and aequall authoritye) those wordes I saie are falsified and wrested from the true originall bothe of the Greke and of the Latine. The greke bothe of Sozomenus (whom M. Iewell alleageth) and of Theodoretus is thus.
                  Theodoret. lib. 2. cap. 22. 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , The latine translation of that place readeth thus. Cuius ante omnia decebat eos expectare decretum. Whose decree they ought to haue taryed for, before all thinges. These be the wordes of the letters recorded bothe by Sozomenus, and by Theodoretus.. These wordes declare that the Councell of A
                  •
               iminum was condemned not so muche bicause Vincentius, and the other were absent, as bicause they had not looked for the Bishoppe of Romes decree, and that before all thinges, before they had concluded any thinge. This was the cause why the Councell of Ariminum was condemned. This lacke of the Popes decree to confirme their doinges, though they were in that Councell foure hundred bishops (as Nicephorus recordeth) vtterly disanulled that Councell,
                  Niceph. lib. 9. Cap. 9. made it voide and of no force. And thus farre is M. Iewel furdered by his own allegation. Let vs consider the remnant.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Lykewise the Councell of Carthage and of Aphrica,The .495 Vntruthe facing and impud
                     •
                  nt  are allowed for good, notwithstanding the Bishoppe of Rome woulde not allowe them.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
               
                
                  Lib
                        •
                     o. 2. ad Boni
                        •
                     a
                        ••
                     ū. Cap. 4.Yet Saint. Augustine saieth of Innocentius the Pope that De vtroque Concilio & de Carthaginensi scilicet & Milenitano scripta susceperat, he receiued letters from bothe these Councelles, to witte, bothe from the Councell of Carthage, and from the Councell of Milenit in Aphrica. And Caelestinus the firste saieth.
                  Epist 1 ad Episc. Gal. Cap. 3. 
               Aphricanorum Conciliorum Sententias suas fecerunt Apostolici Antistites cum probarent. The Bishoppes of the

See Apostolike by approuing the determinations of the Aphricane Councelles, made them their owne. And amonge the Epistle
                  •
                of Sainte Augustine, the epistles of bothe those Councelles to the Pope, for Confirmation of those Councelles, and the Answers of the Pope Innocentius, to bothe those Councelles,
                  Int
                        •
                     r epist. A
                        •
                     gust. Epist. 90.91.92.93 95.96. are yet extant and to be reade of all that are lerned to no small euidence of the Popes authoritye ouer the hishoppes of Afrike at that time, what so euer Master Iewell hath gathered and surmised to the contrary. Yea the very Canon that Master Iewell and his felowes doe make so muche of, of not appealing out of Aphrike to Rome,It is t
                     •
                  e xvij. Canon. is in this very Councell of Millenitum. Whereby we may vnderstande, that Appeales were not restrained without the Consent of the Bishoppe off Rome, and also that (this notwithstandinge) they did not att that tyme vtterly abandonne the bishoppe of Romes Authorite (as Master Iewell imagineth) but in all other thinges, that onely excepted, acknoledged and confessed the same. For so they referred the Actes of their Councell to Pope Innocentius.
                  August. epist. 92. Epist. 95. So they wrote againe to the same Pope, mouing hym to cite Pelagius the heretike out of the East to Rome. So Sainte Augustine confesseth that Innocentius the Pope had by hys Apostolicall authoritye confirmed their decrees.
                  Epist. 106
               
                  Epist. 105. So after that Councel and that decree made, Rome was called by Saint Augustine Caput Orbis, the head of the Worlde. So to Bonifacius the Pope after that decree and Councell of Millenitum, Saint Augustin writing,
                  Contra Epist. Pelagij lib. 1. cap. 1 confesseth him in Epis
                     •
                  opatus fastigio celfiore fastìgio specula pastoralis praeeminere. To haue a praeeminence in the bishoply office, as sitting in a higher roome of the pastoral watche towre.
                  
                     Cap. 3. & 4.
                  
                     Sanctus Papa Zosimus
                  
                Last of all so both by Innocentius and by hys successour Holy Pope Zosimus, as S. Augustin calleth him, Caelestinus and Pelagius were cōdemned at the request and suite of the Africane bishops. And thus farre is M. Iewell holpen by the Aphricane Councels.
            
               
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               
                  Leo epist. 13.
The 496. facing Vntruthe as shall appeare.The Councel of Chalcedon decreed that the bishop of Constantinople shoulde be in Dignite nexte vnto the bishopp of Rome, and shoulde Consecrat the Metropolitanes of Asia, Pontus, and Thracia. This decree Leo the Bishop of Rome very much misliked and woulde neuer assent vnto it, yet that notwitstanding it is in force and continueth still.
            If it continue still (as you saie M. Iewell) then of likelyhood the Turke who beareth now all the Rule at Constantinople, and hath done these many yeres, kepeth that primacy ouer Asia, Pontus and Thrasia, which Leo would not graunte. Thus you care not how absurdely you speake, so you maye exaggerat the matter, to deface the Popes primacye. But howe will you proue either that Leo neuer assented vnto itt,
                  Concil. C
                        •
                     al. Act. 16. as we graunte he did not att the beginning, nor his legat woulde for him, as it appeareth at large in the Chalcedon Councell, or that it continued so afterwarde notwitstanding the Popes contradiction. You woulde proue it out off Liberatus: whom immediatly you alleage, saying.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               Liberatus thereof writeth thus. Cum Anatholius Consenti
                     •
                  nte Concilio primatum obtinuisset, legati vero Romani piscopi cōtradicerent,
               
                  Liberatus cap. 13. T
                     •
                  e 497 Vntruthe not
                     •
                  ble, by n
                     •
                  pping q
                     •
                  ite aw
                     •
                  ye the la
                     •
                  t worde of Liberatus Q
                        •••
                     a
                        •
                     
                     m
                        •
                     do.
                
               a Iudicibus & episcopis omnibus illa contradictio suscepta non est, Et licet sedes Apostolica nunc vs
                     •
                  ue contradicat, quod a Synodo firmatum est, Imperatoris patrocini
                     •
                   permanet. When Anatholius by the Consent off the Councell had obtained the Primacy, and the bishop of Romes legates stoode against it, their gaynesaying of the Iudges and bishops there was not receiued. And albeit the Apostolike See of Rome euen hetherto stande ag
                  •
               inst it, yet the decree of the Councell by the maintenaunce off the Emperour standeth still in force.
            This is yet the homlyest shifte of all. O.M. Iewell. will you euer be like your selfe? Wil you neuer deale truly? Is the Popes Authorite so well estableshed by the consent off all writers of the first 600. yeres, that you cā alleage nothing against it, but either you must alter the wordes of the Author with false trā
               slation, or adde more in your english then you finde in the Author, or last of all (as you doe nowe) cutte cleane awaye some worde of the Author? For in this sentence of Liberatus why

leaue you out the yery last worde of all both in your latin and in your english? Where is the worde Quodāmodo, after a certaine sorte? Why dyd you cleane cut away that worde? It imported somewhat of like, and tēpered the whol matter so farre, that M. Iewel thought good vtterly to leaue it out. For Liberatus saieth that the same preferremēt of the bishop of Cōstātinople before the other Patriarches, as to be seconde in Authorite after the bishop of Rome, though the see Apostolike did vntell that daye resist it, did yet continue still to his time, Imperatoris patrocinio quodammodo, by the maintenaunce of the Emperour after a sorte.
                  Cap. 13. As muche to saie. Not by iust right and competent authorite, in quiet and lawfull possession, but as a matter boren out by the Emperour it contimued so after a sorte. And no maruail, iff the Emperours shortly after the Councell of Chalcedon remayning only in the East, and the Empire of the West decaying, through the inuasions of the Gothes, Hunnes and Wandalles, euen from the time off this Pope Leo vntell the Empire off Iustinian vnder whom this Liberatus liued, no maruaill I saie if all that time the superiorite of Constantinople, where the Emperour of the East for the most parte continued, was by the Emperour maintained and boren out after a sorte, contrary to the pleasure of the See Apostolike. Which herein defended only the Councel of Nice (as the Popes legates in Chalcedon openly protested) where the next prerogatiue to the Pope of Rome was graunted to the patriarche of Alexandria, and chalenged nothinge to the prerogatiue of his owne See, which notwithstanding the seconde place geuen to Constantinople, remained allwaies the Chiefe and head See. For it was pronoūced in the Councel of Chalcedon, when the prerogatiue of Constantinople, was graunted: Omnem quidem primatum, & honorem precipuum, scundum Canones, antiquae Romae deo Amantissimo Archiepiscopo conseruari. That all primacy and

the Chiefe honour was reserued to the welbeloued of God the Archebishop of Olde Rome, according to the Canons. This therefore was a matter boren out by the Emperour, not allowed by ecclesiasticall authorite. This was not only contrary to the pleasure of the See Apostolike, but also to the decrees of the Nicene Councell, which the See Apostolike herein defended not only then by Leo, but afterwarde by Gelasius, and other bishoppes of Rome. Againe to this prerogatiue of the bishop of Constantinople,
                  Conc. tòm. 1. In tomo de vinculo Anathema tis.
                not only the legates of the bishop of Rome resisted, but also more then foure hundred bishops then present. For whereas there were at that Councell (as it appeareth in the Actes thereof) six hundred and thirty bishops, which subscribed to the other decrees of the Councell, yet to this decree of the prerogatiue of Constantinople, there subscribed but two hundred and twelue, scant the thirde parte of the Councell.
                  Vide Act. Con. Chal. 3. & 16. Therefore neither it is put at this present amonge the decrees of the Councel, neither was it allowed longe after for any Ecclesiasticall decree, but only (as Liberatus saieth) borē out and maintained by the Emperour after a sorte. And therefore in the sixt generall Councel helde many yeres after in Cōstantinople, petitiō was made,
                  Dist. 22. Renouātes
                that the See of Constantinople might be the seconde in priuileges after Rome, and before the See of Alexandria. This petition made in that generall Councell more then two hundred yeares after the Councell of Chalcedon had not neded,
                  Cōc. Chal. An. 450. Con 6. An. 681. if in all that time that priuilege of Constantinople had bene in quiet and lauful possession. But bicause it was but maintayned after a sorte by the Emperours, as Liberatus sayeth, who continuing al that time in Constantinople, woulde magnifie their owne Citie, bicause also it was not by the iuste Authorite of the bishop of Rome graūted, therefore it was then againe required, and requested to be in that Coūcel enacted an confirmed. Hereunto might be added the sentence and verdit of lerned

Leo against Anatholius for so vsurping that prerogatiue to the iniury of the bishops of Alexandria and of Antioche, the schisma
                  •
               ical presumptiō of Acacius, and Anthemius, bothe Entychian
                  •
                shortly after that time,
                  
                     Leo ep 53.54. & 55.
                  
                     Liberatus ca. 17. & 21.
                  
                     Lib. 7. cap. 194. Iewell.
                and last of all the Antichristian presumption of Iohn of Constantinople in S. Gregoríes time, coueting to be the vniuersall bishop of all the Churche. But these fewe may suffise to declare how litle this allegat on of Liberatus helpeth M. Iewell. Especially if it had plaesed him to haue geuē thee leaue (gentle Reader) to peruse his whole wordes, and had not so pared quite of the laste worde of the place. Quodammodo, after a sorte, which in dede being added did vtterly marre all M. Iewelles matter: and therefore was by him feately in dede and rhetorically dissembled, but guilefully and wickedly depraued. By such euill dealing an euill cause must be maintayned, what saie you farder M. Iewell.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 498 Vntruth. For S. Hierom. sa
                     •
                  eing was of no matters of faith. Ad Euagrium.
               Which thinge seemeth agreable to that S Hierom writeth. The Authorite of the worlde is greater then the Authorite of one Citie. Meaning thereby the Citie of 
                  •
               ome.
            This saying of S. Hierom agreeth very litle with a decree maintayned by the Emperour against the See Apostolyke. S. Hierom in that place talketh not of Authorite in doctrine and in matters of faithe, common to al the Church, but of certaine particular customes proper to any particular Churche. Wherein the custome of one Citie no not of Rome it selfe can prescribe against the general custome of the worlde. And therefore S. Gregory informing S. Augustin our Apostle touching certaine his demaundes, and namely of the variable customes of diuers Churches vnder one faithe, dothe not prescribe vnto him precisely the custome of the Citie of Rome to be folowed in all thinges, but It pleaseth (saieth he) that if you haue founde any thinge (be it either in the Churche off Rome,
               
                  Beda lib. 1. cap. 27. 
               off Fraunce, or of any other) which may more please God, that ye choose the same. And plante it in the Englishe Churche Yet in matters

concerning faith bothe the same Gregory acknowledged, and practised a Supremacy of the Church of Rome ouer al other Churches, as hath before bene declared, and S. Hierō him self, writting to Damasus a bishop of Rome for his sentēce in a matter of doctrine, saieth expressely vnto him. Qui tecum non colligit, spargit. He that gathered not with thee, he scattereth. And againe. Extra hanc domum quicunque agnum comederit,
               
                  Greg. li. 4 epist. 2. In epist. ad Damas. Tom. 2· 
               prophanus est: Whosoeuer eateth the lambe without this house (he meaneth the Churche of Rome) he is an alienat. And thus S. Hierom agreeth well with Liberatus, not for M. Iewell, but directly against M. Iewell. Such profes M. Iewell hath picked out to weaken the Authorite of the See Apostolike the Churche of Rome. Nowe he Concludeth.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 499 Vntruth. cōteining a number of vntruthes.It may appeare by that I haue thus shortly touched, that the Bishop of Rome had Authorite neither to Summon Councelles, or to be president and chiefe in Councelles, nor to ratifie and confirme the decre
                  •
               s of Councelles, more then any of the foure Patriarches. And last of all that Councelles may stande in force although the Pope mislike them and allowe them not.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                It may appeare by that I haue answered and farder saied to the Contrary, that the bishop of Rome had Authorite within the first 600. yeres, partly to Summon Councelles, allwaies to be president and chiefe in all generall Councells, and especially to ratifie and Confirme the decrees of Councelles. Last of all that no Councell coulde stande in force, if the Pope misliked it and allowed it not.
            It may appeare also by that I haue saied, that the Canon reported in the ecclesiasticall History, is truely and faithefully reported of Socrates, truly and faithfully alleaged of D. Harding, vntruly and shamefully impugned of M. Iewell. The Canon I saie which commaundeth that no Councell be helde without the Authorite of the bishop of Rome.
            
            It may appeare again howe many notorious, impudent and outragious Vntruthes M. Iewell hath committed in this paragraphe

of the Confirmation of Councelles, as beinge not able to alleage one true Authorite against it.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 500· Vntruth. For it wil well folowe as it shall now appeare.I thinke it will be harde hereof to geather M. Hardings Conclusion. That the bishopp of Rome was Head of the Vniuersall Churche.
            I doubte not but it will be easy to gather his Conclusion. The Pope was president in al generall Councells, confirmed and ratified all generall Councelles, and by his Authorite hath disproued Councelles. But in generall Councelles the Vniuersall Churche is represented, as in a parliament the whole Realme, Ergo the Bishop of Rome was at that time the Head of the Vniuersall Churche. And thus M. Iewell must subscribe. Except he will allwaies quarell and wrangle aboute termes, the thinge being clere and euident.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               Athanasius of Alexandria, and Paulus of Constantinople depriued and thrust out of their bishoprikes by the Violence of the Arrians, assisted with the Emperour Constantius, appealed to Rome to Iulius the Pope and bishop there, and by his authorite were restored to their roomes againe. So Leo assoiled Flauianus the Bishop of Constantinople excommunicated by Dioscorus.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .501. Vntruthe slaunderous.The 113. Vntruthe. For the Emperour restored Athanasius and not the Pope.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                This Vntruthe may soone be iustified, not only by the expresse wordes of the Ecclesiasticall story, but euen by the very confession of M. Iewell him selfe in his text. For hauing, in many and idle wordes farre from the purpose, vsed a longe florish before the fight, and as a streame blowen vp with winde and weather, carieth with it muche frothe and filthe by the very rage and drift of the water:Iewell. pag. 6. so M. Iewel in this place, fulowing and wandering ouer the bankes with Copia Verborum, by the Violence and force of his talke, carying a great deale off

errour and Vntruthe alonge before him, at the lenght cometh in with a But. And saieth.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .502. vntruthe. contrary to him selfe.But Master Hardinge will saye. The wordes be playne that Iulius restored Athanasius. It is true, and not denyed.
            
               
                  Stapletō. 
                Loe what a good will is. It is true, saieth M. Iewell and not denyed. If it be true, that Iulius restored Athanasius, the same Iulius being the Pope of Rome, why haue you put it for an Vntruthe, saying: The Emperour restored Athanasius and not th
                     •
                   Pope. If it be not denied, why do you denie it youre selfe? Can it be true, and yet not true? Do you denye it, and yet is it not denyed? Then with you, true and not true, denying and not denying, yea and nay is all one.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .503. Vntruthe For this is not the onely meaning.But the meaning of these wordes is, that Iulius pronounced him clere in that he was accused off, and therefore worthy to be restored.
            Loe ones againe howe M. Iewell striueth and winceth against the Truthe. He saied euen nowe. That it was true that Iulius the Pope restored Athanasius. Nowe he sayeth that he pronounced him clere, and therefore worthy to be restored. The lyke impudent shifte these men doe vse in the expresse wordes off holy Scripture: For where Christe saieth to his Ministers here in earthe. VVhatsoeuer you forgeue in earthe. it shall be forgeuen in heauen. These men saye, that Gods Minister the Prieste dothe not forgeue sinnes, but declareth them to be forgeuen, and pronounceth the party penitent to be clere, and worthye to be forgeuen. By whiche meaning Christe shoulde haue sayed. VVhatsoeuer you forgeue in earthe, it is allready forgeuen in heauen. And not. It shall be forgeauen in heauen. But nowe. The Sentence of Peter goeth before the Sentence of heauen saieth S. Ambrose. And that whiche the Prieste assoileth in earthe,
                  Contr. Nouatia. li. 1. shall be assoyled in heauen. If the Priest did but declare him to be assoiled, then should he be before allready assoiled. In lyke

maner M. Iewell here in this place. Whereas the Ecclesiasticall Historye saieth expressely that Iulius the Pope restored Athanasius: M. Iewell saieth, he pronounced him worthy to be restored. But how will M. Iewell proue that Iulius the Pope pronounced Athanasius worthy to b
                  •
                restored. Howe will he proue that to be the meaning of the Ecclesiastical history? He saieth.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 504. Vntruthe For D. Hardinge well know
                     •
                  th the contrary.For it is certaine, and M. Harding well knoweth that Athanasius vpon Pope Iulius letters was not restored.
            Be bolde and blushe not Master Iewell. You that are so impudent againste the expresse wordes of the Ecclesiasticall history, you may be bolde vpon D. Hardinge, and vpon his knowleadge. But it is certaine and M. Iewell him selfe well knoweth that Athanasius vpon Pope Iulius letters was restored. The wordes of the Ecclesiasticall History are these. The Bishoppe of Rome (Iulius) hearing the Accusations and complaintes of Athanasius and Paulus,
               
                  Hist. 
                        •
                     ripa. li. 4. ca. 15 
               and finding thē all to agree to the Nicene Councell, receiued them into Communion, as hauing charge of them all, through the dignite and prerogatiue of his owne See, and restored to euery one their Churches.
               
                  Curam omnium gerens propter propiae Sedis dignitatem.
                And a litle after. Athanasius and Paulus sending the Popes letters to the Bishops of the East, recouered eche one againe their Bishoprikes. Lo the ecclesiasticall history saieth, that the Pope restored to Athanasius and Paulus their Churches, and that, as hauing charge of them all through the dignite and prerogatiue of his owne See. And againe the history saieth. That Athanasius and Paulus recouered their bishoprikes by sending to their aduersaries the bishops of the East, the Popes letters. Thus it is certaine, and thus M. Iewell him selfe knoweth that Athanasius was restored vpon Pope Iulius letters. In like maner Theododoretus being depriued in the Ephesine Councell, repentinge and appealing afterwarde,
                  Conci. Chal
                     
                        •
                     edō. Act. 1. was by Leo the Pope of Rome restored, and in the Conc
                  •
               ll of Chalcedon was admitted by vertue of that restitution to sitt among the other bishops. For the

Iudges there saied. Let the Reuerend B. Theodoret entre and be a part of the Synod, bicause Leo the most holy B. of Rome, hath restored vnto him his bishoprike, and the Emperour hath decreed that he shal be present. And so he was placed amōg the other bishops, and allowed for a Catholike bishop, by the acclamatiō of the East bishoppes and consent off the Councell, notwitstandinge the cries and acclamations of the Aegyption bishopps, cleauing to Dioscorus the Eutichian their Patriarche to the contrary. Thus was Theodoretus, thus was Athanasius and Paulus two Patriarches of the East, the one of Constantinople, the other of Alexandria restored by the letters of the Pope to their bishoprickes, not only pronounced worthy to be restored. Yet M. Iewell will proue it by a like. He saieth.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 405 Vntruthe in falsifiing the text of Cassiodorus. Lib. 4. cap. 34.The like is also writen of others. Cassiodorus saieth.  Maximus also restored vnto Athanasius, bothe his Communion, and also his dignitie. That is to sa
                     •
                  e, pronounced him worthy to be restored. For Maximus was not the bishop of Rome.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
               
               
                  Histo. trip. lib. 4. cap. 34.First you haue printed these wordes, That is to saie &c. in a distinct letter, as if they were the wordes off Cassiodorus. Now they are your glose, beside the text of Cassiodorus. And so you haue ones deceiued your Reader. Againe Cassiodorus dothe not vse the worde Restituit restore, but praebebat did geue. Such an impossible thinge it is for M. Iewell to kepe truly the wordes of his Author. Againe this restoring of dignite and Communion of Maximus to Athanasius, was not like to the Restoring of Pope Iulius. The Pope by his letters and by the prerogatiue of his owne See (saiethe the History) Restored Athanasius. Athanasius being after expelled againe and by the Councel of Sardica restored: before he came to his owne bishoprike of Alexandria, passed by Hierusalem, where this Maximus was bishop, who also before had consented to his deposition. This Maximus geuing his Consent to the determination of the Councell communicated with Athanasius and

by that Communicating declared to all the prouince vnder him, that Athanasius was restored. This therefore was no like matter to the Restitution made by Pope Iulius. Againe a similitude, or likenesse proueth not, but serueth only to declare, to exemplifie, to make more clere and open a matter off it selfe obscure and darke. And thus the meaninge off M. Iewell contrary to the expresse wordes off the History remaineth vnproued. Thus also the Vntruthe is clerely Iustified. Which is: That Pope Iulius Restored Athanasius and Paulus to their bishoprickes.
            Nowe to touche somewhat that which M. Iewell discourseth to the contrary, to proue that the Emperour restored Athanasius and not the Pope,
                  Athanasius 
                        •
                     hrise restore
                        •
                     . Hist. trip. li. 3. cap. 8. Cap. 12. it shall appeare he deceiueth and abuseth the vnlerned Reader shamefully in the whole matter. For Athanasius as he was diuers times driuen from his bishopricke, so was he by diuerse meanes restored. First he was banished by Constantin the great beinge falsely accused off the Arrians: and was by the decree of the same Constantin in his deathe bedde, restored to his bishopricke againe.
            
                The seconde cause off his banishement was thus. The Arrian bishopps off the East accused Athanasius to Iulius the Pope of Rome.
                  Lib. 4. cap. 6. Iulius cited Athanasius. And he vpon the Citation appeared. The Arrians in the meane while placed an Arrian bishop in his roome.
                  Cap. 9. And calling a Conuenticle at Antioche, depriued Athanasius and diuers other Catholike Bishops:
                  Cap. 12. After which depriuation they sent to Pope Iulius to haue him Confirme their doinges. Iulius the Pope examining the matter and finding Athanasius, Paulus, and the other bishops innocent, restored them all to their bishoprickes againe by his letters.
                  Cap. 15. Being thus restored, first Paulus of Constantinople was banished againe by the Arrian Emperour Constantius.
                  Cap. 18. Cap. 19. Soone after also, the Arrians peeking a newe quarell to Athanasius, and accusinge him to Constantius the Arrian

Emperour, about the Distribution of certain corne in in Alexandria, Athanasius fearing the Emperours displeasure flede of his owne accorde: And with Paulus the bishop of constantinople, came to Constans the Catholike Emperour of the Weste, and brother to Constantius the Arrian Emperour in the East.
                  cap. 20. By whose letters to his brother they were at that time restored, and brought in fauour againe withe the Emperour Constantius, by whose displeasure they had bene before banished. And thus Athanasius was restored three soundry times vpon three soundre occasyons.
            First of the Emperour him felfe, which had vpon misse information banished him. Secondarely, being accused to the Pope and by pretense of a Synod deposed, was of the Pope, by a superiour order, restored. Thirdly fleing vpon displeasure of the prince, was by getting againe his princes fauour restored.
            Thus, if it had liked M. Iewell to deale vprightly, if it had pleased him rather to instruct his Reader then to deceiue him, if he had loued the truth,M. Iewels Craft in destroying a Trueth by telling a Trueth. and not sought escapes against the truthe, he would haue opened the matter, as it lyeth in the story, and not blase out one truthe to conceale an other truthe. For nowe you see (gentle Readers) that as Athanasius being banished twise by displeasure of the Emperours, was by the Emperours restored: so being also depriued of bishops, he was by the chifest bishop of Christes Churche, the Bishop of Rome, in like maner, restored. And thus bothe are true, in diuers cases. One truthe must not ouerthrowe an other.
            Nowe that it maye more particularly appeare what a deale of errour and Vntruthe M. Iewel carieth a longe before him by the violence and force of his talke in this matter, let vs consider his owne wordes. After he had with many idle wordes proued that the Emperour restored Athanasius (which you see, being true, dothe nothinge empaire the other truthe that the Pope also restored him) he alleageth Theodoretus for to

amplifie the matter more, and saieth.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 506 Vntrueth in false applieing of Theodoretus. Theodor. lib. 2. cap. 17.And Theodoretus touching the same writeth thus. Procerum Senatorumque coniuges &c. The lordes and Counsellers wiues besought their husbandes to intreat the Emperours Maiesty that he woulde restore Athanasius to his s
                     •
                  o
                     •
                  ke: and saied further, onlesse they woulde so doe, they woulde forsake them and goe to him.
            
            It is a worlde to see the Impudencye of M. Iewell. It semeth, he neuer cared, what lerned men iudged of his doinges, but that he hath laboured only to heape vp Authorites, without discretion. This place of Theodoretus is not of Athanasius, but of Liberius the bishop of Rome, whom the Arrian Emperour Constantius had banished for mayntayning the Catholike religion. And those Lordes and Councellers wiues were the Matrones of Rome, requesting their husbandes to saie to the Emperour for the returne of their bishop Liberius the Pope of Rome, not of Athanasius the bishop of Alexandria. The lerned do knowe this well. And M. Iewell him selfe can not be ignorant thereof. The story may be reade bothe in Theodoretus (as M. Iewell hath noted it) and in the tripartite history of Cassidorus.
                  Lib. 2. cap. 17. lib. 5. cap. 18. Now M. Iewel, not only applieth this to Athanasius, which yet neither can by any meanes truly be done; but also putteth in the text of Theodoretus, the very name of Athanasius in stede of 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , the pastour Liberius. Thus he alleageth he careth not what nor howe, to make a shewe of lerning. If foloweth in him.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                So likewise the bishops, that the Arrians had deposed, with Flauianus,The .507 Vntrueth in putting Arrians for Eutychians were restored againe by the Emperour and not by the Pope.
            Here is an other grosse errour of M. Iewell. They were no Arriās but Eutichians which deposed Flauianus, and of whom Leo writeth. Trust not your note bookes to much M. Iewell. Take some paynes to looke to the Originalles. Touching the matter, howe proue you they were restored by the Emperour and not by the Pope? You saie.
            
               
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               
                  Leo epist. 39.For Pope Leo him selfe writeth thus vnto the Emperesse Pulcheria. Your Maiestie haue restored h
                     •
                  me againe the C
                     •
                  tholike bishops which by wron
                  
                     •
                  efull sentence were thrust from their Churches.
            
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
               
               M. Iewel
                     •
                   Craft in destroyeing one trueth by an other.This proueth in dede, that the Emperou
                  ••
                restored them. But this proueth not that the Pope restored them not. Will you neuer leaue M. Iewell, to disproue one truthe by an other truthe? Vnder Theodosius the second, the Eutychians, bearing rule, had expelled many Catholike bishops. Martianus a good Catholike Emperour succeding to this Theodosius, remoued the heretikes, and restored the Catholikes. For this he is praised of Leo the Pope. Dothe this dyminish the Popes Authorite? No more truly M. Iewell then the late doinges of Quene Marye in restoring the Catholike emprisoined bishops to their roomes and bishoprickes, did make against the Supremacie of the Pope. But that Pope Leo bare a stroke in this matter, more then the Emperour, it appeareth well in the very same epistle of Leo which your selfe alleage, M. Iewell. Thus Leo writeth in the same Epistle. Quosdam saene Episcopos, &c. VVe vnderstande by the relation of our legates, and of our brother and felowebishop Anatholius, of whom you haue vouchesafed to make a good reporte, that certain of those bishops which haue geuen their consent to the wiched dedes (of the Eytychians) do require a Reconciliation, and do desire the communion of Catholikes. VVhose desires, we minde so farre to accomplishe, that such as are amended, and by their owne subscriptions, do condemne their wicked attemp
                  
                     ••
                  , be admitted in to fauour, the charge thereof beinge committed to our legates and to the foresaid bishop Anatholius. Thus we see as the Emperour restored the Catholikes, so the Pope reconciled the schismatikes. And as the Emperour by his secular powre restored the bishops to their liuelyhood: so the Pope by his spirituall iurisdiction restored the penitent offenders to the vnite of the Churche. These are bothe confessed truthes. The one destroyeth not the other.
            
               To procede, M. Iewell excepting against Pope N
                  •
               colas because he was out of the cōpasse of his first 
                  •
               00. yeres, he auoucheth certain general Vntruthes without any reason or proufe in the worlde, and saieth.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               
                  The 508 Vntruthe for the
                        •
                     
                     
                     
                        ••
                     re abated before t
                        •
                     e vj.C. yeres after.
                  Ch
                        •
                     ist. Eutropius Lib. 13.
               It is well knowen that as the Popes power increased, so the Empire abated.
            This is a manifest Vntruthe ioyned with a slaunder. The Empire most decayed vnder Honorius, as all Histories do testifie. For vnder him, the West part of the Empire was vtterly cut of vntill the time of Charlemain. This was about the yere of our Lorde 400. wel nere two hundred yeres before the ende of the first 600. yeres after Christ, at what time M. Iewell imagineth the Popes power to haue begonne. The Hunnes, the Wandales, the Alani, the Gothes, the Longabardes all before that time had inuaded, spoyled, and possessed al the West parte of the Empire, Italy, Fraunce, Spaine, and Afrike. The empire after remained only in the East. The Empire therefore wa
                  •
                longe abated, before the Popes power encreased, if at the lest (according to M. Iewelles mind) the Popes power beganne o
                  •
               
               ly after the first 600. yeres. But will you see howe substantially M. Iewell proueth that as the Popes power encreased, 
                  •
               o the Empire abated? He saieth.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               
                  Plat
                        •
                     us in Ad
                        •
                     iano. 2. Therefore was Platine forced to saye. Nowe the Emperours h
                     •
                  ue 
                     〈◊〉
                   their Ciuile pow
                     •
                  r, and there Popes haue lost the holynes.
            
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
                Platim wrote this, scante a hundred yeres past. And he wrote it in the life of Adrian the second a lerned and vertuous Pope as platin
                  •
                deseribeth him. The Emperour also at that tim
                  •
                Loys the seconde was a Prince of great vertue and power. So that Platina must of necessite speake of his owne time. Th
                  ••
                M. Iewelles argument is this.
            
               Platina a hundred yeres past complaineth of the weakenesse of 
               
                  〈◊〉
                
               Empire, of the want of holynes in the Pope.
            
            
               Ergo a thousand yeres a goe, as the Popes power encreased, so 
               
                  〈◊〉
               
               
               Empire abated. By suche argumentes and reasons M. Iewell hath bene persuaded to forsake the faithe he was baptised and brought vp in.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                In olde times the Emperour confirmed the Pope. The 509. Vntruthe. For the Emperour neuer confirmeth the Pope. Now the Pope confirmeth the Emperour.
            This is an other Vntruthe boldly auouched, but no whit proued. M. Iewell is neuer able to shewe that any Catholike Emperour euer confirmed the Pope in such sorte as without that confirmation, he might not be Pope. That the Pope at this daie confirmeth the Emperour, it hath so continewed almost these 80
                  •
               . yeres euer sence the time of Charlemain the firste Emperour of the West Church, after the decaye therof,
                  
                     
                        •
                     laudu
                        •
                      dec
                        •
                     d. 2. lib. 1 vnder Honorius, who also was made and crowned Emperour by the Pope Leo the thirde, as his successours euer sence haue bene.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                In olde times the Emperour called the Pope to the Councell. The 51
                     •
                  . Vntruthe. Answered befo
                     •
                  e. 
               
                  •
               ow contrary wise the Pope calleth the Emperour.
            How true this is, it hath before bene declared No Catholike Emperour euer 
                  •
               ummoned Councell without the Authorise and consent of the B. of Rome. Nor was euer any generall Councell allowable and of force without the same Authorite, as before hath bene proued.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                As tou
                  •
               hing the re
                  •
               toring of Athanasius; The. 
                     •
                  1
                     •
                  . Vntruthe. For be w
                     •
                  ite 
                     〈◊〉
                   to the Emperour. Pope Iuliu
                  •
                intreated the Emperour in his behalfe.
            This is a flatte Vntruthe. He restored him by his own let
               
                  •
               ers not to the Emperour, but to the Arrian bishops, who had 
                  •
               niuriously deposed him in their conuenticle at Antioche.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                VVhich as it appeareth was his greatest request.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                What the requeste of Athanasius was to Pope Iulius, it 
                  •
               ppeareth by that whiche Pope Iulius did for him. That was 
                  •
               o restore him to his bishoprike by his owne letters, not to write to the Emperour for him. But will you see how clerkly M. Iewell proueth this? He saieth.
            
               
               
                  Iewell. 
                For thus he writeth vnto Liberius.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
               
               A pot full of plummes Iewel out of Athanasius in Epist. ad Liberi
                        •
                     m.
               Loe, M. Iewel wil proue the request of Athanasius to Pope Iulius, by that whiche he wrote to Liberius, which was Pope after Iulius. Yet let vs heare the wordes of Athanasius to Liberius. The wordes are.
            
               VVe beseche you, that through your good exhortations, bothe by your selfe, and what your Age
                     •
                  tes, we maye be holpen.
            
            What worde is there here of intreating the Emperoure, in the behalfe of Athanasius? Athanasius desireth to be holpen by the Pope, and by his agentes or deputes. He speaketh no one worde of the Emperour. And to what purpose, I aske your wisedome (M. Iewell) shoulde Athanasius require Liberius to intreate the Emperoure, who was then an Arrian him selfe (Constantius by name) and who was no lesse enemy to Liberius then to Athanasius, whom also the same Emperour banished, as he did Athanasius? Liberius was banished him self, and the Noble Matrones off Rome intreated the Emperour for Liberius: And was Liberius required to intreate for Athanasius? What thinketh M. Iewell to wine the game by facing? A man might saie. Non satis commodè diuisa sunt temporibus tibi Daue h
                     •
                  c. But, by such impudent Vntruthes an euil cause must be defended.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
                
                  Sozom. lib. 4. cap. 8. Stapleton Regula in ri
                        •
                     .
               Moreouer, for that he was a Patriarke, he summoned a Particular Councel, and laboured the Bishops.
            What of that Master Iewell? You knowe by youre lawe. Abundans Cau
                     •
                  ela in Iure non nocet. And the common saying, a man can not be to sure of his right.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                For the Arrians saied. There was an Ecclesiasticall Canon that no man being once depose
                     •
                  , should be restored againe onlesse he had first cl
                     •
                  ered him self 
                     ••
                  fore a Councell.
               
                  O
                        •
                     ea
                        ••
                     l. in Epist. ad Iulium.
               
            
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
                What the Arrians saied, M. Iewell, we reken not. We hold
                  •
                not by the Arrians. We hold by the Catholike Fathers. Thoughe you may claime by hererikes, yet it is our part to disclaim
                  •
               
               
against you in that point. We haue not so lerned Christe, M. Iewell.
            The Aegyptian bishoppes in the Councell of Chalcedon vpholders of the Eutichiā heresy. being required and commaunded by the Councell to subscribe to the decretall Epistle off Pope Leo sent to the Concell, refused to do it, and alleaged for their defence, that in the Nicene Councell it was decreed. that the bishops of Aegypt be subiect only to the Patriarke of Alexandria.
                  Cōcil. chal. Act. 4. But the Catholike bishops answered plainely Mentiuntur. They lie. And againe. Ostendant quod dicunt. Let them shewe and proue their saying. So we answer to your Arrians M. Iewell,M. Ievvell. seeketh to heretykes for helpe. saying that a bishop being deposed can not be restored but by a Councell, They lie. And againe. Let them shewe that decree. We knowe heretikes haue euer claimed against the Authorite of the See Apostolike. So the Donatistes appealed from Pope Melchiades to the Emperour. So these Arrians and Eutychians alleaged Canons against their obedience to the bishopp of Rome. If you list to be an heretike M. Iewell, claime by them. we Catholikes can not doe so.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                And therefore Crysostom was muche blamed of his aduersaries, for that he beinge once deposed had recouered his roome without a Councell of other Bishops.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                M. Iewell is forced euer to take parte with the worst sort of men. So must an euill cause be bolstered. Chrysostom was a holy and lerned Father, and wrongefully deposed of the Aegyptians. What they in their wicked and iniurious attempt alleaged for them selues, it is no president to them which meane to deale vprightly, or which will defende the truthe. M. Iewell bicause he defendeth a schisme against Christes vicaire, no maruail if he be forced to vse such proufes. The plea of these Aegyptians against S. Chrysostome was so good, that they were for their labour excommunicated off Innocentius thebishopp of Rome. As it hath before bene declared in examyning

the Appeale of Chrisostom
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 512. Vntruthe for the Appeale vvas offered to the Popes Legates only.And therefore Flauianus, being wrongefully put from his bishopricke offred vp his bille of Appeale, not vnto the bishop of Rome alone, but vnto him other bishoppes.
            Loe here is an expresse Appeale confessed by M. Iewell of the Patriarche of Constantinople to the Bishop of Rome. Yet he saieth it was not to the bishop of Rome alone, but to him with other bishops. Let vs see howe he will proue it.
            
            
               The .513. Vntruthe in nipping off wordes out of the middest of S. Leo his whole sentence. Leo epist. 24.
            
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
               
                
                  Esa. 28.The truthe hereof may wel appeare by these wordes of Leo bishop of Rome vnto the Emperour Theodosius. Omnes par
                     ••
                  um nostrarum E
                     •
                  clesiae, omnes mansueti
                     •
                  ini vestrae 
                     •
                  um. G
                     •
                  mutibus & lach
                     •
                  imes supplicant Sacerdotes vt quia eisdem L
                     •
                  bellum appellationis. Fl
                     •
                  uianus Epis
                     •
                  opus dedit, generalem Sy
                     ••
                  
                  dum i
                     •
                  beatis intra Italiam celebrari. Al the Churches of these our countres, and all the priestes withe sighes and teares beseeche your highne
                  ••
               . that, for as much
                  •
                as Flauianus hath offred vp his bille of Appeale vnto them, it may please you to commaunde, a Generall Concell to be kept in Italy.
            What shall I saie to M. Iewell? I am forced to saie he is one of them of whom the Prophet speaketh, Posuimai
                     •
                   mendacium spem nostram, & mendacio protecti sumus. We haue put out hope in lyeing, and by lyeing we haue ben defended. For had M. Iewell geuen vs here the whole wordes of Leo, had he not in the very middest nipped of one whole sentence, then the truthe should haue appeared, and the contrary to his assertion euidently bene proued. He hath put the wordes in Latin, He hathe englished them truly. He hath in the Margin quoted the place rightly. And would a man suppose any Vntruthe herein to be committed? Truly but that I had herein to doe with M. Iewell,
                  Leo epist. 24. whose nature I am nowe some what acquaynted withall, I should haue trusted his allegation without serching the originall. The whole wordes of Leo are these. Omnes partium nostrarum ecclesiae, omnes mansuetudini vestrae cum gemitibus & lachrymis supplicant sacerdotes, vt quia 
               The wordes which M. Iewell 
                     •
                  ipped quite of. 
               Et nostri fideliter reclamarunt & eis
                     ••
                  m libellum appella
                     ••
                  
                  nis

Flauianu
                     •
                   Episcopus dedit generalem: Synodum iub
                     ••
                  ris intra Italiam celebrari. All the Churches of these our Countres, and al the priestes with sighes and teares beseche your highnes, that forasmuche as The wordes which M. Iewell nipped quite of. 
               Bo
                     •
                  he our men (he meaneth his legates in the Ephesine conuēticle) haue faithefully resisted (to the condemnation of Flauianus) and to them Flauianus the bishop hath bishop offred vp his bille of Appeale, it m
                  •
               y please you to cōmaūde a general Councel to be kept in Italy. These are the whole wordes of Leo in the same epistle. By these wordes it appeareth euidētly, that the bille of Appeale was offred vp not to al the Churche an priestes in Italy, but to the Popes legates present at the Ephesine Synod, in the which, and where, Flauianus was deposed and did appeale, as the wordes, which M. Iewel for that purpose nipped quite of, doe geue vs to vnderstād. As also in a letter of Valētiniā the Emperour to Theodosius it appeareth. where it is writē, that the Bishop of Constātinople sent his libels of Appeale to Leo the Pope.
                  In preamb. Con. Chal.
                But be it nowe that the Pope with his lerned Councell do restore bishoppes, and not alone. What can M. Iewell gather therof? He saieth.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                In suche Councelles the Bishop of Rome being sometimes the chiefe, prononced the party worthy either to be restored,The .514. Vntrueth For the Pope was alwaies Chiefe. or to be deposed.
            The Pope was allwaies chiefe in such Councelles. And not only pronounced the party worthy, but did by his owne Authorite restore bishops. Tanquam curam omnium gerens propter propriae Sedis dignitatem,
               
                  Hist. trip. lib. 4. 
               As hauing charge of th
                     •
                  m all through the prerogatiue of his owne See, as the Ecclesiasticall history speaketh.
            But (saieth M. Iewell) that Sentence was not allwaies putt in execution.Ievvell.
            
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                Shewe M. Iewell when the Popes sentence was not put in execution, You saie for proufe hereof.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                The Councell of Antioche deposed Pope Iulius, yet was not Iulius therefore deposed.
            
               
               
                  Stapl. 
               
                M. Ievvell not vvel in his vvit
                     •
                  es.Th
                  •
               s was not a Sentence geuen by the Pope. But a sentence geuen against the Pope. And those which gaue such a sentence, were Arians. No maruaile therefore if it preuailed not. What meaneth M. Iewell thus to reason? The Arrians could not depose the Pope, Ergo the Pope can not depose Arrians and such other sc
                  •
               usmatikes. Was he wel in his wittes, when he thus reasoned?
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                The Councell of Basill deposed Pope Eugenius. Yet Eugenius continued Pope still.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                This proueth well, that the Pope is aboue a Councell. And that no Sentence can be geeuen against the Pope. But that the Popes Sentence is not allwaies put in execution, no man that hath his fiue wittes can gather thereof. This kinde of reasoning passeth not only all truthe and honesty, but euen all wit and common sence.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                The decree of bishoppes in such cases, without the Emperours Authorite was then of small force.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                In dede for any bishops to depose a Pope by any decree it was euer of small force. The Emperour by violence haue done much, But by right no Emperour can either make a bishop or depose a bishop. And therefore the Fathers in the Millenitaine Councel decreed,
                  Cap. 19. 
               vt quicunque ab imperatore &c. That whosoeuer sued to themperour, to haue him heare and determine publike Iudgementes, that he be depriued therefore of his dignite.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                And therefore Athanasius him selfe reporteth that the Emperour gaue his consent to the Determination of the Councel of Sardica, and so commaunded him to be sent for home.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                God forbidde but that Emperours bothe maye and ought to geue their Consent to Councells, and also to commaunde the executiō of Councels. And when heretikes can not otherwise be brought to obedience as it was in that time of the Councel of Sardica:
                  Hist. trip. lib. 4. cap. 34. it is necessary that the secular sworde do helpe the spirituall Iurisdiction, Thus farre hath M. Iewell ranged

and roued, labouring to bringe somewhat against the Authorite of the Bishop of Rome. But he hath only multiplied his Vntruthes, declared his owne weakenesse, and fortified more the Truthe touching the Popes Supreme Authorite. For being so muche impugned and so litle empaired, so of assaulted and nothinge battered, it remaineth as a Rocke vnuincible, against the which hell gates shall neuer preuaile.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               Concerninge the Reconciliation of the Prelates of the Churche, bothe bishoppes, and Patriarkes, to the bishopp off Rome (114) whereby his Primacy is acknowledge and confesse, I neede not saye muche, the matter beinge so euident.
            
            The 114. Vntruthe. For Reconciliation is no necessary token, neither of Primacie, nor of subiection.The .151. Vntruthe ioyned with a slaunder. for Reconciliation is acknowledging of Primacie, And D. Hard. speaketh of one sp
                     •
                  
                  cial kinde thereof which is to the pope.
            
            Albeit it were true, that Reconciliation of it selfe were no necessary token of Primacy, yet this Reconciliation, being off the Chiefest prelats and Patriarches in Christes Churche, to the See of Rome, this Reconciliation also being ioyned with the other argumentes of Primacy in the Apostolike See off Rome, (as Appeales, Confirming of Bishoppes, Excommunications in all partes of Christendom, Restitutions of bishops and Confirmations of Councelles) it is a necessary and sufficient argument for the Primacy and Souueraintie of that See aboue all others. For as many Circunstances may make a good and sufficient euidence, where one Circunstance alone coulde proue nothinge, so the argument of Reconciliation being ioyned with the other, is sufficient for the acknowleadging and confessing of a Primacy.
            Againe if Reconciliation be no argument of Primacy, M. Iewel should haue done well either to haue shewed that the bishop of Rome was reconciled to other bishopps as well as other bishoppes were to him, or els to haue geuen a reason howe it came to passe that the bishop of Rome was neuer in

such sorte reconciled. Verely beside the examples alleaged here by D. Harding of the Africane bishops reconciled to Bonifacius the seconde, and of Alexander the Patriarche of Antioche reconciled to Innocentius, bothe bishops of Rome: we reade also, that the Bishops of the East, who were no parte off the bishop of Romes peculiar prouince or Patriarkeship, hauing vniustly deposed Flauianus of Constantinople, and wickedly consented to Dioscorus the Eutychian, were not only reconciled by Leo the B. of Rome, but did also require that Reconciliation, and in the reconciliation did abide the Order prescribed by the Pope.
            For beside the wordes of Leo aboue alleaged, wherin he signified that those Bishops Reconciliationem reposcebant,
               
                  Leo epi. 39 dyd require a Reconciliation, in his nexte epistle folowing and bearing the same date with the former, writen to Anatholius the Patriarche off Constantinople aboute the same matter he writeth thus.
                  Epist. 40 Cap. 1. 
               As touching our breh
                     •
                  rn, which we vnderstande bothe by your letters, and by the information of our legates, to be desirours of our Communion, repenting them that they were not stable and stedfast against violence and terrour, but consented to the mischief of another, and for feare yelded bothe to the condemnation off that Catholike and innocent bishop Flauianus, and to the approuing off the wicked heresie off Eutyches, we allowe the order that our deputes haue allready taken, that they be in the meane while contented with the Communion of their owne Churches.
               
                  Suarum interim Ecclesiarum essent Cōmunione contenti. Pacis & cōmunionis nostrae vnitate laetentur.
                
               Howbeit let order be taken by our legates, and you together, that such as with full satisfaction do condemne their wicked doinges, and chose rather to accuse them selues, then to defende them selues, may enioye also oure Communion, and peace. So that yet before, they condemne and accurse all such thinges, as haue bene allowed off them againste the Catholike faithe. And a litle after lest he might seme herein to be ouer gentle, as admitting so easely such notorious offenders, he addeth. Neither can our gentlenesse in any point be reprehended,
               
                  Ibidem.
                
               when we receaue

againe with satisfaction suche as we were sorye to see before deceiued. Therefore the fauour of our Communion is neither to be denied, neither yet rashely to be graunted. For as it is a dede of mercy to comforte the afflicted, so it is a pointe off Iustice to punishe the Offenders.
            
            In an other Epistle, writen within two moneths after to the Empresse Pulcheria also, when he had nowe sent his legates to Constantinople aboute the redresse of these matters, he writeth thus.
                  Leo Epist. 55. I haue now sent (as I declared in my other letters I would doe) the Bishop of Luca, and Basilius Prieste, who ioyintly with my Brother Anatholius, shall execute the Order whiche I haue taken according to the rules prescribed vnto them. For, as I am informed by the letters of the foresaied bishop Anatholius, and by th
                     •
                   suggestion of his clergy, there are many thinges fauourably to be amended, and many thinges rigorously to be punished: to the entent that in such a trouble and disorder, neither the discipline be to sharpe, n
                     •
                  ither the pardon to easy: For the obstinates, and the repentaunts, are not in lyke sorte to be dealed withall. Thus farrre Pope Leo touchinge the Reconciliation of the bishops of the East, who had in the Conuenticle at Ephesus both wickedly admitted the heresy of Eutyches, and wrongfully consented to the deposing of Flauianus.
            We see by the first wordes alleaged that they were reconciled not only to the Communion of their owne Churches, but also to the Communion of the See Apostolike, and that they desired such a Reconciliation. If this had bene but a Common Reconciliation as betwene frendes and equalles, whiche haue bene at variaunce, it had bene enough for them that they were restored by the Popes legates to the Comunion of their owne Churches. It had not neded to haue had beside a Reconciliation and a restoring to the Communion of the Churche off Rome.
            Againe we seee in the wordes in the second place alleaged,

that a kinde of discretion was vsed in graunting the Recōciliation which importeth a Soueraintie in the graunter, and a kinde of subiection in the party reconciled.
            
               The Popes Superiorite proued by Reconciliation, desired off him, or geuen oute by him.In the third and last allegation we see some admitted vpon satisfaction, some repelled for obstinacy: And all by the legates of the See Apostolike. This Reconciliation admitting some and repelling other by Authoritye, is a clere and manifeste token of a Primacy and Soueraintye in the See Apostolike ouer the bishops of the East. For albeit in the waye of Charitye one aequall may be reconciled to an other, yet in the way of Iustice one aequall hath no power to punish the other, that will not be reconciled. This Reconciliation therefore to the Pope off bishops not properly subiect to his Diocese or prouince, wherein as some are reconciled, so other are repelled, is a necessarye token of Primacy in the Pope ouer more bishoppes then of his own prouince, which Primacy in no other B. or Patriarche can be shewed. Against such a Reconliation he speaketh not one worde. Onely he reasoneth that euery Reconciliation importeth not a Primacy. Whiche thinge is not auouched by D. Harding. But only that by such a Reconciliation as was made vnto the B. of Rome, of them as were not of his own prouince or Diocese, a Primacy of the Pope was acknowledged and cō
               fessed. But of this we shall haue more occasion to speake in the nexte Vntruthe. Let vs consider what M. Iewell hathe sayed therein.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               Amonge them that, to satisfye the malitious minde off Eudoxia the Empresse, practised their wicked conspiracie against Chrysostome, through whiche he was deposed, and caried away into bannishement, Alexander Bishop of Antioche and primat of the Orient, was one. (115.) VVho at length stroken with repentaunce, for that he had bene bothe a consenter,

and a promoter of that wicked Acte, submitted him selfe humbly to Innocentius the Pope, and by all meanes sought to be assoiled and reconciled. And therefore sent his legates to Rome to exhibite to Innocentius a solemne Instrument of his Repentaunce and lowly submission, and to accepte what should be enioyned. By whiche his humblenesse Innocentius moued, graunted to his petitions, receiued him into the lappe of the Catholike Church againe, and thus was he reconciled.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                The 115. Vntruthe. This storie is here interlaced with many Vntruthes.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
                What are those Vntruthes M. Iewell? You tell vs in your text.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 516. Vntruthe Slaunderous. For the sending of legates and perfour
                  
                     •
                  yng of the condi
                  
                     •
                  ions of the Reconciliation importeth 
                     •
                  epentaū
                  ce, penance, Submission. Innoc
                        •
                     tius epist. 16. Tom. 1. Profitenti Condi
                        •
                     iones pacis. impletas.
               For in all that is writen thereof by Innocentius, there is no maner mention, neither of Solemne Instrument of repentaunce, nor of accepting of Penance, nor of Subiection or humble submission.
            Innocentius writinge to one Maximianus a bishopp, who had moued Innocentius about the Reconciliation of Atticus the bishop of Constantinople (who also had bene a consenter to the deposing of Chrysostom) and declaring to that bishop, why he had not reconciled Atticus of Constantinople in like maner as he had reconciled Alexāder the bishop of Antioche, by the waie, toucheth somewhat off the Reconciliation made by the same Alexander, in these wordes. Communio suspensa restituitur demonstranti causas &c. A man suspended from the Cō
                  munion, is restored when he sheweth the causes why he was suspended, to be taken awaye, and professeth the Conditions off reconciliation to be fulfilled. Whiche, Atticus neither hathe signified, neither proued to be fulfilled by any messenger either to you or to vs. As our brother and folowe bishop off Antioche Alexander, by a iuste embasye hath prosequuted and proued. Whereat also you being present do knowe, that I haue particularly examined all

our writinges touching the cause of the holy bishop Chrisostom, wherein they haue euidently shewed that at Antioche all thinges haue bene perfourmed as they ought to be. Whose reconciliation we embracing, truly we haue made a waye for all that wil aske it, to obtaine the like: iff at the lest they will att any time proue, that they haue done and perfourmed for their parte, suche thinges as haue bene in others examined and perfourmed,
               
                  communio nemque vt isti, legatio ne solemniter destinata, sibi roga uerint redbiberi.
                
               and also if they desire to be reconciled, by sending solemnely their legates as these of Antioche haue done. Thus farre Innocentius.
            In whose wordes we see, that this Alexander bishop of Antioche sent his legates solemnely to Rome, that by those legates he desired to be reconciled, that he had perfourmed the condicions of Reconciliation, and that thereby he was reconciled. Now this solemne sending of legates desiring to be Reconciled, what was it but a Solemne Instrument off Repentaunce? For suche was the maner of Reconciliation in those daies. So vrsatius and Valens did offer vp to Iulius the Pope, Libellum penitentiae. An Instrument of repentance, when they were reconciled from their Arrian heresy to the Catholoke vnite. The perfourming of the Conditions of Reconciliation, was the accepting of that which was enioyned. The worde Penaunce, as it is not in Innocētius, so neither is it in the wordes of D. Harding. And who doubteth but all this was done with an humble submission, seing that no repentaunce can be without humble submission, nor no reconciliation without repentaunce?
                  Cassiod. li. 4. cap. 12. seing also that Conditiones pacis complere, to perfourme the Conditions off Reconciliation, requireth expressely an humble submission, for lacke of whiche Atticus was not att that time yet reconciled, but continued suspended, and through the which afterwarde, as it appeareth in an other epistle off Innocentius,
                  Epist. 17. he was also reconciled. Touchinge this Reconciliation of Alexander of Antioche to Innocentius, it shal the better appeare, if the diligent Reader remembre in this

place, the solemne Excommunication of Theophilus and other bishops his adherents, in deposinge Chrysostom (off the which this Alexāder was one) made by this Pope innocētius. Of the which I haue at larg spokē before about the matter of Appeales. For by reason of the Excōmunicatiō, this Alexander Patriarche of Antioch, was necessarely recōciled. Therefore Innocētius hauing receiued his submissiō, answereth him in these wordes. Quā grata mihi, quā pia,
               
                  Innocē
                     
                        •
                     i 
                  
                     •
                   
                  epist. 15. 
               quā necessaria legatio a tua sanctitate frater Charissime ad nos directa fuerit, gestorū ipsorum replicatione cognosces. How acceptable, how godly, how necessary (derely beloued brother) your sending of your legates to vs hath bene, you shall knowe by the tenour of our dealing with you. As for the worde Subiectiō, which M. Iewel saieth is not in Innocētius, no more it is in the text of D. Harding. The Spirituall Iurisdiction M. Iewell. requireth no Subiection, as Ciuill Princes doe of their subiectes. But as S. Gregory saieth:
                  Lib. 7. ep. 64. 
               vbi Culpa non exigit, omnes ratione humilitatis 
                     •
                  quales sumus. Where no faulte is committed, by the waie of humilite, we be all equall. Therefore Innocentius, after this Alexander was reconciled, he calleth him, Fratrem Charissimum, derely beloued brother,
                  Epist. 15. and as you alleage for a mighty argument against the Popes primacy, Condiscipulum sedis Apostlice,
               
                  Epist. 17. Epist. 15. The .517. Vntrueth in false trāslating Ephes. 2. Epist. 16. Necessaria legatio Solemnite
                        •
                      de de
                        ••
                     ina
                        •
                     a Cōdit
                        •
                     ones pacis 
                        ••
                     mple
                        ••
                     s d
                        •
                     gna lega
                        ••
                     one 
                        〈◊〉
                      ut
                        •
                     s est & probauit.
                Scholefelowe of the See Apostolike. And sending his letters at that time calleth them primitias pacis nostre: the first frutes (not of frendship as you vntruly in this place translated it) but of the reconciliation made by vs. And so Crist is called in holy scripture Pax nostra Our recō
               ciliation to God. So this Alexander, Conditiones pacis completas esse, digna legatione prosequutus est & probauit, by his worthie legates he went thouroughe with it and proued it to the Pope that he had perfourmed the conditions of Reconciliation. Had all bene but a matter of frendship and equalite, neither had he bene before, by the Pope excommunicated, neither had that solemne sending of legates to Rome bene necessary, neither neded

any such Conditions to be perfourmed, nor the perfourmance thereof so expressely to be prosecuted and proued. Thus therefore was the Patriarche of Antioche reconciled neither as a Subiect vnto his Prince, nor as one equal frende to an other, but as a party before excommunicated to his Spirituall head, that ioyning with his head Christes vicaire, he might be a part of Christes mysticall body.
            Touching the examples alleaged by Iewell, the writing of the Africanes to Pope Innocentius aboute a Reconciliation betwene the Churche of Alexandria and the Churche of Rome,
                  Concil Aphric. cap. 68. was aboute this very matter of Crysostoms deposing, and maketh very well to proue a necessite of the same Reconciliation. But saieth M. Iewell.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                It was not that the Churche of Alexandria shoulde submitte her selfe, as vnto her Head, and liue in Subiection, but that they might be reconciled and liue in peace together.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                The Churche neuer liued in Subiection to the bishop of Rome. This is but an odious terme of disobedient heretikes. The Churche hath liued in obedience of the See. Apostolike for the redresse of faultes committed, either in faithe or in maners, not otherwise. The Churche of Rome had no quarell to the Churche of Alexandria. But the Churche of Alexandria by Theophilus the bishop thereof hauing wrongefully deposed Chrysostom bishop of Constantinople, and being therefore iustly excommunicated of the See Apostolike, the good bisshoppes of Aphrica thought good to write, not to the Churche of Alexādria,
                  Concil. Aphric. cap. 68. which was iustly excommunicated, but ad sanctum Papam Innocentium, to the holy Pope Innocentius, who had excommunicated them, that they might be Reconciled. This expresseth clerely, howe necessary it was for the Church of Alexandria to be reconciled to the See Apostolike. And thus farre M. Iewelles owne alleagation hath helped our matter.
            
               
               
                  Iewell. 
                So Liberatus saieth. Petrus Moggus was reconciled vnto Asatius,
               
                  Cap. 18. not as vnto his superiour, but as vnto his brother.
            This Petrus Moggus was an heretike,
                  
                     Liberatus cap. 17. & 18.
                  
                     Felix in Epist. ad Acacium.
                  
                excommunicated of the See Apostolike, and of Acacius also (whome M. Iewell calleth Asatius) but after was reconciled vnto him. Wherevpō they were bothe of Felix the bishop of Rome excommunicated. The conspyring of heretikes can be no president against the Reconciliations of Catholikes. Who listeth to see the whole tragedy of this Petrus Moggus (whiche accursed the Chalcedon Councell) and of this Acacius consenting vnto him by an edicte of Pacification made by Zenon the Emperour, against the See Apostolike, and the ende thereof,
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . edictum. Cap. 16.17 &. 18. let him peruse Liberatus sett forthe in the seconde tome of the Councelles. The primacy of the bishop of Rome ouer the other patriarches appeareth therein most euidently: As by Appeales, by Reconciliations, by Excōmunications, and such like Practise.
            In this sense writeth Hormisda bisshop of Rome vnto Epiphanius the bisshop of Constantinople.
                  Iewell. The 518. Vntruthe For he wrote so not as absolutely his equal, but as to whome the other was then reconciled.
                  
                     Con. Const. Act. 2. Vide libel. Ioan. ad Ho
                           •
                        nisdam Tom. 2.
                
               Seing we haue one frendsship in Cō
                  munion and in faithe, let vs therfore take like study and like care.
            
            Yea. But what foloweth M. Iewell? It foloweth immediatly. To thentent that as we do now both equally reioyse in our Lorde, that the Churche of Constantinople is vnited to the Apostolike See, so also we may (as you doe charitably moue me) prouide for the Reconciliation of other Churches also. For vnder Iohn the predecessour of this Epiphanius, the Churche of Constantinople was reconciled from the schisme that Acacius before had made, to the See Apostolike. Being thus reconciled, they wrote as felowes and equalles. For vnlesse bishopps had offended either against the Canons or against the Catholike faithe, the Bishop of Rome, vsed no Superiorite ouer them. Thus M. Iewell by titles and phrases woulde disproue that,

whiche the clere and open practise of the Churche euidently proueth.
            That whiche M. Iewell alleageth oute of Socrates for an example of Reconciliation,
                  Cassio. lib. 
                  
                     •
                  . cap. 23. & 25. The 519. Vntruthe in all
                     •
                  aging one thinge for an other. was (519) no Reconciliation at all. They were, or, at lest, pretended to be Catholikes which went to Pope Liberius. They went for a redresse and ease of their great aduersites and miseries which they sustained by the Arrians. They sued also at that time to the Empe
                  •
               our of the West, Valentinianus the first. All this was not for a Reconciliation, but for the establyshing of the Catholike faith against the Arrians, and to haue some redresse of the disorders in their Churches.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 520 Vntruthe For Arsenius was Reconciled to Athanasius as to his Superiour. Atha
                        •
                     as. Apolog. 2.An other like example of Reconcili
                  •
               tion we haue made by one Arsenius the bisshop of H
                  •
               psilitae to Athanasius the B. of Alexandria. This Submission or Reconciliation was made vnto Athanasius, yet was not Athanasius the bisshop of Rome.
            This Reconciliation that Arsenius the bishopp of Hipsilitae made to Athanasius, was not as to his equall, but as to his own primate and Metropolitane. For so in the very sentence alleaged by M. Iewell, it foloweth. Neque citra tuam Metropolitani Episcopi sententiam vllum de episcopis aut alio dogmate cō
                  mu
                     •
                  i & ecclesiastico decretum aedituros. We promise also, that without your Authorite, being the Metropolitane bishop, we will make no decree either concerning bishops, or any other pointe of common and ecclesiasticall doctrine. This Submission therefore or Reconciliation made to Athanasius, though it were not made to th
                  •
                bishopp of Rome, yet it was made to the Metropolitane and superiour, not to a felowe or equall. And thus the maner of Reconciliation of Churches was done not betwene frendes and felowes as M. Iewell fansieth, but with humble submission, and knowleadge of a Supremacie ouer the party reconciled. Finally thus Reconciliations being made to the Bishop of Rome of Patriarches and Metropolitanes

them selues as of Alexander the Patriarche of Antioche and of Atticus the Patriarche of Constantinople bothe to Innocentius the B. of Rome, also of the bishoppes of the East to Leo the B. of Rome, as before hath bene declared, is a sufficient token of primacy and Supremacy in the Churche of Rome ouer all other Churches, Patriarches and Metropolitanes.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               Thus hauing declared the Supreme Authorite and primacy of the Pope, by the Common practise of the Churche, I neede not to shewe further howe in all questions, doubtes and controuersies touching Faithe and Religion, the See of Rome hathe allwaies bene consulted.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 521. Vntruthe Slaunderous. StapletonThe 116. Vntruthe. For many greate questiōs were neuer remoued to Rome.
            What were those great questions that were neuer remoued to Rome? M. Iewell nameth in his text not one question, greate or small. And shall it be true bicause M. Iewell saieth it onely? He hath bene taken in Vntruthes to often, to require now such credit. It had bene an easy matter amonge many to name one. Nowe no instance or exception beinge made, the vniuersall remaineth true. For to proue an vniuersall, it is impossible. But if it like M. Iewell to stande by this Vntruthe, he maye take his penne and turne to the 91. and the 93. epistles in S. Augustins workes, and score it there also vpon Innocentius the first: who in his epistle, answering to the Fathers of the Councell of Carthage (who had required him, vt statutis eorum mediocritatis,
               
                  Augustin. Epist. 90. 
               etiam Apostolicae sedis adhibeatur Authoritas, that to their decrees and Canons the Authorite of the Apostolike See might be added, saieth no lesse then D. Harding in his text saied. For these are his wordes.
                  Innocētius epist 91. inter epist. Aug
                        •
                     stin.
                
               Patrum instituta sacerdotali custodientes officio non censetis esse calcanda, quod illi non humana sed diuina decreu
                     •
                  re sententia, vt quicquid de

disiunctis remotisque pr
                     •
                  uincijs ageretur, non prius ducerent finiendum, nisi ad huius Sedis notitiam peruenire
                     •
                  , vbi tota huius Authoritate iusta quae fuerit pronunciatio firmaretur. You obseruing the decrees of the Fathers, according to the duty of priesthoode, do shewe that they are not to be trode vnder foote, whereas they, not by the sentēce of mā but of God him selfe, haue thought good that what soeuer should be in debate concerning suche prouinces as are farre distant, it shoulde not be determined, before the matter were brought to the knowleadge of this See, where, by the whole Authorire of the same, the right and iuste Sentence might be confirmed. In these wordes Innocentius affirmeth, that whatsoeuer was in debate or controuersy in farre distant prouinces, shoulde be referred to the See of Rome, and there shoulde take his finall sentence. Also that the Fathers had so decreed. And last of all that the same decree of the Fathers proceded not of the Sentence of man but of God him selfe.
            Againe the same Innocentius answering to the Fathers of the Milleuitane Councell in Afrike also, requiring in like maner a Confi
                  •
               mation of their doinges in that Councell, hathe these wordes.
                  Innocētius epist. 95. inter 
                        •
                     pi
                        •
                     t Augustin
                
               Quid etiam Acti
                     •
                  ne firmastis, nisi scientes quòd per omnes prou
                     •
                  ncias de Apostoli
                     •
                  o sente petentibus, responsa semper eman
                     •
                  nt? Praesertim quoties fidei ratio ventilatur, arbitror omnes fratres & co
                     •
                  pis
                     •
                  opos n
                     •
                  stros non nisi ad Petrum, id est, sui n
                     •
                  minis & honoris Authorem ref
                     •
                  rre debere, velut nunc retulit vestra dilectio, quod per totum mundum possit omnibus eccl
                     •
                  sijs in commun
                     •
                   prod
                     •
                  sse. An
                  •
                what haue you declared in this your doinge, but that yowe knowe that thourough oute all prouinces, answers and Solutions doe continually flowe to all that seke for it, at the Apostolicall fountaine? Especially, as often as anye matter of the faithe is called in doubte, I thinke all oure brethern and felowe bishopps ought to referre it to none, but to Peter the Author of their name and honour,

you haue nowe referred, that which might be behoful to all Churches in common through out the whole worlde. Here Innocentius, auoucheth no lesse to the Fathers of the Aphricane Councels, then D. Harding did to his Reader: If the impudency therefore of M. Iewell wil serue him to abyde by this Vntruthe, let him score it vp also (as I saied) vpon Innocentius.
            Nowe if M. Iewel or any other man for him, will take this saying of Innocentius being a Pope him selfe, to be an vntrue saying and spoken only of Ambition to exalte his owne See and Authorite, it might suffise to call only to remembraunce that, this is the same Innocentius, to whom that excellently lerned and most holy Father Chrysostome Patriarche of Cō
               stantinople, Appealed,
                  Palladius in vita 
                        •
                     oā. Chrysostemi, & Chrysost. epist. 1. ad Innocentium. Nicephorus lib. 13. cap. 34. Innocētius epist. 16. Tom. 1. Conc. I
                        •
                     em epist. 17. Concil. Aphric. Can. 68. Aug. epi. 90. & 91 being wrongfully depriued of his Bisshoprike by the Synod of more then thirty bisshoppes: who thereupon, excommunicated Theophilus the Patriarche of Alexandria, which had done that iniury: To whom, Alexander that holy and wise Patriarche of Antioche was Reconciled from the bonde of excommunication which he incurred by the wrongeful deposition of Chrysostom: To whom also, Atticus the second successour after Chrysostom in the Patriarkeship of Constantinople, was in like maner Reconciled: To whom, the Bishoppes of Afrike thought good to write aboute the Reconciliation of the Church of Alexandria to the See of Rome. Last of all, to whom, the lerned Fathers of the Coūcelles of Carthage and of Milleuitum, amonge whom S. Augustin was one, referred the Actes of their Councels to be Confirmed, this I saie might suffise to any indifferent Reader, to remembre, and so to consider, that the Authorite of this Innocentius so euidently practised ouer the Chiefe patriarches of the East, and so expressely confessed of the Aph
                  •
               icane Fathers, proceded of no vaine ambition, but of right and Order, such as was dewe to the Apostolike See of Rome.
            
               But yet iff all this suffise not to Iustifie this saying of Innocentius, which M. Iewel hath noted for an Vntruthe, let S. Augustin be an Vmper betwene vs, and let him pronounce, howe he liked those letters of Innocentius the Pope, wherein he vttered suche wordes, so preiudiciall, for the Authorite of the See of Rome. S. Augustin writing to Paulinus of the Pelagian heresy, whiche in those two Councelles off Carthage and of Milleuitum was condemned,
                  Augustinus Epist. 106. speaketh of the letters of those two Councelles sent to the See Apostolike thus. Missae sunt de hac re ex duobus Cōcilijs, Carthaginēsi & Milleuitan
                     •
                  , relationes ad Apostolicā Sedē. Relatiōs of this matter were sent, from the two Councelles of Carthage and of Milleuitum, to the See Apostolike. Those are the letters vnto the whiche Innocentius made answer, and in the whiche Answer the wordes aboue alleaged of Innocentius, are writen. Of those answers S. Augustin a litle after saieth thus. Ad omnia nobis ille rescripsit, eodem modo, quo faserat at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   oportebat, Apostolicae Sedis Antistitem. To all those matters, he (Innocentius) wrote backe vnto vs, euen as it was right, and as it behoued the Bishop of the Apostolike See.
            This loe is the Iudgement of S. Augustin, touching the Answer that Innocētius made to the two Councelles of Carthage and Milleuitum. In whiche answers seing the wordes aboue alleaged, are comprised, that all doubtes ought to be referred to the See of Peter, and all Solutions be sought from that Apostolike fountaine, we haue the clere iudgement of S. Augustin, that Innocentius in so saying, spake no otherwise then it was right, and then it becomed the Bishop of the Apostolike See. Other bishops so to haue spoken, it had ben in dede neither right nor conuenient. This therefore being so clerely affirmed of Innocentius a Pope of such Authorite well nere twelue hundred yeres paste, in two sundry epistles, and by the Iudgement of lerned S. Augustin approued and commended,

M. Iewell cometh nowe to late to comptroll it, and to sco
                  •
               e it vp for an Vntruth. For conferre the wordes of Innocentius and of D. Harding together, Gentle Reader, and thou shalt see, they are all one bothe in effect and in very termes. But that the one wrote in Latin, the other in English. Such be the Vntruthes, that the plaine and vpright dealing of M. Iewell hath scored vpon D. Harding. The sayinges and decrees of the Ancient Fathers. Yea such a decree, quod non humana sed diuina decreuere sententia, as the Fathers haue decred, not by the sentence of man but of God, saieth Innocentius.
            If M. Iewell had read thus muche in S. Augustins epistles, then was he ouerperte and proude to note the doctrine of such Authorite for Vntruth. He specially who offreth to yelde and Subscribe to any One sentence of any One doctour. If he had not before read so much, but tooke this saying of D. Harding to be (as he thought) a papysticall saying, and voide of all good Authorite, then let him lerne by this, that he knoweth not all thinges, and as he was grossely ouersene in this, so let him not be ashamed to confesse his ignorance in the rest. Our Lorde of his mercy sende him humilite. By true humilite he will soone forsake his heresy.
            Nowe somewhat to touche, that which M. Iewell prosecuteth here in his text, the examples of Marcellinus, Dulcitius, Bonifacius, Euodius and others, which sent their questions to S. Augustine and desired his Counsell, were questions Moued, not Remoued: that is: they were for instruction and Counsell, not for finall decision and determination. Such Remouing of questions to be decided, is here spoken off, not all kinde of doubtes and questions. Neither is this vniuersall so precisely auouched, as that you should require of vs to declare it in euery particular, but being true for the most parte or the most principal maters, it declareth a Primacy in the See of Rome. But, saieth M. Iewell.
            
               
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               S. Ambrose saieth that many that had bene with the B. 
                     •
                  f Rome, would afterward fo
                     •
                   their better satisfaction sende to him.
            
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                Who doubteth, but the iudgement of the lerned, was euer worthe the hearinge, though matters were allreadye decided? This doth not weaken the Authorite of the decree, or of him that maketh a decree. But sheweth a desire cōmon to the children of Adā, to knowe more then nedeth, or then sometimes is requisite. That whiche is alleaged out of Leo, is not to be foūde in the epistle that is quoted. I would M. Iewel would be tried by the Epistles of Leo, what and howe great in his time, wel nere twelue hūdred yere
                  •
                past, the Authorite of the See of Rome was. He should be driuen to graunte the Supreme Authorite of that See ouer all the Church of Christ, as it shal wel appeare in the 123. Vntruth. This saying therefore of D. Harding being no better impugned remaineth true, and proueth well the purpose.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               And to be shorte, howe all the worlde, hath euer fetched light from thence.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 522. vntruthe Slaunderous, and agreing with the Arrians. Hist. tripar. lib. 4. cap. 16.The 117. Vntruthe. For Rome her selfe had her light from Grece.
            So saied the Arrians in dede in their rescript to Iulius the Pope. But no Catholike writer I wene euer saied so. Of this matter we haue before talked at large in the 32. and 37. Vntruthes. For this is nowe the third time that it hath bene noted for an Vntruthe. So muche the Truthe thereof misliketh him, or els so desirous he was to heape vp a number of Vntruthes. A toye, to my knowleadge, neuer vsed of any graue or lerned writer before.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               Leo that worthy Bishop of Rome, was called the vniuersall bishop and vniuersall Patriarche of sixe hundred and thirty Fathers assembled together frō al partes of the world

in Generall Councell at Chalcedon. VVhich is bothe expressed in that Councell, and also clerely affirmed by S. Gregorye in three sundrie epistles, to Mauritius the Emperour, to Eulogius Patriarke of Alexandria, and to Anastasius Patriarche of Antioche.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 523. Vntruthe Slaunderous, and peuish.The 118. Vntruthe. There is no mention made hereof in any Canon in that Councell.
            What then M. Iewell? Can it not be expressed in that Councell, but if it be in some Canon expressed? What a childish reason is this? The Actes of the Councell of Chalcedon do containe a hundred and fiue leaues in print. The Canons of that Councell being sett forthe withe a double edition containe but three leaues thereof. And is there not roome enough (M. Iewell) in all that Councell to finde our matter in, except it be in some of the Canons? Yow mocke and delude your vnlerned Reader M. Iewell, making him to beleue that a Councell consisteth onely of the Canons made therein. And howe many thinges haue yowe alleaged M. Iewell in this Fourthe Article out of the Councell of Chalcedon, and yet out of no one Canon thereof? Were it honest and true dealing, to score vp Vntruthes in all these Allegations vpon Master Iewell, bicause no mention is made in any Canon in that Councell? You are but a pelting wrangler, thus to cauill and trifle. You seke not the edifying of your Reader. You seke only to snarle at him, who hathe disclosed your immoderat pride and cōfuted your vaine malapert Chalenge. But let vs consider your lerned Replie in this behalfe. For this point touched you to the quicke. To be confuted in the very termes, of your owne challenge, that is deathe to you. Let vs therefore considre howe you acquitte your selfe.
            
               
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 524. Vntruthe For D. Harding saieth not that Title was then geuē
               Nowe for a briefe answer, M. Harding hathe founde 630. bisshops that (524) gaue this title to Leo the bisshop of Rome in the Councell of Chalcodon, and called him the vniuersall bisshop, which thinge (as he saieth) is recorded in S. Gregory in three soundry places.
            M. Iewell for a briefe Replie, dothe firste vntruly reporte the wordes of D. Harding, to thentent he maye after daily thereat at pleasure. Gentle Reader, looke backe to the wordes of D. Hardinge last aboue recited. Thou shalt finde, he saieth not as M. Iewell reporteth him. He saieth not that the 630. bishops in the Councell of Chalcedon gaue to Leo the name of Vniuersall Bishop. He speaketh of no such gifte. But he saieth, those Fathers called Leo by that name. This semeth perhappes to be a small difference. Verely if we had not to doe herein with a pelting wrangler, the difference were small in dede. But you shall see what a stirre he kepeth aboute it.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 525. Vntruthe. For it was holden in the yere The 453. Pantaleō 
                  in sua Chronogr. ex Sigeber to & alijs. StapletonHere good Christian Reader, by the way, this one thinge I trust, thou wilt consider of thy selfe. If the name of Vniuersall Bisshop was geuen to the bisshop of Rome in the Councell of Chalcedon whiche was holden in the yere of oure Lorde .488. then by M. Hardinges owne graunte; and by the witnesse of this Councell, the Bisshop of Rome before that time, had not the name of vniuersall Bisshop. Otherwise, howe coulde either they geue, that they had not to bestowe, or he receiue that he had allready? In dede suche bestowing of giftes had bene very childish.
            Loe. Do you not see wha
                  •
                a highe point of lerning M. Iewell hathe picked out of the worde Geue? Thinke you it was no vauntage for him to alter the text of D. Harding? No I warrant you. M. Iewell though he make manye Vntruthes, yet he will make fewe without some vantage. As touching the matter, what if the Councell did not geue that name, and what if D. Harding did not graunte so muche? Then hathe M. Iewell lost a good Argument. And more then that. For you shall see.
            
               Thus of the whole number of six hundred yeres, M. Harding freely, euen at the sight, hathe yelded vs backe (.526.) foure hundred, foure score and eight yeres towardes the Reckening.
            You make your Reckening without your Oste M. Iewell. There is no such graunte made yet vnto you. Therefore you may wipe your bille and goe to rouste.
            This weighty consideration you haue made by the waye,The 526. Vntruthe For yowe come shorte of your reakoning thirty yeres and more. as you saie. What Replie make you to the matter it selfe?
            Before we passe farther, let vs see what credit the Pope him selfe geueth to this Councell of 630. Fathers holden at Chalcedon.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                It appeareth M. Iewell hathe small hope to Replie anye thinge to the matter it selfe, that maketh suche preambles as these are. O M. Iewell. Is your desperat impudency so greate, that you can finde in your harte to picke quarels againste the Fourthe Generall Councell of Christendom, holden aboue a thousand yeres paste, with such concours of bishops, as neuer was sene in any Auncient Councell beside? And do you thinke to discredit this moste famous, moste lerned, and moste holye Councell by the wordes of the Pope him selfe? Pope Leo confirmed that Councel bothe by his Legates present at the Councell, and by his letters after the Councell. Pope Gelasius acknowleadged,
                  Leo epist. 47. Greg. lib. 1. epist. 24. & li. 7. epist. 5. Gelas. in Tom. de Anath. vin. Tom. 1. Con.
                that by the Authorite of the See Apostolike it was holden. Pope Simplicius excōmunicated Petrus of Alexandria: Pope felix, Acacius of Cōstantinople: and Pope Gelasius, Anastasius the Emperour for reprouing the Coūcell of Chalcedon. Pope Gregory cōmaunded the foure generall Councelles to be obserued and reuerenced like as the foure Euangelistes. And thinketh nowe M. Iewell to bringe vs Popes that doe disallowe it? Yea euen of these very Popes alleaged, Leo and Gelasius? Truly though nothinge be to harde to one that muste defende Vntruthe, yet this I trowe will be very harde for M. Iewell, so muche as coulourably to proue. Howbeit let vs beholde howe impudently he faceth

and auoucheth out the matter. He saieth.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Pope Gelasius saieth. The Apostolike See of Rome in parte allowed it not. For that thinges were there borne out by inordinat presumption.
               
                  Inter Acta Con. Tarrac. The 527. Vntruthe. Gelasius falsely alleaged touching the quotation.
            
            For these wordes of Gelasius you haue noted in the Margin the Actes of the Councell of Tarraconense. Nowe that Councell was holdē before Gelasius was Pope vnder Felix the thirde. And in the whole Actes of that Councell there is no worde or halfe worde of the Chalcedon Councell. All this therefore is but a pregnant Vntruthe. The wordes of Gelasius that you do meane are amonge the decrees of Gelasius. Your Notary deceiued you, that tolde you it was in Conc. Tarracon.
                  In tom
                        •
                      de Anathem
                        •
                      tis vinculo
                Such care you haue what you write, and what you teache the people that readeth your bookes. Had you sene M. Iewell the whole place of Gelasius, you woulde haue bene ashamed to haue alleaged them as you haue done, and to haue taken parte againe withe the Eutychian herelikes. For this was the case. In the Councell of Chalcedon the Eutychian heretikes were condemned.
                  Concil. Chal. Act. 16. At the ende of that Councell also not by the consent of the whole bishops, nor of the thirde parte of the bishops (as it hath bene before declared) and against the expresse contradiction of the Popes legates, the bishopp of Constantinople by certaine of the Councell, was made in dignitie next to the bishop of Rome, and preferred before the Patriarches of Alexandria, and of Antioche, contrary to the expresse decrees of the Nicene Councell, whiche the Pope by his legats defended.
                  Can 6. Con. Nic.
                This priuilege of the bishop of Constantinople, the Councell in their letters to Pope Leo desired most humbly the Pope to confirme,
                  Concil. Chal Act. 3. as it maye be sene in the letters of the Councell, regestred amonge the Actes off the Councell of Chalcedon. Yet Leo the Pope in his rescript to the Councelles letters, confirming all other matters touching the Catholike faithe, would in no wise cō
               firme or allowe the priuilege of Constantinople: This priuilege

notwitstanding being (as Liberatus writeth) by the Emperours fauour bore
                     •
                   out after a sorte, the Churche of Constantinople fell shortly after to the Eutychian heresye, vnder Acacius their bishop: who therefore with Petrus Moggus Bisshop of Alexandria were of Pope Felix predecessor to this Gelasius excommunicated. The vpholders of this Acacius,
                  Leo epist. 59. Liberatus. Cap. 18. founde faulte with Gelasius the successour off Felix, for the excommunicating of Acacius, and alleaged that Acacius being an Eutychian ought not to be condemned for that opinion by vertu of the Councell of Calcedon, seing that the same Coū
               cell was not in all pointes allowed of the See Apostolike it selfe. This obiection of those vpholders of Acacius the Eutychian, M. Iewell hath picked out of Gelasius, to proue (as yow see) that this Pope allowed not that Generall Councell off Chalcedon. But Gelasius him selfe as he was an eloquent and lerned Pope, so he answered these vpholders of Acacius the Eutychian at that time, lernedly and eloquently. And the same answer may serue M. Iewell taking also their parte. The beginning of the place is some what abrupte and imperfect. Yet the wordes do euidentlye geue to vnderstande that all thinges touching the Catholike faithe done and concluded in that Councel, à tota ecclesia indubitanter admitti, were admitted of the whole Churche without all doubte or controuersye. But other thinges which in that Councell per incompetentem praesumptionem prolata sunt vel potius ventilata,
               The .528. Vntruthe. Gelasius falsely translated by inordinat presumption were propounded or rather tossed: not, as M. Iewell translateth it, boren oute, which the See Apostolike denied, being presently by the Legates thereof gainesaied, those thinges the See Apostolike allowed not. And the reason in Gelasius foloweth. Quia qu
                     •
                  e priuilegijs vniuersalis Ecclesiae contraria probantur, nulla ratione sustine
                     •
                  . Bicause suche thinges as are contrary to the priuileges of the vniuersall Churche, the See Apostolike by no meanes alloweth. For by the decrees of the

generall Councell of Nice it was decreed that the Bisshop off Alexandria and of Antioche shoulde be the next Patriarches in dignyte after the bisshop of Rome.
                  Cōc. Nicen. Can. 6. The bishop of Constantinople at that time was no patriarke at all. This was the thinge that the See Apostolike allowed not. And therefore Lerned Leo in his letters to the whole Councell of Chalcedon,
                  Leo. Epist. 61. Epist. 53.54, 55. & 62. to Anatholius then bishop of Constantinople, to Martianus the Emperour, to Pulcheria the Emperesse, and last of all to Maximus the Patriarche of Antioche vtterly disproueth and disalloweth that vnlawfull prerogatiue of the bishop of Constantinople, only bicause it was expressely against the Canōs of the Councell of Nice. And in his letters to Maximus of Antioche, thus he saieth. Quicquid praeter speciale
                     •
                   causas synodali
                     •
                  m Conciliorum ad examen episcopale defertur,
               
                  Epist. 62. 
               potest aliquam di
                     •
                  udicandi hahere rationem, si nihil de eo est à sanctis patribus apud Nicaeam definitum. Nam quod ab illorum regulis constitutioneque discordat, Apostolicae Sedis nunquam obtinebit consensum. Whatsoeuer in Councelles is called to the iudgement of bishops, beside the speciall causes of the Councelles, it maye after a sorte be determined, if the matter be not allready defined of the holy Fathers at Nice. For whatsoeuer varyeth from their rules and constitutions, the Apostolike See will neuer consent vnto it. And the reason hereof is most stronge and necessary, which Leo also in that epistle alleageth, saying. Vniuersae pacis trāquillitas non aliter poterit custodiri, nisi sua Canonibus reuerentia inte
                  
                     •
                  nerata seruetur. The quietnes of vniuersall vnite can not otherwise possiby be mayntayned, except the Canons be reuerently and inuiolably obserued. Thus Gelasius and Leo bothe, allowed and confirmed the Generall Councel of Chalcedon, in all matters touching faithe and doctrine, for the which that Councell was especially called, albeit, the prerogatiue of the bishop of Constantinople iniurious to the bishops of Alexandria and of Antioche, and contrary to the Canons of the Nicene

Councell, was worthely and rightfully gainesaied, resisted, and denied. Yet saieth M. Iewell.
            Pope Leo accuseth the whole Councell of Ambition and willfull rashnesse.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .529. Vntruthe Leo neuer accused the whole Councell so.M. Iewell shoulde haue done well, to haue geuen a note in the margin where Leo so saied, his workes being so great and diuerse. How be it the matter being vtterly false and vntrue, no maruail if he lefte the place without quotation. Pope Leo accuseth not the whole Councell, of Ambition, but only certain of the Councell, as Anatholius the bisshopp of Constantinople and certaine other. Therefore writing of this matter so graunted and presumed by certaine of the Councell, he calleth it, quorundam consensum, the consent of certain,
                  Leo Epist. 55. Leo. Epist. 62. and againe quorū
                  dam episcoporum consensum the Agreement of certaine bishops, and in an other epistle, quorundam surreptionem, the guile and fraude of certaine. And as we haue before declared, to this priuilege of the bishopp of Constantinople,
                  Concil. Chalcedon. Act. 16. there subscribed only .212. bishops, as the Actes declare, whereas the whole Coū
               cell consisted of .630. bishops. So in the Ephesine Councell, Inuenalis bishop of Hierusalem attempted to gett by consent of certaine bishops the Iurisdiction ouer Palestine,
                  Leo ep. 62 from the patriarche of Antioche, as Cyrillus the bishop of Alexandria in his letters to Pope Leo complained, but it was by the See Apostolike resisted and ouerthrowen. As that attempt of Iuuenalis dothe not disproue that lerned Councell of Ephesus the first, no more dothe this attempt of Anatholius, any thing empaire the Authorite of the Councel of Chalcedon.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
                32. quaest. 2. Tria legit.
The .530. Vntruthe Slaunderous, and ioyned vvith a folye.
Exca. 27. Con. Chal. 26. quaest. 2. Nullus.
               And S. Hierom in the case of Matrimonie, Inter raptorem & raptam is receiued against all those .630. bishoppes, and against the determination of the whole Councell.
            I wote not verely, whether this false dealing of M. Iewell procede of wilfull malice, or of mere ignorance. The question moued of Gratian is this. An raptori rapta nubere possit patre

assensum praebente. Whether a mayde taken awaye by violence maye be maried to the party that vseth suche violence, by the consent of the Father. First he proueth by the Councell off Chalcedon and diuers other authorites that two suche parties oughte not to be coupled together in matrimonye. But then he saieth. Raptor & rapta nomina sunt vitiorum non personarum. Vitia autem cum per poenitentiam purgata fuerint, nomina eorum abolentur. A vser of vilence, and a party so vsed, are the names of the faultes not of the persons. But faultes being purged by penaunce, do lese their names. For so the aduouterer that repenteth, is no more an aduonterer. Vpon this distinction he alleageth Authorites, that such parties after satisfaction maye marie, and amonge the rest, S. Hierom. Who speaking of three kindes of lawfull mariages,
                  Ibidē. Tria legitima
                putteth for the seconde, this. Virgo in ciuitate &c. Amayde in some cyte taken of a man and coupled to him by violence, if the Father of the mayde will, the man shall geue her a dowry as muche as the Father shall thinke good, and shal geue the price of her virginite. By this satisfactiō of the dowry to be made by the man that hath done the violē
               ce in recompence of that iniury (whiche dowry otherwise the Father shoulde haue geuen with the daughter) the faulte is taken awaye by S. Hieroms iudgement, and so they may marye. Not as Raptor & rapta, co
                  •
               trary to the Councell of Chalcedon, but as man and wife, the other trespasse of violence vsed, being by satisfaction of a dowry payed, abolished. And this 
                  •
               s S. Hierom defended and the Councell of Chalcedon bothe. Vnderstande your lawes better M. Iewell, before yow alleage them. Abuse not your Reader whiche desireth to lerne, and looketh not to be mocked at your handes, M. Iewell, with the quotations in your margin out of Popes decrees, making nothinge for your purpose. Vse no more false marginall notes, like a Cal for birdes: tolling therewith your Readers consent to falsehood and Vntruthe. The more you deceiue, the

greater is your damnation.
            In such regarde they haue the Councelles, when they liste.
            Like as a Shrewe hauing well bett her husband cryeth out to her neighbours, as if her husband had bett her, so here M. Iewell hauing spett all his poyson against the holy Councell of Chalcedon, hauing missereported Gelasius,The 531. Vntruthe Slaunderous. flatly belied Leo, and ignorantly alleaged the decrees, nowe he crieth oute against the Catholikes, and saieth that they haue no regarde of Councels but when they list. This therefore to be but a mere Slaunderous Vntruthe, it appeareth by that which hath before bene saied. Let vs procede.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                But the lawe saieth. It is against reason that one man shoulde in parte allowe the will of the dead (so farre forthe as it maketh for him) and in parte ouerthrowe it (where it semeth to make against him).
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                M. Iewell did very well to put his glose to the lawe. For hereby it is euident, that the lawe maketh nothing for hym. That parte of the Councell of Chalcedon touching the vnlawfull prerogatiue of the bishop of Constantinople before the bishops of Alexandria and Antioche, which Leo and Gelasius after him disproued, made nothinge for the bishop off Romes Primacy, or against his Primacy, but only it made against the Nicene Councell which the bishops of Rome most godly and rightfully defended. For notwithstandinge that Priuilege of the bishop of Constantinople graunted by the Emperours Commissioners, through the consent of certaine bishops, yet the same Commissioners pronouncing that Sentence, saied expressely these wordes.
                  Concil. C
                        •
                     alced. Act. 16. 
               Ex his quae gesta sunt vel ab vnoquoque deposita perpendimus omnē quidem Primatum & honorem praecipuum secundum Canones, antiquae Romae deo amantissimo Archiepiscopo confirmari. By these Actes and depositions of eche one we vnderstande, that all the Primacy and chiefe honour is reserued, according to the Canons, to the welbeloued

of God, the Archebishop of Olde Rome. After which wordes foloweth the priuilege of Constantinople ouer Asia, Pontus, and Thracia. In all these wordes therefore Master Iewell hath declared his good will that he beareth to the generall Councells of Christendom. But gods name be blessed, though he hathe spett his poyson, the Truthe remaineth sounde. Remembre the saying of the wise man M. Iewell. Quid stulti proprium? Non posse & velle nocere. Remembre that of late yeres in the very time of your schisme, the foure first generall Councelles, of the whiche this Councell off Chalcedon is one, were allowed by open Parliament. Verely in the very first beginning of the Christen faithe among vs englishmē, our Countre being in a maner all and throughout conuerted to the faithe, our godly auncetours thought it necessary by a full Synod and Councell of our owne countre to establishe the Authorite of the v. generall Councelles off Christes Churche holden before their dayes,
                  Beda lib. 4 cap. 17. of the which this Councell of Chalcedon is the fourthe. And Seuerus a schismaticall bishop of Antioche had his tounge cut oute by the commaundement of the Catholike Emperour Iustinus for the blasphemies that he vttered against this holy Councell of Chalcedon.
                  Nicephor. lib. 17. c. 2 Such examples you folowe, and suche you forsake in defending your moste impudent Chalenge. Let vs heare you procede.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 532. Vntruthe. For D. Hardinge will not put anye doubte of that Coū
                  celles credit.
The lewdenesse of M. IewellBut M. Harding will saye. Of what credit so euer this Councell ought to be, it gaue Leo the name of vniuersall bishop.
            
            No. No. M. Iewell. D. Harding will put no such doubtes of the credit of the Councell of Chalcedon. He neither hathe saied neither will saie any such thinge. And yet you haue printed those wordes in a distinct letter, as if not only D. Harding woulde so saye, but also had already so saied. So impudent and false you are not only in misalleaging the wordes of the

doctours, whiche the vnlerned Reader seeth not, but euen in falsifying the wordes of D. Harding, whose whole text lyeth open in your booke to be readen. But you thinke perhappes to be of such credit, with your Reader, that he will truste your allegation, without looking to the text beinge so nighe and easy to espie. And verely so did I trust you M. Iewell in the beginning also. But nowe I haue perceiued that you alter sometimes the wordes of D. Harding in your owne text, though they are truly sett forth in his text, which maketh me not allwaies to trust you. But alas, when come you to the matter M. Iewell?
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                And what if all this be vtterly vntrue?M. Iewell toieth and dalyeth.  What if there were no such title either offred or geuen in the Councell?
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
               
               
                  Lib. 4. epist. 32. & 36.Truly then you shall proue S. Gregory a lyar. Who saied expressely, it was Offred. As for the geuing, that worde is not auouched by D. Harding as it hath before bene shewed. But let vs heare your proofes.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 533. Vntruthe. For S. Gregory saieth, it was corrupted many a yere agoe.Certainly the whole Councell of Chalcedon is extant abrode, bothe writen and printed and maye soone be seen.
            If the whole Councell be extant, and yet no suche thinge can be founde in the Councell, then S. Gregory made a lie in dede, which auouched the Councell did so. But I recken it a matter of more credit, that S. Gregorye saied, then that M. Iewell auoucheth. Let M. Iewell proue that the whole Councell is extant and that nothinge thereof lacketh, and so proue S. Gregory a lyar.
                  Lib. 5. epist. 14. Els it will be thought M. Iewell hath made a 
                  〈◊〉
               , and not S. Gregory: Certainely S. Gregory him selfe saieth. Sancta Chalcedonensis Synodus in vno loco ab ecclesia Cō
                  stantinopolitana falsata est. The holy Councell of Chalcedon was in one place corrupted by the Churche of Constantinople.
            
               
               
                  Iewell. 
                Why dothe not M. Harding alleage either the place, or the Canon or the wordes? At the least why geueth he no note in the Margin, where this Authorite may be founde?
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                Forsothe, and if it please you M. Iewell, he alleaged S. Gregory for his Author, and that in three sundry epistles. He thought his Authorite shoulde satisfie you. He knewe not before forsothe, you woulde haue taken the matter so hotte, or haue called him to accompte so straightely, hauing so good an Author as Sainte Gregory is, to beare him witnesse. He thought, such euidence might haue serued his plea. What saye you therefore to the euidence? What saye yowe to S. Gregory? We must suffer you to dalie yet a while, and to baite your Reader withe vaine talke: Goe to then. Let vs heare you.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 534. Vntruthe. For not he, but Athanasius so sayed. Pag. 234. Lib. 5. epist. 14.Perhappes he will saye. This Canon was burnte by some heretikes: as he (534) saied before of the Councell of Nice.
            Not he M. Iewell, but Athanasius him selfe (as you haue before confessed) saieth the Canons of the Nicene Councell were burnte by the Arrians. And of this Councell of Chalcedon S. Gregorye saieth, as yowe heard before. It hathe bene falsified in one place thereof by the Churche of Constantinople.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Howbeit it were much for him to saie, that of the whole Councell onely six lines should be burnte, and that in all the examples through out the worlde, and yet all the rest remaine safe.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                M. Iewell fighteth with his owne shadowe. There is no suche losse imagined. This matter shall be founde in the Councell. You shall heare anon M. Iewell will confesse it himselfe.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 535. Vntruthe. The Pope claimeth not his Title by any suche wordes.Or els the wordes whereby the Pope (535) claimeth his title should so negligently be loste, and that in Rome it selfe, in the Popes owne Library, and yet the wordes that the Pope reproueth and condemneth shoulde stande whole.
            This is a slaunderous Vntruthe. The Pope claimeth

not his Title by the wordes of Vniuersall bishop. Master Iewell in all this Article withe all his studie and conference withe his frendes can name no one Pope that euer so called him selfe, or required to be so called. And yet he putteth this Title neither desired nor vsed of any Pope, as the grounde and foundation off the Popes Supremacye. Will yowe knowe M. Iewel, whereupon the Popes primacy is grounded? S. Gregory hath tolde yow in the beginning of this Article.VVhereupon the Popes Primacy is groūded. Matth. 16. Ioan. 21. Luc. 22. It is grounded vpō the wordes of our Sauiour in the Ghospel to S. Peter, whose successour the Pope is. It hath bene established by the Generall Councells namely of Nice and Sardica. It hath bene confessed by the continuall practise of the Church, by Appeales to that See, by Reconciliations, by Confirmatiōs of Councels, by Confirmyng of Bishops and so forth, not only of these 900. Yeares and vpwarde by your owne confessiō M. Iewell, but euen of the first 600. Yeres also, as it hath bene in this Article against your most lying Replie, clerely and euidently proued. It hath bene confessed of the lerned Fathers, and Confirmed by the decrees of Emperours. Vpon suche good groundes is the supremacy of the See Apostolike builded. These groundes yowe shall neuer remoue M. Iewell, nor any of your secte, without most manifest, most impudent, and most outragious Vntruthes. Suche as you haue in this Article abundantly committed.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                M. Harding hathe no other Councell within six hundred yeares after Christ to holde by, but onely this.The .536. Vntruthe. For he hathe the Councell of Nice and of Sardica, beside, to holde by in this matter. And yet the same can not be founde.
            This is an other pregnant vntruthe. For bothe the Councell of Nice and of Sardica, bothe within lesse then 400. Yeres after Christ haue confessed a primacy in the Bishop of Rome by the whiche D. Harding holdeth, and the very name of Vniuersall bisshop M. Iewell anon will finde him selfe in the Coū
               cell of Chalcedon. Yet we must geue him leaue in the meane

while to Bragge and Crowe at pleasure.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                But S. Gregorie is witnesse sufficient.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                Thanked be God M. Iewell hath not so forgotten him selfe, but that at lenght he cometh to the matter. Nowe Sir. What saieth S. Gregory?
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                He saieth, that 630. bis
                     •
                  oppes in the Councell of Chalcedon, named the bishopp of Rome the vniuersall bisshop. 
               
                  •
               his is an Vntruthe to beguile the Reader.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                Then by Gods grace, yow will proue it to be so. Let vs heare your Reason.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               
                  The .53
                        •
                     . Vntruthe. For S. Gregorye saieth, the bisshops in that Coū
                     cell so called the B. of Rome, as it shall anon appeare.
                  
                     Greg. li. 4. Epist. 32. &. 36.
                  The .538. Vntruth. For he saieth not so onely as it shall straight appeare.
               For Gregorie saieth not, the bishoppes in that Councell Saluted, Intitled, Proclaimed, or (537) Called the bisshopp of Rome by that name.
            As for Saluting, Intitling, Pro
                  •
               layming, they are no parte neither of your Challenge, neither of D. Hardinges Answere. But that the Pope was Called the Vniuersall bishop, you denie, and D. Harding out of S. Gregory will proue. To that what doe you Replie?
            Onely (538.) he saieth. The name of vniuersall bisshop was offred by the Councell of Chalcedon to the bishop of Rome.
            
            Will you graunte so much M. Iewell? Then where is become your what if, whiche yow made before, when yow saied: what iff there were no suche title either geuen or off
                     •
                  ed in the Councell? Yow confesse youre selfe nowe, it was offred in that Councell, and so you proue your selfe that yowe vttered before a manifest vntruthe. But nowe to the matter. Yow haue confessed the wordes of S. Gregory. What saie yow now vnto them? Thus you saie.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .539. Vntruthe. For S. Gregory saieth it. The .540. Vntruthe, Slaunderous.He saied they offred to cal him so, but that they called him so in dede (539) he saieth not. Therefor M. Harding herein (540) ouerreacheth and missetelleth his Authors tale.
            S. Gregorye writeth of this matter in mo places then one. Therefore though in the wordes by 
                  •
               ou noted he saieth not expressely, The bishops of Rome were called Vniuersall bisshops by

the Councell of Chalcedon, yet in an other place he saieth so. In a letter to Iohn of Constantinople he writeth so expressely and plainely, in these wordes. Nunquid non, sicut vestra sanctitas nouit, per venerandum Chalcedonense Concilium huius Apostolicae Sedis Antistites, cui deo disponente deseruio,
               
                  Grego. lib. 4. epist. 38 
               Vniuersales oblato honore vocati sunt? Were not (as your holynes knoweth) the bisshops of this Apostolike See, (whiche by the Prouidence off God I serue) by the Reuerent Councell off Chalcedon Calle
                     •
                   Vniuersall Bishoppes, that honour being Offred them? Beholde M. Iewell, and remembre youre promise at Paules Crosse. You saied there. If it can be shewed out of any Olde Generall Councell that the bishop of Rome was within the first 600 Yeres Called an Vniuersall Bishop, yow will yelde and Subscribe. S. Gregory (whome your selfe before calleth, (a witn
                     ••
                   su
                     •
                  fi
                     •
                  ent) whom Venerable Bede calleth Our Apostle,
               
                  Li. 2. ca. 1. Hist. gētis Anglorū.
                bicause he sent vs our first preachers of Christen faithe, whom the Churche hath estemed as one of the Foure doctours off the same, this holy and Lerned Father telleth yowe, that By the Reuerent Councell of Chalcedon his predecessours (bishoppes of Rome) were Called Vniuersall Bishoppes. Will yow nowe come to the booke and Subscribe? Will you yelde according to Promise? What you will doo, it is easy to Iudge. But that you maye so doe, for your owne sake I wish. In the mean the Reader seeth, both that you haue (not ouerreached or missetolde) but flatly belyed your Author S. Gregory, and also howe D. Harding hath neither ouerreached nor missetolde his Author, but hath auouched that, which his Author expressely wrote.
            But let vs take S. Gregories wordes, euen as your selfe M. Iewell, hath alleaged them. Thus they stande. The name off Vniuersall bishop was offred by the Councel of Chalcedon to the bisshop

of Rome. His wordes are not. The Councell offred to call him so. Therefore M. Iewell hathe ouerreached and missetolde his Authors tale.
            Nowe when the Councell offred that name to the bishop of Rome, I would gladly lerne of M. Iewel, how and by what meanes they offred it. Either they offred it by mouthe, or by writinge. If by writinge, then they intitled him so, and called him so in writing. If they offred that name vnto Leo by mouthe, then they spake it out to his legates (for he him selfe was not present at the Councell) they spake it I saie and vttered it by mouthe. I trust M. Iewell will not saie. The whole Councell stode vp, and gaped vpon the legates, and profered to speake, but the legates before they spake or vttered any worde at all, desired them to holde their peace, and not to vtter their mindes. Vnlesse they did this, or some like thinge, it can not be true that M. Iewell saieth, They offred to call him so, but it must be true that D. Harding saieth, they called him so in dede, and that either by mouthe or by writing. For howe a name or title can be offred, without it be spoken or writen I knowe not.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                But S. Gregorie saieth further, that neither Leo, nor any other of his predecessours bishops of Rome, woulde euer re
                     •
                  eiue that Arrogant and vngodly name, or suffer him selfe to be so called, notwithstāding it were offred by the Councel. The bisshops of Rome neuer vsed that name, notwithstanding it were offred to them. Therefore they ought to loose it by non vsure.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                This is a very good Conclusion M. Iewell. You saie very well: The bishops of Rome neuer vsed it in dede. Therefor (saie you) they ought to loose it by non vsure. On Gods name. We do not desende that Name M. Iewell. The Pope requireth it not, but hath euer shunned it and refused it. Only bicause of your rashe Challenge, it hathe bene shewed, that the Pope hathe bene so called off others. Whiche also your selfe confesseth, saying.
            
               All this nothwithstanding, true it is, that M. Harding saieth, Leo in that Councell of Chalcedon was thus called. The places be knowen and may not be denied.
            Loe gentle Reader: M. Iewell nowe, nothwithstandinge the Vnt
                  •
               uthe noted in his margin, notwithstanding his what ifs,M. Iewell confesseth for Truthe, which he noted before in D. Hard. For Vntruthe. notwithstandinge his great questioning of Canons loste and six lines burnte, notwithstanding I saie all this great storming and striuing that he made before, nowe he confesseth the Truthe, and saieth All this notwithstanding t
                     •
                  ue it is, that M. Harding saieth, &c. Yea he will shewe vs the very places off the Councell of Chalcedon, beside the witnesse of Sainte Gregory, in the whiche the Pope is called Vniuersall bishopp and not only called, but saluted: For thus he saieth.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                He is so saluted in three sundry Epistles.M. Iewell con
                     •
                  esseth that, whiche in 
                     •
                  is Challenge, he valū
                  ted, no mā coulde proue. The one sent by one Athanasius a priest, the other by one Ischyrion a deacon. The thirde by one Theodorus likewise a deacon.
            Lo you haue hearde M. Iewelles Confession. That the Pope is saluted Vniuersall bishop in three sundry Epistles in the Actes of the Chalcedon Councell. But what thinke we nowe? Will M. Iewell trowe we, yelde and Subscribe? He confesseth him selfe, the Pope was Called and saluted Vniuersall bishop in three sundry letters registred in the Councell of Chalcedon, whiche Councell was holden as M. Iewell also confesseth in the yere of our Lorde 488. This was more then one whole hundred of yeares within his 600. What then? Will M. Iewell Subscribe and yelde? No No. He neuer meaned no such matter. You shall see what shift he hathe to escape his promise. He saieth.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                But of that whole number of six hundred and thirty bisshoppes there assembled, I trowe M. Harding is not well able to shew that any one euer saluted or called him so.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                What then M. Iewell? Was your challenge made at Paules Crosse of those six hundred and thirty bishoppes assembled

together in the Councell of Chalcedon. Was that the tenour of your Challenge at Paules Crosse? Is that Condition annexed to the wordes of your Challenge? Nay you speake very largely and freely,The Tenour of M. Iewelles Challenge. 
               If it can be shewed owt of any olde Catholike doctour, or Father, or out of any olde generall Councel, or out of the holy Scriptures of God, or any one example of the primitiue Churche, whereby it may clerely and plainely be proued, that the Bishop of Rome was with in the first six hundred yeres called an Vniuersall Bishopp, or Heade of the vniuersall Churche, you will yelde and subscribe. Nowe Sir, here you haue not only a Generall Councell by the witnesse of S. Gregorye, but also an Example of a Priest and two Deacons of the Primitiue Churche, that Called, Saluted and Intitled Leo the Pope of Rome, an Vniuersall bishop. That it is clerely and plainely proued, you confesse your selfe,Iewell. Pag. 298. saying. The places be knowen, it cā not be denied. Will you nowe except and drawe backe bicause they were no bishops which so saluted and Intitled the Pope?
            Doe not all men here see, that you mocked your whole Audience when you made your Challenge, and that you neuer intended to perfourme, whiche so stoutely you promised twise in the Pulpit? Or was it (M. Iewell) the Acte then passed in Parliament, which made you so bolde? Thinking that thereby all mens mouthes should be mouseled, and you might Crowe alone?
            For why M. Iewell? The Priest and Deacōs of that time, are they no Christen mē? Or is their testimony the worse bicause they were of the clergy? Then beholde an other testimony read and Regestred also in that holy Councell of one neither priest nor deacon, and yet a Christen man, who in his supplication offred vp to the Pope and to the Councell of Chalcedon, vseth the very same Title and stile as the other two deacons and Athanasius the priest did.
                  Concil. Chalced. Act. 3. The title of the supplication is this. Sanctissimo & beatissimo Vniuersali

Archiepiscopo & Patriarchae magnae vrbis Romae Leoni, & sanctissimo Concilio secundum voluntatem Dei & Diuina mandata in Chalcedonēsi Ciuitate cōgregato, a Sophronio Christiano. That is. To the moste holye and moste blessed Vniuersall archebishopp and Patriarche of the great Citie of Rome Leo, and to the moste holy Councell assembled together in the Citie of Chalcedon according to the will and commaundements of God, by Sophronius a Christian man. Will this Example please you M. Iewell? This is an Example of the primitiue Churche. This was neither poore deacon, nor straunge priest, as you terme them scornefully, more like a Hicke scorner, then like a Bishop, but this was a Christen laye man and as it appeareth a man of worship. For in his Supplication to the Pope and to the Councell, wherein he accused Dioscorus the tyrannicall Patriarke of Alexandria, he added, that many other coulde saye as muche as he saied against the same Dioscorus, but that siue pro paupertate, siue pro timore eius tyrannidis non sunt ausi, partly for pouerty, partly for feare of his tyranny they durst not. Wherby it appeareth, this Sophronius was neither poore, neither of such a state as he neded to feare the Patriarke.
            Nowe bicause M. Iewell vrgeth this matter and woulde make it of no force, bicause no bishop did so call the Pope in the Councell, I would wishe M. Iewell, if he can, to satisfie and solute these questions.
            
                First when S. Gregorye witnessed (whiche M. Iewell also confesseth) that the Councell of Chalcedon offred the name of Vniuersall Bishopp to Leo then Pope of Rome,That the Bisshop of the Chalcedō Councell Called Leo, Vniuersall Bisshop. yea and that his predecessours were by that holy Councell so Called, whether he meaned not that the bishoppes off the same Coū
               cell

did offer that name and Call them so, or no. If not the bishoppes, then either the Emperour and his Councell, or the notaries and inferiour clergy of those bishoppes did offer that name and Call his predecessours by that name. And then it was not the Councell at all that did it. For a Councell consisteth of bishops, not of the laye magistrat, or of the inferiour clergy. And therefore it was cried in this very Councell of Chalcedon.
                  Actione. 1 
               Synodus episcoporum est, non clericorum. A Councell is of bishops not of clerkes. If then of the bishoppes of that Councell that name was offred, and ofter it they could not without expressing the name, either by mouthe or by writinge, if by those bishopps, they beinge the Body of the Councel, the Bishops of Rome were so Called, then it is clere that the bishops of that Councell either by mouthe Called the Pope Vniuersall bishopp, or by writinge Intitled him so. And thus by the witnesse of S. Gregory it is clere, the bishopps of the Councell of Chalcedon no lesse in number then six hundred and thirty, either called by mouthe, or intitled by writinge the Bishopp off Rome an Vniuersall Bishopp. And so M. Iewell must Subscribe.
            
                Agayne whereas the supplications of Athanasius priest, of Theodorus and Ischyrion deacons, and of Sophronius the laye Christen man, offred vpp to that Councell, were by the commaundement off the Byshoppes, namely of Paschasinus one of the Popes legates there, of Petrus bishopp of Corinthe,
                  Concil. Chal. Act. 3. 
               Marinianus bishopp of Synnada, of Pergamius bishop of Antioche in Pisidia, of Patricius bishopp of Tyana, and by the consent of all the rest, regestred amonge the Actes and monuments of the Councell, were they not also, I aske you M. Iewell, allowed and approued of the bishoppes? Shoulde they otherwise not only haue bene readen in the Councell, but also be regestred in the Actes thereof? The supplications then being thus regestred and allowed, was not

thinke yow the Title and stile thereof also allowed? If it had bene then acompted a blasphemous, straunge, or iniurious title, that the Pope shoulde be intitled Vniuersall Bishop, woulde that holy and learned Councell, not only haue geuen the hearing thereof, but also commaunded the same to be regestred and reserued with the other Actes of the Councell? Woulde they not rather haue blamed those deacons, that priest, and that other laye man for vsing that Terme, and for intitling the bishop of Rome withe the name of Vniuersall bishop, if they had in dede disallowed it, or bene of that minde as M. Iewel is of? Therefore seing it was not of the bishops reproued, but by their expresse Cōmaundement Regestred amōge the Actes of the Councell and thereby Allowed, it foloweth the bishops allowed that Title, and so the Exāple is of good Authorite, and can not be auoyded. Verely of no lesse authorite then if the bishops them selues had so saluted or intitled the Pope. It foloweth also by force of this Clere Exāple of the primitiue Church, M. Iewell according to the tenour of his Challenge must yelde and Subscribe.
            
                Thirdly I woulde gladly lerne of M. Iewell, howe it happened that Athanasius this priest, Ischyrion and Theodorus the deacons, and Sophronius the laye Christen man, being all of Alexandria in Aegypt, and subiect to that dyocese and patriarkeship (as it appereth euidentlye in their supplications against Dioscorus their Patriarche) made their supplication not only to the whole Councell, but to Leo the Pope by name, who yet was not otherwise present there, then by his legates? Why do these of Alexandria in Aegypt, put vp their supplication to the Pope by name, hauing the whole Councel present, and call him the Vniuersal Bishop, omitting the other Patriarches of Antioche and of Constantinople, but that they acknoweledged him as Head and Chiefe of the Councel, and as the Primat and Superiour to al other bishoppes and Patriarches?
            
               
                Fourthely I woulde the wisedome of M. Iewell would instructe vs howe these suppliants and plaintifs of Alexandria would haue presumed to Salute and intitle the Pope of Rome, a Vniuersall bishoppe and that in the presence of a whole Councell, vnlesse that name and Title of righte appertayned to the bishopp of Rome? Or what vantage coulde it be vnto them to make a lie, and to vtter such a Title in honour of the Pope, whiche did dishonour and debace all the rest of the bisshops (in that sence as M. Iewell taketh Vniuersall bishop) and shoulde therefore in so doing haue prouoked al the Coū
               tell to indignation and displeasure for so iniuring them euē to their faces? Must we for M. Iewelles pleasure, imagine suche a peuish absurdite or blinde bettle ignorance in those foure plaintifs of Alexandria?
            
                Last of all what thinketh M. Iewell in this matter? Thinketh he that those foure plaintifs of Alexandria did then first and vpon their owne heads call the bishop of Rome Vniuersall Bishop? Shall we not rather thinke that in such a solenne Instrument of their humble suite and petition to the Pope and to the Councell, they woulde with all diligence and truthe, exactly obserue the right, dewe, and approued Title of the Bishop of Rome and of the whole Councell? When are Titles of Magistrates exactely and truly penned, but in the suites and complaintes made to Magistrates? And what can more euidently proue the dewe title of a Magistrat, then the approued tenour of supplications made vnto the Magistrat? Or are such Titles in al priuat suites exactely kepte, and in the most honorable assemblie of a whole Generall Councell not kepte? Nay it is most euident by this Example of the Primitiue Churche, the Pope was either by the Consent of that Councell then first, or els before vsually and of right called Vniuersall bisshoppe, of others, though the Popes them selues to auoide the

inconuenience of a wrong sence that might be gathered thereof, haue neuer so intitled them selues. And therefore M. Iewell to this Example of the primitiue Churche must Subscribe.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Therefore, whereas Master Hardinge, the better to put his Reader in remēbraunce, hath sett this note in the Margine, The Bishop of Rome was called the vniuers
                     •
                  ll bishop, and head of the Churche aboue a thousand yeares sithence, he might with more truthe and muche better haue noted his booke thus. S. Gregories wordes misalleaged, the Councell falsified, this onely Canon lost, all the rest whole and safe, A straunge priest, and two porre deacons, in their priuate suites for their goodes, and legacies, named Leo the vniuersall bishop. But of the six hundred and thirty bishops, that had voices in the Councell, not one euer named him so. Thus muche M. Hardinge might truly haue noted in the margine.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                If Facing and Bragging, if Blasing of letters, and impudent Lookes may persuade, then M. Iewell hathe wonne the Price. We reade of two noble men of Athens, Pericles and Thucydides, the one eloquent of tounge,
                  Plutarchus in Pericle.
                the other stronge and valiant of body, that making a Combat and wrasteling the one with the other in the sight of all the people, Pericles being euer caste by Thucy dides, he had yet suche a sleighte that sodainly recouering him selfe, he would by his eloquence persuade the people, that he had geuen his felowe the fall, though all they sawe with their eies that he had taken the foyle and the fall both. It semeth M. Iewell hath conceiued some like vaine hope of Dame Eloquence and Impudencye her cousen, that being expressely forced vpon his fonde and rashe Challenge to yeld and Subscribe by clere and expresse euidence, he maye shifte yet the whole matter awaye, from him selfe, and to geue his aduersary the foile. For this purpose he hath ouerreached the wordes of S. Gregory, and hath forced the whole Councell of Chalcedon to stande gaping vpon the Popes legates, and not be so hardy as to speake out their mindes, when they offred Leo the name of Vniuersal bishop, lest if they had spoken out, M. Iewell had bene confounded. Therefore he maketh S. Gregorye to saie, The Coun
                     •
                  ell offred to call the Pope so, but calleth him not so in dede. Againe he telleth

the Reader of Canons lost, and six lines burnte, and only this poore name of Vniuersall bishop not able to be founde in the whole Councell. Thirdly confessing of fine force the Truthe which before he denied, and shewing how in the very Coūcel the Pope was so Called, Saluted, and Intitled, then he thinketh to debace the matter, for that they were two poore deacons, not Riche Bishops and a straunge priest, not an Englishman borne (for els I maruail why M. Iewell shoulde call any priest of all Christendom a straunge priest) and againe that none of the 630. bishops called the Pope by that name. Whereas yet neither his Challenge was made of those .630. bishoppes, or of any bishops at all, more then priestes or deacons, and also the supplications of those parties and the stile thereof was bothe allowed of the bishops, and by their Commaundement Regestred amonge the Actes and monuments of the Councell. Last of all that all this was done in their priuate suites for their goodes, as though suiters and suppliants might be suff
                  •
               ed to vse a false flatte
                  •
               ing stile more then the Iudges would allowe, and as though that should helpe their cause, and not rather greatly hinder it, hauing a whole Councell of so many lerned and holy bishops assembled from all partes of the worlde to be their Iudges. Which (as it may well be gathered) neither for their holynesse woulde dissemble and winke at suche a false flattering Title, neither for their lerning coulde be ignorant what Title of right appertained to the Pope. Whiche if it had bene otherwise then meete and right, the plaintifs in that case had bene more likely to haue sped the worse, then to haue fared the better therefore. Vnlesse M. Iewel will also saye, that all the whole Councell was either lead by flattery, or blinded with ignorance, and that he onely walketh vpright, and seeth all. Therefore the marginall note of D. Harding is true, that aboue a thousand yeares past, The Pope was Called, Intitled and Saluted, the Vniuersall Bishop: Wherefore M. Iewell muste

Subscribe: There is no remedy.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               Sundrie holy Martyrs bishops of Rome vsed to call them selues bishops of the vniuersall Churche: whiche in effect is the same as the Fathers of Chalcedon vnderstoode.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                The 119. Vntruthe. For these names importe not one thinge,The 541. Vntruthe. Slaunderous. as shall appeare.
            The name of Vniuersall bishop, and of, bishop of the Vniuersall Church, as the Fathers of the Councell of Chalcedon vnderstode vniuersall bishopp, are in effect all one. Howe shewe you the contrary?
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                If an vniuersall bisshop and a bisshop of the Vniuersall Church be (541) all one thinge, how then is it true, that S. Gregory saieth,
                  Lib. 4. ep. 32. & 36 The 542. Vntruthe in altering D. Hard. meaning. For he saied not,, they were all one thinge absolutely, or in Saint Gregories sence, but as the Fathers off Chalcedō vnderstode them. 
               none of my predecessours woulde euer consent to this name? Or how can he finde such fault with the name of vniuersall bisshop, and beare so easely with the name of Bisshop of the vniuersall Churche, which he knewe, his predecessours had vsed, if he tooke them bothe for one thinge without difference? To be shorte, if these names, as M. Harding assureth hym selfe, be bothe one thinge, howe is the one godly, the other vngodlye, the one Arrogant, the other not Arrogant, the one blasphemous, the the other not blasphemous?
            All these wordes make one argument. But all these wordes do not answer D. Harding. S. Gregory blameth the name of Vniuersall bishop: But he blameth not the name of Bishop of the Vniuersall Churche. Therefore to S. Gregory, and in S. Gregories meaning they are not all one. I graunte. But as the Fathers of the Councell of Chalcedon vnderstoode them, they are all one. S. Gregorye vnderstode the name of vniuersall bishop, as excluding all other bishopps.
                  Lib. 4. epist. 34. Of this matter Reade more in the beginning off this Article. fol. 7. Therefore he saieth of Iohn of Constantinople whiche vsurped that name: Despectis omnibus solus conatur appellari episcopus. Dispysing all other bishops, he woulde onely be called a bishop. In this sence it was a proude, arrogant, vngodly, blasphemous, and the very name of Antichrist. But in this sence the Councell

of Chalcedon offred not that name to Leo. For who can euer thinke that suche a number of lerned and holy Bishops would either be so wicked, as to committe such a sacrilege, or so foolish, as to depriue them selues, and to make them selues no bishoppes at all, onely to extolle and make one onely man a Vniuersall and onely bishop of all the worlde. They had therefore vndoubtedly an other sence and meaning in those wordes then that proude patriarche Iohn of Constantinople vsurped, or then holy S. Gregorye and Pelagius his predecessour, so earnestly blamed, reproued, and condemned. They called the B. of Rome Vniuersall bishopp, as they called him the bishop of the Vniuersall Churche. By the which title in that Councell he is oftentimes called,
                  A
                        •
                     t. 13. & 8. namely in the subscriptions of his legates. That is, either a Catholike bisshop, and a bishop of the Catholike Churche, (as M. Iewell thinketh the worde Vniuersall to signifie) or a supreme and chiefe bishopp ouer the whole Churche, as the Councell off Chalcedon tooke and confes
                  ••
               d Leo the bishop of Rome, to be. Whiche maye easely be proued, not onely by the whole Actes of the Councel in the condemnation of Dioscorus and of Eutyches, but by the wordes also of their letters sent and directed to Leo the Pope for a confirmation of their whole doinges in the Councell.
                  Concil. Chal. Act. 3. The wordes of the Councelles whole letters to Pope Leo are these. Si vbi sunt duo aut tr
                     ••
                   congregati in nomine eius, ibi se in medio eorum fore perhibuit Christus,
               The Bishop off Rome Called Heade off the Councell by the Generall letters off the Councell it selfe. 
               quantam circa sacerdotes peculiaritatem potuit demonstrare, qui & patria & liberis, suae confessionis notitiam praetulerunt? Quibus tu quidem sicut membris Caput praeras, in his qui tuum tenebant ordinem, beneuol
                     •
                  ntiam praeferens. If when two or three be gathered in the name of Christe, he promised to be in the middest of them, what a speciall care hath Christ at this time had of his priestes, whiche haue left their countre and their children to sett forthe the confession of him? Ouer the whiche

multitude thou hast bene president as the Heade ouer other partes of the body, declaring to them thy great good will in thy Legates. In these wordes the whole Councell of six hundred and thirty bishops assembled in Chalcedon, do call and confesse Leo the Pope Head to them all. In this sence therefore as he was their Head, it is to be thought they offred the name of Vniuersall bishopp, that is, as the Heade bishopp ouer the Vniuersall Church of Christ, not in the other proude and arrogant sence whiche longe after this Councell Iohn of Constantinople vsurped, and Pelagius and Gregory vertuous and holy Popes reproued and condemned. This sence also as the Councell of Chalcedon vnderstoode, semeth hereby to be all one in effect, withe the title of bishopp of the Vniuersall Churche: not the sence in whiche S. Gregory tooke those wordes. And thus M. Iewell hathe proued that by the meaning of S. Gregory they are diuerse, whiche no man denied, but he hathe not proued that by the meaning of the Councell of Chalcedon they were diuers, whiche D. Harding denied. So he hathe (as in all his Replie ouer in a maner,) Replied, but not to the matter.
            Nowe that M. Iewell for a surplussage hathe founde that diuers other Patriarches were called Vniuersall bishops, what hathe he done thereby but declared his former ignorance and the fonde rashenes of his vaine challenge? For if other Patriarches be so called, and yet of all other Patriarches the bishop of Rome by M. Iewelles owne confession hath euer bene the first,Pag. 286. The vanite of M. Iewelles Challēge. howe coulde he doubte but that the bishop of Rome also was so called? If he knewe so before, what a vanitie was it to make such a challenge of that title whiche other had as well as the bishop of Rome? And which no bishop of Rome euer vsed or desired? If he knewe it not before, but hath lerned it sence by farder serche and diligence, then as he was deceiued in the one, so let him not be ashamed to acknowleadge his ignorance

in the other. As it hathe bene founde I saie that Iohn, Epiphanius, and Therasius of Constantinople were called Vniuersall bishops, by his owne confession, so let him confesse and acknowleadge that the bishopp of Rome, Leo by name, was intitled and saluted an Vniuersall bishopp in foure sundry letters of no Romanes, nor of the Romain prouince, but of the Patriarkeship and prouince of Alexandria, in the presence of the whole Councell of Chalcedon, in their humble suite and plea, where it is most likely, they woulde vtter nothinge but truthe, specially in a matter whiche coulde nothinge furder them, but rather directly hinder thē and make all those bishops their heauy Lordes, if at lest they intitled the Pope Vniuersall bishop in that sence as M. Iewell imagineth, they did. Let him, I saye, confesse this, acknowledge his former ignorance, and Subscribe.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               The same title (of bishop of the vniuersall Churche) was vsed likewise after the Nicene Councell by Felix, by Leo, and diuers others before the six hundred yeres after Christe were expired.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 543. Vntruthe. Slaunderous.The 120. Vntruthe. For immediately before M. Hardinge confesseth that Leo neuer wrote him selfe by that name.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
                This a manifest and impudent Vntruthe, of M. Iewell. D. Harding saied before, In very dede neither Leo him selfe nor any his successour, euer called or wrote him selfe by that name, as S. Gregory saieth, meaning the name of Vniuersall bishop as the course of his text decla
                  •
               eth euidently. But in these later wordes he speaketh not of the name of Vniuersall bishop but of the name of the bishop of the vniuersall Churche. We nede not spende wordes and paper to declare this. The texte of D. Hardinge maye be sene bothe in M. Iewelles Replie, and in the other two editions of that booke. Who so euer readeth the text,

shall see to the eye, that M. Iewell herein was either blindely ouerfene, or maliciousely affected.
            
               VVho so euer trauaileth in the reading of the Auncient Fathers, findeth that name (he meaneth Head of the Churche) allmost euery where attributed to Peter the first bisshop of Rome, and consequently to the successour of Peter, that name (I saye) either in termes aequiualent or expressely.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .54
                     •
                  . Vntruthe. Slaun
                     •
                  erous.The 121. Vntruthe. For Peter only is so called, yet was not Peter then Bishop of Rome.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
               
               The .545. Vnruthe. For Peter was B. of Rome, when he was Head of the Churche.What? Will. M. Iewell defende nowe, that Peter was not bisshop of Rome, and renewe the olde doting opinion of his Father Luther, holding, that Peter was neuer at Rome? M. Iewell saieth: Peter was not then bishop of Rome. What meaneth he trowe we by this? Doth he meane Then, that is when those fathers wrote and called him so, he was not Bishopp of Rome? Who is so very a dolte as to saie that? If he meane, by Then, the time that he liued here in earthe, by howe many Authorites might he be confounded? S. Hierom saieth plainelye:
                  In Catalogo vir. illust. Tō. 1. 
               Petrus Romae vigintiquinque annis Cathedram sacerdotalem tenuit. Peter occupied the priestly Chaire at Rome xxv. yeres,
                  lib. 3. cap. 3. Ireneus, 
                  ep. 165. Optatus, and 
                  Lib. 2. Augustin reakoning vp the Bishops of Rome, vntell their time, do reaken Peter for the first bishopp of Rome. 
                  Lib. 3.3. De excid. Haer.
                Egesippus 
                  Lib. 2. cap. 14 & 15. & 15. Eusebius and Epiphanius do testifie that S. Peter suffred at Rome. And will M. Iewell forsake and gainesaie all these lerned Fathers of Christes Churche, the lowest of them wel nere twelue hundred yeres olde? Iosephus a right approued historiographer saieth, Illud veritatis certè signum esse, si de eisdem rebus eadem omnes conscribāt.
               
                  Hier. 27. Lib. 1. ont
                        •
                     a 
                        •
                     pp
                        •
                     onem.
                That is an vndoubted token of truthe, when all euen of one matter do pronounce after one sorte. Let therefore M. Iewell bringe

any one writer before the age of that fonde frier Martin Luther, that euer wrote the contrary. It is maruail that M. Iewell auouching this matter so stoutely, and building his Vntruthe thereuppon, would yet in all his text, bringe no proofe, no reason, no argument at al to confirme it. I wisse he could haue tolde vs muche out of the story of his brethern of Meydeburge,
                  Centur. 2. had he thought their lies worthe the telling. Therefore he thought better to auouche it by his owne Soueraine Authorite stoutely, then to proue his most Impudent Vntruth fondely. Nowe bicause M. Iewell auoucheth that only Peter was called Head of the Churche, and yet his assertion nothinge weakened there by, let vs shortly See a reason or two that may be Framed thereof.
            S. Peter by M. Iewelles confession, was called Head of the, Churche of the Fathers.
            S. Peter was Bishopp off Rome within the first .600. yeres. Ergo the Bisshopp off Rome was Called Head of the Churche within the first .600. yeres. Nowe bicause M. Iewell saieth that only S. Peter was so called, let vs proue the like of Damasus an other bishop of Rome .400. yeres after Christe, by the argument that D. Harding made, and the which M. Iewell in his Replie reproueth, bicause it was not solennelye made in mode and figure,
                  Ambros. in 1. Timoth. Cap. 3. as thoughe for lacke of that, it coulde not be made otherwise. The wordes first of S. Ambrose are these. Where as the whole worlde is Gods, yet the Churche is called his House the Ruler whereof at these daies is Damasus. Of these wordes I frame this argument, in good mode and figure.
            
               Damasus Head of the Vniuersall Churche.Whosoeuer ruleth the howse of God which S. Paule speaketh of to Timothe, ruleth the Vniuersall Churche. But Damasus the Pope by the verdit of S. Ambrose ruled the howse of God mencioned in S. Paule. Ergo Damasus the Pope by the Verdit of S. Ambrose ruled the Vniuersall Churche.
            
               The Minor or second proposition is euident by the wordes of S. Ambrose alleaged. The Maior or first proposition is euident by S. Paules very wordes, whiche are these. These thinges I write vnto thee (o Timothee) hoping to come shortlye vnto thee. But if I slacke to come,
               1. Timo. 3. (I haue thus writen) to thentent thow mayest knowe howe to behaue thy selfe in the house of God, whiche is the Churche of the liuing God, the Piller and grounde of truthe. Loe this howse of God which S. Paule here speaketh of, is that Church which is the Piller and Grounde of truthe. Suche is no particular Churche, but only the Vniuersall Churche. For Particular Churches may and haue erred many, but the Vniuersall Churche can not possibly erre, and hathe neuer erred. She is the Piller, She is the Grounde of Truthe. Against her Hell gates shall not preuaile. Thus the former Propositions being bothe euident and true, the one out of S. Paule, the other out of Holye and Lerned Saincte Ambrose commenting vpon S. Paule, the Conclusion must nedes folowe, which is, that Damasus the Pope Ruled the Vniuersall Churche, not only his owne dyocese, or patriarkeshipp of Rome. Nowe if the Ruler be not the Heade, I would M. Iewel should instructe vs what the Head of a companye or common welthe signifieth, other, then the Ruler of that company or common welthe. Thus M. Iewell hath in termes equiualent the Head of the Vniuersall Churche. And a bisshopp of Rome so called farre within his first 600. yeres. If therefore M. Iewell made his Challenge at Paules Crosse for the honour of God, for boulting out of the Truthe, and for the matter it selfe whiche is in controuersy, he must according to his promise yelde and Subscribe to this Olde holy Father S. Ambrose. If he did but dally and to ye about certaine termes and phrases, then the worlde may knowe and See, what trifling Sermons prelats and Preachers of this newe clergy not only doe make and pronounce, before their honourable and worshipfull audience,

but also do print and set forthe to be Readen and preserued of their posterite.
            
               
                  Concil. Chal. Act. 3.Leo in the letters of the whole Generall Councel of Chalcedor was called their Head as hath before bene alleaged. But a generall Councell representeth the Vniuersall Churche and is the Chiefe Bodye of the same. Ergo by a good Consequent Leo was Called off no lesse then of a whole Councell the Head of the Vniuersall Churche. Ergo not only S. Peter, but Damasus and Leo two other Popes haue bene so Called. Ergo M. Iewell must Subscribe.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
               Theodoretus in an Epistle to Leo, calleth the same in consideration of the bishop of that See his primacie, Orbi terrarum praesidentem, praesident or bearing rule ouer the whole worlde.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .546. Vntruthe Slaunderous.  The 122. Vntruthe. Standing in vntrue translation.
            I turne to your rext, and finde you to proue this Vntruthe in these wordes.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .547 Vntruth. For the Translation is good and True.Yet Replie will be made, that Theodoretus calleth the Churche of Rome 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . VVhich wordes M. Harding (547) vntruly translateth, President, or bearing rule ouer the worlde. For he knoweth, that the greke worde 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , signifieth, Sitting in the first place, and forceth not of necessite any rule or gouernement ouer others.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
               
               
                  Ignatius in Epist. ad Rom. 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .You proue your selfe but a vaine trifler and a mere grammarian M. Iewell, when you Replie after this sorte. We know, bothe 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                in greke and Praesideo in Latin, dothe sometime signifie, to sitt in the first place. But doe not yow knowe also that it signifieth to Beare rule, and to gouerne? Is not our englishe worde President, taken out of the Latin Praesidere a worde of Authorite and gouernement more then of sitting in the first place? Wil you measure and limit the Office of the Lord President in Wales, with the prerogatiue of only sitting before other, and hauing the first place? But that Theodoret

calling the Churche of Rome 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ., Orbi terr
                     •
                  rum praesidentem the Churche that is president and beareth rule ouer the worlde, meaneth a farre greater prerogatiue, then of sitting in the first place, and that therefore this trāslation is true and yow but a fonde wrangler to finde faulte therewith, the whole place of Theodoret him selfe shal testifie and beare witnesse.
            Theodoret that lerned father and bishopp of Cyrus beginneth his Epistle vnto Pope Leo in this sorte. Si Paulus praeco veritatis &c. If Paule the Preacher of Truthe, 
               
                  Est epist
                        •
                     . praefixa cō
                     mentar. in Pualum.
                
               the trū
                  pet of the Holy Ghoste, ranne vp to the great Apostle Peter, to bring from him a determination touching the question which those of Antioche moued about the obseruations of the lawe of Moyses, much more we whiche are abiecte and off small regarde, doe runne to youre Apostolike See, that we maye receaue from you some holesome medicine to cure the woundes and sores of the Churches. 
               
                  Vobis enim per omnia primos esse conuenit.
                
               For to you it belongeth to beare the chiefty in all thinges. For your See is decked with many praerogatiues, whereby you are Superiour to other. For other cities are commended for greatnesse, for beauty, and for multitude of inhabitants. And many are noble for certain spirituall giftes peculiar to them: But God the geuer of all good thinges hathe geuen to your Citie a plentifull and abundant copie of al goodnesse. For that Citie is the greatest and noblest of al Cities, and it is shee
               
                  Et quae praeest orbi terrarum.
                
               that gou
                     •
                  rneth the whole worlde, and is full of inhabitants. Furthermore this Citie gotte that Empire whiche nowe gouerneth the worlde, and of her owne name hathe called her subiects. But chiefely and principally the Faithe commendeth her, 
               
                  Rom. 1. 
               and the worthy witnesse S. Paule, who crieth out and saieth. Your faithe is preached through oute the whole worlde. Thus farre Theodoret in commendation of the Citie of Rome, and not so muche of the Citie it selfe, as of the Churche and See of that Citie. For these wordes to haue bene spoken of the Churche not of the Citie M. Iewe
                  •
               l

him selfe confesseth, chaunging the wordes. Quae praeest orbi terrarum, into Ecclesiam orbis terrarum primariam. The most Notable and chiefe Churche of the worlde. For the chiefe Citie of the worlde at that time Rome was not, but rather Constantinople, whiche also was therefore called Noua Roma, Newe Rome. Againe it s
                  •
               all the better appeare by the suite and request of Theodoretus in this epistle to Pope Leo, whether he called the Churche of Rome, the president of the worlde, for preeminence of place only, or no. Theodoret in that epistle to Pope Leo being wrongefully depriued and deposed from his bishopricque by Dioscorus the Patriarche of Alexandria in the Conuenticle of Ephesus, of which we haue often mentioned before, declaring firste the iniurious iudgement of Dioscorus, the longe continuaunce in his bishopricke, hauing serued therein xxvj. yeares, the largenesse of his charge, hauing in his prouince (for he was a Metropolitane Archebishop) 
                  Octingintas paraecias.
                eight hundred Churches, his great paynes and trauail in preseruing all that people from heresy, namely from the heresy of Marcion, from the which (as he writeth) he had deliuered aboue a thousand soules, conuerting them to the Catholike faithe, declaring I saye all these thinges to the Pope particularly, he cometh to his suite and saieth, Et post tot sudores & labores &c. And beholde after all this sweate and trauail, I am condemned, being not so muche at accused. But 
               
                  Apostolicae vestrae Sedis expecto sententism.
                
               I looke for the Sentence of your Apostolike See. And I beseche and require your holynes, to aide me in this case 
               
                  Iustum vestrume et rectum Appellanti iudicium.
                
               Appealing to your right and iuste iudgement, and to commaunde me to come before you, and to shewe that my doctrine and belefe foloweth your Apostolike steppes. And a litle after, hauing reakoned vpp what workes he had writen, partly against heretikes, partly vpon holy Scripture, of the whiche to this daye a great parte is extant, he repeteth his suite, and saieth. But I beseche yowe caste not of my humble request, nor despise not my hore head, which after suche paynefull

trauailes is thus iniured. Before all thinges I beseche yow, I maye knowe from you, whether I ought to stande to this wrongefull iudgement, or no. For I looke for your sentence, 
               
                  Si iudicatis mestare iusseritis staebo.
                
               and if you shall commaunde me to abide the iudgement, I will abide it, and neuer trouble man here aboute any more, but abide the iust iudgement of my God and Saviour. Christ Iesus. God is my witnesse I haue no regarde of my honour and promotion, but of the great offence that maye rise hereof in the mindes of many simple folke and specially of suche whom we haue before conuerted from heresy: VVho hauing an eye to the See of Alexandria and other bishops whiche haue condemned vs, will perhappes iudge, that we are not able to discerne the true and right doctrine. Thus Farre Theodoret in his supplication and Appeale to Leo the Bishopp of Rome, he hymselfe beinge a bishop of Cyrus in the East,
                  Concil. Chal. Act. 1. and subiecte properly to the prouince and Patriarkeship of Antioche not of Rome. By this his Appeale, and by the Restitution also to his bishopricke whiche ensued hereupon by Leo the Pope, as I haue before declared out of the Chalcedon Councell, and by the whole wordes of Theodoret it is euident, that calling the Churche of Rome, Orbi terrarum praesidentem, or quae preest orbi terrarum, the President and gouuerner of the worlde, he meaned not a preferment only of sitting in place before other bishoppes, but a Superiour Authorite and Primacy ouer other bishoppes, and such, as to whome from a Patriarche and Councell of Bishops, he might yet Appeale. Yet saieth M. Iewell.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               
                  The 548. Vntruthe. For that Translation agreeth not withe the Greke of Theodoret
                  The 549. Vntruthe. For by Iustinian no such preeminence of sitting is in any Constitution alleaged graunted, as it hath before well appeared.
               He might (548.) better haue turned it: Ecclesiam orbis primariam. The most notable or ch
                     ••
                  s
                     •
                   Churche of the wo
                     •
                  lde. And so woulde his translation haue well agreed with the Constitutions of the Emperour Iustinian, wherein the preeminence of sitting in the first place in all Councelles and assemblies, is by special Priuilege graunted to the bisshop of Rome.
            To the Constitutions of Iustinian touching the bishopp

of Romes prerogatiue I haue answered before, in the 99. Vntruthe.
                  Art. 4. Fol. 51. And declared there the greate vntruthe of M. Iewel
                  •
                falsifying and corrupting the Constitutions of Iustinian. And nowe touching the translation of this place I leaue it to euery indifferent Reader, perusinge the whole wordes of Theodorets epistle, considering the cause and ende of his writing, to iudge whether the translation of Doctor Hardinge be, (as Master Iewell hathe noted it) Vntrue, or that whiche he bringeth, Of sitting before other bishops in all assemblies vtterly False, beinge builded vpon a former Vntruthe of Iustinians Constitutions, and contrarye to the whole Meaninge, Intent, and Purpose of the Author him selfe, Theodoret in that epistle to Leo.
            
               
                  Harding. 
               
               VVhat other is it to call the Churche of Rome the Principall Churche, respect had to the bishop there and not otherwise (wherein a figure of speache is vsed) as Ireneus and Cyprian doe, and President, or (123) sette in authoritie ouer the whole worlde, as Leo dothe, then to call the Bishop of Rome Head of the Vniuersall Churche?
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 550. Vntruthe. Slaunderous.The 123. Vntruthe. Leo hath not one such worde.
            This Vntruthe is soone Iustified, and Master Iewell thereby expressely conuicted, and forced to Subscribe according to Promise.
                  Epi. 84. ad Anastasium Thessalonicensen.
                For Leo calleth expressely the See of Peter, Head of the Vniuersal Church. His wordes are. Ad vnā Petri sedem Vniuersalis Ecclesiae cura confluit, vt nihil vsquam à suo Capite dissideat. The charge of the Vniuersall Church hath recourse to the onely Seate of Peter, to thentent that nothinge may at any time Varie from their Head. Let nowe M. Iewell or any man els picke out any other sence of these wordes, then that the Seate of Peter is Head of the Vniuersall Church. The

cause why the Vniuersall Churche hathe recourse to the only Seate of Peter, is bicause nothing might varie from the Head. And is not then the See of Peter the Head thereof? If this place be not plaine enoughe, take an other. Leo writing to Theodoret after the Chalcedon Councell ended and finished, hath these wordes. Quae nostro prius ministerio definierat, vniuersae fraternitatis irretractabili firmauit assensur, vt vere à se prodisse ostenderet, quod prius a Primae omnium Sede firmatum,
               
                  Epist. 63. 
               totius Christiani orbis iudicium recepisset, vt in hoc quoque Capiti membra cō
                  cordent. That which God had first decreed by vs, the irrefragable consent of the Vniuersal brotherhood, hath confirmed, to shewe that it proceded in dede from him, as the whiche being first confirmed of the most Principall See, had receaued also the determination of all Christendome, to thentent that herein also the Partes might agree withe the Head. In these wordes againe Leo calleth his See (the See of Rome) the Head of all Christendom, and of the vniuersall brotherhood assembled in the Generall Councell of Chalcedon. And least that this testimonye of the Pope him selfe may seme to be off lesse Credit, cal to minde in this place (gentle Reader) the wordes of this whole Generall of Councell of Chalcedon calling this Leo in their letters vnto him, their Head, whiche I haue before alleaged vnto thee in the 119. Vntruthe.
                  fo. 185. B. Yet bicause M. Iewell so stoutely auoucheth of this Vniuersall authorite ouer all Christendom in the See of Rome, that Leo hath not one suche worde, Beholde yet a thirde place out of this Leo auouching most euidently the same. Speaking to the Citie of Rome, in a Sermon which he made vpon S. Peters and Paules daye, he hath these wordes.
                  Leo Serm. 1. in Nat. Petri & Pauli.
                
               Isti sunt qui te ad hanc gloriā prouexerūt, vt sis gens sancta, populus electus, Ciuitas sacerdotalis & R
                     •
                  gia, per sacram Beati Petri sedem Caput orbis effecta, latius praesideres religione diuina quam dominatione terrena. Quamuis enim multis aucta victorijs ius imperij tui terra marique protuleris, minus

tamen est, quod tibi bellicus labor subdidit, quam quod pax Christiana subiecit. These are they (he meaneth Peter and Paule which haue promoted thee (o Rome) to this glory, that thow shouldest be a holy natiō, a chosen people, a priestly and princely Citie, and being made the Head of the worlde by the holy Seate of blessed Peter, shouldest beare a farre larger gouernement by Godly Religion, then by worldly Empire. For although thou hast enlarged thy Empire by sea and by Lande, with manifolde victories, yet it is lesse that warlye power to the hathe atchieued, then that Christen peace to thee hath subdued. Thus farre lerned Leo, whom M. Iewel auoucheth to affirme not one suche worde, as may proue the Churche of Rome sett in Authorite ouer the whole worlde. You haue Hearde Leo saie in this place that Rome throughe the Seate of Peter hath bene made the Head of the worlde, and beareth a larger gouuernement by Religion, then euer she did by Empire. And therefore Prosper loinge before the time of Leo affirmeth Romam per Apostolici sacerdotij principatū ampliorem factam esse arce Religionis quam solio potestatis.
               
                  De vocatione gentiū li. 2. cap. 16 That Rome by the Primacy of Apostolike priesthood was of a larger Authorite in the preeminence of Religion, then in the Throne of Empire. Thus Leo and Prosper withe Ireneus, S. Cyprian, and S. Chrysostome, whom D. Harding alleaged doe vniformely call the See of Rome, the Principal Churche, of more Principall power, the Head of all Christendom, the Mast
                  ••
                of the worlde: But Leo most expresselye aboue other, the Head of the Vniuersall Churche, as yow haue hearde and sene 
                  〈◊〉
                his owne wordes at large.
            M. I
                  •••
               ll to answer all these places, bringeth the like to haue bene 
                  〈…〉
                Paule who suffred at Rome withe S. Peter: Whose Authorite had no other successour but the Bishop there. Who was a Chosen Vessell, beside all the other Apostles, 
                  Ser
                        ••
                     . 1. In Nat. Pe. & Pau.
                whom Leo calleth consor
                     •
                  em gloriae Petri the felowe in honour

to S. Peter, and whose Priuileges therefore and prerogatiues doe fortifie much the Authorite of the See of Rome, but debaceth it not in any pointe.
            
               And in an other place S. Augustin saieth.
               
                  Lib. quaest. vet. & notestam. q. 75. Saluator quādo pro se & Petro exolui iubet, pro omnibus exoluisse videtur. Quia Sicut in Saluatore erant omnes causa magisterij, ita post Saluatorem in Petro omnes continentur. Ipsum enim constituit Caput omnium. Our Sauiour (saieth S. Augustin) when as he commaundeth payement (for the Emperour) to be made for him selfe, and for Peter, he seemeth to haue paied for all. Bicause, as all were in our Sauiour for cause of teaching, so after our Sauiour all are conteyned in Peter: for he ordeined him Head of all.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 551. Vntruthe. For there is no wilfull falsifying: and in the Sē
                  ce no falsyfying at al of S. Aug.The 124. Vntruthe, standing in the willful falsyfying of S. Augustine. S. Augustine saieth Caput eorum, not: Caput omnium.
            
            This is the most apparent Vntruthe of all (except on
                  •
               ) that hath hetherto bene brought. And yet M. Iewell calling this a wilful falsyfying of S. Augustin Dealeth not only vncharitably, but also hath auoutched an other most manifest Vntruth him selfe. For what wilfull falsyfying can here appeare, where no aduauntage his hadde by the exchaunge? Considre the whole sentence gentle Reader, and thou shallt See that S. Augustine affirmeth Peter to be Head of all. He saieth in the same sentence. As al were in Christe. so al are in Peter. And for proofe thereof he saiethe. For Christ made Peter their Head. Whose head M. Iewell, by S. Augustins meaning, but the Head of all? For of all he speaketh, not of some. And to proue that all were contained in Peter, he calleth Peter the Head of them (howe but of?) all. Thus the matter being true, the wordes by errour

altered, can make no willfull Vntruthe, if they make any Vntruthe at all. For I take an Errour or Escape to differ from an Vntruthe.
            
               VVith all, I haue proued, that whiche M. Iewell denieth that the Bishop of Rome within six hundred yeares after Chris
                     •
                  , hathe bene called the Vniuersall Bishopp of no small nu
                     ••
                  re of men of great credit, and very oftentimes Head of the Vniuersall Churche, bothe in termes equiualent, and also expressely.
            
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 553. Slaunderous. The 
                  ••
               5. Vntruthe. For (Peter only excepted) either of these Titles resteth yet vnp
                  •
               oued.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
               
                But Peter was bishop of Rome (as hath bene proued) Ergo these Titles haue bene proued according to M. Iewelles Chāllenge. Ergo M. Iewell must Subscribe.
            
                Againe the Title of Vniuersall bishop hath bene proued in Leo a Bishop of Rome beside S. Peter bothe by the testimony of S. Gregory and by the Councell of Chalcedon it selfe. Ergo againe M. Iewell must Subscribe.
            
                Thirdly by the very last testimony alleaged of D. Harding out of Victor, the Churche of Rome is called Caput omnium Ecclesiarum. The Head of all Churches. If there be any difference betwene all Churches, and the Vniuersall Churche, or if the Churche of Rome, be Head in any other respect, then in respect of the Bishop there
                  •
               f
                  •
               er M. Iewel with all his cōning shewe it. If there be 
                  〈…〉
                none in the worlde can be deuised) then againe 
                  〈…〉
                is brought of the primitiue Church (for the 
                  〈…〉
                is of thinges don aboue the yere 
                  〈…〉
                shortlye after the Deathe of S. Augustin) in 
                  〈…〉
                is called Head of the Vniuersall Churche, and so this other Title hath bene proued in a Bishop of Rome beside S. Peter. Ergo M. Iewell must Subscribe.
            
               Fourthely Damasus (as hathe bene proued) was called of S. Ambrose Ruler of the House of God, which S. Paule speaketh of, which is as muche as Head of the Vniuersall Church, ergo ones againe M. Iewell either must protest to the worlde he sought not for truthe but trifled vpon Termes, when he made his Challenge, or els according to promise he must Subscribe.
            Fiftely Leo the Bishop of Rome was Called of the whole Chalcedon Councell, Head of the Vniuersall Churche,
                  Concil. Chal. A 
                  
                     •
                   3. Idē quoq
                        ••
                      Leo. epist. 63. ad Theodo
                        •••
                     
                  
                when they confessed him their Head, they then bearing the persons of the whole Vniuersall Churche. They saied in their letters vnto him of them selues. Quibus tu, quasi Caput membris praecras. Ouer whome thou haste bene the Chiefe or president as the Head is Chiefe ouer other partes of the Body. And in the same Councell he is Called diuerse times Pope and Bishop of the Vniuersall Churche.
                  Act. 4.6. & 8. Cod· de Sum. Tri
                        •
                     . et 
                        〈◊〉
                     . Cath. Tit. 1 No
                        •
                      Reddentos.
                Therefore to the Chalcedon Councell, calling the Pope their Head, you muste Subscribe M. Iewell.
            Sixtely Iustinian calleth Iohn the seconde, the Bishopp off Rome in his time, Caput omnium Sanctarum Ecclesiarum, the Head of all Holy Churches. Here is an other bishopp of Rome beside Sainte Peter so called: Therefore you muste Subscribe.
            Seuenthly lerned Leo confesseth,
                  Leo vbi supra.
                
               Vniuersalis Ecclesiae curam ad Petri sedem confluere, vt nihil vsquā a Capite suo dissid
                     •
                  at. That the Charge of the Vniuersall Churche hathe recourse to the See of Peter, that nothinge maye at any time vary from their Head.
            
            S. Gregory in like maner calleth the 
                  〈…〉
                off Rome, Caput omni
                     ••
                   Ecclesiarum.
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                The 
                  〈◊〉
                of all Churches.
            Farder as it is alleaged in the second editiō of D. Hardinges

Answer to M. Iewelles Challenge,
                  In libel. de Ingra
                        •
                     is.
                Prosper calleth the See of Peter, Pastoralis honoris Caput, The Head off Pastorall Dignities, as much to say, of all Pastours and Shepeheardes in Christes Churche.
            Athanasius also in his epistle to Marcus the Pope (whiche Epistle M. Iewell hath in vaine impugned) calleth the See of Rome,
                  Athanas. in epist. ad Mari
                        •
                     um.
                
               Mater & Caput omnium Ecclesiarum. The Mother and Head of all Churches. If Head of all Churches and Head off the Vniuersall Churche be diuerse, then, it is bicause the one worde, is mere english, the other is a Latin made English. Other difference in good sence I trowe, will not be founde. To these therefore so Clere and so Many, all within the Compasse of your 600. yeares, if you thinke your Challenge good and wise, Yelde and Subscribe.
            These later allegations of D. Hardinges second edition, M. Iewell in his Replie hathe vtterly dissembled. To the place of Victor thus he Replieth.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The 553. Vntruthe. For Victor writeth a Storie of thinges passed longe within the first
                     •
                   .600. yeresTouching Victor, that wrote the Storie of the Vandales, he is neither Scripture, nor Councell, nor doctour, nor writeth the Order, or Practise of the Primitiue Churche.
            This later sentence is a Manifest and Iewde Vntruthe, auoutched for a shifte to auoide an Inconuenience. An Inconuenience I saye of Subscribing. For if the Storie of Victor were of matters passed in the Primitiue Churche, then the Example alleaged out of him, Calling the Church of Rome, Head of all Churches, shoulde be an Example of the primitiue Churche, and then M. Iewell should be forced to Subscribe. To auoide this Inconuenience, M. Iewell thought good flatly to denie his Storie, as not writing the Practise of the Primitiue Churche. But you maye not so Abuse vs M. Iewell. You requiring in your Challenge Any one example of the primitiue Churche, do after expounde and limit the Time of the primitiue Churche by the terme of .600. yeres after Christ, admitting all Examples within that time. Now Victor

writeth a Storie contayninge the practise of that Time. He writeth the persecution of the Vandales, Arrian heretikes in Afrike, which befell immediatly after the Deathe of S. Augustin, as in his life written by Possidonius it is easye to See.Reade the Storie of Victor ioyned to the Tripartite. Tu
                        •
                     . 1. oper. August.
                For he yet liuinge and lyinge in his death bedde the Wandales beseiged his Citie Hippo. But S. Augustin dyed not longe after the yere of our Lorde 400. Therefore Victor wrote a Storie of matters passed more then a hundred yeres within M. Iewelles 600. whiche he limiteth for the Primitiue Churche. Therefore this Example is of that Time. M. Iewell vnrrulye denieth it, bicause he will not truly and honestly Subscribe vnto it.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Nor is it well knowen, either of what credit he was, or when he liued.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                He is alleaged of all lerned writers, occasion seruing. Only M. Iewell doubteth of his Credit. And why? Bicause he maketh against him. As for that the time he liued, is not well knowen: no more is the time of many other Lerned writers, who yet be of right good Authoryte.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Nor doth he call the bisshop of Rome the Head of the Vniuersall Churche.The 554. Vntruthe. In missereperting the wordes of Victor.Onely he saieth (.
                  •
               54.) Rome is the Chiefe or Head Churche of all othe
                     •
                  s, which thinge of our parte is not denied.
            M. Iewell to extenuat the sayieng of that godly Archebishop of Carthage Eugenius, reported by Victor the Ecclesiasticall writer, hath altered and falsified the wordes. For Eugenius that Catholike Prelat conuēted before Obadus a Captaine of Humerichus the Arrian kinge of the Vandales, called the Churche of Rome, meaning thereby the Bishop of Rome, Caput omnium Eccl
                     •
                  siarum. The Head of all Churches, He saieth not: The Head Churthe of all others. But, The Head off al other Churches. Betwene these two sayinges is greate difference. As for example. The Churche of Caunterbury is the Head Churche of all others, respect had to England. For no Churche in Englande hathe so Ample and Large a Iurisdiction

as that hathe. Yet is not the Churche of Caunterbury the Head of all Churches in Englande. For beside diuers Peculiars exempted from the Iurisdiction of Caunterbury, euen within the Prouince of that Archebishoprike, the Archebishop of Yorke and all of his Prouince are not subiect to any Iurisdiction of the Churche of Caunterbury. Thus Master Iewell for a Iuste Replie to Sufficient Authorites, weakoneth the Authors Credit, Altereth his wordes, Missereporteth the time of his Writinges, and so by Multyplying Vntruthes thinketh to ouerthrowe the Truthe, to abuse his Reader desirous to lerne, and to deceiue Gods People gladde to be instructed. God graunte you M. Iewell the loue of Truthe, and grace to reforme these your Vn
                  ••
               uthes.
         
         
            The Conclusion.
            
               HITHERTO I haue (good Christen Reader) For the loue of the Truth, and for the Zele of Gods honour, and of his Church, Iustified the Vntruthes whiche M. Iewell in the former halfe of his Replie, the foure first Articles hath Charged D. Harding with all, to the number of one hundred and xxv. whiche is the halfe of the whole number through out the Replie, two excepted, and haue Returned them euery one (One onelye excepted) vpon Master Iewell for Vntruthes on his parte, and that Slaunderous. Nowe howe thouroughly I haue answered M. Iewel in this fourth Article, it shal appeare by the Conclusion whiche him selfe maketh, at 
                  •
               he ende thereof. Thus he Concludeth.
            
               
                  Iewel. 
               
               Pag. 3
                     •
                  4. The 555. Vntruth. For D. Hardinge knoweth no such matter.Nowe brefely to laie abrode the whole Contentes of this Article. First, M. Hardinge hath wittingly alleaged suche testimonies vnder

the Names of Anacletus, Athanasius, and other holy Fathers as he (.555.) him selfe knoweth vndoubtedly to be forged, and with manifest Absurdities, and Contradictions, do betraye them selues, and haue no maner colour or s
                  •
               ewe of truthe.
            
               
                  Stapleton. 
               
               
                  Ari. 4. fol. 26. & seq.
               To the absurdities and Contradictions, withe whiche M. Iewell chargeth the epistle of Athanasius vnto Marcus, we haue Answered and proued them none. The Authorite off Anacletus is defended by D. Hardinge in the Confutation of M. Iewelles first Article. M. Iewelles other Fathers haue no names.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                He hath made his claime by certaine Canons of the Councell of Nice, and of the (.556.) Councell of Chalcedon.The .556. Vntruthe. For D. Hardinge spake not one word of any Canon of the Chalcedon Councell. fol. 29. And yet he knoweth that neither there are, nor neuer were any suche Canōs to be founde.
            The Canons of the Nicene Councell alleaged by D. Hardinge, were alleaged by Iulius and Zosimus aboue a thousand yeres agoe, and their Authorite is defended against all M. Iewelles proufes, and reasons, wherein he laboureth to proue the Pope a Forger. His whole Replie in that behalfe is awnswered. As for Canons of the Chalcedon Councell, D. Harding alleaged none. M. Iewell flatly belyeth him.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               
                  The 557. Vntruthe. Slaunderous.
                  The 558. Vntruthe. For that Sentence folowed, and was not in the middest.
               He hath dismembred (.557.) and mangled S. Gregories wordes part contrary to his owne knowleadge,. he hathe cutte them of (.558.) in the middest, the better to beguile his Reader.
            It hath bene at large declared that D. Harding hath in no part mangled S. Gregory, but alleaged his full Sentence, that which folowed, and was omitted, not appertayning any thing to his purpose that then he had in hande. And the Sentence, which is presumed by M. Iewell to haue bene guilefully cut of by D. Harding, folowed immediatly his Allegation, was not in the middest thereof, as M. Iewel bothe there and here most Impudently and Vntruly auoucheth.
            
               
                  Iewel. 
               
               Ievvel. The .559. A burthē of Vn
                     •
                  ruthe s
                     •
                  l
                     •
                   Slaunderous.He hath violently and perforce drawen, and rackte the Olde godly Fathers, Ireneus, Cyprian, Ambrose, Cyrillus, Augustine, Theodoretu
                  •
               , Hierons, and others, contrary to their owne sense and meaning.
            
               
               
                  Stapleton 
                Of all these Fathers, M. Iewell hath noted Vntruthes only vpon certaine places of Cyprian, of Augustine, and of Theodoret. D. Hardinges Dealing in all those places hath bene proued vpright. If the other Fathers haue bene so Rackte, and violently drawen (as M. Iewell here pleadeth) why made he not before his Accusation, why noted he not there Vntruthes? Thinke we that Master Iewell hauing noted so many vntruthes, and all well nere vntruly, hathe yet left other in store whiche of Courtesy he omitted? Then what lucke had M. Iewell, hauing choyse and of so many, to proue so fewe and to spede so il? Shall we not rather thinke (to commende M. Iewelles discretion) that he hath in dede chosen the best and most likely, and that if he had noted more, he would haue spedde the worse. These multiplying therefore of Fathers decked, auoughed but vnproued, I leaue it, as it is, for a Slaunderous burthen of Vntruthes.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
               
               The .560. Vntruthe Slaunderous.Touching Appeales to Rome, the gouuernement of the East parte of the world, Excōmunications, Approbations of Orders, allowance of Councelles, Restitutiōs and Reconciliations, he hath openly (560) missereported the whole Vniuersal Order and Practise of the Church.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                That Appeales were made to Rome from the chiefest Patriarches in Christendom, that the Bishops of the East were subiect to the Bishop of Rome, that the Pope Approued the Ordering of bishops, Confirmed Councelles and had the Patriarkes and Bishops of the East Reconciled to him, it hath at large bene proued, and M. Iewelles whole Replie in these matters hath bene at longe and stitche by stitche confuted. As for Excommunications and Restitutions, if M. Iewell had noted there any matter of Vntruthe, those questions also had in like maner bene debated. But the Discourse of D. Harding in that behalfe was so true, that M. Iewell therein coulde finde no matter of Vntruthe to note, though here for a bragge he saie, that he openly missereported the practise of the Churche. It

is maruaill that M. Iewel keping so good an Audyt of D. Hardinges vntruthes, in suche Open missereporting coulde not score vp one.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                All this notwitstanding,The .561. Vntruthe. For bothe these Titles haue bene founde. he hath as yet founde neither of these two glorious Titles, that he hath so narrowlye sought for: notwithstanding greate paynes taken, and greate promises, and Vaūtes made touching the same.
            D. Harding hath founde them bothe, the one in the Chalcedon Councell bothe foure times in foure seuerall supplications expressed, and also conffessed by S. Gregorye, the other in Victor a writer of thinges passed within the 5
                  •
               0. yeresIn the second Edition. in Iustinian, in Prosper, in Athanasius, and in the Chalcedō Councell also. But M. Iewell must denie all this, bicause he will in no wise Subscribe. For thus nowe he Concludeth and endeth this Article.
            
               
                  Iewell. 
                Therefore to Conclude, I must Subscribe and rescribe, euen as before. That albeit M Harding haue trauaiied painefully herein, bothe by him selfe, and also with cōference of his frendes, yet (562) cānot he hitherto finde, neither in the Scriptures, nor in the olde Councelles,The .561. Vntruthe. As before. nor in any one of all the auncient Catholike Fathers, that the Bishop of Rome within the space of the first 600. yeres after Christ, was euer intitled either the Vniuersall Bishop, or the Heade of the Vniuersall Churche.
            
               
                  Stapleton 
                This is heresy, and this is the frute thereof. An heretike (saieth S. Paule) is suo iudicio condemnatus. Condemned in his owne Iudgement. M. Iewell knoweth him selfe certainely and vndoubtedly that in the Chalcedon Councell Leo the Bishop of Rome was Called Vniuersall Bishop in foure sundry Supplicatiōs. For he saied before him selfe. True it is that M. Harding saied. Leo in that Councell of Chalcedon was thus called.
               
                  Iewell. pag. 298. 
               The places be knowen and maye not be denied. Yet nowe he denieth him selfe, that any suche thinge hath bene shewed, or that euer he was so Called. Is not then this Man in his owne Iudgement condemned? Againe he knoweth certainely and vndoubtedly that

Eugenius the Archebishop of Carthage in Afrike Called the Churche of Rome, Head of all Churches, whiche is but in diuerse Englishe, Head of the Vniuersall Churche, as Victor in his History reporteth. The authorite and saying it selfe he coulde not possibly denie.
                  Lib. 2. de pers. Vand.
                Therefore in his Replie thereunto, he altered the wordes of the Author, and laboured to extenuat the Credit of the Historiographer, as hath before bene declared. Yet being not able to Replie to the matter, but with a Couple of Vntruthes cauilling only, now he denieth flat, any such thinge hath bene shewed. And what Man can be or euer was in his owne iudgement condemned, if you M. Iewell be not that Man? Yet nowe these Matters, being by this Returne of your Vntruthes, more enlarged, and forced vpon you, in such sorte that euery indifferent Reader may see to the eye and beholde the clere euidence thereof, though nowe, you Subscribe and Rescribe as b
                     •
                  fore, yet I trust hereafter, you wil either Subscribe and yelde, or Rescribe and Clere your 
                  •
               elfe better. What euer of bothe you do, your Vntruthes remaine Notorious and Euident and Inexcusable. God geue you Grace to Acknowleadge them, and other Grace to Beware of them.
            
               I aus Deo qui dedit velle, & dedit perficere.
            
            
               Quando quidem Volumen istud perlectum, ac approbatum est à viris Sacroe Theologioe & Anglici Idiomatis peritissimis, quibus merito credendum esse iudico, puto tuto & vtiliter euulgari posse.
            
            
               
                  Ita iudico, Cunerus Petri, Pastor S. Petri Louanij. 
                  17. Aprilis. Anno. 1566.
               
            
            
         
      
   