
      
         
            
            
            A PREFACE TO THE
KYNGES HYGHNES.
            
               
                  IF I HAD NOT OF
longe tyme past conceyued a sure
truste, and great confydence, most
noble prince, of your synguler gē
               tylnes,
and accustomed humanitie,
which dayly to the great comfort
of al your seruātes & subiectes, your highnes
declareth openly, I wolde neuer haue vsed such
boldnes and audacite, as to exhibyte and present
this my rude writynge, vnto your gracis mooste
indifferent iudgement. For moche and longe I
haue doubted with my selfe, whether hit shulde
pertayne vnto me, other by worde or by writyng,
to touche any suche matters of weyght and grauyte.
For as on the one syde, many thynges moued
me' to kepe silence, consyderynge myn own
state, condition, and degre, and how late I was
admytted to the seruyce of youre maiestye, and
howe lyttell experte I am in matters of polycie:
so on the other syde, dyuers thynges styrred me,
to open myne affecte and pourpose, vnto your
grace playnly. For moued I was moche by this
your great and synguler humanyte, wherin amonge
all other princely vertues your highnes
excellyth: moued I was also by the highe iugemente,
which by the goodnes of god aboue other
princis is to you gyuen, in al maters of tru
                  •
                religion
and of iuste polycy: and aboue all moued I

was by the present state of our coūtrey & weighty
nature of thinges perteining to the same now
in controuersy here amonge vs: In the redresse
and due order wherof (as I thynke) stondeth the
chiefe poynte of all pryncely honour, and nother
in abundance of golde, syluer, nor tresure, nor yet
in any worldly power, but euen as the honour of
god, as moche as is set forth to mans iugement,
consysteth and stondethe in the dewe order of all
this sensible worlde, whiche with our eies dayly
we beholde, so the tre we honour of all princis apon
erthe, resteth chiefly in the order and redresse
of their commynalties, by the prouidence of god
to their gouernaunce commytted, to this ende &
purpose, that all theyr subiectes in concorde and
vnyte may inioye suche quietnes and felicite, as
they are broughte forth vnto, by the goodnes of
god and nature: so that this beinge mouyd, and
reasonyng with my selfe of such thinges as perteyne
to your gracys honour chiefely, to the whiche
I shall serue euer durynge my lyfe faythfully,
I coud not tēpre my selfe, nor as me thoughte
in no parte satysfie my bounden duetie, excepte
by some meane I shulde open myn affect to your
gratious maiestie. For greatte sorowe I conceyued
as sone as I entred into my countrey, after
my long absence and peregrination, obseruyng
suche disobedience and diuersitie of opinion, as
here amonge your subiectes was growynge in
by corrupte iugement, to great confusion, and

to the great breche of christian vnitie, while your
grace by your high wisedom & polycye studied to
lay & stablyshe certayn groūdes & fundations, to
the restoryng of very, true, and christen vnite moche
necessary. wherfore sone after I began with
my self to reson of certayn causes & occasiōs, out
of the which chiefely as it appered to me, sprang
all this controuersie & disobedience lately shewid
here among vs: and somwhat to consyder I began
also the manner & mean howe al suche discord
and diuersitie of opinion vtterly put awaye, we
myght as membres of one body, being couplyd
togyther, and knytte agayne in vnitie, runne in
one course and after one fascion: the whiche discourse
and reasonyng, bycause I lacked cōmodite
to open to your grace presently, I gathered in
writyng, & so presented it vnto your maiestie, declaring
therby myn opinion, and by what meane
we all your subiectes with mekenes & humilite,
lyuyng togyther in due obedience, myght restore
and conserue this christen vnitie. This was my
purpose, only in no poynt thinkyng than to haue
my sentence and writyng abrode publyshed. And
though it be so, that for the moste part suche men
as be in hart most desirous, to haue their writinges
set abrode to the face of the worlde, cōmonly
vse this kynde of excuse, coueringe their affecte &
studi of glory with one honest pretext of sobrenes
and humilitie, to say they wrote eyther for theyr
owne exercyse secretly, or for the priuate pleasure

of their frende onely, wherby they auoyde and eschewe
al note and suspition of pride & arrogācy:
yet to your highnes most noble prince, this may
I say truly, and without al colour affirm playnly,
that at suche tyme as I presc̄ted this my writing
vnto your grace at winchester in sōmer last
past, I though nothynge lesse, than to publyshe
it to the cōmon iugement, though in euery mans
mynde the thinge to be fyxed I desired hartely:
but I thought plainly, partly for bicause I iuge
not my writynge to be of that sorte, which are to
be set out to lyghte, and partely bycause I se the
world al redy with ouer many bokes and writinges
troubled dangerously, wherby though moch
knowledge of the truth be opened & broughte to
lyght, yet by lacke of discretion, and by moch arrogancy,
there is growen in withall in Christis
church a gret brake of christiā charite: I thought
I say playnly, & to me it appered sufficiente, specially
concernyng suche matters of weight and
grauitie, to your hyghnes only by my writinge
myn opinyon to declare, & the affecte and desyre,
which I haue long noryshed in my hart to s
                  •
               rue
your grace withal, in some part therby to testifie.
For syth the tyme y• I haue had any reson & iugemēt
to consider the end, to the which al true subiectes
ought to referre all their actes & dedes, I
haue euer fashioned my studyes after suche maner,
that I might therby according to my boūdē
duetie, in som part serue your highnes & my coū
               trey,

to the which stirred & moued I am now moche
by the time, wherin I trust to se, by your high
wisedom & policy, of al such abusion, as by ꝓcesse
of time is growen in to our church and cōgregation,
a holsom, quiet, & iust reformation: wherof
though the begīning hath bē somwhat rough
and ful of difficultie, yet I truste the prouidence
of god, vsyng your highnes as chefe mynister to
the same, shall at the laste, all thynges soo order
and dispose, that they shall procede, bothe to the
cōmyn quietnes of vs your subiectes in this present
age, & to the great cōfort of al your posterite.
So y• as wel for the steying of the one part of suche
disobedience, to be conceyued in the hartis of
som other of your subiectis, which might minister
a great occasion to the plāting of the rote of
a sedition, as for the tēpering on the other part of
a blynd & an arrogant opinion, lately conceyued
by lyghtnes of iugemēt, which might bring in among
vs moche confusion, I wrote this thinge,
declaringe therby vnto your highenes, what I
thought in the mater, and how as I sayd before,
bothe I my selfe was affected, and howe at the
leest I wold wysshe the hartis of your subiectis
after like maner to be īstructed: for y• which cause
I conceyued this exhortation vnto your people,
instructing thē to suche obedience as is dewe to
your prīcely authorite. This was my purpose at
y• beginnyng & ful intent, nothing lesse hauinge
in mynd, as I before recyted, then to publishe the

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
thyng abrode to the world: but now sithe it hath
pleased your grace moste noble prynce, by your
highe wysedome and most indifferent iudgemēt,
the thyng to aproue, whiche I haue written, and
by your goodnes it to accepte and alowe, I shall
not feare to set it forthe to the cōmon redynge &
indifferent iudgement of your subiectes openly,
nothynge dystrustynge, but that by the gracious
goodnes of hym, who gouerneth al, it shall thus
appreued by your gracis authorite, in some part
helpe, both to restore & confirme here among vs
true obedience and christian vnytie, wherby we
al your true subiecies, beinge obediente to your
hyghnes, as to our supreme heed vnder Christe
here in this churche and congregation, shal both
in this age liue in perfyt quietnes and tranquillite,
and herafter also, to the them that shal succede,
leaue a quiet cōmon wele, to the cōmon comforte
of all our posterite, and at the last with heuenly
vnite atteine & inioy with our heuēly hed Christ,
the onely hede of the vnyuersal churche, euerlasting
felicite. This hope I haue fastned ī mi hart,
nothing doubting at al, but y• y• goodnes of him,
whose prouydence hath ordeyned your grace to
reigne in our tyme, lighting your hart with such
knowlege of truthe, as few other christian princis
haue in our daies, shal inspire in to your most
noble mynde, the ryght iudgement of all conueniēt
menes, wherby your highnes the better may
the same truth set forth to his honour & glory.
         
      
      
         
            
            TO THE REDERS.
            
               
                  FOR BICAVSE I HAVE here
folowynge somwhat more brefely
than the nature of the thynge
dothe well suffre, comprised and
gathered vnto the people a certayne
instruction, whereby they
myghte the better be induced to suche vnitie and
obedience as is of theym mooste iustely required:
I shall mooste Christen reders, here in this
prologue, open vnto you a lyttel more at large,
what is the nature of this obedience and vnitie,
to the whiche we be so straytly bounde bothe by
goddis lawe and all good ciuilitie: and touche
also somwhat the cause whiche hath chiefly moued
me to the conceyuynge of this mattier and
purpose. But here in the begynnynge to the intent
the thyng may the better be perceyued, I do
you require a lyttelle to lyfte vp your eies with
som consideration, to wey with your selfe in som
part the diuine power, wysedome, & prouidence,
thoughe the thynge fully to conceyue farre surmounteth
all mannes witte and imagination.
And fyrst this is open and manifest,The prouydence of god. that al this
sensible worlde, wherin is conteyned this wonderful
varietie and nature of thingis,Gen. 1. is nothing
els but as a certayne shadowe of goddis goodnes
and diuinitie, or rather a glasse of the diuine
maiestie, wherby to mans iudgement and capacitie
is opened, the infinite power,Psa. 18. and wonderfull

wisedome of hym, who by his hyghe prouydence
gouerneth and ruleth all. For whither so
euer you cast your eies, other aboue vnto heuen,
there beholdynge that heuenly body in his synceritie,
other here benethe vnto the erthe, there
considerynge of nature the wonderfull varietie,
you shall euer see, of that power and prouidence
in euery thinge mooste certayne argumente and
sure testimony. Wherof I thynke no man canne
doubte, who wyth any consyderation, lokynge
into this glasse, there standeth in meruayle and
admyration. For fyrst there shall he see the infinyte
nombre & multitude of sterres euer kepyng
their certayn course and mouyng without al instabilitie,
there shal he se the son, the mone, with
all the other planettes waueryng abrode, nowe
to this parte of the worlde, nowe to the other,
to the comforte and creation of all mortal thynges
subiecte to corruption: there shall he see the
wonderful vertue and influence of the same, by
the whiche as by chiefe instrumentes the goodnes
of god worketh al thinges. Here in the lower
worlde garnyshyng it with this varietie, wherin
standeth all naturall beautie. ye, & yet ferther, yf
he into this glasse diligently loke, there shall he
see, of the foure elementes, of the fyre, the ayre,
the water, and of the erthe, the mooste meruaylous
nature, so knytte by dewe proportion in a
certaine equalitie, that though they be by nature
mooste dyuers and full of contrarietie, yet they

are cowpled and ioyned togyther, as it were in
a natural concorde and vnitie: there shall he see
the erth, as foundation and ground, susteyning
the reste, hangynge in the myddes after a wonderfull
maner, and about the same the see continually
rollynge, with his certayne and sure ebbynge
and flowynge after a strange fashion, giuinge
to mans wytte no smal cause of meruayle
and great admyration: and fynally to say, there
shall he see of all beastes, fyshes, and fowles, the
meruaylous nature and propretie, by the which
all, the diuine power spredeth her goodnes, accordyng
to the nature of thinges and their capacitie:
so that to hym who so euer into this glasse
diligently dothe loke, may remayne no doubt of
this heuenly wysedome and prouydence, wherof
in euery thinge here in this worlde sette forth to
goodis honour and glorye, appereth so sure tokē
and so certayne signe, for in euery thyng shyneth
the image therof, euery thing here is a glasse of
the same. And to me this thinge, considerynge &
reasonynge with my selfe of the goodnes of god
and of his prouidēce, though the thinges before
touched mynister therof sure profe and sufficient
argument, yet it appereth, that nothynge more
clerely declareth the same, than mans actis and
fashion of lyuynge here in policie, all be it many
men haue taken thereby greate argument to the
contrary, in so moche, that whan they haue sene
many men longe to contynue in worldly ioy and

prosperitie, whome they haue iudged most worthy
of al aduersitie: and contrary, other of great
perfection & vertue to be oppressed with al wretchednes
and myserie. This I say, whā they haue
sene, they haue playnly thought, no prouidence
to be nor gouernance of god, but all to be lefte to
mans wyl and tyranny: To the whiche opinion
they slypped, for lacke of iugement and good cō
               syderation:
for who so euer weyeth mans actes
groundly,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                and of his lyfe the hole proces, he shal
fynde moste manifestly, and by reasone shall be
constrayned playnly to confesse, that this highe
prouydence is not onely declared by suche dedes
and actes of man, as appere to the worlde to be
good and vertuous, but also moche more by other,
whiche seme pestilent and pernicious, and
to all vertue contrarye. For this semeth to be a
certayne truthe and sure, that euen lyke as god
by his infinite goodnes, these erthequakes and
general fluddes, by the whiche many cities and
hole nations oft tymes be ouerflowē and sonke,
euer tourneth to the good order of the reste, and
conseruation of the holle in a naturall tranquillite:
so vice reygning in mans lyfe for a tyme, ye
open warre and sedition, his goodnes cōuerteth
to the settyng forthe of vertue and to his honour
and glory. For such is the nature of that infinite
goodnes, that nothinge it wyll suffre vtterly to
be yll, but out of al imperfection and vicious effectes,
or more truly to say, vicious defectes, his

goodnes pyketh out euer some good. As by example,
this thinge to declare, this dyuelyshe nature
of the dyuell, who aboue al other thinges is
moste pestilent and pernicious, the goodnes of
god vseth to good, as to driue man by fere at the
lest to flee from synne and wretchednes, and his
crueltie and malyce he vseth also to declare his
iustyce and ryghtwysenes, as by the miserye of
vice he driueth man oft to the loue of vertue, and
to conceyue the felicitie therof: lyke as he dothe
many tymes, by sycknes of body and aduersitie,
brynge man to helth and prosperitie, and by the
tyranny and wretchednes therof, he induceth mā
to perceyue the nature of good polycie, and of al
quietnes and tranquillitie restynge in the same.
Euen lyke as by blynde and folyshe superstition
he styreth ofte tymes man to folowe syncere and
trewe religyon. And thus all thyng, whiche appereth
in mās lyfe to be playn yll, & viciouse, his
infinite goodnes turneth to good: and out of all
thing he pyketh som good.Gen. 11. For if there were any
thing which by nature were yl, than were not he
infinyte goodnes, the which without cōtradiction
can suffre no ylle. Wherfore playnely to saye
euen as I thynke, these thynges whiche to the
worlde, and to the common iugement of manne
seme ylle and moste pestylent, of the goodnes of
god, and of his highe prouidence, minister vnto
men most sure argument. The whiche thyng I
haue here nowe touched to this purpose & ende,

that where as many men nowe adayes, consideryng
the state of the Christen polycie vexed with
so moche sedition and heresie, feare moche to see
shortly therof great ruine and decaye, I wolde
haue them to alter that opinion: And to stande
fully in this perswasion, that this diuysion by
sectes and contrary opinion, reignynge amonge
christen nations, the goodnes of god shall turne
to his honour and glorie, and to the setting forth
of his true religion, the whiche longe and many
a day hath ben by simple superstition moche obscured
and hydde: ye and though it were so that
in folyshely fleinge this superstition, we shuld a
whyle slyppe into the contrary, that is to say, the
contempte of religion, yet I doubte not but the
goodnes of god in tyme conuenient, wolde reduce
vs at the laste to the meane, and bring vnto
lyght the knowlege of his true religion, as he
hath done in al tymes from the beginning of the
world vnto this day, by lyttel and lytell euer drawyng
mans wekenes to the true waye. And this
maner with vs I dout not but that his goodnes
wyll vse nowe in these dayes, and so inspire and
gyue lyght to the hartis of his christē flock, that
they all with concorde and vnitie shal to his wyl
be obedient moste mekely. This hope and truste
I haue fyxed in my harte, wherwith I moche
comforte my selfe. And though there be here in
our nation growynge in, a certayne diuision, by
corrupt iugement and false opynion, yet I trust

we shall not so farre slyppe from gooddis prouidence,
that it may take among vs any such rote,
whereby shall sprynge any sedition, or of good
and ciuile order any ruine or distruction: but cō
               trary,
if we as membres of one body, runne all
togyther after one fashion, I trust at lēgth surely
it shall minister a great occasion, to the setting
forthe of Christis trewe religion. For the which
cause nowe, I haue conceyued this lyttel instruction,
exhortynge our people to vnitie and obedience,
the lacke wherof in the state of Christendome
hath bene a great cause of moche diuision,
and specially in the coūtrey of Germany, where
as by the folyshe auoydyng of superstition they
haue slipped into greatte discorde and sedition,
whose example I trust shall be to vs a spectacle,
ministringe vnto vs no small instruction, specicially
if we consyder groundly the cause and fū
               dation
of all their controuersie and sedition, the
whiche doutles, rose of thinges in no poynt necessary
to mās saluation, but about ceremonies
and traditions, to the which many men blynded
by superstition, leaned none other wyse, thanne
to Christis worde and gospel, they dydde not discerne
with ryght iugement, betwixt thinges of
themself good & necessary, & other, which ar only
for the time conuenient to a certayne policie, but
all thinges of longe tyme receyued, by custome,
& generall decree, some of them toke as goodis
lawe indifferently, & som all turned vp so downe

vndiscretely. Wherfore suche persons as by the
examination of them to goddis worde, founde
therin moche abusion, fyrste the reste coude not
well beare, but noted them of herisie, and as mouers
of sedition: by the reson wherof, sprange y•
great diuision, wherby the coūtrey was deuided
into many & dyuers sectes, but now by the prouidence
of god eche one spyeng the foly of other,
they begynne to fall vnto the meane, that is to
say to Christis true religion, gyuinge to goddis
worde the full authoritie, that preachinge without
abrogation. And as for ceremonies and traditions,
they suffre as thynges conueniente to
maynteyne vnitie, where as they repugne nother
to goddis worde, nor to good ciuilitie: the
which thyng if they had done at the begynning,
they shulde not by their blyndnes haue fallen to
suche confusion, nor by their folyshe correction
of the abuses of the churche haue brought in suche
a diuision. Howe be it I doubt not, but that
the prouidence of god hath suffered this thinge
for the institution of other, for we may as I ofte
reherse, take example of that foly, and runne to
gyther in one course with obedience and vnitie,
the whiche if we do, we shall doubtles shortly se
the prouidence of god, so worke, that out of our
church & congregation, we shal se plucked vp al
superstitious abusions: as contrary, if we procede
in our corrupt iugement and lately growen
in diuision, we shall without fayle slippe to like

confusion. For the auoydynge wherof, I haue
directed to the people this rude instruction, mouynge
them to obedience and vnitie, whose nature
nowe sommewhat to touche, remayneth in
the seconde place.
            ¶Wherin brefely to say, this you shall vnderstande,
that obedience in all tymes,The nature of obediēce. and with all
nations hath euer ben reputed, the chiefe bonde
and knotte of all vertue and good ciuilitie, and
not onely amonge vs, whiche be of the chrysten
flocke, lighted with the spirite of god, but also amonge
the gentyl philosophers, ladde onely by
the course and power of nature, with whome obedience
was euer noted to be as the mother of
al vertue and honestie. For whan the affectes in
mans mynd sensuall drawinge hym to pleasure
and vanitie, be so obediēt to reson, that betwixt
them is no repugnancye nor rebellion, but reson
euer hath dominion, leadynge man to his naturalle
dignitie, than is he sette in hyghe felicitie,
than lyueth he in perfyte quietnes and tranquillitie,
as farre as man may optayne in this mortall
lyfe full of frailtie. Lyke as contrary, whan
reason beinge ouer runne, affection dothe reule
by disobedience, then man, as he were fallynge
downe out of goddis order and prouidence, who
appoynteth reason to his gouernance, slyppeth
into infinite misery and wretchydnes, and neuer
enioyeth tranquillitie and quietnes, but dyuersly
torne by dyuers desires,Roman. 
                     •
                  . lacketh all comforte

and swetenes of this lyfe. So that by this, hit
is euidente and playne, what power obedience
hadde with the gentylitie: but of vs, whiche be
lyghted with Christis doctrine obedience of an
nother sorte is required. For our obedyence is
not reuled by suche a sklender reule, as mannes
reasone is, whiche is for the mooste parte
soo blynded with corruption, that seldome it seeth
the clere truthe withoute affection: but the
lyne of our obedience is reasone it selfe, the verye
worde and sonne of God by Christe to vs
                  
                     •
                  oman. 1.
declared, the wylle of god in his scriptures opened.
By this lyne and rule we must square our
affection, to this al, reason and affection of man
set apart, we muste be obedient, to this we must
gyue faythe, sure truste, and also confydence.
To stable this obedience Christ was made man,
                  
                     ••
                  b. 
                     •
                  .
the whiche bothe by doctrine and dede he moste
playnely toughte, the whiche to confyrme with
many wordes, here is no place, speciallye consyderynge
that all holy scripture is fulle of the
same, as it is to all men open and playn. Wherfore
here perauenture you wyl say, that obediēce
to goddis word is required: no man douteth, no
man is ignoraunt therof, but whiche is goddis
worde, and the trewe sense therof, vnto the whiche
we ougthe for to be obediente, here lyeth the
double, this is not vnto all menne playne: for
somme menne herein saye one thynge, and some
saye an nother, in so moche, that we knowe not

to whiche sense & to what thyng we shulde gyue
our obedience, and whether we shulde rather be
obediente to generall counsaylle, or to our princis
authoritie. This perauenture you wyll say.
For the answere wherof, thoughe in the exhortation
folowynge, I haue at large handeled the
thinge, as the chiefe mattier thereof, yet here in
this place somewhat I wyll touche, bothe howe
you shall comme vnto the trewe sense of goddis
worde, and also what obedience you oughte for
to gyue bothe to generall counsayle and princis
authoritie. And fyrste this you shal vnderstand,
as a sure grounde to the resolution hereof, that
suche thynges, to the whiche we owe our obedience,
and are bounden vnto, other by goddis
worde, generall counsaylle, or princis authoritie,
be of .iii. sortes, and of .iii. dyuers kyndes,
for other they be of theyr owne nature, good
and profytable: or contrarye, by nature ylle and
dampnable, or elles indifferente, whyche of
theym selfe be nother good nor ylle. As by an
exaumple, suche thynges are good,Thynges good of th
                     •
                   selfe. not as appereth
to mannes corrupte reason, but suche
as be by goddis owne worde defyned, by the
whiche rule only we muste examyne what thing
is good with ryghte iudgemente: as to truste
in god and in his onely goodnesse, to loue hym
aboue all thynges, and thy brother as thy selfe,
these with such other, expressed by goddis word,

are by nature good, and Profytable. As contrarye,
                  
                     •
                  hinge
                     •
                   yf 
                     •
                  f them self.
suche thinges as by the same worde are
prohibyte and forbydde, are by nature ylle and
damnable, as to distrust the mercye of god, and
doubte of his goodnes, to haue thy brother in
hate, or wrongfully to couete worldly riches.
Thynges indifferent I calle all suche thynges,
                  
                     •
                  hinge
                     •
                   of them selfe in 
                     •••
                  fferent.
whiche by goddis worde are nother pro
                  •
               bthyted
nor commaunded, but lefte to worldly polycie,
wherof they take their ful authoritie, by the whiche
as tyme and place requireth, they are sometymes
good, and somtymes yll: As to eate fleshe
the fridaye, & after the customed maner to kepe
the holy day, to go a pylgremage, and pray vnto
saynctis, these and other lyke, I calle thynges
indifferent, and nothynge necessarie to mannes
saluation, though they may be well vsed and after
a good fashyon, as I shall hereafter more at
large open and declare. Amonge the which also
I nombre this great matter of the popes superioritie,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
               
whiche so troubleth many weake cōsciences.
For as I iuge it not so yll and damnable,
that all our forefathers, whiche haue ben obedient
therto this .vii. C. yeres therfore be damned,
so I iuge it not so good, that obediēce therto shal
be necessarie to them whiche shulde be saued, as
I haue at large declared in the mater folowing,
and opened therin fully myn opinion. But nowe
to the purpose, this and all other lyke, whiche be
not in scripture expressed by commaundement,

I note to be thynges indifferent, the nature of
whome is of this sorte, whiche is highly here to
be obserued, that thoughe of theym selfe, they
be nother good nor yll, nor to them we owe none
obedience, yet whan they be set out with authoritie,
by them which haue hole rule in any kynd
of policie, whether it be in the state of a prince or
populare: than the people are to them bounde, ye
by the vertue of goddis owne worde, who commaundeth
expressely his disciples to be obedient
to commune policie, whan so euer therby is cō
               maunded
any thinge, whiche is not repugnant
to his preceptes and doctrine, ye and though hit
were contrarye to their owne priuate profytte,
plesure, and quietnes, ye or contrary to a worldly
right wisenes: yet wolde he haue his disciples,Iuce. 20.
and the professours of his name euer to be obedient
with humilitie and mekenes, wherwith as
with a peculiar mark, he hath marked his flock.Marc. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . Iuce. 18.
And so nowe this grounde presupposed, I shall
make answere to the doubtes before moued: and
fyrste to them that be vnlerned, to whom I haue
directed chiefly this instruction, this I wyl say,
that scrupulous and exact knowlege of thinges
conteyned in goddis scriptures, is nothinge so
necessary to iduce them to obediēce, as is mekenes
and humilitie, whiche is among many other
thinges to them whiche be rude, the chiefe way,
wherby they maye attayne to the trewe sense of
goddis worde and doctrine. For the which cause

as I thynke in the counsayle of Nece, the sūme
of our feythe, conteynynge suche poyntis as be
necessary to euery mannes saluation, was reduced
vnto certayne artycles, and so propowned in
Symbalo,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                in the common Crede to all chrysten
nations, as a thynge sufficient to be had in hart
and mynde of all men, without ferther enserche
or inquisition, in the reste euer gyuynge obedience
to the order and custome in euery countrey
receyued with concorde and vnitie. So that we
maye iudge, as hit appereth to me,Rom. 13. that to the
vnlerned people and bodye of euerye commynaltie,
withoute ferther knowledge, sufficiente
hit is, euery manne doynge his office and dewtie,
as he is called, and by goddis prouysion
therto appoynted, here in this worldly polycie,
stedfastely to hange vppon the commune order,
leanyng therto constantely, euer comforted
with the same feythe and expectation of the euer
lastynge lyfe, hereafter to be hadde in immortalitie,
& not by our owne merites, but by the mere
benefytte and onely goodnesse of god,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                who to
vs soo trustynge in hym, hath made suche promys
of his benignitie. This is the mooste sure
knotte, as I thynke, of all christen cyuilitie, this
generalle knowledge of thynges necessary ioyned
with mekenes, I thynke sufficiente to the
v
                  •
               lerned people: in all other thynges, whiche
be 
                  •••••
               fferente, euer gyuynge obedyence to comm
                  •
               n
authoritie, and gladdely herynge theym

whyche are directed and appoynted for to preache
Christis doctryne, wherby they may bothe
confyrme and increase dayely theyr faythe. And
where as somme of theym preache 
                  •
               one cleane
contrarye to annother, by the reasone whereof
somme of you maye be perauenture brought in
to somme doubte, this you shall vnderstande,
that theyr controuersies and contrarietie, for the
moste parte be, concernynge thinges indifferent,
and seldome of suche, whiche be necessarye to
mannes saluation. Wherefore their controuersyes
therin oughte to trouble you nothinge atte
all. For menne, the whiche are of lernynge and
letters, in suche mattiers neuer dydde yet accorde
nor agree in vnitie, it is ynough that they
accorde in the artycles of our feythe: and as for
the reste, lette theym proue theyr wyttes after
theyr owne pleasure, mynde, and lybertie.
Wherfore their folye therin and controuersies
nedeth not to mynyster any occasyon of scrupulositie
to the vnlerned people and rude, but euer
they takynge the generalle poyntes and artycles
of Christis faythe, with mekenes and humylitie,
muste in the reste gyue theyr obedience
vnto suche thynges, whiche be decreed & made
in the common policie.
            ¶But nowe I wyll speke somwhat of the obedience
that you shall gyue vnto the common authorytie,
and also what to generall counsaylle,

here brefely I wyll touche. And first this is sure,
that in all kynde of polycies among christen nations,The order of obedience
                     •
                  
               
the worde of god must be of chiefe authoritie,
that muste haue therin the firste place and
preeminēce. Wherfore if any thynge be decreed
contrary to that, by any worldly policie, it must
be vtterly abrogate and boldely disobeyed with
al constancy. For suche barbarous tyranny may
not be suffred in christen ciuilitie: But contrary,
what so euer is decreed in any policie, nothynge
repugnant to Christis doctrine, and to his simplicitie,
to that euer obedience is required, wherin
resteth a great grounde of christen ciuilitie, to
the whiche poynt, if any priuate person repugne
seditiousely, moued by any scrupule of consciēce
conceyued folishely, if he may nother be brought
to knowlege by good instruction, nor yet to iuste
obedience with dewe admonition, he is not worthy
to lyue in that cōmen policie, nor to be a mē
               bre
therof, as one that abhorreth frome all good
order and ciuilitie. For to the obedience of princis
and of all other commen orders and politike
we are bounde, after they be ones receyued, by
goddis owne worde and commaundement. And
suche thinges as by their own nature be indifferent,
are made therby to our saluation necessary,
so that this remayneth a sure truth, that to al suche
thinges as be decreed by princely authoritie,
to goddis worde nothynge contrarye, we are by
goodis worde bound, after they be receyued and

stablyshed: to the whiche we muste gladdely be
obedient with humilitie, ye though they be contrary
to suche thynges, as be propowned by generall
counsell and assemble.The nature of generalle counsayse. For the which this
is to be obserued, that though counsell generall
and vniuersall assemble of all chrysten nations,
be a thynge not necessary to the conseruation of
Christes fayth and doctrine, for as moche as it
was conserued in his most purytie almoste .v. C.
yere, withoute any suche congregation: yet for
bycause it was of wise men and politike brought
in, to the auoydyng of schisme and heresie, and
stablynge of christen vnitie, I thinke it not to be
reiected. For as it is gret superstition and playnfoly,
to iudge it necessarie to mans saluation, ye
and a great token of infidelitie and of dystruste
in the goodnes of god, who hath promysed to al
men in al places, and at al tymes, eternal saluation,Matt. 7.
when so euer & where so euer with faythful
trust they cal for the same: so it is a tokē of great
arrogancye, and lacke of christen humilitie, hit
vtterly to refuse, whan so euer hit is taken as a
collation, and a conferrynge to gether of lerned
men for the inuention and trialle of the truthe,
concernynge suche thinges as pertayne to relygion,
as hit was at the fyrste institution, at the
whiche tyme the thinges driuen out by counsell
generall, were of none authoritie, vnto the time
that princis in euery nation dyd receyue and stablyshe
them in their countreys, by the consent of

the same, as it is euidēt by diuers lawes imperial,
by the which such thinges as were conceyued
in coūsel generall, were authorised & confyrmed.
Wherfore to cōpare these authorities to gyther,
with boute of preemynēce of the same, it is small
reson. For as moch as such thīges as be propouned
by general coūsell & assēble, be of none authoritie
among the people in any coūtrey, tyl they be
confirmed by princely power and cōmon coūsell.
Wherfore this foloweth surely, that the same authoritie
may suche thynges reiecte, whan tyme
place and other occasion, that doth require with
good reason: This therfore semeth to me a sure
conclusion, that rather we ought to gyue obedience
to that thynge, whiche is decreed by comon
authoritie in euery nation, then to such as is propowned
by generall assemble & vniuersall counsell.
For suche thinges are but counsels in dede,
and bynde no man, tyll they be by common consent
receyued, the whiche euer by the same maye
be also dissolued, and specially touchynge suche
thynges that are indifferente, the whiche at the
fyrste counsels were euer omytted and left to the
order of worldly policie: but after that the see of
Rome toke this heed ouer al christen nations, by
lytle & litel in general assēbles, they began to define
& hādle thinges ꝑtaining to y• worldly policy,
for the mainteining of ye pompe & arrogancy,
the which they atteyned to by p̄tense of religion.
Wherfore the coūsels succeding the same heed,

smellid therof, & sauorid moch of worldly vanite,
but if they had cōtinued after y• firste institution,
only medlyng with y• interpretation of scripture
& thinges ꝑtayning by necessite to mās saluatiō,
I thinke to this day no christē prince nor nation
wold in any point haue made to thē any cōtrary
cōstitution: but nowe sith that popes in general
coūsels, cōtrary to the order of y• same, haue med
led with maters ꝑtaining to worldly policy, meruayl
it is not to se, princis decre cōtrary, to whose
order touchinge thinges indifferēt, the people in
euery natiō, are more boūde, thā to such thinges
which ar but only ꝓpouned as coūselsi general
coūsels, & vniuersal cōgregation, as shal appere
more largely herafter: & this cōcerning obediēce
here in this preface to be obserued, to thē y• be vnlerned
I think sufficiēt, & as for thē y• ar lerned,
they knowe how to answer to this matter better
thā do I. How be it I wold coūsel euery man lerned
in scripture, whose cōsciēce is troubled with
any scruplosite cōceiued by any thing decreed by
cōmen authorite, here in our coūtrey, wel to wey
the thing, wherwith he is troubled, with diligēt
exaīation therof, whether it be vpon a groūd necessary
to mās saluation, or els vpon a thing indifferēt:
& aboue al to be ware, & diligētly to take
hede, y• nother by authorite of mā, ꝓcesse of time,
nor cōtrary custom, he suffre not him self so to be
blinded, nor deceiued by siplicite, y• he with right
iugemēt cā not pōder goddis word indifferētly:

and where as he fyndeth cōtrouersie or gret difficultie,
to trye out the true sense of goddis word
and doctrine, in his scripture tought: lette hym
with a meke harte come to hym, of whom commeth
all heuenly lyght,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . 11. who hathe promysed to
all men neuer them to fayle, whiche mekely demande
of hym the knowledge of truthe with ardent
affecte inserchynge the same: for mekenes
is the only way and the strayt gate of the entree
to Christis misteries. For except we base our stomakes
full of arrogancie, we can not conceyue
the swetenes of that heuenly simplicitie, wherof
make hartes onely and humble are part takers.
For as to pride & arrogancy Christ euer resistith,
so to lowlynes and humilitie, his grace euer he
communeth,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  . 11. that he exalteth and setteth in high
dignitie, euen as pride, he euer depresseth and
putteth vnder foote. Soo that by this gate we
must entre, whiche fewe men fynde, yf we wyll
folowe hym, and to the mysteries of his doctrine
take the true way: for excepte we be as chyldren
lowely and meke,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                without all corrupt affection,
there shall to vs be no gate open, to brynge vs to
his kyngdome and heuenly perfection. This is
the trewe trace, wherin he muste treade, who so
euer fruitefully wyl seke the true sense of goddis
worde, the whiche who so entreth, doutlesse shall
fynde, to suche scrupule of conscience a synguler
remedy, without ferther expectation of general
counsel and decree: & neuer shal fere to giue obedience

to suche thynges as be decreed by cōmon
authoritie, specially seing they touche only thinges
indifferent, nothyng necessary to our saluatiō:
as I thinke it shalbe euidēt vnto al thē, who
wyl throughly rede and indifferently weye suche
thynges, as I haue gathered in this lyttell Instruction:
and than I shal not dout, but that we
shall runne all togyther in one course in christen
vnitie,Christen vnitie. whiche shortly to touche standeth in this
poynte chiefely. We must conceyue if we wyl be
true professours of Christs doctrine, a certayne
brotherly loue eche one towarde other, iugynge
our selfes to be borne of one father,Iohan. 13. Galatas. 3. nouryshed of
one mother, membres of one body, hangynge of
one heed, lokynge for one reward, promysed vnto
vs, lyuyng to gyther in this vnitie. We must
thinke that our mayster Christe discended down
from the bosome of his father, to stablyshe this
concorde and vnitie, in the hartis of all theym,Iohan. 17.
which purpose to be inheritours with him in his
kyngedome of heuen euerlastyngely. We muste
thynke, that by this onely is the way to immortalytie,
the whiche if we doo, I doubte not, but
that all suche diuision as hangeth ouer our heedes,
whiche myght bringe in confusion into this
our countrey & polycie, we shal ryght wel auoyd
and eschewe, lyuinge together in due obedience
and perfyt vnitie. For the which I shal not cesse
to pray vnto hym, who hath promysed surely to
gyue the lyght of truthe to all them, whiche demande

it mekely. And the same I shall require
of you all, to whom it shall chaunce to rede this
instructiō, and of this to make a sure cōclusion,
that if we with mekenes and humilitie, faythful
loue and charitie, seke out the true sense of goddis
worde diligently,Matt▪ 21. we shal surely it fynde, and
suche lyght therof receiue, that though we neuer
here of pope nor cardynall, nor yet of counsell
generall, yet shall not we be destitute
of suche truthe and lyght
as is necessary to our saluation.
But here I wylle
make an ende, and
trouble you with
no longer
preface,
remyttynge you to the instruction,
for ferther
declaration.
         
         
            
            AN EXHORTATION TO
the people, instructynge theym to
Unitie and Obedience.
            
               
                  AS IT IS TO AL OTHER
creatures, by the power of God
brought forth into this world, naturally
giuen by his goodnes to
desyre their ende and perfection,
the which they be ordeyned vnto,
so it is to the nature of man, who of al other here
in erthe is moste noble, and of dignitie moste excellent,
as he that is with reasone indewed, the
moste heuenly thinge, wherof bodily creatures
and erthly, may be parttakers, by the whiche as
by the chiefe instrument, he may seke and inserche
al conueniēt meanes, wherby he may attayn
the better to suche ende and perfection, as by the
goodnesse of god to hym is appoynted: and all
though this desyre be to all mankynde common,
and euer hath bene of what religion so euer they
be, yet we mooste, christen people, whiche be of
Christes flocke, and lyghted with the spirite of
god, make ꝓfession of his name, aboue al other
ought to be therof moste desirous, as they which
haue by the singuler benefite of god, a more sure
knowlege, & a more sure groūd, to leane vnto, thē
any other people in erth, for we haue the expresse
& manyfest doctrine of god, by the whiche we ar
taught and instruct the streyght and sure waye,

to the attaynynge of our felicitie, the whiche stā
               deth
nother in worldly honour, plesure, nor high
dignitie, no nor yet in any secrete knowledge of
subtyll philosophie. For than it shulde not be cō
               mon
but to fewe,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                and the multitude of christen
people shuld be excluded from it: But according
to the hole course of the doctrine of our moste louynge
master Christe, it resteth only in faythfull
loue and charitable vnitie.
                  
                     〈…〉
                  . This testifieth our
master him selfe, in his gospel by his own worde,
commaundynge vs aboue al other thing in thisAct. 4.
charitable vnitie, to be coupled and knytte togither,
none otherwyse than he is with the eternall
father in diuinitie. To the which agreeth all the
processe of the doctrine of Paule,
                  
                     •
                  ala
                     •
                  . 3. the trew interpretour
of the mynde of Christe, who euer exhorteth
vs, as we be membres of one body coupled
to our heed Christe,
                  
                     〈…〉
                   1. so with faythful loue of him
to lyue to gether in this charitable vnitie, which
is the ende as he faith of al preceptes and lawes,
as the tynge wherin standeth the perfection of
a christen mynde: from the whiche no manne of
what state or degree so euer he be, at any tyme is
excluded. For this pathe is open to all men that
wyll it seke, whether they be pore or ryche, yong
or olde, sycke or hole, this way they maye entre.
And by this way to their perfectiō & felicite they
maye attayne: of the whiche dere frendes you
may highly reioyse, gyuing thankes to the goodnes
of god, who by our mayster Christe hath so

declared this way, & so indifferently opened it to
vs al without exception of any person,Rom. 3. or preferment
of any certayn kynde of lyfe or degree, that
no man there is, but he may be parttaker of this
perfection and felicitie. For as dere is he to god,
that is a plowman or labourer of the erthe, as is
the moste royall kynge or prince in his high maiestie,
if he loue his master Christe with no lesse
affecte than doth he.Ep
                     •
                  e. 6. As dere is he to Christ who
is a cobblar, as is the greattest philosopher, if he
with his simplicite, haue no lesse trust in the promysses
of god, than hath he with his hyghe philosophie.
AS dere is he to god,Coloss. 3. who is a marchāt
abrode in the worlde trauaylynge for his lyfe, as
is the monke in his cloyster mooste religious, yf
to the worde of god he gyue no lesse truste in his
tranaylle and busynesse, thanne dothe he in his
trauquillitie and quietnes. And in conclusion of
what sorte, crafte, or condicion so euer man be,
though in this polityke life and worldly, there be
great diuersitie, yet before god, who loketh into
the harte, there considerynge the sure fayth and
truste in his promysse and worde, there is no regarde
of person nor degree:Rom▪ 12. but to all proportionably
accordynge to their faytfull loue and charitie,
he gyueth his hygh rewarde and eternalle
felicitie. This is a sure and stable ground of our
trewe religion: this is the comforte of all faithfull
hartes, of this reioyse you, most christen people,
in this fyxe your hope: & you shal fynd therin

great and inestimable quietnesse. Leane to this
anchor, and you shall easyly passe the stormes of
this worlde: stable this in your hartes, and in
the myserable and wretchyd state of this lyfe,
short and transytorie all aduersitie you shal bere
with equall mynde and righte paciently. For to
him that hath vnfaynedly Christe printed in his
harte, and is armed with the fayth and sure loue
of him, who gouerneth al by his high prouidēce,
all worldly aduersite, which cometh not to him
by his owne negligence and faut, is to hym torned
into ioye comforte and playne felicitie:
                  
                     〈…〉
                  , 12. and
this is the greattest benefyte that mans mynde
may receyue here in the erthe, of the doctrine of
Christe, of the whiche benefyte euery man desyreth
to be partaker: for euery man desyreth quietnes
of mynde, euery man iugeth therin to rest
all felicitie, there is no mā so madde and so with
out sence, that aboue all thinge in his harte desyreth
not to inioye and imbrace this quietnesse
and tranquillitie. Wherfore dere frendes this
appereth to me a thynge moste meruaylous and
wonderfull, to see vs all, soo desyrous hereof,
and soo fewe to take the streyghte waye to the
attaynynge of the same, but ledde by bypathes,
somme by vayne pleasure, somme by ambition,
and somme by curious knowledge, and cloked
superstition we runne to our owne ruyne, plaine
myserye, and destruction.
            In so moche that sommetyme whan I do consyder

with my selfe the nature of manne, and his
excellent dignitie, he appereth to myne eye, of
all other creatures moste wretched and myserable,
who by the goodnesse of god beinge ordeyned
to so hye felicitie, by his blynde folye falleth
to soo manyfeste miserye. For the whiche cause,
thoughe I haue many tymes with my selfe in a
maner lamented the state and condicion of man,
who so lyghtly slyppeth frome his dignitie, yet
neuer more than nowe of late I haue bene constrayned
to the same, by the reasone of a greatte
blyndenes raygnynge amonge vs, here in our
countreye, wherby this charitable vnitie, in the
whiche restethe our felycitie, and quietnesse of
mynde, is greattely broken and dissolued, by the
whiche blyndenesse this spirytualle bodye, this
churche of Christe, wherof we be all membres,
yf by trewe and faythfull loue we be knytte to
our spirituall hedde,Ephe▪ 
                  
                     •
                  . is disseuered and in sondrye
partes deuyded and rent. For what vnitie maye
there be iudged to reste amonge theym, where
as that one estemeth an nother to be an heretike,
or at the leeste a scysmatyke? What christen concorde
and vnitie maye in those hartes reygne,
where as one iudgeth an nother to be a foolyshe
Pharisee, or a superstitious papyste? one to be
of the newe fashyon, and hym to be frantycke:
and an other of the olde, and hym to be foolyshe
blynde and diabolike. Howe may these myndes

with such iugementes one of an other in loue be
knitte to gether,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . 1. and be of one sentence in Christ,
the which aboue all thyng Paule dothe require:
Howe may such myndes be as it were mēbres of
one body? how may they receyue the lyght of the
spirite, whiche be in spirite so diuided? vndoubtedly
by no mene: for there Christ doth not reigne
no more than light in darknes doth shyne, where
as is nother concorde peace nor vnitie, wherin is
grounded al christen policie:
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                For vpō this faithfulle
vnitie and loue in Christe, and vppon this
charitable fayth in him is buylded Christis churche,
and this is the stone, whervpon it was first
founded: This is the rocke, wherby it is susteyned:
this is the key, whiche shal make open to vs
heuen gatis, against the which nothing may preuayle.
Wherfore frendes considerynge that this
vnitie is the principalle grounde of all Christen
life, which semeth in som part by our own blindnes
lately to be broken here amonge vs, to the
entent we may somewhat the better amonge our
selfes, by the grace and fauour of the holy spirite
of god, of whom cometh all vnitie, both restore
and conserue the same with quietnes and tranquillitie,
I shall nowe at this tyme fyrste gether
certayn causes of the dissolutiō and brake of this
vnitie, and so afterwarde adioyne certayn meanes,
whiche by the goodnes of hym that gouerneth
al, may in some part helpe to the restitution
of the same, that so consequētly we as membres

of one body, by spirituall loue coupled to gether
and knytte to one heed, may at the last somwhat
the better attayne to our felicitie. This processe
I wyll vse.
            Howe be hit in the fyrste begynnynge this you
shall vnderstande, that I canne not by wordes
most christen people, declare vnto you the sorowe
of mynd, which lately I haue conceyued by a cō
               mon
blyndnes, here reignyng among vs, which
taketh fro me in a maner al swetenes of lyfe, the
grefe wherof is greatter than I can expresse, and
the cause why brefely I shal by your paciēce, first
in some parte touche, bycause hit is somewhat to
my purpose: I haue all my lyfe hitherto, for the
moste part, gyuen my self to the study of letters,
occupienge my selfe in dyuers kyndes therof,
both in secular studies and in holy scripture, but
euer referrynge all my labour and peynes to the
knowlege of Christe, as to the ende, of righte to
be proposed to all christen myndes: hauyng this
hope & comfort euer before myn eies, at the last to
employ my labours take
                  •
                in the same, here in my
natyfe countrey, to some vse and profyte therof.
This was the thynge that made all my labours
euer to seme lyght: and this hope was euer the
chiefe comforte of my mynde: for borne we be al,
and brought forth of nature, not only to lyue as
brute beastes do, seruynge the bodye, but suche
gyftes of mynde, as god of his mere goodnesse
hath gyuen vnto vs,Galat, 6. to employe echeone to the

profyte of other, and so to lyue in perfyte ciuilitie.
This ende I euer loked vnto: This was the
chiefe comforte I hadde in this worlde, and as
me seemeth no smalle comforte to anye honeste
mynde. But nowe frendes sythen I am lately
out of Italy, where as I haue bene many yeres
in studies, hyther retourned into my countreye,
and haue taken somme experience of your maners
here at home, I am almost, playnly to say,
depriued of this comforte, I am almoste putte
out of this hope. For suche blyndenes I haue
obserued to reigne amonge you, suche diuision,
suche discorde of myndes, that foly hit were for
me, amonge suche troubled hartes to conceyue
opinion to inioye this, moste desyred of all men,
that is, quietnes and tranquillitie: in so moche
that if it were not for the greatte goodnesse and
hygh wysedome of our moste noble prince, who
nothynge more tendereth in erthe, than the conseruation
of this vnitie, ye and if it were not for
the greatte opinion, whiche I haue euer hadde
of you moste christen people, whom I haue obserued
always religious, and desyrous of truth,
I shulde vtterly be putte in dispayre, and shuld
more gladdely flee from my countrey, and from
your conuersation, than here to tary among you
without hope and comforte of quietnes in suche
tribulation, and in suche prepetuall myserie, as
vndoubtedly we shalbe wrapped in, by our owne
blyndenes, excepte in tyme we resiste the same.

For this blyndenes hathe so corrupte our iudgementes,
that to the corruption therof, of necessitie,
by the ordynaunce of god,Ep
                     •
                  e. 4. muste folowe confusyon,
and of all quyetnesse and of swete chrysten
lyuynge playne destruction. For the whyche
cause, whatte sorowe I haue inwardly conceyued,
I can not now outwardly by wordes expresse:
in soo moche that if I hadde not somme
hoope to tempre this sorowe, my harte coulde
not supporte the vehemencye therof, but the
goodnes of our prince greattely dothe comforte
me, whome I thynke by the high prouidence of
god, to be gyuen to vs in this tyme to remedye
this common, and pernicious blyndenes, reygnynge
in vs. For daye nor nyghte nothynge his
grace hath more in mynde, than the maner and
meane, to take away this blyndenes frome our
hartis: and mooste lyke a chrystian prynce, no
thynge he more studyeth, thanne to conserue amonge
vs, this spirituall and christen concorde
and vnitie, no thynge he more takethe cure of,
than to remoue al suche thynges, as to his high
wysedome dothe appere, to be impedymentes,
or in any parte lettes or hyndraunces to the settynge
forwarde of the same, by the whiche yet
somewhat I am styrred and moued to conceyue
myne olde hope ageyne, to the whiche also moche
moued I am by the goodnesse of your nature,
mooste christen people, whome I perceyue
to be as dilygente and studyous of the truthe,

and as desirous to haue knowlege of the syncere
and pure religion of Christ, as any nation vpon
erthe, and in no men I se to be more prompte redy
                  •
               cs
to receyue the same, than euer I haue obserued
in you. Wherfore in this parte also great
hope I haue, that whan you be instruct playnly
and clerely of suche blyndnes, as reigneth amōg
you, right gladdely you wyll flye from the same,
auoydynge with all diligence the causes therof,
& promptly admitting the remedies of the same:
the whiche purpose yf you ones conceyue and
stable in your hartes, it is not to be vouted, but
the goodnes of god shal set it forward,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                and bring
you out of this daungerous blyndenes, whiche
nowe so reygneth in your stomakes, mortified &
colde for lacke of charitie.
            But nowe to the purpose, after that I haue in
somme parte declared the affecte of myne owne
mynde, I shall breuely touche and declare this
common blyndnes, whiche reygneth among vs,
and so recite certayn chiefe and principal causes,
wherof the same blynd
                  •
               es hath taken his foundation
and grounde, to thentent that somewhat
the better, suche remedies as by the goodnes of
god, and prouidence of our prince, shall hereaf
               
                  ••
               r
be applyed to the same, may take effecte, and

                  •
               rynge forthe their frute, to the cōmon comforte
of all christen hartes: the whiche whyle I do, I
shal beseche you paciētly most christen people, to
here me, and with indifferent iudgement, by no

affection corrupt, to wey such thynges as I shal
set before your eies. But here som of you perauē
               ture
shal greatly meruayle most christē people of
this my purpose & enterprise, so boldly to affirme
& to take vpon me, to declare suche blyndenes to
reigne amonge vs, specially in this tyme, wherin
by the iugement of many wyse men, the truth
is declared and opened to our eies, after suche
maner, that we playnly condempne all our forefathers
of ignorancye, gyuynge thankes to all
mighty god, for so manifest declaration of truth
nowe in this age by his goodnes to vs opened:
To whom this I wyll fyrste in the begynnynge
say, that all be it some thynges by the goodnes
of god, and diligent prudence of wyse and polityke
men, are brought to lyghte, whiche before
tyme from our forefathers were couert and hyd,
yet of suche moment and weyght they be not in
dede, wherfore we oughte to condempne all the
antiquitie: and all our forefathers for the ignorance
therof, vtterly to caste into the depe pytte
of helle: nor yet of suche sorte they be not, that by
the inuention of them, we may iustely so glorie,
as by them to be delyuered from al blyndnes and
ignorancye, for yet blynde we be, and excepte we
take diligent cure, in this blyndnesBlyndeness
                     •
                  
                we shal dye.
For that blyndenes is almoste incurable, to the
which is ioyned prowde arrogācy, so that of this
doubte there is none, that al though in this our
age many thinges are brought out of darkenes

to lyghte: yet of suche nature they are not to be
iudged, that we shulde therby be constrayned to
cōfesse, of truth to haue the clere sight. This benefyte
is to great for our age to beare, wherin as
it appereth to me, by discorde, diuersitie of iugementes,
and contrary sentence, truthe is almost
ouerthrowen, and dryuen away, which is of this
nature,
                  
                     •
                  phe. 4. that she neuer wyll appere, but onely in
suche hartes, whiche withoute corrupte affection
be pure and syncere: therfore to pronounce
blyndnes to reigne in vs I wyll not feare, and
nowe procede to declare the same: wherin fyrste
most christen people, this you shal vnderstande,
that of all kyndes and sortes of ignoraunce and
blyndnes, whiche occupieth our myndes, I wyl
not nowe speke. For that matter were ouer large
to entreate, and not conuenient to your eares to
here: For as moche as ignorance and blyndnes,
after the sentence of the auncient lerned men, to
whose mynde I do therin agree, is the fountayn
and mother of all vicious affectes and myserie.
For man dothe nothyng that is yuel,Pl
                     •••
                  in Ti
                  
                     •••
                   A
                     •••
                  . Eth. 7. but he hath
som pretext and colour of good, wherby he is induced
to the execution of his dede. For this is a
sure grounde, no man wyttyngly and wyllyngly
wyll do hym selfe hurt, nor no suche thyng whiche
is to hym yuell, except to hsi iugement it appered
good: so that euer by som fals perswasion
reason is corrupt, & blinded with affectiō. But this
blindnes in ordryng the natural affectes & desyres

to naturall reason, which euer hath ben cō
               mon
to mankynde, and euer shalbe duryng this
worlde, I wyll sette a parte, euen lyke as I wyl
also, the ignorance and blindnes of the nature of
thignes, whiche cometh by lacke of knowlege of
letters, and hygh philosophie, wherof our natiō
is somwhat rude, and moche more I fere shortly
wyl be, by a contempte of letters, whiche dayely
growethe in amonge vs. Of these. ii. kyndes of
blyndenes I saye nowe at this tyme, I wyll not
speake, but I wyl touche. ii. other kyndes of this
blyndnes, concernyng pure religion, and trewe
honour of god, whiche are more pernicious to al
ciuyle order and polycie, than the other be, of the
whiche the one bryngeth in, the disobedience to
cōmon lawe stablyshed by cōmon authoritie, the
other the contempt of religion, which is the foū
               dation
& groūd of al good & true policy. The first
I may call a superstitious blindnes, the whiche
by longe processe of time, is roted in our stomakes
vnder the pretence of religion: The seconde
me semeth may wel be called an arrogant blynd
nes, whiche lately is growen in here among vs,
by lyghtnes of iugement, contrary to all religious
opinyon, and Christen ciuylitie: the whiche
both so manifestly reigne in our hartis, that this
thynge to declare by longe processe & many wordes
may playnly appere superfluous. For as tou
chinge the superstitious blyndnes of many, we
haue had lately amonge vs lamētable experiēce,

to al honest hartes greuous and sorowful, of the
whiche many wordes nowe to speake, I can not
without great sorowe: for a sorowfull case it appered
to me to see suche men, so notable, bothe of
vertue and lernynge, as by common fame, some
of them were reported to be, whiche lately haue
suffred, so sturdely to stycke in a manyfest superstition,
that rather they shulde chose to lose theyr
lyues, than to be remoued frome their opinion,
wherin they stode so styffely, vnder the perswasion
of true religion: For it appered to them to
pertayne to the religion of Christe, by necessitie
the byshop of Rome amonge al christen nations,
to haue suche superioritie, as of many yeres he
hathe, abusynge their pacience, vsurped vppon
them: In the defence wherof, as it had ben an
article of the fayth, they boldly, with more pacience
than wysedome, suffred their deth, the whiche
thinge in dede as hereafter shall appere, is a
playne and manyfest superstition, and spryngeth
out of superstitious blyndnes, bryngynge forth
pernicious and sturdy obstinacy, with disobedience
to princely authoritie, and to lawes authorysed
by common counselle and good policie, to
the obedience wherof, we are bounden by the lawes
of god and of nature, so long as they stande
in full strength and power, with no repugnancy
vnto the same. The blyndnes of these persons I
am sure all you moste christen people, of harte do
lament, and specially of somme of theym, whose

fame of lernynge and vertue, throughout Christendome
was spredde, but as you ernestly lament
and sorowe the blyndenes of the same persones,
soo I truste you wylle with all harte and
mynde, auoyde suche superstition and blynd obstinacye,
and suffre it not to take any roote and
grounde amonge you, wherof myghte succede
ruine bothe to vs and our posterite, of this thing
in many of you, whiche conceyue the matter as
it is in dede, with dewe obedience in hart admittynge
the same, I doubt nothynge at all, but certayne
I am, that their example shall be to you of
small moment and weyght: in so moche that to
speake any worde of that matter to some of you,
after law stablyshed thervpon, & lerned iugemēt
declarid therin, semith to me almost superfluous
and labour in vayn. But yet for as moch, as som
other there be among you of lesse knowlege, and
weaker conscience, of this thinge hereafter in
his place I shal somwhat say and open to you at
large my sentence therin, But nowe I wylle returne
agayn, ferther to descrybe and declare vnto
you this superstitious blyndenes and blynde
superstition.
            And fyrste to thentent ye may better perceyue
the reste of my communication I shall shortely
touche, as moche as shalbe expedient to my purpose,
the difference betwyxt true and perfyte religion,
& fals and vayn superstition, for the whiche
brefely to say without longe disputation,
            
               
True religion is this,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                with syncere and pure spirite
to honour god, and with most reuerent loue
and ardent affection of harte and mynde to worshyppe
the diuine nature, by Christ in our dayes
to mankynde declared, as author of al thinges,
fountayne of all goodnes, and gouernour of al.
This teacheth vs our mayster Christe, the very
true doctour of all trewe relygion, in his gospel,
instructynge the woman of Cananee,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                feruently
desyrynge the knowledge therof, where he saith
vnto her, that the very true worshyppers of god
be suche as in spirite and truthe worshyppe him
in harte. For lyke as he is of nature spirituall, &
nothinge but truthe, so he delyteth in suche honour
and worshyppe, as in truthe of spirite cometh
out of the harte, and spiritualle power of
man, and not onely out of his lyppes, or by any
other exterior signes declared: It is the honor of
harte that he doth require, who only loketh into
the hart of mā, with him there is no place of dissimulatiō.
wherfore aboue al thing as the course
of his lyfe and doctrine openly declareth,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   2
                     •
                  . Hypocrisye
hym moste hyghly displeasyth: for as god
is syncere and pure truthe, so accordyngely with
fals fayned hypocrisye, he is moste offended: soo
that trewe religion is with the inwarde affect of
harte, the trewe honour of god, though it be set
out also, to the face of the worlde, by outwarde
token and ceremonie. And this we lerne of our
master Christ: The which thyng also his apostel

Iames playnly confyrmeth, where as he sayth,Iacob. 1.
that pure and clene religion stondeth in brotherly
loue, and euery one to his power helpyng eche
other, to commune the gyftes of god, to our cō
               mon
comforte, and so liftyng vp our hartes from
all worldly affection, to put our hole confidence
and truste in his goodnes, liuing in him and not
in our selfes, there settynge all our comfort and
ioye, louynge hym with harte aboue all thynge,
and all thinges for him. In this christen people,
shortly to conclude, stondeth the puritie of trewe
religion, in so moch that he of what state & cōdicion
so euer he be, yt thus loueth god, as maker &
gouernour of al, with reuerēt drede of brekynge
his precept & cōmandmēt, euer beryng to him lo
uyng fere & fearful loue, with hart obediēt to the
same, This mā I say is a pfyte religious man,
though he be nother couered with sainct Benets
cote, nor yet with saynt Francys: ye & though he
be at ploughe and the carte, and labourynge the
grounde, yet may he be as perfite in religion as
the moste perfyte monke lyuynge in his cloyster.
But here frendes I wolde not ye shulde of me
take occasion, to condemne all these monastical
sortes & kindes of religion, which for the conseruation
& setting forward of this pure and perfyt
religion of Christ by holy & reuerēt fathers haue
ben inuēted & cōstitute, lōge & many yeres by cō
               mon
authorite amōg vs receiued: for this opiniō
I wold not haue you to cōceiue, which abhorrith

from christen ciuilitie. But by this meane I shal
induce you, to perceyue somwhat the better this
blynde superstition, whiche is a playne contrary
to pure religion, the whiche as you haue harde
requyreth ardent loue of god, myngled also with
some reuerent feare: for euery christen hart must
feare to breake and transgresse the commaundemēt
of god. Wherfore we must bere towarde god
both fearefull loue and louynge feare, the which
thynge as you shall nowe here,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  . hathe minystred
the grounde to all superstition, whiche brefely to
saye is nothynge elles,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                but a scrupulous and a
seruyle maner of the honourynge of god, conceyued
in the harte of man, by ouermoche feare
of the transgression of the commaundement of
god, whiche bringeth in corrupte iugement, makynge
vs to iudge that thynge, to pertayne to
his honour and trewe religion, whiche dothe nat
in dede, but hangeth onely of mannes constitution.
As by example, some of vs are so superstitious,
that if they here not .iii. masses euery day
in the honour of the Trinitie, though they haue
busynes of great necessitie: yet greuousely they
iudge them selfes to offende the maiestie of god.
And some if they crosse not them selfes at sainct
Iohn̄s gospell, or kysse nat the paxe in the masse
tyme, thynke in that day scante to spede well, suche
is the superstitious fere in many mens myndes,
whiche hath gyuen occasion to so many sortes
and kyndes of monasticalle lyues, and solitarie

religion. For many men consideringe the
dangers abrode in the worlde, ministred to them
by manyfolde occasion, and weyinge with them
selfes their owne fraylnes and imbecillitie, wherby
they perceyued they coulde not resist the common
pleasures and vanities of the worlde, and
so fearyng to be trapped therby, fledde into wyldernes
& solitarie places, auoydyng the worldly
companye, there lyuynge at the firste, in greatte
quietnes of mynde: by whose example many other
moued, by lyttel and lyttel, grew to a great
company, and made in wyldernes as hit were a
lyttell polycie, amonge whom at the begynnyng
bothe vertue and lernynge, came to great perfection,
in soo moche that other obseruynge theyr
constaunce and austeritie of lyfe, lyuinge abrode
amonge the common pleasures, begynnynge to
distruste to their kynde of lyues, fearyng the displeasure
of god, with ouermoch drede of liuing
abrode, iudged superstitiousely the pcrfection of
Christis religion, in that solitarie kynde of lyfe
onely to remayne, by the reason wherof that nō
               bre
nowe in our days is ouermoch growen, whiche
so haue fylled monasteries, that many cities
almoste be lefte voyde, to the great ruine of common
ciuilitie. But of this hereafter, and to retourne
to the pourpose, nowe after that by these
few wordes, somwhat I thinke you do perceiue,
what is true religiō, and what superstition, and
wherin they differre. For as true religion is the

honour of god, with reuerent fere of disobeying
of his preceptes, so superstition is a scrupulous
honour myngled with ouermoche and seruyle
feare, with meruaylous disquieting of the weke
conscience & blynde, the whiche by corrupt iugement
taketh suche thynge to pertayne of necessitie
to the honour of god, which in dede nothyng
so doth, but hangeth onely vpon mans consent:
so that by this I saye nowe you shall be induced
playnly to confesse, moch blynde superstition to
reigne in your hartes, as I shall nowe partely
note. For all sortes and kyndes of superstition,
here to prosecute, shuld be ouerlonge, & nothinge
necessarie to my purpose: sufficient it shalbe som
to descrybe, the reste leauyng to your owne examination.
            And fyrst thinke not you, that like as there hath
bene some to the great sorowe of honest myndes,
which lately blynded by superstition, haue iuged
the vnitie of Christis churche, vtterly to be broken,
by pluckynge frome the pope, his vsurped
power ouer vs and superioritie? so there be some
other of no lesse blyndnes, whych if the organes
shoulde be plucked oute of the churche, and the
curyous syngynge tempered and broughte to a
conuenyente meane, ye or yf the prayers commonly
sayde amonge vs in temples in a strange
tongue, of the people not vnderstonde, shoulde
openly be rehersed in the mother tongue, to the
entente that the affecte of the harte myght therby

rather be styrred, to the trewe honour of god,
whiche I say wolde lykewyse iuge with no lesse
superstition, Christes relygion vtterly to be ouer
tourned. And further if to priestes the mynisters
of goddis worde, libertye were graunted
by common authoritie, to marye and take wyues
for the auoydynge of Fornycation, wolde
they not thynke, that christian purytie were vtterly
than extincte? ye and if the holy dayes and
masses also celebrat vpō the same, were brought
to lesse nombre, than wolde they say, Christ were
vtterly driuen awaye. And yet ferther yf monasteryes
shoulde be mynisshed, and of theym the
foundations altered, ye thoughe it were to the
hygh settynge forwarde of vertue and lernynge,
yet wolde many of you thinke, Christis relygion
vtterly therby to peryshe. Suche is our blyndnes,
suche is our foly. And what trow you cōcernyng
the sacramentes, that many of vs haue not
also of them very folyshe & superstitious opiniō,
lokynge onely to the outwarde sygne and ceremony,
nothynge consyderynge the inwarde and
heuenly mysterie? Be there not som amonge vs
thynke you, that wold iuge their childrē not to be
wel baptised and christened, if they were not dipped
in the fount quite ouer the heed, wherby the
childe oft tymes cōceyueth his deth? & yet this is
but a rite & a custome, diuersely vsed amonge diuers
natiōs, & nothing ꝑteining to y• substance of
the sacrament. Be there not som also, the whiche

yf their frende were sycke, and in daungier of
lyfe, and so at the laste taken by dethe, before the
priest coulde aryue to minister to him, the hoste,
and extreme vnction, wolde playnly thinke and
iudge that he shuld die a damned sowle, and sore
lament therfore, the departure of their frende, as
though in suche a case, the wyl and purpose were
not sufficient. Be there not also some, the which
in confession, if for lacke of memorie or a lyttell
negligence, they dydde not recyte all their dedes
with the circumstance of the same, wold plainly
iudge, voyde the absolution? Yes vndoubtedly.
Of this sort among vs there be dyuers and many,
whiche by manyfolde superstition, haue their
iudgementes so corrupte, that al be it that by the
power of princis and cōmon authorite, the abuse
of suche thinges, wherto they haue ben long accustomed,
shuld be reformed & brought to better
frame, yet in their hartes and myndes they wold
not wel beare it, but styl against suche alteration
and refourmyng to true religion, wold murmur
and grudge, moued by their blynd superstiiton:
suche is their madnesse & grosse opinion, they do
not well ponder and wey, the nature of politike
thinges and indifferent, whiche be of this sorte,
that in processe of tyme by littell and littell euer
grow to iniuste extremitie, in so moch that of necessitie
they require prudent reformation: ayenst
the which they sturdely armed with superstition,
euer repugne, bicause they lack right iugement,

to discerne betwixt thynges worldly & politike,
and thinges whiche hange of the necessite of nature,
and of the scripture and gospell of god, the
whiche thinges contrary to the other, whiche by
nature be indifferent, neuer admyt chaunge nor
innouation, no nor yet tempering by dispēsatiō,
as hereafter in his place more playnly I shal declare.
But nowe I thinke dere frendes, in some
part, by this whiche I haue said, our blyndnesse
and vayne superstition, whiche thus reygnethe
in our hartis, is open vnto vs, in so moche that
hereby you may perauenture be styrred, to fynde
by diligent examination of your owne consciences,
manye other sortes of this superstition, the
whiche all to correcke and amende, lette vs not
cesse continually to pray to him, who is only author
of all trewe religion. And this nowe consequently
I shal procede, in lyke maner, brefely to
touche, the other kynde of blyndnes, whiche reigneth
in vs no lesse thanne dothe this, and with
more hyndrance to all good order and ciuilitie.
For yet better it is, blynded with superstition, to
admyt suche thinges to be of the law of god, whiche be not in dede, than by arrogant blyndnes, to
derogate the authoritie therof, and so bringe in
the contempt of religion, whiche is the common
gate of all myserie and myschiefe bothe priuate
and publyke. For in that mynde or in that common
weale,Roman. 1. where as is no respect of god & good
religion, there al thynges muste nedes runne to

ruyne and confusion.
            And firste to declare what I meane by this arrogant
blyndenes,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                this you shall vnderstonde,
that lyke as superstition is scrupulous and seruile
honour of god, coupled with ouermoch fere,
so contrary this blyndnes in religiō, is by a fayned
& dissimuled honour of god vtterly seperate
from all fere and drede of his punyshment: in so
moche that suche menne, in whose myndes reigneth
this arrogancie, if hit were not for feare of
mannes lawe, wolde brynge to ruyne all order
and policye, they wolde haue all thynges whyche
nature hathe broughte forth to the common
comforte of manne, to be in common, iudgynge
this inequalitie in possession of thynges, where
as somme haue to lyttell, and some ouer moche,
to be playne ageynste Nature, and manyfeste iniurye,
they wolde in all thinges serue their owne
fantasye, they wolde in harte be subiecte to no
ceremonie, lawe, nor mannes tradition: for that
they saye agreethe not to the libertie of a Chrystian
manne, who is free frome all bondage of
lawe, and subiecte to no ceremonye, the whiche
they say be only snares and stayes vnto weke
myndes, nothynge agreing vnto theyr dignitie.
            Thus with greatte wordes many of vs booste
and blowe, euen as though we were equall with
sayncte Poule, for bycause that we canne reherse
certayne of his wordes perteynynge vnto
the same lybertie, but the meane tyme we serue

our affectes, and to them in al this libertie be vtterly
subiecte more than any slaue vnto his master:
for whether so euer they drawe vs, thyther
heedlonge we runne, & them wilfully we folowe,
makinge no resistence therto: wherin dere frendes
what arrogant blyndenesse this is,Trewe lybertie. Galat. 4. manifestly
I trowe you see: this to bragge in wordes
of christen lybertie, beinge so subiecte to vayne
affectes and all myserye, frome whiche a harte
that inioyith that libertie, is nete and pure, in no
poynt seruynge therto, but by spirituall comfort
so is confirmed, that all such affectes he treadeth
vnder foote: wherin stondeth this libertie, whiche
maketh a man obedient with a gladde harte
to all ceremonies and lawes, wherof by this arrogant
blindnes a great sorte of vs be manifest
despisers, as you daily not without sorowe, who
so wyll aduerte, may by experience both here and
see. For somme there be amonge vs, whiche of
their owne foolishe fantasie, generally all traditions
do condempne, though that they be neuer
soo good and conueniente to the conseruation
of the spirituall policie, as vndoubtedly many
of them be: All ceremonies they haue in derision,
and calle them plaine hypocrisie, thoughe
they were neuer so well of holy fathers ordeined
and institute, to stire the deuotion of simple mindes
to christen puritie: all ecclesiasticall lawes
they vtterly abrogate, though they be yet amōge
vs receiued and authorised by cōmon authorite,

all counselles they vtterly condemne, as thinges
gouerned and ruled by playne and manyfest tyranny,
and as for pilgremage and veneration of
sainctes they haue for playne idolatrie, and soo
lykewise purgatory and praying for them which
be deed they repute folyshe simplicitie: fastynge
also they in no case wyll admyt, though it hathe
ben approued of al antiquitie: Holy dayes they
wyll admitte none, fearynge peraduenture the
occasion of the remembraunce of god, whome
though in worde they besily confesse, yet by their
dedes they vtterly hym denye, and out of theyr
hartes playnly him caste,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                accordynge to the nature
of this blynde arrogancy, which vnder the
pretence of religion despyseth the same as vayne
superstition: lyke as also vnder the pretext of iustyce
and good policie, it couertly subuerteth all
good order and ciuilite. And as for the sacramē
               tes,
thynk you to thē, some of this sort haue any
reuerence, the whiche they iudge to be onely as
doome sygnes? truly none at al: in so moche that
and yf it were not for the goodnes of our prince,
whome they se stedfastly stande in the defence of
the same, they wold sure before it were longe, as
ryghtes ecclesiasticalle and ceremonies, vtterly
condemne them also, and put them quite out of
memorie. For such is their pestilent persuasion,
that all thinge they wolde as it semeth bringe to
confusion, nothinge admittynge at all, but that
whiche is in scripture expressely conteyned, whiche

they also wyll vuderstonde after their owne
fantasie, to the contrarienge wherof yf you bring
the sentence of any auncient doctour, as of Ierome,
Austyne, Gregorie, or Ambrose, their authoritie
by and by they trede vnder fote, sayinge
they were men, to whose iudgement they be nothinge
bounden at al: And if you begyn to reson
with them to conuince thēof this their blynd arrogancy,
streight waye your reson they shake of,
saying it is drawē out of sophisticall philosophy:
& so after this maner many of vs our arrogant
blyndenes, blyndely defende, from the which by
no meane we wyl be deliuered, but sturdely stāde
in the defence of the same: whiche thynges frendes
is soore to be lamented. For these men vnder
the presence of libertie, couertly purpose to distroye
all christen policie, and soo in conclusion
bringe al to manyfest ruine and vtter confusion.
For what can you loke other of them, whiche so
arrogantly dispise all ceremonies, rytes, and ecclesiastical
lawes, al holsome customes and traditions,
but at the last also the certayne ruyne &
destruction of all christen puritie, and true religiō?
And if it were not that by the high wisedom
and policie of our prince, I haue greatte hoope
and sure truste some remedies shortly to be prouided,
wherby our hartes shalbe purged of such
blindnes cōcernyng religiō,Galat. 3. I might me semeth
make a sure conclusion, that shortly we shulde▪ se
brought in here in our coūtrey by this our owne

blyndnes, our owne confusion, the whiche nowe
as one of the effectes consequent, and of necessitie
annexed to the same, amonge other I wylle
brefely shew. For frendes of this be you assured,
this blyndenes of religion reigninge in our hartes,
as I haue declared, partely by superstition,
and partly by arrogant opinion,
                  
                     •
                  . 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 4. can not longe
contynue without dyuellishe effectes, of the whiche
some we se all redy, to our great sorowe put
before our eies, and some I wyll touche, whiche
all men do not obserue, though some of them be
all redy put in effecte, and some by all coniecture
are lyke to succede, excepte by his prouydence
chiefly, who gouerneth all, they may be from vs
aduerted and vtterly turned away.
            What meruailous effectes, howe diuers and
straunge this dyuellyshe blyndenes worketh in
mannes mynde, I wyll not, no nor if I wold I
can not all expresse.2. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 4. For euen as god hym selfe is
nothynge but truthe and wysedome, so the dyuel
is nothynge but blyndnes and foly: and as god
by wysedom,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   of Bly
                     •
                  denesse. as by the chief instrument worketh
all that is good both in heuen and erthe, soo the
dyuell by blyndnes worketh all that is euyl, here
in mannes lyfe: and with that as with the chefe
instrument, impugneth euer be
                  •
               yly the workes
of goddis wysedome and prouydence, as by example,
by the blyndnes comynge of the lacke of
knowledge of thynges he maketh mans mynde
rude and ignorant, lettynge hym therby frome

the admyration and contemplation of Nature,
and of all power therof, wherby elles he myghte
be styrred to consyder the bountyfulle goodnesse
of god, of whome nature taketh all her vertue
and power. By this blyndenes also he bringeth
man to the obedience of his vayne and beastely
affectes, by the reason wherof he neuer tastethe
of the swetenes of vertue, and into that gardein
he neuer doth entre, ye or yet if he doo, there he
can not tary at all, but streyght way is caste out
agayne, to that Eue beynge ouer obedient.Genesis. 3. This
I coulde confyrme by many places of scripture,
But I wylle not nowe tarye thervppon, nor be
about to expresse vnto you the hole course of this
dyuellyshe blyndnes, nor the romblyng effectis,
whiche the dyuell by this instrumente bringeth
forth here in the myserable and wretched lyfe of
manne, to the common distruction of all vertue
order and ciuilitie, wherof he is by his corrupte
nature ennemy: but I wyl somwhat touche only
certayn effectis, and them somwhat open to you,
the whiche this blyndnes in religion, whiche I
haue shewed, ye or rather we in our lyfe dayely &
playnly do shewe, to reigne in our hartes, partly
by vayne superstition, and partly by arrogant &
light opinion, hath and dothe daily bringe forth
here in our countrey. And fyrst as touchinge the
effectes of blind supstition, what it hath done all
redy it is to you al, more manifest thā nedeth declaratiō.
For what disobediēce to cōmon lawes,

good and expedient to the welth of this realme,Ro
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  3.
and what disobedience to the princely authorite,
to the whiche by goddis lawe straytely all trewe
subiectes are bounden, hath lately bene shewed,
and hath succeded as an effecte of this blynd superstition,
we dere frendes to the great sorow of
suche myndes, as of harte desyre the cōmon quietnes,
these days paste haue sene in them, whiche
nothinge fearynge the crueltie of peyne, haue to
the worlde testified by their deathe their disobedience,
moued by vayne and fals superstition,
whiche grewe in their hartes, and there was stablyshed
vnder pretexrte of trewe religion: by the
whiche perswasion they more boldly than wysely,
by the iudgement of wyse men, suffered their
deth. So that in this playnly moste christen people
here you may se, the moste dyuellyshe effecte
of this superstition, whiche induced men of such
lernynge, of suche wytte, and of suche perfectnes
of religion, as some of them which suffred, were
noted to be, so to be disobediente to common authorite,
& so wilfully to repugne ageinst the same
that more gladly in their superstitious opinion
they ranne vnto deathe, and with more pacience
sufferynge the same, semed it to desyre, then many
of vs desyre the swetenes of this lyfe or pleasure
therof. Suche was their blyndnes, whiche
so blynded their hartes, that contrary to al cours
and lawe of nature, they gladly that thinge suffred,
that man naturally euer doth abhorre. But

as I sayde herein you may se the great strength
and power of sturdy superstition, whiche so hath
ouerrūne y• wyttes of witty ꝑsons, coloured with
the spice of religiō, that al power of nature they
vtterly ouercame: but of this effect I wyl speke
no more, trusting that the example of these shall
gyue vnto you all sufficient warnynge and monition,
to auoyde all suche blynde superstition, &
yet hereafter in his place I shall not pretermytte
somewhat to say concernyng the instruction of
your weake conscience and knowlege in this behalf.
For what disquietnes reigneth in these hartes,
whiche by superstition are corruptly infecte,
by the reason wherof they be as it were into dyuers
partes rent, I wyll not be about here to expresse,
but leue it to the iugement of them, which
fele thē selfes vexed therwith. For here was my
purpose, only to touche this effect of superstitiō,
to the declaration whereof, these fewe wordes as
I think haue ben sufficient. wherfore consequētly
I wyll nowe procede to other, whiche nedeth
longer declaration, for as moche as all men do
not them obserue, for priuely they be cropen into
our bosomes, and dayely dothe more and more
there increase, the thynges be suche, that I wold
you myght them iustely deny, but of your owne
hartes I shall haue testimonie, your owne conscience
shall wytnesse with me.
            And brefely to say, this it is, as wel by the blindnesse
of this dyuellyshe superstition, as by this

pestilent and arrogant opiniō, there is growing
in among vs here a corrupt iugemēt one of an other,
by the reson wherof, eche one in hart iugeth
other to be, eyther pharisee or heretyke, papist or
sch
                  •
               smatike, to the whiche iugemēt consequently
is annexed diuision, & so to the same is succeded
of the very true and spirituall vnitie, a manifest
dissolution and an open bracke therof by dissention.
That this is true I shall in as few wordes
as I can manyfestly declare. For if I shuld particularly
and at length prosecute this thinge, I
shulde be ouerlonge and tedious to you. Wherfore
I wyll touche onely as it were certayn common
places and generall groundes, wherby we
are slypped into this pestilent and dyuellishe diuision
of spirite, by the reason wherof, somme of
you may perauenture be moued to consider the
corruption of your own iugementes herin.
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                And
fyrste in the begynnyng this you must take for a
manyfest truthe, that all suche which ouermoche
gyuinge to traditions, ceremonies, and ecclesiasticall
rytes, and customes, stycke to them as to
thinges stable by nature vnuariable, and of necessitie
to the saluation of manne required, without
the whiche the groundes of Christis religion
may not be conserued,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                all suche I say lening
to a false perswasion, erre, and haue conceyued
therby a great grounde of a corrupt iudgement.
For this is sure, that rites, ceremonies, and customes
of the churche, accordyng to tyme, place,

and nature of the people may be varied, as thinges
of them selfe nother sure nor stable, ye and
necessite it doth require. For euen as al dyet to al
men for bodily helth, is not agreable nor conuenient,
so all ceremonies to all nations for good
religion be nother mete nor expedient. Wherfore
the sturdy defence of them in priuate persons cō
               trary
to common authoritie, commeth vndoubtedly
of a folyshe and corrupt iugement, and roteth
superstition: Lyke as contrary this is of no
lesse truthe, that all suche persons, whiche traditions
of fathers, rytes, & customes vtterly condemne
and despise, bycause they fynde them not
in holy scripture playnly expressed, and so therfore
affirme them to be pernicious to all christen
ciuilitie, and as burdeynes of conscience,Matt▪ 23. iudge
them of their owne heedes vtterly to be caste awaye:
All suche I saye of the other syde be in no
lesse errour, and haue by this grounde and opinion
foūded a more corrupt iugement, thā haue
yet the other, therby runnynge into a contempt
                  •
               
of religion. For to this iugement is annexed the
ruine of al christen pollicie, whiche is conserued
and moche maynteyned by rytes & customes ecclesiastical,
ye the groūdis of scripture & the very
doctrine of Christ without these brefly wold gretly
decaye, and I thinke by littell and lyttell vtterly
vanyshe away. For as moche as the weake
vulgare myndes of the people euer haue benne
after this sorte, that withoute somme exterior

and outwarde sygnes and ceremonies, their simplicitie
coulde neuer be lad to true religion, nor
of god to conceyue the diuinitie. Wherfore of
this grounde as I sayd, ryseth a corrupte and a
pestilent iudgement and mother of all impietie:
and out of lyke perswasion it springeth, that many
men say, that these rytes and customes ecclesiasticall,
are maynteined onely by them, whiche
take profyte and lucre therby, and of suche they
were fyrste constitute, ordeyned, and stabled for
that pourpose and none other, whiche is also a
manifest and fals opinion. For many of these rites
and customes were inuented of theym, who
were bothe in doctryne and lyfe, dispisers of all
worldly gayne,
                  
                     •
                  hell. 2. profyte, and pleasure, and loked
only to the preferrement and encrease of vertue
and of true religion, and after also were stablyshed
by common lawe and generall counsell in
euery congregation. This can not be denyed of
any man, whiche with indifferency, and syncere
mynde, nothinge blynded with affection, weyeth
thinges as they be in their owne nature. But
somme of vs blinded with suche perswasion, yet
procede ferther, and plainly do affirme, that prestis
to haue possession, is vtterly ageinst Christis
doctrine, and his true religion, litell considering
howe that to receiue the gift and benefite of any
man, giuen with charitie, nothinge repugneth
to Christis doctrine, nor to his simplicitie: and
howe that al suche donation & gift was brought

in, and stablyshed, by men of perfyte charitie, to
this purpose that byshoppes, pristes, and al religious,
shuld holly being intent to the preching
of goddis worde, therby be maynteined in quietnes
and tranquillite. This they consider not, but
lokynge to the abuse, wherof doubtles is greate
nede of reformation, & therwith blynded, blindly
do rūne to the cōdemnation of the thing without
reason and iugement. For this is a certain truth
and sure, that the perfection of Christis religion
resteth not so moch in the refuse of all possession,
and wylfull pouertie, as it dothe in the streight
vse of these worldly thynges, with perfyte charitie.
Ye and though in the begynnynge the prechers
of Christis worde, were poore and had nothynge,
whiche was conueniente to that tyme,
whan mankynd was vtterly drowned in worldly
vanitie, yet now in this age, after the stablyng
of Christis religion so longe and many yeres, I
see no cause why, suche pouertie shoulde be soo
necessary, and that possession shulde be soo contrary
to christen perfection. Wherfore this perswasion
bredeth in our hartes a corrupt iugemēt
and a pestilent diuision, by the whiche somme of
vs are slypped to a more corrupt and pernicious
grounde, whiche is to flee the order of generalle
coūsel, and of al interpretation of scripture there
cōmonly receiued. For to this succedeth in a maner
the ruine of scripture it selfe, the authoritie
wherof declared to man comonly, hangeth moch

vpon generall counsell. For though the truth of
goddis worde dependethe nothynge vppon the
iugement of man, yet the declaration therof, to
the face of the worlde, hangeth moche theron: in
so moche that these whiche we haue and take to
be the true gospelles, and to conteyne the veray
doctrine of Christ, we knowe not surely so to do,
but onely by feyth and confidence that we gyue
to the definition of generall counsell and consēt
of the same: In so moche that if dyuers nations
shulde dissente in the groundes of scripture,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   15. and
in the interpretation therof, refuge shoulde we
haue none conuenient to chrystian policie, and
mete to conserue the polyticall vnitie, yf frome
generalle counsayle we shoulde take awaye all
order and direction, and to that gyue no obedience
at all. This therfore to iudge is playne arrogancye,
and the streyghte waye and certayne
to brynge all to vncertayntie: so that boldely I
dare affyrme, that this perswasyon, hathe sette
in many of vs, of many thynges corrupte opinyon.
And thus, whatte by superstition, and
what by arrogant opinion, many of our iudgementes
dere frendes, are fowle and perniciously
corrupte, by the whiche we are nowe induced
by false and blynde perswasion, to conceyue eche
one of other an odious and a corrupt opinyon:
by the reasone whereof, somme of vs are called
of the newe fashyon, and somme of the olde,
somme phariseys, and some schismatykes, and

some also playne heretikes: As by example this
somwhat to declare such as repugne ageynst the
pride of Rome, gladly shakyng of the yocke therof,
and wyllyng to receyue some newe doctrine,
to the comforte of their myndes: suche, as newe
fangled persones, be noted of other to be of the
newe facion, ye and suche as besye them selfes
in redynge of newe bokes, and scripture, freely
condempnynge manye of the olde customes, by
processe of tyme growen to great abuse, though
their purpose be neuer soo good, yet shall not
they scape the note of an heretyke, or els of more
gentylnesse, they shall be called but a schismatike:
wherin I dout not to pronounce, that they
be euyll iudged, and that they whiche so iudge,
haue conceyued of them a corrupte iudgement.
For the moste parte I dare saye of them, whiche
be called of the newe facion, lyke trewe and obedient
personnes bothe to god and their prince,
wolde gladly with common quietnesse, the alteration
of certayne ceremonies and customes of
the churche, to the encrease of all vertue and of
true religion: and yet contrary they are iuged, euen
lyke as many other, whiche are noted to be
of the olde facion, bycause they not gladly sette
forwarde this newe mutation, but sommewhat
styffely stycke in the olde ceremonies, and rytes
of the Churche, wherein they haue benne of
youthe broughte vppe, and taken of their fathers
the same customes, not condempnynge

lyghtly the constitutions ecclesiasticall: these I
say, are iudged of other to be superstitious and
pharisaicall, folyshe and papisticall: the whiche
also I dare with no lesse boldnes affirme, than I
dyd of the other, that they ar mysiudged: For of
them the moste parte vndoubtedly, though they
some thynge stycke in the olde customes, as thinges
of longe tyme receyued for good order and
polycie, yet whan so euer it shal appere by cōmon
counsell here in our countrey, them to chaunge
and vtterly to abrogate, substitutinge other by
common assent, they wyll euer be gladde as true
and loyall subiectes, to all suche to be obedient,
but in the meane tyme, though lyke quiet modest
and obedient persones, they stande in the olde,
they are not to be blamed as pharisees, but rather
deserue prayse, therin declaring their duetie
& obedience, from the whiche lyghtly they ar not
moued, accordinge to Poules counsayle with euery
newe inuention, by lyght braynes brought
in,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   15. contrary to good order and al ciuile constitution.
wherfore without fayle many of those of the
olde facion, are of the newe lykewise mysiudged
and wrongefully taken, as they be of the other:
and so, though some of the olde facion be peraduenture
yet playne superstitious, for superstitiō
so shortly wil not be pluckid vtterly out of mind,
ye and though somme of the newe, be in harte of
true religion vtter dispisers, as if it were not for
feare of deathe, I thinke playnely they wolde to

the worlde declare: yet I doubt not but the most
part both of the newe facion and also of the olde,
of the truthe be ryght studious, and of true religion
moche desirous, and dayly doo praye vnto
him, who is the onely fountayne of all vertue &
truthe, that it maye please him, so to light their
hartes and conscience, that by his grace delyuered
from blyndenes, they may at the last se some
sparkle of his lyght and truthe: of the whiche
nowe one iudgeth an other to be no parttaker at
all, but echeone blyndely iudgethe other to be
blynde, eche one iudgeth other to erre, and to be
slypped from the trewe and catholike faithe, the
which some by newe facion pretende to bring in:Diuisyon.
and some by the olde study to defende, so that by
this contention, whyle euery man besily endeuoreth
him selfe, to maynteyne among vs this true
and catholike faythe of Christe, the meane tyme
is vnder growing secretly in our hartes this lamentable
diuision, the very bracke of the groūde
of Christis religion, whiche is founded & grounded
vppon vnitie, wherof here is amonge vs a
playn and manifest dissolution. For he that thinketh
that in those hartes resteth christen vnitie,
where as one in harte iudgeth an other to be an
heretike, he is playne frantike, and lacketh the
common sense: he is eyther blynde, or playnely
wyll not see, the whiche thynketh, that with suche
contrary and corrupte iudgementes may be
conserued this spirituall vnitie, which requireth

our hartes as in a common bande, to be knytte
and coupled to gether in charite: wherof betwixt
the newe facion and the olde our hartes are soo
voyde and soo colde, that I thinke many of vs
there be, whiche withoute grefe wolde see, their
christen brother to hange vpon a galowes tree.
Suche enuye & malice of one to an other is growyng
in amonge vs, that I can not se howe we
may iustely be called membres of this spirituall
body of Christe: in the whiche as by charitie all
partis do flouryshe and growe in vnitie, receyuynge
grace and spirituall comforte of that heuenly
heed, soo by malyce and rancour, the same
falle in diuisyon, and for lacke of that spiryte
receyued of that heed, runne into manifest ruine
and destruction. The experience whereof here
amonge our self dayly we se, where as you may
perceyue, one nothing gladde to helpe an other,
though he be in extreme necessitie: one nothynge
prompte to gyue succour to other, thoughe for
lacke therof he shulde incontinent dye, one not
redy to instruct an other, though he iuge hym to
be in greatte errour and folye: one not redy to
beare the weakenes of an other, though he be of
greatte simplicitie: but contrarye one denyethe
helpe and succour to other, euery one fleethe the
instruction of other, no man gladdely nor wyllyngly
admonyssheth his christian brother, but
suffereth hym to erre, and hath him in derision.
For suche is the diuision growyng in by folyshe

simplicitie and arrogant opinion, that one of vs
in no meane may abyde of the other any brotherly
admonition, but euer one hathe an other suspecte,
that with some corrupt and newe opinion,
he wyll infecte his iudgement, and bringe hym
into some pernicious errour, contrarye to Christis
catholyke faithe and religion: Thus in spirite
and harte we be deuyded, and of this spirituall
vnitie is growen a playn bracke and dissolution,
which is an effect consequently folowing
the cōmon corruption of our iugementes, which
we conceyue one of an other: the whiche thynge
is open vnto all theym that delyte not in their
owne blyndenes, and wyll not lyft vp their eies,
this for to see. For al suche, whiche with christen
hartes be desyrous of the cōmon quyetnes, and
of the restitution of this vnitie, wherin with charitie
all Christis membres oughte to be knytte,
therby inioyinge theyr sure and certayne felicitie,
this canne not denye. And sorowfulle I am,
that the thing of it selfe is so open to euery mannes
eye: in soo moche that many men of greatte
wisedome and prudence, greatly do feare, that to
this breache of this spirituall vnitie, growynge
in by lacke of knowledge & charitie, shall succede
the ruyne of good order, and of the iuste cōmon
policye: to the coniecture wherof, by this maner
perauenture, whiche I shall brefely touche, they
maye be moued. For as moche as all good polycye
is euer grounded vppon concorde and vnite,

vpon the whiche as vpon the sure and onely durable
foundation, all politike order is edified, al
ciuile constitutions be ordeyned and stablyshed:
Therfore where as that ground fayleth, hauyng
therin any bracke, all the reste by reason and necessitie,
must fall to ruyne and miserye. For as al
storyes the very glasse and true image of the lyfe
of man, playnly testifie, there was neuer comon
weale, whiche longe dyd endure, whiche layde
not of this grounde a sure foundation, And to
the conseruation hereof, euer put not moste diligent
cure. But what shulde we seke confyrmation
of this by story, seinge our mayster Christe
of his owne mouthe this hath pronounced,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  , 12. that
no comminaltie, where as reygneth this dissolution
of vnitie in harte, may long endure without
ruine and destruction: wherof we haue sene
in our owne dayes sorowful example and lamentable
experience, here of our neyghbours in the
countrey of Germany, where as for lacke of prudente
respecte to the conseruation of this vnitie,
manyfestly hath succeded ruine of the common
polycie and wonderfull confusion: in so moche
that amonge them selfes within the space of .vi.
monethes there was slayne aboue an hundrede
thousand mē. This to all the worlde is open, no
man can it denye, and nowe they be so deuyded
by sectes and heresies, that scant the shadowe of
true religion remayneth in that confusion. And
all this hath succeded by the iudgement of men

of wytte and polycie, bycause there was not in
tyme respecte to the bracke of this spiritual vnitie,
whose errour I doubte not, shall be to our
example: by them we shal be instructe in tyme to
prouyde for the breache of this vnitie. For the
thynge is not yet soo depely roted here amonge
vs, but that by the fauoure and helpe of hym,
who is the verye hedde of all vnitie, by the hye
wysedome and prouydence of our prynce, who
as the chyefe offycer and mynyster here vnder
Christe, nothynge more studieth thenne the conseruation
therof, ye and by the goodnes of your
owne nature mooste christen people, who I am
sure to the restitution of this grounde, wyll be
mooste pliable, and with all diligence endeuour
your selfe therto. This breche is not yet so great
I saye, but that by all these meanes shortly and
surely stopped it maye be, by the whiche we all
as it were in one course knitte togyther as membres
of one body, may runne to gether with this
vnitie, wherby we shall surely at the last attayne
to that ende and felicitie, the whiche the hye prouydence
of god, of his mere goodnes, hath to vs
ordeyned and appoynted.
            And to the entent we may somewhat the better
attayne to the same, puttynge awaye this oure
blyndenesse reygnynge amongest vs, bothe by
false and vayne superstytion, and also by arrogant
and lyghte opinyon, with all the pestylent
and dyuellysshe effectes annexed to the same:

I shall nowe consequently of this our blyndnes
gether certayne causes, wherby our iugementes
are thus corrupted by such fals groundes as we
haue conceyued: that so at the laste, auoydynge
the same with cōmon quietnes, we may the better
both restore and conserue among vs this heuenly
vnitie.
            And here moste christen people, this you shall
vnderstande, that lyke as of all blyndnes reygnynge
in vs I haue not before spoken, so now
in this parte of all causes therof,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   of 
                     〈◊〉
                  . I wylle not
make mention, for suche kynde of philosophye
is not accordyng to your capacitie. For nothing
there is here in this worlde, whiche is broughte
forthe and made of onely one cause, but lyke as
the thinges be of nature dyuers and varyable,
so of many and dyuers causes they take their creation,
many causes runne to gether in certayne
course and order, to the bringynge forthe of all
thinge here in this worlde, subiecte to all corruption:
and so the dyuers effectes bothe in mans
body and also in mynde, sprynge oute of dyuers
occasions, as to our purpose nowe at this tyme,
this blyndnes which I haue declared to reigne
in our myndes, cometh not of one occasion, but
of many and dyuers: of the whiche certayne after
my iugement moste conuenient before you to
be opened, I wyll nowe touche, as brefely as I
can, gyuynge you some occasyon therby peraduenture,
to the inuētion of other, and auoyding

of the same. And fyrste one greatte cause of this
blyndenes reignynge amonge vs, I note to be
vnwyse maysters,2. Pet. 2. Preacner
                     •
                  . foolysshe teachers of relygion,
vndiscrete preachers of the gospell of god,
whiche by their madnes and frantyke folye, ye
and by their lacke of iugement and discretion,
haue broughte you oute of all good facion, they
haue ben a great occasion of this cōmon blyndnes,
whiche shulde bringe you to the truthe, and
shew you the lyght, they haue ledde you into miserable
darknes, and almost put out your sight:
It is they that of manye yeres haue grafted in
your hartes and stabled superstition, it is they
which of longe season by their fonne doctrine or
rather fonne foly, haue moch corrupt your iugementes.
For the people in euery cōmon weale be
rude and ignorant, hauyng of them selfe smalle
lyght of iudgement, but euer in simplicitie, as
shepe folowe the herde, so folowe they their masters,
euer treadynge in their steppes, whether
so euer they go indifferētly: For the which cause
the auncient wyse men and olde philosophers,Plato rep. 5.
were wont euer to saye, that loke of what sorte,
what nature so euer they be, which are maisters,
teachers, rulers, and heedes in any citie or polycie:
of the same sorte and nature of necessitie,
must be all the rest of the comminaltie. For their
lyfes, doctrine, and dedes, be to the people chefe
example and rules: their doctrine is their bokis,
their lyfes he their common glasses, wherin they

with diligence euer be tootynge and lokyng, and
to their example as moch as they may, they euer
forme and facion them selfes in all thinges and
in all kynd of lyfe, but specially in forme and facion
of religion: for therof, of all other thing, the
people of them self haue leest iudgement, and be
of the same moste ignorant, as a thinge whiche
mooste hyghly passeth the common capacitie of
man. For the whiche cause al the antiquitie euer
referred the institution therof, to heuenly power
& to goddis diuinitie, as we most christen people
surely do of ours, the whiche our master Christ
receyuynge of the hygh wysedome of the heuenly
father, hath most plainly and clerely & in fewe
wordes described vnto vs, and by his apostels
instructe vs therwith, no man excludynge from
the misteries therof, they whiche be common to
all mens capacitie. For the gospell is a doctrine
of simplicitie,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   gospel. Galat. 5. and nothinge but faythfull charitie,
a doctrine so manifeste and playne, that if it
were as easye to fulfyll and put in effect, as it is
to conceyue and to vnderstāde, I thynke there is
no manne so rude, nor no manne by nature so ignoraunt,
but he myghte attayne to the hyghest
mysteries, and to the hyghest knowledge necessarye
to the saluation of manne conteyned therin.
For suche was the pourpose of our mayster
Christe,Matt. 13. Corin. 1. to prescribe a doctrine to all men kynde,
open and common. Wherfore he made rude fyshers,
and ignorant persones, the fyrste prechers

teachers and doctours thereof. But nowe dere
frendes, though this doctrine be neuer so playne
and full of simplicite, neuer so clere and manyfest
of it self, yet it is by the curiositie of our masters
and teachers therof, nowe of late yeres so
obscured and hydde, so cloked with subtyl interpretation,
so mangled by contrarye exposition,
that many of vs nowe be in greatte perplexitie,
moche dowbtynge of the truthe therof, vtterly
ignorant of the grounde and foundation of the
same. For where as the chiefe maisters and teachers
haue preched and write, contrary one to an
other, howe shuld ignorant and simple myndes
conceiue any grounde and sure stey, wherto they
myghte leane for succour and comforte? Howe
shoulde they fynde any certayne truthe therin?
where they here their masters in such controuersie,
whyle somme of them sette vp the authoritie
of olde tradition, rytes and customes, as thynges
necessarye for the conseruation of good polycie,
where other vtterly do them abrogate and
damne, as thinges pernicious to all perfyte and
true religion: and some purgatorie and praying
for them whiche be deed, playnely do condemne,
and som openly admyt, some pilgremage & veneratiō
of imagis, as thingis of idolatry manifestly
deny, other them preache & sette in full authoritie.
But what shuld I here be about to recyte al
such thinges, wherin our masters be īcōtrouersy
seing that to al mē I trow they be surely knowē?

in so moche that many of the people commonly
say, that they wyll no more here prechynges, tyll
the preachers amonge them selfes better agree:
they wyll no more gyue their eares to such masters,
whiche brynge them into so manyfest perplexitie,
and som of them haue induced into this
fals superstition, and some to the contempte of
true religion, so that a great parte of our blyndnes
and corrupt iugement, we may most iustely
dere frendes attribute vnto the vndiscrete preachers,
and of Christis doctrine blynde maysters
and techers: who haue not ben cōtent with their
tongues onely their blyndnes to cōmune abrode
and testifie, but also with their penne wrytynge
the same they haue descriued, and so the iugemē
               tes
of them which haue ben a lyttel lettered, with
their foly by writing declared, they haue most ꝑniciously
infected: som by their eloquence, mans
lawe, ceremonies & rytes, customes & traditions,
so haue exalted, so sette a height, that many simple
myndes therby are perswaded, the somme of
Christis religion in them to remayne, or at the
lest so by them to be maynteyned, yt to their ruine
or alteration, shall succede of trewe religion the
playn decay or innouation: Some other cōtrary
by their bokes haue them so depressed, and vtterly
condempned, that they boldely affirme the
mayntenance of them to bringe in, of all syncere
and pure christianite the vtter destruction, by the
whiche Christis glory so hath ben of longe tyme

obscured and hyd, that the worlde (as they say)
hathe gyuen more to the outwarde workes and
mans tradition, than to lyuely faith and trust in
Christis passion: so that after this maner, as wel
by foolysshe bokes as by fonne preachynge, you
good people ar brought in a great mammering,
your symplicitie semeth to be moche blynded by
their curiositie.
            Howe be it frendes this you muste nowe consequently
take, that all be it great causes of your
blyndnes, be these vndiscrete prechers, these curious
and arrogant teachers, yet you maye not
al attribute to them, you be not your selfes clene
without faut: If you your selfes some of you I
say, had not sturdy hartes, and ful of obstinacy,Obstinacye.
by this superstition folyshely conceyued, though
of many yeres it hath growen in your stomakes,
yet it shulde not so there be roted, and so styffely
of you be defended, that to common authoritie
you shuld gyue no place: This declareth in many
of vs to be great and manifest obstinacie: like
as in some other of vs, easy it is also to see, great
lightnes of mynde, and of iugement instabilitie,Lyghtnesse.
whiche with euery blast of newe doctrine of our
newe masters, be ouerthrowen and ledde, and to
euery lyght perswasion lyghtly gyue place, leauynge
by and by al olde custome and ceremonie,
whiche is no lesse faute than in superstition to be
sturdy. Wherfore to excuse your selfes most christen
people holly by your maysters, as many of

you do, iustly you may not. For though in them
be great faute,1 Corin. 3. and perauenture more damnable
than is in you, yet you your selfes be not cleane
withoute blame. For these vnwyse doctours of
religion, neyther with their proude arrogancye,
nor yet with their superstitious symplicitie, if
they found not in your hartes a prompt redynes
to receyue their opinion, neuer shuld haue place
to fasten in you their folyshe doctrine, they shuld
not lyghtly stable in you any poynt of vayne superstition,
nor yet in your hartis any contempte
of good and trewe religion. For lyke as the sede
caste in the grounde neuer bryngeth forth frute,
excepte by nature the grounde be apte and mete
there vnto, soo the doctryne of preachers dothe
neuer neyther edyfye nor dystroye,Matt. 13. excepte in
the hartes of them, to whome it is communed,
there be founde to the receyuynge therof somme
promptnes and conueniency. The faute wherof
is to our selfes holly to be imputed, for thoughe
as I sayde before, the vulgare people be moche
ignorant, and of iugement very bare, yet they be
not of nature so naked sette forthe here into the
worlde, but that certaine sedes in their hartes
they haue planted, certayne sparcles of knowledge
there they haue grafted, which if with any
meane diligence they wyll sette forth & tyll, some
iugement they shall haue betwixt good and euil,
some discretion they shal attayne, to discerne the
good preacher from the vayne, some knowlege

they shall haue to perceyue hym that preacheth
wel vertue and honestie, from him that precheth
his owne folyshe fantasie, by some token & signe
they shall discerne him: that is arrogant and sedicious,
from him that is meke & vertuous. And
of this ꝑauenture here after in his place, bicause
I iudge it moche to you at this tyme expedient
and necessary, I shall somwhat say, concernyng
the difference betwyxt the good preacher and the
euyll, and howe you shall knowe one frome the
other, whiche shall be no small helpe to delyuer
vs from this blyndnes that we nowe be in wrapped,
mysiudgyng one an other, wherof nowe in
some parte the causes you see, whiche is in dede
nothynge harde to perceyue, and I wold to god
it were no lesse harde to fynd and apply remedy:
but euen as it is in the body of man to fynde the
disese, and the cause therof,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                though it be not easy
nor lyght, nor to euery man open and playne, yet
it is not soo harde, as it appereth to me, as with
prudent experiēce to apply remedyes to the same
in tyme and place conuenient. And so here lykewyse
in this our purpose nowe to note these causes
of our blyndnes, as prechers obstinacie, and
leuitie of mynde, was no greatte difficultie, but
open to euery mans eye: but to fynde out remedies
conuenient now to the same, applying them
to the restitution of this desyred vnitie, this is
not lyght, this is not in my power, this is not of
my wytte nor capacitie. Wherfore a great parte

of this thinge commyttinge to the prouidence of
god, whose order and gouernaunce to lacke I
trust yet our synnes haue not deserued, & a great
parte to the hye policie of our most noble prince,
whose cares, studyes, and thoughtes lye holly
therin. I shall nowe in the reste moue, exhorte,
& instruct you, most christē people, with certayn
thinges, the which for the most parte lye in your
owne diligēce, & be put in your own power, wher
by you may yf you wyll, endeuour your selfe, as
I doubt not but ye wyll, greatly sette forwarde
bothe the restorynge, and the quiete conseruing
of this so moche of all men desired and praysed
vnitie. For though it be so that out warde remedyes
by foreyn causes adhihyte, may to this purpose
gyue moch preferment, greatly promoting
and settynge forwarde the same, yet this can not
be douted,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . 3. but that in your selfes stōdeth a great
parte of the hole matter, as in whom the groūde
and foundation therof holly doth lye, none other
wyse than it dothe in them, whiche labour in bodily
disease, in whom you see, that all be it phisitions
by medicines and other out ward remedies
moche do conferre to the helth of their pacientes
by good experience ministrynge the same, yet a
great parte of their restitution lyeth in them selfes
by good diet, quiet order, and other good gouernaunce
temperynge their affectes, without
the whiche all crafte of phisyke lyttell dothe auayle.
And yet here in this purpose dere frendes

we are in moche better case than they be, whiche
are vexed and labour of bodyly disease: for as
moche as we haue the presence of our phisition,
the heuenly spirite and diuyne power euer attehande,Matt. 28.
more redy at all tymes to minister vs remedies,
than we by our owne blyndnes and negligent
foly lette, be therof desyrous. Wherfore
as I sayd, moche lyeth in our selues bothe to restore
and conserue this heuenly vnite, we muste
dispose our selfes with hart & wyl vtterly to cast
away this blynde superstition and arrogāt foly,
and with diligent indeuour and cure forme our
iudgementes with ryght knowlege and conuenient
obedience, that we maye therby the better,
auoydynge the dissolution of the vnitie spiritual,
without al confusion of policie annexed therto,
as membres of one body knytte to one heed,
here in this lyfe inioye common quietues, and
hereafter eternal felicite, wherof you al most christen
people by nature are feruently desyrous, the
whiche desyre I trust in you shal neuer be foūde
vayne, but bringe forthe at the last suche fruite
and perfection, as to suche ardent desire & noble
affecte is due and conuenient. For of this be you
certayne and sure, that the infinite goodnes of
the diuine power neuer leueth such hartes desert1. Pet. 2.
without succour and helpe, whiche with feruent
desyre and sure affiaunce, faithe, and truste annexed
therto, diligently seke and inserche therby
to haue the knowledge of truthe and honestie.

And lette this be a sure grounde stabled in your
hartes, of the which you shal neuer be deceyued:
for god neuer suffreth them by any meanes to be
deluded,Psal. 30. whiche put their affiance and truste in
hym, as I doubte not but you doo. Wherfore I
wyll nowe procede vnto my purpose.
            All though it be so mooste christen people, that
som of vs by blyndnes as I haue shewed before,
haue our iugementes corrupte, the which thing
dayely also openly to the worlde we testifie, yet
excepte affection to wyn owne countrey vtterly
blynd me also, this I thinke I may boldly & truly
affirme, that for the mooste parte vniuersally,
there is amonge vs as true christen simplicitie &
good religion, as there is in any other christian
nation: or at the least, this I may saye, that to
haue the same stabled amonge vs, in wylle and
desyre we gyue place to none other: And of this
we haue euer had the fame, syth Christis doctrin
was fyrst amonge vs preched and taugth. wherfore
at the leest this wyll as presupposed, I take
to be in vs, and take it also as no small grounde
to the rest,Plato. whiche I shall say. for as wyse men
write, he hath nowe halfe atteyned vertue & honestie,
that of him selfe bryngeth good wyll and
desyre, to the attaynynge therof. And our master
Christ also this euer as chiefe ground,
                  
                     •
                  han. 15. requireth
in vs, the reste by his spirite in our hartes euer
fourmyng: Therfore nowe this presupposynge
I shal procede to prescribe and declare vnto you

certayne generall groundes, wherby you maye
concernyng some such thinges as nowe in these
dayes be in great contention, and so of the brack
of this spirituall vnitie a great occasion, so form
your iugementes with conuentēt knowlege and
obedience, that you may be in some parte better
delyuered, both from vayne and fals superstitiō,
and also from lyght and arrogāt opinion, wherin
suche iugement as by longe redynge of scripture
it hath pleased god to giue vnto me, and suche
as I thinke al christen hartes to be fourmed
with all, bothe by conuenience and necessitie, suche
iudgement I say I shall as it were in a lytel
table brefely to you propose, besechinge you all
with the same hartes therin to loke, and with the
same affectes, the same to rede that I write hit
withal, the whiche I testifie god, who only seeth
the harte and priuie thought of man, is the very
same, wherwith I haue instruct myn own mynd
and consciēce: Requiryng you also that if I shal
appere vnto any of you in any parte to erre, and
corruptly to iudge, that it wylle please you with
the same mynde to admonyshe me therof, that I
wryte to you with all. For euer I wyl be to hyer
iugement conformable. And for bycause I write
not to them, which be of great lernyng, to whose
wysedome the thinges are better knowen than
they be vnto me, I wyl vse no longe processe nor
clerkely disputation, but to you mooste christen
people, whiche be not greatly lettered, I wyl directe

my cōmunication, gatheringe in fewe wordes
the somme and pithe of suche thinges, as I
shall iudge conuenient, to your knowlege and
capacitie.
            And fyrste to the intent you may see of christen
lyfe the excellent dignitie, and what ende chiefly
a christen harte ought euer to loke vnto, and so
fyrste surely to lay this grounde and foundation
whervnto euer we must moche of the rest of our
communication, resolue and referre, as to the
chiefe ende and principall of all, you must a lytle
lyfte vppe your eies, and as it were out of hyer
place, diligently behold the lyfe of man, and ther
in with som iugement loke, where you shall find
that in man here in erthe, by the prouydence of
god, set to passe a short and transitorie lyfe, there
be as it were .ii. polytees .ii. dyuers maners of liuynge
.ii. dyuers ways and fashiones of passing
this pilgremage, of the whiche the one is heuenly
spirituall and godly, the other ciuile,
                  
                     •
                   Corin. 3. natural,
and worldely: what I meane by these .ii. lyues,
I wylle brefely to you declare. This ciuile and
worldly lyfe,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   politike 
                     〈◊〉
                  . is to man naturall, and by nature
to hym conuenient, wherin he hathe by the onely
and mere benefyte of nature, suche sedes and
plantes of truthe and honestie in his harte roted
and planted, the whiche, yf by his owne negligent
folye, he suffred not by affection to be
ouer runne, but with dylygence wolde folowe
and nourysshe the same, they whyche I saye

shulde vndoubtedly brynge hym to suche dignitie,
as to the excellencye of his nature by nature
is dewe and conuenient, but bycause man is no
aungell, but hath a body frayle and corruptible,
subiecte to affectes and all corruption, therfore
law ciuile and politike rule entred into this lyfe,
& therin of necessite toke place,The necessite of lawes. which is drawen
out & stabled vpon the groūdes of nature, by her
benefite in mans hart plāted & layd, to the which
groūdes, ciuile lawes & ordynāces by wyse & prudent
policie, stabled in mans lyfe, so long as mā
is conformable, so longe as man is by them gouerned
and ledde, folowynge theym with obedience,
other for feare and drede of punyshemente
ensuynge their transgression, or for hope & truste
of perfyte pleasure or any other worldly thynge
annexed to their diligent obseruation, so long I
say mā lyueth lyke a ciuile polytike and worldly
man, and suche maner of lyuynge brefely to lay,The spirituall lyfe.
I iudge to be this cyuile naturall and worldely
lyfe, wherof nowe we speke. An other lyfe there
is, whiche I called heuenly spiritual and godly,
whiche is aboue the comon course of nature, not
receiuing her groūdes of nature, nor of the comō reson
of mā, but of very reason it self, of the very
certayn & true reson of god, which is the very son of god,Iohan. 1.
by our mayster Christe ioyned to the nature
of man, and by him to the worlde opened.
This reason is the very worde of god, and god
hym selfe by Chryste to manne kynde shewed,

whose doctrine his disciples by mouthe taught,
and by writynge haue lefte to our instruction.
Howe be it here you muste vnderstande, that to
the knowledge of this reasone, by mans reason
man him self can not attayn,
                  
                     •
                   Corin. 1. to this he is blynd,
nature is not sufficient, but to the attaynyng of
this reson, reson subdued, faith must be therin to
him as it were a gyde, fayth must gyue hym iugement
and sight, & be as it were his eye, faithe
must shew vnto hym al the secrete misteries ther
in:
                  
                     •
                  ebre. 11. and shortly to say fayth must lay al groundis
in this lyfe, as nature dyd in the other. And lyke
as in the ciuile and politike lyfe feare and hope
euer ledde the politike man and worldly, to the
obseruation of his lawes: so in this very heuēly
and spiritual life, faith and loue, lede man made
spiritual, makynge him by loue to lawes obedient:
in so moche that at the last by faithfull loue
and charitable faith, man is brought to sure felicitie,Galat. 5. 
                     〈◊〉
                   liberte.
and stablyshed in true libertie, that is to
say, he is therby deliuered from all corrupte and
worldly affection, he is then free from synne and
dethe, them vtterly tredynge vnder foote, he is
then delyuered from all daunger and feare therof,
than he in this mortall lyfe passing the state &
condicion of man,Philipp. 3. lyeth lyke no mortall man,
but liueth like a Christe, like a god in erthe, and
like reasone it selfe, neuer giuinge place to any
affection, than he inioyeth suche spirituall comforte
and pleasure in harte, as is moche easyer

for them to cōceyue, which haue had gust & experiēce
therof, thā for any mā by wordes to expresse
this thinge, we whiche commonly gyue place to
worldly affection, and with the burdeyn of this
body suffre our selfes to be oppressed, as it were
a farre of, onely doo se. And euen lyke as we beholde
the heuenly bodyes, the sonne, the mone,
with the other sterres, and planettes, hauynge
no sure iudgement of the nature of them, nor yet
of their quantite: so of this spiritual and heuenly
lyfe, we se as it were in a clowde and afarre of
the hye perfection and excellency, but the trewe
iugement therof we do not conceyue, being blinded
with bodily affectiō,2. Timoth. 1. and holly intent to ihis
worldly polycie, by the besynes wherof and vanitie,
we vtterly forgette this our high perfection
and dignitie, the fulle declaration whereof I
wyll not here attent, nor it is not my pourpose:
onely this I wolde by these fewe wordes leade
you vnto the consyderation with your selfe, of
pure christianitie, the which after this rude and
brefe description of these .ii. lyues, which I haue
gathered out of the doctrine of Poule, shall not
be moche harde for you to conceyue: for thoughe
these .ii. lyues of their owne nature be distincte
and dyuers, for as moche as the one is common
to all mankynde, for whether they be Iewes,Matth. 5. sarasynes,
Turkes, or Mores, in som polycie they
must agree, withoute the whiche is no ciuilitie:
though I say in them selfe, they be dyuers, yet in

vs christen men, they in one must perfitly agree,
they must consent, and in the perfyte couplynge
therof resteth the conseruation of this spirituall
vnitie, the whiche of necessitie dothe require in
common policie a certayn consent and sure agrement.
For this is a sure truthe, that worldly policie
qualifyed with charitie,Christen ciuyly
                     ••
                  
                  ▪
                is therby conuerted
into christen ciuilitie, in our lyfe, whiche be christen
men, one of theym is the waye to the other,
one of them to the other is so knytte and ioyned,
that the one without the other can not longe endure,
the one without the other shortly wyll decay.
For euen like as the ciuile lyfe politike & seperate
from peace and vnite, longe by no meane
maye be maynteined without destruction:Tit. 3. so the
spirituall lyfe and heuenly withoute respecte of
common polycie, shortly by necessitie shall falle
to confusion. Wherfore this must be taken as a
sure and common grounde, that in al christen ciuilitie
of greatte and hygh necessitie to all suche
thinges, as by common authoritie are stablished
and foūded, without repugnance to the spirituall
vnitie and manifeste doctrine of Christe, the
people must euer be obedient, to all suche thynges
with gladde harte they must euer agree and
consent. For of this we haue in Christis doctrine
in many places manifest commandement,
                  
                     •
                  ebr. 13. bothe
of Peter and of Poule in their holy epistles, ye
and Christe him selfe sayd, he came not to breake
such thinges, as by cōmon lawe were receyued,

but rather to stably she, confirme, and make perfite
the same,Matth. 5. as bothe his lyfe and his doctrine
manifestly declare.Roman. 13. For where as before christen
men obserued lawes onely by feare of punyshement,
Christ wold haue his flocke to be obedient
and fulfyll the same only by loue, & by none other
outwarde respecte. And therfore his doctrine is
as a corner stone, agreinge to al polycie, and determyneth
therin no certayne kynde at al, but as
wel may the ꝑfection of Christis doctrine be fulfilled
in that state, where as be many heedes and
dyuers polyticall, as there as is but one chiefe &
principal: So long as policie and lawes therby
stablyshed and set, breke not the groundes of spirituall
vnitie, there is no repugnāce to be made
of those which be humble subiectes,1. Pet. 2. meke & obedient
to such thinges as be receiued by cōmon assent.
This thing dere frendes I oft inculke and
reherse, bicause if it be wel and throughly perceiued,
and in our hartes surely grounded, it shall
minister vnto vs a great grounde & occasion, to
pluck vp by the rotis this fals superstition, whiche
in these days disquieteth so many mens feble
& weke consciences without reason: And specially
if to this we ioyne an other grounde, wherby
you shall be brought moste christen people somewhat
to conceyue a diuersite and plain differēce,
betwixt such thinges as be of playne necessitie, &
of them self by nature good, and such as be only
of a certain cōueniency, & by nature be indifferēt.

The lacke of the iugement and discretion wherof,
hath gyuen great occasion to stable in many
mens hartes this vayn superstition, and is also
no small cause of proude arrogant opinion. For
the conceyuynge wherof, this dere frendes you
must vnderstonde, that lyke as I sayde before in
the lyfe mere polytike & worldly, there be certain
groundes, whiche of necessitie, must euer be conserued,
and neuer suffre dispensation: and other
thinges there be, whiche as tyme and place doth
require, euer by lawe ciuile and polycie maye be
altered and suffre abrogation: so in the godly life
and spirituall, there be also certayne groundes,
wherin is founded this spirituall vnitie, whiche
by no mans policye maye be chaunged, but euer
must stand stable and firme without innouatiō.
And other thynges also there be, whiche by common
authoritie maye be remoued, abrogate, and
vtterly put awaye, and sto
                  •
               de onely by conueniency,
and haue their power onely of the consent
of the hole congregation: as by exaumple, this
thing to declare somewhat more at large,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                groū
               des
these be of the polytyke lyfe, honour to be
done to the diuine nature, whiche gouerneth all,
reuerence to be had to our parentes, which haue
laboured to bringe vs into the lyght, cure to be
had of those whiche come of vs by naturall procreation,
to be beneficiall to them, whiche be in
necessitie, and to repell from our selfes all iniurie.
And in conclusion all suche thinges whiche

of lawe ciuile stablyshed, taketh not full power,
but haue their strength of the true iugement of
naturall reason, pure and not corrupte by affection,
all suche be groundes in natural law: thinges
resting in policie and ciuile constitution, beinge
of nature indifferent, be infinite, and for the
tyme and place euer variable, as somme tymes
thynges of marchandyse to command to bringe
in, and sometyme the same to prohibite, sometymes
money of the people by taxe to be gathered,
and some tyme the same contrary to restore, is to
good policie righte conuenient. Lyke as in some
places, the eldest sonne to succede in the hole inheritance
for the maynteynyng of the familie, is
of some iudged good policie: and in some other
places it is playn iniury, so that al such thing as
time & place with other circūstance doth require,
so euer they be by the iudgement of wyse men &
politike, to be chaunged of conueniencye, whan
to them is gyuen full authorite to alter & change
theym with free lybertie. And lyke maner in the
lyfe spiritual certayn groundes as I sayd, there
be, whiche must euer be taken as fyrme and stable,Roman. 5.
as Christ to descende from the bosome of his
father, to be made man for mannes redemption,
the fayth and truste in hym and in his promysesGala. 5.
to be sufficient for mannes saluation, the workis
of man ciuile without faythe, not to be of power
to serue to mans iustifycation,Tit. 3. the mysteries of
Christe by his sacramentes to faythfull myndes

to be cōmuned. And brefly to say, al such thinges
as in Christis gospel by expresse cōmandmēt, eyther
of our master Christe, or of his holy apostles
& disciples be to vs giuen & taught, all such be of
mere necessitie, & not indifferēt, & by no power in

                  •
               eth suffre abrogatiō: but cōtrary al other thiges
ꝑteining to this spirituall polycie, whiche be not
cōteyned in y• gospel expressely,Matt. 15. or deduced of the
same surely, as rites customes and traditions of
fathers, hauing no groūd but only by p̄scription
of time, al such may be alterid by good order & policie,
whā it shal appere to thē which haue authorite
so conueniēt, as the forbiddig of scripture to
be red ī y• mother tonge, & in the churches so to be
rehersid, somtime was not without consideratiō,
where as now to many it may otherwise appere,
as it doth of pristes mariage, foundyng of chantries,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
               
buylding of monasteries, popes pardons,
institution of holy dayes, which al with many other
of y• same sorte & nature, to wyse mē nowe a
dais apere plainly to be growē to an iniust extremite.
wherfore to alter thē it is thought not with
out gret cause highly expedient, & to the institution
of Christis true doctrine very ꝓfitable & cō
               uenient,
the whiche by mans constitution & ceremony
is vndoutedly moch obscured, & the purite
therof almost put out of memorie: in so moche ye
many men being in that behalf somwhat superstitious,
iuge in these cōstitutions & ceremonies
to stand moche of Christis religion, to the which

perswasion brought they are for lacke of this discretion
betwixt thinges of necessite, & such as be
but only profitble and cōueniently for the time
institute, to the conseruation of the other whiche
be groundes necessary, of the which sort without
faile be al rites & constitutions ecclesiastical: and
yet I do not thynk yt by & by they be vtterly to be
cōdemned, as many do with arrogāt opinion, bicause
they be not of this necessitie & in scripture
expressed. For our master Christ, of whom I take
this groūd, where as he in diuers places puttith
difference betwixt his cōmandment & mans tradition,Matth. 23.
he I say him selfe cōmandeth vs cōtrary,
byddyng vs to fulfyl his cōmandment, & yet not
to leue & vtterly pretermyt the tradition, for such
thinges which of long custom haue ben receiued
are not so without order to be plucked away, but
they require good consideration and pondering
of some manifest detriment & hurte,Ephe. 4. to very true
religion, before they be vtterly put awaye, & not
after the iugement of euery lyght braine so to be
condēned, as thinges ꝑnicious to al christen ciuilite.
For al though som of thē be very vn ꝓfitable
& to true religiō an open īpedimēt, yet som other
there be which be as good & conueniēt menes, to
induce rude & simple mi
                  •
               des to cōceyue the misteries
of Christ, & to kepe as by signes the memory
of the same. Notwithstāding, this again is true,
vpō the other side ye none of thē be of such necessi
te, yt the altering of thē shuld bring in vtterly the

ruine of religion. Wherfore with suche superstition
and sturdy obstinacye, they ought not to be
defended, as many men thynke, for lacke of the
sure conceyuynge of this grounde, whiche nowe
you haue harde in few wordes touched, the whiche
grounde if it had ben stabled in the hartes of
some of them, whiche for their disobedience by
superstytyon conceyued, lately haue suffered,
they wolde not peraduenture so heedlynge haue
runne to their dethe, the whiche they so gladly
suffered, induced by corrupt opinion: for perswaded
they were, that the vnitie of Christis church
coulde not by any case maynteyned be, withoute
this longe vsurped superioritie, whiche the byshoppe
of Rome hath of many yeres by the simplicitie
of christen people be magnified in, and
that such a heed shuld be stablyshed by the word
and doctrine of Christe, here in his churche of
necessytie, and not to be a thynge of nature indifferent:
& that he shuld also be the vicar of god
and vniuersall iudge of all christianitie. This
was their perswasion, whiche is the chiefe key of
all superstition, this is as it were the fountayne
and grounde of all other lyke abusion. wherfore
all be it that this ground by the hye prouydence
of out most noble prince, and by common authoritie
here in our nation, be soo vtterly abrogate
and pluckid away, that among you most christen
people there is none I thynke so ferre from wit
and iudgement, that wyll theragaynst repugne,

but as true subiectes be therto obedient: yet for
the instruction of some weake consciences, whiche
by some fals perswasion, perauenture maye
yet be troubled with some scrupulosite therof, I
haue thought conuenient nowe in this place, as
I promysed before, somwhat to say touching the
chiefe poyntes, wherby I haue fourmed myne
owne iudgement with knowlege and due obedience,
to the intent that you also mooste christian
people, conceying the nature of the thynge as
it is in dede, indifferent, may with harte and cō
               science
be therto gladlyer obedient, and not only
by feare of common punyshment. Wherfore the
nature of the thinge as it is in it selfe plainly, as
farre as my wyt and lernynge wyl serue, in fewe
wordes I shall open vnto you indifferently.
            After the tyme that I had exercysed a parte of
my youthe in secular studies and in philosophy,
and therby formed my iugemēt with som knowlege
of nature, and of thinges perteynyng to the
maners of man in the ciuile and polytike lyfe, I
toke streight forth holy scripture in hande, therby
to instructe my mynde with the lyghte of the
doctrine of Christe, the onely comforte of true &
faithful hartes, to the which ende al my labours
and studies in other kynde of letters I euer referred
& directed, as to the thing, which all Christis
scholers oughte euer to loke vnto. But as
sone as I hadde exercysed my selfe a fewe yeres
therin, and some lyght of iugement by the comfort

of Christis spirit gathered in the same, wherby
I myght the better discerne thinges, whiche
stonde in worldly polycie, from the groundes of
scripture and pure christianitie: and as soone as
I hadde conceyued with my selfe the perfection
therof, the sincere simplicitie conteyned therin,
and the quietnes of faythefull hartes and pure
consciences, whiche to the stablysshynge therof,
was surely adioyned, I began with my selfe sore
to lament, to se and consider the state of y• worlde
cōmonly, howe far it was slypped from that heuenly
perfection, and celestial conuersation, and
both with my selfe diuers and sondry tymes, and
with other with whom in studies I was cōuersant,
of the causes therof I beganne to consider
and reasone? in the enserchynge wherof, all be it
many and dyuers causes I founde, whiche now
to reherse were ouer longe, & not to my purpose:
Yet this I wyl say dere frendes nowe vnto you,
that fewe other I se of gretter efficacy, than this
vsurped long and many yeres superioritie of the
pope, whyche for the maynteynynge of his authorite
vnder the cloke of religion, hath brought
in amonge christen nations moche fals superstition,
and for the mayntenance of his hye pride &
cloked tiranny, hath amonge christē princis many
tymes to the greatte ruine of common quietnes,
sette greatte diuision. For who is he that of
storye hath any consideration, whiche playnely
bothe not see, how fewe christen princis there be,

whiche for the set tynge vppe of this arrogancy,
hath not ones one agayne an other drawen their
swerdes, to the great effusion of christen blode,
and ruine of all good ciuilytie, ye and yet which
is worste of all, they haue ben perswaded therby
to sette vp Christis honour and religion; O lord
what a blyndnes was this reignynge in princis
hartes, and what a superstition one christen man
to kyll an other vnder the pretext of Christis religion?
And as for the abuses of that authoritie
as well in pardons and dispensations as in inter
dytes and excommunication, I thynke there is
no man so blynd, no nor yet nation so farre from
iudgemente, nor so farre from the commonsense
and trewe consyderation, the whyche that dothe
not see, and obserue. For amonge christen men
no nation there is, whiche beynge obedyente to
that authoritie, hath not felte by pyllynge and
pollynge, and tyrannycalle exaction, euer couered
with the pretexte of religion, of these abuses
the playne and manyfeste experyence. This
thynge I haue obserued dere frendes longe and
many a daye, not withoute greatte sorrowe and
dolour of mynde, and yet somme hope euer I
haue hadde ones to see, of these thynges a iuste
and a true reformation, as welle in other countreys
and nations as here at home in our owne
nation. This hope I hadde, wherwith I very
moche eased my sorowe and doloure, lyuynge
in great desyre to see the thynge putte in effecte.

Wherfore dere frendes now of late, at such time
as I retourned oute of Italye, hyther home to
myn owne countrey, here to finyshe in quietnesse
the reste of my lyfe, seruyng our prince, if I were
in any poynt able, to the whiche ende of youthe
I appoynted all my studies: whan I retourned
I say, and sawe this thinge partly put in effect,
whiche I soo longe desyred, the whiche desyre I
testifie god was to his honour, what ioye, what
gladnes in my hart and mynde, I therof conceiued,
I wyll not nowe be about to you by wordes
largely to expresse. But this I wil say vnto you,
the gladnesse that I conceyued of pluckynge awaye
this superioritie, was not so moche for the
stopping of the profites, which to the imparyng
of this realme, was no small thing, wherin the
moste parte of mens eyes are chiefly fyxed, as it
was for the hope I had of the reformynge of cō
               mon
religion, and of the purgynge of vayne superstition,
wherwith many symple myndes here
in our nation, haue ben greatly infect: the chiefe
cause wherof hath bene this superioritie of the
see of Rome: in so moche that this I thinke truly
I may say, that euen as Rome by mekenes &
charitie, was the fyrst occasion of communynge
and propagation, ye and stablyng also long and
many yeres of Christis doctrine and true religion
here in our nation, so nowe the same by pride
and arrogancy, by processe of tyme hath ben the
chiefe and principall occasion, of ouermoche extollyng

mans tradition, and the very open gate
of all superstition, so that nowe by the stopping
of this gate, great hope I haue ones yet to see,
Christis doctrine restored agayn to the pure and
natiue simplicitie, and to the olde simple purite.
And to the conceyuynge of this hope moche moued
I am by the hye vertues of our moste noble
prince, whose highnes boldly I dare affirme, no
thing more desyreth, than the restitution of Christis
true doctrine here in our nation, and that to
see flourishe in the hartis of his subiectes, declaringe
in lyfe the frute of the same. To this tendeth
all the cures, thoughtes, actes, and dedes
of his royall maiestie. Wherfore me semeth not
without a cause my hope is conceyued, if this be
true that all antiquitie hath approued, suche as
be princis, suche be their subiectes, whose trace
euer foloweth all the comminaltie. Seing therfore
oure prince to be of this pourpose and desyre,
and of suche iudgemente and policie, that
beste he knowethe the meane of the restitution
hereof, why shulde not I conceyue this gladdenes,
and stable hit in my harte? why shoulde not
I reioyse, or rather why shuld not all we be glad
and reioyse most christē people? Truly we ought
to gyue thankes to almyghty god, by whose prouidence,
we haue this noble prince now reigning
in our tyme. And surely I doubte not, but that
the goodnes of god, who hath inspired his harte
with lyght and iugement to conceyue the groūd

of this popes superioritie, and to his honour to
plucke hit downe, shall also gyue hym the same
lyght and grace to fynde out all conuenient menes
to the mayntenance of the same, that it may
procede with a common quietnesse bothe to the
comforte of our present age and of the posterite,
and that so therby hereafter may succede the restitution
of the pure doctrine of Christe and syncere
religion, with the pourgynge of all fals and
vayn superstition: This is my hope and this is
my truste, of the whiche as I sayd at my retorne
here into my countrey, great gladnes I conceyued,
the whiche contynually I nouryshe in my
harte, with sure hope dayly the same to increase,
howe be it herin I fynde the nature of mannes
affecte, and that to be trewe whiche of the wyse
and auncyent Socrates, ofte was rehersed, that
in mannes affecte, plesure and peyn, sorowe and
ioye, were neuer seperate, but as the partes of a
rynge euer coupled togyther, and euer knyt one
to the other, as it were by a common chayne. For
thoughe it be soo that of this acte of pluckynge
downe this popyshe authoritie, moste iustely as
me semeth I haue conceyued this gladnesse, yet
it is not perfyte and syncere, there is in my harte
a certayne sorowe myngled with the same, whiche
hath moche defaced my gladdenes and ioye.
For sory I am & of the very hart, to se that thing
whiche you all moste christen people, I am sure
with no lesse sorowe lately haue sene, that is to

say, to see so noble an acte, so good and so profytable,
so open a gate to the restoringe and stablyshynge
here amonge vs a very true and cōmon
weale, whiche coulde neuer lyghtly haue hadde
place, standynge this outwarde and tyrannicall
authoritie. For euer it shuld to ye prince haue ben
a lette and an obstacle, at suche tyme as he shuld
attempte any refourmynge of true religion, to
see I say ageynst so noble an acte, suche men repugne,
suche men to be disobedient, whose vertues
I euer trusted shoulde haue benne to oure
prince, to wchynge the restitution of his true cō
               mon
weale a chiefe instrumente. For what vertues
were in somme of them, superstitious symplicitie
set a syde, all the worlde knoweth. Wherfore
suche vertues so to be corrupt with superstition,
that therby they shuld be induced to be disobedient
to their prince, and to suche holsome lawes,
I can not but of hart sore to lament, I can
not but be sorowfull, that suche blyndnes shulde
be ioyned to such knowlege, & such vertue shuld
be blurrid with such vice, & such an acte so wisely
cōceyued shulde be blotted with disobedience so
folyshly declared. This maketh me sory & sore in
hart to lament, and truly to saye not so moche for
their causes, who for theyr disobedience, accordynge
to the course of lawe, iustely haue suffered,
as for yours mooste christian people, whose
symple and weake consciences, not able peraduenture
well to conceyue the nature of thynges,

as they be in dede, by their disobediēce and sturdy
obstinacie, may in some part perauenture be
moued to conceyue of this acte some scrupulositie,
by the reason whereof in you may succede,
disquietnes of mynd, diuersly drawen by diuers
obedience. Wherfore partly to the auoydynge of
myn owne sorow conceyued by suspicion of your
simplicitie, and partly to do my duetie in setting
forthe of so manyfest a truthe, I shall as brefely
and clerely as I can set before your eies, the nature
of ye thing, vsinge therin no longe scholasticall
disputation, and this processe obserue. Fyrst
I wyll shewe vnto you, that this superioritie is
not of the law of god, prescribed vnto vs for the
necessitie of our saluation, but yt it is a thyng indifferent,
the disobediēce wherof, bringeth not to
our sowles damnation. Secondly I wyll shewe
you, howe it fyrst grewe in, as a thinge conuenient,
and to the conseruation of the vnitie of Christis
churche expedient. Thirdely I shall declare
howe that as it hath bene many yeres vsurped,
it is to the very spirituall vnitie, nother necessarye
nor yet conuenient: and so I truste sommewhat
the better your consciences shall be delyuered,
from suche scrupulositie, as may take from
your myndes christen quietnes and vnite.
            And fyrst most christen people this is of you al
as most open and manifest, to be taken as a sure
truthe, that all be it the olde testamente, wherin
god to the people of Israel declared his first wil,

be called the scripture of god, and his very lawe:
yet for as moche as Paule testifieth,1. Corin. 10. all thinges
to them as in a shadowe grossely there to be shewed,
accordyng to their rude capacite, the which
to vs after clerely were opened by our mayster
Christe, to whose glorye all the lawe tended.Ephe. 1. we
therfore may say all the lawe of god in Christe to
be as in a somme conteyned,Coloss. 1. who is the perfection
and ende of all lawe, it is he only that in the
olde lawe was figured, and now in the newe law
of the gospell openly is to vs declared: in so moche
that this boldely we maye affyrme, goddis
lawe holly and perfitely in the gospell to be conteyned,
for as moche as Christ, in whom all law
of god is fully as in a sōme gathered, is there to
vs clerely taught,Roman. 8. & nothīg to be necessary to our
saluatiō, wherof in ye gospel we haue not expresse
mention, or at the leste oute of that deduced by
some certayne reason, and open demonstration.
For as touching the traditiōs of faders, though
they be moche expedient to the increse and maintenance
of Christis gospell and truthe, yet of suche
strength and power they be not,Marc. 7. that to their
obseruation, we be of necessytie bounden, vnder
peyne of vtter damnation, nor yet they be not
of any suche necessitie, that to the alteration of
them, ye or vtter abrogation, ensueth by and by
the ruyne and destruction of all christen ciuilitie
and religion. Wherfore though it were soo, as it
is not in dede, that this superioritie of the pope,

were to vs by tradition descended & gyuen, yet it
is not of this nature and necessitie, that without
hit we can not attayne to our saluation. For
by suche bonde no christen nation, at anye tyme
receyued any mans tradition. This therfore we
may affirme now dere frendes, as sure and true,
that if we can not fynde this superioritie clerely
vnto vs in the gospell expressed, nor of the same
manifestly deduced by clere interpretation, it is
not to our saluation of hye necessitie: the whiche
thinge to seke, and out of the gospell to pyke, I
thynke is lyke, as to seke and to pyke darkenesse
out of the lyght.Ageynst the popes authorytie. For to my iugement all thynge
there indifferently weyinge, all appereth playne
contrary: in so moche that to me considering the
sōme and hole cours of Christis doctrine, he semed
nothinge lesse to go about, than to stablyshe
amonge his disciples, and amonge theym that
wold make profession of his name, any such superioritie:
but leuyng all suche thynges to princes
worldly polycie, purposed to drawe the hartes
of his scholers from all suche ambicious and
vayne desyre, and turne them to the sight and cō
               templation
of suche thynges, as be celestial, and
of nature pure and euerlasting, seperate from al
this worldly vanitie, euer wylling them to hang
vpon the desyre of suche thynges,Ma
                     ••
                  . 23. as bretherne
to gether knytte in a certayn equalite, vtterly excludyng
al cōtention for any maner superiorite:
he euer taught his disciples as membres of one

body, coupled together in perfyt loue and vnite,
to hang vpon him only,Ioan. 17. as vpon the true heed &
fountayn of al suche thynges, as they shuld euer
desyre, leauyng the order of al worldly thinges,
as I saide, to suche as by office haue cure of the
same: for as moch as that perteyneth to worldly
policie, wherof he wolde haue his disciples to
haue in a maner cōtempt, & to be in the world as
out of the worlde, & rather to refuse al suche besy
policie & careful study of transitorie thinges, thā
therby to be let from the office of pure christianitie,
which chiefly doth rest & stonde in this with
despisynge of all such thinges, with feruent hart
and affection euer to desyre thinges,Matth. 19. euerlastyng
and eternall. To this rūneth the course of al Christis
doctrine, which by his mouth he taught, & by
his disciples to vs in writing hath left, in so moche
that of his doctrine to gether, that amōg his
disciples, he shuld stable any suche superiorite, &
so therby to deriue it to the bishoppe of Rome, is
manifestly to turne al thing vp so down, & to the
cleane cōtrary: the which thinge Christ him selfe
in dyuers places of his gospel particularly doth
teache & expresse. For where as his disciples not
yet perfyte nor lyghted with his spirite, but hauynge
a lyttel of the spirite of the worlde, stroue
amonge theym selfe for superyoritie of place, he
made aunswere, instructinge them this, Princis
of the worlde, and other,Marc. 10. whyche haue not as
yet the heuenly guste, stryue for suche thynges,

as they whiche haue theyr hartes fyxed therin.
But you whom I wolde haue to conceyue other
desires, shal not do so, for as moche as all suche
contention cometh of playne arrogancye, frome
the whiche I wolde haue you vtterly to abhorre,
and stablynge in your hartes by humilitie, the
contempte of all suche thynges, contende alway
to the desyre of the heuenly and celestiall, to the
whiche if you wyll attayne, euen as this chylde
here stondynge amonge you,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . 19. liueth in simplycite
vtterly without care of worldly vanitie, so must
you leauynge asyde all contention for all worldly
thinge, and all superioritie, beare hartes pure
without affection, euer lokynge vp to the heuenly
conuersation, therin settynge all your comfort
and ioye, after this sentence Christe answered to
his disciples, stryuynge amonge them selfes for
superioritie, moued by ambition: wherin he manifestly
declareth, that if he had purposed to stably
she amonge them any order of superioritie or
degree, he wolde then moued therof haue made
some mention, commandynge the reste to gyue
obedience, to suche heed and order: but in all the
course of his doctrine, you shall neuer fynde any
mention or memory of suche institution and polycie.
For this is a sure thynge of you all to be
taken as moste true,Th
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  nde of Christis doctry
                     ••
                  
                  ▪
                that the chief poynt of Christis
doctryne stondethe in this, to perswade all
those, whiche wolde be his true disciples, this to
conceiue, as a chiefe grounde with obedience to

al worldly policie, not beinge contrary to ye glory
of god,1. Corin. 7. to vse these worldly thīges as passingers
& pylgrims, nothyng restinge thervpō, & to be in
the worlde, as out of the worlde, and to vse this
lyfe as a meane to lyfe, wherof this is but a shadowe,
puttynge no affiance nor truste therin, but
holly to hange vpon hym, who is the onely foū
               tayne
of all goodnesse and truthe,Matth. 10. and with the
desyre therof to haue their hartes euer inflamed,
with vtter contempte of all suche thynges, whiche
therto do put any obstacle and impedimente.
This vndoutedly is as it were the marke, which
our master Christ hath before our eies set, wherat
he wolde haue vs euer continually to shoote:
this is as it were the hauē, to the which he wolde
haue vs to direct our course, saylyng in the troublous
stormes of this lyfe: and this to stablyshe
in our hartes was his chiefe purpose, and so to
institute in vs the spiritual lyfe and godly, wherof
before I haue made mention: And as for the
worldely lyfe and polytike, he came not nowe to
stable nor institute, whiche by the benefyte of nature
he hadde before sufficiently founded, but he
came to bringe vs to an hygher perfection, and
to make vs playne spirituall, treadynge vnder
foote all thynges temporal. And this is not my
fantasy and dreame, Christe by his owne worde
manyfestly dyd expresse it many tymes,Iohan. 17. Luc. 22. sayeng,
He cam not into this world to reigne nor to rule,
but to minister vnto vs heuenly doctrine, and to

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
exhorte vs to contemne those thynges, whiche so
blynd cōmonly mans hart, he sayd oft, his kyngdome
was not of this world: whiche is most manyfest
in this, that he neuer taught one poynt of
worldely policie, but euer refused the institution
and direction therof, as to him he made answer,
whiche required the diuision of his inheritāce by
his iugemēt, sayeng, who hath made me a iudge
in suche matters,
                  
                     •
                  uc. 12. the which to redresse is not my
purpose? & to him that presēted before him a pece
of money with the image of themperour,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . 22. he bad
render that to hym, for therwith I haue nothing
to do, but to god gyue thy harte and affection of
pure mynde, whose image is there prynted and
sette, as of hym, who is onely lorde therof. This
euer he refused the cure of suche thynges, as pertayne
and belonge vnto the cyuile and polytyke
lyfe, and yet to them he was euer obedient, as the
hole course of his lyfe manyfestly doth declare.
He was circūcysed and purified,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . 3. he kept the sabbot
daye, and was baptysed, he payde tribute to
the prince, ye and to the hole lawe was so obedient,
that accordynge to the course therof he suffred
his deathe, the whiche all he dyd for our instruction,
teachynge vs neuer to dispyse,M
                     •••
                  h. 27. nor to
be disobediente to suche thynge as by common
authoritie is commonly receyued, but euer with
humble and meke obedience, therto contende,
and desyre to attayne the fruition of suche thinges
as neuer shall fayle nor decaye. Wherfore

dere frendes, seinge that the doctrine of our master
Christe is of this sorte, euer drawynge vs
frome the loue of this worlde to hygher consyderation,
forbyddynge vs vtterlye all contention
for any superioritie of order and degree, leauing
all suche thynges to ciuile and worldly polycie,
the instytution whereof he euer refused, as a
thynge base and vyle compared to that doctrine
whiche he euer taughte. All this consyderynge
I saye, and well ponderynge in mynde indifferentely,
to affyrme, that Christe stablysshed amonge
his disciples any suche superioritie, makynge
therby Peter chiefe heed, and also consequently
the byshoppe of Rome, that he therby
vppon all christendome shoulde be a chiefe iuge,
and vppon all princis and lawes to haue authoritie
with interdites and dispensation, theym to
tempre and reule at pleasure, ye and vppon the
worde of god alone to haue power of interpretation:
this to my iudgement, whan I weye the
thinge with my selfe, appereh to me, more than
madnes and extreme foly. For this passethe all
pryde and arrogancy, this is aboue all tyranny,
Christen nations were neuer so madde, by any open
decree or consent in counsell generalle, euer
to gyue to any one manne, suche authoritie: but
vndoubtedly by the symplicitie of christen people,
and by the pacience of good princis, ye and
by the arrogancye and pride of those, the whyche
haue vsed and occupyed the See of Rome,

it is growē by litle & litle into this intollerable tirāny:
the which after this sort as it is vsed, to affirme
to be of the lawe of god, and of necessite, is
playn cōtrary to the law of god, and moch to the
obscurynge of his glory. But yf you wyl se dere
frendes the authoritie of Peter, whiche to all other
apostels was equally gyuen, withoute any
superioritie, shortly I shal declare it vnto you.
            Lyke as the lyfe whiche Christe came to institute,
and stablyshe in the hartes of them, whiche
wolde folowe him, was of an other sorte and degree,
of a hyer puritie and excellency, than was
the lyfe of them, whiche loked no ferther than to
thynges present, drowned in all worldly & vaine
affection, and folowed only the course of the lyfe
politike, wherof I spake at large before: so is the
power and authoritie, that he gaue vnto theym,
whiche with sure faythe and truste in his worde,
folowed hym and his doctrine, of an other sorte
and greatter excellency, than euer before Christe
was gyuen to man in this worlde, or stablyshed
by any policie, there was neuer before him suche
thinge gyuen to mortall man. For to whom was
hit euer sayde, what soo euer thou byndeste or
loosest in erthe, the same in heuen shall lykewyse
be loosed and bounde? And yet to Peter this power
was gyuen, and to all the apostelles with
equalite. There was neuer before Christe emperour
in Rome, nor sens Christ prince out of christendome,
whether he were gret turke or sowdan

or amonge the mores any kinge most myghty of
power, that euer had any suche dignitie, to none
of them all was euer gyuen suche power. For
their power and authoritie, resteth onely in the
lordshyppe and dominion, gouernance and rule
of those thynges worldly vnstable and transitorye,
the which al as vyle by nature and of small
dignitie, Christis doctrine techeth to treade vnder
foote, and to a hyper degree he lyfted the hartes
of his disciples,Ioan. 10. and soo gaue theym hygher
authoritie,Matth. 15. as to lose manne from all myserie of
synne, though the synne were neuer so great, and
to sette hym in sure state of felicitie: and who so
euer he were and of what nation,The anthorite of Peter. cōdicion, state,
or degree, all indifferently to lose from synne, yf
they wyll with perfyte faythe and sure truste in
Christe professe his doctrine folowynge euer the
perfection of the same. To this fayth and truste
being in Peter and in the other apostels our master
gaue this diuine power, and this is the very
key of the gate of heuē, which as you se openeth
to all men the gate indifferently, there is no man
excluded from entrynge therin,Galat. 3. but all, puttynge
their holle affiance in Christe folowynge his doctrine,
shall be admytted withoute difficultie.
            This is a meruaylous power to man gyuen, to
plucke man so myserable and wretched out of al
myserie, and to putte him in the state of felicite:
And with this power our master Christ sēt forth
his disciples, instructe with his spirite, to all the

worlde, by the prechynge of his doctrine to turne
them out of their wretched trade and misery, and
to wake them out of their dreame: for drowned
mankynde was with worldly affection, and fynally
to put them in remembraunce of the benefytes
of god and of their dignitie, and that so by
his doctrine they at the last inspired and styrred
vppe, myght attayne to their felicite. This was
the chief authorite & power, to thapostels by our
master gyuen, to the puttyng in vse wherof he institute
certayn mistical sacramētes, wherby man
shuld be styrred to receyue grace & fauour of almyghty
god,The sacramentes. and so com oft to the memory of the
great benefytes of the goodnes of him, which he
by his grace hathe aboue all other to vs of his
flocke specially opened and communed. To this
tende all the sacramentes of Christe institute, to
brynge vs I say to the remembrance of suche benefyte,
as he to all theym, whiche by sure saythe
hang vpon him, hath surely promysed, as I shal
more playnly herafter declare. So that dere frendes
in fewe wordes to conclude, this high power
and greattest that euer to mankinde was gyuen
in erth, to the apostels of Christ gyuen was this.
Fyrst, of al myserie of 
                  •
               ynne man to release, not
as of them selfe, but as of the ministers of god,
so to all other to be deriued,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . 
                     •
                  . who so euer in Christ
wold put sure confidence & truste, as in the fountain
of al saluation:Ma
                     ••
                   6. and then so this doctrine to
preche to al mankynd indifferently, as to the creatures

of god, only to his image formed & made.
by the hering wherof, they at the last considering
their owne dignite, myght be brought out of all
misery: and so thirdly by the cōmunynge of the
misticall sacramentes therof, myght therby inspired
with grace & the heuenly spirite,Luc. 22. be styrred to
the memorye of his infinite benefyte and goodnes;
which to vs not deseruyng he hath communed,
by the reason wherof consequently, we deliuered
out of this misery & wretchidnes, might
attayne vndoubtedly to suche felycitie and quietnes,
as he of his mere goodnes hathe to vs by
his worde and promise appointed and determyned.
This is the authoritie & power in these fewe
wordes described, whiche Christe in his gospelle
to his apostels hath communed, and so cōmunid
that indifferentely to all without inequalitie, he
stablyshed it in them, ye and in all other whiche
with like faith and confidence in him beleue, and
succede in their place, leauynge al worldly vanities
aside, & tredyng them vnder fote, hang only
vpon him, as he that hath aboue al other ye true
superioritie, and is of all churches the very true
heed. And that this is a certayne and sure truth,
of the gospell in many places we haue most manyfest
testimony, where as Christ instructing his
apostelles to the preachynge of his worde, sayth
vnto them all without exception of any,Matt. 18▪
                what so
euer ye loose in erthe, the same in heuen shall be
losed: and also what so euer you do there bynde,

the same in heuen shall be bounden also, that is
to saye, who so euer he be, to whom you preache
my worde, of what countreye or nation, secte or
religion, if he by your preachynge tourne to the
confession of my name, trustynge therby faythfully
to haue saluation, to him you shal haue power
to declare, that he is therby delyuered from
bondage of all synne, and loosed frome it by my
vertue and power, to him communed and declared
openly by you, whome I make the ambassadours
of my wyll:
                  
                     •
                  . Corin. 5. And lyke wise whom so euer
you see to denye me in erthe, despisynge my doctrine
by you preached, and refuse the confession
of my name, all suche by this same power, you
shall vtterly condempne here in erthe, and to the
same my wyll in heuen shall be agreable, and the
same shall confyrme. After this maner our maister
spake to his disciples, gyuynge them power
to the prechinge of his worde. To the which sentence
also in an other place his wordes do agree,
whiche he spake after his resurrection, whan he
sent forth his apostels, to preache to al the world,
inspirynge them with his holy spirite, after this
maner saying, Howe at your going forth vpon
this heuenly embassage you shall receyue the heuenly
spirite,Ioan. 
                     •
                  0. by whose grace you shal haue with
al this power, that whose so euer synnes ye lose,
the same shall by and by be released to them, and
whose so euer you bynde and iudge not to be relesed,
they shal with the bonde remayne, as moch

to saye, as what synne so euer it be, or what sorte
or condition be the synner of, so that he with sorowfull
hart confesse the same, trustynge by the
goodnesse of me onely to be delyuered frome his
myserie of synne, if you by the spirite, whyche I
haue nowe gyuen vnto you, iudge hym to be released
in erthe, your iugement shalbe confyrmed
in heuen, and if by the same spirit, which I haue
to you gyuen, you iuge him contrary to be worthy
of condempnation, to that my wyll in heuen
shall agree, and with this power nowe I sende
you forthe. These wordes declare moste christen
people manyfestly, that this hygh authoritie, by
Christe was vndoutedly gyuen to his heuenlye
messangers & apostels, whan he sent them forth
to preache his heuenly doctrine, by the benefyte
wherof man shulde be quyte delyuered frome al
kynde of synne and myserie: but that this same
was to all them gyuen equally, this is not to all
men so manifest & playn, this many men denye,
affirmyng y• to Peter it was giuen with a prerogatiue
of excellēcy, and so therby to the bishop of
Rome, in whose place he only dothe by their sentence
succede, they attribute a superioritie. This
they say & only they say, but as for sure grounde
of scripture, their sentence to confirme, playnly
there is none. For as touchynge this, whiche is
of al other, most chief,Matth. 18. that to Peter Christ spake
particularly, gyuynge to hym this power, that
was vndoutedly, bicause he beinge of faith more

feruent, and as it appereth of greatter stomake,
ye and as it shulde seeme also by many signes, of
better vtterance and eloquence. For the whiche
cause he of the olde interpretours of scripture is
euer called the mouthe of the apostels: he I saye
hauyng these giftes, spake before the rest, and so
to him particularly Christe sayd, he wolde gyue
the keyes of the kyngedome of heuen, but he
sayde not, that vnto hym alone he wolde gyue
them. For after whan he gaue theym in dede, he
spake to all indifferentely. And ferther yet this
same power whiche he said he wold gyue to Peter,
was not of any other sorte, then that, whiche
he gaue to al other, as it appereth by the wordis,
but euen all one, and runnyng to the same effect,
as to release and bynd sinne with like authorite,
and therby to make opē the gates of heuē. Therfore
to affirme suche prerogatiue, onely bycause
he spake to Peter particularly, semeth a weake
and a sklender grounde, seing that he dydde not
say that to him alone, he wolde gyue such authoritie,
and besyde that whan he gaue it in dede, he
than gaue it equally. And yet more ouer, he that
indifferently weyith the same place, with the circumstance
therof, shal fynde playnly, that speakynge
to Peter he spake also to all, as he for all
answered. For euen as the question was not asked
of Peter alone, but of al equally, so necessaryly
the promysse of power to al was at the same
tyme indifferentely opened, thoughe Peter as

spokes man to the rest, onely made answere: but
Peter alone had not that fayth, the whiche is the
foundation and sure stoone, whervppon Christe
buylded his churche, to the which was made the
promyse of this power, but of that feythe they
were all indifferently, though Peter with more
feruent affect out wardly it declared, & the faithe
it was that Christe founde in them, whiche moued
hym to make the promyse of that hyghe power,
the whiche he after gaue indifferently to all
other, whiche with lyke faith are sent forthe and
appoynted by his churche and faythefulle congregation,
to preache the fruite of his heuenly
doctrine abrode to the people,Luc. 22. to their comforte
& saluation. Of this place therfore to gether any
prerogatiue of power to be gyuē to Peter, is but
a weke cōiecture, & a feble groūd, & like to ye same
which is gatherid of an other place, where Christ
sayd to Peter he had prayde for him, yt his faithe
shuld not fail, & that after his cōuersion he shuld
confirm his brethern, the which wordes he spake
to the comfort of Peter, forseinge by his prouidence
the wekenes of his faithe and imbecillitie,
whiche he shewed aboue the rest of his apostels.
Wherfore beside the cōmon cōfort, which he gaue
to them al, yt they shulde syt with him in his maiestie,
at the extreme iugement of al, to take oute
of Peters harte, the dispayre therof, whome he
knewe shulde after denye hym, and thryse deny
hym, he promysed his faithe shoulde not fayle,

and that by the occasion therof he shuld confirm
his brethern, to put faith in him, whose goodnes
was not soo offended with suche infidelitie, but
that by sorowfull harte and repentance he shortly
recouered his fauour agayne. Wherof al christen
hartes may take a notable example and syngular
comforte, to the auoydynge of al desperation:
but as for any superiorite of power hereby
to be gyuen to Peter, to all them whiche indifferently
weye the circumstaūce of this place, it can
not but appere a weyke groūde & feble cōiecture:
and yet weyker is this, whiche of an other place
of the gospell as most principall is taken, where
as Christe demaunded of Peter, whether he loued
him more than the other of his apostels,
                  
                     ••
                  n. 21. the
whiche he affirmed, to whom Christe then sayde
and commaunded, that he shulde than fede his
flock, and that he rehersed thrise to gyther, wherof
is thought manifest al the hole matter. But in
this leauynge other answeres of many wyse mē
made, I wyl shewe you my sentence & iugement,
that Christe there intended no suche thing at all,
nor to stablyshe in Peter any superiorite therby,
was nothinge his purpose, as it semeth manifest
for as moche as he sayd onely fede my flocke, not
addyng or puttyng to any argument or token of
any higher power and authorite, but only thrise
rehersed that thinge, whiche is the common office
of all his apostels, and of al other, which be
appoynted to be preachers of his worde, the whiche

thing as it semed by inculcation he wold fasten
in Peters harte, ye and soo consequently in
the hartes of all them, whiche of his name wyll
make profession. That thing I say he wold fasten
in hart, which is of al his doctrine the chefe
ground and foundation, that is to say, that who
so euer by mouthe and outwarde confession, professe
to loue Christe, and to be a sheparde of his
flocke: thenne must he in dede, and by outwarde
demonstration openly declare, when occasion requyreth,
the inwarde affect, to the entent that the
worde and dede may in effecte agree. For he that
by mouthe sayth he loueth Christe, and by dedes
dothe hym deny,Tit. 1. he is no mete disciple of the doctrine
of Christe, nor mete apostle, nor sheparde
for his flocke, for his confession doth not profite
nor edifie the inwarde affecte of all christen hartes,
may not onely in wordes,Matth. 23. but in dede be declared:
without the whiche thou shewest thy selfe
to be an hypocrite,Hypocrisye, and a dissemblyng professour
of Christis doctrine, the which hypocrisie aboue
all thinge Christe doth abhorre, and hath as ennemy.
Wherfore as I thinke, Christe asked Peter
thrise of his inward affecte, and was not content
onely with the outwarde confession of loue
by mouthe, whiche may by dissimulation be couered
and cloked, but gaue him cōmandment to
fede his flocke, with that faith & with his heuenly
doctrine: and so in effecte to declare his loue,
the whiche though Christ without dede outward

who lokith into mēs hartis, right wel doth know
yet to the comforte of other, and to their instruction,
we muste euer as occasion requireth: so declare
our inwarde affecte, with loue and charitie
by outward workes to the profyt of other. This
doctrine maye well be taken of this inculcation
and ofte rehersall of these wordes to Peter, but
as for any superioritie of power, therby to attribute
vnto hym, playnly to me semeth a dreame,
where as of power is made no mention. Wherfore
of the groundes of scripture, and of Christis
gospelle dere frendes no man can take sure
argumente of this prerogatiue, as by these places
ye maye see, whiche are amonge other of all
moste chiefe and principall. For of the rest be taken
yet more feble coniectures, the whiche haue
many yeres troubled all the worlde, and blynded
these popes with arrogancy, and in all other stabled
moche superstition, to the greatte ruyne of
Christis pure doctrine and of all good religion.
Wherfore frendes seinge that the manifeste doctrine
of our master, so playnly sowneth to equalytie
of power, in all the apostelles indifferently,
and onely by lyghte coniectures menne maye
be ladde to the contrarye, I wotte not why we
shulde so styffely defende this authoritie, so febly
founded, and so wekely, as you partly haue hard
by scripture grounded.
            And moste specially seinge that the practyse of
the same authoritie in the tyme of the apostelles,

whiche moueth me aboue all other argumentes,
out of the gospell drawen, and wordes of Christ
wrytten, is vtterly contrarye, ye and many yeres
so continued in the begynnyng of Christis churche,
the whiche I shall nowe breuely to you also
declare, wherby you maye better be instructed,
thanne by argument oute of scrypture drawen,
wherin lyeth moche controuersie. For this is to
be thoughte as a certayne truthe and sure, that
the apostelles so inspired with the spirite of god
wolde neuer put in practise thynge contrarye to
the doctrine of their maister Christe, which they
had so newly receyued, and so stablyshed in their
hartes. Wherfore though Peter lyke as he euer
dydde in the presence of his mayster, shewe hym
selfe moost prompte and redy with faithfull hart
and loue to serue hym in all thynge, so after his
Ascension vppe to his father, shewed hym selfe
mooste studiouse in the preachynge, and in the
fyrste stablynge of his newe and godly doctrine,
euer redye to preache and common the same, to
the foundynge of his churche and faythfull congregation.
Yet this ye shall fynde in obseruyng
his actes and practyse of his lyfe, and of all other
Christis apostelles, that he nother of hym
self preched this doctrin, any prerogatyue of power,
aboue other vsynge therin, nor yet they any
suche thinge gaue vnto hym, in settynge forthe
the same. As of the fyrste acte, whiche the Apostelles
dydde, hit is verye euydente and playne,

when they shoulde supply the roume of Iudas,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
               
Peter onely dyd purpose the thing, whiche after
they perfourmed, by election and cōmon authoritie,
gyuyng to hym no prerogatiue at al of any
hygher power, sauinge only that he as most eloquent
& bolde proposed the matter, whyche they
fynyshed by their common assent. And after the
same maner in the creation of Diacons, this order
was obserued, whan certayne were appointed
to minister in lower office to the hole congregation,
while the apostels occupied them selfe in
prechynge of Christis doctrine:
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                this thyng was
not done by the authoritie of Peter alone, but by
the common agreement of all the rest, whiche at
the begynnynge of the churche, were in that lyttell
congregation. And at such tyme as the gentyles
beganne to receyue the doctrine of Christe
Peter dydde not by his authoritie commande or
appoynt, whiche of the apostelles shulde god toAct. 8.
preache vnto theym, to the increase of Christis
churche, but he hym selfe with Iohn were sente
forth of the other this office to do: whiche argueth,
that aboue the reste he had no authoritie, for
than he myght of him selfe haue done that thing
whiche he dyd not, but with the authoritie of the
hole congregation was sent forthe with Iohn̄, &
with equall authoritie together they preached, to
the cōmon edification of Christis churche, in no
poynt shewyng any prerogatiue therin. But this
thynge is yet moche more euident, by the entreatynge

of a controuersie, which at the begynning
rose in that lytel church, the order wherof yf you
obserue with diligence, you shall most manifestly
see, that to Peter was gyuen no prerogatiue
of authoritie: The controuersie rose by the reson
of some whiche preched to the gentyles, that circuncisionAct. 15▪
               
was necessary to their saluation: this
thinge beinge in great controuersie, was not defyned
by Peters authorite, but referred to Ierusalem
to the counsell of the apostels, wherin this
order was obserued. Peter fyrst declared his sentence
and mynd, how that this circuncision was
but a ceremony, and to the saluation of the gentyles
nothīg necessary: after whom spake Poule
& Barnabas to the same sentēce, but after them
all, Iames gaue iudgemente of the thynge, declarynge
of them all the common sentence, and
sent it forthe by writinge, not as a thynge determined
by any prerogatiue of Peters authoritie,
but by the assent of all together, agreinge in vnitie.
Wherby ye may se dere frēdes, that Peter,
as it were giuing place to Iames at Ierusalem,
in that tyme shewed no argumente of any hyer
authoritie, but rather contrarye of that place hit
shulde seme, that Iames shoulde be of greatter
authoritie, for as moch as he pronounced the cō
               mon
sentence and iudgemente of all. But after
myn opinion, nother Iames was heed, nor yet
Peter, but all with equall authoritie and one assent,
laboured mooste besily, to common abrode

this heuenly doctrine, to the saluation of man in
euery countrey, this of their actes is most manifeste
and clere.
            But aboue all other yet to me of the dedes and
doctrine of Paule this doth most manifestly appere:
And fyrste that he in Arabia, Syria, and
                  
                     •
                  ala. 
                     •
                  .
other places, as he hym selfe testifieth manifestly,
this I say sheweth mooste surely, that Peter
was then no suche heed of the churche, as many
men dreme, that of hym as vicar of Christ, al power
shulde be deriued to other. For then Poule
without his institution, wold neuer haue attēpted
to preache, not hauynge of hym his authoritie,
the whiche is iudged to be of suche necessite,
that the denienge of his superioritie, shuld bring
in euerlastinge damnation. And besyde this loke
what he dyd at Antyoche, where as Peter vsing
a lyttell mannes policy, gaue place to the wekenes
of the Iewes, withdrawynge hym self from
the company of the gentyls & their facion of lyfe,
was boldly of Paule reproued,
                  
                     •
                  ala. 
                     •
                  . as one that shuld
with suche ceremony and dissimulation, offende
the libertie of Christis gospelle, whiche indifferently
to the maners of all nations shulde be accommodate
and applyed, without respecte of ceremony:
this he dyd manifestly, which I thinke
he wolde neuer haue doone, if he hadde iudged
in Peter to be any suche hyghe authoritie, but
rather he wolde haue confourmed hym selfe to
the doctryne of his heed, hauynge suche superioritie,

beinge the onely liefetenaunt and vicar
of his maister: but playnely he iudged no suche
thing, he neuer conceyued no suche power aboue
other in Peter to rest. The which is also of an other
of his dedes more yet manifest, he saith thatGalat. 
                     •
                  .
after he had longe tyme preached the gospelle of
Christe amonge the gentyle nation: He ascended
to Ierusalem, there to conferre with Peter, and
other there beinge the pyllers of the churche, not
bycause he doubted of his owne doctrine, wherof
he was so sure, that if Peter had preched contrary,
ye or any aungel of heuen, therof he woldGala. 
                     •
                  .
haue had lyttell regarde, he had his doctrine of
so sure a grounde: but he ascended onely gyuing
place to the wekenes of them to whome he preached,
whom he thought rather to wynne, hauing
his doctrine to Peters, and other there being of
great fame agreable, the whiche he dyd in dede.
For of them he saythe, thoughe they were neuer
so greatte, by suche collation to hym self he had
no profytte, no thynge he there lerned, that by
the goodnesse of their common mayster Christe
he hadde not lerned before. Wherfore he saythe,
he departed frome Ierusalem, not as one that
toke Peter for any hedde or gouernoure of the
churche of Christe, but as one of equall authorytie,
hauynge his doctryne and power of the
verye same grounde, that Peter hadde made
with hym, there with Iames and Iohn̄,Galatas 2. as it
were a leage, a confederacyon, and a socyetie,

ye and as a companyon with hym nothynge inferiour
in power, agreed togyther, that euen lyke
as they chiefly shuld enterprise their office, to exercise
amonge the iewes, inducynge them to the
truthe of the gospell, so wolde he and Barnabas
his companyon go to the gentyles, theym by all
menes to allure to this heuenly doctryne of their
mayster, and so as it were the hole worlde deuydynge
amonge them with courage, pourposed it
to subdue, and bringe mankynde from the study
and cure of these vayne thinges frayle and transitorie,
to the desyre of suche thynges, whiche by
nature be euerlastynge stable and sure. This ye
se dere frendes by Poules actes and dedes, how
in Peter he neuer knewe no such superioritie nor
prerogatiue of power, nor in no place nor tyme
dydde submytte him selfe therto: the whiche also
by his doctrine, he clerely dydde confyrme, as in
few wordis I shal now to you declare. The sōme
of Poules doctrine and the chiefe poynt therof,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
               
whiche he receyued of his mayster, stondeth in
this, to perswade vs despisyng al thinges worldly
and transitorie,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                vsynge them as we had them
not at al, euer to loke vp to them whiche be eternall,
and in them to haue our eies surely fyxed,
and distrustinge oure owne power, workes, and
dedes,Tit. 3. as thinges by the whiche we can not euer
lastynge lyfe deserue, put our hole truste and affyance
in Christe, by whose onely goodnesse we
may attayne our saluation,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                hangyng vpon him

faithfully, as vpon the onely heed and fountayn
of all good,2. Corin. 5. of hym onely lokynge to take lyght
and grace,Roman. 12. wherby we may in this lyfe walkyng
as in a pylgremage, knytte to gyther all by charitie,
as by a common bande, and lyke membres
of one body coupled in spirituall vnitie, by the
mere benefyte of our heed, and his infinite goodnes,
at the laste attayne to our perfyte ende and
felicitie,1. Corin. 2. there inioyinge such celestiall comfort &
heuenly pleasure, as nother tongue can expresse,
nor harte of man thinke. This is in fewe wordis
as hit were the somme of the doctrine of Paule,
wherin ye see the chiefe grounde to be,Ephe. 4. the faithe
and sure truste, that we muste conceyue of this
heed our mayster Christe, by whose mercyfulle
goodnes we shall be saued, and not by our owne
workes, nother by circuncision, sabbotte day,Ephe. 2. Galatas. 5. Colo
                     •
                  t. 2. nor
ceremonye, but onely by the faithefull loue, that
we muste beare to that heed, euer obedyente to
walke in outwarde workes, accordynge to his
commaundement, whiche with loue we must do,
one euer therby helpynge an other, to the intente
that we all togyther maye so at the laste be cowpled
in dede to this heed, of whome nowe here
we hange, whiche is oure onely comforte. Of
this heed I say Poule makethe ofte and moche
mention, as of the thynge whiche is mooste necessarye
to our saluation, but of any other heed
here to be chiefe in his churche,Ephe. 1. Colos
                     •
                  . 1. as his vycar in
erthe, to whose iudgement as to his owne al the

worlde shulde be obediente and conformable of
hygh necessitie, he neuer speaketh worde, he neuer
gyuethe to vs any sygnification: whiche I
thinke he wolde haue done, if it had ben so necessary
to our saluation, and to the vnitie of Christis
church so strōge confirmation. And though
to somme peraduenture this argumente appere
weyke, bycause it semeth not wel to folow, Poule
maketh no mention therof, therfore it is not so:
Yet to me consyderinge the thinge as it is, with
the circumstaunce therof, it appereth almoste a
sure demonstration, seinge that Poule makyng
soo moche mention of the heed of the churche of
Christe, inculkynge it so ofte as a thinge mooste
necessary, if he had thought, that Peter had bene
an vnder heed of Christe hym selfe, as some saye
nowe in his churche stablyd, as necessarye to the
conseruation of the vnitie therof, I thynke I say
in some place he wold haue made mention therof,
or elles plainly his doctrine had ben insufficiente,
lackynge the declaration of that thynge,
whiche to the stablynge of Christis doctrine, is
of soo hyghe necessitie. But this Paule neuer
dydde, but the contrarye playne. For he neuer
toke Peter for hedde of his Churche: whyche
thing also I am sure Peter, if it hadde ben putte
to hym, wolde haue vtterly and cleane forsaken
it, specially after that sorte to be of suche necessitie.
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
               
Paule toke him as his compaignion equall
with hym in power and dignitie spirituall, both

two despisers of dignitie temporall. I am sure,
if Peter were alyue, that he wold thinke nothing
more contrary to the doctrine of his master, than
to affyrme of suche power anye superioritie, as
nowe is to him against his wyll ascribed to be of
suche necessitie, that withoute it the doctrine of
Christe shoulde runne to ruyne and decaye. And
that man without the confession of suche power,
shuld fall to sure perdition. This I am sure Peter
wolde abhorre and Paule also, This theyEphe. 4.
wolde thinke to be plaine contrary to the simplicitie
of Christis doctrine and vnitie. Wherfore
frendes seing that nother the places of scripture
indifferently weyed, nor the practyse of the same
in the tyme of the apostels to the world declared,
serue to the ascribynge of any prerogatiue of power
to Peter, or aboue the reste any superioritie,
and seynge also that bothe the dedes and doctrin
of the mooste diuyne Interpretour of Christis
gospelle Paule, sound to the contrary, as I haue
manyfestly shewed, I see no cause why we shuld
of suche necessytie, attrybute to the bysshoppe of
Rome suche superioritie, that the defection from
the same, shuld blotte any nation, with the crime
of heresie or of scisme, and so consequently induce
any scrupulous suspiciō of euerlastyng damnation.
But playnly to say, the assertion of such supiorite,
after this sort appereth a great madnes,
extreme foly, & playn suꝑstition: the whiche thing
thoughe of scripture it selfe as I haue towched,

be manyfest and playne, yet the same I wylle in
as fewe wordes as I can, fearynge leest I shall
be tediouse therin, bothe by storye and probable
Argumente declare vnto you, and so it shall
be manyfeste, that this thynge is not of suche
greatte necessitie, to the conseruation of the vnion
of Christis churche, as many menne blyndly
do iudge.
            ¶And fyrste herein to me it apperethe a thynge
moche meruaylous, by what meane this thynge
to be of so great necessitie, shulde enter in to mēs
fantasies and myndes, specially of lernyng and
iudgement, consideringe that frome the tyme of
Peter vntyll the tyme of Syluester byshoppe of
Rome, in the reigne of Constantyne, aboute the
space of .iiii. hundrethe yeres, of this heed with
such superioritie was no mention at all. For this
by certayne storye is knowen, that all that tyme
the byshoppes in euerye place chiefe and princypalle,
as Ierusalem, Antioche, and Alexandria,
were bothe chosen and institute of the hole congregation,
or els by the priestes, to whome was
gyuen of the multitude suche authoritie, and no
mention is had all that space, that they ranne to
the bysshoppe of Rome, as theyr common heed
and superiour, whyche at the same tyme was rather,
as by probable coniecture we maye gather,
longe and many a daye, inferiour vnto the churche
of Ierusalem, & Alexandria, I meane not in
power & authorite, for therin was sure equalitie,

but in vertue and knowledge of Christis doctrine,
whyche in Alexandria and in Antyoche,
as nere to Ierusalem, toke fyrst greater ground,
than it dyd in the citie of Rome, whose pryde &
worldely polycye many a daye, moche resysted to
the truthe of the gospel, and that heuenly humilitie
therin to vs taught, the which nothing was
agreable to the imperial pryde, in the emperours
then reygnynge. Wherfore christen men there secretly
in corners made their assembly, and priuy
profession of Christes name, auoydyng the persecution
of the wycked emperours, whose arrogancy
was clene contrary to Christis simplicite.
And thus at Rome it cōtinued without great encrease
of Christis doctrine longe & many yeres,
where as at Alexandria and Antioche was at the
begynnyng moche more open profession of Christis
name and doctryne, the whiche may well be
gathered of the multitude of lerned men and religyouse,
wherof at the begynnynge of Christis
churche was in Alexandria and Egypte, in Antioche,
and in the parties of Grece, as story maketh
mention, far greatter nombre, than there
was at Rome, or here in the weste parties of the
worlde, where as Christis relygyon toke more
slowe encrese, than it dyd in the easte, where it beganne.
For at Rome vntyll the tyme of Constā
               tyne
it neuer toke so notable encrease, his vertue
goodnes and authoritie, moche altered the policy
of Rome: for his fame and example greattely

styrred y• hartis of the cōmon peple, whose iugementes
euer moche folowe theyrs, whiche be in
authoritie, by theyr example moche they fourme
their myndes, theyr trade of lyfe they studye to
expresse: so that vntil this good emperours time,
thoughe before at Rome it had a good grounde,
yet it was not so stablished by authorite of prince
it did not so florishe in the face of the worlde, but
christen men liued there in moche subiection, and
specially at the begynnynge, when for their relygion,
they suffred moche miserie, & persecution.
But nowe to the purpose, al this space of thre or
foure hūdreth yeres, nother the byshop of Ierusalē,
nor of Antioche, no nor yet Alexādria, neuer
shewed argument of any superioritie of power
dewe to the byshoppe of Rome by the doctrine of
Christe, they neuer gaue to hym of necessitie, and
of the gospell dewe any poynt of obedyēce, they
were not institute, nor made by his authoritie,
they neuer cam to his iugemēt for sentence, as to
the vicar of Christ: but often tymes by collation,
they toke one of another the trewth of scripture,
and therof the trewe interpretation therby they
founde oute, to that euer gyuynge dewe obedience,
but of that hyghe superiorite, all that tyme
was no mention, no worde, nor by story and lytel
sygnyfication? whiche is also mooste manifeste
by the celebration of the fyrste counselles generalle,
whiche were congregate by the princelye

authoritie, without mention of any suche superiorytye,
gyuen to the byshoppe of Rome, the
whiche thynge to proue is more open thanne
nowe nedeth any declaration. Wherfore hit can
not be thoughte, to be of suthe necessytie, specyally
seynge all that tyme at the begynnynge of
Christis churche, whenne the doctryne of oure
mayster was mooste pure, and not corrupte by
mannes inuentyon, but as hit came from the
fountayne, syncere and clere, was entred and
stabled in the hartes of them, which therof made
professyon, there is noo storye made oone tytle
of mention, of anye suche superyoritye to the
bysshoppe of Rome to be gyuen, no nor yet to
none other, speciallye that it shoulde be of suche
hygh necessitie, that without it Christis doctrine
coulde not stande, the whiche to all menne
that haue eyes, and consider the storye of the begynnyng
of the churche, stode than in greatter
puritie, than euer hit dydde, sens the tyme that
we haue had this one hed, stablisshed with suche
authorytie and power, the whiche thynge is so
manyfeste and playne, that no manne consyderynge
the antiquitie, and comparynge it with
the posteritie, maye denye this. For this to the
worlde is open, in so moche that this thynge to
be of necessyte to the saluation of man, as many
men dreme, now also to confyrme with moch argumēt
and reson, appereth vtterly superfluous.

Howe be it this I wyll saye, a great lykelyhode
that this shoulde not be necessary is this. Fyrste,
that all the aunciente and good Interpretours
of Christis Gospell amonge the grekes, whome
I iudge to haue more lyghte in the holye scripture,
as they had in al other letters and lerning,
than any other nation, that euer yet receyued the
trewthe of Christis religion, the whiche without
profe here of me, is open by theyr workes to all
men, that with diligence them wyl rede. Al these
I say with one consente, kepe sylence of this authoritie
to be gyuen to the byshoppe of Rome of
suche necessitie, in theyr workes therof ye shall
neuer fynde mention, the whiche is not like, they
wolde haue done, if they had iudged it to be soo
necessary a thynge, and a gospell truth of Christ
institute, and stabled: besyde this if this ground
were trewe, then shulde al the Indians all these
thousand yeres haue runne heedlyng to damnation,
which neuer toke the byshop of Rome heed
of Christis churche and his vicar in erthe, nor of
hym neuer toke tradition, and yet they haue ben,
ye and yet be nowe in our dayes, vnder Preter
Iohn̄, their kynge and heed, of Christis doctrine
deuout & true professours, and with vs in al the
groūdes of scripture vtterly agre, in ceremonies
and rytes ecclesiasticalle, there is moche diuersitie,
as it is necessary, accordyng to the nature of
the contrey and people. The same thynge myght
be sayde of them in Armeny, whiche neuer wold

be obedient to the byshoppe of Rome, but hadde
amonge them their heed, whom they called their
catholyke, as he that was a trewe professour and
maynteyner of the catholyke faythe. The same
also myght be sayd of the Greke nation, whiche
neuer wolde confesse the obedience to the church
of Rome, to be necessary to the saluation of mā.
Wherfore chiefely by the byshops of Rome, they
were most vniustly noted, not to be as membres
of Christes vniuersall and catholyke body. But
now al these nations, Indians, Armenians, and
Grekes vtterly to condemne, and seperate them
from the benefit of Christis passion, wherin they
haue had euer their chiefe comforte and trust, only
for bycause they wold not, nor were not to this
heed, as to the vycar of Christe obedyente: All
these I say to condemne and caste theym into the
depe pytte of hell, semeth playne madnesse, and
moste blynde arrogancye: and I pray god, that
they whiche so blyndly do iudge, be not for their
owne iudgement rather to be condempned. For
this iugement hath no grounde neyther of scripture,
nor yet of reasone, but is a playne blynde
superstition. For as I haue shewed you before,
that thynge to attribute to god of necessitie, vnder
pretense of religion, whiche in dede is not so,
but hangeth only vpon mās cōstitution, is moste
playn and manifest superstition. Wherfore dere
frendes, seinge that neyther scripture, storye, nor
good reason dryueth vs to confesse this superioritie

that tyme taken as of Scripture necessarye, for
than his decree hadde bene ryghte foolysshe, by
lawe to stablyshe that, whiche of the gospelle doctrine
shuld be so necessary. But to the purpose,
he thenne was made heed, but not by authoritie
of the generall counselle, but onely of the emperour,
who by his prudence and policie, thoughte
it expedient to stablysshe one heed, to order suche
thinges and putte in effecte at all tymes, whiche
were by generall counsell conceyued and decreed
concernynge the interpretation of scripture, the
controuersie wherof at the fyrst begynnyng was
onely there intreated, and no other thynge perteynynge
to polycye: Suche thynges were euer
lefte to the iudgement of Princis, and of euery
commynaltie: and there the dyuersitie of opinyons
in scripture were euer brought to a certayne
vnitie and concorde. This Authoritie only had
the bysshoppe of Rome at the fyrste begynnyng
of his superioritie, as it apperethe by generalle
counsaylles, and with this he contynued manye
yeres, neuer attentynge farther, vntylle at the
laste by longe warres and moche greatte dyuision
amonge princys, the Empyre of Rome fell
in moche ruyne and decaye, the whyche gaue the
fyrste occasyon to this greatte heddy power and
authoritie of Rome. For as the Emperour decayed
by prowde dyuysyon, so the pope increased
by symple superstytion. For to that authorytie
whiche firste he had of Constantyne, his successours

in the empire added moche more, gyuynge
theym priuiledge and possession, with moche
worldely authoritie and iurysdyction, thynking
therby moch to honour god, whose vicar in erth
he soone after beganne to call hym selfe. For as
soone as this authoritie, by emperours was stablyshed,
than he of hym selfe beganne to call generall
counsayle, and there many other thynges
to decree besyde scripture, whiche were iudged
partely to be good for the conseruation of Christis
doctryne, as dyuers decrees, and ecclesiasticalle
lawes, and partely for the mayntenance of
this vnitie of heed, which then appered for the auoyding
of schisme and diuision, to the world almost
necessary, and specially after that purgatorie
after a newe facion was inuented, and surely
iudged to be: for therby chiefelye beganne his
reygne, thenne came in pardones and reseruation
to his owne see, than crope in the difinition
of thynges by his hye authoritie, than entred
excommunication and interdytes vpon all princis
and christen nations: for after that the emperours
by symple superstition came to that poynt,
that to the popes they iudged theym selfes to be
subiectes, and not to be in full authoritie, tyll before
his presence they were intronised and crowned,
what other prince coulde there be, whiche
shuld not iuge him selfe inferior to the power of
him, which by him selfe was almost able to make
an emperour? So that brefely to say, & not ouer

For there is one vnite spiritual and an other politicalle,
vppon the whiche as vppon the chiefe
groundes,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                is stablyshed al polycy, bothe spiritually
and worldly, wherof you shulde nothynge
meruayle at all, if ye coulde conceiue the wōderfull
nature of this vnitie, whervppon is founde
the hole ingyn of this sensible worlde, as in the
whiche all the partes therof both in the heuenlye
bodyes and in the erthely creatures, are as in a
chayne coupled and knytte: and yet ferther the
very nature of goddes diuinite, as ferre as man
may therof any thynge affirme, as grounded in
the same. For god is no thyng but vnitie, & vnite
is god, ye and this incomprehēsible nature of the
mooste meruailous trinitie, in vnite is founded.
but this as a thynge passynge our capacite, we
wyll sette a syde, and meruayll no thynge at all,
that in this vnitie, wherof not without cause so
moche mention we make, resteth as in the groūd
al good & vertuouse policy, & is thend to y• which
al good lawes and ordynaunces euer must loke:
And as in the spiritual lyfe, we must euer moste
regarde this vnitie spirituall, so in the worldlye
muste be had respecte of the polyticall,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                the which
brefely to deseribe is nothing els but a concorde,
agrement and a consent of all them whiche be in
one polyce, to the receyuynge and puttynge in
vse suche lawes,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                constitutions, and ordynances,
as by polityke wyttes are deuysed to the conseruation
of the worldly quietnes and tranquillyte

to the whiche as to the chiefe ende, onely euer loked
they, whiche without the lyghte of Christe,
haue in any coūtreys stablyshed any polycie. For
to this ende loked Plato, where as in his deuysed
common weale, with the communitie of thinges,
he pourposed aboue all thynge to grounde
therin this vnitie. To this ende loked the aunciente
Grekes, and the wyse Romaynes, with all
theyr ciuyle constitutions, stablyshyng good order
in their cities and townes. The other vnitie
spirituall is of an other sorte,Spirytuall vnytie. and bringeth man
to an higher consyderation, whiche is this, all obedience
presupposed and taken to all ciuile and
polytike rule, a certayne consente of spirite and
mynde,Ephe. 4. and as it were with one harte a heuenlye
conspiracye, to the attaynynge of heuenly thynges,
whiche by god are to manne, puttynge his
onely truste by fayth in him promysed & appoynted,
by the hope wherof he treadynge vnder fote
all worldly vanities,2. Corin. 4. euer lyueth in desyre of heuenly
thynges and celestiall, the sure trust wherof
gyueth to mans harte inestymable quietnes,
and maketh him to be obedient to al worldly policye,
and thoughe hit be not good, yet paciently
it to beare, this hope and trust giueth man suche
courage, that all worldly thynges he easily hath
in contēpte, vsinge them onely in this lyfe as in a
pylgremage,Hebre. 13. where as we haue as saynte Paule
sayth, no dwellyng place. This spirituall vnitie
was stablyd in his flocke by our maister Christe,2. Corin. 5.
               
good polycie. Howe be it this in fewe wordes I
shall declare, that this heed with suche power as
hath of many yeres ben therto attribute, is in no
poynt conueniēt to the cōseruation of this vnite,
but rather a great occasion of the breche of good
christyan ciuylitie. This remayneth in the laste
place now to be declared, wherin I shal not nede
long to stond. For who so euer consydereth with
hym selfe the vsurped authoritie, in dispensynge
with the good and catholyke groundes and canonyke,
propowned by generall counselles, and
the sellynge of the same, the interditynge of coū
               treys
and nations vpon worldly causes, with excommunications
chiefely sente out for the same,
vpon the good christen flocke, I thynke he shall
fynd & shortly se, that this superioritie, as it hath
ben vsed, is lyttell conueniēt to christen ciuilitie:
specially if he ioyn to this the authorite by ꝑdons
abused, & plucking soules out of purgatory, with
the reseruyng of causes to his own power, & definitiō
of causes by apellatiō referrid to his popely
authorite. These thīges who so cōsiderith, he shal
shortly ꝑceiue, what incōueniēces among al christē
nations doth rise of this heedy authorite, and
what blynd superstition is therby groūded in all
Christis religion: For though in euery ꝑticular
church & prouīce it be conueniēt to haue one heed
to gouerne, for the auoyding of confusion, wherfore
byshops were institute aboue all priestes in
euery church cathedral, as testifieth al antiquite,

yet by lyke example therof to induce, the same to
be so conuenient in the hole body, as it is in euery
parte, is playne foly, and not without manifeste
lacke of iudgemēt. For where as in the hole body
of Christis churche be so many sondry nations,
and therin besyde the diuersities of tongues and
maners, so diuers polycies and ordynaunces of
lawes, that one mā therof to haue knowlege and
experience, which is required to the ryght iudgement
of causes, it semeth impossible. How shuld
it be thought conuenient in suche a body to constitute
one heed with suche authoritie, to whose
iudgement in all causes to hym deuolued and
brought, all the reste of christian nations shulde
stonde and be obedient? For thoughe he were a
man of mooste hye perfection, and of wysedome
mooste polytyke, seynge that the administration
of Iustice and equitie standeth a greate parte in
the knowledge of the particular circumstaunces
of causes, howe shuld he to so many nations, of
whom he hath no knowlege nor experience, giue
iustice with truth & equitie? For it can none other
wyse be, but that one man and one hede, so ignoraunt
of thynges, not hauyng particuler instruction
therof, shal be impotent and lacke power,
be he neuer so good, to satisfie all suche persons
and causes, whiche by appellation out of diuers
countreis and nations, shuld thither be referred:
by the reason wherof shuld succede many iniust
& wronge iudgemētes, as we both by olde story,

to whose gouernance he cōmytted his church, as
to his very vicar in dede, euer faythefullye haue
trusted vpon him, with sure fayth and confidēce.
Wherfore frendes if we with louinge harte one
to an other, hange vppon hym as vppon the hed
and onely fountayne of all good, & passing this
lyfe in the vse of these thynges traunsitorye and
vayne, as in a pylgremage, euer desyrynge to
come to our home, there to enioye thynges stable
and sure: doubte ye not but we then gouerned by
his spirite, his onely vicar in erthe, thoughe we
neuer knewe pope nor cardinall, shall kepe his
trewe vnitie, whiche is conserued, as by the chief
grounde, by faithful loue in hym and louing charitie
one to an other, euery one gladde to succour
other, euery one gladde to instructe other as his
christian brother. This we maye doo withoute
mention of the bysshoppe of Rome and knowlege
of that heed, and so conseruynge the groundes
of scripture and of the gospell of god, which
are but fewe in nombre, easye to be kepte in memory,
wherby liuynge in christen ciuilytie with
obedience to our prince, and to all suche thynges
as be stablyshed by comon authoritie here in our
nation, we may at the laste attayne to our felicitie,
though we neuer here worde of this superioritie,
whiche is a thyng of nature indifferent, by
the reson wherof it taketh his power & strength,
of the common consente of man and agrement,
and so som christian nations may it receyue and

maynteyne, and some hit reiecte without offence
of anye groundes of Scripture necessarye to
mannes saluation, and withoute anye breche
of the christian vnitie,Schysme & heresye. by schysme or heresie: to
the whiche shoulde insue euerlastynge dampnation.
For heresye and schysme are not iustely to
be ascrybed to anye nation,1. Corin. 1. excepte they slyppe
from the manyfeste groundes of scripture in the
gospel expressed, or in generall counsayle receiued
by interpretation, where as of the wordes of
scripture was gathered diuerse sentence and variable,
concernynge suche thinges as of necessite
perteyne to mans saluation, of the whiche sorte
this superioritie of the byshoppe of Rome, which
he hath by the pacience of christen prynces longe
abused, is none, as I thynke now is open clerely
to you all. Wherfore dere frendes I doute not
nowe at all,Obedience. but that ye consyderynge the nature
of this thynge, as hit is in it selfe, whiche is not
of necessitie to mans saluation, but a thynge indifferent,
whiche may be receyued, and maye be
reiecte by common consent, I doubte not I say,
but that ye wyll without scrupule of conscyence,
of harte therto be obedient, ye & to al other thing,
which by common authorite here in our contrey
hereafter shalbe decreed, concernynge the reformatiō
of al suche thingis as perteine to religiō,
and to the purgynge of vayne suꝑsticion: I dout
not but that the redresse of all ceremonies in the
church, customs & rites ecclesiastical ye wil gladly

we ought rather to gyue obedience in such thinges
to princely authoritie here in our nation, thā
to suche thinges as be propouned by general assemble
and congregation,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                where as is no power
of commaundement in thinges indifferente, but
only instructiō and brotherly exhortation, wherof
Christis doctrine taketh all his grounde and
foundation, without any ciuile punyshement or
compulsion. For Christ requireth the hart, to his
worde frankely and frely gyuinge obedience, ye
and the ende and perfection of his doctrine and
commandment, is to induce man by loue to vertue,
causynge alway his disciples, that thyng to
do by loue onely moued, which other obserue for
feare of punyshement. For the which cause as I
thynke, suche thinges as were propowned in the
fyrste counsels longe & many a day, were not called
lawes, byndynge mā with authorite, but only
canons and certayne rules, wherwith man frely
customing him self, might be gentilly induced to
folow the trade of vertue & honestie. And this to
be true,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                declareth a lawe made of the emperour
Iustinian, wherby to suche rytes and customes
ecclesiastical, as from the see of Rome and general
assemble, were deriued to many other natiōs,
he gyueth power and strength of lawes, settyng
them in ful authoritie, the whiche before bounde
no man, but were receyued at libertie. Wherfore
it appereth, that suche thinges, as by generalle
counsell are propowned, and to christen polycye

thought conuenient, be of no strengthe, power,
nor laufull authoritie and oblygatorie, vntylle
they be of euery nation receyued by cōmon ass
                  •
               t,
by the vertue wherof they may ageyn be dissolued
and vtterly abrogate, as tyme and place prudently
considered, the same shall requyre. This
you muste thinke, and this you muste doo, with
mekenes and obedience, moste christen people, if
you wyll be of the christian flocke. And soo after
this maner frendes, formyng your iugementes,
and fleing from al superstition, you shall among
your selfe, moche sette forwarde the truthe of the
gospell and of all good religion, and soo consequently
lyuing to gether in brotherly loue, euery
man in his offyce doinge his duetie, we shall at
laste by concorde and vnitie attayne to our ende
and perfyte felicite.
            ¶And thus I truste moste christen people, that
you nowe after this consideration had with your
selfes, as well of the spirituall lyfe, with the power
therin of Christe gyuen to all them, whiche
by perfyt faith trust in hym only, as of the worldly
and cyuile, with mans constitutions deuysed
by policye: and also that you nowe after ye haue
herde somewhat the difference betwixte thynges
of necessitie to be receyued for mannes saluation,
and thinges, whiche be but onely of mē deuysed,
for the conseruation of the same, I truste I saye,
nowe this consideration hadde, that you se somwhat
the meane, howe that ye shal instructe your

worldely punyshement, to none you wolde then
be obedient, but all whiche is contrarye to your
appetites in your hartes you wolde despise, and
soo the verye lawes of Christe, ye and Christe
him selfe, shortely you wolde lyttell esteme: for
this contempt of all tradition, shal induce in many
suche arrogancy, that all they shall iudge to
stande in mans opinion, & so neyther Christe, nor
his gospell they shall willyngly defende, but rather
flye frome the confession of his name, then
therfore to suffre death and worldely shame. For
suche is the nature and malyce of mans harte,
that if you take ones frome hym relygious obedience,
and feare of relygion conceiued by longe
custome and processe of tyme, he shall by lyttell
and lytell, by arrogant opinion, fall in to the vtter
contempte, and inwarde dispysynge, of all
trewe relygion, and so lyue without any inward
feare in harte of god, or hereafter of any punyshment:
to the which what wyl folow, al the world
dothe see, for then nedes must ensue the ruyne of
all ciuile order, and of all good worldly polycye,
wherof good and trewe religion is the mooste
stable and sure foundation. Wherfore frendes
for the instruction of your iudgementes in this
behalfe also, and for the auoydynge of this euyl,
whiche is yet worse than the other, for better it is
to man, and more agreable to lawes of god, and
nature, to suffre vaine supersticion, than to bring
in corrupte contempt of religion: somewat I wil

herin nowe to you say.
            And firste this you shall vnderstande dere frendes,
as a cōmon groūde, that al be it rytes, customes
of the churche, & traditions, ecclesiastical lawes
and decrees, & brefely al thynges besyde the
gospel and doctrine of god receiued among christen
nations, be of this sorte and nature, that
they be not of necessite to be receyuyd, and as the
gospell necessary to our saluation, nor to them of
necessitie we are euer bounden, vnder peyne of
damnation, but as tyme and place requyreth by
common authorytie, in euery countrey and dyuers
polycie, they maye suffre abrogation, and
maye be altered and moued by the pleasure and
common consent of the holle, in euery churche &
nation, where they be receyued: yet you may not
with the contempt of this popes authoritie, and
vnder the pretence of the same, all theym by and
by, of your owne hedes vtterly condēne, without
exception, as thynges ꝑnitious to Christis relygion,
but tary ye must a whyle, temperyng your
tonges, and be not to hasty of your iugementes,
vntyll the tyme they be abrogate by common authoritie,
and other in their place substitute by cō
               mon
assent. For this is a certayn and sure truth,
that ceremonies we muste haue,Rytes & customs ecclesiastical. rytes and customes,
all maye not be lefte, the whiche be so conuenient
menes to induce rude & symple myndes,
to memory, & to the conceyuyng of the mysteries
of oure relygion, that if they were vtterly wyped

we call relygyous, argueth and declareth manyfestly
other moche lacke of reason in them that so
do, or lyttell regarde of Christis relygion, of the
which who so euer with right iugement consider
the begynnynge, shall playnely see, that Christis
religiō was moch lyke vnto this monastical profession,
& vnder princis and rulers of the worlde
toke the fyrst ground, and fyrste begynnyng, after
the maner of this solytarye lyfe, wherin lyue
these which 
                  •
               e good religious men. For howe
sayncte Ihon Baptyst,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                who was the fyrst preparer
and messanger of this heuenly lyfe, lyued in
myldernes and solytarie, all the world knoweth:
and howe our master Christe with his apostelles
lyuyd moch after the same rate, and euer taught
the same, I do not saye as our fatte monkes doo
nowe,Ma
                     •
                   19. but as in a monastycal lyfe with the dispisynge
of all worldly thynges and transitory, all
they that rede the gospell lykewyse do se: And of
the actes of the apostles it is mooste manyfeste,
howe all that professyd Christis name lyued,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                hauynge
al thynges in common, as many do yet in
these monasteryes, and long after in Egypt and
in Arabye, in Spry, and in Grece, al those which
were most notable masters of Christis doctrin, &
in life professed the same, liuid in wyldernes & solitary,
dispisyng of the world, al vayn plesures &
trāsitorie, not only in wordis, but in lyfe & dedes,
to y• whiche of suche thynge was euer most iustly
gyuen more credite: and afterwarde in Rome it

grewe in by suche a maner of secrete profession.
For longe it was vsed amonge them there, that
all suche as wolde folowe the doctrine of Christe
lefte all worldly comforte, and fledde to this solitary
lyfe, there lernynge in prayer and pouertie
this, as the chiefe ground of our religiō, with
the hope & cōfort spiritual receiued of our master
& his doctrine, to dispise this life & thynges trā
               sitory,
euer lokynge to an other, & there to inioye
thynges stable & sure. And this by lytell & lyttell
vnder greate princis and rulers of the world our
relygion so grewe in, by the prouidence of god,
vntyll at the last it was spred ouer all, and occupyed
a greate parte of the worlde, as to all men
it is open and playne. But yet this is also sure
and ce
                  •
               tayne, that amonge all nations, after it
was stabled, some there were euer from the fyrst
begynnynge, whiche made profession of this solitary
lyfe and monasticall relygion, some euer
iudged therby to drawe nere to the steppes of
their mayster, and somewhat nere to folowe the
fyrste institution, of the doctrine of Christe, then
they doo, whiche lyue abroode amonge the pleasaunt
troubles and paynefulle pleasures, here in
the common life: of the whiche sentence & minde
haue ben always many auncient wise and holy
menne, perfyte bothe in vertue and lernynge, as
Ierome, Austyne, Gregorye, and Basylle, with
many other, whose names to reherse were superfluous.
wherfore dere frendes this hole kind of

the whiche bicause you can not fynd in scripture
mencioned,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                you thynk of christē myndes it shuld
not be affirmed, and that it is but a popysshe inuention.
Wherin frendes vndoutedly moch you
erre, and ouer boldly iuge, for thoughe the pope
therin hathe his power mysvsyd to the mayntenaunce
of his owne glorye, as he hathe done in
many other thynges beside, wherby he hath long
illudyd symple myndes, yet the thynge in it selfe
was of no pope inuentyd, wherof is mention
with the famouse and notable doctours of oure
religion, bothe latynes and grekes, before suche
tyme as the pope had amonge al byshoppes any
superiorite, and moche before it grewe to this intollerable
tyrannye: these auncient maysters of
Christis doctrine, as moche as they maye of a
tradition, say & affirme such a place to be, wherin
mans sowle shall be purged from alle spottes
of worldly affection, printed therin by the immoderate
loue and pleasure had in worldly conuersation,
before the tyme it may attayn the eternal
fruition of euerlastynge thinges, and with aungelles
to inioye the heuenlye meditation. But of
this sorte to be as in our dayes it is of many folyshely
affyrmed, amonge the olde authors there
is no mention, none of them iudge it to be suche
a place, out of the whiche any popes power may
delyuer mans sowle at his pleasure. This thyng
semethe to be an inuention of man of late yeres,
& of the olde fathers no tradition. wherfore after

that maner it to deny I thinke were none errour
at all, but the thynge vtterly to take awaye, semeth
to come of moche arrogancy, and greatte
lacke of iudgement and reasone: for that thynge
to deny constantly, wherof there is noo certayne
grounde nor sure, is playne foly and lacke of discretion.
For as to affirm purgatorie to be, there
is no grounde of suretye, so it to denye hath moche
lesse certaynte, for scripture giueth sure argument
to nother of them both. wherfore as to affirme
hit to be, as an artycle of the faythe, and
to the saluation of man to be of necessite, I think
it great folye: so to deny it to be a holsome tradition
to the conseruation of the christian lyfe moche
conuenient, I iuge it to be playn arrogancy,
specially considerynge that to the assercion therof
we haue the consent of many auncient greatte
lerned holy and vertuous men, whose example
and iugement, I wold rather moue you to leane
vnto moste christian people, and to their sentence
rather to be conformable, than to certayn lyght
wyttes, nother fourmed with lernyng nor iugement,
and whiche is chiefe of all, voyde of vertue,
to assente, and to them to be plyable, whose
lyghtnes both in this and many other thynges
hath benne a great occasion to the corruption of
some of your iugementes, and hereafter excepte
you be ware shall be moche more. For vnder the
colour of bryngynge in lyberte from bondage of
tradition they wolde induce you to admitte only

fete, the whyche of somme of his disciples was
nothynge approued, he taughte vs a greatte
grounde for the admission of all suche inwarde
and aboundant deuotion, though the outwarde
deede appere to the worlde a superfluouse operation.
            And as for prayinge to saintis is a thinge, whiche
hath ben long and many yeres receiued both
of the greke churche and latyne,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                not as a thyng
to the whiche we are bounden by the expresse cō
               maundement
of god, but as a thyng consequent
therto,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                for in scripture exaumple we haue one, to
desyre an other to praye for hym, whiche sayncte
Poule dyd ofte and many tymes,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  . wherof is gathered
consequently to be a thyng lykewyse conuenyent,
to desyre theym, whose vertues are of
Christe approuyd, to praye for vs, that we al together
as membres of one bodye, maye receyue
grace of our heuenly heed. And thus to praye to
saynctes in no parte dothe derogate the honoure
of god. For the praying thus to them is to praye
to god, and is nothynge differente in effecte, but
to praye to them as of whom we shulde truste as
of authors and gyuers of that thynge, whiche
we by prayer demaunde and desyre to gette and
obtayne. This were by the honour of theym, to
plucke downe the honour of god,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                and playne ydolatrie,
and this is forbyd in holy scripture, as
the other maner is, as a thynge agreable therto,
conueniently receyued, though it be not of high

necessite. And so brefely to conclude in this matter,
to haue in honour images of saintes, as thinges,
wherby you may be put in mynde and stired
to the folowynge of their vertues, bothe in lyfe
and maners to expresse the same, is no poynte of
idolatrye, but amonge christen men a thynge of
great conueniency to be receyued, lyke as pilgremage
and prayenge to them also is not to be condemnyd,
but as a thynge wherby we hyghly honour
god, to be admyttyd: therby declarynge to
hym our humble and meke hartes ful of charite,
where euery membre requiring the helpe of eche
other, hangeth vpon that comon heed and fountayne
of all goodnes. After this maner prayeng
to sayntes, hath euer ben receyued of all the antiquitie,
from whose steppes christen people, let vs
not in euery thinge lyghtly slyppe, but rather folowe
them in suche thynges as be good and conuenient,
than without iugement to reiect al thinges
whiche be of nature indifferent, approuyng
onely them whiche be of hye necessitie: and by the
expresse word of god to vs in his doctrin taught,
as many of vs doo, whiche is as I haue often
sayde, as a common fountayne of the corruption
of our iugementes, to the takynge awaye of many
suche thynges, which haue ben of many good
men and wyse, stablyshed to the settynge forth of
Christis doctrine with charytable vnytie. For of
this ground it spryngeth also that some men forbydde
vtterly to praye for theym,Prayer for the deade. the whiche be

deed, bycause it is not in scripture conteyned expressely,
and bycause whan they departe they go
incontinent eyther to heuen or to helle, howe be
hit of that they be not sure, nor to the denyinge
of purgatorie, as I said before of scripture, there
is noo certayne grounde: but to scripture after
the sentence of holye fathers, the contrarye is
rather agreable. But lette it be, that there were
noo purgatorye at all: Thynke not you deere
frendes, that it is a conueniente thynge, and to
charitie conformable, that euery man shulde desyre
after deathe good to his frende, and by prayer
to god, to open his louynge mynde, that
he boothe in lyfe and also after his deathe constantlye
euer beareth toward his brother? There
was neuer nation so rude and barbarous, that
wolde forbydde one to wysshe good to an other
bothe a lyue & deed. Wherfore amonge vs christen
menne, whiche are sure that our frendes after
deathe shall remayne other to peyne, or pleasure,
amonge vs I saye to raygne any suche opinyon,
that we shoulde not praye for theym, and
wyshe theym to be partetakers of the good, and
not of the euylle, apperethe extreme maddenesse
and mooste rude vnkyndenesse: specyally
seynge that we haue no certaynetye, whether
hit pleasethe god to take theym other to payne,
or to pleasure. And thoughe that this be trewe,
that to the one certaynly, they are by the prouydence
of god determyned and appoynted, yet

we therof beynge vncertayne, in desyrynge and
wyshynge to them the best, can not doo but wel,
in as moch as we declare therby to god the charitie
of our hartes: ye and ferther I shall saye to
you, thoughe the prayer that we make for theym
that be deede, shoulde not be to theym profytable
at all, for as moche as they be other in state of
grace or damnation, yet in our prayer I thynke
neuer the lesse our mayster dothe delyte, and takethe
to his honour our aboundante deuotyon
and feruent charytie, as he dyd the oyntment of
Mary, whiche was to no man profitable. Therfore
seynge that beside the consent of many of the
auncyent doctours, oure maysters of our relygion,
the thynge in it selfe appereth so conuenient
to reason, to humanyte, and aboue al to christian
charite, I se no cause why we shuld it so reiecte
as a thyng to the doctrine of Christ nothing
conformable, to the whiche vndoubtedly, and to
very christian charytie, it is moche agreeable, the
which frendes if you also iudge & in harte think,
you shall increase amonge your selfes brotherlye
loue and vnitie, and moche more if some of you
wold after the same maner tempre your iudgementes
in many other thynges of the same sorte,
which ouer lyghtly ye condēne, bicause they appere
to take their groundes of this popyshe authorite,
of the which though many thynges euyl
haue issued & sprōg, yet this cā not be denied, but
moch good was also to vs deriued fro the same,

them as in goddis commandment. For if a man
had dere frendes,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                al the faith which is in al men,
and as saynt Poule sheweth most manyfestly, of
that sorte that he myghte therby remoue mountaynes
out of their places, yet if he had not ioyned
therto a charytable harte and mynde, euer
prompte and redy to shewe the same in effect and
outward dede, as occasiō is ministred, that faith
nothyng shuld to him auayle at all:
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                lyke as contrary,
if one man worked all the outwarde workes
in the worlde, if they were not in fayth roted
and grounded, to him they shulde nothynge profyt
nor helpe, so that nother dedes alone, nor yet
naked faythe without charyte, be not sufficiente
meanes to brynge man to his saluation, but charytable
faythe and faythefull charyte,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  . be requyred
of hye necessitie: this is the grounde, this is
the ende, and in this stondeth the hole perfection
of all christian religion. Wherfore auoydynge
dere frendes the great blonderyng now
                  •
                a daies
made of faythe and workes, in fewe wordes this
I shall to you say: If you wyl be of the flocke of
Christ, and of the nombre of them which be true
professours of his name, you muste not onely by
mouthe and in worde your faythe testifie,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  . but in
dede the same also to the face of the worlde declare
to his honour and glorye, not iudgynge
your owne dedes to deserue your saluation, but
that euer referryng to his onely goodnes & mercy.
This Christ teacheth vs by his owne mouth,

where as he sayeth in his gospell, that suche as
by mouthe onely calle vnto him, confessynge his
name, shall not by and by entre to the kyngdome
of heuen, but all suche as in effecte and in dede
fulfyl the wyl of his father, there shal haue place.
So that frendes of this you may be assured, that
it is not inoughe for vs to saye, I beleue well, &
thē care not what ye doo. A more pestilent opinion,
& more pernicious to Christis doctrine was
neuer I trowe amonge menne then this, to saye
that faythe alone, without charitable workes, is
sufficient to mans saluation. For this I wyl say
to you of the doctrine of sayncte Paule, that it
is nother our fayth, be it neuer so great, nor yet
our workes, be they neuer soo many,Tit. 3. that can deserue
our saluation, it is the mere goodnes and
mercy of god, which shalbe our saluatiō, the which
he of his only goodnes hath promised to giue
vs, if we beleue faythfully in hym, and truste in
his promysse with faythefull harte, and in outwarde
dede obey his cōmaundement, and walke
in the same: soo that as moche are we bounden
to worke as to beleue, & yet nother of them both,
no nor yet bothe of them to gether, be able to deserue
our saluation, but this onely lyeth in the
goodnes of god, to whom it hath plesed to make
vs this promysse, that yf we truste in hym with
faythefulle harte vnfaynydly, and in outwarde
dede folowe his commaundemente without hypocrysye,
we shall haue euerlastynge lyfe: vnto

des of our heuenly doctrine, but euer in all suche
thynges, whiche by nature are indifferent, and
be not of the expresse commaundemente of god:
we must conceyue this iudgement, that when so
so euer it shall appere to them, whiche be in authorytie
prudente and polytike, any suche thynges
to alter and chaunge, as tyme and place require
for good polycie, therto euer to be obedient
with mekenes and humilite, as sone as they be
chaunged by common authoritie. In the whiche
thynges also we muste vse in our iudgementes
this temperaunce, theym neuer to condempne
lyghtly, and with arrogant opinion iudge vtterly
to be caste away, thoughe they haue ben in vse
neuer so longe, vntyll the tyme that by common
counsayle they be abrogate and iudged to christian
pollicy to be nothynge expediente, by them
whiche haue of suche thynges perfyte iugement:
the whiche if we do mooste christian people with
prudence obserue, we shalle by this meane soo
fourme our affectes, and in some partes soo correcke
our iudgementes, that as of the one syde
we shall auoyde al blynde supersticion, so we shal
of the other syde eschewe all arrogaunt opinion,
and so consequētly some what remedy this common
blindenes,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                which therby is chiefely growen
amonge vs, to the great ruine of Christis heuē
               ly
doctrine, and his spirituall vnite. This meane
we muste folowe and ensewe, if we wyl attayne
to our felycyte, of the whiche dere frendes maruayle

you nothyng at al. For by a certain meane
the armonie of this hole worlde is conteyned in
this natural order & beautie: by a meane al ciuile
order and polycye is mayntayned in cities and
townes with good ciuilitie: by a meane mannes
mynde with all kynde of vertue garnysshed, is
broughte to his naturall perfection and lyght:
And by a meane all trewe religion without impyetye
or superstytion, is stablysshed and sette
forthe to goddis honour and glorye in all chrystian
natyons and countreyes: ye and soo by a
meane we shall, mooste christyan people, chiefely
auoyde this daungerous diuisyon growen in amonge
vs, by the reason wherof, somme are
iudged to be of the newe fashyon, and somme
of the olde. For whan
                  •
               e that one seeth an nother,
euer to suche thynge gladdely conformable,
as by common counsaylle is determyned,
made, and decreed, neuer repug
                  •
               ynge in harte
therto, nor yet condempnynge arrogantly all soche
thynges as haue benne receyued longe and
many yeres withoute discrecyon, but euer abydynge
the sentence of common authorytie, the
meane tyme frely therto beinge obedient: when
euery one I saye this seeth in eche other, I can
not tell howe any diuision shoulde growe in among
vs, I can not telle why one shoulde calle
an other pharisee or yet heretike: If we wold after
this maner and meane agree in iudgement,

the supreme hede here of our churche,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  . whiche apperethe
to many of you straunge and newe, bycause
of the lōge custome of many yeres. If you
consyder with your selfe the nature of the thing,
as hit is indede, there is in hit nothynge nother
strange nor new. For what strangenes is this, a
hole congregacyon and perfyte, as this is of our
nation, to electe and chose theym a heed polytike
with free libertye, whiche may with his hyghe
wysedome directe and redresse all suche thynges
as pertayne vnto christian polycye? This hathe
benne euer common and in vse, sythe the fyrste
institution of Christis churche. And thoughe
that christen pryncis and nations haue longe
stonde in this polycye and obedience to Rome,
yet to that they be not bounden, that the defection
frome it and disobedience shulde induce suspition
of heresye or schisme, whyche are thenne
onely to be imputed, whan any pryuate manne
or holle nation slyppethe frome suche groundes
of scripture, as he of necessitie requyred to mannes
saluation: of the whiche sorte the defectyon
frome the popyshe authoryte is not to be iudged
nor thought. And this thynge moste manyfestly
prouethe a lawe made of the mooste Christian
emperour Iustinyan,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  . wherin he gyuynge pryuiledge
to Constantynople, openly decreeth, that
churche no more to hange of the see of Rome,
as it seemed to doo frome the tyme of Constantyne:
but that the archeby shoppe there shulde be

chosen of his owne churche, hauynge authoritie
also to create & institute other byshops vnder the
same see, without runnynge to Rome for authorite.
wherby you maye moste clerely se, both that
this superioritie of Rome, was not at that tyme
iudged to be of suche necessite, and of the lawe of
god, as nowe many thynke: and that the emperour
also was hede of that churche, hauynge ful
authorite to order all suche thynges as perteyned
to christian polycy, as by many other lawes
whiche he made, it is moste manyfest. Wherfore
frendes our prince here, who is of no lesse authoryte
in this our churche of Englande, than was
the Emperour Iustynian at Constantynople,
this authoritie of Rome so to brynge to order,
and as supreme heed in the polycie of our churche,
this thynge to stable, nede not to you appere
nother straunge nor newe, seynge the lyke hathe
ben done of christen emperours before this longe
and many yeres. Feare ye not therfore mooste
christian people, to this acte to our nation soo
good and profytable, of harte to gyue obedience,
the whiche doubt ye not, but god shal so gouerne
by his prouidēce, that it shal go forth to his glorye,
comforte & profyt both of the present age & of
al the posterite. And euer haue you this in mind,
that to all such thynge as is decreed by common
counsell and authoritie here in our nation, you
that be vnlerned and ignorant, not hauyng your
consciēce formed with lyght and knowlege, you

               
                  •
               udgement, which is the true preacher of Christe
and religious, from hym that is the preacher of
the worlde arrogant and seditious.
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . 15. For chari
               
                  •
               ie,
as hit is the sure marke of all the chrystian

                  •
               locke, so it is moch more the sure note and signe
of him that shulde trewely preache Christis doctrine.
For yf his lyfe fyrste, whiche is chyefe of
all, and also his worde to that do not sownde,
if to that it do not agree, you maye boldely conclude
bothe hym and his doctrine of all christian
hartes to be eschewed,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   2. and to be auoyded none
otherwyse than heresye. And yet ferther if you
perceyue hym, ceremonies traditions and rytes
of the church so to maynteyn as thinges necessary
to the saluation of mā, ye or contrary them vtterly
to damne, as thynges pernycious and contrary
to Christis religion: than make you a sure
conclusion,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                that he lacketh moch discretion, and
is other folyshely superstitious, or els arrogantly
sedicious, and no mete precher of Christis doctrine.
who euer with charite precheth such thynges
as perteyne to goddis glory, euer most studiousely
settynge forth the same, & out of the workes
of nature, wherin y• goodnes of god spredeth
her self, the true precher euer whē he therin beholdeth,
somwhat he piketh, wherby he moued, declareth
goddes honour and glory of his name:
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . 3. &
lykewyse out of the ceremonies, vsed in Christis
churche, the whiche withoute good teachynge
are but dumbe sygnes, he euer gadreth sommewhat,

wherby he induceth manne to the memorie
of goddis benefyte and mercy. But aboue al
the trewe preacher euer besyly endeuoreth hym
selfe aboute the groundes of scripture, and suche
as be of necessytie necessarye vnto mannes
saluation, theym to stable in all chrystian hartes,
and of theym to make sure ground and fundation:
And as for all other thynges, whyche
stonde in mannes polycye: he euer therin induceth
and teacheth obedience to common authoritie,
nothynge agaynste the same superstitiously
nor arrogantly defendynge, nor yet all thyng
besyde the same arrogantely condempnynge:
but euer in all his preachynges and teachynges
he settethe before his eyes, as chyefe ende, concorde
and vnitie, vnto the whiche he euer directeth
hym selfe, and his oracyon with prudente
symplicitie, auoydynge all diuisyon, whiche is
the mother of all confusion: and so atte the laste
inducynge the contempte of these worldly thynges
vayne and traunsitorie, he perswadeth the
feruent loue and desyre of thynges euerlasting,
the whiche are stedfast, sure, and stable, and also
are to vs promysed, of the mere goodnes of god,
if that we wylle with sure faythe and truste of
the obteynynge therof be euer to his commaundement
conformable and obediente. This teacheth
he chiefly, whiche is the trewe and perfyte
preacher of Christis doctrine, whom to discerne
and iudge, shall be nothynge harde to you dere

comforte and ioye, wherof this is but as a shadowe,
and an image: the whiche yf you doo
moste christian people, this I dare say and boldly
to you affirme, that all be it we neuer hereafter
knowe nother pope nor cardynall, no nor yet
here of counsel generall of all christian nations,
yet may we, liuynge togyther in faythfull loue &
charitable vnite, lighted by the spirit of god and
his heuenly doctrine, hangynge onely vpon his
benefyte, passe this lyfe in mooste pure and perfyte
christianitie. This we haue expressed by the
mouthe of our mayster Christe in his gospelle,
who surely promyseth this to euerye multitude
gathered togyther in his name,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                & to euery faithfull
congregation, that whan so euer they assemble
to gyther for his glory, with perfite faith and
truste in hym, with charitie demaundynge lyght
of truthe to passe this lyfe withal to his pleasure
and honour, they shall neuer lacke knowledge
of suche thynge, which shalbe necessary to their
saluation, they shall neuer lacke grace to defend
them from all suche thynge as shall lede them to
euerlastyng damnation. Wherfore most christian
people, seinge that the benefyt of god is so open
vnto vs, and the lyght of his holy spirite so
common, that no man is excluded from it, but he
onely that so wyll: let vs not drownyd in vayne
pleasure, by our owne neglygence suffre our selfe
to be depryued of this goodnes: let vs not being
corrupt with worldly affection suffre our selfe to

fall from the dignite of our nature, and runne to
our owne distruction: let vs not suffre our selfe
by any pestilent & diuellyshe dyuision lose the infinite
benefite of Christis passion: but let vs with
one fayth in hym in perfyt concorde & vnitie with
sure truste and hope hange vppon him as vppon
the only hede of al christianitie: let vs euery one
supportyng & bearyng the imbecillite and wekenes
of other, echeone be glad to admonyshe his
christian brother, let vs euerye one be gladde to
helpe and succour eche other with charitie and
pure affecte: and than vndoutedly we shall bothe
in this life haue quietnes of minde and tranquillytie,
& here after haue the fruition of suche ioye
and comforte as god by his prouydence hath ordeyned
to the nature of man in immortalytie, the
whiche I beseche him, of whom cometh al light,
so to lyghte vs in this lyfe, that we maye all as
membres of one bodye, hereafter knytte to our
heuenly heed, enioy comonly.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            LONDINI IN AEDIBVS THOMAE
BERTHELETI
REGII IMPRESSORIS
EXCVSA.
CVM PRIVILEGIO.
            
            End
         
      
   