
      
         
            
            
            ¶ A prayer ſayd by the lorde Sturton being on his knees before he went vp the ladder, and alſo his confeſſion before his death the .vi. day of Marche in the yeare of our lord God. M. D. L .vii.
            
            
               LOrd harken to my wordes, conſider the thought of my hert, behold how lowde I crye vnto the, let my iuſt prayer enter into thine eares which vnfainedly cometh from mine heart, heare me lorde for I am poore and deſtitute of mannes helpe, take care for my ſoule, ſaue me thy ſeruaunt which wholye truſt in the, haue mercy vpon me, O Lord, for I will neuer ceaſe crying to the for helpe, for ye art mild & more merciful thē my tōg can expreſſe, as oftē as aduerſity aſſaileth me I wil crie and cal for helpe vnto the, I wyl cal vpō yt in the day time, and in the night my cry ſhal not be hid from the, O thou god of the heauens, the maker of the waters, and lord of all creatures, heare me a poore ſinner calling vpon the and putting my hole truſt in thy mercy. O lord what great pleaſures thou haſte prepared for me in heauē, that I ſhould delight in no earthly thing but in the, my moſt pleaſure is to cleane faſt vnto the and in the to ſet my hope and truſt, haue mercy vpon me O lorde (O lord god) haue mercye vpon me: for thy manifolde mercies ſake. Forgeue almine offences. I commit my ſpirite into thy handes, de lyuer me from the powers of darkenes of this worlde. Thou haſt redemed me Lorde God of truth. I praye you all to pray for me, and then he ſayd. In tedomine ſperaui non confundar in eternum. &c.
            
         
         
            ¶ The wordes of the lord Sturton vpon the ladder before his death.
            
               GOod people I am come hither to dye, I am come hither to dye, and iuſtly condempned for mine offences by the lawe, what myne offences were it is not vnknowen vnto you all, whiche was for a moſte cruell and deteſtable murther, by my commaundemēt done and committed. wherfore I ſhall deſire you al for gods ſake, to let me be an example to you all, and to all the worlde, and beware yt ye let no ranker or malice take roote in your hartes, for where ranker or malyce is rooted no good vertue can growe, I ſhall deſyre you all, and al the worlde to forgeue me, and ſpecially thoſe poore women and childrē, whoſe huſbandes I haue ſo cruelly cauſed to be murthered, that god may put it into their hartes for Chriſtes ſake and for charity to forgeue me, and if there be any here whom I haue offended I ſhal deſire you all for charities ſake to forgeue me, and if there be any of you whom hath oftended me, I do from the bottome of my heart forgiue you as truly as I truſt god of his mercy hath forgeuen me, being moſt ſory and repentaunt. And when I ſhall depart this world that ye wil ſay all, Lord, take his ſpirite into thy handes, and I ſhal alſo deſire you for Chriſtes ſake to ſaye with me vpon your knees our lordes prayer which is the Pater noſter, and ſo turning him vnto the Eaſt ſayed our Lordes praier, which done he deſired Sir John Souch to forgiue him, who aunſwered, my lord I forgeue you euen from the bottome of my heart, and then going higher vpō the ladder ſayd, good people pray for me, and ſo winking ſayd ſomwhat ſofter. I charge the Sathā in goddes name to depart from me, and ſuffer my ſoule to reſt in our lord. And then ſayd, Domine accipe ſpiritum meum thre times, thē one of the garde did bind a handker theife about his eyes, and ſo he was immedtatly turned beſide the ladder, on whoſe ſoule Chriſt take mercy.
            Amen.
         
      
      
         
            ¶ Imprinted at London in Flete ſtrete nere to Saint Dunſtans Churche by Thomas Marſhe.
         
      
   