
      
         
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
               
                  genealogy
                  ¶ The Chronicles of England, from Brute vnto this preſent yeare of Chriſt 1580.
                  
                     Collected by IOHN STOW Citizen of London.
                  
                  Printed at London by Ralphe Newberie, at the aſsignement of Henrie Bynneman.
                  
                     Cum Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶Authours out of whom theſe Chronicles are collected.
            
               ABbas Floriacenſis.
               Abraham Hartwel.
               Adam Merimouth.
               Aethicus.
               Alfridus Beuerlacenſis.
               Alfridus Riuallenſis.
               Alexander Neckham.
               Amianus Marcellinus.
               Antonius Archiepiſcopus.
               Antiquitates Britan. eccle.
               Antiquitates Glaſconiae.
               Antiquitates Calen. de Brist.
               Antiquitates S. Pauli Londō
                  ▪
               
               Annales de Hide.
               Annales Elienſes.
               Annales de Aquitania.
               Arbor Succeſſorum.
               Aſſerius Meneuenſis.
               Aurea Historia.
               Arnolds Chronicl
                     •
                  
                  ▪
               
               Andrew Bourde.
               Anthonie Aſcham.
               Anthonie Anthonie.
               Baptista Platina.
               Bede de gestis Anglorum.
               Brute Booke.
               Canterburie Records.
               Caeſars Commentaries.
               Capitolinus. Carta Regia.
               Chronica de Dorobernia.
               Chronica Chronicorum.
               Chronica de Burgo S. Petri.
               Chronica de Dunstable.
               Chronica de Wigmore.
               Chronica de Bury.
               Chronica de Dunmow.
               Chronica de Eaton.
               Chronica de Tewkesbury.
               Chronica Glaſconiae.
               Chronica de Eoueſham.
               Chronica de Tintern.
               Chronica de Tinmouth.
               Chronica de Colchester.
               Chroniques de Normandie.
               Chroniques de Britaine.
               Chronica Colleg. Regis Oxon.
               Chronica de Hautenprice.
               Chronica de Holland.
               Chronica de Bromholme.
               Chronica S. Albani.
               Conradus Mendenbar.
               Cornelius Tacitus.
               Constitutiones de London.
               D
                     ••
                   C
                     •••••
                  s Doro
                     •
                  h
                     •••
                  .
               Edmond Haddenham.
               Edmerus Dorobernenſis.
               Engwerant.
               Encomium Emme.
               Epistola Bonifacij.
               Euſebius. Eutropius.
               Eulogium.
               Eraſmus Roteradam.
               Edward Hall.
               Edmond Campion.
               Freculphus.
               Floriacenſis Wigornenſis.
               Flores Historiarum.
               Flaccus Albinus.
               Francis Guicciardine.
               Galfridus Monemutenſis.
               Galfridus Viniſalfe.
               Gaſperus Varerius.
               Geruaſius Dorobernenſis.
               Geruaſius de Mappamundi.
               Geruaſius Tilberienſis.
               Gesta Abbatis Albani.
               Gildas Sapiens.
               Giraldus Cambrenſis.
               Giraldus Corn
                     •
                  bienſis.
               Guilelmus Mahnesburienſis.
               Guilelmus Nouoburgenſis.
               Guilelmus Thorne.
               Gualterus Couentrienſis.
               Guilelmus Riſhanger.
               Gualterus Hemingford.
               Guilelmus Gemiticenſis.
               Guilelmus Tailour.
               Guilelmus Paston.
               Guilelmus Shepeſhed.
               Gualterus Baker.
               Guilelmus Dunthorne.
               Georgius Lilius.
               Guilelmus Packington.
               Geffrey Chaucer.
               Guilelmus de Wilum.
               Gual, Haddon. Herodian.
               Henricus Huntingdonenſis.
               Henricus Lecestrenſis.
               Henricus Blandford.
               Hector Boetius.
               Humfrey Lhuid.
               Henrie Bradſhaw.
               Iacobus Bergomas.
               Iacobus Laſſabeus.
               Iohannes Salisburienſis.
               Iohan. Hanuile. Ioſephus.
               Iohannes de Vigney.
               Iohannes Rowland.
               Iohannes Mandeuile.
               Iustine. Iohannes Rouſe.
               Iohannes Maior.
               Iohannes Bale.
               Iohannes Fordon.
               Iohannes Capgraue.
               Iocelinus de Barkeland.
               Iocelinus Furnenſis.
               Iohannes Leylandus.
               Iohannes Leoaffer.
               Iohannes Taxtor.
               Iohannes Pike.
               Iohannes Beuerlacenſis.
               Iohannes Euerſden.
               Iohannes Blackeman.
               Iohannes Truklow.
               Iohannes Lewenclaij.
               Iohannes Prington.
               
                  Iohannes Gower.
               Iohannes Belandin.
               Iohn Froſert.
               Iohn Audley.
               Iohannes Forteſc
                     •
                  .
               Iohn Revſtall.
               Iohn S
                     〈…〉
                  .
               Iohn Ca
                     〈…〉
                  
               
               Inſcriptiones Glocest.
               Iohn Lidgate.
               Iohn Harding.
               Lampridius.
               Leges Edwardi Regis.
               Liber constitut. London.
               Liber Dunelmenſis.
               Liber Norwicenſis.
               Liber Tutsberienſit.
               Liber ſ. Martini magni.
               Liber Lanthoni.
               Liber Roffenſis.
               Liber Trinitatis London.
               Liber Colne.
               Liber Mona. Ely.
               Liber Bermondſey.
               Liber pont London.
               Liber Glocestrenſis.
               Liber Warwicenſis.
               Liber ſ. Mariae de Southwark.
               Liber Kenelworth.
               Liber Bernewel.
               Liber ſ. Barthol. Smithfielde.
               Liber Colegij ſ. Petri.
               Liber Edendon.
               Liber Eastminster.
               Liber Maior. & Vic. London.
               Liber Eweline.
               Liber Lichfielde.
               Lilius Viraldus.
               Liber Theokesburie.
               Lodouicus Viues.
               Marianus Scotus.
               Martinus Polonus.
               Mathaeus Paris.
               Mathae. Westmonasteriēſis.
               Matheus Parkerus.
               Marlin. Melkin.
               
                  Nenius. Necham.
               Nicephorus.
               Nicholas Treuitus.
               Nicholas Vpton.
               Nicholas Perotus.
               Nicholas Bromefielde.
               Old Records.
               Oracul Sibil. Oroſius.
               Osbernus. Pauſanias.
               Panegeric. Constancio dictus
               Pau. Oroſius. Pau. Diaconus.
               Paulus Aemilius.
               Petrus de Ikham.
               Petrus Ramus.
               Petrus Pictauenſis.
               Perce de Longtofte.
               Phillippus Comineus.
               Policraticon.
               Ponticus Virunius.
               Polidorus Vergilius.
               Quadrilogium.
               Radulphus de Diceto.
               Radulphus Niger.
               Radulphus Baldoke.
               Radulphus Cogſhall.
               Ranulphus Higden.
               Record. eccleſiae de Aſſaphe.
               Registrum noui Mona.
               Registrum fratrum minorū.
               Registrum monast. de Hide.
               Registrum de Wodbridge.
               Registrum de ponte Rofenſi.
               Registrum de Clerkenwel.
               Registrum mon. de Burie.
               Registrum mon. ſ. Albani.
               Record. eccleſiae Christi Can.
               Registrum mon. Cartuarien.
               Registrū fratrū carmelitarū
               
               Registrum Maiorum Londō.
               Registrum mon. de Bataile.
               Registrum de Garter.
               Richardus Cirencestrenſis.
               Richardus Southwel.
               Richardus Diuienſis.
               Richardus Canenicus.
               Rogerus Houeden.
               Robertus Gaguin.
               Robertus Glocestrenſis.
               Robertus de Auesburie.
               Reynwels Teſtament.
               Robertus de Brune.
               Robert Fabian.
               Robert Greene.
               Richard Turpin.
               Scala Temporum.
               Scalamundi.
               Speculum Historiale.
               Sebaſtian Munſter.
               Sigebertus Gimblacenſis.
               Scala Chronicor.
               Simon Dunelmenſis.
               Solinus. Suetonius.
               Smart Falconer. Strab
                        •
                     .
               
               Spartianus. Sozomenus.
               Sulcardus. Socrates.
               Theodoretus. Titus Liui.
               
               Thomas Caſtleforde.
               Thomas Sprote.
               Thomas de Wike.
               Thomas Walſingham.
               Thomas Rudburne.
               Thomas Delamore.
               Thomas Hocline.
               Thomas Moore.
               Thomas Lanquet.
               Thomas Cooper.
               Thomas Churchyarde.
               Vita Berini.
               Vita Aldelmi.
               Vita Erkenwaldi.
               Vigetius. Vita Albani.
               Vita Guilelmi Longocampo.
               Vopiſcus.
               Vox Clamantis.
               Wolfangus Lazius.
               William Norwel.
               William Caxton.
               William Beare.
               William Lambert.
               William Patten.
               Ypodigma Neustriae.
               Zozimus.
            
         
         
            
            
               
                  DROIT · ET · LOYAL
                  HONI ◦ SOIT ◦ QVI ◦ MAL ◦ Y ◦ PENSE
                  royal blazon or coat of arms
               
            
         
         
            
            To the right Honorable the Lord Robert Dudley, Earle of Leiceſter, Baron of Denbigh, Knight of the moſt noble Orders of the Garter, and of Saint Michaell, one of hir Maiesties moste Honourable priuie Counſell, and Maiſter of hir Horſſe.
            
            
               THe good acceptatiō of my Summarie dedicated to your Lordſhip fiue yeares ſince (right honorable & my ſingular good Lord) hathe ſo emboldened this Treatiſe, growne now to a greater Volume, that it preſumeth with aſſured hope of like acceptance, to preſent it ſelfe to your Honor, & vnder the protectiō therof, to venture into the world, and viewe of men: and that the more boldly, being an Historical Diſcourſe of this oure natiue Countrie, ſetting before our eyes, to our instruction & profite, the incredible inconſtancie, & continuall alterations of this tranſitorie world, wyth the worthie exploites of our Kings and Gouernors.

What I haue performed herein to the common commoditie in ſearching out the truth: and what varietie of worthy matters I haue recouered, with no ſmall coste and care, out of the graue of Obliuion, wherein they haue laine buried, I referre to your honorable cenſure, and the indifferent Reader, not doubting but your Lordſhip, whiche hath gotten grounded experience by the administration of most weighty affaires, & furniſhed your wiſedome wyth diligent reading of ſundrie Histories, will bothe vouche ſafe to accepte this Monument of my affectionate minde with your wonted curteſie, and ſhield it vnder the autoritie of your name against thoſe, whiche in this age requite honest endeuours with vnhonest ſpeeches. The Almighty God preſerue your Honor, with continual encreaſe of his benefits, to his glory, and your aduauncement.
            
               Your Lordſhips moſt humble to commaund.
IOHN STOW.
            
         
         
            
            ¶ To the gentle Reader.
            
               AMongst other Bookes which are in this our learned age publiſhed in great numbers, there are few, eyther for the honestie of the matter, or commoditie which they bring to the common wealth, or for the pleaſantneſſe of the ſtudie and reading, to be preferred before the Chronicles and Hystories. What examples of men deſeruing immortalitie, of exploites worthy great renowne, of vertuous liuing of the posteritie to be embraced, of wiſe handling of weighty affaires, diligently to be marked, and aptly to be applied: what incouragement of nobilitie to noble feates, what diſcouragement of vnnaturall ſubiects from wicked treaſons, pernitious rebellions, and damnable doctrines: to conclude, what perſwaſion to honestie, godlyneſſe, and vertue of all ſorts, what diſſuaſions from the contrary is not plentifully in them to be found? So that it is as hard a matter for the Readers of Chronicles, in my fanſie, to paſſe without ſome colours of wiſedome, inuitements to vertue, and loathing of naughtie factes, as it is for a welfauoured man to walke vp and downe in the hot parching Sunne, & not to be therewith ſunburned. They therefore which with long ſtudie, earneſt good will, & to their great costes and charges haue brought hidden Histories from duskie darkeneſſe to the ſight of the world, and haue bin diligent obſeruers of common wealthes, and noted for the posteritie the fleeting manners of the people, and accidents of the times: deſerue (at the leaſt) thankes for their paines, and to be miſreported of none, ſeeing they haue laboured forNote that the backebiter ſlayeth three at once, himſelf by his ovvne malice, hym that crediteth hys falſe tales, and him that he backebiteth. all. I write not this to complayne of ſome mens ingratitude towardes me (although iustly I might) but to ſhewe the commodities which enſue of the reading of Histories, that ſeeing they are ſo great and ſo many, all men would (as they ought) imploy their diligence in the honeſt, fruitefull, and delectable peruſing of the ſame, and ſo to accompt of the Authors, as of men carefull for their Countrey: and to confeſſe, if neede require, by whome they haue taken profite.
            It is now ſeuentene yeres ſince (I ſeing the confuſe order of our late Engliſh Chronicles, and the ignorant handling of auntient affaires) leauing myne owne peculiar gaines, conſecrated my ſelfe to the ſearch

of our famous Antiquities. What I haue done in them before time, the former editions of my Summarie of Chronicles maye wel testifie, but howe farre (be it ſpoken without arrogancie) I haue laboured for the truth more thā ſome other, this laſt edition wil euidently declare: wherein, that I differ from the inordinate and vnskilful collections of other men, it is no maruel, ſeeing that I doe not fully agree with my ſelfe, as ſome malitious perſons haue fondely charged me: but lette it be conſidered, that there is nothing perfect at the first, and that it is incident to mankinde to erre and ſlippe ſometime, but onelye the point of fantasticall fooles, to perſeuer and continue in their errors. Wherfore, ſeeing that the peruſing of auncient Records and best approued Histories of all times (not without great difficultie obteined) doe not onely moue me, but for their aucthoritie driue me to acknowledge both mine and other mens errors, and in acknowledging to correct them, I truste to obtaine thus muche at your handes, that at the leaste you wil call to remembraunce a moste gentle and wiſe lawe of the politike Perſians, wherein it was enacted, that a man accuſed to bee in their lawes a trespaſſer, and founde guiltie of the crime, ſhould not ſtraight waye bee condemned, but after a diligent enquirie and ſearche of his whole life and conuerſation (no ſlaunder imputed vnto him as of importaunce) if the number of his laudable factes didde counteruaile the contrarie, he was full quit of the trespaſſe. The ſame lawe do I wiſhe the readers of theſe my Chronicles to put in vre, that if the errors be not ſo plentiful, as Histories truely alleadged, they wil beare with them: for as I promiſed, ſo haue I tried all matters worthie of immortalitie, by the certaine Touchstone of best allowed Historiographers: and yet notwithstanding, ſome faults by misprinting haue eſcaped the correction, whiche eaſily may be ſeene and amended by the diligent Reader.
         
      
      
         
            
            
               ❧ A briefe Deſcription of Englande, Scotlande, VVales, and Cornvvall.
            
               
                  BRitaine, or Brutanne which by two names is called England and Scotland, is an Ilande in the Ocean Sea, ſcituate right ouer againſt France: one parte of which Iſle Engliſhmen do inhabite, another parte Scottes, the thirde parte Walſhmē, and the fourth part Corniſhmen. All they eyther in language, conditions, or lawes, do differ among themſelues.
            
               England (ſo called of Engliſhmen whiche did winne the ſame) is the greateſt parte, and is diuided into xl. Counties,xl. Counties or Shires. which we call Shires: whereof ten (that is to ſay) Kent, Suſſex, Surrey, Southampton, Barkeſhire, Wiltſhire, Dorſetſhire, Somerſetſhire, Deuonſhire and Cornwal, doe conteyne ye firſt part of that Iland: which part bounding toward the South, ſtandeth betwéene the Thames and the Sea.
            From thence to the riuer of Trent, which paſſeth through the middeſt of England be. xvj. ſhyres, wherof the firſt ſixe (ſtā
               ding Eaſtward) are Eſſex, Middleſex, Hartfordſhire, Suffolk, Northfolke, and Cambridgeſhire: the other ten whiche ſtande more in the middle of the Country are theſe: Bedforde, Huntingdon,
               
               Buckingham, Oxforde, Northampton, Rutland, Leiceſter, Notingham, Warwike, and Lincolne. After theſe there be. vj. which border weſtwarde vppon Wales as Glouceſter, Hereford, Worceſter, Shropſhire, Stafford, Cheſter, and Monmouth. About the middle of the Region lie Darbiſhire, Yorkſhire, Lancaſhire, and Cumberlande. On the left hand toward the Weſt is Weſtmerland. Againſt the ſame is the Biſhoppricke of Durham, and Northumberlande, whiche boundeth vpon the North in the Marches of Scotland.
            Theſe ſhyres be diuided into. xxij. Biſhoprikes, which by a Gréeke worke, be called Dioceſes. Of whiche Dioceſes, Canterburie hath Kent. Rocheſter hath part of Kent. London hath Eſſex, Middleſex, and part of Hartford. Chicheſter hath Suſſex. Wincheſter hath Hampſhire, Surrey, and the Iſle of Wight, Saliſburie hath Barkeſhire, and Wiltſhire. Exceter hath Deuonſhire and Cornwal. Bath and Welles hath Sommerſetſhire. Worceſter hathe Worceſterſhire, and parte of Warwickſhire. Glouceſter hath Glouceſterſhire. Hereforde hath part of Shropſhyre, and Herefordſhyre. Couentrie and Lichfield hath Staffordſhyre, Darbiſhire, part of Warwickſhyre, and part of Shropſhyre. Lincolne which is the greteſt, lying betwéene the Thames and Humbre, hath Lincolne, Leyceſter, Huntington, Bedforde, Buckingham, and the reſidue of Hartfordſhire. Ely hath Cantabridgeſhire, and the Iſle of Ely. Norwich hath Suffolke▪ and Northfolke, and part of Cantabridgeſhyre. Oxforde hath Oxfordeſhire. Peterborow, hath Northamptonſhire, and Rutlande. Briſtowe hath Dorſetſhire. And this is the prouince of the Archbiſhop of Canterburie, whych is the Primate of all England, wyth Wales. The Archbiſhop of Yorke, hath Yorkeſhire, Notinghamſhire, and a piece of Lancaſhire. The Biſhop of Durhā
                hath the Biſhoprike ſo commonly called, and Northumberlande. Cheſter hath Cheſſhire, moſt part of Lancaſhire, Richmonde, part of Flintſhire, and part of Denbighſhire. Carlile conteyneth Cumberlande and Weſtmerlande: and thys is the other Prouince of the Archbiſhoppe of Yorke, whiche is

another primate of England, and was of long time alſo primate of al Scotland: but theſe Dioceſes take their names of the Cities where thoſe Seas be placed, the chiefe whereof, is London▪
                where in the beginning was the Archbiſhops Sea, but afterwards tranſpoſed to Canterbury, a Cittie in Kente, placed in a ſoyle amiable and pleaſaunt.
            
               London ſtandeth in Middleſex, on the Northe ſide of the Thames. That moſt excellent and goodly riuer hath firſt the name of Iſe, and beginneth in Coteſwolde in Gloceſterſhire, about a mile from Titbery, and as much from the high waye called Froſſe: and it taketh firſte the name Tamiſ
                     •
                  , néere to Dorceſter bridge, where the riuer Tame and the forſayde Iſe méete, and ſo with a maruellous quiet courſe it paſſeth by London, and then breaketh into the French Ocean by maine tydes, whiche twice in xxiiij. houres ſpace doeth ebbe and flow more than lx. myles, to the great commoditie of trauellers, by whiche all kindes of Marchandice be eaſilye conueyed to London, the principal ſtore & ſtaple for al cōmodities within this realm. Upō ye ſame riuer is placed a ſtoneLōdon Bridge. bridge, a work very rare and maruellous, which bridge hath (reckning ye draw bridge) xx. arches made of fourſquare ſtone, of height. lx. foote, & of bredth. xxx. foote, diſtant one frō another xx. foote, compacte & ioyned togither with vaults and cellers. Uppon both ſides be houſes builded, that it ſéemeth rather a continual ſtréete than a bridge.
            The Oceā ſea doth bound England, the firſt part of Brytaine, Eaſt & South, Wales & Cornwal Weſt. The riuer of Twede deuideth England & Scotland North. The length of the Iland beginneth at Portſmouth in ye South parte, & endeth at Twede in the North, contayning. 320. myles.
            Thys Realme aboue other is moſte fruitefull on thys ſyde Humbre: for beyonde it is fuller of Mountaines. And althoughe to the beholders of that Countrey a farre off, it maye ſéeme playne, yet it is full of manye hilles, and thoſe for the moſte parte voyde of trées, the valleyes whereof be verye delectable, inhabited for the moſte part by noble

men, who according to auntiente and old order▪ deſire not to dwel in Cities, but neare vnto valleyes and riuers in ſeuerall villages, for auoyding of vehement windes, bicauſe that Iland naturally is ſtormie.
            
               Humbre hath his beginning a little on this ſide Yorke, & by and by runneth Southward, and then holdeth his courſe Eaſtward, and ſo into the maine Sea, greatlye encreaſed by the Riuers of Dune and Trent.
            
            
               Trent beginneth a little from Stafforde, running through Darbiſhyre, and Leiceſterſhire, paſſing by Litchfielde & Notingham on ye right hand, & Dune on the left hād: ſo that both thoſe riuers do make an Ileland whiche is called Auxolme, and then ioyning togither on this ſide Kingſtone vpon Hul, a goodly marchaunt Towne, they fall into Humbre: by whiche riuer they may ariue out of Fraunce, Germanie and Denmarke.
            
            
               England is fruitefull of beaſtes, and aboundeth with cattel: wherby the inhabitants be rather for the moſt part graſiers than ploughmen, bycauſe they giue themſelues more to féeding, than to tillage. So that almoſte the third part of the Countrey is employed to Cattell, Déere red and fallowe, Gotes, (wherof there be ſtore in the North parts) & Conies, for euery where there is iolly maintenaunce of thoſe kindes of beaſtes, bycauſe it is full of great woods: where of there ryſeth paſtime of hunting, gretly exerciſed, ſpecially by the Nobilitie and Gentlemen. (Andrew Bourd ſayth, there be moeAndrevv Bord Parkes in England than in all Europe beſide.)
            
               Scotland an other part of Brytain, (wherof in this place IScotland. haue thought good to treate at large, that no further mentiō of the ſituation therof might be made hereafter) began ſometime at the Hill called Grampius, nowe called Grantſbeyn ſtretching to the furtheſt coaſte Northwarde, but after the ouerthrowe of the Pictes, it began at the Riuer Twede▪
                and ſometimes at the Riuer of Tyne, the fortune of warres altering the ſame, as it doth al other things. Therfore the length of Scotland from Twede to the furtheſt coaſte, is eſtéemed to

be 480. miles: But as Scotland is longer than Englande, ſo it is narrowe and endeth like a wedge. For the mountayne Grampius is euil fauoured and craggie, which Tacitus in theCornelius Tacitus. life of Iulius Agricola doth remember, pearcing throughe the bowels of Scotland, from the coaſt of the Germaine ſea, that is to ſay, from the mouth of ye Riuer of Dee to the Iriſhe ſea, euen to the Laake of Lomunde, whiche lyeth betwéene that Countrey and the ſame hil.
            The riuer of Twede (which ſpringeth out of a little hyl, not far beyond Roxborough) is mingled with the Germaine Ocean, ioyning Southward with that Countrey whiche is called the Marches, being the eaſt bounds betwéen England & Scotland. The ſaid riuer of Twede ſeparateth ye Marches from Northumberland, the furtheſt Countrey of Englande, hauing proſpect to the Germaine Sea, the chiefe town wherof is Barwicke, nowe in poſſeſſion of the Engliſh.
            The Weſterne limit of Scotlande whilom was Cumberlande, whiche the Riuer of Solue deuideth from Annandale. Betwéen, theſe two Regions the Cheuiot Hils appere.
            Next to the Marches Pictlande bordereth, nowe tearmed Loughdean, bounding vpō the Eaſt, a very hillie Countrey, barren almoſt of any trées. The moſt famous townes of the ſame be Dunbar, Hadington, Leith, Northberwik, & Edenborough, the Kings ſeate, where alſo is the Caſtel of Maydens, a very ſtrong and defenſible place. The ſame Citie the riuer of Forthea (commōly called the Frith) doth water and paſſe by: whiche being caried into the Germaine Ocean, maketh greate armes or meres, commonly called the Scottiſh ſea: wherein beſides other is the Iland of Saint Columbe, by name called Aemonia. The ſame riuer agayne deuideth from Loughdean a Countrey adioyning (aboundant of all things) called ye Fife, in whych Country are many townes, as Donfermile, Cupre, but the notable town of Saint Andrewe, ſpeciallye famous for the Uniuerſitie, and beautified with the ſea of the Archbiſhoppe and primate of all Scotlande. On the other ſide towardes the Iriſhe ſide Northwarde,

is Nidiſdalia, ſo called of the Riuer that paſſeth therby, where bee the ſtrong townes of Douglaſſe and Donfrieſe.
            
            Upon the South adioyneth Galloway, more aboundaunte of Fodder for Cattel, than of Wheate, wher is the Towne of Candida Caſa, now called Whitherne, and the auntient tē
               ple of Saint Ninian, adourned alſo with an Epiſcopal Sea. In thoſe parts beſides the towne of Wighton is a laake of a wonderfull nature, bycauſe the one ſide in Winter doeth fréeſe, and the other not. By that ſtandeth the Countrey of Caricta, once renoumed, wyth the towne Caricton, whereof perchaunce it tooke the name. Aboue Caricta towardes the Weſt, is Elgonia (by which name Ptolome calleth the Countrey) bordering vppon the Ocean, wherein is the Laake Lomunde, whiche is very brode and large, contayning manye Ilandes, ſituate at the foote of the mountaine Granteſbeyn, eyght myles from the Caſtell of Donbriton, beſides the riuer Bodotria, now named Leuinus, entring into the riuer of Glota or Clude. Here ſome do contende that the name of Bodotria is not well applyed to Leuinus, bycauſe it appeareth by Cornel. Tacitus, that Bodotria & Glota haue ſundry paſſages into ye ſea, and are clearely dirempte one from the other, as Leuinus and Glota are not: wherfore they iudge rather the riuer nowe called the Frith to be that which of olde time had to name Bodotria, and to proue the ſame, they adde manye other reaſons, whiche here I omitte. But a good ſpace on thys ſide Grampius riſeth the riuer of Taus, the greateſt in all Scotland, taking his name of a Laake from whence it ſpringeth, whiche falleth by Atholia and Calidonia by many places, but chiefly by Perthum now called Saint Iohns towne, and laſtlye by Dunde, in time paſt called Alectum, and there breaketh into the Germaine ſea, and at the mouth forceth great eſtuars or armes of the ſea, whereof Tacitus maketh mention. Againſte Taus is Anguiſe, whiche by meanes of that riuer is fertile and proſperous, and is deuided from Fife.
            
            To y• ſame vpō the North adioyneth Athels, not the barrē
               neſt

Countrey, as well for water as for plentie of ſoyle. On the other ſide Arguile ſheweth it ſelfe, whyche being full of laakes, yéeldeth greater plentie of fodder than fruite, whoſe vttermoſt bounds ſtretch ſo farre, as Ireland is not diſtante paſt. xvj. miles, about which the promontorie or foreland, called Lands hed ſtandeth. That coaſt whilom the Silures did inhabite, as Polidor gathereth by theſe wordes of Plinie in hys 4. booke, the. 16. Chapter.
            
               Ireland being ſituate ouer againſt Brytain, is diſtant frō the nation of Silures by the ſhorteſt cut. xx. myles. Howbeit, ſome other, for that it is manifeſt by the ſame Plinie in yt ſame Chapter, and alſo by other writers, that Brytaine was not in hys tyme well knowen ſo farre North, ſuppoſe he mente not by this, that the Silures ſhoulde inhabite Arguile, but rather South-Wales, from whence the paſſage ouer was better known (and as he mighte haue vnderſtanding) ſhorteſt. Wher alſo as wel Tacitus, as Antoninus ſéeme to place that people.
            Betwéene Argile and Olgouia Weſtwarde lyeth the Countrey of Sterling, ſo called by a towne there. Here the foreſt of Calydonia began on the left ſide, which within ſtretcheth farre and broade. This forreſt ſometimes bred white Bulles, long maned like Lions, whiche were ſo wilde as they coulde not be tamed, but bycauſe the fleſh was pleaſant and daintie to the mouth, the whole race of them almoſte is extinguiſhed. There likewiſe is the Caſtel of Calydone, ſituate by Taus called Doucheldine. From a little hil of the forreſt ryſeth Glota, or Cluid, which by a brode chanel falleth into the Iriſhe Ocean: for ſtayed in a manner by the bankes of the mountaine Grampius, it ſlydeth into the ſea by greate tydes, ſo (as witneſſeth Tacitus) the Romaines thought it to be another Ilande. Of that riuer the Dale was called Glotevale, whyche Countrey that Riuer runneth by: and in the ſame is the Citie of Glaſco, a goodlye Uniuerſitie.
            Agayne towardes the Eaſte is ioyned the Countrey aſ Anguiſh and Merne vppon the Sea coaſte, wherein

Fordune by ſituation is verye ſtrong, and for the reliques of S. Palladius the Scottiſh Apoſtle famous.
            Of the ſame ſyde of Scotlande, is the Countrey of Marre, garniſhed with a Citie called Aberdone, ſtanding betwéene the two Riuers of Dona and Dea, with a Schole alſo adorned. Then followeth Morrey, whiche the two notable Riuers doe compaſſe aboute, called Neſſa and Spea. At the mouthe of thys laſt Riuer, ſtandeth the Towne of Elgis, aboute the banckes whereof be huge woods repleniſhed wyth all ſortes of wilde beaſtes. There is a Laake alſo called Spina, ſtoared with plentie of Swannes: but in the middle part ſtandeth the broad Countrey of Roſſia now called Beane Rozen, ſtretching to the vttermoſt angle euen to both the Seas, and the further it goeth Eaſtwarde, the better it is inhabited. In the ſame is a boſome of the Sea, nowe and then ſo conuenient for Sailers, as cōmonly it is called the port of Health, (or the Hauen of Safetie) and the towne Thana. The breadth of the Iland is very ſhort, for falling into ye forme of a wedge, it is ſcant. xxx. mile ouer, which defended with thrée promontories like towers, repelleth the greate waues and ſurges of the Sea: and inuironed with two gulfes, whiche thoſe promontories doe incloſe, the entries be quiet and calme, and the water peaceable. The ſtraite of that lande is at this day called Cathanes, coaſting vpon the Sea Deucalidon.
            
            Thus muche of the particulars of Scotlande. But y• ſame is in euery place ful of good Hauens and nauigable entryes, Laakes, with Marſhes, flouds, fountaines, very full of fiſhe, and mountaines, vpon the tops wherof be pleaſant plaines, yéelding great ſtore of graſſe, and plentie of fodder for Cattel, wooddes likewiſe full of wilde beaſtes. That part of the land is well ſuſtained with commodities, and therefore the people harde to be vanquiſhed at anye time, by reaſon the woods and Marſhes be at hande for refuge, and hunger eaſed wyth Ueneſon and Fiſh. About Scotlande in the Iriſhe Seas, are xl. Ilandes, of Plinie tearmed Brytanniae, other call them Meuania, other Hebrides. Manye of theſe in length at leaſte

are thirty miles, but in breadth not aboue. xij. Amongeſt thē is Iona beautified with the Tombes of the Scottiſh Kings. The Ilanders generally ſpeake Iriſhe, whiche declareth them to take their originall of the Iriſhe nation. Beyonde Scotlande towarde the Northe, be the Iles of Orchades, whiche (as Ptolome ſaith) be. xxx. in number, ſome lying in the Ducalidon Sea, and ſome in the Germaine Ocean, the principall of whiche Ilandes is Pamonia, bycauſe it is a Byſhops ſea, and is vnder the gouernement of Scotlande. The Ilanders vſe the Gothes ſpéeche, whiche argueth them to procéede from the Germaines. They be tall of ſtature, but verie helthie and luſtie of body and minde, liuing very long, although their chiefeſt foode is fiſhe, for the lande almoſt continually beſet with colde, in many places is not able to bear corne, and generally almoſt without trée or buſhe. Beyonde the Orchades ſtandeth Thule, in the Froſen ſea nowe called Iſelande, to which our marchauntes repaire for fiſhing once euery yeare in the Sommer. And thus much haue I to ſay of the ſcite of Scotlande: nowe of the nature and maners of the people.
            The Scottes whiche inhabite in the Southern parte, bée wel nurtured, and liue in good ciuility, & the moſt ciuile, vſe the Engliſh ſpéech. And for that wood there is geaſon & ſcant, their common fewel is of a blacke ſtone, whiche they dig out of the Earth. The other part Northern, & ful of mountaines, a very rude and homely kinde of people doth inhabite, which are called the redſhankes or wilde Scottes. They be clothed with a mantel and ſhyrte ſaffroned, after the Iriſhe manner, going bare legged to the knée. Their weapons are bowes & dartes, with a verie brode ſword and a dagger, ſharp only at the one ſide. All ſpeake Iriſh, féeding on fiſhe, milke, chéeſe, & fleſhe, hauing a great number of Cattell. The Scottes differ from the Engliſhe in lawes and cuſtomes, bicauſe they vſe the ciuill lawe as almoſt other Countryes doe. The Engliſh haue theyr own laws and edicts. In certain other conditions they be not farre vnlike, but their language is one, their habite

& complexion like, one corage in battel, and in the Nobilitie one deſire and pregnancie in hunting. The countrey houſes be narrow, couered with ſtraw & réede, wherein the people and beaſts do lodge togither. Theyr towns beſides S. Iohns towne are vnwalled, which is to be aſcribed to their animoſitie & hardineſſe, fixing all their ſuccor & helpe alway in the valiancie of their body. The Scots are verye wiſe, as their learning declareth. For to whatſoeuer Art they do apply themſelues, they eaſily profite in the ſame. But the ydle & 
                  •
               louthful, and ſuch chiefly as ſhun and auoyde labour, liue in great pouertie, & yet wil not ſticke to boaſt of their nobilitie and gentrie, as though it were more ſéemely for the honeſt to lacke, than comely, (by exerciſe of ſome honeſt Arte,) to get their liuing. But the Scots generally be deuoute obſeruers of Religion. And thus muche of Scotlande.
            
               Wales the third parte of Brytaine lyeth vppon the lefteVVales. hande, whiche like a Promontorie or foreland, or an Iſle (as it were) on euery ſide is compaſſed with the maine Sea, except it be on ye Southeaſt part with the riuer of Sabrine, commonly called Seuern, which diuideth Wales from England, although ſome late writers affyrme Hereford to be a bound betwéene Wales and England, and ſay that Wales beginneth at Chepſtow, where the riuer Wey (augmented with anThis arme of the Sea, as I 
                     •
                  udge, is novve called Auſt, vvhere is a paſſage betvveene the village of Auſt and Chepſto
                        ••
                     .
                other riuer called Lugge▪
               ) paſſing by Hereforde, doth runne into the Sea, whiche riuer ryſeth in the middle of Wales out of that hil (but vncertayne whether oute of that Spring that Sabrine doth,) for euen to that place there goeth a great arme of the Sea, which paſſing through the land weſtward, on the right hand leaueth Cornwal, and on the left Wales: whiche Topographie or deſcription, althoughe it be newe, yet I thought good to follow. Therefore Wales is extended from the town of Chepſtow, where it beginneth almoſt by a ſtraight line a little aboue Shrowſburie, euen to Weſtcheſter Northward. Into that part, ſo many of the Brytaines as remayned aliue after the ſlaughter and loſſe of their countrey, at the length being driuen to their ſhiftes, did repayre,

as auntient writings report, where partly through refuge of the mountaines, and partly of the wooddes and mariſhes, they remained in ſafetie: which part they enioy euen to this day. That land afterwards the Engliſh men did cal Wales:
               Giraldus Cambrenſis. and the Brytaines the inhabitants of the ſame, Walſhmen: for amongs the Germaines, Walſhman, ſignifieth a ſtranger, an alien, an outborne or ſtrange man, that is, ſuche a one, as hath a cōtrarie lāguage from theirs, for Wal in their tongue is called a ſtranger borne, as an Italian or Frenchman, which differ in ſpéech from the Germaine. Man ſignifieth Homo, which is a Man in Engliſhe. Therefore Engliſhmen, a people of Germanie, after they had wonne Brytaine, called the Brytaines, whiche eſcaped after the deſtruction of theyr Country, after their Country maner, Walſhmen, bicauſe they had an other tongue or ſpeach beſides theirs: and the lād which they inhabited Wales, which name afterward both to the people and country did remaine. By this meane the Brytaines with their kingdome loſte their name. But they which affirme that name to be deriued of their Kyng or Quéene, without doubt be deceyued. The countrey ſoyle towardes the Sea coaſt, & in other places in the valleys and playnes, is moſte fertile, whiche yéeldeth bothe to man and beaſt great plenty of fruite and graſſe: but in other places for the moſt part it is barraine & leſſe fruitful▪ bicauſe it lacketh tillage: for whych cauſe huſbandmen doe liue hardly, eating Oten cakes, & drinking Milke mixt with water. There bée many towns & ſtrong Caſtels, & foure Biſhoprickes, if theFoure Bishope in VVales. Biſhopricke of Hereford be counted in England, as the late wryters declare. The firſte Biſhopricke is Meneue, ſo called of Meneua, which at this day they call Saint Dauids, a Citie very auntient, ſcituated vppon the Sea coaſt, and boundeth Weſtwarde towarde Irelande. An other is Landaffe, the thirde Bangor, and the fourth Saint Aſaph, which be vnder ye Archbiſhop of Canterbury. The Welſhmē haue a language frō the Engliſhmen, which (as they ſay yt fetch their pedigrée frō ye Troians) doth partly ſounde of the Troian antiquitie,

and partly of the Gréeke. But hewſoeuer it is, the Walſhemen doe not pronounce their ſpeache ſo pleaſauntlye and gently as the Engliſhmen doe, bicauſe they ſpeake more in the throate: and contrariwiſe, the Engliſhmen rightly following the Latines, do expreſſe their voice ſomewhat within the lips, whiche to the hearers ſéemeth pleaſaunt and ſwéete. And thus much of Wales, the thirde part of Brytaine.
            Nowe followeth the fourth and laſt part of Brytaine named Cornwal. This part beginneth on that ſide which ſtandeth towarde Spaine Weſtward: Toward the Eaſte, it is of bredth foure ſcore and ten miles, extending a little beyond S. Germains, which is a very famous village ſituate on ye right hand vppon the Sea coaſte, where the greateſt bredth of that Countrey is but. xx. miles: for this parcel of land on the right hande is compaſſed with the coaſt of the maine Sea: and on the left hand with that arme of the ſea, which (as before is declared) parteth the land, and runneth vp to Chepſtow, wher the Coūtry is in forme of a horne: For at ye firſt it is narrow, and then groweth broder a little beyonde the ſayd town of S. Germain. Eaſtward it bordreth vpō Englād: Weſt, South, & North, ye main ſea is roūd about it: it is a very barren ſoile, yéelding fruite more through trauel of ye tillers & huſbādmē, than through the goodneſſe of the ground: but there is greate plentie of Lead & Tin, in the mining & digging wherof doth ſpecially conſiſt the liuing and ſuſtentation of the inhabitāts. Their tong is far diſſonant from Engliſh, but it is much like to the Walſh tong, bicauſe they haue many words cōmon to both tongs: yet this difference there is betwéen them, when a Walſh man ſpeaketh, the Corniſh mā rather vnderſtandeth manie words ſpoken by the Walſhman, than the whole tale he telleth, whereby it is manifeſt, that thoſe thrée people doe vnderſtand one another, in like maner as ye Southern Scots doe perceiue and vnderſtand the Northern. But it is a thing very rare and maruellous, that in one Iland there ſhould be ſuch varietie of ſpéeches. Cornwal is in the Dioceſſe of Exceter, whiche was once worthy to be counted the fourthe parte

of the Iland, for the contrariety of the language. Afterwards the Normās, which conſtituted a kingdome of al thoſe thrée parts, reckened Cornwal to be one of the Counties or ſhires of the Countrey. Thus much of the particular deſcription of Brytaine, that the whole bodie of the Realme (by the members) maye be the better knowne to ſome peraduenture that neuer heard the ſame before.
            The forme of the Ilande is Triquetra, or thrée cornered,Strab
                     •
                  . lib. 4. hauing thrée corners, or thrée ſides: two whereof, that is to ſaye, the corner toward the Eaſte, and the other toward the Weaſt (both extending Northwardes) are the longeſt.
            The thirde ſide whiche is the South ſide, is farre ſhorter than the other: for the Ilande is greater of length than of bredth. And as in the other two partes is conteyned the length, euen ſo in ye laſt, the bredth, in which place the bredth beginneth: and ſo continuing from the Southe parte to the North, it is but narrowe. The firſt and right corner of which Iland Eaſtwarde, is in Kent, at Douer and Sandwich. Frō whence to Callais or Boloigne in Fraunce, is the diſtance of xxx. myles. From this Angle, which is againſt France, to the thirde Angle, which is in the Northe in Scotlande, the maine wherof boundeth vpon Germanie, but no land ſéene, (and there the Iland is like vnto a wedge euen at the verye Angle of the lande in Scotlande,) the lengthe is ſeauen hundred myles. Againe, the length from this corner at Douer in Kent, to the vttermoſte parte of Cornewall, being S. Michaels mount (whiche is the Weſt parte or Weſt Angle) is ſuppoſed to be thrée hundered myles. From this lefte Angle being the Weſt part and the vttermoſt part of Cornwal, which hath a proſpect towardes Spaine, in which parte alſo ſtandeth Irelande, ſcituate betwéene Britaine and Spaine to the North Angle in the further part of Scotland, in which parte the Iland doth end, the length is eight hundred miles, in whych part there be very good hauens, & ſafe harboroughes for ſhippes, and apte paſſages into Ireland, being not paſte one dayes ſayling: but the ſhorter paſſage is from Wales to

Waterforde, a towne in Irelande vpon the Sea coaſt, muche like to that paſſage betwéene Douer and Calays, or ſomewhat more: but the ſhorteſt paſſage of all, is out of Scotland. From this laſt Angle to Hampton, which is a Towne vpon the Sea coaſt, with a hauen ſo called toward the South, and therfore called Southhampton, betwéene the angles of Kent and Cornwall, they doe meaſure by ſtraight line the whole length of the Ilande, and doe ſaye, that it contayneth. 800. myles, as the bredth from Meneua or Saint Dauids to Yarmouth, which is in the vttermoſt part of the Iland towards the Eaſte, doeth conteyne. 200. miles, for the bredth of the Ilande is in the South part, which part is the front and beginning of the lande, and endeth narrowe, or as it were in a ſtrayghte. So the circuite or compaſſe of the Ilande is. 1800. myles, which is. 200. leſſe than Caeſar doth recken or accompt. (⸪)
         
         
            
            
               ❧ Of the firſt habitation of this Ilande, a ſhort note to the Reader.
            
               WHere it is recorded by the ſacred and moſt auntientGene. 10. Historie, that after the vniuerſal floud, the Iſles of the Gentiles were diuided by the posteritie of Iapheth the ſonne of Noah, wee doubt not but this Iſle of Brytaine was alſo then peopled by his progenie, the Historie of whom, as it is to be wiſhed and appertinēt to this purpoſe, ſo ſith it is irrecouerable, not onely vnto vs, but alſo to other nations, I thinke it better to ſay nothing therein, than to ſet downe here Samothes, Magus, Sarron, Druys, and Bardus for his ſucceſſours, which are vpholden and boulstered onely by the credite and authoritie of a newe ſmal pamphlet falſely forged, and thruste into the worlde vnder the title of the auntient Hiſtorian Beroſus. For that is the cenſure of al the beſt learned, as concerning our cōmon Beroſus, which at his first appering, about one hundred yers ſince, was partly ſuspectLodouicus Viues. Gaſparus Varrerius. by Lodouicus Viues, afterwarde conuinced to be fabulous by the lerned Gaſ. Varrerius, in a ſeueral treatiſe, and now vniuerſally reiected of all skilful Antiquariesas, a mere fable vnworthy the name of Beroſus. Therefore I dare not grounde the beginning of our Historie vppon the credite therof, vnleſſe I woulde be preiudicial to the trueth wherevnto I leuel al my endeauour. I hope it ſhal bee ſufficient in this Historie for the Brytaines time, to follow the authoritie of the receiued Brytiſh Hiſtorie, which Geffrey Archdeacon of Monmouth tranſlated out of the Brytiſhe tong about. 400. yeares ſince, beginning with Brute, who after the progenie of Iapheth ſeemeth to be firste diſcouerer, namer, and Ruler of this land. Yet before we enter into the History of Brute, it ſhal not bee impertinente to note here that where as Pomponius Mela mētioneth that one Hercules killed Albion a Giant

aboute the mouth of Rhoſne in Fraunce, manye learned men haue iudged the ſaide Albion to haue ruled here, (ſith the Greeke monumēts do always cal this Iſle ALBION,) and after his dethNicol. Perotus Lilius Giraldus. Solinus. that Hercules came hither, Lilius Giraldus writeth. An auntient aultar alſo conteyning the inſcription of a vowe founde in the vttermoſt North part of Britaine 1500. yeares ſince, as Solinus reporteth, plainelie proued that Vliſſes the renoumed Graecian in his tenne yeares trauailes, after the ſacking of Troy, arriued in this our Countrey. And thus much is founde only in approued Histories as cō
               cerning Britaine before the arriuall of Brutus. (⸪)
         
         
            
            The race of the Kings of Britaine ſince Brute: and in the margent are placed the yeares beefore Chriſte his byrth, when euerye Kyng beganne their raignes, til Cunobelinus, in whoſe time Chriſt the Sauiour of the world was borne, and then followyng, the yeares from Chryſte hys byrth are placed.
            
               
                  BRute the ſonne of Siluius, the ſonne of Aſcanius,
               1108 Gaufrid
                     •
                  . the ſonne of Aeneas, after the death of hys father, being baniſhed into Gréece, deliuered there the remnāt of the Troiās from ye long captiuitie, wherin they were deteined vnder the Greciās, with whome he departed thence for to ſéeke ſome habitation: and aſſociating to hymſelfe Corineus wyth hys Troians whome he founde in the waye, after a long and weary iourney, and manye notable actes atchieued in Aquitaine, he arriued in this Ilande, whyche was called Albion, at a place nowe called Totnes in Deuonſhire, the yeare of the world. 2855. the yere before Chriſts natiuitie. 1108. wherein he firſt began to raigne, and named it Brytaine, (as ſome write) or rather after his owne name Brutaine, as Aethicus
               Aethicus. that wonderfull Philoſopher (a Scithian by race, but an Iſtrian by Countrey) tranſlated by Saint Hierome aboue a thouſand yeares paſt, termeth both it and the Iles adiacent Inſulas Brutannicas. And for more proofe of this reſtored name,Brutannicas. not only the ſaide Philoſopher (who trauelled through many landes, and in this lande taught the knowledge of mynerall workes) maye be alleadged, but ſundry other, as the Sybils Oracles, who in the name of the Brytaines is written with y. that is the Gréekes little u. whyche Oracles althoughe they were not the Sibils owne worke, as ſome ſuſpecte,Oracula Sibili.
               
yet are they very antient indéede, and that they might ſéeme more auntient, vſe the moſte auntient name of Countreys and peoples. And ſome Engliſhe writers aboue an hundred yeares ſince, vſually doe name it Brutan, and not otherwiſe,
                  
                     •
                   Mandeuil. through a large hiſtorie of thys lande, tranſlated oute of Frenche. Brute builded the Citie of newe Troy, now called London, he ſtabliſhed therein ye Troian laws, & gaue ye vttermoſte Weſterne parte of the Realme to his companion Corineus, of whoſe name it was called Corinea, and to thysIohn Harding. Iohn Hanuile. Nichol. Vpton. day Cornwal. Iohn Harding
                ſayth, that Brute bare Gules two Lions rampant endorced Ore. Alſo a Banner of a Uertdian of Golde fichule crowned and entronized, that were Aeneas armes when he entred the land of Latins. Iohn Hanuil
                in Archinis, and Nicholas Vpton, ſaith he bare Ore a Lio
                  ••
                paſſant Gules.
            When hys death approched, he diuided the whole Ilande among his thrée ſonnes, whiche he had by Innogen his wife, Locrine, Camber, and Albanact. Unto Locrine he gaue the middle parte betwéene Humber and Seuern, whiche of him was called Loegria▪
                To Camber he gaue all the region beyonde Seuern, which of him tooke the name of Cambria, and is now called Wales. To Albanact he gaue all the lands beyond Humber, whyche of his name was called Albania: after whiche partition he deceaſſed, when he had raigned. 24. yeares, and was buryed at newe Troy.
            
            
               
                  LOcrine, the eldeſt ſonne of Brute raigned. xx. yeares: hée1084 Gaufride. chaſed the Hunnes▪
                   whiche inuaded this realme: and purſued them ſo ſharpely, that many of them with their Kyng were drowned in a riuer whiche then parted Englande and Scotland. And forſomuch as the king of Hunnes, named Hū
                     ber, was there drowned, the riuer is til this daye named H
                        •
                     mber. This king Loctine had to wife▪ 
                  Guendoline▪
                   daughterHovve Humber tooke that name of Corineus, Duke of Cornwall, by whome he had a ſon named Madan▪
                   He alſo kept as Paramour, the beautifull Lady Eſtrilde, by whom he had a daughter named Sabrine. And after the death of Corineus, hée putte from hym the

ſayde Guendoline, and wedded Eſtrilde: but Guendoline repayred to Cornwall, where ſhée gathered a greate power, and foughte with King Locrine, and ſlewe hym. Hée was buried at newe Troy. She drowned the Lady Eſtrilde, with hir daughter Sabrine in a Ryuer, that after the youngSeuerne. maydens name is called Seuerne.
               
            
            
               
                  GVendoline the daughter of Corineus and wife to Locrine
                  1064 Gvvendoline a Queene raigned. Gaufride. Flores Hiſtoriar.
                   (forſomuch as Madan hir ſon was too yong to gouerne ye lande) was by common aſſent of all the Brytaines, made ruler of the whole Iſle of Brytaine, whiche ſhe well and diſcretely ruled, to the comforte of hir ſubiectes. xv. yeares, and then left the ſame to hir ſonne Madan.
               
            
            
               
                  MAdan, the ſonne of Locrine and Guendoline▪
                   was made1049 ruler of Brytain: he vſed great tiranny among his Britons: and being at his diſport of hunting, he was deuouredThe King deuoured by VVolues. by wild Wolues, when he had raigned. xl. yeres. He left him twoo ſons, named Mempricius and Manlius. One olde pedigrée ſaith, he builded the city of Madan▪
                   now of the riuerDoncaſter builded. 
                  Don called Doncaster.
               
            
            
               
                  MEmpricius, the ſon of Madan, being King, by treaſon ſlue1009 A travtor to hys brother, deuoured of vvilde beaſtes. his brother Manlius after whoſe death he lyued in more tranquilitie, where-through he fell in ſlouth, & ſo to lechery, taking ye wiues & daughters of his ſubiects: & laſtly, became ſo euil, that he forſooke his wife and concubines, and fell to the ſinne of Sodomie with beaſts, whereby he became odible to God & man. And going on hūting, he loſt his company, & was deſtroyed of wilde Wolues, wherof the land was then ful, when he had raigned. xx. yeares.
            
            
               
                  EBranke, ye ſon of Mempricius, was made ruler of Brytaine,
                  989 Gaufride. he had. xx
                     •
                  . wiues▪ of whom he receyued. xx. ſons, and. xxx. daughters: whyche▪ were ſente by their fathers to AlbaFlores Hiſtariarū. Siluius, the fourth King of Albanois▪
                   in Italy▪
                   to be marryed to the Albanes. This Ebranke firſte after Brutus attempted to inuade Fraunce wyth an armye▪ 
                  
                     〈…〉
                  s IacobusIacobus Bergomas. Iacobus Leſſabeus. Bergomas ſayeth in hys ſixte of hys Chronicles, and Iacobus▪ Leſſabeus in the deſcription of Henault affyrmeth

the ſame, and that he was driuen backe by Brunchildis Lord of Henault with no ſmall loſſe of his men. Aſſaracus the ſecondGermanie toke the name of Ebranke his ſonnes, vvho conquered the ſame. ſonne of Ebranke, with the reſt of his yonger brethren 18. at the leaſt, by the aide of Alba Siluius, cōquered all Germanie, which was then no great matter, for then Europe was very ſmally inhabited, ſaue only about the Sea coaſts, as Dalmatia, Italie, and the coaſts of France, as in reading the hiſtories may eaſily be ſéene how the Eaſt people at ſundryBergoma
                        •
                     . Hector Bo
                        •
                     nu
                        •
                     . times came ſwarming into Europe. Of theſe brethren had Germanie the name, à Germanis fratribus, that had ſubdued it. Ebranke was a founder of many Cities (ſayth Bergomas) as Alcluid in Albania (now Scotland) whiche is afterDunbretain, Edenbrough, Bamburgh, and Yorke builded. 
                  Hector Boetius, Dunbretaine, but other thinke the ſame to be cleane deſtroyed. He made the Caſtell of Maidens, now called Edenbrough. He made alſo the Caſtel of Bamburgh: in the. xxiij. yeare of his raigne he builded Kayrbranke, nowe called ſince by the Saxons, Euorwike, nowe corruptely Yorke, wherein he builded a Temple to Diana, & ſet there an Archflame, and was there buryed when he had raigned. lx. yeres.
               
                  Iohn Rouſe ſayeth he builded Caior Manour after it was called Belloſitum, at length Caior Boſſa, Rhydichen, and Oxenford, of a certaine Forde, which Iohn Leiland calleth Iſis, in Engliſhe Ouſe, and ſaith it is namely called Oxforde for Ouſeforde.
               
            
            
               
                  BRutus. 2. the eldeſt ſon of Ebranke, ſuccéeded in the kingdome,929 and for that his father had receyued ſuche a repulſe at the hands of Brunchildis Lord of Henault, he, in reuēge thereof inuaded Henault with a great army in the Fennes and Marſhlande at the mouth of the Riuer Scaldis (of olde time named Stadus) and encamped him ſelfe vppon the Riuer Hania, where betwéene Brutus and Brunchildis, was foughten a ſtrong battaile in that place, which to this day is called, Eſtam bruges, of the ſtation and campe of Brutus, as Iacobus Leſſabeus writeth in hys deſcription of Henaulte. This Brute of his luſtie courage was ſurnamed Gréeneſhielde, he raigned. xij. yeares, and was buried at Yorke.
            
            
               
               
                  LEill the ſonne of Brute Greeneſhielde, béeyng a louer of917 Iohn Bradſhaw. peace, builded Carleile and repaired Carleon, whych was ſince by the Romaines reedified, when a legion of Souldiors was ſent thither, and by them named The City of Legions, nowe called Chester, of the auntient buyldyng wyth vaultes and towers, eche houſe like a Caſtell, whych ſometyme hadde béene of greate pleaſaunce. A legion of the Romaines (as Vigetius reporteth) contained 6000. warriours or moe:Vigetius. whiche legion was diuided into 10. bands, but the firſt paſſed all the reſt, both in number of ſouldioures, and alſo in eſtimation: for this band bare the Eagle, whyche was the chiefeſt Standarde of the Romaines. This firſt bande contayned 1105. footemen, heauy armed horſemen 132. and was named Cohors miliaria, that is to ſaye, a companye of a thouſand and moe ſouldiours. This band is the head of all the legion: whenſoeuer they muſte fight, theſe beginne the battaile, & are firſt ſet in order in the front of the battell. The ſeconde band containeth 555. footmen, and 66. horſemen of heauy armour, and this bande is called Cohors quingentaria, that is to ſay, a company of 500. and moe ſouldiours. The thirde bande likewiſe hath 555. footmen, and 66. horſemen, The fourth bande hath 555. footemen, and 66. horſemen. The fifth bande hathe as many. Theſe fiue bandes are ſet in araye in the firſte battaile. The ſixte bande hath 555. footemen, and 66. horſemen. The ſeauenth bande hath 555. footemen, 66. horſemen. The eighte bande hath 555. footemen, 66. horſemen. The ninth bande hath 555. footemen, 66. horſemen. The tenth hath 555. footemen, 66. horſemen. Theſe ten bands make a ful and perfect legion, contayning. 6100. footemen, and 726. horſemen. King Leill in the ende of his▪ raigne fel to ſlouth and luſt of the body, by mean wherof ciuill ſtrife was rayſed, and not in hys dayes ended. He raigned. xxv. yeares, and was buried at Carleile alias Cheſter.
               
            
            
               
                  RVdhudibras, alias Cicuber, the ſonne of Leil, builded Caergant,
                  Canterburie▪ VVincheſter, & Shaftiſbury built
                        •
                     . of the Engliſhemenne called Canterbury, (that is to ſaye, the Courte of the Kentiſhemen) Caierguent, nowe Winchester,
                  
and Caerſepton nowe called Shaftiſburie, wherein hée builded thrée Temples, and placed in the ſame Flamines.Flores Hiſtoriarū
                   He raigned xxix. yeares.
            
            
               
                  BLadud the ſonne of Rudhudibras, who had long ſtudied at863 Stamford an Vninerſitie. 
                  Athens, broughte with him foure Philoſophers, to kéepe Schoole in Brytaine: for the whiche he builded Stamforde, and made it an Uniuerſitie, wherein hée had greate number of Scholers ſtudying in all the ſeauen liberall Sciences: whiche Uniuerſitie dured to the comming of Saint Auguſtine. At whiche time the Biſhoppe of Rome interdited it for hereſies
                     Iohn Harding. I. Rouſe. Iohn Ba
                        •
                     e in 
                        •
                     ys Votaries. Bathe vvyth the hote Bathes built. The King attempteth to flie. that fel among the Saxons and Brytons togither mixt, ſo ſayth Harding. He builded Caier Badon or Bathe, and made there a Temple to Apollo, and placed there a Flamine: he made alſo the hote Bathes, and practiſed hys Necromancie: he decked himſelfe in feathers, and preſumed to flie, but by falling on his Temple, he brake his necke, when he had raigned. xx. yeres.
            
            
               
                  LEire ſonne of Bladud ſucceded his father. He builded Caier
                  844 Leyceſter built. Flores Hiſtoriarū.
                   
                  Lair vpon the Riuer Sore, now called Leycéster, and made there a Temple of Ianus, placing a Flamine to gouerne the ſame. He had thrée daughters, Gonorel, Ragan, & Cordeile, whyche Cordeile for hir vertue and wiſedome towardes hir father, ſucceded him in the kingdome. When he had raigned xl. yeares he deceaſſed, and was buryed vnder the channell of the Riuer Sore, wythin Leiceſter. Thys vault vnder the
                     
                        •
                     . Rouſe. earth was builte in honour of Ianus Bifrons. There all the Workemen of that Citie, when the ſolemnitie of the daye came, begun al things that they had to do the yere folowing.
            
            
               
                  COrdila, ye yongeſt daughter of Leire, ſuccéeding hir father,805 was ſore vexed by hir two nephues, Morgan of Albanie, & Conedagius of Camber and Cornwal who at the length toke & caſt hir in priſon: where ſhe being in diſpayre of recouering hir eſtate, ſlewe hir ſelfe, when ſhe had raigned. v. yeres, and was buryed at Leiceſter in Ianus Temple, by hir father.
            
            
               
                  MOrgan, the eldeſt ſonne of Dame Gonorell, claymed800 
                  Brytaine, and warred on hys nephewe Conedagius, that

was King of Camber (that nowe is Wales) and of Cornwall: but Conedagius mette with Morgan in Wales, and there ſlewe hym: whyche place is called Glamorgan tillHovv Glamorganshire tooke that name. this daye. And then Conedagius was Kyng of al Brytaine. He builded a Temple of Mars at Perche, that now is SaintSaint Iohns tovvn builded. Johns Towne in Scotlande, and placed there a Flamine: He builded another of Minerua in Wales, whyche now is named Bangor. The thirde he made of Mercurie in Cornwall,Bangor built. where he was borne. He raigned. xxxiij. yeares, and was buryed at newe Troy.
               
            
            
               
                  RIuallo, ſonne of Conedagius, ſuccéeded his father, in whoſe766 Bloude rayned. Flores Hiſtoriarū.
                   tyme it rained bloude thrée dayes: after whyche tempeſt enſued a greate multitude of venemous Flies, whych ſlewe muche people: and then a greate mortalitie throughout this land, which cauſed almoſt deſolation of the ſame. This Riuallo raigned ouer this whole Iland. xlvj. yeares, and then deceaſſed, and was buryed at Caierbranke, that nowe is Yorke. Rome was builded in Italy by Remus and Romulus
                  Rome builded. 356. yeares after Brute arriued in this lande.
            
            
               
                  GViguſtus, ſonne of Riuallo ſuccéeded in the Kingdome of721 
                  Brytaine who raigned quietly, but was a common drunkard, wherof followed all other vices. When hée had raigned. xxxviij. yeares, hée deceaſſed, and was buried at Yorke.
            
            
               
                  SCicilius, brother of Gurguſtus, ſuccéeded in the Kingdome:684 of whome is lefte but little memorie: hée raigned. xlix. yeares, and was buryed at Bathe.
               
            
            
               
                  IAgo or Lago, Couſin of Curguſtus, raigned. xxv. yeares:636 for his euil gouernement he dyed of a Litargie, and was buryed at Yorke.
               
                  Iohn de Vigney, in his Booke named The Moralization
                        Iohannes de Vigney. Game of Cheſſe deuiſed. of the Cheſſe, ſayeth, that the ſame game of the Cheſſe, was deuiſed by Xerxes the Philoſopher, otherwiſe named Philometre, to reproue and correcte the cruell minde of a filmous Tyrant called E
                        ••
                     lmerodach Kyng of Babilon (as is ſuppoſed) about the yeare before Chryſtes byrth. 614.
               ¶ Kim
                     •
                  acus raigned. liiij. yeres, and was buried at Yorke.612
               
            
            
               
               
                  GOrbodug raigned thrée ſcore and thrée yeares, and was559 Flores Hiſtoriarū. 496 The brother ſlue the brother, and the mother murthered hir ovvne ſonne. buryed at newe Troy.
               
            
            
               
                  FErrex with his brother Porrex, ruled Brytaine fiue yeres: but it was not long ere they fell at ciuill diſcorde for the ſoueraigne dominion, in whyche Ferrex was ſlaine, and Porrex afterwardes by hys mother, whoſe name was Idoine, was killed in his bed. Thus cruelly was the bloude and houſe of Brute deſtroyed, when this realme by the ſpaceBrutes line extinguished. of 616. yeares had béene gouerned by that lynage.
               After this the realme was diuided with ciuil warres, for lacke of one ſoueraigne gouernor, vntil Dunwallo reduced the ſame into one Monarchie.
            
            
               
                  MVlmutius Dunwallo, the ſon of Cloten, Duke of Cornwall,442 Firſt King that vvare a crovvn of gold, vvho builded Blackvvell Hall. The ſeconde Lavves vvere Mulmutius lavves. Flores Hiſtoriarū.
                   reduced this Realme into one Monarchie, being before by ciuil warres and diſſention ſeuered and broughte into diuers dominions: he was the firſte that ware a crown of golde: he conſtituted good lawes, whyche long after were called Mulmutius Lawes. Theſe lawes holy Gildas wrote oute of the Britiſh ſpéech into Latine. He gaue priniledges vnto Temples, and ploughes, and beganne to make the foure notable wayes in Brytaine. In newe Troy he builded a greate Temple called Templum Pacis, which ſome ſuppoſe to be Saint Paules, ſome Blackwell Hall, and wythoute doubte, the olde worke of Blackwel Hall now remayning, was the Jewes Synagogue. He raigned. xl. yeares, leauing after him two ſonnes, Belinus and Brennus. He was buryed in the Temple of Peace whiche he had builded.
            
            
               
                  BElinus and Brennus, ſons of Mulmutius and Cornouenna,
                  401 diuided this whole Iſle of Brytaine betwene them. Unto Beline the elder brother was appointed Englande, Wales, and Cornwall. Unto the other the North parte beyond Humber. This Brennus, a yong man, deſirous of gloryFlores Hiſtoriarū. I. Leiland. 
                        •
                     a
                        •
                     fride. and dominion, rayſed warre againſte Beline. But in concluſion, by ye means of their mother, they were accorded, and Brennus being wholly giuē to ye ſtudy of wars, left hys coūtry to yt gouernāce of his brother, & wēt into Frāce amō
                  geſt

ye 
                  Galles, where for his excellēt qualities he was greatly eſtéemed, & made of them theyr ſoueraigne Captaine, with whō he paſſed into Italie, ſacked Rome, and expelling the Tuſcanes, builded Millain, Breſcia, Como, Bergamo, Vincenza, Trent, & Verona, whiche he called after his owne name Brenona. AfterIuſtine. this (as writeth Trogus Pompeius, abridged by Iuſtine,) hée raiſed an hoſte of 150000. footemen, and 15000. horſemen, & inuaded Macedone againe. When Soſthenes ſawe how they waſted the Countrey and villages, he mette them with hys hoſt of Macedones well appointed. But by reaſon they were fewe, and their enemies manye, they were ſoone put to the worſer. Wherefore while the Macedones being beaten, kept them within the walles of their Cities, Brennus like a conquerour, againſt whom no man durſt ſhew his head to make reſiſtaunce, foraged al the Iles of Macedone. And from thence as though thoſe booties and ſpoyles ſéemed too baſe and ſimple in his eye, he tourned his minde to the Temples of the Goddes immortall, malapertlye ſcoffing that the goddes were riche, and ought to departe liberally to men. Therfore he toke his iourney towards Delphos, ſetting more by ye gain of the gold that had ben offered to the Goddes, than by theyr diſpleaſure.
               The Temple of Apollo at Delphos, is ſituate in ye mount Parnaſſus, vppon a cliffe on euerye ſide falling ſtéepe downe. There the confluence of men hath made a populous Cittie. Moreouer both the Temple and the towne are encloſed with the ſtéepeneſſe of the rocke. The middle part of the rocke inwarde is in faſhion like a Theatre, by meanes whereof when men make any ſhouting, or any Trumpet is ſounded, the ſame breaketh & redoundeth in ſuch wiſe vpon the ſtones from one to another, that the Echo is herd double and treble, the noyce reſounding farre lowder than it wente forth. The whyche cauſeth the ignoraunt to ſtande in more feare, thinking it to be the preſence of the Godheade. In the winding of the rocke, almoſt mid-way to the toppe of the Hil, there is a little playne, and in the ſame a déepe hole into the ground,

which ſerueth to giue Oracles: Out of the which a certaine colde breath aſcending vpwarde, ſtirreth the mindes of the Prophetes into a madneſſe, and ſo compelleth them to giue aunſweare to ſuch as come for counſayle. In the ſame place therefore, there are to be ſéene many and riche gifts of kyngs and peoples. Wherefore when Brutus came within the view of the Temple, he was in doubt a greate whyle, whether hée wer better to attempt the matter forthwith, or giue his ſouldiours that nights reſpite to reſt them. Euridanus and Theſſalonus, who for conetouſneſſe of the praye, hadde ioyned themſelues with him, willed to cut off al delay, while theyr enimies were vnprouided, where as by giuing them that nights reſpite, theyr enimies ſhould perchance get both courage and ſuccour: but the common ſouldiours of the Frenchmen, when after long penurie, they founde a Countrey repleniſhed with wine, and all other kind of victuals, they diſperſed themſelues in the fields, making hauock of al things like conguerours, by which meanes the Delphians had reſpit to lay for themſelues, and manned the towne by the helpe of theyr neyghbours, or euer the Frenchmen coulde be called from the wyne Fat to their ſtandarde. Brennus had thréeſcore and fiue thouſand choſen footemen of the beſt in al his hoſte, where as the Delphians were in al but. 4000. fighting men. In diſdayne of whiche ſmall handful, Brennus to the entente to ſharpen the mindes of his men, ſhewed them all, what a riche and plentiful pray they ſhoulde haue. The Frenchmen being by this vouching of their Captaine, or rather by theyr owne beholding, ſtirred vp, and alſo wounded with the wine they had poured in the day before, without reſpite of any dā
                  ger ran he
                     •
                  long to the encounter. On the contrarie part, the Delphians putting more truſte in God than in their owne ſtrength, reſiſted theyr enemyes, and what with ſtones, and what with their weapons, threw the Frenchmen (as they ſcaled,) headlong from the top of the mountain. While the two partes were thus ſtriuing one with another, ſodainely the Prieſtes of al the Temples, and the Prophetes, wyth

theyr haire aboute their eares, &c. like men ſtraught & out of their wittes, came running into the forefront of the battaile, crying out, that while they were al making their ſupplications to God for ayde, they met a yong mā of beautie and perſonage, far excelling any mortal creature, and in his companie two Uirgins in armour, wherefore they beſought them, ſéeing the Gods did garde their ſtandarde, they ſhoulde not ſticke to diſpatch their enimies. And there with all they forthwith perceyued that God was preſent on their ſide. For both a piece of the mountaine being broken off, by a ſodaine earthquake, ouerwhelmed the French hoſte, and the thickeſt of theyr enimies (not without gret ſlaughter,) were opened and put to flight. In the necke whereof there enſued a tempeſte, with hayle, thunder, and lightning, conſuming as manye as were anye thing ſore wounded. The Captaine Brennus himſelfe not being able to abyde the ſmarte of his woundes,
                     Brennus killeth himſelfe. toke 
                     •
                   ſworde and killed himſelfe. Thus farre abridged out of Iuſtrne.
               
               
                  Beline in the meane time bothe in ciuill iuſtice and alſo Religion, greatly encreaſed his Realm. He made thrée Archflamines, whoſe Seas were at new Troy, Kayrbranke, & Kayrlegion.
                  Archflames. Foure notable vvayes. He finiſhed the foure greate wayes begon by his Father: he ſubdued and made tributarie vnto him Denmarke. In newe Troy he made the Hauen, whiche at this day retayneth
                     Belines gate builded. Iohn Leland. Tovver of Lō. dō firſt builded. the name of hym, called Belines Gate: And as Iohn Lelande wryteth, he builded the Towre of newe Troy. He maryed hys daughter Cambria, vnto a Prince of Almaine called Antenor, of whome theſe people were called Cymbri, and Sycambri.
               
               Finally, after he had raigned with his brother and alone xxvj. yeares, he dyed: and after the Pagan manner, with great pompe was burned, and his aſhes in a veſſell of braſſe ſet on a hygh Pynacle ouer Belines Gate. He builded Carlheon vpponFlores Hiſtoriarū. the Riuer Vske, which ſince by a legion of the Romanes there placed, was named Caerlegion, now cleane deſtroyed.
            
            
               
               
                  GVrgunſtus, ſon of Beline, ſucceded his father. I. Rouſe ſaith375 he builded Caier Werithe, that is Longcastra: He ſubdued Denmarke, compelling them to continue their tribute, and in his returne home, mette with a fléete of Baſdenſes comming from the parts of Spaine, which were ſéeking for habitations,Giraldus. bycauſe their Countrey was ſo populous, and not able to ſuſtaine them, to whom the king graunted the Iſle of Ireland
                  Ireland inhabited. to inhabite, and to holde the ſame of him as their ſoueraigne Lord: But the Scottes write, that Spaniards arriued beforeHector Boetius. this time in Irelande. This Gurgunſtus builded Porchester and Warwicke in the middle of the Realme, (ſayth I. Rouſe.) He raigned. xxix. yeres, and was buried at Caerlheon.
               
            
            
               
                  GVinthelinus, ſonne of Gurgunſtus, was Crowned king of356 Brytaine. A prince ſober and quiet, who had to wyfe a noble woman named Mercia, of excellent learning and knowledge.Flores Hiſtoriarū. She deuiſed certaine lawes, whych long time among the Brytaines were greatlye eſtéemed, and named MarcianMarcian lavves the thirde. Lawes. This prince raigned. xxvj. yeares, and was buryed at new Troy.
               
            
            
               
                  CEcilius the ſonne of Guinthelin and Marcia, raigned. vij.350 yeares (as the Scottes write.) In the firſt yeare of hys raigne, a people called Picts, arriued here in Brytaine, and poſſeſſed thoſe partes, whiche now be the Marches of botheThe Picts firſte inhabited the Marches. Realmes Englande and Scotlande. Cecilius was buried at Caerlheon.
               
            
            
               
                  KImarus ſucceded Cecilius, who being a wilde yong man, & liuing after his owne luſte, raigned but thrée yeares, and323 was ſlaine as he was hunting of wilde beaſtes.
            
            
               
                  ELanius, called alſo Danius, was king of Brytaine nine321 yeares.
            
            
               
                  MOrindus, the baſtarde ſonne of Danius, beganne to raign311 in Brytaine: he foughte with a king who came out of Germanie, and ſlewe him wyth all his power. Moreouer,Gaufride. out of the Iriſhe Seas in hys time came forthe a wonderfull monſter, whyche deſtroyed muche people: Whereof the king hearing, woulde of his valiaunt courage, néeds fight

with it, by whom he was clean deuoured when he had raigned eight yeares.
            
            
               
                  GOrbomannus, eldeſt ſonne of Morindus, raigned eleauen303 yeres: a Prince iuſte and religious: he renued the Temples of his Gods, and gouerned his people in peace & welth. This Gorbomannus builded Grantham in Lincolneſhire. Our Engliſhe Chronicle ſaith, he builded bothe the townes
                     Caxton Grantham builded. I. Ro
                           •
                        fe.
                   of Cambridge and Grantham: but ſéeing that Cambridge in auntient Chronicles is called Grant (as it is alſo Grantcheſter, Cairgrant, and Grantbridge) it was an eaſie matter (as Grammarians knowe) to tranſlate Grantham into Cambridge, and ſo aſcribe the building of bothe Townes to him that builded but one of them.
            
            
               
                  ARchigallo, brother to Gorbomannus, was crowned kyng292 of Britaine: he was in conditions vnlike to his brother: for he depoſed the noblemen, and exalted the vnnoble. He extorted from men their goods to enriche his treaſurie: for which cauſe by the eſtates of the Realme he was depriued ofThe King depriued. his royall dignitie, when he had raigned fiue yeares.
            
            
               
                  ELidurus, the thirde ſonne of Morindus, and brother to286 
                  Archigallo, was elected King of Brytaine: a vertuous & gentle Prince, who gouerned his people iuſtly. As he was hunting in a forreſt, by chaunce he met with his brother Archigallo, whome moſte louingly he embraced, and found the meanes to reconcile him to his Lordes, and then reſigned to hym hys royall dignitie, when he hadde raygned fiue yeares.
            
            
               
                  ARchigallo, thus reſtored to his royall eſtate, ruled the282 people quietly and iuſtly tenne yeares, and lyeth buryed at Yorke.
            
            
               
                  ELidurus aforenamed, after the death of his brother Archigallo,
                  272 for his pietie and Juſtice, by the generall conſent of the Brytaines was again choſen King. But he raigned not paſſing two yeares, but that his yonger brethren, Vigenius and Peredurus rayſed warre againſte him, tooke him priſoner, and caſte him into the Tower of newe Troy, where

he remayned during their raigne.
            
            
               
                  VIgenius and Peredurus, after the taking of their brother,270 The tovvne of Pickering built. Caxton. I. Rouſe.
                   reigned togither ſeuen yeares. Vigenius then dyed, and Peredurus raigned after alone two yeres. He builded ye town of Pickering in the North parts of Yorkeſhire.
            
            
               
                  ELidurus, the thirde time was made king, who continued261 his latter raigne honourablie and iuſtlye: but being ſore bruſed with age and troubles, he finiſhed his life, when hée had nowe laſtlye raigned foure yeares, and was buried at Carlile.
               
               
                  Gorbonian raigned in Brytaine ten yeares.258 248 2
                        •
                     4
               
               
                  Morgan guided the Realme peaceably fourtéene yeres.
            
            
               
                  EMerianus his brother, when hée had tyrannouſlye raygned ſeauen yeares was depoſed.
            
            
               
                  IVal was choſen King for his iuſtice, and temperance, which227 gouerned peaceably twentie yeares.
            
            
               
                  RImo gouerned this Realme ſixtéene yeares, his time was207 191 171 A good exāple. peaceable.
               
                  Geruncius reygned in Brytaine twenty yeares.
            
            
               
                  CAtellus raigned peaceably ten yeares, he hung vp all oppreſſors of the poore, to giue example vnto other.
            
            
               
                  COilus ſucceded Catellus, who quietlye raigned twentie161 yeres.
               
                  Porrex, a vertuous and gentle Prince, raigned fiue yeares.142
               
            
            
               
                  CHirimus, throughe his drunkenneſſe, raigned but one136 135 133 132 131 136 1
                        •
                     4 120 118 yeare.
               
                  Fulgen his ſon raigned two yeares in Brytaine.
               
                  Eldred, raigned in Brytaine but one yeare.
               
                  Androgius, likewiſe raigned but one yeare.
            
            
               
                  VRianus the ſonne of Androgius, wholy gaue himſelfe to the luſtes of the fleſhe, and raigned thrée yeares.
               
                  Eliud raigned fiue yeares, who was a great Aſtronomer.
               
                  Dedantius King of Brytaine raigned fiue yeares.
               
                  Detonus raigned in this lande two yeares.
               
                  Gurgineus raigned thrée yeares in Brytaine.
               
                  
                  Merianus was king of Brytaine two yeares.115 113 111 108 106 104 94 91 Prodigious ſignes. 88 86 82 81 78 76 74 70
               
               
                  Bladunus gouerned thys lande of Brytaine two yeares.
               
                  Capenus raigned king of Brytaine thrée yeares.
               
                  Ouinus ruled this land of Brytaine two yeares.
               
                  Silius raigned in this land of Brytaine two yeares.
            
            
               
                  BLedgabredus raigned ten yeares, and gaue himſelfe to the ſtudie of Muſicke.
               
                  Archemalus was king of Brytaine two yeares.
            
            
               
                  ELdolus raigned foure yeares. In his time diuerſe prodigies were ſéene, as Globes of fire, burſting out of the ayre with great noyſe. &c.
               
                  Rodianus, was king of Brytaine two yeares.
               
                  Redargius raigned king of Brytaine thrée yeares.
               
                  Samulius raigned king of Brytaine two yeares.
               
                  Peniſellus was king of Brytaine thrée yeares.
               
                  Pyrrhus ruled this land of Brytaine two yeares.
               
                  Caporus, was king of Brytaine two yeares.
            
            
               
                  DInellus, the ſon of Caporus, a iuſt and vertuous prince, gouerned this Real me foure yeares.
            
            
               
                  HElius his ſonne, raigned not fully one yere. Of this prince the Ile of Elie toke the name.
            
            
               
                  LVd the eldeſt ſonne of Hely, ſuccéeded his father: he amē
                  ded66 Lud repayred & fortified London. Flores Hiſt.
                   his laws, and toke away al vſages that wer nought: moreouer he repayred the Citie of new T
                        ••
                     y with faire buildings and waltestand builded on the Weaſt parte thereof, a ſtrong gate; which vnto this time retayneth the 
                     •••
                  ne of him and is called Ludgate. Finally, he dyed, leauing after hym two ſonnes Androgius and Theomantius: who not being
                     Ludſton, or London toke the name of king Lud.
                   of the age 
                     •
                  o gouerned, their vncle Caſsibelan obtayned the Crown. London toke the name of Lud, and was called Ludſton: He was buried nere to the ſame Ludgate, in a Temple which he there 
                     ••
                  ilded.
            
            
               
                  CAſsibelanus, the ſonne of Hely, after the deathe of his brother58 Iohn B
                           •
                        le. Iulius Caeſar his firſt voyage into England, Eutropiu
                           •
                        .
                   
                  Lud, was made gouernour of Brytaine, which ruled xix. yeares. In the. viij. yeare of his raigne, Iulius Caeſar co
                     •••
                  ing vnto that parte where Caleys and Boloigue

now ſtand, determined to make warre into Brytaine, whichEutropiu
                        •
                     . vntil that time remained vnfrequented and vnknown of the Romains. His quarrell was, bicauſe ye in the wars of Frāce,Caſars Commentaries. he perceyued the Frenchmen to haue much ſuccour and ayde from thence: And bycauſe he could not vnderſtand nor learn the greatneſſe or ſtate of the Ilād, neither what nations they were whiche inhabited the ſame, nor what lawes, cuſtomes, or kinde of gouernemente they vſed, nor yet what Hauens they had, able to receyue any number of ſhips, he ſent Caius Voluſenus before with a Galley, to diſcouer as muche as hée coulde, concerning thoſe matters, who within fiue dayes after retourned to Caeſar, declaring ſuch things as he had learned by coaſting alongſt the ſhore, for he durſte not for feare of the Brytaines ſtirre out of his Galley. In the meane ſpace there came Embaſſadours from many Cities of the Iſle, and deliuered him Hoſtages, with whom he ſent Comius of Arras, charging him to exhort and perſwade the reſte of the Cities and Countyes to do the like. And he himſelfe ſhortly after hauing prepared. lxxx. ſhips, ſayled into Brytaine, whereTvvo voyages of Caeſar.
                   at the firſt being wearied with an harde and ſharpe battayle, and after with ſodaine tempeſt his nauie almoſt deſtroyed: he retourned againe into Fraunce, there to winter his men.
               The next Spring (which was the yere before Chriſt. 51.) his Nauye being newe rigged and encreaſed, he paſſed the Seas againe with a greater armye, but whiles hée went towards his 
                     ••
                  imies on land, his ſhips lying at Anker, were driuen on the ſands, where they ſtacke faſt: or elſe throughe beating one againſt another, with force of the tempeſt, they were deſtroyed, ſo that. xl. were loſt, the other with muche labour were ſaued. In the meane ſpace Saeua one of Caeſars ſoldiours,Eutropius. with foure others, who before in a ſmall veſſel were conueyed to a rocke neare the Iſle, and by ebbing of the Oceā being for ſaken, a greate number of Brytaines fell on a fewe Romaines, and ſome of his companions (though but fewe) found meanes to returne by boate, but Saeua remained with out fear in ye midſt of his enimies dar
                     •
                  s; firſt with his ſpeare

he re
                     ••
                  ſted them, after with his ſword he alone foughte againſt many of them, and when he was both wearie & woū
                  ded, and had loſt his helmet and ſhielde, with two light harneſſes, he ranne to Caeſars tents, and aſked pardō of the Emperor for his ouerboldneſſe, who not onely forgaue him, but honored him with the Office of a Centurion. Upon land Caeſars horſſemen at the firſt encounter were vanquiſhed, & Laberius Durus the Tribune ſlaine in a place now called Chestō
                   wood neare vnto Rochester, (as ſaith the Chronicle of Wygmore.)Cro Wigmore.
                   At the ſecond conflict, not wtout great daunger of his men, he put the Brytaines to fight, from thence he went vnto the riuer Thamis, on ye further ſide wherof Caſsibelanus with a great multitude of people was kéeping the banks, who had ſet all the ſayde bankes, and al the ſhallow places, vnder the
                     Caſars Comen. water with ſharpe ſtakes, euery one of them as big as a mās thighe, bounde aboute with leade, and driuen ſo faſt into the bottom of the riuer, that they can neuer be remoued, (ſo ſaithBede. Aſſer. 
                  Bede, and Aſſer,) who affirme that in their times the ſayde ſtakes were eaſilye perceiued to remaine as aforeſayd. But Caſsibelanus and his Brytains not being able to reſiſt the violence and force of the Romaines, hid themſelues in woods, & with ſodaine eruptions oftentimes inuaded them: but in the
                     London ſubmitted to Caeſar.
                   meane time London their ſtrongeſt Citie ſubmitted it ſelfe, & deliuered hoſtages to Caeſar, who at their requeſt placed Mā
                     dubratius to be their gouernour, whoſe Father called Imanentius, being chiefe Lord or ruler of the Trinobants, Caſsibelane had before ſlaine, wherewith Mandubratius fled, and comming to Caeſar, not only ſubmitted hymſelf, but alſo was a great meanes (as many doe write) for Caeſar to ſubdue the reſt: yet did Caſsibelane ſende meſſengers to the foure Kings that ruled in the quarters of Kente, that with al theyr puiſſance they ſhold ſet on the Romaines that lay next thē: their names wer Cingetorex, Caruilius, Taximagulus, & Segonax, who obeying his requeſte were diſcomfited, and Cingetorex taken, wherewithal Caſsibelane being diſmayed after many loſſes, was conſtrayned to giue pledges, and to agrée that

                  Brytaine ſhoulde become tributarie to Romaines. Then Caeſar
                  
                     Iulius C
                           •
                        ſar conquering the vvorld vvas ſlain vvith bodkins. Eutropius. Iohn Lydgate. Plinie. Suetonius. The Caſtels of Douer, Cauterbury, Rocheſter & the tovver of London built. Saliſbury, Chicheſter, & Exceſter builded. like a conquerour, with a great number of priſoners ſayled into Fraunce and ſo to Rome, where after his retourne out of Brytaine, he conſecrated to Venus a ſurcotte of Brytayne Pearles, the deſire wherof partly moued him to inuade this Countrey: ſhortlye after he was by the Senate ſlaine in the Counſel houſe. Iohn Lydgate, Iohn Rouſe and others write, that Iulius Caeſar builded in this lande the Caſtels of Douer, of Canturburie, Rochester and the Towre of London, the Caſtell and towne of Caeſars Burie, taking his name after Caeſar, the which is now called Saliſburie. He alſo edifyed Caeſars Cheſter, that now is called Chichester, and the caſtel of Excester. &c
               
                  Caeſar in his Commentaries fayth, the Brytons coyne was
                     Caeſars Cōmenmentaries touching the barbarouſneſſe of Brytons. of braſſe, or elſe rings of Iron ſized at a certaine waight, in ſteade of money: they thoughte it a heynous thing to taſte a Hare, a Hen, or a Gooſe: they clothed themſelues in Lether: they dyed thēſelues with woade, which ſetting a blewiſh colour vpon them, made them more terrible to beholde in battel: they ware theyr haire long, and ſhaued all partes of their bodyes, ſauing the head and vpper lippe: they had tenne or twelue wiues a piece, common with themſelues, ſpeciallye brothers with brothers, and parentes wyth theyr children, but the iſſue that came of them was accounted his that firſte maried the mother.
            
            
               
                  Theomantius, the ſonne of Lud, and nephew to Caſsibelan,
                  37 ſucceded in the Realme of Brytaine, and raigned quietlye xxiij. yeares: he was buryed at London.
               
            
            
               
                  OCtauius Auguſtus deſiring to be like Iulius Caeſar hys34 Dion. Caſsius. 
                        •••
                     . 49. Father (for ſo he alwayes tearmed him) prepared an expedition in Brytaine, but being come forwarde into Fraunce, vnderſtanding that the Panonians lately ſubdued, rebelled, he tourned his power againſte them, and altered his minde as touching our Countrey.
            
            
               THe fourthe yere after, he opened the Temple of Ianus at25 
                  Rome, fully determining to inuade Brytaine, but when he had marched on his way, as far as Ariminum Ambaſſadors

of Brytaine met him, humbly ſuing for peace, & ſubmittingDio. 53. G
                        •
                     l
                        •••
                     u
                        •
                     . themſelues vnto his obedience and protection. Wherfore he ſtayed again to ſettle ſome troubles then raiſed in Fraunce.
               
            
            
               THe yeare following, bycauſe the couenāts betwéen hym24 and the Brytains could not be agréed vpon, he made prouiſion for a thirde expedition into thys Ile, but an actual rebellion in Biſcay and Sauoy with-helde him then alſo. ButS
                        •••
                     bo. lib. 4. ſhortly after Ambaſſadours came from Brytaine to Rome intreating for peace, ſwearing filthily in the Temple of Mars, offering giftes in the Capitoll to the Gods of the Romaines: and ſubmitted part of the Ile vnto Anguſtus. Now the Brytaines beganne firſt to pay tolles and tribute without grudging, for all wares which they traded, whiche were for that time, Iuorie boxes, tonges, ouches, & other trinckets of amber and glaſſe. And all here were ſo quiet, that one bande of ſouldiours and a fewe horſemen were ſufficiente to kepe the Ile in the Romaine poſſeſſion.
            
            
               
                  CVnobelinus the ſonne of Theomantius raigned king in14 Brytaine. xxxv. yeares, and was buried at London. In the xiiij. yeare of hys raigne Chriſte our ſauioure was borne in Bethlehem of Iuda.
               
            
            
               From this place following, the yeares from Christ his byrth are placed in the Margent.
               WHen Caeſar Auguſtus the ſeconde Emperoure, by theAnno Chriſti 1 Ex Euſebi. Paulus Oroſi. Baptiſta Platin
                        •
                     , Martinus Polon
                        ••
                     . will of GOD hadde ſtabliſhed moſte ſure peace throughe the Worlde, our redéemer Ieſu Chriſte, verye God and man, was borne in the. xlij. yeare of the raigne of Auguſtus, he began to preache the. xv. yeare of Tiberius, and ſuffered his paſſion the. xviij. yeare of the ſame Tiberius, according to the Prophecies. But here is to be noted, that the firſt yere of our Lord hath but ſeuen days, after ſome computation, for he was borne the. xxv. day of December, & the firſt of Januarie following, began the ſecond yeare.
               
                  
                  
                     GViderius, ye firſt ſon of Cunobelinus, was ordayned Kyng.21 Flores Hiſtoriarū
                      This man was valiaunte, hardie, wealthie, and truſted muche in his ſtrength. And for that he thought the Romains had their tribute wrongfullye, he of great courage denyed to pay the ſame.
                  Wherefore Tiberius the Emperour purpoſed to come hither in perſon, but death preuented him. Guiderius raygnedGeffrey Mo
                           •
                        . 23. yeares. Aruiragus, or rather (as the Brytaynes tearmeHumfrey L
                           ••
                        yd. him) Monrigus, the yongeſt ſonne of Cunobelinus, and brother of Guiderius was ordayned King of Brytaine: he ſlewG. Mon. 
                     Hamon neare to a hauē of the ſea, & threw him gobbet meale therin, it is now called South-hampton. He ſtrēgthned the CaſtellC
                           •
                        r
                           •
                        . Douer. of Douer, and alſo the Caſtle of Richbourgh, neare vnto Sandwich in Kent. He raigned. xxviij. yeres, and was buried at Gloucester.
                  
               
               
                  ALbeit the Brytaine Hiſtorie doth here place Aruiragus, yet40 it is probable yt 
                     Cunobelinus as yet liued, for about, 40, yeares after Chriſt: Admimus the ſonne of Cunobeline baniſhedSuetonius. out of Brytaine by his Father, was receiued into protection by Caius Caligula the fourth Emperor, who was thē
                     Dio. lib▪ 59. ſet forwarde with greate preparation againſte Brytaine, but when he came into the partes of Holland againſt Norffolke hée ſtayed, writing vaunting letters to ye Senate, that al Brytain was yéelded vnto him, bycauſe Admimus had ſo done. AfterwardeThe ridiculo 
                           ••
                         expedition of Caligula into Brytaine.
                      as though he would immediately fight a fielde, he caſt his men into battayles, and ſquadrons vppon the ſea coaſte, diſpoſing all hys Engines in moſt warlike manner (no man knowing what he ment): this done he hymſelfe in a Gallye launched into the ſea, and immediately returning, he cauſed the Trumpets to ſound to battayle, & ſodainly commaunded them to gather cockles and muſcle ſhelles, and therewith to fill theyr helmets, ſaying they were ſpoyles due to the Capitoll, and in theſe ſpoyles he greatlie triumphed, as thoughe he had ſubdued the Ocean. He rewarded his ſouldiours, and retourned to Rome, after he had built a hygh watche Towre in token of his victorie againſt the ſea, the ruines wherof are

great remaining in Holland, but ouerflowed by the water, and is to thys daye called the Brytons houſe, in remembrance of this ridiculous expedition againſt Brytaine, by the perſuaſion
                        Brytaine houſe in Holland.
                      of Bericus baniſhed out of Brytaine.
                  
               
               
                  
                     CLaudius the Emperoure diſpatched Aulus Plantius wyth45 an army into Brytaine, wher after dinerſe conflicts whē he had receyued part of the Bodunni into hys tuition▪ and hadde ſlaine Cataracus and Togodumus ſonnes of Cunobeline, & therby had made the Brytains more eagre to reuēge, he ſent for Claudius himſelfe, who with great preparation and Elephants,Dio. Suetonius. came into Brytanne to his army, then encamped nere the Thames, with which he paſſed ouer into Eſſex, fought with the Brytanies, obtained the victorie, tooke the chiefe Cittye of Cunobeline, and all weapons from the Brytaynes, and ſo retourned to Rome the ſirthe month after he ſette forth from thence, where hée triumphed, ſurnaming hys ſonne Brytanicus: to whiche triumphe he permitted not onely the preſidents of prouinces, but alſo certayn baniſhed priſoners to repayre to Rome: and amidſt the ſpoyles taken from the Brytains, he fixed on the top of hys Pallace a crown of gold beſet with ſtemmes and foreparts of ſhippes, in token he had vanquiſhed the Brytiſh Ocean. He behaued himſelfe verye courteouſly towards diuerſe of his friendes, in ſo muche that when Plantius (a notable man) who in his voyage whych he made into Brytaine atchieued diuers notable actes, and ſhold triumph for the ſame, the Emperour himſelfe accompanied him, and (the vſe being ſuche that with his triumph he ſhold go vp into the Capitoll) Claudius gaue him the preheminence▪ and went on the left hand.
                  At this time Veſpatian who was after Emperor, was ſent by Claudius into Brytain, wher he fought 30 times with the Brytaines, ſubdued to the Romane Empire two worthy nations, aboue 20. townes, and the Ile of Wight.
                  
               
               
                  
                     OStorius was appointed lieuetenaunt in Brytaine for the50 
                     Romans who at his firſt entry in the beginning of Winter aſſayleth the Brytaines, & purpoſeth to pen them vp and

include thē with riuers & fortificatiōs, wherfore ye 
                     Ioeni made an inſurrectiō, which whē he had pacified wt ſome ſlaughter, he marched againſt ye 
                     Gangi, for raging al the Cuntries as he paſſed, but was forced by new tumults to tourne from them againſt ye 
                     Brigants, whō with ſome ſlaughter, & promiſe of pardon, he pacified. Thē he made prouiſiō againſt ye 
                     Silures which inhabited South-wales, bearing thēſelues bold vpon ye puiſſāce of Caratacus a valiant Brytain, who being ſkilful of y• Countrey, remoued ye war into Shropſhire, wher he fortified amōgſt craggie mountaynes a place ſtrong by ſituation, where neuertheleſſe the Romanes preuayled. The wiſe daughter, and brethren of Caratacus were taken, and he flying to Cartiſmā
                        dua a q. ruling in Yorkſhire, was by hir deliuered captiue to his enemies. ix. yeares after the warres began, who ſending him to Rome, was ther in open aſſembly brought before Claudius, with his wife, daughter, brethren, and friendes, and ſuch ſpoyles as had bin taken frō him, wher he (nothing diſmayed in ſpirit or countenance,) ſpake after this ſort to Claudius:
                  
                  If my moderation of proſperous ſucceſſes had bin correſpondēt to my ſtate and nobilitie, I might haue come to this Citie, rather a friende than a Captaine: neyther you haue diſdayned to admit me into league, being deſcended of noble parentage, and ſoueraigne ouer many nations. This preſent ſtate of mine, as it is villanous toward me, ſo it is honorable to you. I had horſſe, men, money, munition, & what wonder is there, if I had loſt them vnwillingly? For if you will rule and raigne ouer all, of neceſſitie all muſt come into ſlauerie: if I had yéelded at the firſt, neyther my fortune nor thy glorie had bin renoumed, & the obliuion of me had enſued immediately after my execution: but if you ſaue my life, it ſhall be an euerlaſting example of your clemency. At theſe words Claudius remitted his offence, graunted him life, & the Senate adiudgedIn Oſtorius time certaine Cities vvere giuen to Cagidunus a Brytish king, and a Colonie of Romanes vvas placed here. 
                     Oſtorius worthy to triumph: but in the mean time the inhabitaunts of South-wales, to reuenge Caratacus captiuitie intercepted & diſcomfited certain bands of ye Romans, amidſt which new wars, Oſtorius tired we trauel, departed this life.
               
               
                  
                  
                     CLaudius ſent Didius to ſupply the place of Oſtorius nowe52 
                           •
                        ac
                           ••
                        us. 3. H
                           •
                        ſto. departed, but in the mean time ye 
                     Silures fought fortunatly againſt the legions which was vnder the conduct of Manlius Valens. In this time war brake out betwéene Cartiſmanda Q▪ of the Brigants, & Venutius hir huſband, whom ſhe refuſed, & matched hir ſelf with Vellocatus his Eſquire: wherevpon Venutius fauored of the people, aſſayled hir territory, and ſhe ſuccoured by ye Romains, after ſhe had intercepted by trechery Venutius brother & allies, fought with him. Wher after a ſharp fight, ſhe by the ayde of ye Romaines, preuayled, as alſo Caeſius Naſica did wt his legion againſt the Brytans in an other place: for Didius vſed others in theſe matters, bicauſe he was aged, & onely kept y• which others had heretofore conquered.
               
               
                  
                     CLaudius being now poyſned by Agrippina his wife, Nero
                     61 hir ſon obteyned ye Romain▪ Empire▪ & about the. 7. yeare of his raigne Verennus was appointed lieutenant here, who died within ye firſt yere of his gouernmēt, ſaying y• he would haue ſubdued prouinces, had he ſuruiued but. ij. yeares, but about this time great ſlaughter was here of the Romaines.
               
               
                  
                     SVetonius Paulinus was thē ſent hither, who at his arriual purpoſing to ſubdue Angleſey, whither many Brytains had62 we drawne thēſelues, he inveſſels wt flat kéeles ferried ouer his footmē, bringing ouer his horſemē by ſome fourdes, wher as on ye ſhores ſtood cloſely togither great nūbers of Brytās, & among thē women gadding vp & down frantickly in mourning wéedes, their haire hanging about their ears, & ſhaking firebrāds: ye 
                     Druydes alſo caſting vp their hāds toward heauē thundred out cruel execrations, wt which vncomely ſightes ye Romaines at firſt ſtoode diſmayed, but after encouraged by y•
                     Dion. Caſstus. Generals perſwaſion▪ they bruſt in among thē, made greate ſlaughter, got ye poſſeſſion of ye Ile, & felled down ye woods▪ cō
                     ſecrated to ſuperſticious vſes: two Citties belōging to y• Romains wer takē. 80▪000. of their people ſlaine, & the whole Ilād reuolted, & to the Romanes reproch, the ſlaughter was cō
                     mitted by a womā, being foretold thē by many ſtrange ſignes & tokēs. For in y• court was heard a noiſe wt much ſlaughter.

In the Theatre a greate tumulte and muche wondering, when there was no man ther, that either ſpake or mourned. Beſides, in the riuer of Thames certaine houſes or buildings were ſéen. The Image of the goddeſſe Victoria in the Temple of Camulodunum tourned hir backe as though ſhe had yéelded to hyr enimies: the women ranne as madde here and there, ſaying, and ſinging, Deſtruction is at hande.
                  Finally, betwixt the Iland & Fraunce, the Ocean ſea appeared as it flowed with bloud. The occaſiō of this war was a cōfiſcation of the Brytains goods, which being remitted by Claudius the Emperoure, Decianus Catus then Procurator of the Ile, ſaide that it ought to haue bene renued. To this cauſe was added, that wheras (againſt theyr wils Seneca had lent them fourtie Sestercies vpon great vſurie) he now wyth greate force and all kinde of violence compelled them to paye all the whole ſumme at one payment, and alſo perſuaded them to make warre on the Romaines.
                  
                     Bunduica of Brytaine, a woman of noble byrth, not onely wyth muche honour ruled amongſt them, but alſo was the ſoueraigne in theyr wars, & had in déed a ſtomack more mā
                     ly than womanlike: who hauing gotten togyther an armye of 120000. men, gotte hir vpon hyr ſeate made of Marriſhe turues, after the manner of the Romaines, and being a tall woman, of comely ſhape, and ſeuere countenāce, ſharp voice, with yealowe haire hanging downe to hyr ſkyrtes, (Ponticus Virunius ſaith to hir thyghes) ſhe ware a great chayne ofPonticus Virunius golde, and hadde on hyr backe a coate of ſundrye colours, & a playted Kirtle. Whē ſhe was thus apparelled, and had in hir hands a gret ſpeare, ſhe ſpake vnto them to this effect.
                  Firſt ſhe commended libertie, ſhewing them, how pouertie wyth libertie, was farre better than great riches in miſerie and bondage: on the other ſide, wyth great eloquence ſhée declared the miſchiefes and calamities they ſuffered at the handes of the Romaines, who exactyng Tributes of paymentes, ſo oppreſſed them, that muche better it were once to dye, than long to lyue in ſuche extreame ſlauerie.
                  
                     Secondly, ſhe reproued them, for not expelling their enimies, as their forefathers had done Iulius Caeſar, Claudius, and Caligula: And againe, ſhe praiſed them for their preſent readineſſe to helpe hir, and recouer their auntient ſtate.
                  Thirdly, ſhe diſabled the Romaines, for that they were fewe, combred with armoure, and ſo faint of courage, that they had rather fight a far off, than encounter with them by hand ſtrokes: ſhe cōmended the Brytaines, to be more in nū
                     ber, of greater valor, and farre more able to abide hunger, colde, thirſte, raine, winde, heate, &c. ſhée added the vantage of the place, as being at home, where the Wooddes and Ryuers, Lakes, and all other things were well knowne to euery one of them.
                  Laſtly, ſhe exhorted them to ſhewe themſelues as Dogs and Wolues among fearefull Hares and Foxes: wherewithall, ſhe let out of hir lap a quicke Hare, thereby to learn the euent of hir enterprice. The Hare hauing a proſperous paſſage, all the multitude gaue a greate ſhowte, and Bunduica clapping hir handes, gaue thankes to hir Gods, that ſhe ruled not the Romaines, as did Nero, (who, though hée were a man, yet was in déede but a woman, for that he ſangVVhat the Brytaines vveregiuen to. and playde on the Harpe) but the Brytans, who eſtéemed it better to be Warriours than Ploughmen, who, as they had all things in common, ſo had they both wiues and children, and that hauing a kingdome amongeſt ſuche a kinde of people, ſhe prayed their deuine aydes agaynſte a ſpitefull and wicked kinde of men, if they were to be called men, who vſedNiceneſſe of the Romaine
                           •
                        . hote bathes, dainty fare, wine, ointmentes, laye in ſofte beds, and were vaſſalles to ſuch a wanton Minſtrel as their Emperor Nero was.
                  
                     Bunduica hauing ſpoken theſe and ſuche like amongſt hir people, with all hir hoſte ſhe ſette forward agaynſte the Romains, who at that time were without head or gouernor, for that Paulinus was gone with his army into Angleſey, (as is before reherſed,) which is an Iland nere Brytaine, by meanes whereof Bunduica tooke two of their Cities, and committed

the notable ſlaughter before remembred.
                  She exerciſed all kinde of crueltie on ſuche men as ſhée tooke. As for the noble women that ſhe gat, ſhe hanged them vppe, and cutte off their paps, and ſewed them to their mouthes: beſides this, ſhe ſtretching their bodies oute at length, thruſte ſharpe ſtakes cleane throughe them: al which things were done in deſpighte, when they ſacrificed and feaſted in their Templas, but ſpecially in the woodde called Andates.
                  
                  
                     Paulinus, who had now ſubdued Angleſey, hearyng of the foreſaide ſlaughter, returned to Brytaine, yet woulde hée not aduenture the fortune of battaile with them, fearing theyr number, but when he wanted victual, and that his enimies approched, he was compelled to abide the battell Bunduica▪
                      who had in hir army 230000. men, was hir ſelfe placed in a Chariot, and ordered hir men at length: but Paulinus coulde not ſtretche his company ſo long, for that they were not of any ſuche number, but at length he deuided his army into thrée partes, ſo that at one time they mighte fighte in ſundry places, exhorting them not to be abaſhed at the multitude of their enimies, for bothe they and their forefathers, hadde wyth leſſe number atchieued greater matters, and gotten greater victories. Adding, that now was the time to play the men, to enioy that in quiet, which before their aunceſtours had woon, and recouer that whiche they had loſte, or elſe to liue for euer in miſery and ſhame. Againe, he ſhewed what crueltie their eyes had ſéene, by thoſe barbarous people, to ſuche as they had ouercome, exhorting them in reuenge thereof to fighte manfully, and there was no doubte but the Gods (who were alwayes fauourable to ſuch as had ſuffered crueltie) woulde helpe them: and better it were to die fighting valiantly, than with reproche to be taken, and die in their enimies handes like Dogges. Finally, (ſayeth he) whether we liue or dye, Brytaine ſhal be ours, for, though the other Romaines loſe it, yet ſhall our bones continually kéep it. When he hadde thus ſpoken, the ſigne of the battel was giuen, and ech part prepareth himſelfe: the Brytaines

with great and ſtrange noiſe, the Romaines in ſilence came to neare, that they might throwe their dartes to them: and perceiuing their enimies to approche, with greate violence, ruſhed in amongeſt them, and brake their āraye: but after being compaſſed with the multitude of their enimies, the battel waxed doubtfull. The lighte harneſſed men beganne to ſmite eache other, and thoſe of heauy armoure togither with the horſemen encountred, and the Romaine Archers foughte againſte the Britiſhe Chariots. They whiche foughte withoute breaſt-plates, were ſlaine with Dartes. This encounter was made in thrée ſeueral places, and was foughte with greate courage on bothe ſides. At the laſte the Romaines departed Conquerours, many were ſlaine in the battaile, and many were taken. Greate numbers whych eſcaped, prepared to fight againe, but in the meane ſpace Bunduica died of a diſſeaſe which ſhe had, and they mourned, and buried hir verye honorablye. After, thoſe that remayned were eaſily ouercome and diſperſed.
                  
                     Tacitus ſaith, that Praſutagus King of the Iceni, a PrinceCorneli
                           ••
                         Tacitu
                           •
                        . of greate wealth, appointed, that Caeſar and his owne twoo daughters ſhoulde inherite his landes, hereby thinking all his life to be more quiet: and being deceaſſed, his wife and daughters ſhoulde be the more ſafer by meanes of ſuch protection, but it fell oute farre otherwiſe, for the Centurions gat his Realme, theyr ſeruauntes ſpoyled hys houſe, beat hys wife, and deflowred his daughters: beſides, the chiefeſt men of his lande were diſplaced of their inheritaunces, and handled extremely. In reuenge whereof, Bunduica rayſed the warre, and committed the ſlaughter before remembred, and at laſte hir army once ouerthrowne by Paulinus, being afraid to fall into hir enimies hands, ſhe poiſoned hir ſelfe.
                  
                     Policletus then a ſeruannt of Nero, was ſente hither to ſuruey the ſtate of Brytaine, who diſcharged Paulinus Suetonius of the gouernement.
               
               
                  
                  
                     PEtronius Turpilianus was ſent into Brytaine as a manne64 Petronius Turpilianus. eaſie to be entreated, and being not altogither acquainted with offences of the enimies, was the readier to receiue thē to grace: who ſetting matters in their former ſtaye, and attempting no further, deliuered the Prouince vnto Trebellius Maximus. Trebellius being both faint-harted and too ſluggiſhe, and alſo vtterly vnacquainted with experimentes of armes, ruled the prouince▪ with a certaine mildeneſſe of gouernement. Nowe had the barbarous people alſo learned to wincke at inticing vices, and the ciuil warres of the Romaines then happening, was a cloake to his cowardiſe: but there preſentlye aroſe diſcorde betwéene Roſcius and Caelius, legates of the. xx. legion, when the ſouldiors (accuſtomed to be employed in expeditions) gaue themſelues to laſciuiouſneſſe: wherevppon Trebellius tooke his flighte, and hid hys head, to auoyde the furie of the army, and in moſte baſe and beaſtly maner, gouerned (as it were) by entreatie, ſo as they mighte ſéeme to haue compounded, that the ſouldiours ſhoulde liue in all libertie, and the Generall at hys ſafetie. This time for a yeare and halfe there was deadly ciuil war amōg the Romaines for the Empire, betwéen Galba, Otho, and Vitelius.
                  
               
               
                  
                     VEctius Volanus, then was ſent hither by Vitelius, he did69 Vectius Volanus. not vſe any diſcipline or correctiō in Brytaine, ſo as there continued the like ſlouth and cowardiſe in the ſouldioures, toward their enimyes, and the Campe ſtill as full of wantonneſſe, ſauing that Volanus was a good and milde man, and thereby made himſelfe beloued where hée ſhoulde haue béene feared. In this time Vitelius aduaunced many Souldioures in the Brytaine legions, and Herdonius Flaccus broughte vnto hym 80000. choſen men of warre oute ofTacitus. 
                     Brytaine. The Brytans ſéeing ye Romaines thus encombred with ciuil war, began to trouble them, wherefore Volanus would ſend no ſuccour to Vitelius at his commaundement, when Veſpaſian warred againſte him for the Empire, and all the Brytaines fauored Veſpaſian.
                  
               
               
                  
                  WHen as (with the reſt of the world) Veſpaſian had recouered70 
                     Brytaine, thē were there placed great Captaines, and notable armies, the enemyes hope abated, and Petilius Cerealis broughte greate feare vppon the Brytaines. ThePetilius Cerealis. Citie of the Brigantes (which was accounted one of the greateſt of the lande) beyng by hym aſſayled, he hadde manye encountres, and ſome not withoute ſlaughter, whereby hée eyther conquered or aſſayled a greate part of their country.
                  
                     Iulius Frontinus a man as worthye and valiaunt as wasIulius Frontinus poſſible, tooke then the charge vpon him, & ſubdued the nation of the Silures, being both valiant & warlike notwithſtanding the valor of the enemy and difficulties of the places.
                  This was the ſtate of Brytaine, and courſe of the warres, whych Agricola found arriuing in the middeſt of Sommer,Iulius Agricola. the Souldiors euen then beginning to retire to their ſtrengthes, and the enimye ſearching for his moſt aduantage.
                  The Citie of the Ordouices fewe dayes before hys arriuall almoſte wholly defeated a company lying vppon their bordures. This beginning ſtirred vp the prouince, ſeruing for an example to them, who coueted the warres, and yet deſired to ſée what was in their newe Gouernor. Agricola, although the Sommer were nowe well ſpent, the bandes diſperſed all aboute the prouince, the ſouldiours had determined to reſte for that yeare, the time being late and incommodious to commence the warre, thinking it woulde be better to manne the péeces moſte ſuſpected: yet he determined neuertheleſſe to preuent daunger, and gathering togither the Standards of the Legions, with a few of his forraine aides, for that the Ordouices durſt not take the field, marched foorth agaynſte them hymſelfe in the vauwarde of his armye, that others might take like courage in the ſame danger, and put almoſte that whole nation to the ſworde: then followyng hys good ſucceſſe, he inuaded Angleſey, (whiche Suetonius had before attempted) cauſing certaine Brytaines that ſerued him, and knewe the ſhallows and maner of ſwimming, wyth horſe and harneſſe to paſſe ouer into the Iſle on a ſodaine,

wherewith the inhabitauntes were ſo amazed (whoTacitus: feared nothing bycauſe they ſawe no nauie) that they ſubmitted the Ile vnto him, immediately. Nowe hauing ſome quietneſſe, and perceyuing that warre would little preuaile againſte the Brytaines, if they were iniuriouſlye handled, he purpoſed to cut off al cauſes of quarrel, and firſt reforming his owne familie, did nothing partially, onely reſpected the vertue of men, looſened tributes, and behaued himſefe moſte honourably. And thus muche the firſte yeare.
                  When the Sommer beganne, he aſſembled his armies, trayned his ſouldioures, forrayed the enimies Countries with ſodaine inuaſions to their greate feare, and yet ſo fauorably, as many Countries willingly yéelded vnto him, and ſuffered Caſtelles to be builte among them. The Winter following he ſpente in ciuill adminiſtration, counſayling the people priuately, and helping them publikely, to builde houſes, Temples, and Courte houſes. He procured noble mens children to ſtudy liberall Sciences, and then beganne the Brytaines to conforme themſelues to Romaine faſhions and attyre.
                  The thirde yeare he diſcouered people in the Northe hitherto vnknowne, euen as farre as Tau, terrifying the people, and placing fortreſſes moſte wiſely to the annoyaunce of the enimie,
                  The fourth Sommer he employed getting thoſe Countries whiche hitherto he had paſſed throughe, euen to the Edenborough Frith, and Cluid, the narrowe ſpace betwéene the whych waters he fortified.
                  The fifth yeare by Sea he diſcouered and vanquiſhed further nations in the North, and placed garriſons in the coaſt towarde Irelande, wherevnto he alſo aſpired, and to that end reteyned an Iriſh Prince with him, that was driuen oute of his Country by ciuil diſſention.
                  But in the Sommer whiche beganne the ſixt yere of hys gouernement, he ſearched the Hauens by a nauie for that purpoſe ſent to the Sea, fearing leaſte all thoſe nations beyonde

had vnited themſelues and kept the paſſages by land: but afterward he marched forward, his nauie coaſting with his army by land, ſo as ſometime in the ſame Campe, he had horſemen, footemen, and Seamen, lodged togither. It was reported by ſuche as were taken priſoners, that the ſighte of the nauie much aſtonied the Brytaines as men from whom all refuge was cutte off, the ſecrets of their Seas being diſcouered, wherefore determining to trie it with hand blowes the inhabitantes of Calidonia with greate preparation, although the reporte thereof were greater (as it often hapneth in vnknowne matters,) of their own accorde, aſſayled ſome Caſtelles, and ſéeyng themſelues rather to bée aſſaylantes than defendauntes, putte the Romaines in ſome doubte: wherevpon the 
                        •
                     owards pretending pollicie, aduiſed to retire on this ſide Bodotria, rather than to be driuen thereto by force, when as in the meane while, Agricola knowing that the enimye woulde charge hym in ſeuerall troupes and companyes, and fearing to bée ouermatched and couped in wyth number, or deceyued by the ignoraunce of the place, diuided his army into thrée battailes, and ſo marched forwarde: whiche order marked by hys enimyes, made them alter their purpoſe, and in the night killing the watch, brake in vpon the ninth legion, halfe aſléepe and halfe afrighted, which (as they tooke it) was the weakeſt, & ſo the fighte continued within the Camp til it was day light, at which time the Romaines began to gather courage, and the Brytaines were diſcomfited, ſo as, hadde it not bene for the woodes and bogges, that victorie had ended the whole ſtrife, after which battaile the Romain ſouldiors grew to be of hautie corage, crying out to pierce the country of Calidonia, that they might finde oute the vttermoſte portes and boundes of Brytaine. The Romaynes on the other ſide, aſcribing the prayſe of this victorie, not to the proweſſe of the Romaine ſouldioure, but to Fortune, and the wilineſſe of their Capitaine, vſed al meanes poſſible, to hearten vppe and arme their Youth: beſtowing their wiues and children in place
                        •
                     
                     
of ſafegarde, and by ſacrifices and holy aſſemblyes vnite all their Cities togither, vpon theſe reſolutions they remoued.
                  In the beginning of the next Sommer which was y•. viij. yere of his charge, Agricola ſeding his fléet before him, which often put a land and ſpoyled the Countreys, thereby cauſing a great and vncertaine feare: himſelfe with a picked army, whervnto he added of the valianteſt Brytains, came to y• mountain Grampius, whereon his enimies had encamped, (for the Brytaines nothing quailed by the ſucceſſe of the former encounter,) and expecting nothyng but a reuenge, or bondage, learning at length, that common daunger is only to be reſiſted with common conſent, by leagues and embaſſages hadde ſtirred vppe the mindes of all the Cities aboute. Nowe were there to be ſéene in armes thirtie thouſande and vpwarde, vnto whiche number, the Youth, and all ſuch as were of ſtrong and luſtie yeares, euery man bearing his tokens of prayſe about him, continually repayred from al ſides. When amongeſt manye other Capitaines, Calgacus a man bothe in nobilitie and valor aboue the reſt, ſpake to the aſſembly in this manner: As often as I behold the cauſes of this warre, and oure neceſſitie, my minde gyueth me greate hope, that this day and youre mutuall conſent ſhal be the beginning of libertie to all Brytaine, for, euerye one of you hauing tryed ſeruitude, and hauing no other land nor ſea, whiche can ſaue vs (the Romaines nauie being at our elbowes) the verye warre and weapons whyche are the honoure of the worthy, muſte be the onelye ſafetie of the faint-harted. With theſe and manye ſuche reaſons drawne from the calamitie of their future ſeruitude, the pride & tirā
                     ny of their Gouernoures, the fickle friendſhip of the ſtrangers, ſeruing in their enimies Campe, ready to change vpon anye highe occaſion, and the preſente remedye of all miſery, whyche, as he ſayde in the beginning, was onely valiancie, he ſo ſtirred vp all mens mindes, that they applauded his Oration after theyr manner, with ſongs and diuers kinde of noyſes. This Oration being ended, as alſo Agricola
                     
hys ſpéeche to hys Souldioures, the twoo armies beganne to encounte
                        •
                     
                     ▪ 
                     Agricola placed hys battayles in this order: he made his mayne battayle of the ſtraungers (his aydes) whiche were in number▪ viij. thouſand, on eche ſide wherof, for wings he placed hys horſſemen to the number of thrée thouſande, and his legions he cauſed to guard the trenches of his Campe, that if it were poſſible, the victorie mighte be gained without the ſheading of Romaine bloude, or if his maine battel were broken, they might be gathered againe, and the fighte reſtored by hys legions. The battaile of the Brytaines (to terrify their enimies, as alſo to make their braueſt ſhew,) ſtode on higher ground, ſo as their vawarde beyng come vppon the playne, the reſte were on the foote of the hill, their Chariots, in the meane tyme, galloping vp and downe the fielde, making greate ſhowtes and cries. Then Agricola perceyuing the number of his enimes to bée greater than his owne, and fearing to be charged bothe on the face and 
                        •
                     lanke of his battayle at one time, and that manye thoughte neceſſary to haue the legions aduannced forwarde, remayned notwythſtanding, firme in his firſte reſolution, cauſing his battaile to be ſomewhat drawn in lengthe, himſelfe alighted from his horſe, and ſtoode on foote before his Standerdes. The firſt fighte was with ſhotte of Arrowes and Dar
                        •
                     es, during whiche time, the Brytaines, both ſkilfully and couragiouſlye with their huge Swordes & ſmall Bucklers, eyther bare or brake the Romaines ſhotte, and anſwered them with an infinite number of the like, vntill Agricola was perſwaded by bandes of Holanders, and Brabanders, that the matter mighte be broughte to ſwordes and hand-ſtrokes, whiche kinde of fight they 
                        ••
                     re acquainted withall, by long haunting the warres, and the ſame was very incommodious for their enjuries, bearing but ſmall ſhieldes, and vnmeaſurable Swordes: For the pointleſſe Swords of the Brytaynes, were vnfi
                        •
                     te for a throng, and where they wanted roomth. Wherefore the Holanders ſtrake thicke togither, and thruſt them ouer the Bucklers, wounding

them in the faces, and hauyng broken that battell, paſſed forward towarde them whiche kepte the hill, whiche ſéene by the reſte of the Romaine bandes, they partelye moued by enuye of the others glorye, and partelye by heat
                        •
                      of their owne courages, cutte in péeces thoſe that they firſte encountred, leauing notwythſtanding, ſome halfe deade, and others not touched, for haſte, to obtaine a perfecte victorie. In the meane whyle, the troupes of the Brytaine horſemenne, dydde take their flighte, but the Chariots putte themſelues péece-meale among the foote bandes, whyche kinde of fighte, (at firſte) ſéemed ſomewhat terrible to their enimies, but it long ſerued not their tournes, being aſſayled wyth a thicke preaſe of their ennimyes, and the grounde not commodious for the Chariots, nor their ryders all of the beſte. So as at the laſte, theyr Chariot horſes, courſing vppe and downe the field without guiders, ouer-ran manye of their owne company, as they fled for feare from one place to another. The Brytaines, whiche al this while kepte the hill, & came not to ye fight, making little reconing of the ſmal number of the Romaines, beganne by little and little to deſcend, entending to hem them in, in the middeſt of their conqueſt, which ſurely they had done, if Agricola, ſuſpecting the ſame, hadde not diſpatched foure companies of horſemen (whiche he kept for all ſodaines) to encounter with them, who, the more fiercely they aſſayled, ſo much the more ſharply repulſed them, and ſent them to flight: wherevpon the deuiſe of the Brytaines turned to their owne harme. Moreouer, by Agricola his cōmandement the wings of horſemen were taken from the front of his battel, & were made to charge vpon the battel of his enimies, ſtanding ouer againſt them. Then might you beholde in the open field, a gréeuous and lamentable ſpectacle, ſome folowed the chace, ſome tooke priſoners, and after killed them to take others. Now the enimies as euery one thoughte beſte, fledde, ſome in heapes and armed

fledde from a ſmaller number: other, thoughe vnarmed, tarryed and were ſlaine: euery where laye weapons, 
                        ••
                     rcaſſes, and lymmes, out of the ground all bloudy: ſometime the vanquiſhed approching neare to Woodes, woulde make hed, and entrap the héedleſſe followers, ſo as, if Agricola hadde not cauſed certayne luſty bandes in the manner of a ſearch, and alſo diuers horſemen▪ leauing their horſe where the Wooddes were thicke, and other on horſebacke, where the Wóoddes would ſuffer, to raunge them all aboute, there might haue béen ſome detriment receiued by too much hardineſſe▪ But when the Brytaines ſawe themſelues purſued in order of battaile, they tooke againe their flight, not in companies, as before, nor tarrying one for an other, but here and there, euen as men glad to eſcape, ſought long, and by wayes. Night & wearineſſe of ſlaughter ended the chaſe. There were ſlaine of the Brytaines about tenne thouſand: of the Romaine army, thrée hundred and fortie, among whome Aulus Atticus, Capitaine of aband, whom the heat of his youth, and corage of his horſe broughte into the hands of his enimies. That night the victors made mery wyth the ſpoyle, but the Brytaines wandering vppe and downe, men and women lamenting togither, reléeued, and fetcht awaye their hurte men, aſſembled togither the whole, forſooke their houſes, and for anger ſette fire on them, chooſing themſelues lurking places, which ſtraite they forſooke againe▪ ſometime▪ conceyuing good hope, whyche ſtraighte waye quayled agayne: and ſome were knowen to kyll theyr wyues and chyldren, as thoughe they hadde therein taken compaſſion vppon them▪ The nexte daye made the victorie more manifeſt, in which there was nothing but ſilence, the hilles being then forſaken, and alſo the houſes ſmoking a far off.
                  
                     Agricola ſendyng abroade his eſpialles, coulde finde no ennimye to make 
                        •
                     ed, wherefore Sommer being too farre ſpente to procéede any further in the warre, he hadde his Souldioures into the coaſtes of the Horest
                           •
                        
                        ▪
                      and there

taking hoſtages, cauſed his nauie to coaſte aboute Brytaine, whiche at laſte arriued at the Hauen called▪ 
                     Trutulenſis, afterwarde hauing beſtowed his ſouldioures in their wintering places▪ departed Brytaine, and lefte the prouince in quiet to his ſucceſſor.
                  Diuers ſ
                        •
                     uthours affirme, that about this time, the GoſpellFirſte Chriſtians in Brytaine. of Chriſte our ſauiour was firſt preached in this Iland. Nicephorus a Gréek Author, in his ſecond book the. 40. Chahiter,Nicephorus. hath as foloweth. Simon borne in Cana Galilei, who for his feruent affection to his Maiſter, & the greate zeale hée tooke by al meanes to the Goſpell, was ſurnamed Zelotes, he hauing receyued the holy Ghoſte from abone▪ trauayled through
                        •
                      
                     Aegip
                           •
                        
                      and Affr
                           •
                        k
                           •
                        
                        ▪
                      then through Mauritania and all Lybia, preaching the Goſpell. And the ſame Doctrine he brought to the Occidentall ſea, & the Iles called Brytani
                           •
                        , &c. And in the third Booke the firſt Chap. he ſaith. The holy Apoſtles (like as we haue declared already) béeyng diſperſed throughout the whole earth, did diuide the prouinces amongeſt them by lot, to preach the Goſpel in▪ 
                     Peter vndoubtedly firſt at Hieruſalem, then in Galatia, By
                           ••
                        inia, with the higher Aſia, Capadocia, and all Italie, taught the Goſpell: Iohn in Aſi
                           •
                        
                        ▪
                      who ended his life there: To Andrew fel the Prouinces on the co
                        ••••
                      of 
                        〈…〉
                      all Scythia, Byzans, Ma
                           •
                        edonia, and the 
                        〈…〉
                      of Greece: Thomas
                      amongſt the Parthians▪ Indians, 
                     
                        •••
                      the 
                        〈…〉
                      of Tap
                           ••
                        b
                           ••
                        
                      did publiſhe the Goſpell: Another choſe Aegipt and Lybia: another the vttermoſte coaſtes of the Ocean, with the Iles of Brytaine, &c. Do
                           •
                        otheus wryteth thus▪ 
                     Simon Zelotes paſſing through Mauritania, &Do
                           •
                        otheus. 
                     Affrica preached Chriſt, at length was crucified, ſlaine and buried in Brytaine▪
                      Alſo he ſaith, A
                           •••••
                        bulus, whom ye Apo
                     
                        ••
                     le to the Rom. remēbe
                        •
                     th, was ma
                        •
                     e
                        •
                     a Biſhop in Brytaine▪ 
                        George Maior
                      writeth in a preface, that immediately after Chriſts r
                        •
                     ſurrection vnder Claudius the Emperor, the light of y• Goſpel wa
                        •
                      
                     
                        •••
                     dled in Brytaine by Ioſeph of A
                           •••••
                        hia that bl
                        ••
                     ed the body of Chriſte. 
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                      writing againſt the Jewes of thoſe times▪ ſayth▪ The Brytaines inhabitāts

of places vnknown to the Romaines, yet did obey and were ſubiect to the kyngdomes of Chriſt. William of Malmeſbury,
                     Antiquities of Gla
                           •
                        tenb
                           •
                        r
                           •
                        . Freculphus.
                      in his Book of the Antiquities of Glastenburie, alleageth Freculphus to wryte in his ſecond Book and fourth Chapter, as followeth: Philip the Apoſtle, preaching the worde of God in Gaule (nowe called Fraunce) choſe oute. xij. amongeſt his Diſciples, whome hée ſent into Brytaine to preache the word of life, and vpon euery one of them, he moſt deuoutly ſtretched out his right hande: ouer theſe he appointed for chiefe, his deare friende Ioſeph of Aramathie, that buried our Lord.Glaſtenbury firſt Church of Chriſtians in Brytaine. Theſe (ſaieth Iohn Capgraue, who alleageth Melkin and Merlin) came into this lande the yeare of Chriſtes incarnation, 63. in the tyme of Aruiragus, who gaue to them the Ile of Aualon, where they builded an Oratorie of wrythen
                        Iohn Capgraue. Melkin and Merlin. wandes, and after there were buryed: whiche place beyng ſince encreaſed, and newly builded by diuers Princes, was named Glastenburie. For confirmation whereof, Kyng HenryChart
                           •
                         Regi
                           •
                        . the ſecond hauing diligently peruſed the Priuileges and Charters, which he cauſed to be preſented and read, not only of William the firſt, of William the ſeconde, and Henry the firſt his Grandfather: but alſo the Charters of the Princes his predeceſſours, of more antient time, to wéete, of Edgar, Edmond, Edward, Elfred, Bringwalthius, Kenthwin, Baldred, Ina, Arthur, and that noble man Cudred, and many other Chriſtian Kings beſide, alſo of Kenewalla, ſometyme a Heathen and Pagan Kyng, concerning the houſe of Glaſtenburie▪
                      found, that in ſome of thoſe Charters it is called the Mother of Saintes, of ſome other, the Graue of the Saints, and that the ſayde place was firſte builded euen by the very Diſciples of Chriſte themſelues, and by them dedicated to oure Lorde, as the firſte place whiche he choſe to himſelfe in this Realme: al which the foreſaid King Henry eſtabliſhed by his Charter.
               
               
                  
                     MArius ſonne of Aruiragus, an excellent wiſe man, was73 Galfr
                           •
                        d
                           ••
                        . ordayned King of Brytaine. At this ſeaſon Rodrike King 
                        •
                     f the Pictes, (whiche were people of Scythia) accompanyed

with the Scots inuaded Brytaine, & ſpoyled the country with ſword & fire, againſt whom Marius with his knights aſſēbled in al haſt, & gaue thē ſharp battel, wherin Rodrike was ſlain,Flores Hiſtoriarū. with a great number of his ſouldiors vpon Stanſemore, in token of which victorie, there was a ſtone not far from Carleile erected, with this inſcription, In token of Marius victorie. To thē which remained Marius gaue inhabitance in the further part of Scotland. And forſomuch as ye Brytaines diſdained to
                        Ran. Hig. Henry Bradſhaw. Cheſter repayred. giue to thē their daughters in mariage, they acquainted thē with ye Iriſhmen, & maried their daughters, & grew in proceſſe of time to a gret people. He repaired, walled, & fortified ye city of Caerlegion, now called Chester. He rained. liij. yeres.
               
               
                  
                     DOmitianus the Emperor ſēt Saluſtius Lucullus into Brytaine,
                     94 Suetonius. whom he ſhortly put to death, for that he ſuffred certaine lawes to be called Lucullen, after his name. Some write, that Cneus Trebullius was now Gouernor héere.
                  What Lieutenants were in Brytaine for the time of Nerua & Traiane, I find not recorded: but when Adrian was poſſeſſedIulius Seuerus. in the Empire, Iulius Seuerus gouerned here vnder him, whō 
                     Adrianus called out of Brytaine, to war againſt ye Jews,120 & came hither himſelfe in perſon, pacified the tumults, reared a wall, which ſhoulde ſeparate the barbarous from hysSpartianus. ſubiects, and returned to Rome.
                  
               
               
                  
                     COilus ye ſon of Marius was ordeined King, he was broughte124 Galfridus. Colcheſter builded. vp euē frō his youth in Rome among ye Romaines, & therfore fauoring thē, paid ye tribute truly: he builded Colchester, and raigned. lv. yeares, and was buried at Yorke.
                  
               
               
                  
                     ANtonius Pius ſucceded Hadrianus in ye Empire, & gouerned139 Capitelinus. this prouince by Lollius Vrbicus, who ouercame the Brytaines, and rayſed another wall of turffes to kéepe oute the inroades, the Northern Brytaines.
               
               
                  
                     ANtonius Philoſophus now ruled the Romaine Empire,162 and Calphurnius Agricola was ſent hyther with authoritie againſt the Britaines then repining at the Romaines, but with what ſucceſſe it is not ſpecified.
               
               
                  
                     LVcius ye ſon of Coilus, was ordained King, who in all hys179 Florent. Vig
                           •
                        r
                           ••
                        . acts & déeds followed the ſteps of hys forefathers, in ſuch

wiſe as he was of al men loued & dread. He ſēt his two Ambaſſadors Eluanus & Meduuinus▪
                      twoo learned mē in yt ſcriptures, with his louing letters to Elutherius Biſhop of Rome,
                     England receyued the faith▪ 
                        
                           
                              •
                           eda. Aſſer. Flores Hiſtoriarū. Record of Saint Aſaphs Church▪ 
                        Iohn Capgraue. Marianus Scotus.
                      deſiring him to ſende ſome deuout & learned men, by whoſe inſtruction both he & his people might be taught ye faith & religiō of Chriſt: wherof Elutherius being very glad, baptized theſe two meſſēgers, making Eluanus a Biſhop, & Meduuinus a teacher, & ſent alſo with thē into Brytaine two famous Clarks, Faganus & Deruuianus, by whoſe diligence Lucius & his people of Brytaine were baptized & inſtructed in ye faith of Chriſt. 28. Temples were made Cathedral churches, & Byſhops placed, where Flamins before had bin: at Lōdon, Yorke▪
                      & Carlein, (which is now S. Dauids in Wales) were placed Archbiſhops:London, Yorke and Carlein, Archbishops. The Epiſtle of Eleutherius to Lucius King of Brytaine. Lib. conſtitut. Lon.
                      & now foloweth an Epiſtle of Elutherius, ſente to Lucius K. of Brytain, as I find ye ſame recorded in a Booke of ye 
                     Conſtitutions of London▪
                      pertaining to ye 
                     Guild Hall of London▪
                     
                  
                  The yeare after Chriſts birth 202. Pope Elutherius did write to Lucius king of Brytaine, for ye amendment of ye kings & the nobilitie of Brytaine as foloweth. You required that we ſhould ſend you the Romain & Imperial laws, ye you might vſe thē in your kingdom of Brytaine, but thoſe laws we may diſproue, & not the lawes of God. You haue receiued lately through Gods goodnes in your kingdom, ye faith and law of Chriſt: you haue there in your kingdom both Teſtaments, out of thē by Gods grace, & the aduice of your realme take a law, & thereby patiently gouern ye kingdom. You are ye Uicar of God in your kingdom, according to ye kingly prophet. The earth is ye Lords, & his fulneſſe is ye whole world, & al yt
                     Pſalm. 45. dwel therin: & again, Thou haſt loued righteouſnes, & hated iniquitie, wherfore God (euē thy God) hath annoynted thée with y• 
                     
                        •
                     ile of gladnes aboue thy fellows. They are ye kings children, chriſtian nations, & people of your kingdome that liue & conſiſt vnder your protection, peace, & kingdom according to the Scripture, as an Hen gathereth chickens vnder hir wings, the people, & nations of the kingdome of Brytaine is youres, ſuche as are diuided you ſhoulde gather them

togither to the lawe of Chriſte: his holy Churche, to peace & concorde: and cheriſhe, maintaine, protect, gouerne, and defend them from the iniurious, malicious, and their enimies. Woe be to that kingdome, the King whereof is a childe, and the Princes eate earely in the morning. I doe not call a King a child for his youth or minoritie, but for his follie, iniquitie,Pſalm. 55. and madneſſe, according to the Kingly Prophet. The bloud-thirſty and deceitfull menne ſhall not out-liue halfe their dayes. By eating we ſhall vnderſtande Gluttonie, by Gluttonie, Luxurie, by Luxurie, all filth, wickedneſſe, and miſchiefe, according to King Salomon: Wiſedome will notSapience. 
                           •
                        . enter into a ſpitefull ſoule, nor inhabite in a body ſubiecte to ſinne. A King hathe his name of gouerning, and not of hys Kingdome, ſo long you ſhall be a King, as you rule well, otherwiſe, you ſhall not be ſo named, and loſe that name, (which God forbid) God graunt that you maye ſo rule your Realme of Brytaine, that you may raigne wyth hym euerlaſtingly, whoſe Uicar you are in the ſaide Kingdome. To whome with the father, &c.
                  There remayneth in the Churche of Saint Peter vpon Cornhil at London, a Table, wherein is written, that Lucius foūded the ſame Church to be an Archbiſhops ſea, and made it the Metropolitane and chiefe Churche of hys Kingdome, whych ſo endured the ſpace of 400. yeres, vnto the comming of Saint Auguſtine.
                  
                  
                     Ioſeline of Fornes, in his booke that he wrote of the BrytiſhIoſeline of Furneys. Biſhops, ſaith, that Thean, who was firſt Archbiſhop of Lō
                        don, in the time of Lucius, builded the ſaid Church of S. Peter
                     Archbishops of London. 13. in a place called Cornhil in London, by the aide and help of Ciran, chief Butler to King Lucius, & alſo that Clauus, the ſecōd Archbiſhop there, builded a Librarie to the ſame church adioyning, & conuerted many of the Erwydes (learned men in the Pagan Law) to the Chriſtian faith. The third Archbyſhop was named Cadar, the fourth Obinus, the fift Conan, y• ſixt Paladius, the ſeuenth Stephan, the eighte Iltut, the ninth Dedwin, the tenth Thedred, the eleuenth Hillary, y• twelfth

                     Guidilinus, the thirtenth Vodinus, who was ſlain of the Sarons that came firſt into this lande. Lucius raigned 12. yere, and was buryed at Gloucester.
                  
               
               
                  
                     COmodus after his father Antonius Philoſophus ſucceded181 Dion. in the Empire with moſt cruel tyranny. In his time the Northerne Britains burſt in through the wall, forrayed the Countrey, and ſlew the Romaine Generall with his ſouldiours, wherfore Vlpius Marcellus was appointed here a careful vigilant Captaine: he ſore annoyed the Brytains, which were enemies to the Romain ſtate, and purchaſing enuie by his vertue, was ſhortly diſmiſſed▪
                  
                  Then Ceronnis who ruled all vnder Comodus, appointedLampidi
                           ••
                        
                        ▪ Dion. certaine men of baſe eſtate to gouerne the Romain enemies here, wherewith the ſouldiours being gréeued, ſent. 1500. choſen men out of theyr number to Rome, who accuſing hym before Comodus to compaſſe the Empire, for his ſonne was deliuered vnto them, who immediatelye mangled hym and ſlew his wife with his two ſonnes.
                  
                     Comodus thē ſent Holnius Pertinax into Brytain, and ſurnamedLampridi
                           ••
                        
                        ▪
                      himſelfe Brytanicus, thervnto perſwaded by flatterers, when the Brytaines were ſo euill affected toward him, that they woulde haue nominated ſome other Emperour againſtCapitolinus. him, and namely Pertinax: but theſe tumults were appeaſed by the Wiſdome of Pertinax, to his great danger, for he was wel-nere ſlaine in tumulte, and left among the dead, whiche iniurie he after ſeuerallye reuenged, & ſued for his diſcharge, being afterwarde preferred to the Empire.
                  
                     Clodius Albinus was then ſente hyther by Comodus▪
                      whoCapitolinus. at the firſt ſo greatlye eſtéemed of him, that he honored hym with y• title of a Caeſar▪
                      which Clodius refuſed: but afterwards when a falſe rumor was diſperſed, yt 
                     Comodus was ſlain, he made an Oratiō to the legions of Brytain, impeaching yt gouernement of Emperours, and preferring the Senate, whervpon Commodus being ſharpned againſte hym, ſente Iunius Seuerus to rule héere, and ſhortly after Comodus was ſlaine. ſlaine.
               
               
                  
                  
                     PErtinax then was choſen Emperour, & within. iij. months194 was ſlaine throughe the per
                        •
                     wations of Didius Iulianus, who enioyed the Empire two monthes, and the practice of Clodius Albinus, which then returned into Brytain, and (as it ſéemeth) recouered his former gouernement.
               
               
                  
                     SEuerus after the death of Pertinax was ſaluted Emperor:194 he immediately ſlewe Didius Iulianus, and bycauſe he feared Clodius Albinus with his Brytain legions, he created him Caeſar, and partaker of the Empire, and ſente Heraclitus to gouerne this Ile: but after he had ſubdued Niger who alſo vſurped the Empire, he moued warre againſt Albinus, who paſſing hence into Fraunce with the Brytiſh army, encountered with Seuerus neare Lions, and was there ſlaine. Henceforthe Seuerus quietly enioyed the Romaine Empire, & made ſharp wars into the Eaſterne partes of the world, with great glorie.
                  But returning to Rome, he vnderſtoode of a war rayſed in209 Brytaine. Wherefore he haſted hyther with his two ſonnes Baſsianus and Geta
                           •
                        at his arriuall peace was offered, whithe he refuſed, and leauing his yonger ſonne Geta to gouerne the prouince, (being the hyther part of the Ile) he with Baſſianus hys eldeſt ſonne entred into the Northe, and paſſed y• further parte of thys Ilande without any reſiſtaunce: yet by ambuſhes, difficultie of the way, & other inconueniences, he loſt. 50000. men, and then returned, enforcing the enemies to conclude a league, and yéelde ſome parte of theyr Countrey.
                  At concluſion of which league, when he and his ſonne rid to treate with the Caledontans or Northern Brytains, Baſsianus his ſonne drawing his ſworde in the ſighte of the enemie, was ready to haue ſlaine him, and had done it, had not ſome of the company made an outcry: yet this fault was remitted.
                  After this league, the Brytaines of the North reſorted to the Emperours Courte, wher Iulia, Seuerus wife, obiected to a womā of Brytaine, the wife of Argentorix the Caledonian, that

the Brytiſh women accompanyed wyth men diſhoneſtlye, ye
                        •
                      quoth the Brytiſhe woman, we ſatiſfy the naturall luſte in better ſorte than you Romaynes, for we accompanye our ſelues openly wyth the beſte menne; and you committe adulterie cloſely wyth moſte vyle perſons. But after this league there was a generall reuolte of the Brytaynes againſte the Romaines, which yet was pacifyed with great ſlaughter, and then he builte a Wall of Turfe, to inhibite
                        S
                              •
                           uerus vvall. the Northern Brytaines, from whence when he retourned, at the nexte lodging, a blacke Moore that ſerued him, a notable ſcoffer, mette him wyth a Crowne of Cypres: hée moued with the colour of the man and the Cypres (whiche was then vſed at all burials,) as with ſignes of euill lucke, commaunded the manne to be ſente awaye, wherewyth he cryed: Thou haſte bene all in all, and haſt banquiſhed all, and now of a couquerour be thou a GOD. Then commyng to the Citie of Yorke (as it is ſuppoſed,) he was bySpartia
                           •••
                        . miſtaking brought to the Temple of Bellona: blacke beaſts alſo being ordayned▪ for ſacrifice, followed him home to hys Pallace: which things theſe then dyd accōpt to be ominons.
                  Shortly after he departed▪ out of this life at Yorke, partly through ſickneſſe, and partly through griefe conceiued of hys ſonnes euill demeanoure. At his laſt gaſpe he vttered theſe words: I found the ſtate troubleſome euery where, and leaue it quiet euen to the Brytaines.
                  
                     Herodian writeth, that in theſe wars of Seuerus againſt ye
                     Herodian North Brytains, he founde their Country full of watry Mariſhes: by thoſe mariſhes did the Britains ſwim and ſkirmiſh with their enemies, being couered with water vp vnto the Nauell, not caring that men ſaw the priuie partes of theyr naked bodyes. Neyther dyd they knowe the vſe of apparel, but accuſtomed to compaſſe theyr bellyes and neckes onely wt Iron, which they eſtéemed an ornament & token of riches, as other barbarous people ſuppoſed of Gold. They paynted their bodyes with diuerſe pictures and formes of beaſtes, and therefore ware no garmente, leaſte the painting ſhould

be hidden, being a nation very valiaunt, and warlyke, gréedy of ſlaughter, and content only with a ſmall target, a ſpeare, and a ſkayne hanging by their naked ſides, ignoraunt of the vſe of ſhyrtes of mayle and helmets, for they reckned ye ſame comberous vnto them, when they ſhoulde ſwimme ouer the lakes &c.
                  A gréetious diſeaſe came vpon Seuerus, being ſore appalled with age, ſo that he was conſtrained to kéepe his chamber and ſende Antonius vnto the warres: but Antonie not regarding the buſineſſe of Brytaine, endeauoured by all meanes he coulde, to winne the hartes of the ſouldiours vnto hym, deprauing hys brother, to the intente they ſhoulde only aide him to the attayning of the ſoueraintie. The long maladie of his Father, cauſed him to perſwade Phiſitions to rid the olde man out of the worlde, vntil that Seuerus, being conſumed, ended his life, who was the moſte famous of all Emperours in war like affayres: For none other had obtayned ſo many victories and conqueſts, either ciuil againſt his aduerſaries, or for rayne againſt the barbarous nations. Thus deceaſed he, after he had gouerned the Empire the ſpace of xviij. yeares, leauing his ſonnes for ſucceſſours in the ſame: vnto whom he left alſo greate aboundaunce of riches, as none of his previceſſours had before hym done. When Antony had gotten the ſupreme authoritie, he put to death the Phiſitiōs, bycauſe they obeyed not his commaundemente in haſtnyng hys Fathers deathe: and ſlewe all his owne, and brothers bringers vp and inſtructers, for that they wente about to reconcile them, leauing none aliue, that was eyther of dignity, or had reuerenced his Father. The Captaines of the army, he enticed, to perſwade the ſouldiours to proclayme him only Emperour: imagining dayly manifold miſchiefes againſt his brother: but he could not win the ſouldiours good willes. Wherefore Antony, hauing taken truce with the Britans, remoued towardes his mother and brother. Their mother laboured to bring them to agréement, wherein alſo, manye prudente Counſellours earneſtly trauelled. Antony thereby

was enduced, rather of force, than good will; to counterfaite loue. After which done, the two brethren gouerning y• Empire with equal honour, launched out of Brytaine, and ſayled with the reliques of theyr Father toward Rome. For when they had burned the bodye (as was the cuſtome of the Romaines) they carryed the aſhes, (intermedled with pleaſaunt odours, in a Boxe of Alabaſter) to Rome, that it mighte be ther enterred amongſt the monuments of other Princes. Themſelues led thus their army, as conquerors of Brytain, & paſſed ouer ye Ocean vnto the next coaſte of Fraunce, and ſo haſted towards Rome. When they were entred into Rome, all the people crowned with Laurel, receyued, and the Senate welcomed them. Formoſt roade the Emperors themſelues, clothed in Emperial purple. And nexte vnto them followed the Conſuls, bearing the veſſel with Seuerus reliques. Whiche veſſel, the people, after they had ſaluted the newe Emperour, did reuerently worſhippe. The Emperours & Conſuls being thus accompanyed wyth Princely pompe, 
                        •
                     aryed the ſaine into the Temple, where the deuine monuments of Marcus▪
                      and other Emperors, are ſéene. After they had finiſhed the ſolemne ſacrifiſe, and according to ye auntient vſage, celebrated the Funerall ceremonies, both the brethrē departed into the Emperiall palace: which they deuided betwéene them, cloſed vp all backe dores, and priuie poſterns, & mette togither only at y• outter gates. They choſe beſides eyther of thē vnto himſelfe a ſoundry guarde, & neuer came togyther vnleſſe it were ſometime for a little whyle to be ſéene of the people. Neuertheleſſe, firſte of all, they accompliſhed the due Funerals of their Father. For the Romaines accuſtome to conſecrate with immortalitie, ſuch Emperours; as at theyr death, lea
                        ••
                     e eyther children, or ſucceſſoures in the Empire behinde them. And thoſe which are endued with that honor, they canonize 
                        •••
                     ongſt the Gods. There is through the Cittie, a certaine▪ dolefull lamentation, mixed with fearefull i
                        •
                     . And they vſe to enterre the dead corpſe very ſumptuouſly. But then, they haue an Image, made as like the deade

Emperour, as may be. The ſame, within the Porche, of the Emperial Pallace, they lay in a gret and high bed of Iuorie, couered ouer with cloth of gold. The ſame Image looketh very pale, like a diſeaſed patient. About the bed on eyther ſide, a great part of the day, do certayne perſons ſit. That is to wit on the left ſide, the Senate, clothed in blacke garments: and on the right ſide, many matrones. None of theſe are ſéene to weare any ouches, or chaynes of golde, but being clad wyth thinne white veſtures, they ſhew the countenaunce of mourners. And thus doe they continue the ſpace of ſeauen dayes: during the which, euery daye the Emperours Phiſitions do repayre vnto the bed, and, as though they had felt the patiēts Pulſes, declare that he waxeth more ſicke than before. Finally, when it ſéemeth that he is deceaſed, certain of the moſt noble and worthye yong men, of the orders of Knightes and Senators, doe take vp the bedde on theyr ſhoulders, and cary it through the ſtréete, called Sacra via, vnto the olde market place, where the Romain magiſtrats are accuſtomed to render vp their Offices. There on both ſides, are certaine ſtages made with ſteppes, vppon the whiche, on the one ſide, is a queare of Boyes, being noble mens ſonnes, and on the other ſide are many beautiful women, ſinging Himnes and Ballades, in prayſe of the deade Emperour, meaſured with diuerſe lamentable verſes. When theſe are finiſhed, the yong men do take vp the bedde againe, and beare it out of the Citie, into the fielde called Campus Martius, in the broadeſt part whereof, there is erected a Towre foure ſquare, with ſides of equall height builded of great Timber, like vnto a Tabernacle. The ſame within forthe, is filled wyth drye chippes, and Réedes: And on the outter ſide, it is hanged wyth Arras clothes of golde, and decked with▪ Images of Iuorie, and ſundry painted pictures. Within it alſo, is another leſſe Towre, but like in forme, with doores and Portals opened. And ouer that, the third and fourth, with many other roomes aſcebdubg continually, vntill they retche vnto the higheſt, which is leſſe than all the other. A man maye compare thys

building vnto Towres, whyche are ſette in hauens, wyth fire on the toppes, to directe ſhippes whiche ſayle by nighte on the Seas, into theyr perfecte portes. The ſame are commonly called Phani. Nowe when they haue putte the bed in the ſeconde Tabernacle, they gather all kyndes of ſpices and perfumes, wyth diuerſe odoriferous fruites, Hearbes, and iuyces, the whyche they throwe on heapes in the Tabernacle. Neyther is there anye Nation, Citie, or Perſon, whyche excelleth in honoure, or dignytie, but at that tyme, wyll to the vttermoſte of hys power, moſt honorablye celebrate the laſte Funeralles of the Emperour.
                  When they haue couched a greate heape of Spices togither, and ſtuffed the building therewyth, all the Romayne Knightes doe ride aboute the Towre, with a iuſte courſe and order too and fro: Chariots are alſo drawne aboute, wherein manye doe ſitte, clothed in purple, repreſentyng the perſons of all noble men being Magiſtrates and Captaines of Rome.
                  
                  The Ceremonies being throughly ended, the ſucceſſour in the Empire, taketh a brande of fire in his hande, and fireth therewith the Tabernacle. After whome, all other that are preſent, doe throwe fire likewiſe into the ſame. And immediately, all the building being filled with thoſe drye ſtickes and ſpices, beginneth to burne vehementlye. Then out of the higheſt and leaſte Towre, as out of a hygh ſtéeple, is let forth an Eagle, the which they beléeue, doeth beare the Emperours ſoule into Heauen. And from thencefoorthe is that Emperour worſhipped as the other Gods.
                  From this time to the raigne of Diocleſian, for the ſpace of. 72. yeares, there is nothing recorded in our Hiſtories hythereto publiſhed concerning Brytaine: but where as it is manifeſt that the ſoueraintie of Brytain reſted in ye Romain Emperours al that ſpace, I wil ſet them here downe ſucceſſiuely.
               
               
                  
                  After Seuerus, Baſsianus ſurnamed Antonius Carracalla,
                     212 Herodian. murdering his brother Geta, ſucceded in the Empire. Hée was cruel to his people: he founded the Bath in Rome, which is called Antonians: he was out of meaſure giuen to ſenſualitie, and carnal concupiſence in ſo much, that he eſpouſed his mother in law Iuba▪
                      He was murdered by Martialis when he had gouerned by yeares.
                  
                     Macrinus one yeare.218
                  
                  
                     Antoninus Elagabalus. iij. yeare.
                  
                     Seuerus Alexander, who was ſlayne by his ſouldiours here223 Lampridius victor. 236 238 239 245 250 252 252 254 in Brytaine, in a vyllage called Sicila, but other ſave in Fraunce. xiij. yeares.
                  
                     Iulius Maximus. iij. yeares.
                  
                     M. Antonius Gordianus j. yeare.
                  
                     Antonius Gordianus the ſonne▪ vj. yeare.
                  
                     Iulius Philippus the firſt Chriſtian Emperour. v. yeare.
                  
                     Decius▪
                      ij. yeares.
                  
                     Trebonianus Gallus▪
                      and Vibius Hoſtilianus ij. yeares.
                  
                     Iulius Aenilianus. 4. monthes.
                  
                     Licinius Valerianus vj.
                  
                     Licinius Gallicinus▪
                      xv.
                  At this time there aroſe in diuerſe Countreys. 30. Uſurpers; which are called the. 30. tyrants, of the which Lollianus Poſthumius, Victorianus Tetritius, as it is ſuppoſed, kep
                        •
                     e Brytaine from Gallicinus.
                  
                  
                     Flauius Claudius. ij.269
                  
                  
                     Aurelianus. 5.
                  
                  
                     Tacitus▪
                      vj. monthes.276
                  
                  
                     Florianius. iij. monthes.
                  
                     Aurelius Probus. v. yeares. In whiche time Bonefus a Brytaine
                     277 borne, but brought vppe in Spaine, fearing leaſt he ſhold be executed bycauſe the Germaines had burnte certaine veſſels in the Rhene, whereof he had charge, vſurped the Empire with Proculus at Colen▪
                      and woulde haue exempted from theVopiſens. Romaines, Brytaine, Spaine, and part of Fraunce: but being baquiſhed by Probus in a long and ſore battaile, he ſtangled

himſelfe: ſome ſedition was then raiſed in Brytaine, and appeaſed by Victorinus a Moore, by whoſe motion Probus had made him regent of Brytain, whiche was cauſer of this trouble. Thys Probus permitted the Brytaines and others, that they might haue vines and make wine. After he had raigned fine yeares, he was ſlaine by the ſouldiours.
               
               
                  
                     CAius then ſuccéeded him, with his two ſonnes Numerianus,
                     282 Vopiſens. and Carinus, to whiche Carinus he aſſigned Brytaine Gaule, (called Fraunce) Illiricum, Italie, and Spaine, but all thrée within thrée yeares ſpace loſt their liues.
               
               
                  
                     VAlerius Diocleſianus was then choſen Emperour,284 who adioyned Maximianus vnto hym in lyke gouernement.
                  Aboute thys tyme, holy Alban for profeſſing Chriſt, beingVita Albani. ledde from the Cittie of Verolamium, vnto Holmehurst, where nowe the towne of Saint Albans is builded, ſuffered martyrdome, who is ſpecified to be the firſt Martyre of Brytaine: and ſhortly after to the number of one thouſande Chriſtiās, were martyred at Lichfielde, where Amphabole, inſtructerLiber Lichfielde. of Alban, was taken, broughte to Verolamium, and there tormented to death.
                  
                     Carauſius was appointed to be admirall of the Brytaine Seas, whyche were ſore troubled by the Pyracies of the Franckes and Saxons: but when he had oftentimes apprehended the Pirates, and neyther reſerued the prizes, or wasReſerued. accountable for it, neyther to the Emperours, nor his deputies, it was ſuſpected that of ſet purpoſe he permitted theſe Rouers to haue recourſe through thoſe Seas, to the ende hée mighte rifle them, and inrich himſelf. Maximianus therfore ſent part of his armye to ſuppreſſe him, in which were manye of the Thebane legion, who in thys iourney were ſlayne, by his commaundemente, and made martyres bycauſe they profeſſed Chriſt.
                  
                     Carauſius vnderſtanding of the preparatiō made againſt him, paſſed out of Gaule into Brytaine, where bringing the Countrey to hys obeyſaunce, he vſurped the Roabe of

an Emperour: wherevppon they whiche were ſente to ſurpriſe him, retourned to Maximianus, who then was encombered with newe warre in Gaule agaynſte the Peaſantes.
                  In the meane time Carauſius built ſhippes in Brytayn, intercepted certayn cōpanyes of ſouldiours, aſſembled a gret number of barbarous people with ſpoyle, with hope of whō he purpoſed to trouble the ſea coaſtes of Gallia & Spaine. Holland (alſo then holden by certayne Frankes) reuolted to Carauſius.
                  
               
               
                  THen purpoſed Maximianus the ſeconde tyme to make288 warre agaynſte Carauſius, but by ſtormye weather, and wante of Pilotes, hée was enforced to deferre hys purpoſe, leauyng the gouernement of thys Ile to Carauſius.
                  
                  Shortlye after, the two Emperours elected two Caeſars,
                     291 
                     Valerius Maximus and Conſtantius Chlorus, to which Conſtantius they committed the recouerie of Brytaine. Hée immediatelye paſſing through Gaule hytherwarde, ſodaynely ſurpriſed Geſſeriacum, nowe called Bullen, (whiche Carauſius had manned,) and ſo ſtopped the Hauen, that it could ſtande Carauſius in no ſtéede. Then building ſhippes to paſſe ouerPaneg. Conſtantius dictus. hither, he firſt aſſayled luckily the Hollanders, whiche had reuolted to Carauſius: and then ſtaying for conuenient winde, he houered a while on the ſea coaſte, and in the meane tyme Carauſius was traytorouſly ſlayne by Alectus his familiar friende.
               
               
                  
                     ALbertus then vſurped the Empire here in Brytayne,292 agaynſte whome Conſtantine wyth hys former preparation made readye for warre, and launched out in haſte, thoughe the winde was contrarie: Whyche when hys ſouldiours vnderſtoode, they ſette out alſo wyth ſide windes out of the Seyne and other Ports, in ſuche foggie and myſtieSeyne. weather, that they paſſed by Alectus Nauie, then honering for them aboute the Ile of Wighte, not ſéeing one the other.
                  
                     The Romaines as ſoone as they landed burnte theyr ſhippes, determining either to winne, or loſe their liues, which when Allectus vnderſtoode, he left the ſhore, and prepared himſelfe for battaile with his Mercenarie barbarous ſouldiours, in which he was ſlaine, by Aſclepiodatus Lorde greate maiſter of the Emperours houſe.
                  In thys fight none of the Romaynes periſhed, but here al the fielde was ouer-ſpred with deade bodyes of the enimies, among whom lay Alectus himſelfe, without any Imperiall ornamentes, and ſcantly knowen.
                  Other Romaine ſouldiours alſo whiche had loſte theyr companye in the myſte, arriued at London, ſlewe in the Citie greate number of barbarous people whyche eſcaped from the battaile, and purpoſed to haue ſacked London.
                  
                  Then when Conſtantius came a lande, the Brytains with their wiues and children flocked vnto him, and ſubmitted themſelues ioyfully, being nowe deliuered out of a long thraldome.
                  Thys expedition of Conſtantius into Brytain, is aſcribed by ſome to Maximianus, into which error a falſe inſcription of the Panegirike hath led them.
               
               
                  
                     ASclepiodatus▪
                      as is before touched, recouered Brytaine,290 Galfridu
                           •
                        . he belayde the Citie of London with a ſtrong ſiege, wherein was Liuius Gallus the Romaine Captaine: and ere it wer
                        •
                      long, by Knightly force and violence, entred the Citie, and ſlew the forenamed Gallus, neare vnto a brooke there at that daye running, into whiche brooke he threwe him, by reaſon wherof, it was called in Brytiſh Nant Gallon, ſince in the Saxon tongue Gallus or Wallus brooke: and thys daye, the ſtréete where ſome-time the brooke ranne, is called Walbrooke.
                  
               
               
                  
                     COill after Aſclepiodatus toke on him the Kingdome of301 Brytaine.
               
               
                  
                     COnſtantius begā his Empire with Gallerius, the Empire305 was deuided betwéen them: ſo that Conſtantius ſhoulde poſſeſſe Affrica, Italie, Fraunce, and Brytaine: Gallerius
                     
                     
ſhoulde haue Illirica, Aſia, and the Eaſt partes: whiche done, they ſubſtituted vnder them two Caeſars. Cōſtantius holding himſelfe content with the dignitie of Auguſtus, refuſed to ſuſtaine the trouble whiche he ſhoulde haue endured through the adminiſtration of the affaires of Italie and Affricke: hée ſought by all meanes howe he mighte enriche the people of the Empire. He aboliſhed the ſuperſtition of the Gentiles in his dominions, ſo that afterwarde Brytaine felt no perſecutions. The yeare following he paſſed out of Fraunce hyther againſt the Pictes, at whiche time his ſonne Conſtantine, who then ſerued Galerius, perceyuing his deſtructien to be compaſſed, poſted to his Father in al haſte, howghing & killing the poſt horſſes, whych way ſo euer he paſſed, that he mighte not be purſued, and came to his Father the verye houre that he wente aboorde to come into Brytaine: but Conſtantius asPanegiricus. ſoone as he came to Yorke, ſodainely ſickned, and perceyuing his daye to drawe neare, when he was aſked to whome hée woulde leaue the Empire, aunſwered, to Conſtantine, and ſhortly after departed.
               
               
                  
                     COnſtantine ſurnamed the great, ſonne of Conſtantius by306 
                     Helena, firſt conſecrated, hys Father being nowe deade, and with ſo great ſorrowe and ſheading of teares, ſolempnized his burial, that the ſouldiours hoping he would reſemble hys Father, ſaluted him Emperour at Yorke againſt his wil: but when the Romaine Senate had confirmed hys election with theyr conſent he willingly accepted it. And the yere folowing ſetting the affayres of Brytaine in order, he paſſed hence wyth manye Brytaines, firſte agaynſte the Frankes whome he vanquiſhed, then agaynſte Maxentius an Uſurper, whome he ſlewe: and afterwarde agaynſte Licinus who named hymſelfe Emperour, whome alſo he ſubdued. Many barbarous nations alſo were by hym diſcomfited. He eſtablyſhed the Goſpell in hys Empyre, and after hym all Emperoures were Chriſtians. In the firſte beginnyng of hys raygne, hée was worthye to haue bene compared wyth the beſte and chiefeſt Princes of

the Romaines that euer were: and at the ende thereof, to be reſembled to ſuch as were of the meaner ſort. He was much giuen to purchaſe prayſe and fame by feates of cheualrie: hée had good fortune in battaile, and yet not ſo good, but that his induſtrye excelled it farre.
                  After he had repreſſed the ciuill warres, he vanquiſhed the Gothes in diuerſe places: and wanne greate memorie of prayſe among the Barbarians: He applyed himſelfe wholly to the ſtudye of the Liberal artes: he endeauored to gayne the loue of the people, through his well deſeruings, ſéeking the ſame by his great liberalitie. The Cittie whiche he builte, he made it able to compare (in manner) with Rome it ſelfe.Conſtantinople And as he made prepation for battaile againſt the Parthians, he died at Nicomedia.
                  
                  
                     Euſebius writeth that Conſtantine was baptiſed firſte inEuſebius. the laſt dayes of his life in Gracia, in the Cittie of Nicomedia, of the Biſhoppe there.
                  Alſo Sozomenus & Theodoritus write, that he was baptizedSozomenus. in his latter dayes a little before his death, when he wiſt he ſhould dye, in the xxxj. yere of hys Empire.
                  He left behinde him thrée ſonnes, to witte Conſtantinus Conſtans, and Conſtantius, to ſuccéede him in the Empire.Theodoritus.
                  
                  
                     Helen ye mother of Conſtantine the great at Ieruſalem foūd the Croſſe on the which Chriſt ſuffered his paſſion, ſhe repaired the Citie of Ieruſalem, and adorned it with manye fayre Churches. She builded walles aboute London and Colchester.
                  
                  About this time Octauius whom Conſtantine had left gouernour▪
                     Octauius. Simon Dunelmenſis. in this Ilande, rebelled, againſt whom Conſtantine ſent Traherne wyth a legion of Romaines, who (after diuerſe conflictes) was ſlaine. Gratianus ſurnamed Funarius, was at this time gouernour of the Romaine legions here.
               
               
                  
                     COnſtantinus beganne his Empire and raigne ouer Brytain:
                     337 wt him his Father Conſtantine had appointed by his laſte will, that hys two brethren Conſtans and Conſtantius ſhoulde participate and haue theyr portion of the Empyre,

but not long after, when Conſtantinus attempted warre agaynſte hys brother at Aquileia, and demeaned hymſelfe vnaduiſedlye therein, he was ſlayne, and then was the Empire reduced vnder the gouernement of the two brethrē only.
               
               
                  
                     COnſtans then ruled Brytain, which he adminiſtred with340 greate iuſtice: but after when he fayled of hys health, he aſſociated vnto him in ſtéede of friendes, euil deſpoſed perſōs to aſſiſt him, throughe whoſe euill counſell he declyned into horrible vices, by meane whereof, waxing ſcant tollerable of the inhabitantes of the prouinces, he was ſlaine by Magnentius who vſurped the Empire in France, Spaine, & Brytaine alſo as ſome write.
               
               
                  
                     COnſtantius then had the regiment of Brytaine, who ſent353 hither a Spaniarde called Paule, a notarie by profeſſion, to bring out certaine men of warre whiche had conſpired wythAmianus. 
                     Magnentius: but he vpon falſe ſurmiſes grieuouſly moleſted the guiltleſſe, fettering and manacling whome hée pleaſed.Martinus. Wherevpon▪ 
                     Martinus, then lieuetenant in Brytaine, being moued with compaſſion, deſired hym to forbeare the harmeleſſe: but he was ſo rigorous, that he alſo charged Martinus himſelfe of conſpiracie with Magnentius and was earneſt to bring him before the Emperour: wherevppon Martinus drawing his ſword ſ
                        •
                     it at him, and bycauſe he coulde not ſlaye him, he ſodainely ſlewe himſelfe, and Paule embrued with bloud, haled a gret company (linked in chaynes) to the Emperours preſence, which were eyther baniſhed, executed, or attainted.
                  
                     Conſtantius after this appointed Iulianus to gouerneAmianus Marcellinus. 
                     Gaule (or Fraunce) at whiche time greate ſpoyle was made in Brytaine by the Scottes and Pictes, wherefore Iulianus buſied with warre againſt the Almains, ſente Lupcinus hyther with an armye, in whoſe abſence Iulianus vſurped the Empyre: whereof when Conſtantius hearde, he retourned from the warre (againſt the Parthians,) againſt Iulianus, and dyed in the way.
               
               
                  
                  
                     IVlianus (called the Apostata) began his raign ouer Brytain362 & the Empire, a mā ſéen paſſing wel in the Liberal ſciēces, but an earneſt aduerſarie of Chriſtian religion: he baniſhedAmmian
                           ••
                        . Marcellinus. 
                     Palladius a gret and honorable perſon into Brytain, vpon a ſuſpition: he ſent Alipius who had bin lieuetenaunt of Brytaine to repaire Ieruſalem, but terrible flaſhes of fire iſſuing out of the Earth, when they layde the foundations, enforced them to leaue theyr purpoſe. This Iulian, with great preparations made war vpon the Parthians, he ſpoyled Aſſiria, and retournyng from thence a conqueror, he was ſlaine by hys enimies, as he preaſed vnaduiſedly into the battels. After him ſuccéeded in the Empire Ieninian, and held it. ix. monthes.
               
               
                  
                     VAlentinian was then choſen Emperor by the ſouldiours.365 The Pictes, Scottes, Attacots, and Saxons, grieuouſly moleſted the Brytaines. Nectaridius
                      who had the charge of the SeaMarcellinus. coaſtes here, was ſlaine by them, and Bulchobandes a greate Captain was encloſed by them: wherfore after diuerſe Captaines; Theodoſius was ſent hither, who diſcomfiting the 
                        ••
                     
                     nimie, and recouering the ſpoyle, entred triumphantlye into London, and the next yeare wēt into the North, ſuppreſſed the enemies, recouered the prouince, and repaired Cities & fortreſſes: hée oppreſſed Valentinus an Hungarian, who being baniſhed hither, practiſed new tumults, deliuering him to Dulcitus
                     Dulcitus. to be executed, without any enquirie of his confederats, bycauſe he would not renew the tumult: whiche done, he returned to Rome. Shortly after Valentinian ſente hither Fraomarins (which he before had ordayned king of the Buccenobats in Germanie) to be marſhall of the Almaines whiche ſerued in Brytain. And not long after Valentinian dyed.
               
               
                  
                     GRatian with his brother Valentinian was then created375 Emporour. He to the entent he might better repaire the decayed ſtate of the Empire, made Theodotius a copartener with him in it.
               
               
                  
                     MAximus a valiaunt & worthy man was ſhortly after forced383 here in Brytain to take the Empire vpon him, who paſſed into Fraunce, and immediately al the Germaine legions

and Romaine ſouldiours reuolted vnto hym from Gratian, ſo that hée being deſtitute of men of warre, fledde to Lyons, where he was ſlayne by treaſon: for Maximus gaue out that Gratians wife was comming to hir huſbande, whiche Gratian intierly louing hys wife, lightlye credited, and therfore accompanyed wyth a few, wente forthe to méete hyr: but in the Coache where he ſuppoſed to haue founde hys wife, was Andragatius a deſperate man, who leaping out of the Coache killed Gratian.
                  
                  Then Maximus created his ſonne Victor a Caeſar, andZozimu
                           •
                        . vſed ſome crueltie againſt Gratians Captaines. Valentinian being herewith terrifyed, ſent S. Ambroſe vnto him to treate a peace, which he accepted, and Theodotius permitted him to vſe the title of Auguſtus. Then he ſetled himſelfe at Trier inSige
                           •
                        ertus. 
                     Germanie, empoueriſhed the Countryes rounde about hym, executed certaine Hereticks called Priſcillianists, and then entred into Italie, breaking the peace, and thought to haue intercepted Valentinian, but he with his mother fledde to Theodotius, and perſuaded him to take reuenge of Maximus. In the meane time Maximus came to Aquileia, all Italie and Affrica ſubmitted themſelues vnto him, when ſodainelye Theodotius comming from Constantinople, moued warre againſt him, corrupted his ſouldiours with brybes, and after one or two ſkirmiſhes enforced Maximus to flye to Aquileia, where his owne ſouldiours deliuered him to Theodoſius, by whoſe commaundement he was ſhortly after beheaded. Andragatius alſo who kept the Seas, vnderſtanding this, drowned himſelfe, and Victor the ſonne of Maximus was ſlaine in Fraunce by Arboguſtes. The Brytaines which ſerued him retourned into Fraunce, and ſetled them in the Countrey there, which is now called Brytaine, ſo was Brytaine recoueredGiraldus. againe to the Romaines Empire.
                  
                     Saint Vrſula, with the 11000. Uirgins, whiche were ſenteThe. 11000. Virgins. Flores Hiſtoriarū.
                      into Brytaine to be married to Conon and hys Knyghtes, were ſlaine and martyred of the barbarous people being on the ſea. But, as ſome write, by Attila King of the Hu
                           ••
                        es.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     HOnorius, the ſonne of Theodoſius, ſuccéeded in the Empire,365 Bede. Pelagius Hereſie. in whoſe time Pelagius, a Brytaine borne, diſparckled the venome of his faithleſſe Doctrine very farre abroade, holding, that a man might liue well without the help of the grace of God: vſing héerein the ayde of Iulianus of Campania, who was intemperately ſtirred with the loſſe of his Biſhoprike, to whome Saint Auſten, and other Fathers alſo haue anſwered in moſt ample maner, but yet they would not be amended thereby, but being conuicted of their falſehoode, they rather would encreaſe it by defending and maynteyning it, than amend it by returning to the truth.
                  This time Marcus was choſen Emperoure by the SouldyouresL
                           •
                        zi
                           •••
                        . in Brytaine, fearing the inuaſion of the Vandales, but immediately they ſlewe him, and elected Gratianus, whome alſo they murthered within foure monethes.
                  Then Conſtantine, a Souldiour of baſe eſtate, onely vpon confidence of his name, was elected héere Emperoure, who paſſing hence into France, with all the youth of Brytaine, gote all the men of warre there to take part with him. Honorius ſent therefore Sarus to withſtand him, who in a foughten field ſlew Iuſtinian, Conſtantines Captayne, and ſo purſued Conſtantine, that he made him take Valentia, wherein he ſharply beſéeged him, vntill Gerentias with his Brytaines, and Edebrichus with the francks rayſed the ſéege.
                  Then Conſtantine fortifyed the Alpes, and Rhene with Garriſons, ſent Conſtans his ſonne (whome of a Monke he had made a Caeſar) with a great Armie into Spayne, where he tooke, and afterward ſlew certayne noble perſonages a
                        •
                     lyed to Honorius, and returning to his Father, left Gerontius to gouerne Spayne. Conſtantius
                      himſelfe then craued pardon of Honorius for vſurping the Empire, ſaying, that he did it by compulſion, which when Honorius heard, he ſo wel liked, that he ſent an Imperiall Roabe vnto him.
                  In theſe troubles, Brytaine was greatly endangered by Pictes and Scottes, and ſued to Honorius for ſuccoure, but he ſending them only Letters, willed them to looke to their

owne ſtate. Shortly after Conſtance, that was Monke, was ſlayne by Gerontius his owne Captayne, at Vienna in France: and Conſtantine himſelfe being beſéeged at Arles by Honorius Souldiers, entred into holy orders, and fled into the Church, thinking thereby to ſaue himſelfe, but was drawen out from thence, and ſlayne. Gerontius who had trayterouſly killed his Maiſter, was beſette rounde aboute withNicephorus. 
                     Spanyards in his Lodging, wherefore he firſt ſlew Allanus his tryed friend, then Nunichia his wife, and laſtly himſelfe, and now Honorius recouered Brytaine. In his time (ſaith Beade)Beade. 
                     Rome was deſtroyed of the Gothes, the 1164. yeare after it was buylded: after which time the Romanes left to rule in Britaine, after almoſt 470. yeares, that Iulius Caeſar firſt entered the ſayd Ile. The Romanes dwelt within ye french, which as we haue ſayd, Seuerus drew ouerthwart ye Iland at ye South part, which thing may appeare by ye Cities, Temples, Bridges, & paued ſtréetes to this day remayning, notwithſtāding they had in poſſeſſion, & vnder their dominiō y• farther parts of Britaine, and alſo the Ilands which are about Brytaine. By meanes (as is afore ſayd) ye 
                     Romanes had vſed to trāſport with them ouer into France the floure of al the youth of Brytaine, to ſerue thē in their foraigne warres, their men of warre were conſumed, & was not now able to defende thēſelues againſt the inuaſions of their enimies: wherevpon many yeares togither they liued vnder the oppreſſion of two moſt cruel Nations, the Scottes, & Pictes, which were of ye circuite of Britaine, but deuided from the lande of Britaine by two armes of the Sea, running betwixt them, of the which one from the Eaſt Sea, the other from the Weaſt, runneth in farre and wide into the land, though they may one reake to the other. In the middle of the Eaſt créeke, there is a Citie builded called Guidi. Aboue the Weaſt créeke toward the right hand ſtandeth a Citie called Alcluith, which in their language is asAlcluith. much to ſay, as the Rocke Cluith, for it ſtandeth by a Floud of the fame name. The Britaines then being thus afflicted by the ſaid nations, ſent their Embaſſadors with Letters vnto

                     Rome, with lamentable ſupplications, requiring of them ayd and ſuccour, promiſing them their continuall fealtie, ſo that they would reſcue thē againſt ye oppreſſion of their enimies: wherevpon there was ſent vnto them a legiō of armed ſouldiers from Rome, which comming into the Iland, & encountring with the enimies, ouerthrew a great number of them, & draue the reſt out of the frontiers of the countrey, & ſo ſetting them at liberty, & frée from the miſerie with which they were before ſo gréeuouſly ouercharged, counſelled them to make a wall betwéene the two Seas, which might be of force to kéep out their euill neyghbours: and yt done, they returned home with great triumph. But the Britaines building y• wall which they were bid to make, not of ſtone as they were willed, but of turffe, as hauing none amōg thē that had ſkil therin, made it ſo ſlender, y• it ſerued thē to little purpoſe. This wall they made betwene ye two ſaid armes or créekes of the Sea, many miles long, that where the fence of the water lacked, there by the help of ye trench they might kéepe their country from y• breaking in of their enimies, of which péece of worke, there remayneth euen vnto this day moſt aſſured tokens yet to be ſéene. This trench beginneth about two miles frō the monaſtery of Abercuring, in a place which in the Pictes language is called Penuahil, and in Engliſh is called Panwell, and runningPenuahil. out Weſtward, is ended by the City of Alcluith. But the former enimies, whē they had once perceiued yt the Romane Legion was returned home againe, forthwith being ſet on land by boates, inuaded the borders, ouercame ye countrey, & as it were beate downe all before thē: whervpon Embaſſadors be ſent again to Rome, beſéeching thē they would not ſuffer their miſerable countrey to be vtterly deſtroyed. Againe, there is ſent another legion, which cōming vpon a ſuddaine, made a great ſlaughter of y• enimies, & chaſed thē ouer into their own country. Then ye 
                     Romanes told the Britaines, yt it was not their eaſe to take any more ſuch trauellous iourneys for their defence, and therefore bade thē to practiſe their armoure themſelues, and learne to withſtand their enimies.
                  
                     They builded vp a Wall of hard ſtone from Sea to Sea, right betwéene the two Cities, whiche there were made to kéepe out the Enimie, in the ſelfeſame place where Seuerus before had caſt his Trench with publike and priuate charges: the Brytaines alſo putting too their helping handes, they then builded it eyght foote broade, and twelue foote high, right as it were by a line, from Eaſt, to Weaſt, as it doth to this day appeare, which being perfected, they giue the people ſtraight warning to looke well to themſelues, they teach them to handle their weapen, and inſtruct them in warlike feates. Alſo by the Sea ſide Southward, where their Shippes lay at harbor, leaſt their Enimies ſhould land there aboutes, they made vp Bulwarkes along, one ſomewhat diſtant from another, and this done, bid them farewel,Gildas Sapiens. as minded no more to returne. At this time almoſt all the treaſure of Brytaine was hidde vnder ground, or tranſported ouer into France.
                  
                  As ſoone as they were gone, the Scottes and Pictes hauing intelligence that they had made promiſe they woulde come no more, they taking heart of grace, returne agayne to their buſineſſe: and firſt, all that was without the wall, they tooke for their owne. After that, they giue aſſault vnto the wall, where the Britaynes were with Graples pulled downe, and otherwiſe ſo aſſaulted, that they leauing both the Cities and the wall alſo, were diſperſed and put to flight, the enimies following, killed and ſlayed more cruelly, than euer they did before, wherevpon being driuen out of their owne houſes, and poſſeſſions, they fall a robbing and ſpoyling one the other of them, ſo farre foorth, that all the whole Countrey was brought to that exigent, that they had none other ſuſtenance, but that they gote by hunting, and killing of wilde Beaſtes.
               
               
                  
                     THeodoſius the yonger, ſonne of Arcadius, ſuccéeded his408 Uncle Honorius, and appoynted Valentinianus his Couſin, Emperour in the Weaſt partes.
                  At this time, Timotheus héere in Brytaine, vnder a pretenceSigebertus.
                     
of Religion, and great continencie, drew many into a dangerous Hereſie.
                  
                     Chriſanthus, the ſonne of Byſhop Martian, a Conſull ofSocrates Lib. 7. 
                     Italy, was made Uiceroy, and Lord Deputie of Britayne: he was afterward made Biſhop of Conſtantinople.
                  
                  Now the poore remnant of the Brytaines directed letters to Aetius, whereof this was the beginning: To Aetius thrice
                     446 
                     Conſull, the mourning of the Brytaines.
                      In the proceſſe of which Epiſtle, they thus ſet foorth their pitifull eſtate. The barbarous enimie driueth vs vpon the Sea: the Sea agayne vpon the enimie: betweene theſe twayne riſeth two manner of deathes, eyther we are killed or drowned And yet for all their ſuite, they could obtayne no ayde of hym, as he whiche had then both his hands full of buſineſſe and battayle at home with Bleda and Attila, Kings of the Hunnes.
                  
                  The Pelagian Hereſies being brought in by Agricola,
                     
                        Pelagian Hereſie. the ſonne of Seuerianus, a Pelagian Biſhop, about this time did fore corrupt the faith of the Brytaines, but the Brytaines béeing neither willing to receyue their lewde Doctrine, as blaſphenrous againſte the grace of God, neyther able to refute their wilie and wicked perſuaſions, they deuiſed this wholſome counſell, to ſéeke for ayde of the Biſhops of France, againſt theſe their ſpirituall enimies. And they calling a common counſell, conſulted among themſelues, whome of them all it were beſt to ſend to help their neighbours fayth. By the aſſent of them all there was choſen two woorthie Prelates, Germanus Altiſiodorenſis, and Lupus, Biſhop of the Citie
                        Germanus and Lupus.
                      
                     Trecaſſa, whiche ſhoulde paſſe ouer into Britaine, to confirme them in the Faith, whiche with readie obedience, accepting the commandement of the Sinode, tooke ſhipping thitherward, and had proſperous windes, which ſet them aſhore in place where they themſelues deſired. Thither a great multitude of people being aſſembled, receyued the Prieſtes of God, and the word of God was preached by them, not onely in their Churches, but alſo in the open ſtréetes, and in the Countrey, in ſuch ſort, that in all places both the ſound and

faithfull were confirmed, and they that before ſwarued out of the right faith, were amended. The Authoures and head profeſſors of this heretical error, lay lurcking all this while, and much ſpited to ſée the people dayly to fall from them. After long aduiſement vſed, they take vpon them to trie the matter by open diſputation, which being agréed vpon, they come foorth richly appoynted, gorgeouſly apparelled, accompanyed with a number of flattering fauourers. The people were preſent both to ſée and iudge the matter. The parties were farre vnlike of condition: on the one ſide was the faith, on the other mans preſumption: on the one ſide méekeneſſe, on the other pride: on the one ſide Pelagius, on the other Chriſt. Firſt of all Germanus and Lupus gaue their aduerſaries leaue to ſpeake, which vaynely occupyed both the tyme and eares of the people with naked words, but after the reuerend Biſhops poured out their words cōfirmed with ſcriptures, out of the Goſpels and Apoſtles. Thus the vanitie of Heretikes was conuicted, and falſehoode confuted, ſo that at
                        Pelagians Hereſie confuted. euery obiection, they were forced to confeſſe their errour, not being able to aunſwere them: but after their departure, the Hereſie began againe to reuiue. Wherefore Germanus returned into Britaine with Seuerus, baniſhed the Heretiques with baniſhment, and reſtored the faith.
               
               The end of the Romaynes gouernement in Brytaine.
               
            
            
               Brytaines and Saxons.
               THe Brytaines continued in doubtfull Warre with the Scottes and Pictes, ſometime bearing away the victorie, & ſometime leauing it to the enimie. But conſidering the ambitious minds of men, and fearing leaſt ſome ſhould vſurpe the Kingdome at home, while they were deteyned with warres abroade, thought good to appoynte ouer them ſome King: and ſo with one conſent they elected Vortiger.
               
               
                  
                     VOrtiger raigned in Brytaines, in whoſe time hunger more447 Beade. preuayling againſt the Brytaines, droue many of them to

yéeld themſelues vnto the hands of their enimies. Other there were, which could neuer be brought therevnto, but from the hils and brakes where they lurked, many tymes inuaded their enimies, as truſting ſo much the more in the help of God, how muche the leſſe hope they had of ayde of men, and by ſuch meanes, firſt of all both reſiſted and ouerthrew them, which many yeares togither had liued by the ſpoyle of the Countrey, whereby for the time they drewe homeward with ſhame ynough, contending not long after to returne. The Pictes then, and long time after, kept them ſelues quiet at home, ſaue onely they would now and then make inuaſions into the land, and driue away booties of Cattell. After that they drew to a quietneſſe, there enſued ſuch plentie of graine, as neuer was ſéene the like before, as farre as any man could remember, whereof the people grew to looſe and wanton liuing, whereof all manner of lewdeneſſe followed, ſpecially crueltie, hate of truth, and loue of lying, in ſo much, that if any were gentler and more giuen to truth than other, the other would worke him all the hurtRiot and euill life the deſtruction of the Brytaines.
                      and ſpite they could: this did not only the ſeculars, but alſo the Cleargie, and the heads thereof, giuing themſelues ouer to drunkenneſſe, pride, contention, enuie, and ſuch other, caſting from them the yoke of Chriſt.
                  In the meane ſeaſon a bitter plague befell among them for their corrupt liuing, conſuming in ſhort time ſuch a multitude of people, that the quicke were not ſufficient to burie the dead: and yet for all that, the remnant remayned ſo hardned in ſinne, that neyther their friendes death, nor feare of their own, could cure the morrein of their ſoules, which dayly periſhed through their ſinfull liuing: whereby a greate ſtroke of Gods vengeance enſued vpon the whole ſinnefull Nation: for being now infeſted againe with their old neighbours the Scottes and Pictes, they deuiſed with themſelues what was beſt to do, and where they might ſéeke reſkue to withſtand and repell the feare of the Northren nation: and they agréed all with their King Vortiger, to demand ayd of ye
                     
                     Saxons beyond the Seas, which thing doubtleſſe (ſayth Bede) was done by Gods owne appoyntmente, that the people mighte be thereby plagued, as by the ende it manifeſtly appeared.
                  The people of the Engliſh or Saxons, being ſent for of the
                        Saxons ſent for into Brytaine.
                      ſayd King into Brytaine, landed héere in thrée long Shippes, and by the Kings commandement, are appoynted to abide in the Eaſt part of the Land. And the Iſle of Thanet was giuen to them, they to defend the Countrey like friendes, butWil. Malmesberie. in déede, as it proued afterwarde, minding to deſtroy the Countrey as enimies. Wherefore encountring with ye Northerne enimie, the Saxons had the better, whereof they ſending word home into their Countrey, as alſo of the fruitefulneſſe of the Land, the Saxons ſente ouer a greater Nauie and number of men better appoynted for the Wars, which being now ioyned with the former band, drew to a ſtronger Armie than all the power of the Brytaines was able to ouercome. Theſe by the Brytaines were allowed a place to dwell among them, with that condition that they ſhould warre for them againſt their enimies, for wages of the Brytaines. Theſe Saxons, Engliſh, and Iuits, that came from beyonde the Seas,Beade. were thrée of the ſtrongeſt nations in Germany. That is, the Saxons, Engliſh, and the Vites, or Iuites. Of the Iuites, came the people of Kent, and the Ile of Wight, and they in the prouince of Weaſt Saxons, are called of Iuites, right ouer againſt the Ile of Wight. Of the Saxons (that is of that Region now called old Saxons) deſcended the Eaſt Saxons, the South Saxons, and the Weaſt Saxons. Of the Engliſh, deſcended the Eaſte Engliſh, the Mercies, and the Northumbers. The chiefe Captaines of the Saxons are ſayd to haue bin two bréethren, Hingeſt, and Horſus: this Hingeſt prepared a great banquet, appoyntingWil. Malmesberie. his Daughter (Rowan as ſome write) to attend at the table, to the ende ſhe might delight the Kings eye as he ſate: which thing was not done in vayne, for as the King was alwayes deſirous to behold the beautie of Women, ſo was he ſtraight wayes taken with the beautie and elegant behauiour of

this mayden, and without farther delay, deſired to haue hir to his Wife, and woulde compell hir Father to conſente therevnto, who in his heart was willing ynough withall, but for a ſubtiltie ſayd nay, alleaging that ſo baſe a mariage was not méete for the King, and holding himſelfe as agréeued and not willing. All Kent was giuen him for a reward, to conſent therevnto, in which countrey, all equitie and iuſtice was decayed, vnder gouernement of one called Gnorongus, who notwithſtanding was ſubiect vnto Vortiger, as all the reſt of the Princes of the Iland were.
                  For the loue that Vortiger bare to Rowayne the Saxon, he was deuorced from his lawfull Wife, by whome he had thrée ſonnes, for which déede, welnéere all the Britans forſooke him.
                  
                     Vodine Archbiſhop of London, a man of ſingular deuotionArchbishop of London reproueth the King. and good life, by the aduiſe of Vortimer, wente to Vortiger, and ſayd to him, that he had not done as a Chriſtian Prince, in departing from his lawfull wife, and taking another woman, whoſe Father was an enimie to the Chriſtian fayth, and alſo wente aboute to conquere the Crowne of Britaine: Then ſayde Vortiger, I was not wiſe when I brought the Saxons to help me againſt mine enimies, but I was more vnwiſe, when I was taken with the mordinate luſt of the daughter of Hengiſt: I knowe that mine Empire will bée terrible, except I repent me with ſpéede and turne to God.
                  
                     Hengiſt hearing Vortiger make this lamentation, blamed him, for that he beléeued the perſwaſions of a profane man, of fayned life (as he tearmed him) and forthwith ſlewe the good Archbiſhop Vodine, and many other Prieſtes, andArchbishop of London ſlayne. Religious perſons. All the Churches in Kent were polluted with bloud, the Nunnes, with other religious perſons, were by force put from their houſes and goodes, and conſtrayned to polution of their bodies.
                  The Britaines conſidering the dayly repaire of the Saxons into this Realme, ſhewed to their King the ieoperdy that might thereof enſue, and aduertiſed him of the danger, but

all was in vaine: for Vortiger, by reaſon of his wife, bore ſuch fauoure to the Saxons, that he woulde in no wiſe heare the counſell of his ſubiects, wherefore, they with one minde depriued him of his royall dignitio, when he had raigned ſixe yeares, & ordeined to be their king Vortimere his eldeſt ſon.
               
               
                  
                     VOrtimere purſued the Saxons, and by his martiall knighthoode454 fought againſt them foure battailes, beſides diuers ſkirmiſhes, vntill at length he was poyſoned by the meanes of Rowa
                           •
                        he his ſtepmother, after he had raigned vj. yeares.
                  The firſt battel, Hēgeſt & Horſe fought with Wirtigerre (orMarianus Scotus. I loriacen. Wigornieu. 
                     Vortimer as others haue) was in a place called Aegleſtrop, & notwithſtanding that Horſe was ſlayne in this battell, yet Hengeſt caried away ye victorie. The ſecond battell Hengeſt & Eske fought with ye 
                     Britaines, in a place called Crecanford. Of the Britaines many periſhed by the ſword, the reſt of thē abandoned Kent altogither, and with great feare fled vnto London.
                  
                  The third battell Hengeſt & Eske fought with the Britans néere vnto a place called Weppedes fleete, that is to ſay, ye 
                     Fleete of Wepped, where they ſlew xij. Dukes or Captaynes of the Britaines, with many other, where as on the part of y• 
                     Saxons, there was one only man ſlaine, whoſe name was Wepped.
                  
                  The fourth battell was fought by Hengeſt & Eske againſt the Britaines, who obtaining the victory gote an innumerable ſpoile, in whiche battell the Britaines fledde from the Angles.
                  
               
               
                  
                     VOrtiger obteined againe the Kingdome, and ſhortly after460 
                     Hengeſt, which was chaſed into the Ile of Thanet, entred the land with a number of Saxons, but when he hearde of the great aſſembly the Britaines had made againſt him, he treatedW. Malme. for peace, which in fine was cōcluded. Shortly after Hengeſt (by a guile which before he had deuiſed) bid his ſon in law, & iij. C. of his Nobles vnto a feaſt or banquet, where when heThe Barons of the Britaines ſlaine at a banquet. had ouerlaid his gueſts with ouermuch Wine, he fel to quarelling, & with taunting talke, pinched euery one of thē, and ſtraight fel to fighting, wherthrough the Britaines were ſlaine euery one. The King was taken priſoner, and forced to giueThe King taken priſoner. for his ranſome, Kent, Suſſex, Suffolke, & Northfolke. This murther of the Britans, was on yt plaine of Saleſbury. Then Hengeſt
                     
began his dominion ouer Kent, & Vortiger, fled into Wales, &
                        Hengeſt King of Kent.
                      builded there a Caſtel, of which building, & lōg let of ye ſame, and of his Prophet Merlin, Geffrey Monmouth, and others ſpeake many things. Great cōpanies of ye 
                     Saxōs dayly flockedBeade. into this Iland, & grew ſo ſtrong, y• the people of y• Countrey which ſent for thē, ſtoode in great feare of their puiſſance, for thoſe Saxons had taken league with the Picts, & began to turne their force vpō the Britaines: and to be ſhort, the fire once kindledA miſerable ſtate of the Britaynes.
                      in yt lands of the Paganes there, tooke iuſt reuenge of y• wickednes of the people, raging firſt vpō the Cities & Countrey next adioyning, after from the Eaſt ſea to the Weaſt, ouerwhelming all the whole Iland without reſiſtance: both publike & priuate houſes were ouerthrowne to ye groūd: the Prieſts were ſlaine ſtanding at the altare: the Biſhops with their flocke were murthered, without reſpect of their dignity, nor there was any that woulde bury the ſlaine: ſome of the miſerable leauings being takē in the hilles, were there killed: other being ſterued with hunger, were faine to créepe out of their caues, & buy their victuall at their enimies hāds with ſale of their libertie for euer, if yet they were not killed out of hand: other fled ouer the Seas with an heauie hearte: other tarying ſtil in their coūtrey in feare of death, & lacke of foode, liued ful miſerably in ye Mountaines, woods, & Cliffes.
                  
                     Aurelius Ambroſe, and Vther (bréethren of Conſtantine yt was before ſlaine in France) landed with a Nauie of Ships at Totnes, made war vpon Vortigerne, and buried him in his Caſtell in Wales, when he had ſecondly raigned vj. yeares.
               
               
                  
                     AVrelius-Ambroſe was ordeined king of Britaine, in whoſe time, the Britaines by little & little began to take ſtrength466 Beade. Wil. Malme▪
                      and courage vnto thē, comming out of their caues in whiche they lucked before, and with one conſent, calling for heauēly help, that they might not for euer be vtterly deſtroyed, they had then for their Captaine a Romane, called Ambroſius Aurelius, a gentle natured man, which only of all the bloud of the Romanes remayned then aliue (his parents being ſlayne) whiche bare the name of King of the Countrey.
                  This man being their Captayne, they aſſembled themſelues

togither, and prouoking the victors to the fighte, through Gods aſſiſtance atchieued the victorie, and from that day forward, now the men of the Countrey, now the enimie had the victorie, vntill the yeare that Bathe was beſéeged; where they gaue their enimies a greate ouerthrowe, which was about the xliiij. yeare of their comming into the land: but of this we ſhall ſpeake more héereafter.
                  This Ambroſius cauſed the Churches to be repaired,Brute Booke. whiche had bin ſpoyled by the Saxons. He cauſed the greate
                        Stonehenge beſides Salesburie. Gadeaſins Tilberienſis.
                      ſtones to be ſette on the playne of Saleſburie, whiche is called Stonehinge, in remembrance of the Britaines that were ſlaine and buryed there in the time of Vortiger, at the banquet and communication of Hengiſt with the Saxons.
                  
                  A Saxon named Cella, with his thrée ſonnes, and a companyKingdome of the South Saxons. Agar
                              •
                           a Scot. Brute Booke.
                      of Saxons, landed in the South part of Britaine.
                  
                  A Saxon named Porth, landed with his two ſonnes, Byda and Meagla, at an Hauen in South-hamptonſhire, after whome the Hauen is named Porteſmouth.
                  
                  The third Kingdome of the Eaſt Saxons, began in Britain,
                     Kingdome of the Eaſt Angles. vnder Duke Vffa. Aurelius Ambroſius being poyſoned, dyed when he had raigned 32. yeares, and was buryed at Stonehinge called Chorea Gigantum.
                  
               
               
                  
                     VTher Pendragon, ſo called, for that he cauſed alwayes a498 Gafrid. Arbor Succeſ. Dragon to be borne before him in his battels, was crowned King of Britaine: he vanquiſhed Otta and Oza at Windgate by Coquet Riuer. He was enamored vppon Igren, the Dukes Wife of Cornewall, and to obtayne his vnlawfull luſt, made warre vpō hir huſband Goilen, and ſlew him in battell at Duvilioc. On hir he begat Arthure. He raigned eyghtéene yeare, and was buryed at Stonhinge.
                  
               
               
                  
                     ARthure the ſonne of Vther borne in Cornewall, at the age516 of fiftéene yeares was crowned King of Britaine, as ſome ſay at Caerleon, other at Wincheſter: one old nameleſſe pamflet ſaith at Ciliceſter, by Dubritius Archbiſhop of Legions.Nene
                           •
                        iu
                           •
                        .
                  
                  This Citie of Ciliceſter in Britiſh is called Caier ſegent, and was ſcituate néere Reading. It was ſo called, for

that Conſtantius, the ſonne of Conſtantine the great dyedSea. Cr
                           •
                        . there: his Sepulture might once haue bin ſéene there beſides the Citie, as the Letters engranen on it in ſtone did declare. He tooke to Wife Guinouer, Couſin to Cador Duke of Cornewall, and Daughter to the King of Biſcay.
                  
                  Of this King there be many fabulous reportes, but certayne,Wil. Malmesbery he was a Prince (as Malmesberie ſaith) more worthy to haue aduancement by true Hiſtories, than falſe Fables, being the only proppe and vpholder of this his Countrey.
                  In the beginning of his raigne, Lotho and Conradus hisAurea Hiſtor. allies, enuying his proſperitie, made Warre againſt him, but he valiantlye vanquiſhed them with their Pictes and Scottes, at his pleaſure, and appoynted them a GouernoureSea. Cr
                           •
                        
                        ▪ Neni
                           ••
                        . named Anguiſell. He fought twelue fieldes againſt the Saxons, and alwayes bare away the victorie, of whiche, the laſt was fought at Bath, where by his owne proweſſe and manhoode, he vanquiſhed nine hundred. Afterward he rayſed theMalmesberie. ſéege which the Saxons had planted about Lincolne, and ſlewe them in great numbers.
                  Thus hauing abated the rage of the Saxons, and reduced his Countrey to quietneſſe, he conſtituted the order of theRound Table. round Table, into which order, he only receyued ſuch of his nobilitie as were moſt renowmed for vertue and chiualrie. This round Table he kept in diuers places, but eſpecially at Cairleon, Winchester, and Camalet in Somerſet-ſhire.
                  There is yet to be ſéene in Denbigh ſhire, in the pariſh ofLeyland. 
                     Llanſanan, in the ſide of a ſtonie hill, a place compaſſe, wherein be foure and twentie ſeates for men to ſit in, ſome leſſe, and ſome bigger, cut out of the maine Rocke by mans hand, where children and yong men, comming to ſéeke their Cattell, vſe to ſitte, and play: they commonly call it Arthures round Table.
                  So hauing eſtabliſhed all things well at home, he with his nobilitie made an expedition into Norway, where he atchieued
                        Norway ſubdued. ſundry notable, and maruellous exploytes, and ſubdued the ſame, with all the Regions thereabout, to Ruſſia,
                     Leges S. Edwardi.
                     
placing the limite of his Empire in Lapland.
                  
                  He cauſed the people of thoſe Countreys to be Baptiſed, and receyne the Chriſtian Religion.
                  He alſo obtayned of the Pope to haue Norway confirmed to the Crowne of this Realme, calling it the Chamber of Britaine.
                     
                        Norway the Chamber of Britaine.
                     
                  
                  Then ſayling into France, he forced Frolo (Gouernoure there for the Romaynes) to flighte, and afterward in Combate manfully ſlew him.
                  Shortly after, he addreſſed deadlye Warre againſteGaufridus. 
                     Lucius Hiberus, who claymed a Tribute of Arthure for Britaine, and had aſſembled greate powers to ouercome Arthure, but Arthure encountring with him, after a long and bloudye fighte, diſcomfited his Armie, killed him, and ſente his body to the Senate of Rome for the Tribute.
                  While Arthure was thus valiantly occupyed in his warres beyond the Seas, and had conquered thirtie KingdomesFlores Hiſtoriar. (ſuch as they were in thoſe days) Mordred to whome he had committed the gouernement of Britaine, confederating himſelfe with Cerdicus firſt King of the Weaſt Saxons, trayterouſly vſurped the Kingdome, of which treaſon, whenBattayle at Douer.
                      relation came to Arthure, he ſpéedily returned into Britaine, and at Richborow néere to Sandwich, gaue battell to him, and wanne the fielde. Anguiſell of Scotland, Gawin
                      and Cador were there ſlayne: then purſuing him into Cornewall, gaue him battell there agayne by the Riuer of Alaune, of ſome hiſtories called Cablan, where Mordred was ſlayne.
                        Wal. Conu
                              ••
                           . Mordred ſlayne. Ann. Glaſco.
                      And Arthure béeing deadly wounded, was conueyed to Glastenburie, where he dyed, and is buryed, after he had moſt victoriouſly gouerned this Realme ſixe and twentie yeares.
               
               
                  
                     COnſtantine, kinſman to Arthure, and ſonne to Cador
                  
                  Duke of Cornewall, was ordeyned King of Britayne, and542 B
                           ••
                        te Booke. raigned thrée yeares.
                  
                     Thys man was by the two ſonnes of Mordred gréenouſlye vexed, for they claymed the Lande by the righte of theyr Father, but after many Battayles, they fledde, the one to London, the other to Wincheſter, whyche Cities they obteyned, and tooke them: but Conſtantine
                        Mordreds children ſlayne. followed, and ſubdued, and tooke the foreſayde Cities, and one of the yong men hée founde in an Abbey at London, and ſlewe hym néere the Aulter cruelly, and buried hym nigh Vter Pendragon, at Stonehinge. The otherGildas. Arbor ſucceſsio. young manne hée founde at Wincheſter, and ſlewe hym, flying into the Churche of Saincte Amphibalus.
                  
                  
                     Aurelius Conanus, a Britayne, rayſed mortall warre againſt Conſtantine the King, and after ſore fight ſlew him in the field, when he had raigned thrée yeares, and was buryed at Stonehinge.
                  
               
               
                  
                     A Vrelius Conanus, Nephew to Arthure, was Crowned545 King of Britaine.
                  
                  He cheriſhed ſuch as loued ſtrife and diſſention within his Realme 
                        •
                      and gaue light credence to them which accuſed other, were it right or wrong.
                  He empriſoned by ſtrength his Uncle, whiche was right heyre to the Crowne. He raigned thrée and thirtieFlores Hiſtoriarū. yeares.
                  The Kingdome of Northumberland began firſt in Britaine
                     The fifth Kingdome of the Saxons. 578 Gildas. Gaufrid.
                      vnder a Saxon named Ida.
                  
               
               
                  
                     VOrtiporus, the ſonne of Conanus, was ordeyned King of Britayne, a vicious King, and cruell tyrant, who put from him his Wife, and kept hir daughter for his Conc
                        •
                     bine. In diuers battels he diſcomfited the Saxons. He raigned foure yeares.
               
               
                  
                     MAlgo pulcher Canonus of Northwales, beganne his581 raigne ouer the Britaynes, and gouerned them fiue yeares.
                  This Malgo was in proportion of body, greater than all the Dukes of Brytaine, but he delighted in the ſoule ſinne of

Sodomie. He ſlewe his firſt wife, and then tooke to wife hisGildas. owne brothers daughter.
               
               
                  
                     CAreticu
                           •
                        
                      began to rule the Brytaines. This man loued ciuill586 Warre, and was odible both to God and to his ſubiects. They moued the Saxons (being accompanied with Gurmundu
                           •
                        
                      King of Ireland) to make warre vpon Careticus, in ſuch wiſe, that he was ſayne to take the Towne of Cicester, where they aſſaulted him ſo ſore, and fired the Corne, by tying fire to the wings of Sparrowes, that he with his men fledde from thence into Wales: by whiche meanes, he lefte a great part of his dominion, and ended his life, when he had raigned thrée yeares.Sea. Cro.
                  
                  This Gurmund burned vp the land of Britaine from Sea to Sea, and the more part of that Ile called Leogrea he gaue to ye 
                     Saxons. The Britaines gaue place, and fled into the Weaſt parts of Cornewall, and Wales. Theanus
                      Archbiſhop of Lōdon, & Thadeocus Archbiſhop of Yorke, whē their Churches were al deſtroyed to the ground, they with their Cleargie fledde into Wales, & many of them into little Britaine. This plague came on the Britaines for their couetouſneſſe, cauine, and 
                        •
                     echerie.
                  
                     Gurmund builded Gurmondcheſter.
                     
                        Gurmuncheſter buylded. 61
                           •
                         
                        Paulus Diaconus.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     CAdwane Duke of Northwales, was made ſoueraigne of the Britaines, who gaue ſtrong battell to Ethelfride King of Northumberland, and forced him to intreate for peace: After which concord being made, they continued al their life time louing friends. He raigned xxij. yeares.
                  The Kingdome of the Eaſt Saxons beganne vnder Erchenuin
                           •
                        s,
                     Sixt Kingdome of Saxons.
                      about the yeare of Chriſt, 614.
                  The Kingdome of Mercia, or middle England, began vnderSeauenth Kingdome of Saxons. 635 Penda▪ 626.
               
               
                  
                     CAdwalin, the ſonne of Cadwane, raigned ouer ye 
                     Britaines: he warred ſtrongly vppon the Saxons, and made Penda King of Mercia. tributarie to him▪ He raigned xlviij. yeares, and was buryed at London, in a Church of S. Martine néere vnto Ludgate, whiche Churche was then new founded and buylded by the Britaynes, in Anno. 677.
               
               
                  
                  
                     CAdwalladar was ordayned king of the Brytaines, and685 ruled only thrée yeares: he vanquiſhed and ſlew Lothier king of Kent, and Athelwold king of ſouth Saxons: and thē forſaking his kingly authoritie, he went to Rome, there to be chriſtened, who after became a Monke, and was buried in S. Peters Church at Rome. He was laſte king of Brytain. After which time the Brytaines were called Walſhmen, whiche name was giuen them by the Engliſhmen, or Saxons, who vſed to call all men Walſhmen, that be ſtraungers vnto them.
               
               
                  NOw are we come to ye time wherin God (who for ye ſins of the people tranſlateth kingdomes) diſpoſſeſſed the Brytaines of theyr auntient habitation, & rule of this land, who by the victorie of Saxons were enforced, eyther to miſerable ſeruitude, or driuen into the Weſterne partes of the Ile, now called Wales & Cornewall, (where they now inhabite,) or elſe to their countrymen the Brytains in France. But the Saxons enioying the fertile ſoyle of this Realme, parted it in proceſſe of time into ſeuen kingdomes: Kent, Southſex, Eaſt-angles, Eaſt-ſaxons, Mercia, Northumberlād, and Weſt-ſaxons, whych the learned call the Heptarchie of the Saxons, of which kingdomes, I purpoſe (for auoiding of confuſiō) to treat ſeuerally, ſetting down the limits of theſe Countries, with the ſucceſſion, actes, and ciuil battayles of their pettie Kinges, vntil the time that this Heptarchie, or gouernement of ſeauen, was reduced to a Monarchie, or regiment of one.
               
            
            
               Kentiſh Saxons.
               KEnt the firſt Kingdome, poſſeſſed by ye 
                  Saxons, contained456 that countrey that ſtretcheth fro the Eaſt Ocean to the riuer of Thamis, hauing on the Southweſt ſide Southrey, on the Weſt London, & vpon the Northeaſt the ſaid riuer of

Thamis. It hath the Archbiſhoprick of Canterbury Metropolitane and primate of all Englande, and the Biſhoppricke of Rochester▪
                   and had Kings as followeth.
               
                  
                     HEngeſt the ſonne of Widgils, the ſonne of Victa, the ſon of Wecta, the firſt ſon of Wodē
                      and Fr
                           •
                        a, was the firſt of the Saxons that made himſelf king of Kent, as before yée haue hearde, 
                        •
                     yght yeares after his firſte entring into thys Ilande in the yeare from Chriſtes byrth 456. He raygned xxxiiij. yeres, & dyed honorably (ſayth Marianus Scotus) but Peter de 
                           •
                        kham and others ſay, that by the counſel of E
                           •
                        dad Biſhoppe of Gloucester, Edel
                      Duke of Glocester, cauſed hysMarianus, Petre de l
                           •
                        k
                           •
                        . Floria▪ Wigor. 490 514 536 562 heade to be cut of at Coneſ
                           •
                        orow.
                  
               
               
                  
                     ESke or Vske, ſuccéeding his father Hēgeſt, raigned peaceably. xxiiij. yeares.
                  ¶ Otta ſonne of Eske raigned. xxij▪ yeares.
                  ¶ Ermericus the ſonne of Otta raigned. xxv. yeres.
               
               
                  
                     EThelbert the ſon of Ermericus had the gouernemente of that Kingdome, by the ſpace of. liij. or after Beade. lvj. yeares. This Ethelbert in the beginning of his raigneW. 
                           •
                        alme. being but a child, was troubled with warres on euery ſide, ſo that he coulde hardly defende his own coaſtes. In hys firſt battaile againſt Ceauline king of the Weſte Saxons and Cuthe his ſon, he was forced to make his flighte into Kent, hauing two of his Dukes Oſlaue and C
                           •
                        eb
                           •
                        
                      ano ſlayne in a place called Vuibbadune▪
                      but when he came to more age, and was more cunning in warre, in ſhort ſpace he ouercame all the Kingdomes of the Saxons rounde aboute him, ſaue the Northumbers. And to the end he would haue acquaintance with forraine Princes, he made affinitie and alliance with the King of Fraunce by marrying of his daughter Berta, a Chriſtian woman, to whom he permitted to vſe the lawes and rytes of hir Countrey, and to haue a Biſhoppe, whoſe name was Letardus, to remaine with hir, for hir better inſtruction in the lawes of GOD. By thys▪ meanes the barbarous and Heathen Saxons kéeping company with y• 
                     Frēch▪
                      and agrée to haue all one lawe and like cuſtomes: beſides

this, the chaſt and vertuous life of Letardus the Biſhop, and the other French whiche came with the Quéene, chaunged the Kings minde vnto the knowledge of Chriſt, whereby it came to paſſe, that afterwards he did ſo ſone giue place to ye preaching of Auguſtine. At thys time (ſaith Beade) the Brytaines
                     Beade. being at quiet, little regarding the ſtormes paſte in theyr fathers dayes, and hauing reſpect onely to the preſent proſperous éſtate in the which they then liued, were ſo ſet to breake all good orders of truth and iuſtice, that ſcante anye token or remembraunce thereof remayned, but onelye in a fewe, among many other of their doings, which their ownGildas. Hiſtorigrapher Gildas, doth lamētably ſet forth in writing, (he ſayth of them thus) that they neuer toke care to preache the Goſpel of Chriſte vnto the Angles and Saxons, which inhabited the land among them. But yet the goodneſſe of God prouided for the ſayde nation of the Angles, muche more worthy preachers, by whome they might be brought to the faith
               
               
                  
                     POpe Gregorie moued of godly inſtinction in the hundred596 Marianus. Floriacen. Beade. fortie and ſeuen yeare after the arriuall of the Angles in Brytaine, ſent Auguſtine, Melitus, Iuſtus, & Iohn, with ſundry other Monkes that liued in the feare of God, to preach the Goſpell, to the nation of the Angles in Brytaine, whiche
                        Auſtē
                         came into Brytaine. Ethelbert vvas the firſt Chriſtiā King of the Saxons. landed in the Ile of Thanet, and were firſt receyued by Ethelbert king of Kent, whom they conuerted to the Chriſtian Faith with diuerſe of his people in the. xxxiiij. yere of his raigne: and king Ethelbert delaying no time, gaue vnto Auguſtine the Cittie of Canterbury, who furthered thus by the King, receiued at his handes an old Church, ſometyme founded there by the faythfull Romaines, and dedicated y• ſame to our ſauiour Jeſus Chriſt, whiche ſince was called Saint Auſtins.
                  
                  
                     Auguſtine conſecrated Melitus and Iuſtus Biſhops, and
                        Saint Auguſtins at Canterbury builded. appointed Melitus to preach vnto y• Eaſt Saxons, who wyth theyr King Sebert the nephew of Kyng Ethelberte, at the preaching of Melitus receyued the worde of lyfe.

King Ethelbert founded the Church of Saint Paule in London.
                     Saint Paules in London. S. Andrevves at Rocheſter builded. 
                     Iuſtus was made Biſhoppe of Rochester, wher Ethelbert builded for him and his ſucceſſours the church of S. Andrew. Auguſtine ordayned Laurence to ſuccéede him in the Archebiſhopricke, and ſhortely after departed this life. Ethelbert raigned. lvj. yeares and was buried with Berta his wife at Saint Auſtens by Canterbury.
                  
               
               
                  
                     AThelboldus the ſonne of Ethelbert, not onely refuſed the616 
                     
                        •
                     ayth of Chriſt, but alſo toke to wife his mother in lawe. He was oftentimes grie
                        •
                     ed with woodneſſe and diſtraught, but by Laurence the Archbiſhop of Canterbury, he was conuerted to leaue his Idolatrie and vnlawful ſinne, and was turned again to the Faith. He founded the Priory of Fulkeſtone in Kent, and raigned xxv. yeres.
               
               
                  
                     ERcombert the ſonne of Adbold by Emma his wife, hée640 firſt ſuppreſſed the temples of the Idols, and bycauſe his people were giuen to exceſſe, commaunded a ſolempne faſt of. xl. dayes long, to be obſerued throughout all his Kingdome, and raigned xxv. yeares.
                  About this time Henorius Archbiſhop of Canterbury deuided his prouince into Pariſhes.
               
               
                  
                     EGbert his ſonne ſuccéeded, whoſe quiet gouernement for667 a long ſeaſon was after defaced by the cruell murder of Ealbert, and Egelbright his couſins Germās, whom eytherW. Malme. he ſlewe himſelfe, or procured to be ſlaine: he raigned nine yeares.
               
               
                  
                     LOtharius ſuccéeded his brother Egbert, who being aſſaulted oftentimes by Edrike the ſonne of Egbert, in a cruel674 fight was ſhot through with a dart, whereof he dyed vnder his Surgeons handes, when he hadde raygned thirtéene yeares.
               
               
                  
                     EDricke the ſonne of Egbert, within the ſpace of two yeres686 loſt both life and Kingdome. After his death y• kingdome being ſometime gouerned by vſurpers, and ſometime by forreners, beganne to decay.
                  The Kentiſhmen, by caſting of fire, did cruelly burne

                     Moll the brother of Cedwal King of the Weſt Saxons, and twelue of his Knights with him: wherewith Cedwal being moued to fury, did miſerably harry and ſpoyle all Kent, ſo that by the ſpace of ſixe yeares, there was no King in that Country.
               
               
                  
                     VVIthredus the ſonne of Egbert purchaſing peace wyth698 money, was then eſtabliſhed king, in which ſtate he behaued himſelfe very honorably, both in peace and warre. He founded the Priory of Saint Martin at Douer, and raigned xxxi
                        •
                     j. yeres, with whō king Swebhearde raigned ioyntly in one part of his kingdome.
               
               
                  
                     EDbert the ſonne of Withred walked in his fathers ordinaunces,731 and had like ſucceſſe, and raigned thrée & twentie yeare.
               
               
                  
                     EDelbert his brother ſuccéeded, in whoſe time the Citie of754 (Canterbury as is to be thought) was burned by chance: he raigned. xj. yeares.
               
               
                  
                     ALricke the thirde ſonne of Withred ruled Kent after hys765 brethren, and was vanquiſhed in a fought field againſte the Mertians: he raigned xxxiiij. yeares.
               
               
                  
                     EDelbert or Egbert otherwiſe called Pren, thē vſurped the kingdome, and leauyed warre againſt the Mertians, by799 whom he was taken priſoner, and not long after reſiſted, but the Kentiſhmen woulde not receiue him, Cuthred then vſurped, & bare a title of a Kentiſh king for the ſpace of. viij. yeares.
               
               
                  
                     BAlbrede then toke on him Princely dignity, but Egberte
                     807 Kyng of Weſt Saxon ſo diſcomfited him in battayle, that hée fled and forſoke hys Kingdome, when he had raigned xx. yeare, whereby thys kingdome of Kent was vnited to the Kingdome of the Weſt Saxons.
                  
               
            
            
               South Saxons.
               
                  SOuthſex the ſecond Kingdome, cōtained the Counties of Southſex and Surrey, which had on the Eaſte ſide

                  Kent, on the South ſide the Sea, on the Weſte ſide Hampſhire, and on the North the riuer of Thamys: it con aineth the dioceſſes of Chichester and part of Winchester.
               
               
                  
                     AEle the eight from Woden, with his thrée ſonnes, Cimē
                        478 Plencing, & Ciſſa, came into Brytaine with. itj. ſhips, & landed in a place called Kimeneſore, & there ſlew many of the Brytaines, and forced the reſt to make their flighte into a woodde whiche is called Andredſleage. Afterwarde fighting wyth the Brytaines in a place néere vnto Marerodes burne, ſlew many of them, and put the reſte to flight. Then he and Ciſſa his ſonne after long ſiege, brake into the Citie of Andreds Cester, and ſlewe the inhabitantes from the greateſt to the ſmalleſt, and ſo beganne the Kingdome of Southſex: hée raigned. xxxvj. yeares.
               
               
                  
                     CIſſa hys ſonne ſuccéeded, he builte the Citie of Chichester,
                     514 and named it after hys owne name, he raygned lxxvj. yeares.
               
               
                  
                     EThelwulfus (whom Bede nameth Edelwach) was chriſtened590 Eeade. Firſt Chriſtened King in Southſex. in the prouince of the Mercies, in the preſence and at the exhortation of King Wulfhere, who alſo at the font was his godfather, and in ſigne of that adoption, gaue him two prouinces, that is to ſaye, the Ile of Wight, and the prouince of Manures, in the Weſt part of England.
                  
                  
                     Wilfride the Biſhop came to the prouince of the South-Saxons, vnto them did he miniſter the worde of Faith, by the permiſſion and gret reioyſing of the King. This Biſhop Chriſtened the chiefe Lordes and Knightes of the Countrey: and the reſt of the people at the ſame time, or ſone after were Chriſtened by other Prieſtes. The Quéene Ebba was chriſtened in hir Ile, which was in the prouince of the Vicctans: for ſhe was the daughter of Eanfride, who was Eanheres brother, whiche were both Chriſtian men, and all their people. But al the prouince of South Saxons had neuer before that time hearde of the name of God, nor the faith.
                  
                     This Wilfride preached the Goſpell, and not onelye deliuered the people from the perill of damnation, but alſo from an horrible moraine of temporall death. For in thrée yeares before, it had not rayned in all thoſe quarters, whereby a famine deſtroyed the people by heapes, in ſomuch that diuerſe tymes fortye or fiftie in a companye, béeing famiſhed for hunger, woulde goe togyther to ſome rocke or Sea bancke, and caſte themſelues all downe, eyther to be killed with the fal, or drowned in the Sea: but on the ſame day they receyued Baptiſme and Faith, there fell a plentifull ſhoure of rayne, wherewith the Earth flouriſhed againe.
                  Thys Biſhop alſo taught the people there to get their ſuſtenance by fiſhing.
                  
                     Edilwach gaue vnto Byſhoppe Wilfride the lande of fourſcoure and ſeauen tenements, where he might place his companye, the name of the place was Seoleſey. In thys
                        Selſee Moneſtarie in Southſex. place he founded a Monaſterye, to be hys Epiſcopall Sea.
               
               
                  
                     CEadwall a valiaunt yong manne of the Weaſte Saxons, being baniſhed from hys Countrey, came wyth an hoſte of men and ſlewe King Edilwach, waſted that prouince, cruelly murdered and ſpoyled euery where. Edilwach raigned. xxv. yeares.
                  And ſoone after Ceadwall was driuen out by two Captaines of the Kings, Bertham and Anthun, which from that tyme dyd holde and kéepe the Dominion of that prouince: the chiefe of whyche two, was afterwarde ſlayne of the ſame Ceadwall, (being then King of the Weaſt-Saxons,) and the prouince ſubdued: and the latter was ſlaine by Ina.
                  
               
            
            
               
               East Angles.
               EAſtangles the thirde Kingdome contayned the Countryes of Norffolk and Suffolk, Cambridge, and the Ile of Ely, which had on the Eaſt and North ſids the ſea, on the Weſt, Saint Edmondes Dike, with a part of Hertfordſhyre, and on the South ſide Eſſex. It contayneth the dioceſſes of Norwich and Ely.
               
                  
                     VFfa the eight frō 
                     Woden, firſt king of Eaſt Angles, raigned492 vij. yeares.
                  ¶ Titulus raigned. xx. yeares.499
                  
               
               
                  
                     REdwaldus the tenth from Woden, as men write: this is he that for the fauour of Edwin, killed Edelfride king of519 W. Malme. Northūberland. The ſame Redwalde was by y• perſwaſion of Edwyne baptiſed, but after by his wiues coūſel he fell frō the fayth agayn, but his ſonne Dorwaldus in pure and vncorrupted Chriſtianitie was ſlaine by the heathen Rochbert. Redwaldus raigned xxv. yeares.
                  ¶ Gerpenwalde raigned xij. yeares.554 566 Eaſt Angles baptiſed.
                  
               
               
                  
                     SIgebertus being broughte vp in Fraunce, when he fled the enmitie of Redwald, was there baptiſed, wherevpon after his retourne comming to the Crowne of the Eaſt Angles, and deſiring to followe the godly order whiche he had ſéene in Fraunce, ſet vp a Schole to bring vp children, by the helpe and ayde of Byſhop Felix, whom he toke out of Kent for that purpoſe, appointed them maiſters and teachers, after the manner of Kentiſhmen.
                  This Felix 
                     
                        •
                     orne in Burgonia, was made Biſhop of Dunmock,
                     
                        Falix Bishoppe of Donwich.
                      now called Donwich, an auntiente Citie, ſometime of great fame, gouerned by a Maior and thrée Baylifes, nowe ſoare decayed and waſted by the Sea: he ſatte Byſhop xvij. yeares and was buryed at Ramſey.
                  
                  
                     Sigebert renounced the world and became a Monck, and left his Kingdome to his kinſeman Egricke, with whom hée (being aſſaulted of Penda King of the Mercies) ioyned himſelfe in battayle and was ſlaine.
               
               
                  
                  
                     ANna the ſonne of Guido, ſuccéeded Egrieks, and was lykewiſe ſlaine by the furie of Penda. Etheldred daughter to Anna, founded the Churche of Saincte Peter in the Iſle of
                        Ely Minſter founded. 
                     Ely. Anno.
                      674.
                  
                     Athelhere brother to Anna ſuccéeded, and bothe he and Penda were ſlaine by Oſwinus Kyng of the Northumbers, and that deſeruedly, bycauſe he hadde ayded Penda againſt his owne brother, and his kinſman.
                  
                     Adelwaldus hys brother ſuccéeded hym with like fortune, and left the Kingdom to Aldulfus, Elohwoldus and Hisberna, ſonnes of the ſame Athelhore.
                  
                  
                     Etheredus ſuccéeded him.
               
               
                  
                     EThelbertus his ſonne, whome Offa Kyng of Mercies deceitfully790 ſlewe: he was buryed at Hereforde.
                  
                  Uery few men of might did raigne after him in East-Angle, by reaſon of the violence done by the Mercians, vntill S. Edmond.
                  
               
               
                  
                     EDmonde raigned xv. yeares, in whoſe time Hinguar and870 
                     Hubba began Danes, entring the Prouince of the Northumbers, raged ouer all the ſame, and made great ſpoiles. Hinguar hauyng gotten a great pray, left Hubba, and wythAſſerius. his nauy ſayled into Eaſt-Angle, & arriued at a certaine Citie thereof vnawares to the Citizens, ſette it on fire, and ſlueAlbo Florica cenſis. both man, woman and childe. This wicked Hinguar tooke Edmonde King of that Prouince, in a Uillage then called Hegliſdune, neare to a Wood bearing the ſame name, where this holy Edmond being conſtant in the Chriſtian Faith, was firſt by the Pagans beaten wyth battes, then ſcourgedKing Bdmund cruelly martyred by the Danes. with whips, he ſtill calling on the name of Ieſus: hys aduerſaries in a rage ſhotte him ful of Shaftes, and then ſmote off his heade: after whiche time the Angles ceaſed to raigne in the East-Angle, but the ſame was poſſeſſed by Danes, til a fiftie yeares after, that Edward the ſonne of Etheldred did expulſe the Danes, and ioyned that Prouince, and alſo the Eaſt-Saxons, to hys Kingdome of the Weast-Saxons.
                  
               
            
            
               
               East-Saxons.
               
                  ESſex the fourth kingdome contayned Eſſex, Midleſex, and Hartfordſhire, being boūded on the Eaſt, with the Germaine Ocean, on the South with the riuer Thamis, on the Weaſt with Colme, and on the North with Stowre, which at this day parteth Suffolke from Eſſex: it contayneth the dioceſſe of Lō
                     don.
               
               
                  
                     ERchenwine, the eighte from Woden, from whome all the Saxons deriued their genealogies, firſt erected this Countrey527 to a Kingdome, which neuertheleſſe he held as Feodarieto the kings of Kent, who were as yet the very ſoueraines of the whole country frō 
                     Thamis to Humber. And as we haue ſpecified, Vortiger yéelded ſeaſon to Hēgeſt for his deliuery,
                        
                           •
                        eade. when y• Péeres of the Brytains were ſlain on Saliſburie playn, and he taken priſoner.
               
               
                  
                     SLedda the ſonne of Erchenwine, ſuccéeded his father in the587 gouernement, and to eſtabliſhe the ſtate more ſure, married Ricula the daughter of Ermenrich King of Kent, and enioyed hys gouernemente ſo quietly, that he miniſtred ſmall matter to Hiſtoriographers.
               
               
                  
                     SEbert the ſonne of Sledda by Ricula, ruled this kingdome602 after his father. The ſeconde yeare of hys raigne, by the perſwaſion of Ethelbert hys vncle, and preaching of Miletus firſt Byſhoppe of London, he embraced Chriſtianitie, and was baptiſed by Miletus, and (immediately to ſhewe himſelfe a Chriſtian,) builte a Churche to the honour of Saint Peter, on the Weſt ſide of London, in a place, whiche bycauſe it was ouergrowen with Thornes and enuironed wyth Waters, the Saxons at that time called it Thorney, andVVeſtminſter built. nowe of the Monaſterie and Weſt ſcituation is called Westminster.
                  
                  In this place long before was a Temple of Apollo, (as Sulcardus writeth,) whyche being ouerthrowne wyth an Earthquake, Eucius builte a Churche for the Chriſtians,
                        
                           •
                        ulcard
                           ••
                        .
                  
                  
                     
                     Sebert (when he had raigned thirtéene yeres) dyed, and was entombed in the Church which he builte, with his wife Acthelgod, whoſe bodies many yeares after, in the the timeT. Walſingham. of Richarde the ſeconde, were tranſlated from the olde Churche to the newe at Westminster: and there enterred.
               
               
                  
                     SErred, Sewarde and Sigbert, ſonnes of Sebarte, ioyntly (as it ſéemeth) then ruled Eastſex▪
                      men wickedly giuen, irreligious,616 and deadely enemies to the Chriſtian profeſſion: who preſumed contemptuouſlye to the Table of the Lords Supper, beyng not Baptiſed: and bycauſe Miletus woulde not permitte them to be partakers of the Chriſtian Sacramente, they expelled hym from his Sea at London, but ſhortly after Serred encountring with the Weſt Saxons, was ſlaine with both his brethren by king Kinegls.
                  
               
               
                  
                     SIgebert ſurnamed the little, ſonne of Sewarde ſuccéeded in this kingdome, and lefte the ſame to Sigebert his kinſman.
               
               
                  
                     SIgebert ſonne to Sigebalde, brother to Sebert, then ruled in Eastſex, he by the perſwaſion of Oſwy King of Northumbers,
                     
                        
                           •
                        eade▪
                      abandoned all ſuperſtition, and became a Chriſtian, and toke an holye manne Ced wyth hym, who did mightily beate down errours, & wan many by preaching the Chriſtian religion in his Dominions, wherevpon Ced was by Finan conſecrated Biſhoppe of the East Saxons, and then procéeded with more authoritie in hys functiō, ordering Prieſts and Deacons in all places of Eſſex, but eſpecially at Ithanceſter, and Tilberie.
                  
                  Thys Cittie of Ithancester, ſtoode on the bancke of the riuer Pante, that runneth by Maldune in the hundered of Danſey, but now that Citie is drowned in Pante, ſo yt nothing remaineth but the ruines of the Citie in the ſayde riuer. Tilbery ſtandeth on the Thamis ſide.Ralph Cogſhal▪
                     
                  
                  In y• good procéedings of King SIGEBERT, he was ſlain by a kinſman of his owne, vpon none other occaſion, but for that he vſed too muche clemencie towardes his enimies, as

the murtherers themſelues confeſſed.
                  
                     Swidhelin ſonne of Sexbald, ſuccéeded then in this regimēt, who was baptized by Ced in Rendleſham in East-Englande.
                  
                  
                     Sigher then ruled with Sebba, whyche Sebba became a Monke, and is buried at Saint Paules in London.
                  
                  
                     Sigehard then raigned.
                  
                     Erkenwald Biſhop of Eaſtangle founded the Monaſteries of Charteſey in Surrey, and Barking in Eſſex. Anno. 677.
                  
                     Seofride nexte ſucceſſiuely, of whome I finde nothyng recorded.
                  
                     Offa the ſonne of Sigher then ruled this Prouince, he enlarged with building, and enriched with landes the ChurchRich▪ Ciceſ
                           ••
                        . of Weſtminſter, and then forſaking hys wife, landes, kinne and Countrey, he went to Rome with Kenrede King of Mercia, and there in a Monkes coule ended this life, leauing Selred to rule his Countrey.
               
               
                  
                     SElred (whom other call Colred) peaceably after Offa raigned718 Ri. Grincaſtri. 748 in Eſſex thirty yeares, and at length was ſlaine.
               
               
                  
                     SVthred after Selred was ſlayne, raigned in Eastſex: but Egbert King of the Weast-Saxons, the verye yeare that he conquered Kent, ſubdued alſo this Suthred, and annexed Eſſex to hys Kingdome: yet London with the Countrey confining about it, came not in ſubiection to the Weast-Saxons, but obeyed the King of Mercia, as long as that Kingdome continued.
                  
                     Sigehricke and Sigehard afterwarde aſpired to the Kingdome of East Saxon, but with no good ſucceſſe.
               
            
            
               Mercians.
               
                  MErcia the fifth Kingdome and greateſt of the other, contayned Glouceſter, Hereford, Cheſter, Stafforde, Wirceſter, Oxforde, Warwicke, Darby, Leiceſter, Buckingham, Northampton, Notingham, Lincolne, Bedforde, Huntington, and parte of Hartforde ſhires. It had on the Weaſt ſide, the riuer Dee faſt by Chester, and Seuerne faſt by Shrewſburie vnto Bristow: in the Eaſt, the Eaſt ſea: in the South,

                  Thamis vnto London, in the North y• riuer Humber, & ſo Weſtward, down to the riuer Merce, vnto the corner of Wyrhall.
               
               This kingdome of Merce in the beginning was departed into thrée parts, into Weſt Mercia middle Mercia, and Eaſt Mercia: it cōtayneth the dioceſſes of Lincolne, Wircester, Hereforde, Couentrie and Lichfielde.
               
               
                  
                     CReda (the eleuenth from Woden) firſte King of the Mercies,
                     586 raigned ten yeares.
                  ¶ Wibba his ſonne raigned. xx. yeares.596 616 626 W. Malme.
                  
                  ¶ Ceorlus his ſonne raigned. x. yeares.
               
               
                  
                     PEnda the ſonne of Wibba, a manne actiue in warres, but franticke and moſt wicked, toke on him the kingdome of the Mercies, when he was fiftie yeres old: he ſhooke the Cities, and diſturbed the borders of the kings, that were hys owne Countreymenne borne: he ſlewe Edwin and Oſwald, kings of Northumberlande, (where Oſwald was ſlaine is nowe ſcituate the town of Oſwalſtre, which of him toke that name,) he alſo ſlew Sigebert, Egfride, and Anna, kings of the Eaſt Angles, which all were of holy life and conuerſation: hée baniſhed Kenewallus king of Weſt Saxons, but in the ende himſelfe was ſlaine by Oſwyn which ſuccéeded Oſwald hys brother, when he had raigned. xxx. yeares.
               
               
                  
                     PEda the ſonne of Penda ſuccéeded in part of the Kingdome656 W. Malme. being preferred by the gift of Oſwin, whoſe daughter hée had taken to wife, on condition he ſhoulde embrace Chriſtianitie and forſake Idolatry. This Peda was the firſt foūder of Medeſhamsted, now called Petarborow. Through yt treaſon
                        Peterborow founded. of his wife he dyed ſodainly, when he had raigned after hys Father. iij. yeares.
               
               
                  
                     OSwine toke the Kingdome, but he raigned there onely659 thrée yeares.
               
               
                  
                     VLferus brother to Peda, earneſtlye preferred Chriſtianitie662 whych hys brother had begonne, but he was the firſt (ſayeth W of Malmeſbery, that throughe the ſinne of Simony ſold the Byſhoprick of London vnto Wyna. He raigned. xvij. yeares.
               
               
                  
                  
                     EThelred brother to Vlferus ſuccéeded in the kingdome of676 Bishops ſea 
                           •
                         VVorceſter. the Mercians: hée obtayned a Byſhoppes Sea to be in the Citie of Worcester▪ 
                        Boſellus
                      was firſte Biſhoppe there: Egwinus was the ſecond. This Egwinus, by the helpe of Kenredus King of Mercies, founded the Monaſterie of Eueſham, in aEx Carta. place then called Eoueſham, of the ſhepherdes fielde andEuesham. houſe, purchaſed by the ſaide Biſhop. The towne in the Saxons time was called Hotheholme. Aboute the ſame time twoLiber Tewkſ. noble men named Odo and Dodo founded the Priorie of
                        Tewkeſbury. Monaſtery of Glouceſter. Inſcriptiones Glouceſtriae.
                      
                     Tewkeſburie. Alſo Oſricke duke of Gloucester founded the Monaſterie of Gloucester then ſince the ſame is a Biſhops Sea.
                  
                     Etheldred became a Monke at Bardoney, when he had raigned xxx. yeares.
               
               
                  
                     KInredus ſonne to Wolferus, in the fifth yere of his raigne706 went to Rome, and became a Monke.
               
               
                  
                     CElred the ſonne of Ethelred, who as he was maruellous710 in prowes againſt Ina of the West Saxons, ſo was he miſerable by vntimely death, for he rained not paſt. viij. yeres, and was buried at Lichfielde.
                  
               
               
                  
                     EThelbalde raigned in continuall peace many yeares, and718 Chronicle of Holande. Ro. Mai. Epiſtle of Boniface to Ethelbald. then by the procurement of Beruredus, was ſlaine of hys own ſubiects. Unto this Ethelbald, Boniface, ye ſecōd Biſhop of Verche in Holland, after Archbiſhop of Mens vpon the Rijne, an English māborn, who was afterward martyred, ſent an Epiſtle, of the whiche I will here ſette downe a péece to be ſéene, for that it ſheweth partlye the ſtate of that time, and ſerueth for example in time to come.
               
               
                  TO his moſt deare Lorde, and to be preferred in the loue of Chriſt aboue all other kings of England, Edbaldus, Boniface Archbiſhoppe, the Germaine legate, perpetual helth of charitie & loue in Chriſt. We acknowledge before God that we did reioyce to heare of your proſperitie, your Faith and good workes: and we be ſory when we heare any thing that goeth againſt you, eyther in ſucceſſe of warre, or in danger of your ſoule, for we haue heard, that you forbid thefte and robbery, that you loue peace, defende the widowe and

the poore, for the which we giue God thanks: but in that you refuſe lawfull marriage, which if it were to the preferring of chaſtitie, it were cōmendable: and ſith you wallow in leacherie and adultery with Uirgins conſecrate to God, it is both ſhamefull and damnable, for it doth confounde your renowme, bothe before God and man, placing you among Idolators, bicauſe you violate the temple of God. Wherfore my deare ſonne repent, and remember how filthy a thing it is, that thou who by the gifte of GOD raygneſt ouer ſo many nations, ſhouldeſt to the great diſpleaſure of GOD, make thy ſelfe a bonde ſlaue to thyne owne fleſhly luſt. Wée haue hearde alſo that the more parte of noble men and people of the Mercians, by thyne euill example haue left theyr lawfull wiues, and haue defiled the wiues of other, and alſo Uirgins, whiche howe farre it differeth from all good order and honeſtie, let the lawes of ſtraunge nations touche you: for in the auntient Countrey of the Saxons (where was no knowledge of God) if eyther a mayde in hyr fathers houſe, or being married to an huſband, were become an aduoutreſſe, ſhe ſhoulde be ſtrangled by hir own hande cloſed to hyr mouth, and the corrupter ſhoulde be hangedAduoutry amōg the Infidels pushed by death. vpon the pitte where the aduoutreſſe was buryed. If ſhée were not ſo vſed (hyr garmentes being cutte awaye downe to the gyrdle-ſtéede) the chaſte matrones dyd ſcourge and whip hyr, and pricke hyr wyth kniues, and ſo was ſent from Towne to Towne, where other freſhe and newe ſcourgers or whippers did méete and whippe hir, vntyll they hadde killed hyr. Likewiſe the Womedeans, who are the moſte vncleane kinde of people, hadde thys manner of vſage wyth them, that the huſbande beyng deade, the woman togyther wyth the deade bodye ſhoulde caſte hyr ſelfe headlong into the fiered ſtacke or pile of woodde prepared for the burning of theyr bodyes. If therefore the Gentiles (not knowing GOD) hadde ſo greate zeale to chaſtitie, howe muche the more (my deare ſonne) it is to be required at thy handes, who arte a Chriſtian and a King. Haue

therefore compaſſion of thyne owne ſoule, and ſpare the greate number of people, that by thy Fatherlye▪ example yet may beware to offende God, for whoſe ſoules thou ſhalt giue an accompte. Conſider alſo, that if the Englſhe nation, deſpiſing lawfull matrimonye, doe encreaſe by aduoutrye, (as the Frenche men, Italians, and alſo the verye Pagans do caſte in our téeth and vpbrayde vs withall,) of ſuche coniunctions and copulations, ſhall ſpring vppe a peakiſhe daſterdely people, which ſhall deſpiſe God, & wyth theyr wicked qualities vndoe the Countrey, as it came to paſſe to the Burgundians, the people of Prouance, and the Spaniardes, whom the Sarazens haue many yeares aſſaulted for theyr ſinnes whiche in times paſt they had committed. Beſides this, it is told vs, that you take away priuileges of Churches, and thereby giue euill example to your noble men to do the like, but I praye you remember howe terrible vengeaunce God toke vppon the Kings your predeceſſours, whiche committed ſuche offences as we rebuke you for.
                  A wicked ſpirit came vpon Colredus your predeceſſoure, whiche was a defiler of Uirgins, and a breaker of eccleſiaſticall Priuileges, for ſitting royally among his barrons at a dinner, the Diuell plucked away his ſoule without confeſſion of his ſinnes. The Diuell alſo drewe in ſuche a rage. Oſredus king of the Northumbers, whiche was guiltie of the ſame crimes, that with a vile death he loſte both kingdome and life in his luſty yong age. Alſo Charles king of Fraunce whiche ouerthrewe Churches, and altered the Churche money to hys owne vſe, was conſumed with a long tormēt and fearefull death. It followeth therefore my deare beloued ſonne, that with Fatherlye and earneſt prayers we beſéeche you that you will not deſpiſe the Counſel of your Fathers which diligently do admoniſhe your highneſſe, for nothing is more commodious to a good king, than willinglye to amend ſuch faultes when he is warned of them, as Salomō
                      ſayth, who ſo loueth diſcipline, loueth wiſdome: therfore

my déere ſon, declaring our aduice, we beſéech you by the liuing God, by his ſonne Jeſus Chriſt our Lord, and by hys holy ſpirit, that you will remember how tranſitorie this preſent life is, and howe ſhorte and momentane the pleaſure of this filthie fleſhe is, and how vile and ſhamefull a thing it is, that man ſhall leaue euill examples vnto his poſteritie for euer: beginne therefore to frame your life in better wayes, and amend the errors of your youth, that you may obtayne prayſe with men in this life, and eternall glorie in the life to come: we wiſh your Highneſſe well to fare, and to encreaſe in all goodneſſe. Ethelbald was ſlayne at Secgeſwald, and was buryed at Hrependune.
                  
               
               
                  
                     BEraredus the murtherer of Ethelbald, did nothing worthy749 to be remembred, but being ſtraightway ſlayne by Offa, had an end méete for a Traytour.
               
               
                  
                     OFfa, Nephew to Ethelbald ſuccéeded: he ioyned battayle749 with Kineulfus King of the Weast Saxons, and gote the victorie. He ſent for Ethelbert King of the Eaſt Angles, promiſing great things by flatterie, but when he had got him to his Palace, he cauſed him to be beheaded, and then vniuſtly inuaded the Kingdome of the Eaſt Angles.
                  
                  He cauſed the reliques of S. Albon to be taken vp, and
                        Vita Alboni. S▪ Albons builded put in a Shrine aborned with golde and precious ſtones, and builded there a princely Monaſterie.
                  He founded the Abbey of Bathe.
                  
                  He tranſlated the Archbiſhops Sea to Lichfield.
                  
                  He made a dike betwéene Wales and the Kingdome of
                        Offa Dike. the Mercies, which ditch extendeth by South from the parts about Bristow, ouer the Mountaynes of Wales, and ſo North toward Flint, and vnder a hill of coale, euen to the mouth of Dee, or the North Sea. He raigned xxxix. yeares, and dyed at Oflay, and was buryed in a Chappell which then ſtoode onOfflay. the bancke of the Riuer Ouſe, without the Towne of Bedford.
                  
               
               
                  
                     EGbertus or Ecfride his ſonne, raigned one yeare. Alquine
                     Alquine. writte to Osbert of the Mercians, that the noble yong Ecfride dyed not ſo ſoone for his owne faultes, but bycauſe his

Father was a great ſheader of bloud.Plae
                           •••
                         A
                           ••
                        inus. 789 W
                           •
                        l. Malme.
                  
               
               
                  
                     KEnulfus, Nephew in the fifth degrée vnto Penda, warre
                        •
                      on the Kentiſh Saxons puniſhed their Country very ſore, and caryed away bound their King Egberthus, but not long
                        Winchelcomb founded. after, when he had builded a Church at Winchelcomb▪
                      on the day of dedication therof, he deliuered him, declaring a worthyBishops Sea a
                           •
                         
                        Hereford founded. example of clemencie. He founded the Church of S. Ethelbert in Hereford and raigned xxiiij. yeares.
               
               
                  
                     KEnelmus ſonne to Egbertus a child of ſeauen yeares, was813 innocently ſlayne by his Siſter Quenda, whereby he obtayned the name of a Martyre.
               
               
                  
                     CEolwulfus, brother to Kenulfus, raigned one yeare, and820 was expulſed by Bernulfus.
                  
               
               
                  
                     BErnulfus in the third yeare of his raigne, was ouercome821 by Egbertus King of Weaſt Saxons at Elyndune.
                  
               
               
                  
                     LVc
                           ••
                        us after he had raigned two yeares, was oppreſſed824 by the Eaſt Angles.
                  
               
               
                  
                     VVIthlaſnus being at the firſt ſubdued by Egbirth raigned826 xiij. yeares, paying to him and his ſon a tribute.
               
               
                  
                     BErthulfus raigned xiij. yeares, in the ſame eſtate, till at839 W. Malme. the laſt he was chaſed beyond the ſeas, by the ſea rouers of Denmarke.
                  
               
               
                  
                     BVrdredus paying the Tribute, enioyed the ſame twenty852 yeares, and then he being depoſed, and driuen out of his Coūtrey, fled to Rome, and there was buryed at the Engliſh ſchole. Then that kingdome was by the Danes deliuered to Geolwolfus and in few yeares after that, Alfred y• Nephew of Egbirth gate it. So the kingdome of the Mercies fel away in the yeare of Chriſt. 875.
               
            
            
               Northumbers.
               THe ſixt Kingdome was of the Northumbers, whiche conteyned Lankiſhire, Yorkeſhire, Cumberland, Weſtmerland, Northumberland. It had on the Weaſt the Sea, by South, the Riuer of Humber, and ſo downeward toward the Weaſt

by the endes of the Shires of Nottingham and of Darby, vnto the Riuer of Merce▪
                   and hath the dioceſſe of Yorke, Durham, and Carelile.
               
               At the beginning, it was deuides into two Kingdomes, Bernitia and Deira. Bernitia ſtretched from Edenborough Frith to Tine and Deira, from Tine to Humber, but theſe two were ſhortly vnited.
               When Hengeſt had eſtabliſhed himſelfe in Kent, he ſentW. Malme. his brother Otha, & his ſonne Ebuſam to poſſeſſe the North partes of Britaine, where many times they put the men of that prouince to flight, and for the ſpace of 99. yeares, they and their ſucceſſors aſcribes to themſelues the names of Dukes, and bare themſelues vnder the Kingdome of Kent, but in the yeare of Chriſt. 547. the yeare after Hengeſts death 60. that Dukedome was changed into a Kingdome.
               
                  
                     IDa▪
                      the ninth frō 
                     Beldegius, and the tenth from Wodden,
                     547 continued fourtéene yeares in the Kingdome of Deires.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Ae
                           •
                        la his ſucceſſor of the ſame kinded, but by another559 line, ſtrongly aduanced his Kingdome thirtie yeares.
                  In his time, children of Northumberland were caryed to be ſolde in the Market at Rome, where when the Citizens beheld them, and wondred at their comelyneſſe and beautie of face, amongſt other, Gregory the Archdeacon of the Apoſtolicall ſeate being one, aſked of what Nation they were, vnto whome it was anſwered, that they were the children of Engliſhmen, of the prouince of Deires, and ſubiect to Alla their King, but were Painims, wherevnto Gregory ſayd, they ſhall be taught to ſing Allelu
                           •
                        a there, during the raigne of Alla ouer the Deires.
                  
               
               
                  
                     ADda the eldeſt ſonne of Ida raigned vpon the Bernitians ſeauen yeares:
                  ¶ Elappea fiue yeares:
                  ¶ Theodwald one yeare:
                  ¶ Frethulfe ſeauen yeares:
                  ¶ Theodrike ſeauen yeares:
                  
                     ¶ Aethelfride two yeares, and all in the life of Bernitianus.
                  
               
               
                  
                     AEThelrike, the ſonne of Ida, raigned in both prouinces of582 Wil. Malme. 
                     Deirie and Bernicia fiue yeares.
               
               
                  
                     EThelfride, brother to Ethelricus, made greater ſpoyle ofMarianus. Floriacenſis. the Britaines, than all the other Kings of the Angles, and vnpeopled and ſubdued more of their Countreys, and made the ſame tributarie and habitable for Engliſhmen: wherefore Aadan King of the Scottes being greately moued with his happie ſucceſſe, came againſt him with a mighty Army, but was ouercome and put to flight of a few Saxons, whiche battell was fought by Ethelfreth, in a place called Degſaſtan, in the eleuenth yeare of his raigne, and in the firſt yeare of Phocas the Emperoure.
                  This King alſo long after this time, leuyed a newe power, and according as Auguſtine the Archbiſhop of Canterbury had before ſpoken, marched toward the Citie of Legious, which of the Britaines is called Cairlegion, and there firſt ſlew 1200. Monckes, aſſembled to make prayer vnto God,1200. Monkes ſlayne. for the good ſucceſſe of their Souldioures in the battell: and afterward he ouerthrewe the whole power of the Britaynes hoſt. He was ſlayne by Redwall King of the East Angles in a battell néere vnto a Riuer whiche is called Idle, in the yeare of Chriſt 616. when he had raigned xxvij. yeares.
               
               
                  
                     EDwyne ſuccéeded and droue out the ſeauen ſonnes of617 Firſt Chriſtian King of Northumberland. Marianus. Floriacen. Wi.
                      King Ethelfride.
                  
                  In Anno 626. Paulinus being the thirde Biſhop of Rochester, was conſtituted by Iuſtus then Archbiſhop of Canterburie, to be Biſhop ouer the Northumbers, and ſente by Eadbald to Edwine the King of that nation, with his Wife, being the daughter of King Ethelbert, and ſiſter of the ſayde King Eadbald.
                  
                  A certayne deſperate fellowe, named Eomer, was ſente vnto King Edwine, by Guicheline King of the Weaſt Saxons, who came vnto him on Eaſter day, and hauing a naked weapen vnder his garment, aſſayled the King, but Lilla his ſeruant thruſt himſelfe before ye ſtroke, yet notwithſtanding

the Kyng was with that ſtroke wounded throughe the bodye of his faithfull ſeruaunt.
                  The ſame night the Quéene his wife was deliuered of a daughter, whyche vppon Whitſondaye nexte after, was the firſte that was baptized of Paulinus the Byſhop, and named Eanfleda.
                  
                  In the yeare of Chriſt. 628. Edwine, the moſt mighty king of the Northumbers, and his people, receiued the word of God, at the preaching of Paulinus the Biſhoppe: this was done in the xj. yeare of hys raigne, and in the 230. yeare after the arriuall of the Angles in Brytaine.
                  
                  
                     Edwine gaue vnto Pauline a Byſhops Sea in the CitieCathedrall Church of Yorke founded. of Yorke, and began the Cathedrall Church of S. Peter there, whiche Church was after finiſhed by King Oſwald his ſucceſſor, after this, in encreaſing of the Chriſtian Faith and heauenly kingdome, his earthly poſſeſſions did wonderfully encreaſe, for he firſt of al the Angles broughte Brytaine wholy vnder his ſubiection, ſauing the Kingdome of Kent.
                  
                  
                     Edwine in the xvij. yeare of his raigne, and xlviij. of hys age, was ſlaine in a battel whiche he fought at Headfeld, with the moſte valiant Painime Penda King of the Mercies, and Ceadwalla Kyng of the Brytaines. Paulinus
                      the Biſhop buylded
                        Lincolne Minſter founded. Beade.
                      the great Church at Lincolne. In the raigne of King Edwine, ſuche was the peace and tranquilitie throughe all Brytaine, whiche way ſoeuer King Edwines dominions lay, that a weake woman mighte haue walked with hir newe borne babe ouer all the I and without any domage. Moreouer, for the refreſhing of wayfaring men, he ordained cuppes of yronCuppes of braſſe by the high vvayes. or braſſe, to be faſtned by ſuch cleare Wels and Fountaines as did runne by the wayes ſide, whych Cuppes no man durſt touch further than to his owne preſent vſe & neceſſity, for the loue & good wil they bare to their prince, who was for ye time of his raigne ſo honored and loued, that the triumphant banners were borne before him, not in war only, but in peace to, whereſoeuer he went abroad.
                  After the death of Edwine, the Kingdome of Northumberland
                     
was againe diuided.
               
               
                  
                     OSriche the ſonne of Elfrike, who was Edwins vnckle, ſuccéeded633 in the gouernance of Deira. And Eanfride the ſonne of Ethelfride, ruled ye 
                     Bernicians: but both theſe forſaking the Chriſtian profeſſion, wherein they were inſtructed, yéelded themſelues to be defiled with the filth of Idolatry: but thys Apoſtacie was reuenged by Cedwall King of ye 
                     Brytans, who ſlewe them bothe, and with tragicall ſlaughter ſpoyled Northumberland.
                  
               
               
                  
                     OSwald brother to Eanfride, then gouerned this Kingdom,634 who with a ſmall army ouercame the Brytans, and ſlewe Cedwall theyr King at Deniſeburne. He ſent for Aidan a Scot to aduance ye Chriſtian religion among his people, aſſigning to him the Iſle of Lindisfarne or holy Iland, for his Sea. Hée greatly enlarged his Kingdome, reconciled the Deirians and Bernitians, whych did deadly hate one the other. And when he had raigned viij. yeres, was ſlaine in a cruel battel at Maſerfielde, by Penda King of Mercia, and canonized a Sainct.
               
               
                  
                     OSwine brother to Oſwald, ſuccéeded: he buried the heade642 and armes of Oſwald, whyche Penda commaunded to be hanged vpon poles. His gouernment was greatly diſquieted by inuaſion of the Mercians, rebellion of his own ſonne Aelfride, and inſurrection of Adilwald ſonne to Oſwald. Hée murthered Oſwy, the ſonne of Oſrike, who ruled Deira, béeing traiterouſly deliuered vnto him at Ingethling, whereLiber Lichfield. 
                           •
                        . Rudbern
                           •
                        . afterwarde a Monaſterie was erected. But at length he deliuered his Country from forraine inuaſion, vanquiſhed the Mercians with Penda in a foughte fielde neare the riuer Iewet, brought them to his ſubiection, and cauſed them to be inſtructed in the Chriſtian Faith.
                  He builded a Churche among the Mercians called Lichefielde,
                     Lichfield Churche a Byshops ſea founded. and procured the ſame to be a Biſhops ſea, in Anno. 657.
                  
                     Duina was firſt Byſhoppe there of Mercia, and alſo of Lindisferne: for there were then ſo fewe Prieſts, that one Byſhoppe was compelled to gouerne two Prouinces. King Oſwine ended his life quietly, when he had raigned xxxij. yeres.
               
               
                  
                  
                     EGfride his lawfull ſonne, then inherited Northumberland:
                     670 he depoſed Wilfride of the Biſhoprike, and appoynted two Biſhops ouer the Northumbers. Mildred,
                      otherwiſe called Etheldred, his wife, would by no meanes accompany hir huſband, but continued a Uirgine, and after ſhe had bin maried twelue yeares, tooke at the handes of Wilfride the vaile and habite of a Nunne, and builte the Monaſterie of Eely, where ſhe was Abbeſſe.
                  
                     Egfride hir huſband fought a battell with Edilfride King of Mercia, but after they were reconciled by Theodore the Biſhop. Then turning his power againſt Ireland, he ſente Berte thither, who miſerably deſtroyed the ſéely people. But the yeare following, he marched againſt the Pictes (contrarie to the good counſell of S. Cuthbert, whome he made Biſhop) and was ſlayne by them in an ambuſh, when he had raigned fiftene yeares.
               
               
                  
                     ALfride, baſtard ſonne of Oſwine, ſuccéeded after his brother685 
                     Egfride. He did repaire y• decayed ſtate of Northumberland, but coulde not recouer all that Picts, Scottes, and Brytaines tooke frō the Northumbers at the death of his brother. He raigned ninetéene yeares.
               
               
                  
                     OSred his ſonne, a child of eyght yeares ſuccéeded, who,704 whē he had wickedly raigned eleuen yeares, was murthered by his kinſmen Kenred and Oſricke.
                  
               
               
                  
                     KEnred, when he had ſlaine Oſred, ruled Northumberland
                     715 two yeares.
               
               
                  
                     OSricke obteyned the Kingdome after xj. yeares, and elected Ceolnulph brother of Kenred to be his ſucceſſor.
               
               
                  
                     CEolnulph raigned in this prouince with great pietie &728 victorie viij. yeares, & then forſooke the eſtate of a King, and tooke the habite of a Moncke in the holy Iland.
                  
                     Benedict, who firſte broughte Maſons, Paynting, and Glaſing into this Realme to the Saxons, flouriſhed at thisGlaſing brought among the Saxons. Bede famous. time. Beda alſo that famous learned man, liued at this time, who dedicated his Hiſtorie of the Church of England to the forenamed Ceolnulph.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     EGbert, couſin germane to Ceolnulph, raigned in Northumberland
                     736 Wil. Malme. twenty yeares peaceably, and then forſaking the Worlde, entred into Religion, and became a Monke: his brother bearing the ſame name, was Archbiſhop of Yorke, which Sea he greatly aduanced, and founded there a moſt woorthy Librarie, repleniſhed with all goodLibrarie at Yorke.
                      Authours.
               
               
                  
                     OSwulfe ſuccéeded his Father, who was ſlayne by the757 people in the firſt yeare of his raigne.
               
               
                  
                     MOllo then tooke the regiment, and after eleuen yeares758 was traytecouſly murthered by Alerede.
                  
               
               
                  
                     ALered raigned after him eleuen yeares, and was enforced76
                           •
                        
                      by the people to leaue the Countrey.
               
               
                  
                     AThelred or Etheldred the ſonne of Mollo, was aduanced780 to the regiment of Northumberland by the people, and the fifth yeare after was by them depriued.
               
               
                  
                     AELfwold then was proclaymed King of Northumberland,
                     785 and when he had raigned eleuen yeares, was ſlayne by his ſubiects: he lyeth buryed at Haugustald.
                  
               
               
                  
                     OSredé, the ſonne of Aelerede then ſuccéeded, but the firſte796 yeare he was depriued.
               
               
                  
                     AEThelred or Etheldred who was before depoſed, now receyued797 the Kingdome, and when he had ruled foure yeares, was alſo miſerably ſlayne. After his death, thys Kingdome decayed, and was pitifully ranſacked by ciuill ſedition, and foraigne inuaſions, for the ſpace of 30. yeares, in whiche ſpace, there ruled héere withoute title of Kings
                  ¶ Eardulfe,
                  
                  ¶ Alfwold,
                  
                  ¶ Eandred,
                     Lib. A
                           •
                        tonenſis.
                  
                  ¶ Ethelred,
                  
                  ¶ Readulfe,
                  
                  ¶ Osbert, which two laſt, were ſlaine at Yorke, by the Danes, in a place yet to this day called Elle Crafte.
                  
                  This Osbert rauiſhed a Lady of his Countrey, wife to Bernebokard, in reuenge whereof, the ſame Bernebokard
                     
fléeing into Denmarke, returned againe with the Danes Hinguer
                      and Hubba, and ariued in holy Iland, and ſo came to Yorke, and there ſlew King Osbright.
                  
                  ¶ Egbert then obteyned Northumberland.
                  
               
               
                  
                     RIcſy then vſurped it, and after him Cuthred, frō whome Sitricke the Dane gote it, vnto whome King Athelſtane the Monarche gaue his daughter in mariage.
               
            
            
               Weast Saxons.
               THe ſeanenth Kingdome was of the Weaſt Saxons, which conteyned the Countreys of Barkeſhire, South-hampton, Wiltſhire, Dorcetſhire, Somerſetſhire, Deuonſhire, and Cornewall: and hath dioceſes Bathe and Welles, Sariſburie, and Exeſter: hauing on the Eaſt ſide Southſex, on the North ſide Thames, on the South and the Weaſt the Sea Ocean.
               This Kingdome, although it tooke beginning long after the firſt comming of the Saxons, yet the ſame endured longeſt, and ouercomming all the other Kingdomes, broughte them againe to one Monarchy.
               
                  
                     CErdic, the tenth from Woden, with his ſonne Kenrike, landed in Britaine, at a place called Cerdike ſhore, and ſlew Natanleod King of the Britaines, and fiue thouſand men, of whoſe name the Countrey as farre as Cerdikes foorde, was called by the name of Natanleod.
                  
               
               
                  
                     CErdike and Kenrite began to raigne as Kings, and519 the ſame yeare they fought with the Britaines in a place called Cerdikes foorde, and departed vanquiſhers.
                  After that, they fought with the Britaynes in a place called Cerdicks lege.
                  
                  They tooke the Ile of Wight, and gaue the ſame to their Nephewes Stuffe and Withgare, and ſlewe the Britaines in Wethgarbirg. He raigned xvij. yeares. Withgare the Nephew of Cerdic was buried at Withgarbrig, or the Citie of Withgar.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     KEnrike the ſonne of Cerdic fought with the Britaines at5
                           •
                        6 
                     Seareſberige, and afterwards at Beranbrige, and at both times put them to flight, and raigned xxv. yeares.
               
               
                  
                     CEaulin the ſonne of Kenrike tooke vpon him the Kingdome560 of the Weſt Saxons.
                  
                  In the beginning of his raigne he diſcomfited Ethelbert King of Kent and ſlew his two Dukes Oſlaue and Cnebban at Wibbandune. Afterward his brother Cutholfe vanquiſhed the Britaines at Bedford, and wanne from them the townes of Liganburge, Egelſburge, Benſington, and Eigneſham.
                  
                  Sixe yeres after, Ceaulin ſlew thrée kings of the Britaines, Commeaile, Condid
                              •
                           n,
                      & Fariemeile, at Deorham, and tooke thrée Cities from them, Gloceſter, Cirenceſter, and Bathanceſter.
                  
                  After he fought with the Britaines at Fethanleah▪
                      in whichTho. Rudborne. Leyland. he had the victorie, but loſt his ſonne Cutha: for now his fortune changed, and when he had raigned xxxiij. yeares, he was ouercome at Wodneſbeorhe, or Wannes ditch in Wilſhire, and expelled out of his Kingdome by the Britaines.
                  
               
               
                  
                     CEalrike the ſonne of Cutholfe ruled the Weſt Saxons fiu
                        •
                     
                     591 yeares.
               
               
                  
                     CEolnulfe ſon of Cutha before named ſuccéeded, who had598 continuall warres either with the Engliſhmen▪
                      with Britaines, with the Scottes, or with the Pictes, and laſtly moued warre againſt the South Saxons, and there dyed when he had raigned fourtéene yeares.
               
               
                  
                     KInegilſus the ſonne of Ceolrike ſuccéeded. He brought his611 Marian. Floria. W
                           •
                        g. hoſt againſt the Britaines into Beandune, and there 
                        •
                     lew of them two thouſand xlvj.
                  He alſo fought with Penda King of Mercians néere vnto Cirenceſter, and after made peace with him. And ſhortly afterVVeſtſex baptiſed. in the yeare of Chriſt 635. by the preaching of Berinus, King Kinegilſus and all his people receiued the Chriſtian faith, to whome, King Oſwald was Godfather at the Font, of which Kings, the ſaid Berinus had granted to him the Citie of Dorchester, and builded there an houſe of Canons forVita Berini.
                     
his Biſhops Sea. Kinegilſus raigned xxvij. yeares.Dorcheſter a Bishops Sea. 6
                           •
                        8
                  
               
               
                  
                     GVichiline the ſonne of Kinegilſus was baptiſed by Berinus the Biſhop in the Citie of Dorchester, and deceaſed the ſame yeare.
               
               
                  
                     CVthredus the ſonne of King Guicheline, was baptiſed639 at Dorcheſter, by Berinus the Biſhop, who was his Godfather at the Font. He raigned foure yeares.
               
               
                  
                     KEnnewalcus the ſonne of King Kinegilſus, tooke on him64
                           •
                         VVincheſter a Bishops Sea. Malmesbery buylded. Vita Aldelm
                              •
                           .
                      the Kingdome of the Weſt Saxons.
                  
                  He founded the Cathedral Church in Wincheſter placing there a Biſhops ſea.
                  He gaue Meydulfus burgh to Aldelmus the Abbot, there to builde a Monaſterie. Afterwarde béeing infeſted with warres by Penda King of the Mercians, bycauſe he had forſaken his wife, ſiſter of the ſayd Penda, was by him driuen out of his Kingdome, and fledde to Anna King of East Angles, where he was baptiſed of Biſhop Foelix, and after was reſtored to his kingdome by the help of the forenamed Anna. He raigned xxx. yeares. After whom Quéene Sexburgeo his wife gouerned a while. She foūded a Monaſtery of Nunnes in the Ile of Shepey, and became hir ſelfe a Nunne, and after Abbeſſe of Eely.
                  
               
               
                  
                     EAſ
                           •
                        winus Nephew to Kinegilſus ſuccéeded, he fought a67
                           •
                        
                      battell againſt Wulfere King of Mercia, in a place called Bidanheafod He raigned two yeares.
               
               
                  
                     KEnewinus, ſonne to Kinnegilſus, chaſed the Britaines euen676 to the Sea ſhore, and raigned nine yeares.
               
               
                  
                     CAdwalla, Nephew to Ceauline ſuccéeded in the Kingdome.685
                  
                  He ſlew Berthune Duke of the South Saxons, and broughtMarianus. that prouince vnder gréeuous bondage.
                  After that, he & his brother Mull waſted Kent, & ſubdued the Ile of Wight, which till that time was giuē to Idolatrie, wherof he purged them, giuing the fourth part therof to Biſhop Wilfride, who appoynted Preachers to conuerte the people of that Ile to Chriſtianitie. Ceadwalla once agayne

ſpoyling the Countrey of Kent, his brother Moll, and xij. of his Knightes were ſlaine by fire caſt vpon them, after which tune, euen before he was baptiſed, he gaue for tithe or tenth to God all the pray and ſpoyles he had gotten to hisWil. Malme. owne vſe: in whome (ſaith Malmeſburie) although we prayſe his affection, we allow not the example: for it is written, that who ſo offereth the ſacrifice of poore folkes good, doth as it were ſacrifice the ſonne in the ſight of his Father.
                  This being done, he went to Rome to be baptiſed, when he had raigned two yeares ouer the Weſt Saxons.
                  
               
               
                  
                     INe raigned among the Weſt Saxons, a noble man, of great687 Aſſer. power and wiſedome, and therewith valiant and hardie, in feates of armes very expert: he mainteined ſuch warre againſt the Kentiſh Saxons, that he conſtrayned them to ſéeke and intreate meanes of peace, giuing to him for the ſame great giftes 30000. Mancas (péeces of Gold ſo named.)
                  This Ine was the ſonne of Kenred, the ſonne of Ceadwolde, brother to Keadwold, and ſonne to Chenling, ſonneMarian. of Kenri, ſonne of Cerdic, the firſt King of the Weaſt Saxons.
                  
                  This man builded firſt the Colledge of Welles.
                     Colledge of VVelles, and Abbey of Glaſtenbury builded.
                  
                  He alſo builded the Abbey of Glastenburie, and payde the Peter Pence firſt to Rome.
                  
                  When he had gouerned the Weaſt Saxons by the ſpace of ſeauen and thirtie yeares, by the earneſt laboure of hys wife Etheldreda, which was Abbeſſe of Barking in Eſſex, he gaue vp his royall dignitie, and went to Rome.
                  
               
               
                  
                     EThelard kinſman on the fathers ſide to Ine, ſuccéeded in726 the Kingdome, notwithſtanding Oſwald a yong man of the Kings bloud did diſturbe the beginning of his raigne,Wil. Malme. for he ſtirred vp Rebellion among the inhabitants, but not long after he died, and then Ethelard raigned quietly fouretéene yeares.
               
               
                  
                     ENthrede his kinſman made warre on Ethelwald King of Mercia and againſt the Britaines, and had of them the victorie.
                  In hys tyme there appeared two Blaſing Starres,

raſting as it were burning brands towards the North. HeBlaſing Starres. raigned ſixtéene yeares.
                  The Engliſhmen buryed not the bodyes of their dead
                        Antiqui. Britan. Eccleſi. Buriall in Church-yardes. in Cities, vntill the time of Cuthbert Archbiſhop of Canterburie, who procured of the Pope, that in Cities there ſhould be poynted Church-yardes.
               
               
                  
                     SIgebert was made King of the Weaſt Saxons. He was cruell757 W. Malme. Scal. Cro
                           ••
                        . and tirannous towards his ſubiects, and chāged antient Lawes and cuſtomes after his owne luſt and pleaſure, and bycauſe a certayne noble man ſome deale ſharply aduertiſed him to change his manners, he put him to cruell death: and for ſo muche as he continued in his malice, and would not amend, he was depriued of al kingly authoritie,A Tirant came to a miſerable end and shamefull death. and laſtly, as a perſon forlorne, wandring in woods, and hiding himſelfe in caues of wilde Beaſtes, he was ſlayne in Andreds Walde by a Swineheard, whoſe Lorde and mayſter called Cumbra, he had wrongfully put to death, whē he had not raigned one yeare.
               
               
                  
                     KEnulphus of the bloud of Cerdicus appeaſed certayne757 murmours and grudges that were amongſt the people, for the depoſing of his predeceſſor Sigebert. He founded theBishops ſea at VVelles founded. Cathedrall Churche of Welles. As he haunted a woman which he kept at Merton, he was ſlayne by treaſon of one Olio, the kinſman of Sigebert late King, when he had raigned nine and twentie yeares, and was buryed at Winchester.
                  
               
               
                  
                     BRithricus of the bloud of Cerdicus, was made King of786 
                     Weaſt Saxons.
                  
                  He maryed Eadburga the Daughter of Offa King of Mercia, by whoſe power he expelled Egbert, that was an vnder King in the Lordſhip of the Weaſt Saxons.
                  
                  In his tyme it rayned blond, whiche falling on mensBloud rayned. clothes, appeared like Croſſes.
                  In Anno 800. the Danes arriued in the Ile called Portland,
                     The Danes firſt ariued in this land. but by the puiſſance of Brithricus, and other Kings of the Saxons, they were ouercome at Donmouth, driuen backe,

and compelled to auoyde the land.
                        Marianus. The King poyfoned by his vvife.
                  
                  
                     Brithricus was poyſoned by his wife Ethelburga, when he had raigned ſeauētéene yeares, & was buryed at Warham. For this déede, the Nobles ordeyned that from thenceforth the Kings wiues ſhould not be called Quéenes, nor ſuffered to ſitte with them in place of eſtate.
                  
                     Eadburge with infinite treaſure fled into France, where offering a greate portion of hir Golde to King Charles of France, he ſayd vnto hir, chooſe Eadburge whome thou wilte haue to thy Huſband, me, or my ſonne: and ſhe anſwered, if choyſe be granted me, I chooſe your ſonne, bycauſe he is younger than you: then (quoth Charles) if thou hadſt choſenAfter a vvicked life follovved a miſerable end to Queene. Eadburge. me, thou ſhouldeſt haue had my ſonne, but bycauſe thou haſt choſen my ſonne, thou ſhalt haue neyther him nor me, and then gaue to hir a Monaſterie, wherein ſhe profeſſed hirſelfe a Nunne, and became their Abbeſſe a few yeares, but afterwards committing adulterie with a lay man, and caſt out of the Monaſterie, ſhe ended hir life in pouertie & miſerie,Houeden. as of many that haue ſéene hir we heard, ſayth mine Author Aſſerius.
                     Aſſer.
                  
               
               
                  
                     EGbrichus obtayned the gouernement of the Weaſt Saxons.
                     802 He tamed the Welchmen, vanquiſhed Bertulphus King of the Mercians at Hellendune, and ſubdued to his obeyſanceW. Malme. the Kentiſh Saxons, Eaſt Saxons, and Northumbers. He cauſed the braſen Image of Cadwaline King of the Britaines to béeScal. Croni. throwen downe, and this Lande no more to be called Britaine, but Anglia or England. He was Crowned at Wincheſter.
                     Britaine firſt named England.
                  
                  In the 33. yeare of his raigne the Danes ariued at Lindisferne,
                     Danes arriued heere. Sca. Cro.
                      and foughte with the Engliſhmen at Carham, where two Biſhops, two Earles, and a greate number of the Engliſh people were ſlayne. Two yeares after y• 
                     Danes ariued in Weſt Wales, where Egbright ouercame them at Hengiſtendon. He raigned ouer the moſt part of England the ſpace of ſeauen and thirtie yeares and ſeauen monethes, and was buryed at Winchester.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     ADelnulfus the ſonne of Egbrichus beganne his raigne ouer8
                           •
                        9 Wil. Malme. the more parte of Englande. He tooke to wife Iudith, daughter to the King of France, and had by hir four ſonnes, which were Kings after him.
                  In his time, there came a great armie of the Pagan Danes
                     Alredus Riusall. with 350. Ships into the mouth of Thamis, and ſo to London, and ſpoyled it, and put to flight Beorthulfe King of Mercia,
                     Danes ſpoyle London. with all his power which came to bid them battel, and then the Danes went with their armie into Southerie: then Adhelnulfus with his ſonne Adhelbald, and a great army came againſt the foreſayd Danes, and at a place called Aolea they fought a cruell battell, wherein the moſt parte of the Danes were ſlayne.
                  The ſame yeare Adhelſtane the ſonne of Adhelfus, andSca. Cro. 
                     Calchere y• Earle ſlew a great armie of the Paganes at Sandwich in Kent, and tooke nine of their Shippes.
                  
                     Adhelnulfus ſent his ſonne Alfride to Rome with a great number of noble men and other, at which time Pope Leo confirmed the ſaid Alfride, and tooke him to his ſonne by adoption, and alſo conſecrated him King.
                  This Adhelnulfus did make the tenth part of his kingdomeTenth giuen to the Church by King Adelnulfus. frée from tribute and ſeruice to the King, and gaue it to them that did ſerue Chriſt in the Churche: and the ſame yeare he wente to Rome, where he repaired the EngliſheEnglish Schoole at Rome repayred. Schole, which was firſt founded by Offa King of the Mercies.
                  
                  In the meane ſeaſon, his ſonne Adhelbald rebelling, vſurped the Kingdome, ſo that when Adhelnulfus returned, he was forced to deuide the Kingdome, and to take the worſe part. He raigned eightéene yeares, and was buryed at Winchester ſayth Aſſer.
                     Aſſer.
                  
               
               
                  
                     ADhelbald raigned after his Father: againſt God, & the857 worthineſſe of Chriſtianitie, yea, and cōtrarie to the cuſtome of all Paganes, he preſumed to hys Fathers marriage bedde, and with greate infamie, married Iudith the French Kings daughter. He raigned after his fatherFlori, Wigor.
                     
two yeares, and was buryed at Shirborne.
                  
               
               
                  
                     AThelbrict, brother to Athelbald, tooke vnder his dominion860 
                     Kent, Southery, and Suſſex.
                  
                  In this time, the greate Armie of the Paganes inuadedDanes inuade and ſpoyle VVincheſter. and ſpoyled the Citie of Wincheſter, who when they returned with a great pray towards their Ships, Oſrike Earle of Hampton, and his folke, and Adhelnulfus the Earle, with Barkeſhire men, met them, and farre from any Towne they ioyned battell, where the Paganes were ſlayne in euery corner, and the Chriſtians kept the field.
                  The Normans and Danes made a firme league with the Kentiſhmen, who promiſed them money to kéepe the league, but notwithſtanding the Paganes brake priuilie out of theirDanes make a league, and breake it. Caſtels by night, and ſpoyled all the Eaſt parts of Kent.
                  
                  
                     Athelbrict raigned fiue yeares, and was buryed at Shirborne.
                  
               
               
                  
                     ETheldred brother to Adhelbrict, receyued the Kingdome866 of the Weaſt Saxons. In the firſte yeare of his raigne, a great Nauie of Paganes came into England, and remayned all the winter in the Kingdome of Eaſt England.
                  
                  
                     Anno 871▪ the Paganes came to Reading in Barkeſhire, where they caſt a great ditch and wall betwixt the two Riuers, Thames and Kynetan, on the right ſide of the ſaid towne.
                  
                     Adhelnulfus Earle of Barkeſhire and his armie, mette with the Paganes in a place called Englefield, where the Paganes had the worſt, and many of them ſlaine, and the reſt put to flight.
                  
                     Etheldred King of the Weaſt Saxons, and Aelfrede his brother, came to Reading, where was foughten a fierce and cruell battell, but at the laſt the Christians fled, and the Paganes had the victorie.
                  The Chriſtians within four dayes fought a battell with the Paganes in Aſſendune, but the Paganes deuided themſeluesBattayle at Aſſendune. into two battels, for then they had two Kings, which when the Chriſtians ſawe, they likewiſe deuided their armie into two companyes.
                  
                     It was determined that King Ethelred with his battell, ſhoulde goe againſte the two Pagan kings with their battell, and that his brother Aelfrede with his armye, ſhoulde ſet on all the Pagan Dukes and theyr armye.Battayle at Aſſendoune. All things thus ordered, when the king farried long in hys prayer, and the Pagans being readilye prepared, came to Chipenhane where the battel was pitched, Aelfred ſéeing he muſte either retire or ſette on his enemiesSca. Cron. before his brother did come, he ſtraight ways ſet vpon them, though the place of battel was vnequall, for the Pagans had gotten the higher grounde, and the Chriſtians brought their battel from the valley. There was in that place one onely thorne trée, very ſhort, about which trée the battels met and ioyned, wher when they had a long time fought, Hubba one of the kings fiue Earles, and many thouſandes moe of the Pagans being ſlaine, the other were chaſed.
                  A great heape of ſtones was layd copped vp where Hubba was buried, and the place called Hubbeſlow.
                     Hubbeſlovv.
                  
                  This being done, King Etheldred and his brother Aelfrede
                     Sca. Cro. ſhortly after gathered their power againe to fight wyth the Pagans at Baſing, where after a long and ſore battayle, the Pagans had the victorie.
                  After this battayle, came another armye of Pagans fromPagans vanquished. beyonde ſeas, and ioyned with the firſt.
                  When King Etheldred had raigned fiue yeares, he was ſlaine of the Pagans at Whitingham, and buried in the Monaſterie of Winburne, with thys Epitaph:
                  
                     In hoc loco quieſcit corpus ſancti Etheldredi regis Weſtſaxonū
                     
                     Sca. Cro. Marians. Scotus. 
                     martyris, qui anno Domini. 872. 23. die Aprilis, per manus Dacorum Pagan
                           •
                        rum occubuit. His armes a croſſe Florie.
                  
                  
                     Anno. 870. Saint Ebbe Abbeſſe of Coldingham, ſixe myles
                        Flores Hiſtoriarū
                           ▪
                         Chaſtitie before beautie preferred, a rare example. North from Berwike, cutte off hir noſe and vpperlippe, and perſwaded all hir ſiſters to doe the like, that they being odible to the Danes, might the better kéepe their Uirginitie, in deſpite wherof the Danes burned the Abbey, & the Nunnes therein.
               
               
                  
                  
                     AElfrede borne in Barkſhire, at a village called Wantinge,
                     872 Marians. Scotus. Florentij Croniea cronicarum. Aſſer. Alfridus▪ Beuerlacenſ
                              ••
                           . Speculum Hiſt. VVilshire, vvhy ſo named. Ricardus Cireceſtrenſi
                              •
                           . Hap of vvarre doubtful. the fourth ſonne of Athelwolfe, receyued the gouernement of the whole realme, and within one month after, with a very ſmall number fought a ſharpe battayle againſte the whole armie of the Pagans, in a place called Wilion (whiche lyeth on the Southſide of the Riuer Wily, of whiche riuer the whole ſhyre taketh hys name) and after they had foughte a greate parte of the daye, the Pagans fled, but ſéeing the fewneſſe of them that purſued, they ſette themſelues in battayle againe, and got the fielde.
                  The Weaſt Saxons made league with the Pagans, vppon condition they ſhoulde departe out of theyr Countrey.
                  The next yeare they wintred at London, and made league with the Mercies.
                  
                  The nexte yeare they wintered at Lindeſey, which was in the Kingdome of Northumberlande.
                  
                  The next yere, at Ripindune: they conſtrayned Burgoredus king of Mercies, to flée beyond the Seas, who went to Rome, where he dyed, and was buryed in the Schole of the Saxons.
                     Burgoredus death.
                  
                  The Pagans ſubduing ye whole kingdome of the Mercies, whiche they committed to Ceonulfus: The next yeare one part of the Pagans wintered in Northumberlande neare to the riuer Tyne, ſubdued the whole Countrey: the other parte went with Guthram, Oskecellus, and Amandus, thrée kings of the Pagans, to Grantbridge, and wintered there.
                  The yeare following, the Pagans going from Cambridge in the night, entred the Caſtel of Warham, where there was a Monaſterie of Nunnes, ſcituate betwéene two riuers, Fraw and Trent, in the Country called in the Saxon Thornſeta, a moſt ſure ſeat, except in the Weſt only, where it ioyneth to the lande: with whome king Aelfrede made a league that they ſhoulde departe his kingdome, but contrarie to theyr othe, they rode into Deuonſhire, to Exancester, and there wintered.Exceſte
                           •
                        .
                  
                  The next yeare. 120. of the Pagans ſhippes were drowned

at S
                           •
                        anauing: And kyng Aelfrede purſuing an armie that went by lande to Excester, toke of them pledges, and alſo an othe to depart with all ſpéede.
                  In the yeare following the Danes 
                     
                        •
                     ame to Chipingham, a manner of the kings, ſcituate on the left ſide of Wiltſhire and there wintred, compelling many of the Weast Saxons to leaue their Countrey and to goe beyonde the ſeas: the reſt that remayned they subdued▪ King Aelfrede himſelfe was ofttimes brought into ſuch miſerie, yt none of his people knew where he was become. On a time, being forced to hide hymwithAſſer. Spe. Histo. Ri. Ciren. a Cowhearde in Somerſetſhire, as he ſatte by the fire, preparing his bowes and ſhaftes, the Cowherdes wife baking breade on the coales, threw the kings bowes & ſhaftes aſide, and ſaid, thou fellow why doſt thou not turn the bread which thou ſéeſt burne, thou art glad to eate it ere it be halfe baked. This woman thought not that it had bin K. Aelfred, who had made ſo many battels againſt the Danes, and gottē ſo manye victories. For God did not onely vouchſafe to giue him victorie ouer his enemies, but alſo to be wearied of thē in the ſight of his owne people, to the ende he ſhould knowe there is one God of all, to whom all knées ſhall bow, and in whoſe hands the hearts of kings conſiſteth. The brotherHinguar ſlayne in Deuonshire. of Hinguar and of Healfden, who had wintered in Mercia, & had made great ſlaughter of the Chriſtians, ſayled with▪ 23. ſhippes into Deuonſhire, where doing great miſchief, he & theThe Enſigne of the Danes vvas a Rauen. Alredus Riual.
                      moſt part of his people were ſlain, the reſt eſcaped by fléeing to theyr ſhippes. In this battayle among many rich ſpoyles was taken a banner or enſigne called Reafan, which among the Danes was had in greate eſtimation, for that it was imbrodered by the thrée ſiſters of Hinguar, and Hubba, ye daughters of Lodbroke. King Aelfrede made a Caſtel in Aethelingei,
                     Ethelyngey, the noble Ilande. Egbrights ſtore▪
                      from thence he went to Petram Egebrichti, which is on the Eaſtſide of the chace called Sal nudum, in Latine Silua magna, y• great wood: there met with him al the inhabitants of Hāpſhire, whiche when they ſawe the king, reioyced as though he had bene riſen from death to life.
                  
                     The king with his army wente to Ethandune and fought againſt the Pagans where he made great ſlaughter, and purſued the reſte to their Caſtell, who after. xiiij. dayes deſired peace, gaue pledges and toke othe to depart his realme: and Gythram their King receiued baptiſme harde by Ethelingſey, in a place called Alre, whome Aelfrede receyued to bée hysGythram king of Danes chriſtened. Chicheſter. God-ſonne.
                  In the yeare. 879. the Pagans went from Chipnan to Cirenceaster, and there remayned one yeare after. The ſame yeare a great armye of Pagans came from beyonde the Sea, andFulham. wintered at Fullanham, harde by the riuer of Thamis.
                  
                  The nexte yeare, the Pagans wente from Circestre to theMarianus Scotus. Eaſt Engliſh, deuiding that Countrey among them, & there inhabited. The Pagans that wintered at Fullanham, went into Eaſt Fraunce.
                  
                  In the yeare. 885. an armie of Pagans came into Kent, and beſieged the Cittie of Rhofeceaster, which lyeth on the EaſteRocheſter beſieged. ſide of the riuer Medowege and before the gate of the ſame Citie they made a ſtrong Caſtell, but Aelfrede with a greateMidvvay. Armie chaſed them to their ſhips.
                  The next yeare▪ 
                     Aelfrede reſtored, and honorably repayred
                        Aſſerius. Floriacenſ. London builded & made inhabitable. the Cittie of London (after it had bene amongſt other Cities deſtroyed with fire, and the people killed vp,) he made it habitable againe, and committed it vnto the cuſtodie of his ſonne in lawe Adhered Earle of the Mercies. Kentiſhemen, South and Weſt Saxons, (whiche before were in CaptiuitieMarianus Scotus. vnder the Pagans) willingly came and ſubmitted thē
                     ſelues.
                  In the yeare. 890. Gythram the king of the Pagans (whoſe name in his Baptiſme was changed to Athelſtane)Hadley. dyed, he was buried in the kings towne called Headleaga among the Eaſt Engliſh.
                  
                  In the yeare. 892. the great armie of the Pagans, came frō the Eaſt kingdome of Fraunce vnto Adbon, and from thence with 250. ſhippes▪ into Kent, arriuing in the mouth of the Riuer Limene, whiche riuer runneth from the great woodde,

whiche is called Andreads Weald, from whoſe mouth foureAndreads vveald in Suſſex and Hampshire. myles into the ſame woodde they drewe theyr ſhips, where they deſtroyed a Caſtel, and fortified another more ſtrong, in a place called Apultrens, now Apulder. This wood was from the Eaſte to the Weaſte. 120. myles in length and more, in bréedth. 30. myles.
                  The ſame yere, Haſtings came with. 80. ſhippes into theMilton. mouth of Thamis, and made a ſtrong town, Middleton in theBeaufleet. South ſide of ye 
                     Thamis, and another on the Northſide, called Beaufleete.
                  
                  The yeare following, the Citie of Yorke was taken by the Normans, but Seber the Biſhoppe, by Gods prouiſion eſcaped.
                  The ſame yeare alſo Aelfred fought againſt the Normans at Fernham, where he ſlewe them, wounded their King, andFernham. chaſed the remnant through the Thamis into Eaſtſex, wherby many of them were drowned.
                  
                     Aelfrede hearing that a great number of the Pagans were arriued at Exanceastre, he toke with him a greate army, and by battayle ouercame, and chaſed them away.
                  In the meane ſeaſon Adhered Earle of the Mercies, andBeaufleet taken from the Pagās. the Citizens of London with other came to Beaufleete, and beſieged the Caſtell of the Pagans, and brake into it, where they tooke excéeding riche ſpoyles of golde, ſiluer, horſſes, and garmentes, among whiche was taken the wife of Haſtings and hys two ſonnes, whiche were broughte to London, and preſented to the King, who commaunded them to be reſtored againe. But Haſtings came againe into Beaufleete, and repayred to the Caſtell, whiche they hadde broken downe. From thence he wente to Sceabridge, and there builded aSudbury. ſtrong Caſtell: there was ioyned vnto hym the armye that remayned at Apuldrane, and other that came from the East Engliſhe, and from the Northumbers, who altogyther ſpoyledApuldo
                           •
                        . and robbed, tyl they came to the bancke of Seuerne, and there at Bultingatume, they made a ſtrong towne, but by Adhered Earle of the Mercies and other, they were beſieged, & ſhortly

through famine forced to come out, where many on botheFloren
                           ••
                         Cronica cronicaruin. Marianus Scotus. ſides were ſlaine, but the Chriſtians had the victorie.
                  In the yeare, 895. the Pagans wintered in a little Ile calledIle of Merſey. Ley, a riuer that then bare ships vnto VVare. Aſſerius.
                      
                     Mer
                           •
                        ig in the Eaſt part of Eſſex, ſcituate in the ſea, and the ſame yeare they ſayled by the riuer of Thamis, after by the riuer of Ligea, and twentie myles from London began to build a Fortreſſe. In the Sommer following, the Londoners and other néere adioyning, did ſéeke to deſtroy the fortreſſe of the Danes, but they being put to flight, king Aelfrede pitched 
                        •
                      fielde not farre from the Citie, leaſt the Pagans ſhould take away the Harueſt of the Countrey, and viewing the riuer one daye, perceyued that the Chanel mighte be in one place dammed vp, that the Danes ſhould not get out their ſhippes, he forthwith commaunded on both ſides the riuer a damme to be caſt, and deuided that riuer into thrée ſtreames, ſo that where ſhippes before had ſayled, now a ſmall boate coulde ſcantly rowe, which when the Pagans perceyued, they leauing theyr wiues and ſhips, flée a foote to Quatbridge, & thereNovv called Catvvarebrig, or Catvva
                           •
                        d bridge. building a Fortreſſe, lodged there the Winter following, whoſe ſhippes the Londoners bring, ſome to London, the other they brake downe and deſtroyed.
                  
                     Anno. 897. the Pagans came from Quatbridge, parte into Eaſt England part into Northumberland: ſome got them ſhips and ſayled into Fraunce. After al theſe verations, by the cruel Danes committed, folowed farre greater, the ſpace of thrée yeres, by death of cattaile, and mortalitie of men. XX. Daniſh ſhips were taken being Pirates, and the Pyrates ſlaine or hauged on the gallowes.
                  This victorious Prince, the ſtudious prouider forAlfred deceaſed wid
                        •
                     wes, orphanes and poore people, moſte perfect in Sa
                           〈…〉
                        
                      Poetrie, moſte liberall, indued with Wiſdome,Prayſe of King Alfrede. fortitude, iuſtice, and temperaunce, the moſt patient bearer of ſickneſſe, wherewith he was dayly vexed, a moſte diſcrete ſearcher of trueth in executing iudgement, a moſte vigilant and deuout Prince in the ſeruice of God, Alfrede, the. xxix. yeare and ſixth month of his raigne, departed this life, the

xxviij. daye of October, and is buried at Winchester, in the new Monaſterie, of his foundation. He founded a Monaſterie of Monkes at Ethelingſey, and another for Nunnes at Shaftſburie. He ordayned the hundreds, and tenthes, whiche
                        Wil. Malm
                              •
                           . Floriac
                              •
                           nſ. Reg. Hig. Sea. Cro. Regiſt. Hyde. T. Rudburn
                              •
                           . Vniuerſitie in Oxforde. Marianus Scotus.
                      men call Centuaries and Cupings: he ſent for Gr
                           ••
                        balde, to come into England that by his aduice, he might erect y• ſtudie of good learning, cleane decayed. By the counſell of Neotus he ordayned common ſcholes of diuerſe ſciences in Oxē
                        forde, and tourned the Saxon lawes into Engliſhe, with diuerſe other bookes.
                  He eſtabliſhed good laws, by the which he brought ſo gretRegiſt. Hid
                           •
                        . a quietneſſe to the Countrey, that men might haue hanged golden bracelets and Jewels where the wayes parted, and no man durſt touch them for feare of the law. He caried euer y• Pſalter in his boſome, y• whē he had any leyſure he might read it ouer with diligence.
                  He deuided the xxiiij. houres of the daye and nighte intoAſſerius. thrée parts▪ he ſpent. viij. h
                        •
                     ures in writing, reading, & praying: eight in prouiſion of his body: &. viij. in hearing and diſpatchingMarianus Scotus. the matters of his ſubiects. He deuided his yerely reuenues into two partes, and the firſt he deuided into thrée: one part he gaue to his ſeruāts, the ſecond part to his workmen which were occupyed in building, the third part to ſtrā
                     gers. The ſecond part of y• whole, he deuided into iiij. parts, the firſt part wherof he gaue in almes to the poore, the ſecond to Monaſteries by him founded, the third to ſcholes which he had erected, and gathered of many both noble mens & other mens ſons of his nation, the fourth part he diſtributed to the next Monaſteries in all the Engliſh Saxon. Alhfwido
                      wife to king Alfrede founded the monaſterie of Nuns in Winchester.
                  
               
               
                  
                     EDward ſurnamed Senior, the ſon of Aelfred, was annoynted900 Speculum hiſto. Ri. C
                              •
                           ren. Adhelvvold
                           •
                         reuolteth. king, & ſhortly after Adhelwoldus, couſin germaine vnto king Edwarde, reuolted and wente to the armie of the Pagans, who forthwith choſe him to be their Kyng in Northumberlands.
                  
                  
                     
                     Ioannes Leoafer▪
                      in his thirde booke of the deſcription 
                        ••
                     
                     Iohns Leoafer. 
                     Africa, writeth that about this time (to ſay) about the yere 
                        ••
                      our Lorde. 905. the Engliſhmen at the perſwaſion of the Gothes, beſieged the great Citie Argilla in Barbarie, which the Affricanes call Arella, being. 70. myles diſtant frō the ſtreight of Marrocho Southwarde, hoping thereby to withdraw the Sarazens out of Europe, where they fought with ſo great courage and good ſucceſſe, that they wanne the ſayde towne, and ſo ranſacked it with fire and ſworde, that ſcant one eſcaped there, and the towne laye deſolate and without inhabitant
                        •
                      for the ſpace of thirtie yeare. We account thys to haue hapned in the foreſayde yeare, bycauſe the aucthour after the 
                        ••
                     
                     ſhion of the Sarazens, doth referre it to the. 314. yeare of M
                           •
                        
                        homets Hegira, which by cōference of theyr places doth ſéeme to beginne in the yeare of our Lord. 591. which number being added, do bring forth. 905.
                  
                     Adhelwoldus King of the Pagans brought a great armye from Eastſex, and the East Engliſh whiche robbed and ſpoyled through all Mercia, and the Weaſte Countrey, vntill they came to Crickalde, and there went ouer the Thamis and tooke great ſpoyles about Bradney.
                  
                  King Edward gathered an army and went towarde the Danes, but while he tarried his army out of Kent, Adhelwolf
                      King of the Danes came vpon him with a great power, and badde him battayle, wherein Cochricus & Adelwolfe, kings of the Pagans were ſlaine.
                  In the yeare. 910. a battaile was fought at Wodneſfielde, a mile North from Wolfrune Hampton in Staffordeſhire, whereVVodneſfielde in Staffordshire VVlfrune Hampton. 
                     Cowilfus & Healidene kings of y• 
                     Pagans, with many Erles and Nobles were ſlaine, but of the common people innumerable.
                  
                     Aethered Earle of the Mercies dyed, and king Edwarde toke into his Dominion London and Oxenforde, and all the Countrey adioyning therevnto.
                  In the yeare. 913. by the Kings commaundement, at Hertforde, betwixt the riuers of Memeran, Benefician, and Legian,
                     
in the North ſide a Citie is builded.
                  In the yeare. 914. the Pagans of Northumberlande, and Leycester, in the Countie of Oxforde toke ſpoyles, and in the kings towne called Hokenorton, and in manye other places they ſlew many people, and retourned home againe: another army of y• 
                     Danes, being horſſemen, were ſent into Hartfordeſhire, towardes Legeton, with whom the men of y• Countrey encountered, and ſlaying manye of them, put the reſt to 
                        ••
                     ight, taking theyr horſſes and armour, with a great praye. King Edward leauing certaine to builde a Citie in y• SouthMaldon i
                           •
                         Eſſex. part of the riuer L
                           •
                        gea, with more parte of his armye wente into Eſſex, and encamped at Mealdune, where he tarried til a Towne was builded at Witham.
                  
                  In the yeare. 915. a great Nauie of Danes ſayled aboute the Weſt Countrey, and landed in diuerſe places, taking gret prayes, and went to their ſhippes againe. The King for ſtrengthning of the Countrey, made a Caſtel at y• mouth of the water of Auon, and another at Buckingham, & the thirde faſt by, that is, on eyther ſide of the riuers courſe one, & then wente into Northampton and Bedfordſhires, and ſubdued the Danes there, with their leader called Turketils.
                  
                  King Edward builded or new repayred the towns of Tocester
                     Toceſter. VVigmore. and Wigmore.
                  
                  In the yeare▪ 918. the Kentiſh, Southrey, and Eaſt Saxons, beſieged Colchester, and wanne it by force, and ſlew all therein,Cogſhal. a fewe excepted, that eſcaped by flight. The ſame yeare kingColcheſter in Eſſex. 
                     Edward wente to Colchester with an army, repayred y• wals, and put a great garriſon of ſouldiours into it.
                  The next yeare died the noble Princeſſe Elfleda (wife toHērie Bradſhaw. Reynul
                           •
                         Hygden. 
                     Etheldredus Duke of Mercia) and was buryed in the Monaſterie of Saint Peter, whiche hir Lorde and ſhe before had builded in the Towne of Glocester, whiche Monaſterie was after throwen to the grounde by the Danes, but Aeldredus Biſhoppe of Yorke, & of Worcester, made there another, which is now the chiefeſt Church in the towne.
                  This noble woman Elfleda, réedified the Cittie of Cheſter▪
                     
                     
ſhe repayred the towne of Tomworth, beſide Lichfielde,
                     Cheſter. Tomvvorth. Lichfielde. Stafford. VVarvvike. Shrevveſburie. VVatersburie. Eldesburie. Leyceſter repayred. Runcorn tovvn and caſtell, and Brimsbery vvith the bridge builded. 
                     Stafford, Warwicke, Shreweſburie, Watriſburie, Eldiſburie, Legeceaster with a towne and Caſtell in the North ende of Mercia, vpon the Riuer of Merſe, that is called Runcorne ſhe builded a bridge ouer Seuerne called Brimeſberie bridge▪ &c.
                  When ſhe had once aſſaied the paines that women ſuffer in trauayling with childe, ſhe euer after refuſed the embracing of hir huſbande, ſaying, it was not ſéemely for any noble woman to vſe ſuch fleſhly lyking, whereof ſhoulde enſue ſo great ſorrow and paine: tamed the Walchmen, and in diuerſe battayles chaſed the Danes, after whoſe death, Edward helde that Prouince in hys owne hande.
                  King Edward builded a newe town againſt the old town of Notingham on the South ſide of the Riuer of Trent, & made
                        Marianus Scotus. Wil. Thorne. Henrie Hunting. Alredus Riual. Thilvval built. Mancheſter repayred. a bridge ouer the ſayde riuer betwéene the two townes: he ſubdued the kings of Scotland & Wales: he builded a town in yt North end of Mercia by y• riuer of Merſe, & named it Thilwal, and repayred the Towne of Manchester: after al which déeds by him done, he deceaſed at Faringdon, and was buried at Winchester, in the new Church, whiche hys father A
                           •
                        lfrede had builded when he had raygne. xxiiij. yeares.
               
               
                  
                     A Delſtane, after the deathe of Edwarde Senior his father,924 Alfridus Beuerla. Iohn Leyland. Speculum hiſto. Rich. Cirenc. was Crowned at Kingstone by Athelmus Archbiſhoppe of Canturburie. His corenation was celebrated in the market place vpon a ſtage erected on hic, that the King mighte bēe ſéene the better of the multitude. He was a Prince of worthy memorie, valiant and wiſe in all his actes, and broughtW. Mal
                           ••
                        . thys lande into one Monarchie: for he expelled vtterly the Danes, and quieted the Walchmen. He cauſed them to paye hym yearely tribute twentie pounde of golde. 300. pounde of ſiluer, and 2500. heade of Neate, with houndes & haukes to a certaine number.
                  And after that he had by battayle conquered Scotlande: hée made one Conſtantine king of Scottes vnder him, adding this Princely word, that it was more honoure to hym to make a King, than to be a King. He made ſeuen coyning mintes at

                     Canturburie, foure for the King, two for the Archbiſhoppe, and one for the Abbot: at Rochester. iij. two for the king, and oneCanturb. recordes. for the Byſhoppe: beſides theſe, in London eight: in Winchester
                     W. L
                           ••
                        b
                           •••
                         Sax. Lawes. ſixe: in Lewes two: in Hastings two: in Chichester one: in Hampton two: in Warham two: in Excester two: in Shafteſburie two: and in euery good towne one Coyner.
                  He founded Saint Germaines in Cornewal, which was ſinceT. Rudborn. Girardus Co
                           ••
                        ubi. a Biſhops ſea: he founded Saint Pe
                              •
                           rocus
                      at Bodmin he founded Pilton Priorie, Midleton and Michelney.
                  
                  In his time Guy Earle of Warwicke, in acombate ſleweGuy of VVarvvicke ſlevv Colbrond. 
                     Colbrond the Daniſh Giant, in Hide Meade, neare vnto Winchester.
                  
                  
                     Athelſtane raigned fiftéene yeares, and was buried atIo. Lidgat. 
                     Malmeſburie.
                  
               
               
                  
                     EDmunde, the brother of Adelſtan, tooke on him the gouernaunce940 of thys realme, whoſe ſhorte raigne tooke from him the renoume of moſte hyghe prayſes that ſhould haue redounded to this poſteritie: for he was a mā diſpoſedMarianus. of nature to nobleneſſe and Juſtice: hée toke out of the Danes handes the Townes of Lincolne, Notingham, Darbie, Leiceſter, and Stanforde, and brought all Mercia to hys Dominion: he expulſed the two kings Anlafus the ſonne of Sithricus,
                     Io. Taxtor. and Reginalde the ſonne of Cuthberte out of Northumberlande, and ſubdued the Countrey to hys Dominion. He granted the Priuiledge vnto Saint Edmund in which the limits of the Towne of Edmundes Burie are conteyned.
                  On Saint Auſtins day, in the kings town named Puckelchurch,
                     W. Malme. the King (whileſt he woulde haue ſaued his Sewar from the handes of a wicked théefe called Leofe) was ſlayne, when he had raigned fiue yeares and. vij. monthes, and was buried at Glastenburie.
                  
               
               
                  
                     ELdrede ſuccéeded Edmunde his brother: for hys ſonnes946 Sp
                           •
                        . Hiſto. Rich. Ciren. 
                     Edwyne and Edgar were thoughte too yong to take on them ſo great a charge. He tooke on him but as protector, but afterwardes he was crowned at Kingstone.
                  
                  
                     This Eldred had the earneſt fauour of the commons, bycauſe he was a great maintayner of honeſtie, and alſo moſt abhorred naughty and vnruely perſons: for his expertneſſe in feates of armes, he was much commended, whereby he quieted and kepte in due obeyſaunce the Northumbers and Scottes, and exiled the Danes.
                  
                  He placed the Biſhoppe of Cornewal at Saint Germaines, where it continued tyll the time of Edward, nexte before the conqueſt, in whoſe time it was tranſlated to Excester.
                  
                  In the yere. 951. he committed to priſon Wolſtan ArchbyſhoppeMa
                           •••
                        nus. Canturb. recordes. of Yorke in Luthaberie, bycauſe he often had bene accuſed to haue commaunded manye Citizens of Thetforde to be ſlaine, in reuenge of the Abbot Adelme vniuſtly by them ſlaine: he was a yeare after releaſed, and reſtoared to hys ſea.
                  King Eldred builded Mich at Abindone, gaue gret lāds,Aſſes. and confirmed them Charters, with ſeales of golde.
                  He raigned. ix. yeares, and was buried in the Cathedrall Church at Winchester, in the old Monaſterie.
               
               
                  
                     EDwyn ſuccéeded his vncle Eldred in the kingdome: He955 was crowned at Kingstone, of whom is left no honeſt memorie, for one heynous acte by him committed in the beginning of his raigne.
                  In the ſelfe daye of hys coronation, he ſodainely wythdreweA vicious king. W. Malme. Speculum Hiſt. 
                              •
                           i. Cireceſt.
                      himſelfe from his Lordes, and in the ſight of certaine perſons rauiſhed his owne kinſwoman, the wife of a noble man of his realme, and afterwarde ſlewe hir huſband, that he might haue the vnlawfull vſe of hir beautie. For whyche acte, and for banniſhing Dunstane, he became odible to hys ſubiectes: and of the Northumbers, and people of middle Englande, that roſe againſt him, was depriued, when he had raignedThe king depriued. four yeres. He dyed and was buried in the new Abbey of Winchester.
                  
               
               
                  
                     EDgar the peaceable, brother to Edwyne, was crowned at959 King Crovvned at Bathe. 
                     Bathe. He was ſo excellent in iuſtice, and ſharpe in correction of vices, as wel in his magiſtrates, as other ſubiects,

that neuer before his dayes was vſed leſſe fellonie by robbers, or extortion, or briberie, by falſe officers. He chaſtiſed ye
                     Alfridus Beuerla. great negligence, couetouſneſſe and vicious liuing of the clergie, and broughte them to a better order. Of ſtature hée was but little: yet of minde valiaunt and hardie, and veryeMarinus. Alredus Riual. expert in martial pollicie. He prepared a gret nauie of. 3600. ſhips, which he depoſed in thrée parts of his realme, and had ſouldiours alway preſt and readie againſt the incurſions of forrain and ſtrange enimies. King Edgar hauing reſtored & new founded. xlvij. Monaſteries, which before his time had bin deſtroyed, and intending to continue that his intent tyll the number of. 50. were accompliſhed, he confirmed the Monaſterie of Worcester, whiche Oſwalde then Biſhop of Worceſter,
                     VVorcester nu
                           •
                        
                        ſter reſtored. Ex charta regia.
                      by the kings conſente and leaue had enlarged and augmented, and made it the Cathedrall Churche of that ſhire. The Princes of Wales, payde to him yearely in name of Tribute.VVolues deſtroyed. 300. Wolues, by meanes whereof within thrée yeres, in England and Wales might ſcarcely be found one Wolef.
                  The Danes and all other people in England, vſed the viceAgainſt qua
                           ••
                        ing of great drincking. The king therefore put downe many alehouſes, and would ſuffer but one in a village or Towne, except it were a great borough: he ordayned certaine CuppesLavvs againſt dronkardes. with pinnes or nayles, and made a lawe, that who ſoeuer dranke paſte that marke at one draughte, ſhoulde forfayte a certaine payne.
                  
                     Alwynus Alderman, earle of East-angle, kinſman to king Edgar, founded the Abbey of Ramſey: King Edgar confirmingRamſey fon̄ded. Ex charta regia.
                      the ſame on Chriſtmaſſe daye. 974. in the preſence of all the Nobilitie. The ſame yere was an Earthquake through al England.
                  
                  
                     Edgar being at Chester, entred the riuer of Dee, hée tookeEight kings rovved K. Edgar. Horiacenſis. Iohn Pike. Eulogium. W. Malme. Alfridus Beuerla. Speculum hiſto.
                      the rule of the Helme, and cauſed eyght kings to rowe hym vnto Saint Iohns Church, and from thence vnto hys Palaice, in token that he was Lord and King of ſo many Prouinces. The names of the eight Kings were, Rinoch king of Scottes; Malcoline
                      of Cumberland, Macone
                      king of Man and of

many Ilands: Dufnal King of Demecia, or South Wales: Siferth
                      and Huwall, kings of Wales: Iames
                      king of Galaway: and
                        
                           •
                        i. Cir
                           •••
                        ſt. Rog H
                           ••
                        ed. Flores Hiſtoriarū. R
                           •
                        y
                           ••
                        lf Hygden. Hērie Bradſhaw. Edmerus. 
                           〈…〉
                         Oſbernus. Autonius Archi. Marianus Scotus. 
                     Iukil of Westmerlande. King Edgar raigned ſixetéene yere, & was buried at Glastenburie
                  
                  By his firſt wife Egelſlede (as ſome doe write) or by a religious votarie, as ſome other doe write, he hadde iſſue Edward ſurnamed the martyr, who ſuccéeded after his Father. Of his wife Elfrith daughter to Ordgarus, Duke of Deuonſhire, he receyued another ſon named Ethelrede, & a daughter named Wolfrith.
                  
               
               
                  
                     EDward the ſonne of Edgar was crowned at Kingstone by y•
                     975 The king crovvned at Kingſtone. Iohn Pike. W
                              •
                           l. Malme. Alfridus Peuerl. Speculum hiſto. Ri. Ciren. Flores Hiſtoriarū. The king murthered by his ſtep mother. handes of Dunstan Archbiſhoppe of Canturburie, and Oſwalde Archbiſhoppe of Yorke. This man might well be compared to his Father for his modeſt
                        •
                     e and gentleneſſe, ſo that he was worthyly fauoured of all men, except onely of hys ſtepmother, and other of hir aliaunce, whyche euer bare a grudge againſt him, for ſo muche as ſhe deſired to haue y• gouernaunce of the realme for hir owne ſonne Ethelred.
                  
                  This Edward while he was hūting in a foreſt (by chāce) loſt his companie, and rode alone to refreſh himſelfe at the Caſtell of Corffe, where by Counſayle of his ſtepmother Elfrede, he was traytorouſlye murthered▪ as he ſatte on hys horſſe, when he had raigned thrée yeares. He was buried at Warham, and after at Shafteſburie.
                  
                  
                     Elphred did after take great penaunce, and builded twoVVarvvel and Almeſbury built. monaſteries of Nuns, Almeſburie & Warwel: in which Warwel the after liued a ſolitarie life till ſhe dyed.
               
               
                  
                     ETheldrede commonly called Unready, the ſonne of King978 W. Malme. Speculum Hiſt. Ric
                           •
                         Ciren. 
                     Edgar, by his ſeconde wife Elphrede, was crowned at Kingstone. But bycauſe he came to the Kingdome by wicked meanes, and by killing his brother, he coulde neuer get the good wyll of the people, who had conceyued an ill opinion of hym: of thys aroſe ciuill warres within the Realme, and often diſſention and diſcordes, as well of the Nobles as of the common ſort.
                  
                     Anno. 982. a great part of the Citie of London was brent,Thomas Rudburn.
                     
which Citie at this time had moſt building from Ludgate towarde Westminster: and little or none where the harte of the Citie is nowe: except in diuerſe places was houſing that ſtoode without order: ſo that manye Cities, as Canturburie, Yorke, and other in Englande, paſſed London in building: but after the Conqueſt it encreaſed, and nowe paſſeth all other.
                  A diſeaſe not knowen in England in time paſt, to witte,
                        Aſſer. Flux of men, &c morraine of Cattaile. Bishops Sea at Exceſter. Feuers of men, with the Flix, and Morren of cattayle killed many.
                  
                     Anno. 994. King Ethelred erected a Byſhoppes ſea at Excester.
                  
                  The ſame yeare Anlafe Kyng of the Norwayes▪
                      & Sweyne King of Danes, on the daye of the Natiuitie of our Lorde, in xviij. Galleys came vp to London, whiche they attempted to breake into, and to ſet on fire, but they were repulſed, not without their greate detriment and loſſe by the Citizens, wherevppon they being driuen with furie, leauing London, ſet vpon Eastſex and Kent, by the ſea coaſtes, brent Townes, and waſted the fields, without reſpect of ſex or age killed al▪ & waſted with fire & ſword al what they may not carry away. At length being pacified with a Tribute of. 16000. pounds, departed to theyr ſhyppes, and Wintered at Southampton.
                  
                  
                     Anno. 995. a Comet apeared. The Biſhoprick of Lind
                           •
                        
                        fer
                     Bishops ſea a
                           •
                         Durham, or Hol
                           •
                        e Iland was remoued to Durham.
                  
                  In the yeare. 1002. King Etheldred cauſed al the Danes inThe Danes 
                           〈…〉
                        
                        thered. Burton vpon Trent. 
                     England to be ſlayne, vpon the day of Saint Brice. The ſame yeare Vl
                           •
                        ricus Spote founded a Monaſterie at Burton vppon Trent. In Anno. 100
                        •
                     . Swayn King of Denmark with agret army inuaded Englēd with fire and ſword. 1004▪ they fought a great battell at The
                           •
                        forde againſt Vlfekettel Carle of Eaſt-Angle.
                     Aſſer.
                  
                  The yere. 1009. they fought another battel againſt Vlfekettel at Rengemore. The yere, 1011. they deſtroyed Canturburie, & for that y• Archbiſhoppe Elfegus woulde not yéelde to them he was firſt impriſoned there, & after carried to Grenewiche, and there ſtoned to deathe. Christes Churche is

ſpoyled and brent: the Monkes with all other men are 
                        •••
                     
                     
                     
                        •
                     hed,Tirāny of the Danes in Englande. nine of euery ten being put to death, the tenth ſuffered to liue in miſerie: the number of them that were left aliue was four Monkes, and of lay people eight hundred, ſo that y• number ſlaine was 36. Monkes, and. 8000. of the lay people.
                  In Anno. 1012. they toke tribute of. 48000. poundes, andRecord eccle. Ca
                           •
                        . Marianus▪ Tloriacenſis. at the laſt after diuerſe ouerthrowes giuen to the mē of this Iland, they poſſeſſed the ſame, and putte king Etheldred to flight, conſtrayning him to liue in exile among the Normās.
                  
                  This Etheldred had two wiues, Ethelgina an EngliſheEthelgina and Emma vviues to Etheldred. Alured and Edvvard, the ſons of Etheldred. woman, and Emma a Norman: of the firſt he had two childrē, of which ſauing of Edmonde who ſuccéeded hym in the kingdome, it were nothing to our purpoſe to ſpeake. Of the ſecōd that was Emma, ſiſter to Richard Duke of Normandie, there were borne two ſonnes, to witte, Edward and Alured. And that I do here (contrarie to that is commonly vſed▪) ſet Edward before Alured as elder brother, I am moued therevnto by no ſmal aucthoritie, which I haue taken out of the hiſtoriographersW. Gemeticenſis. Encomium Emma of that age, out of Gemeticenſis▪
                      a moſt diligē
                     
                        •
                      writer of Genealogies, and one other author, who in hys Commentarie written in praiſe of Emma the Quéene, affirmeth that Edwarde was the elder brother, whom I doe the better beléeue, bycauſe it is not like, that he ſéeing the things wyth his eyes, ſhoulde miſtake the matter, eſpeciallye writing to the Quéene, who was mother to them both.
                  
                     Swanus in the meane time ſubdued al Englande, and the people for feare yelded vnto hym on euery ſide, ouer whome moſt cruelly he tryumphed. But not long after he departed this life at Geyneſburge and left Canutus his ſonne, ſucceſſour in the Kingdome.
                  
                     Etheldrede hearing that Swanus was dead, leauing in Normandie with Duke▪ 
                     Richard his ſiſters ſonne, Emma his wife, and the children that he hadde by hyr, returned with al ſpéede into Englande with Edmunde his ſonne by hys firſte wife, being then at mās ſtate, & by the truſtineſſe of his own

men, and the ayde of the Normans, moued warre againſt his enimie.
                  
                     Canutus finding himſelfe vnable to matche with him, went into Denmarke, minding to returne hither immediatly againe.
                  
                     Etheldred being contrarie to his expectation thus reſtored to his kingdome, ſhewed great crueltie vpon the Danes that remained in England, ſparing neither man nor woman, yong nor old. Therefore Canutus being very deſirous to reuenge the ſame, prepared a new armie, and came into England againſt Etheldred with al ſpéede he could, raging wide and ſide with fire and ſword. Etheldred in the meane ſeaſon, whether by ſickneſſe or for ſorrow, dyed, when he had raigned
                        
                           •
                        o. Taxtor. Wil. Malme. Alfredus Beuers lacenſis. eight and thirtie yeares, and was buryed in the North Ile of Paules Church in London aboue the high Aulter.
               
               
                  
                     EDmond the ſonne of Etheldred by his firſt wife, ſuccéeded1016 Edmond Ironſide. W. Malme.
                      in the Kingdome, who (whether it were for the greate ſtrength of his body, or for that he alwayes vſed to go in armour) was ſurnamed Ironſide.
                  He had ſixe battels againſt Canutus King of the Danes
                     Leyland. at Penham hard by Gillingham in Dorcetſhire.
                  
                  He put the Danes to flight after that at Shirestone.
                  
                  He held euen hand with them in the field, notwithſtanding that the Engliſhmen at the firſt beganne to flée, by the policie of Edricus Duke of Lincolne, and of Merce, who cryedEdrike a Traytor. runne away wretches, Edmond your King is ſlayne.
                  After this, King Edmond came to London, to deliuer the Citizens, whome part of the enimies had beſéeged as ſoone as he was gone from thence.
                  He had made a ditch alſo round about the Citie, whereDitch about London. the Riuer of Thamis doth not runne. The Danes fléeing, the King followed them, and paſſing ouer Brentford, he vanquiſhed them with a notable victorie.
                  The reſt of ye 
                     Danes which remayned with Cnute (whilesLondon beſeeged both by land and by vvater. 
                     Edmond reſted him, and ſet his matters in order) did againe beſéege London, both by water and by lande, but the

Citizens ſtoutely withſtoode, and repulſed them, wherefore they ſhewed their anger vpon the Countrey of the Mercies, ſpoyling Townes and Uillages with robbery, burnings, and murther, and caryed their pray to the Shippes whiche they had gathered togither in the Riuer of Medway, which runneth by Rochester, from whence they were driuen by the King, who taking the foorde of Brentford before them, put them to flight, and ſlew a great number of them.
                  The ſixt and laſt battell was at Eſſendone in Eſſex, néere to Rochford, in which battell Edmond had gote the victorie,Cogſhal. Sca. Cro. but Edrike agayne playing the Traytor, greate ſlaughter of the Engliſhmen was made, there the honor of Englande was ouerthrowen, and Edmonde wente almoſt alone on foote to Gloceſter, where hée gathered a newe force to ſet vpon his enimies, but Cnute purſued him as he fledde, and hauing prepared their armies, both the Kings themſelues attempted to fight hand to hand for the right of theCombate for the Kingdome. kingdome in the Ile of Olania in Seuerne, in the which Combate, they both being wéeryed, fell to a couenant to deuide the ſame, ſo that the one halfe of the Kingdome ſhoulde beEngland deuided. vnder Canutus, and the other halfe vnder Edmond, which Edmond not long after dyed at Oxford, whereas it is ſaide he was ſlayne by the treaſon of Edrike of Straton, and was buryed at Glastenbury, leauing Edmonde and Edwarde his children very yong.
                  This Edrike was not long vnrewarded according to his deſertes, for hymſelfe making vaunt thereof vnto Canutus, then being at Baynardes Castell in London, ſayde in this wiſe, Thus haue I done Canutus for the loue of thée,Edrikus a Traytor. to whome he anſwered, ſaying: and thou ſhalt dye as well thou art woorthy, bycauſe thou art giltie of Treaſon againſt God and me, in that thou haſt ſlayne thine owne Lord and King, which was ioyned to me in league as a Brother, his bloud be vpon thine owne head: and ſtraight wayes, leaſt there ſhould be any tumulte, the Traytor was in the ſameSpeculum hiſto. Ri. Cireceſt. Chamber tormented to death with firebrands and linkes,

and then his féete being bounde togither, he was drawne through the Stréetes of the Citie, and caſt into a ditch, called Houndes ditch, for that the Citizens there caſt their deadHunſditch. Treaſon revvarded. Dogges, and ſuch other filth, accompting him woorthy of no better buriall. Theſe Princes raigned togyther two yeares.
               
               
                  
                     CAnutus the Dane, taking an occaſion, bycauſe in the couenant1018 that was cōcluded concerning ye deuiding of the Realme, no aſſurance was made for the Children of Edmond,
                     The Danes poſſeſſed all England. he chalenged all England to himſelfe alone by law as they call it, of growing to, which was a moſt eaſie thing for him to do, bycauſe there was no man that durſt erect himſelfe as patrone to defend the childrens right and title, and by this ſuttle and craftie interpretation of the couenant: the Dane gote the Monarchie of England and ſlew the brother of Edmond, and conueyed the children farre away out of England, leaſt they ſhould at any time be brought againe and receiue their right. Some ſay, they were ſent to a certayneThe Kings children conueyed into Svvethen. man that was a Prince in Swethland, there to be diſpatched out of the waye: and that the Prince vnderſtanding they were Kings children, ſpared them, cōtrarie to the credit and truſt that was committed vnto him: which appeareth to be true, in that the ſame foraigne Lord kept and brought vppe the children honourablye, the yongeſt of whiche whoſe name was Edwarde, did afterwardes marrie Agatha, theAgatha the Emperors daughter the vvife of Edvvarde. daughter of Henry the fourth, Emperour of Rome, of whome he had many children, of whiche we ſhall ſpeake héereafter. And the other, which was ye elder brother, whoſe name was Edmond, dyed without children. In the meane ſeaſon Canutus, bycauſe he had no heire that lawfully might ſuccéede him in his kingdome (for Harold & Swaine were begottē ofHarolde and Svvayne concubines children. a Concubin) partly that he might eſtabliſh in time to come the kingdome that he had gotten vnto his owne kindred yt came by lawfull ſucceſſion: and partly that he might purchaſe to himſelfe the friendſhip of the Engliſhmen, and of the Normans, procured to haue giuen him in marriage Emma,
                     
the widow of King Etheldred, who at that time was with Edward and Alured hir ſonnes in exile with Duke Richard in Normandy, whiche mariage ſéemeth to be made euen by Gods prouidence, who had determined to reſtore the common wealth in England, whereby, as by the law and title of recouerie, and returne out of exile, the monarchie of all England, which the Danes had taken from the Engliſhmen, and had poſſeſſed ſixe and twentie yeares and more, did returne againe to the Engliſhmen that were the right heires. For Emma concluded mariage with the Dane, vpon conditionMariage made vpon conditiō. that the Kingdome of England ſhould remayne vnto none other but to the Children that were begotten of hir, if any of them did remaine aliue: by reaſon of this mariage, ſhortly after ſhe did beare Canutus a ſonne of his owne name, commonly called Hardycanutus.
                  
                  This ſecond name was giuen him bycauſe of his greatHovv tvvo names vvere giuen to Kings. courage, like as his brother Harold was named Harefoote, that is to ſay, lightfoote, bycauſe of his notable ſwiftneſſe of foote.
                  By this affinitie and aliance, the Danes became of the more ſtrength and power.
                  He kept Engliſhmen in his ſeruice ſo long as he liued.
                  He ſubdued the Scottes whereby he was King of England,
                     Canutus King of foure Kingdomes. 
                     Scotland, Denmarke, and Norway.
                  
                  After that, he went to Denmarke, and ſo to Rome, and returned againe into England, where he kept good iuſtice all his life, and did many charitable déedes.
                  He made a faire Church at Aſhendume in Eſſex.
                  
                  He founded a-new the Monaſterie of Saint Edmondeſbury,
                     Saint Edmundsbury buylded. Ex charta regia. Marianus.
                      reſtoring the donation which Edmond King of the Weſt Saxons had giuen to Saint Edmund the King and Martyr, who lyeth there buryed.
                  He appoynted to be King of Norway Swanus
                      his ſonneMarianus. (as was ſayde) by Alfgine daughter to Althelme Duke of Northampton, and his Lady Vulfrune: but other ſaid, he was a Prieſts ſonne &c.
                  
                     He alſo appoynted his ſonne Hardycanutus by Emma, to be King of Denmarke, and deceaſſed at Shafteſburie when he had raigned twentie yeares, and was buried in S. Swithens at Winchester.
                  
               
               
                  
                     HArold for his ſwiftneſſe called Harefoote whome Canutus
                     10
                           •
                        8 had by a Concubine Alice of Hampton, a Shomakers daughter (affirming himſelfe to be ſonne of Canutus andPeter de Ich
                           •••
                        . Marianus. Floriacen. 
                     Alfgina the Earle of North-hamptons daughter) ſlept not vppon the occaſion and oportunitie offered, but vſing the force of the Danes that dwelt in England, inuaded the Realme, while his brother Hardycanute gouerned in Denmarke.
                  
                  He tooke from his mother in law Emma, the moſt parte of the riches and treaſure that Canute his father had left hir, and then with conſent of the great Lords began to raigne, but not ſo mightily as his Father Canutus did, for a more iuſt heire Hardycanutus was looked for, wherevpon the Kingdome was deuided, the North part to Harold, and the South to Hardycanute.
                  
                  
                     Edward and Alfred ſonnes to King Ethelred, with many Knightes, came out of Normandy, to ſée their mother at Wincheſter, whiche ſore troubled the mindes of many greate men, who bare more fauour to King Harold. Eſpecially Godwine Earle of Kent, feigning to receiue Alfred as a friend, came to méete him, but in the end put him in priſon, parte of his companye he put in fetters, and after put out their eyes. Of ſome he cauſed their ſkinne to be plucked ouer their eares, chopping off their hands and féete. Some he commanded to be ſolde, and diuers were murthered at Gilforde.
                  
                  Quéene Emma hearing of this dealing, ſhe ſent hir ſonne Edward backe againe into Normandy.
                  
                  After this, Alfride was conueyed to the Ile of Eely, where his eyes being firſte plucked out, he was deliuered to the Monckes to be kept priſoner there, where ſhortly after hée departed this life, and was buryed in the South Ile of the Weſt part of the Church.
                  
                     Bycauſe Hardycanutus delayed to come ouer being ſent for, he was vtterly reiected, and Harold, who before was King of the Mercies and Northumbers, was choſen King of all England, who ſhortly after expelled his mother in law Emma out of the Realme. He raigned thrée yeares, dyed at Oxford, and was buryed at Westminſter, and after at Saint Clements without Templebarre at London.
                  
               
               
                  
                     HArdycanutus the lawfull begotten ſonne of Canutus and1041 
                     Emma as ſoone as he had gotten his fathers Kingdome, fetched home his mother out of exile: and in reuenge of diſpleaſure that was done to hir, and of the murther of his brother Alured, he commanded the carkas of Harold to be digged out of the earth, and to be throwen into the Riuer of Thamis, where by a Fiſher it was taken vp, and brought to the Danes, who buryed it in a Church yard, which they hadThis is ſuppoſed to be S. Clements Church vvithout Temple barre. at London. Which done, the King appoynted eyght markes to be payde to euery Sayler in his name, & twelue markes to euery Pilote or Maiſter, which tribute was to be payd of al England, ſo gréeuous, that ſcarce any was able to beare it. Shortly after, he ſent for Edward the ſonne of Etheldred, his brother of the mothers ſide, to come into England, and embraced him with all loue and fauour. Being at a mariage feaſt pleaſantly drincking with the Bride & other perſons, in the middeſt of his cups he fell ſuddaynely downe to the ground & ſo remaining dumbe, departed this life the third yeare of his raigne, & was buried by his father at Wincheſter.
                  
               
               
                  
                     EDward borne at Iſlip beſides Oxford, the ſonne of Etheldred,
                     104
                           •
                        . Alfridus Beuerla. Io. Rouſe. whom Hardycanutus had ſent for into England, was Crowned at Wincheſter. This Edward for his excellēt holyneſſe, is vntill this day called Saint Edward who ſo ſoone as he had gotten his fathers kingdome, of his owne frée will releaſed the tribute of 40000. pound, called Dane gelt, whichDane gelt. the Engliſh people, euen from the very beginning of the reigne of the Danes, was compelled to pay to their Kings eueryThe firſt com
                        
                           ••
                        ing vp of the common Lavv. yeare. He was alſo the chiefe author and cauſe, that the law which we call the common Law, was firſt brought

vp, being gathered togither out of the lawes and ordināces of four nations, which were receiued when the Iſland was ſubiect to diuers regiments & gouernances, to witte, of the Mercies, of the Weſt Saxons, of the Danes, & of the Northumbers.
                     Mercies, vveſt Saxons, Danes, and Northumbers. He was hard to his mother, bycauſe ſhe was hard to him in his minoritie, and alſo ſuſpected with Alwine Biſhop of Winchester, whome he put in priſon, by counſell of Roberte Archbiſhop of Canturbury: but after his mother had purged hirſelfe, Alwine was deliuered, and Robert the Archbiſhop conueyed himſelfe out of England. He tooke to wife Edgitha,
                     Sea. Cron. the daughter of Earle Godwine, who bycauſe ſhe broughtEdgitha vvas barreyne. him forth no children, neyther was there any hope that ſhe ſhould beare any, whē he did ſée that many did gaye after y• kingdome, he began to be carefull for one that ſhould iuſtly ſuccéede him, and therfore following the reaſon of y• commō law, he ſent for home into England his Nephew Edward, the ſonne of king Edmond his brother, who by reaſon of his lōg abſence out of the Countrey, was cōmonly called ye outlaw. This is that Edward, the ſonne of King Edmond ſurnamed Ironſide, which remained aliue, whome Canutus when he had gotten England, had ſent into Swethen with his brother. He knowing the aduiſe of his. Uncle, came againe into England, and brought with him Agatha his wife, & Edgar, Margaret and Chriſtian his children, borne in Panonia, in hope of the kingdome, where he liued but a while. Thus S. Edward being diſappoynted, both of his Nephew and his heire, for that Edward the outlaw was both by néereneſſe of bloud, and by lawfull ſucceſſion right heire vnto the Kingdome, withoute delaye pronounced Edgar the outlawes ſonne, and his greate Nephew, to bée heire of the Kingdome, and gaue him to ſurname Adeling, which name in thoſe dayes was peculiar onely to Kings Children, which were borne in hope and poſſibilitie of the Kingdome: for thys worde Adeling, in the Engliſh tong, is as much to ſay, as Prince, or Lorde, the contrary of which word is▪ 
                     Vnderling, that isThe ſignification of the vvord Adeling. to ſay, a ſeruan
                        ••
                     or or bondman: or according to the Walche

ſpéech, Adeling ſignifieth heire: but bycauſe this Edgar was but yong of yeares, and within age, by his teſtamente he made Harold the ſonne of Godwine (a ſtoute man both in warre and peace) Regent, vntill the yong Edgar ſhould be of age to receyue the Kingdome, and that then he ſhould be made King: which thing Harold with a ſolemne oth promiſed to ſée ſo performed and done. Notwithſtanding, he like a Traytour (by force of armes) immediately after y• death of Edward, refuſed the name of Regent, and pronounced himſelfeAlfridus Beuerl. Speculum hiſto. R
                           •
                        . Cireceſt. Flores hiſto. King, whiche thing ſhortly after brought deſtruction both to himſelfe, and to all England.
                  
                  
                     Anno 1051. Euſtace Earle of Bullogne, which had to wifeFloriacen. 
                     Goda, ſiſter to King Edward, arriued at Douer, where one of his men quarelling aboute his lodging, ſlewe one of the Towneſmen, in reuenge whereof, not only the quareller, but other of his company, and many of the Towne were ſlayne, whiche doing ſo muche offended Godwine Earle of Kent, that he aſſembled a great power, wherewith he marched toward Gloceſter, where the king then lay, vnto whome he ſent meſſengers to denounce warre, except he would deliuer Euſtace and his fellow Normans and Bolognians, which held a Caſtell in the dominions of Kent.
                  
                  After this, Godwins armie entered into Gloceſter, but it was there agréed, that at a day appoynted, the King and Earle Godwine ſhould méete at London: and thus departing for the time, the King increaſing his armie, ledde the ſame to London, and Godwine with his power came to Southwarke on the other ſide of the Riuer Thamis: but there bycauſe his armie by little and little ſtipped from him, he fledde, and the King forthwith pronounced him, with his fiue ſonnes, to be baniſhed, who ſtraightwayes with his wife, and two of his ſonnes came to Thorney, where his Shippe being laden with Golde, Siluer, and precious things, he ſayled towarde Flanders: his other ſonnes tooke Shippe at Bristow, and ſayled into Ireland.
                  
                  In the next yeare, Harold and Leofwine, ſonnes to Earle

                     Godwine, returning out of Ireland, entred Seuerne, arriued with many Shippes in Somerſet and Dorſetſhires, ſpoyled many Townes in the Countrey, ſlew many people, and returned with pray, then they ſayle about Porteſmouth. &c.
                  Earle Godwine landed in Kent, gathered a power, ſayled to the Ile of Wight, waſting along the Sea coaſtes, till his ſonnes Harold and Leofwine came with a Nauy, which being come togither, they take their courſe vp the Riuer of Thamis, came to Southwarke, and there ſtayed for the Tide, and then weyed vp Anchor, and finding none that offered to reſiſt them on the Bridge, they ſayled vp by the South ſide of the Riuer, and his armie by land, placing it ſelfe vppon the banckes ſide, made ſhew of a thicke and terrible battayle.
                  After this, the Nauie turned toward the North ſhore, as though it would haue compaſſed in the Kings Nauie: but they that were with the King, and with Godwine, abhorred to fight againſte their owne kindred and Countreymen, wherefore a peace was made, Godwine with his ſonnes were reſtored to all former honor, and the Normans were baniſhed the land.
                  As William of Malmeſbury writeth, a certayne yong woman
                        W. Malme. Kings euill healed by the King. being terribly diſeaſed, by reaſon of humors gathered about hir necke into great ſwelling kernels, came to King Edward, who with his right hand dipped in water, handled hir necke, and forthwith ye hardneſſe did breake, the wormes with the matter ranne out, and all the noyſome dwelling aſſwaged, ſo that ſhe was perfectly hole, and faire ſkinned ere the wéeke were ended: and they that knewe his life, ſayd, he had oft cured this plague in Normandy.
                  
                  This Edward raigned thrée and twentie yeres, ſixe monethes,T. Rudborn. and odde dayes.
                  He was buryed on the day of the Epiphanie, in the Abbey of Saint Peeter in Westminster which he had newly builded.
                  In the ſame day Harold the eldeſt ſonne of Godwine
                     
Earle of Kent, and brother to Edgitha the Quéene, hauing obteyned fayth of the nobilitie, tooke the Crowne.
                  
                     Leofrike Earle of Mercia, and of Hereford, founded the Monaſterie of Couentrie in Anno 1044. He alſo granted great priuiledges to that Towne.
               
               
                  
                     HArold, that he might in ſome behalfe ſéeme to make the1066 The yeare of our Lord beginneth heere at Chriſtmas. yong Edgar amendes for the wrong he had done him, gaue him the Earledome of Oxford, and ſo from a King, he made him an Earle. But in the meane ſeaſon England began to be toſſed and turmoyled with warres within and without: for the diſheriting of the right heire is alwayes wont to be the beginning of ciuill warres.
                  The 24. day of Aprill, a Comete appeared, not only to the people of this land, but alſo in other parts of the world ſeauen dayes. Toftus enuying (as men ſaid) the proſperitie
                        
                           •
                        og. Houed. Simon D
                           •
                        nel. Gualter Couen. of his brother, ſtirred vp troubles in the Realme, for he ioyning himſelfe to Harold the King of Norway, aſſaulted England in warlike ſort, both by ſea and land. Whoſe attempt whiles Harold of England prepared to withſtand, William Duke of Normandy, who notwithſtāding he was a Baſtard,VVilliam Conquerour couſyn to King Edvvard by the mother ſide. was of kinne to Saint Edward in the thirde and fourth degrée of conſanguinitie, ſéeing a conuenient time and occaſion offered to take the Kingdome in, gathered a Nauie of 896. Shippes, and came into England with a very well appoynted armie, alledging, that by all right and title it was due to him, by the gift of King Edward his kinſman, and alſo by the couenant that was made, and by othe eſtabliſhed betwixt Harold and him. He landed at Pemſey, nine milesGualter Couen. from Hastings, the 28. of September. Harold notwithſtanding he was bare of men, by reaſon of the battel that he had fought againſt Toftus, and the men of Norway, yet hearing of Williams comming, wente ſtraightwayes againſte him. Both armies being broughte into aray, the battell was fought, wherin great ſlaughter of Engliſhmen was made, andEngland conquered by vvoden bovves and arovves. the Normans gote the victorie, eſpecially by meanes of their wodden bowes and arrowes (which the Engliſhmen had not

then in vſe) for Duke William commanded his men, thatIo. Rouſe. ſome of them ſhould ſhoote directly forwarde, and ſome vpward, by reaſon whereof, the arrow ſhot vpward, deſtroyed the Engliſh as they ſtouped, and the arrow ſhot directly afore hand wounded them that ſtoode vpright: and King Harold himſelfe (valiantly fighting) was ſhotte through theHarold ſlayne. braynes, whereof he dyed, when he had raigned nine monethes, and was buryed in the Priorie of Waltham which he
                        Sigebertus Gemla
                              •
                           en. W. Gemi
                              ••
                           cenſis. Gualterus Couen. Hen. Hunting. Regiſter of Wodbridge. Chronicle of Normandy. The deſcription of the Saxons. Mathew Paris. W. Malme. Flores Hiſtoriarū.
                      had founded. This battell was fought at Haſtings in Suſſex, vppon the fourtéenth day of October being Saterday, in the yeare of oure Lord 1066. There was ſlayne of Engliſhmen 67974. and of Normans 6013.
                  This was (ſaith Mathew Paris) the dolefull deſtruction of this ſwéete and pleaſant land, the Kings whereof (meaning the Saxons) at their firſte comming, with barbarous countenance and geſture, in warlike ſort, prouoked all men to malice and hatred towards them, who ouercame al men by warre and ſubtiltie: but after they had receyued the Chriſtian faith, and by little and little applyed their diligence vnto Religion, they neglected the exerciſe of armour, for the Kings did change their habite, and ſome at Rome, and ſome in their owne Countrey, ſought to change their temporall Kingdomes for euerlaſting Kingdomes: and many which all their life time embraced worldly things, did yet diſtribute their treaſures vnto all the workes of mercy: but afterwards when charitie waxed colde, all their ſtudie and trauaile of Religion ſlaked, and then came the deſtruction of the inhabitants: firſt at the comming of the Danes, and now in the expulſing of the Engliſhmen by the Normans: for the noble men giuing themſelues to gluttonie and lecherie, did not goe to the Church in the morning as Chriſtian men vſe to doe, but lying in their Chambers dalying with Women, did heare the Prieſt haſtilie rattle vp diuine ſeruice. The Clerkes alſo that had taken orders, if one had learned but his Grammer, euery one wondered at him.
                  
                     All men generally gaue themſelues to drinking and gulling, and ſpent both day and night in ſuch exerciſes till they vomited.
                  The Saxons ware their garmentes to the midde knée, their heare rounded, and their beardes ſhauen (all ſaue the ouerlip) their armes adorned with golden bracelets, andW. Malme. their ſkinne paynted and printed. &c.
                  
                     ¶ Thus endeth the Reigne of the Saxons, who were firſt ſent for by Vortiger, about the yeare of our Lord. 450. and had nowe continued ſometimes in warres with the Britaines, then with the Danes, and now with the Normans, the ſpace of ſixe hundred yeares.
                  
               
            
            
               Verſes.
               
                  A thouſand ſixe and ſixtie yeare
                  it vvas, as vve do reade,
                  When that a Comete did appeare,
                  and Engliſhmen lay dead:
                  Of Normandie Duke William then
                  to Englandvvard did ſayle,
                  And conquerde Harold vvith his men,
                  and brought this Land to bale.
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ King VVilliam Conquerour.
            
            
               
                  WIlliam Duke of Norman
               die,Anno. reg. 1. ſurnamed Conquerour, Baſtarde ſonne of Robert the ſixte, Duke of that Duchie, and Cooſin germane vnto King Edward on the mothers ſide, beganne his dominion ouer the Realme of England, the fourtéenth day of October, being Saterday, in the yeare of our Lord 1066. After the battayle at Hastings, Duke William came to London, where with great ioy he was receyued, both of the Cleargie and people, and was proclaymed King.
            When the Citie of London was thus yéelded vnto him, he tooke his iourney towardes the Caſtell of Douer, to ſubdue that, and the reſt of Kent alſo: which when the Archbiſhop Stigand, and Egelſin the Abbot of Saint Auguſtines (being as it were the chiefeſt Lords and gouernours of all Kent) did perceyue and conſider, that the whole Realme

was in an euill ſtate, and that whereas in this Realme of England, before the comming of the foreſayd Duke William there were no bondmen, now all, as well noble men, as the common people, were without reſpect made ſubiecte vnto the perpetuall bondage of the Normans, taking an occaſion by the perill and danger that their neighbors were in, to prouide for the ſafegard of themſelues and their Countrey, they cauſed to aſſemble at Canterbury all the people of the Countie of Kent, and declared to them the perils and dangers imminent, the miſerie that their neighbours were come into, the pride and inſolencie of the Normans, and the hardneſſe and griefe of bondage and ſeruile eſtate: wherevpon all the people rather chooſing to end their vnfortunate life, than to ſubmit themſelues to an vnaccuſtomed yoke of ſeruitude and bondage, with a common conſent determined to méete Duke William, and to fight with him for the laws of their Countrey. And y• foreſayd Stigand the Archbiſhop, and the Abbot Egelſin, chooſing rather to die in battell, than to ſée their nation in ſo euill an eſtate, being encouraged by the examples of the holy Machabees, became Captayne of the armie. And at a day appoynted, all the people met at Swaneſcombe two miles weſt from Graueſ-end and being hidden in the woods, lay priuily in wayte for the comming of the foreſayd Duke William. And bycauſe it can not hurt to be very wary in ſuch caſes, they agréed before hande, that when the Duke was come, and the paſſages on euery ſide ſtopped, to the end he ſhould no way be able to eſcape, euery one of them, as well Horſemen as footemen, ſhould beare boughes in their hands. The next day after, whē the Duke was come into the fields and territories néere vnto Swaneſcombe, and ſaw all the Countrey ſet and placed round about him, as it had bin a ſtirring & mouing wood, and that with a meane pace they approched and drewe néere vnto him, with great diſcomfiture of mind he wondered at that ſight. And as ſoone as the Captaynes of the Kentiſhmen ſawe that Duke William was encloſed in the middeſt of their armie,

they cauſed the trumpets to be ſounded, their banners to be diſplayed, and threw downe their boughes, and with their bowes bent, their ſwords drawne, and their ſpeares and other kinde of weapons ſtretched forthe, they ſhewed themſelues readie to fight. Duke William and they that were with him, ſtoode (as no maruell it was) ſore aſtonied, and amazed, and he which thought that he had already all England faſt in his fiſt, did now diſpaire of his owne life. Therefore on the behalfe of the Kentiſhmen were ſent vnto Duke William the Archbiſhop Stigand, and Egelſin Abbot of Saint Augustines, who told him their meſſage in this ſort:
            My Lord Duke, behold the people of Kent commeth forth to méete you, and to receiue you as their liege Lord, requiring at your hands the things which pertayne to peace, and that vnder this condition, that all the people of Kent may enioy for euer their antient liberties, and may for euermore vſe the lawes and cuſtomes of the Countrey, otherwiſe they are ready preſently to bidde battell to you, and them that be with you, and are minded rather to die héere altogither, than to departe from the lawes and cuſtomes of their Countrey, and to ſubmit themſelues to bondage, whereof as yet they neuer had experience. The Duke ſéeing himſelf to be driuen in ſuch a ſtraight and narrow pinch, conſulted a while with them that came with him, prudently conſidering, that if he ſhould take any repulſe or diſpleaſure at the hands of this people, which be the key of England, all that euer he had done before, ſhould be vndone againe, and of no effect, and all his hope and ſafetie ſhoulde ſtande in danger and ieopardy: not ſo willingly as wiſely he granted the people of Kent their requeſt. So when the couenant was eſtabliſhed, and pledges giuen on both ſides, the Kentiſhmen being ioyfull, conducted the Normans (who alſo were glad) vnto Rochester, and yéelded vp to the Duke, the Earledome of Kent, and the noble Caſtell of Douer. Thus the antiente liberties of Englande, and the lawes and cuſtomes of the Countrey, whiche before the comming of Duke William
               
out of Normandy, were equally kept throughout all England, do (through this induſtrie and earneſt trauell of the ArchbiſhopThe antient liberties and lavves of England, remayne in Kent only. Thomas Sprot. Wil. Thorne.
                
               Stigand and Egelſin Abbot of Saint Auguſtines) remayne inuiolably obſerued vntill this day, onely in the Countie of Kent. Thus farre Thomas Sprot, after him William Thorne.
            
            After this, Duke William waſted Suſſex, Hampſhire, Southery,
               Marianus. Floriacen. Wigor. 
               Middleſex, and Hertfortſhire, not ceaſſing to burne Townes, and ſley the people, till he came to Barkehamſteed, where the Archbiſhop Alredus, Wolſtan Biſhop of Worceſter, Wilferus
                Biſhop of Hereford, Clito Edgar,
                the Earles Edwine and Morcare, and euery one of the noble men about London came to him, and giuing pledges, ſubmitted themſelues, and ſware fealtie to him, with whome alſo he made a league, & neuertheleſſe permitted his army ſtill to burne Townes, and to take ſpoyles.Chro. S. Albani.
            
            There was at that time an Abbot of Saint Albons calledFrederike Abbot of S. Albons his policie againſt Duke VVilliam. 
               Fretherike, who hearing of the comming of Duke William into Hartfordſhire, cauſed the woods betwixt London and Saint Albons to be felled, that no man could eyther ride or go that way for them: and thus the Abbot kept his Monaſterie, that Duke William might not come there, but was fayne to coaſt ouer to the Caſtell of Barkehamſteede, who there, vnder ſuretie, ſent for Frederike Abbot of Saint Albons, and demanded of him why ſuch felling of woods was made about him, more than in other places: Frederike anſwered and ſaide, if the Spirituall men through this land had done their indeuour, it ſhoulde not haue bin in thy power to haue entred the land ſo farre: for the Spiritualtie is of great power. Duke William anſwered, and I may liue and reioyce, I ſhall looſe their power, and make it leſſe, and ſpecially I will beginne with thée.
            The Abbot thought he had ſaid too farre, and (as ſoone as he might) departed home, called a Chapiter of his bréethrē, tolde them of Duke William, tooke his leaue of them, and went to Eely, and neuer returned.
            
               Then Duke William toke much of the liuelode of Saint Albons. At Chriſtmaſſe he would be crowned at Glocester, at Whitſontide at Westminster, at Eaſter at Winchester: theſe feaſtes he kept with great royaltie, but he made his cōmons bare, and himſelfe riche. He was proude of port, and had a great belly, balde heade, and a bigge man in all the parts of his body, he was a good Archer, and right fewe might bende his bowe. He brought the Iewes from Rhone to inhabite here.
            Whē Chriſtmaſſe approched he marched with al his armyDuke VVilliam crovvned. to London, that there he mighte be crowned King, which was there done on Chriſtmaſſe daye by Aldred Archbiſhoppe of Yorke, and not by Stigande of Canturburie bycauſe he came not lawfully by that dignitie: then he receyued homage, othe of fidelitie, and pledges of the nobles, and commaunded that in euery towne and village a bel ſhould be roong euery nighte at eight of the clocke, and y• all people ſhould then put forthFire and light forbidden to the Englishmen. theyr fire and candle, and goe to bed, which order was obſerued through this realme during hys raigne, and the raigne of William his ſonne.
            The Hiſtoriographers of that time accompted the yere to beginne at Chriſtmas, after which accompt then began the yeare 1067. but after the accompt of England now obſerued, the yeare beginneth not til the. 25. of March following.
            And now bicauſe thoſe houſes may not be vnremembred vnto whō King William diſpoſed y• lands and poſſeſſions of this realm for their good ſeruice, I haue thought good to publiſhe the names of them as heretofore I haue done, out of the Chronicles of Normandie, gathered by William Tayleur of Rhone.
            
            To witte, Odo Biſhoppe of Baion▪ 
                  Robert
                Earle of Mortaigne: Theſe two were brethren to Duke William by hys mother: Bandonni de Buillon: Roger Earle of Beamont, that was ſurnamed with the Beard, of him came the linage of Mellent.
            
            
               
               
                  Guillam Ma
                        •••
                     
                     ▪
                  
                  The Cronicles of Normandie vvri
                        •
                     tē in frēch by Guillem Tailleur.
               
               Guilliam fitz Oſberne.
               Le ſire de Mōtfort ſus Rille▪
               
               Guillam de vielz Pōt.
               Neel de ſaint Saueur le vicont.
               Le ſire de F
                     ••
                  giers.
               Henry ſire de Ferrers.
               Le ſire Dambemare.
               Guilliā ſire de Romare.
               Le ſire di Lichare.
               Le ſire de Tonque.
               Le ſire de la Mare.
               Le ſire de Nehabon.
               Le ſire de Piron.
               Le ſire de Beauſon.
               Le ſire Damnon.
               Le ſire de Soteuile.
               Le ſire de margneuille.
               Le ſire de Tankeruille.
               Eustace Dambleuille.
               Le ſire de Magneuille.
               Le ſire de Gremeſuille.
               Guillam Crespin.
               Le ſir de ſainct Martin.
               Guillem de Moulins.
               Le ſire de Pins.
               Gieffray ſir de Mayēne.
               Affroy de Behunt.
               Affroy & Mau
                     •
                  gr. de Cartaict.
               Guillam de Garennes.
               Hue de Cournay ſire le de Bray.
               Le conte Hue de Do
                     •
                  rnay.
               E
                     •
                  g
                     •••
                  o
                     •
                  nt de Laigle.
               Le vicont de Touars.
               Richart Donnemchni.
               Le ſire de Biars.
               Le ſire de Salligny.
               Le Boutellier daubegny.
               Le ſire de Marre.
               Le ſire de Victry.
               Le ſire de Lacy.
               Le ſire du vall Darie.
               Le ſire de Tracy.
               Hue ſire de Montfort.
               Le ſire de Piqgny.
               Hamon de Brayen.
               Le ſire de Spinay.
               Le ſire de Port.
               Le ſire de Torchy.
               Le ſire de Iort.
               Le ſire de Riuers.
               Guillem M
                     •
                  yon.
               Raoul Teſſon de Chignelois.
               Rogier Marmion.
               Raoul de Gael.
               Au
                     •
                   Neel de Biars.
               Parnel du Monstier.
               Bertram le Tort.
               Hubert Robert.
               Le ſire de Seukee.
               Le ſire de Dormal.
               Le ſire de Brenal.
               Le ſire de ſainct Iehan.
               Le ſire de Bois.
               Le ſire de Homme.
               Le ſire de Sauſſay.
               Le ſire de Cailly.
               Le ſire de Semilly.
               Le ſire de Tilly.
               Le ſire de Romely.
               Martel de Baſqueuill.
               Le ſire de Praux.
               Le ſire de Gonys.
               Le ſire de Saincteaulx.
               De Mullox.
               Theſe Archers of the vale of Rueill, and of Bretueill, & of many other places.
               Le ſire de ſeinct Saen.
               Le ſire de la Rimer.
               Le ſire de Salnarinlle.
               Le ſire de Tony.
               Eude de Beaugien.
               Le ſire de Ollie.
               Le ſire de Sacy.
               Le ſire de Vaſſye.
               Le Biſquams de Chaymes.
               Le ſire de Sap.
               Le ſire Dugloſſe.
               Le ſire de Nim
                     •
                  .
               Le ſire de Blamuille.
               Le ſire de Brencon.
               Le vidā de Partenay.
               Raoult do Mormont.
               Pierre de Bailleul.
               Sir de Foſcamp.
               Le ſir de Beaufault.
               Le ſir de Tillieres.
               Le ſir de Pacy.
               Le ſeneſchall de Torchy.
               
                  Le ſir de Lacy.
               Le ſir de Gacy.
               Le ſir de Doully.
               Le ſir de Sancy.
               Le ſir de Bacy.
               Le ſir de Tourneur.
               Le ſir de Praores.
               Guillem de Colombiers.
               Hue ſir de Bollebec.
               Richart ſir Dorbec.
               Le ſir de Donnebos.
               Le ſir de Trois gros.
               Le ſir de mont Fiquet.
               Hue le Vigot, alias Bigot de Mal
                     ••
                  ot.
               Le ſir de la Haye.
               Le ſir de Bracy.
               Le ſir de Moubray.
               Le ſir de Say.
               Le ſir de Laſer
                     •
                  .
               Bonteuillam Tronſebours.
               Guillem Patris de la land.
               Hue de Mortemer.
               Le ſir Donuiller.
               Le ſir Donnebant.
               L
                     •
                   ſir de ſaint Cler.
               Robert le fitz Herneys duke Dorlians.
               Le ſir de Harecourt.
               Le ſir Creuecure.
               Le ſir de Dancourt.
               Le ſir de Brunetot.
               Le ſir de Cambray.
               Le ſir Dauncy.
               Le ſir Fonteney.
               Le counte Deureux.
               Le ſir de Roberchil.
               Alan ſergent Counte de Britaigne.
               Le ſir de 
                     •
                  aint Wallery.
               Le counte Deden.
               Gualtar Guiſart, counte de Longeuile.
               Le ſir de Scouteuile.
               Le counte Thomas Dā
                  binale.
               Guillem de Hoimes e
                     •
                   Darques.
               Le ſir de Barreuile.
               Le ſir de Breante.
               Le ſir de Freamuile.
               Le ſir de Panilly.
               Le ſir de Cler
                     •
                  .
               Tostamdubec.
               Le ſir de Mangny.
               Roger du Mont Gomery, Comes.
               Almary de Touaers.
               Beſide a very greate number of Knighte and eſquires that wer vnder them.
               Thus far out of the Cronicle of Normandie, the other following are taken out of a Table ſometime in Battaile Abbey.
               Awmerle.
               Audeley.
               Angilliam.
               Argentoun.
               Arundell.
               Auenant.
               Abel.
               Awgers.
               Angenoun.
               Archer.
               Asperuile.
               Amonerduil
                     •
                  .
               Arey.
               Akeny.
               Albeny.
               Asperemound.
               Bertram.
               Buttecourt.
               Brahus.
               Byſeg.
               Bardelf.
               Baſſet.
               Bygot.
               Bohun.
               Baylife.
               Bondeuile.
               Barbaſon.
               Beer.
               
                  Bures.
                  Carta W. Reg
                        •
                     
                     ▪ de S. Martin 
                        ••
                      g
                        •••
                     d
                        •
                     .
               
               Bonylayne.
               Barbayon.
               Berners.
               Braybuf.
               Brand.
               Bonuile.
               Burgh.
               Buſshy.
               Blundell.
               Breton.
               
                  Bela
                     •
                  yſe.
               Bowſer.
               Bayons.
               Bulmere.
               Broune.
               Beke.
               Bowlers.
               Banastre.
               Belomy.
               Belknape.
               Beauchamp.
               Bandy.
               Broyleby.
               Burnel.
               Belot.
               Beufort.
               Baudewine.
               Burdon.
               Berteuylay.
               Barre.
               Buſſeuile.
               Blunt.
               Beawper.
               Bret.
               Barret.
               Bainard.
               Barnevale.
               Barry.
               Bodyt.
               Berteuile.
               Bertine.
               Belew.
               Buſhell.
               Beleners.
               Buffard.
               Boteler.
               Boteuile.
               Braſard.
               Belhelme.
               Braunche.
               Boleſur.
               Blundel.
               Burdet.
               Bagot.
               Beawpount.
               Bools.
               Belefroun.
               Barchampe.
               Camos.
               Canuille.
               Chawent.
               Chauncy.
               Couderay.
               Coluyle.
               Chamberlaine.
               Chambernoune.
               Cribet.
               Corbine.
               Corbet.
               Coniers.
               Chaundos.
               Coucy.
               Chaworth
                     •
                  .
               Claremaus.
               Clarell.
               Camuine.
               Chaunduyt.
               Claruays.
               Chantilowe.
               Colet.
               Creſſy.
               Courtenay.
               Constable.
               Chaucer.
               Cholmelay.
               Corneuile.
               Champeney.
               Carew.
               Chawnos.
               Claruaile.
               Champaine.
               Carbonell.
               Charles.
               Chereberge.
               Chawnes.
               Chawmont.
               Cheyne.
               Curſen.
               Conell.
               Chayters.
               Cheynes.
               Cateray.
               Cherecourt.
               Chaunuile.
               Clereney.
               Curly.
               Clyfford.
               Denauile.
               Dercy.
               Dine.
               Dispencer.
               Daniel.
               Denyſe.
               Druell.
               Deuaus.
               Dauers.
               Doningſels.
               Da
                     •
                  el.
               Delabere.
               De la Pole.
               De la Lind.
               De la Hill.
               De la Wate.
               De la Watche.
               Dakeny.
               Dauntre.
               Deſnye.
               Dabernoune.
               Damry.
               Daueros.
               De la Vere.
               De Lee.
               De la Warde.
               De la Planch.
               Danway.
               De Hewſe.
               Diſard.
               Durant.
               Drury.
               Estrange.
               Eſcutauile.
               Eſcriols.
               Engayne.
               Euers.
               Esturney.
               Foluile.
               Fitz Water.
               Fitz marmaduk
               Filberd.
               Fitz Roger.
               Fitz Robert.
               Fanecourt.
               Fitz Phillip.
               Fitz William.
               
                  Fitz Paine.
               Fitz Alyne.
               Fitz Raufe.
               Fitz Browne.
               Foke.
               Freuile.
               Faconbrige.
               Friſſel.
               F
                     •
                  lioll.
               Fitz Thomas.
               Fitz Morice.
               Fitz Hughe.
               Fitz Warren.
               Faunuille.
               Formay.
               Formiband.
               Friſon.
               Finer.
               Fitz vrcy.
               Furniuall.
               Fitz Herbert.
               Fitchet.
               Fitz Iohn.
               Gargraue.
               Graunſon.
               Gracy.
               Glaunuile.
               Gouer.
               Gaſcoyne.
               Gray.
               Golofer.
               Grauns.
               Gurly.
               Gurdon.
               Gamages.
               Gaunt.
               Hanſard.
               Hastings.
               Haulay.
               Huſie.
               Herne.
               Hamelyn.
               Harewell.
               Hardel.
               Heck
                     •
                  t.
               Hamound.
               Harecord.
               Iarden.
               Iay.
               Ianuile.
               Iasparuile.
               Karre.
               Karron.
               Kyriell.
               Le Strange.
               Leuony.
               Latomere.
               Loueday.
               Logenton.
               Leuel.
               Le Scrope.
               Lemare.
               Litteril
                     •
                  .
               Lucy.
               Liſlay.
               Longspes.
               Longſchampe.
               Lastels.
               LindSey.
               Loterell.
               Lindſey.
               Longuaile.
               Le Vawſe.
               Loy.
               Laue.
               Le dispenſer.
               Marmilou.
               Moribray.
               Moruile.
               Manley.
               Malebranche.
               Malemaine.
               Muſchampe.
               Muſgraue.
               M
                     •
                  nilebillers.
               Mortmaine.
               Muſe.
               Marteine.
               Mountbocher.
               Maleuile.
               Mountney.
               Maleherbe.
               Muſgros.
               Muſard.
               Mautrauers.
               Merke.
               Murres.
               Montague.
               Mantalent.
               Mandute.
               Manle.
               Mal
                     •
                  ry.
               Merny.
               Muffet.
               Menpincoy.
               Mainard.
               Morell.
               Morley.
               Mounrmartin.
               Myners.
               Mauley.
               Mainwaring▪
               
               Mantell.
               Mayel.
               Morton.
               Neuile.
               Newmarche.
               Norton.
               Norbet.
               Norece.
               Newborough.
               Neele.
               Normanuile.
               Otenell.
               Olibef.
               Olifaunt.
               Oyſell.
               Oliford.
               Oryoll.
               Pigot.
               Pery.
               Perecount.
               Perſhale.
               Power.
               Paynel.
               Peche.
               Peuerell.
               Perot.
               Picard▪
               
               Pudſey.
               Pimeray.
               Pounſey.
               Punchardon.
               Pynchard.
               
                  Placy.
               Patifine.
               Pampilion.
               Poterell.
               Pekeney.
               Peruinke.
               Penicord.
               Quincy.
               Quintine.
               Roſe.
               Ridle.
               Rynel.
               Rous.
               Ruſſell.
               Ro
                     •
                  d.
               Richmond.
               Rocheford.
               Reymond.
               Seuche.
               Seint Quintine.
               Seint Omer.
               Seint Amond.
               Seint Leger.
               Someruile.
               Sanford.
               Somerey.
               Seint George.
               Seint Les.
               Sauine.
               Seint Clo.
               Seint Albine.
               Seint Barbe.
               Sandeuile.
               Seint More.
               Seint Scudemor
               Towrs.
               Toget.
               Talybois.
               Tuchet.
               Truſlot.
               Truſbut.
               Traynel.
               Taket.
               Talbo
                     •
                  .
               Tanny.
               Tibtote.
               Truſell.
               Turbeuile.
               Turuile.
               Totet.
               Tauers.
               Torel.
               Tirell.
               Totels.
               Tauerner.
               Valence.
               Vancord.
               Vau
                     •
                  ſour.
               Vender.
               Verder.
               Verdon.
               Aubrie de Vere.
               Vernoune.
               Venables.
               Ven
                     •
                  ure.
               Verlaud.
               Verlay.
               Vernoys.
               Verny.
               Vilan.
               Vmframuile.
               Vnket
               Vrnall.
               Wake.
               Walenger.
               Warde.
               Wardebus.
               Waren.
               Wate.
               Wateline.
               Wateuile.
               Woly.
               Wyuell.
            
            THis yeare through the greate ſuite and labour of Williā
                the Norman, then. Biſhoppe of London, King William grā
               ted the Charter and liberties to the ſame William, Byſhoppe,VVherefore the Mayor and Citizens of Lō
                  don repayre to Poules. and Godfrey, Portgreue, and al the Burgies of the Cittie of London, in as large forme as they enioyed the ſame, in the time of Saint Edwarde before the Conqueſt: in rewarde whereof, the Citizens haue fixed on hys graue, being in the middeſt of the great Weſt Ile of Saint Paules Church in London, this Epitaph following.
            
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           
                              GVilielme viro ſapiētia & vitae ſanctitate clar
                                 •
                              , qui primùmEpitaph of VVilliam Byshop of Londō. diuo Edwardo Regi & Confeſſori familiaris, nuper in Epiſcopum Londinenſem erectus, nec multò post apud inuictiſſimū Principem Guilelmum Angliae regem eius nominis primum, ob prudentiam fidemqúe ſingularem in conſilium adhibitus: ampliſſima huic vrbi celeberimae priuilegia abeodem impetrauit. Senatus populuſque Londinenſis bene merenti poſuit. Sedit Epiſcopus annos. 20. Deceſſit anno à Christo nato. 1070.
                           
                              
                                 HAEc tibi, clare pater poſuerunt marmora ciues,
                                 Praemia, non meritis, aequiparanda tuis:
                                 Namque ſibi populus, te Londonienſis amicum,
                                 Senſit, & huic vrbi non leue praeſidium.
                                 Reddita libertas duce te, dotaque multis
                                 Te duce, res fuerat publica muneribus.
                                 Diuitias, genus, & formam breuis opprimat hora,
                                 Haec tua ſed pietas, & benefacta manent.
                              
                           
                           Obijt anno. 1070 Sedit Epiſcopus annos. 20.
                        
                        
                           The ſame in Engliſh.
                           
                              TO William a man famous in wiſedome and holyneſſe of life, who firſt with Saint Edward the king and Confeſſour being familiar, of late preferred to be Byſhoppe of London, and not long after for hys prudencie and ſincere fidelitie, admitted to be of counſel with the moſte victorious Prince William king of Englande of that name the firſt, who obteyned of the ſame great and large priuiledges to this famous Citie. The Senate and Citizens of Lō
                                 don to him hauing well deſerued, haue made this. He continued Biſhop. xx. yeares and died in the yere after Chriſt his natiuitie. 1070.
                           
                              
                              
                                 THeſe Marble monuments to thee thy Citizens aſsigne,
                                 Rewardes (O Father) far vnfit to thoſe deſerts of thine.
                                 Thee vnto them a faithfull friend, thy London people founde,
                                 And to thys towne, of no ſmall weyght, a ſtay both ſure and ſounde:
                                 Their liberties reſtorde to them, by means of thee haue been,
                                 Their publike weale by meanes of thee, large gifts haue felte and ſeen.
                                 Thy riches, ſtocke, and beautie braue, one houre hathe them ſuppreſt,
                                 Yet theſe thy vertues and good deedes, with vs for euer reſte.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            KIng William, (leauing his brother Odo Byſhop of Bayon,
               Marianus. Ypodigm
                     •
                   Neuſtri
                     •
                  . and William Fitz Osberne whom he had made Earle of Hereforde, to be Wardens of England) retourned into Normandie, which at that time was bent to ſhrink from him. Hée toke with him Edgare Etheling, Stigandus Archbiſhoppe ofW. de W
                     •
                  lum. 
               Canturburie, Frederike
                Abbot of Saint Albons, Egelnothus
                Abbot of Glastenburie, Edwyne
                Duke of Mercia, Morcarus
                duke of Northumberlande, Walden
                Earle of Northampton and of Huntington, Roger
                late Earle of Hertford, Renulphe
                Earle of Cambridge, Goſpatrike
                Earle of Cumberlande, Gualter
                the ſon of Siward, and manye other nobles of England thinking they woulde be truer to him in a forraine Countrey than in their owne: by theyr diligence he ſubdued the rebelling Normans. When Winter was at hand, King William retourned, and ſet an importable tribute on the Engliſhmen.
            
            After this going into Deuonſhire he beſieged Excester,
               Exceſter beſieged. which the Citizens and other Engliſh men helde againſte him.
            The Counteſſe Githa mother of King Harolde, and ſiſter to Swanus king of Denmarke with manye other fléeing out of the Cittie eſcaped, and got them ouer into Flaunders, and the Citizens yéelded to the King.Anno reg. 2. 1068 Ypodigma.
            
            
               Mathild wife to King William came forth of Normandie, and on Whitſonday, was conſecrated Quéene by Aldred Archebyſhop

of Yorke. After this Marleſwin, Goſpatricke, and other noble menne of Northumberlande, to auoyde king Williams roughe and boyſterous dealings, taking with them Edgar, Etheling, and his mother Agatha, with his two ſiſters Margaret and Chriſtian, wente by ſea into Scotlande, where they were receiued and well entertayned of Malcoline king of Scottes, who tooke Margaret the ſiſter of Edgar to wife.Iohn Rouſe.
            
            King William with his armye wente to Notingham andCaſtel at Notingham, Yorke and Lincolne. builded. there builded a Caſtel: he went to Yorke, and made there two Caſtels, and put in them gariſons: he cōmaunded alſo Caſtels to be made at Lincolne and other places.
            This yere Henrie the kings ſonne was borne in Englād,
               
                  T. Rudborne. Earle of Northumberlande ſlaine. for his eldeſt ſons Robert and William Rufus were borne in Normandie, before he Conquered England.
            
            King William gaue to Robert Commin the EarledomeLiber Dunelme. Anno. reg. 3. of Northumberland, who entred by force into Dureſme, but for his outrages there done, he and 900. of his men were ſlaine by the men of that Countrey, in the Biſhoppes palace, thatSea. Cro. had himſelfe receyued him honourablye, and king William came Afterward vpon them and ſlewe them euery one.
            
               Agelricus biſhop of Durham, being accuſed of treaſon, was1069 impriſoned at Westminster. And his brother Egelwine being made Biſhop there, was ſoone baniſhed.
            The Engliſhmen that were fledde out of Englande, hauyng Edgar to be their Captaine, returned out of Scotlande, and ſodainely ſet vpon the gariſons that King William had ſette at Yorke, put them to flighte, ſlewe them, poſſeſſed the Citie, and pronounced Edgar to be King: but not long after King William came with a great armye and recouered thr Citie, conſtrayning Edgar to retourne into Scollande. Edgar
                ſeeing he coulde not make his partye good with king William, adioyned vnto hym Canutus king of the Danes, promiſing hym halfe of the kingdome. Thus they entred Englande and came to Yorke.
            
            The Normaines that were left to defende the Citie, ſetteYorke brent. their ſuburbes on fire, that their enimies ſhoulde haue no

commoditie of it, but the winde droue the fire on high, and ſet all the Cittie on fire, ſo that the gariſons were forced to flée into their enimies hands. In the 
                  •
               kirmiſh were ſlaine 3000▪ 
               Normans, wherevppon all the North parte of England fell from William to Edgar.
            
            When William had word, of the ſlaughter of his men, hée with great trauel came to Yorke, where he fought with hys enimies, and put them to flighte. Canutus with a few Danes got to their ſhippes, but Edgar and the Engliſhmen which eſcaped, retourned into Scotland. King William ſpoyled all the Countrey beyonde Humber.
            
            Such a dearth was in England that men did eate horſſes,
                  Anno reg. 4. Mans flesh good meate. Ioh Taxtor. 1070 Monaſteries rifled. cattes, dogges, and mans fleſh.
            King William bereaued all the Monaſteries and Abbayes in Englande of theyr golde and ſiluer, ſparing neyther chalice nor ſhrine, appropriating the ſayd Monaſteries and Abbayes to himſelfe: he alſo brought vnder Knightes ſeruice, all thoſe Biſhoprickes and Abbayes that held Baronies, which had bin frée from all ſecular bondage, appointing them howe many ſouldiours they ſhould finde him and his ſucceſſours in time of warre.
            In a counſel at Winchester Stigand
                was depoſed as an
                  Ypodigma. Stigand depoſed Apoſtata Archebiſhop, who for money got his Biſhopricke: and Lanfranke was choſen Archbiſhop of Canturburie.
               Anno. reg. 5. 1071
            
            
               Edwine Earle of Mercia, Marcherus
                Earle of Northūberlande, and Swardus an Earle, with Egelwine Biſhop of Durham, and many other of the cleargie and laitie, kéeping theNoble men fled wooddes, for that they were not able to abyde the Kings diſpleaſure, at the laſt came into the Ile of Elie, Herewarde
                being their Captaine, who ſore afflicted that Countrey, but king William beſieging the Ile, they all ſauing Herewarde ſubmitted them to his pleſure, who committed ſome to perpetual priſon, ſome he put to death, and ſome he ranſomed, but Hereward by ſtrong hande broughte his men out of the Ile and eſcaped.
            
               The Caſtell of Ledes in Kent, was builded by Creueken,
               
                  Anno. reg. 6. Ex libro Nor
                        •
                     . Caſtel of Leder and of Oxforde builded. Iohn Rouſe. 1072 Mathew Paris. Yorke ſubiect to Canturburie. Anno reg. 7. 1073 Anno reg. 8. and the Caſtel of Oxforde by Robert de Olly, two noble men that came into England with William Conquerour.
            
            In a Counſel holden at Windſore, the primacie of y• church of Canturburie ouer the Churche of Yorke being examined, it was founde by good aucthoritie of olde writings, that the Church of Yorke ought to be ſubiect to the Church of Canturburie and faithfully to obey the ſame.
            King William with a great power inuaded Scotland, and forced Malcoline to do him homage and fealtie.
            King William with a greate power of Engliſhmen, wente into Normand
                     •
                  e which rebelled, and ſubdued it, ſpoyling the Cities, townes, vineyardes, corne, &c.
            
               Gregory the ſeauenth Pope, excommunicated all committers1074 Maried prieſtes remoued. Ypodigma. Mathew Paris.
                of Simony, and remoued maried Prieſtes from executing of deuine ſeruice, whereof roſe greate troubles in England.
            
            
               Ranulph Erle of ye 
               East-Engliſh, by y• counſel of the Erles Woltheopus & Roger, trauelled to expel K. Williā
                out of his kingdome. The cōſpiracie was concluded at a mariage in y•
               Conſpiracie. Citie of Norwich, & forthwith they ſente to the King of Denmarke, deſiring his ayde, and hauing confederated with the Walchmen, euerye one where they came, robbed the Kyngs townes.
            King William came ſodainly out of Normandie, and toke the Earles, committing them to priſon: but the Walchmen he cauſed to haue theyr eyes put out, and ſome to be hanged.
            
               Kanut the ſonne of Swayne, and Hacon the Earle, cameAnno reg. 9. out of Denmarke, with 200 ſaile but when they heard y• theyr fautors were ouercome, they tourned into Flaunders.
            
            King William cauſed a caſtell to be builded at Dirham, &1075 Ypodigma. commaunded Waltheothus, Earle of Northampton and of Huntindon, ſon to Siward duke of Northumberland, to be beheaded at Winchester, who was buried at Crowland.
            
            The king ſayled into Brytaine, and beſieged the Caſtel of Dolens, but preuayled not.
            
               
               Walter Biſhoppe of Durham, bought of king William theBiſshop murdered. Anno. reg. 10 Earledome of Northumberlande, wherin he vſed ſuch cruelty, that at the length the inhabitants ſlewe him and an hundred of his men, by the riuer of Tine, where the Biſhop helde his courtes.
            The Earth was harde frozen, from the Calendes of Nouember,1076 T. Caſtleforde. Iohn Leyland. Anno. reg. 11 till the middeſt of Aprill.
            King William gaue the caſtel with the town of Pontfrait, with land lying there about, to Hilbert Lacy a Norman. The caſtel town & lāds about Pontfraite, longed before y• Cōqueſt to one Richard Aſhnalde, who had iſſue Ailricke, who had Swane, who had Adam, of whom came two daughters, one of them maried to Gaulfride Neuile, the other to Thomas Burgh, but neyther of them had anye part of the Towne or lands about Pontfrait. Robert
                ſonne to Hildebert Lacy, founded the Priory of Pontfraite.
            
            
               Robert the firſt ſonne of King William, bycauſe he could not poſſeſſe Normandie, which his father had giuen him before his cōming into England, (in the preſence of Phillip king of Fraunce) he went into Fraunce, and through ayde of Kyng Phillip he fetched prayes in Normandie, brent townes, ſlewe men, and brought his father into no ſmall perplexitie.
            Upon Palme ſondaye aboute noone, appeared a Blaſing1077 Anno. reg. 12 1078 Ypodigma. ſtarre neare vnto the ſunne.
            
               Malcoline King of Scots, waſted Northumberland, ſlew many, and toke a great pray with him into Scotland.
            
            The Cathedral Church of Hereford was brent by Grifin and Algare ſonne to Leof icke Earle of Merce.
            
            While King William gaue battayle vnto his eldeſt ſon Robert, before the Caſtell of Kerbothead, which King Philip
               King VVilliam vvounded. had lent him, he was wounded by hym in hys arme and caſte beſides his horſſe, but as ſoone as Robert knew him by his voyce, he ſtraight alighted, and required his Father to mount on his horſſe, and ſuffred him to depart: many of kingAnno. reg. 13 
               Williams men were ſlaine, and his ſon William with many other ſore wounded.
            
               
               Truſtin Abbot of Glaſtenbury, committed a filthy acte in his1379 Murder. Mathew Paris.
                Church, for he cauſed thrée Monkes to be ſlaine which were layde vnder the Altare, and xviij. men to be wounded, that their bloud ran from the Alter down y• ſteps to y• pauement.
            This yeare was a great wind on Chriſtmas daye. And
                  Anno. reg. 14 1080 Anno. reg. 15 1081 Anno. reg. 16 Tutsbury. Liber Tutsbury. 1982 Bermondſey. Anno. reg. 17 1083 a greate Earthquake and roarings out of the earth, the vj. of Aprill.
            
               Henry Erle Ferrers founded a Priory within hys Caſtel of Tutſbury, the late new Church was builded in Anno. 1407. when the Normans were put out.
            
               Alwin Child a Citizen of London founder of the Monaſterie of S. Sauior at Bermondfeey in Surrey, gaue vnto the Monkes there, dyuers rents in the Cittie of London.
            
            
               Matild the Quéene, daughter to Baldwin Earle of Flaunders, and wife to King William, died, and was buryed at Cane in the Monaſtery of Nunnes, whych ſhe had builded.
            
               Richard ſonne to King William, died in the new Forreſt, and was buryed at Winchester.
            
            King William cauſed inquirie to be made, howe manyeAcres of land numbred. 
                     
                        ••
                     . Rouſe. Anno. reg. 18. 1084 A greate taxe acres of lande were ſufficient for one ploughe by the yeare, howe many beaſtes to the tilling of one hide, how many Cities, Caſtels, Farmes, Oranges, Townes, Riuers, Marſhes, and Woods, what rent they were by yeare, and howe many Knightes or Souldiors were in euery ſhire, all whych was put in writing, and remayneth at Westminster.
            
            King William tooke homage, and othe of allegiaunce of all Englande, of what tenor or fée ſoeuer they were, and tookeAnno. reg. 19 of euery hide of land ſire ſhillings, and then fayled into Normandy.
            
            When the Normans had accompliſhed their pleaſure vpon1085 the Engliſhmen, ſo that there was no noble man of that nation left to beare any rule ouer thē, it became a reproch to beNev
                     ••
                   
                  
                     ••
                  rreſt. called an Engliſhman. Wicked cuſtomes ſprang vp, and the more the people ſpake of equitie, the more wrōg was done: the Juſticiers were the authors of al vnrighteouſnes. Who ſo did take a Deare or a Goate, had hys eyes putte oute. It

was broughte to paſſe, that for the ſpace of more than. xxx.
                  Mathew Paris. Bishop at Lincolne. miles, good profitable corne ground was turned into a chace for wilde beaſtes.
            
               Remingus Biſhop of Dorchester, remoued his Sea to Lincolne,
               Anno reg. 20. where he bu
                  •
               lded a new Church to be his ſeate.
            King William kept his feaſt of Chriſtmas at Gloucester▪
               
               Flori. Wigmore. where to thrée of his Chaplaines he gaue thrée Biſhoprikes, to Mawrice, the Biſhopricke of London: to William, that of Thetford: and to Robert, that of Chester.
            
            There was a greate water floude, ſo that hils were made1086 VVater floude. ſofte and conſumed, & with their fal ouer whelmed many villages. King William founded the Abbeys of Battel, where hée ouercame Harolde of Selbe in Yorkeſhire, and of Cane in Normandy,
               Battell Abbey. in the which he was buried. He founded the Priory of Saint Nicholas at Excester. He gaue greate Priuiledges toSaint Martins le Graunde. Liber S. Mar. Anno reg. 21 
               Saint Martins le grand in London, (which Church was founded before the Conqueſt by Ingelricus and Ewardus his brother couſins to king Edward the Confeſſor) he alſo gaue to ye Chlledge, as appeareth by his Charter, in theſe words: I do giueCreepleſgate of London, but a Poſterne and all the grounde adioyning vvas a Doore or Marishe. and graunt to the ſame Church al the land and more without the Poſterne which is called Cripleſgate on either parte of the poſterne, that is to ſay, from the North corner of the wall, as the riuer of the Wells there running, departe the ſame more from the wal, to ye rūning water which entreth the Citie, &c.
            This yere was a great death of Cattel, and ſore diſtemperancie1087 of ayre, many dyed firſt of feuers, and after of famine.
            In the mean time, a deuouring fire ſpread ouer al the principallFamine and Peſtilence. Cities of Englande. The Church of Saint Paule in London was brent with the more part of the Citie, which fire beganLondon and Poules Churche brent. 
                     
                        〈…〉
                      Erkenwaldi.
                at the entry of the Weſt gate & conſumed ſo ye Eaſt gate. Mawrice then Biſhop of London began the foundation of the new Church of Paules. Richard
                his ſucceſſor did wonderfully encreaſe the walles of the ſaid Church, and of his owne coſtFloria Wig. purchaſed y• large ſtréetes about it where were wont to dwel many laye men, and compaſſed it with a ſtrong wall.
            In a prouince of Wales, called Roſe, was found the ſepulchre

of Gawen vpon the ſea ſhore, who was ſiſters ſonne to
                  Wil. Malme. Mens bones of large ſixe. 
               Arthur king of the Britaines, being xiij. foote of length. King William being at Roane in Normandie, Philip
                king of Fraunce ſaide that he kept his Chamber as women do in childbed, & nouriſhed his fat belly, but when he is churched I will offer a thouſand candles with him. King William hearing of theſe ſcornes, went with a great army into Fraunce, ſpoyling al things as he paſſed. Laſt of al he burned the Citie of Meanx with our Lady Churche and two Anchers that were encloſed there, who perſwaded themſelues, they ought not to forſake their houſe in ſuch extremitie: whereat the King reioyſing, cheared his men to féede the fire, & came himſelfe ſo neare, y• with the heate of his harneys he got a diſeaſe to the encreaſe of his ſickneſſe. Alſo the kings horſſe leaping ouer a ditch, did burſt the inner parts of the K. with the pain wherof he was ſore afflilcted, and retourned to Roane, wher ſhortly after he ended his life. The. ix. day of Septem, in the yere ofKing VVilliam dyed. our Lord. 1087. when he had rained xx. yeres & xj. monthes lacking fine days, his body being brought wt great ſolēnitie in Cane in Normandie there to be buried in a Church whiche he had founded, a certaine knight boldly forbod the burial ofW. Malme. him in that place, affirming that by title of inheritaunce the ground was his, & that king William ought not to be buriedBurial forbiddē to VVilliam Conquerour. in the ground, which by violence he had obtayned: wherfore by conſent of Henry his ſon, this reproch was appeaſed with the payment of an hundred pounde of ſiluer. He had iſſue by Matild his wife, daughter to Baldwin Erle of Flaunders: Robert Curthoſe,
                vnto whom he gaue Normandie. Richard
                thatIſſue of VVilliā Conquerour. dyed yong: William Rufus, vnto whom he gaue England: and Henry to whō he gaue his wiues inheritance & treaſure: hée had daughters Cicily, Abbeſſe of Cane: Conſtance
                marryed to Alane Earle of Brytain: Adale
                wife to Stephen Earle of Bloyſe: Margaret
                promiſed to Harold king of Englād, & Alianor betrothed to Alfonſe King of Galicia. King Williā
                commanded all priſoners to be releaſed, & his treſure to be diſtributed vnto churches.
         
         
            
            ¶ King William Rufus.
            
            
            
               
                  WIlliam le Rovvſe or Rufus, the thirde ſonne of William Conquerour; beganne his raigne theAnno reg. 1. ninthe daye of September, in the yeare of our Lorde 1087. and was crowned at Westminster by Lanfranke Archbiſhop of Canturburie, y• firſt day of October. He was variable, inconſtant, couetous, & cruel, hée burdened his people with vnreaſonable taxes, pylled the ryche and oppreſſed the poore, and what he thus got, he prodigally ſpent in great banqueting and ſumptuous apparel, for he woulde neyther eate, drinke, or weare any thing, butW. Malme. Robert of Gloceſt. S. Albons Cronicl. that it coſte vnmeaſurably déere. As for example it was in thoſe dayes written (and for vs now to be noted) that in a mornyng hys Chamberlayne bringing him a newe paire of hoſen, he demaunding what they coſte, and the ChamberlaineThe beſt paire of hoſe three shillings. anſwering thrée ſhillings, the king being wroth, ſaid,

away begger that thou art, are thoſe méete hoſe for a King to weare, bring me a paire of a Marke, or thou ſhalte ſore repent it, then his Chamberlaine fette another paire that were much worſe than the firſt, and ſayd 
                  •
               h
                  •
               y coſt a Marke, wherewith King William was well pleaſed. Thus farre haue I noted the ſaying of King William, bycauſe it importeth the ſimplicitie of apparell in thoſe dayes vſed, ſo farre different from the exceſſe of this preſent time.
            
               Odo Biſhop of Bayon, and Earle of Kent, with his brother1088 The Nobles 
                     •
                  ebeſ
                     •
                  . 
               Robert Earle of Mortaigne and Hereford, and almoſt all the Nobles of England, rayſed warre againſt King William, and would haue had Robert his eldeſt brother to be King: but King William▪
                by f
                  •
               irs words pacifying ſome of the principall conſpirators, beſéeged the reſidue in the Caſtell of Rocheſter,
               W. Malme. and with muche labour laſtly ouercame them.
            An Earthquake ouerturned many houſes and churchesAn Earthquake. in England.
            
            
               Lanfranke Archbiſhop of Canturbury deceaſſed. He renuedAnno reg. 2. 1089 the great Church of Canturbury, reſtoring xxv. manors to the ſame. He repaired the walles of that Citie, builded two Hoſpitals, the one of Saint Iohn the other at Harbaldowne.
               Hoſpitall of Saint Iohn and Harbaldovvne. He reſtored the Church of Rochester from four ſecular Clarkes, to fiftie Monkes. He alwayes attended his booke, and trauelled to correct the corruption of Writers.
            When Lanfranke was dead, King Wilham kept in his owne hands the Churches and Monaſteries of England afterMathew Paris. G. Lilly. their paſtours were dead, making great ſpoyle, and lotting them out to ferme.
            King William making warre againſt his brother Robert
               
                  Anno reg. 3. 1090 King VVilliam made vvarre on his brother. Duke of Normandy, tooke the Caſtels of Wallarroke and of Albemarle, making great ſpoyle in his brothers Countrey: but at length agréemente was made betwéene them, that Robert ſhould giue vp into the Kings hands, the Caſtels that he had gotten of him: and the King ſhoulde helpe him to get all that his father had, England only excepted: and alſo, if one of them dyed without iſſue, the other ſhould ſuccéede

in the inheritance: to which couenant were ſworne twelue Princes of the Kings ſide, and twelue Barons on the Dukes ſide.
            
               Malcoline King of Scottes did homage and fealtie toKing of Scots did homage. Mathew Paris. Great tempeſt. King William. of England.
            
            A great tempeſt ſell on Saint Lukes day in 
                  •
               imdry places of England, ſpecially in Winchcombe, where a great part of the Stéeple was 
                  •
               uerthrowne with thundering and lightning, and in London the winde ouerturned 606. houſes, and606. houſes ouerturned. the rou
                  •
               e of Bow Church in Cheape, wherewith ſome perſons were ſlayne: foure of the 
                  •
               afters of 20. foote in length were with ſuch violence pitched into the ſtrée
                  •
               e that ſcantlyWil. Malme. Gualter Couen. foure foote of them remayned aboue grounde, whiche were fayne to be 
                  ••
               t euen with the ſame grounde, bycau
                  •
               e they could not be plucked out.
            About this time, one Iuſtinus ſonne to Gurguntus▪
                EarleAnno reg. 4. of Glamorgan, and Morgannoke, refuſing to obey Rheſus▪
                ſonne to Theodore Prince of South-wales, ſente Aeneas,
               The vvinning of Glamorgan and Morganoke out of the VVelchmens hands. ſonne to Gedi
                     •
                  orus, ſometyme Lorde of Deme
                     •
                  ia, into England, to take muſter of Souldioures, and there receyued a great Armie, vnder the conduct of one Robert Fitzhamon, and ioyning with other tables out of Went and Brecini
                     •
                  , met with Rheſus in Blacke h
                     •
                  ll, and there 
                  ••
               ewe him, and ſ
                  •
                paying the Engliſhmen their wages, diſcharged them. But they taking regard vnto the goodneſſe of the ſoyle, and the great variance which was then amongſt the Welchmen, as in foretime the Saxons had done, they turned their force of armes againſt thoſe which had entertayned them, and ſoone diſplaced them wholly of all the Champion, and the beſt of the Countrey, which Robert Fitzhamon diuided amongſt twelue Knightes whiche he broughte with him, reſeruing the better parte to hymſelfe, who building there certayne Caſtels, and ioyning their power togither, defended their Farmes and Lordſhips▪ whiche they had taken and poſſeſſed, whoſe heires peaceably▪ enioy the ſame vnto this day: but Iuſtinus ſcarſely reſerued to himſelfe and his, the hilly

Countrey. The names of the twelue Knightes were theſe.
            
               1 William Lowdon.
               2 Richard Granuille.
               3 Paganus Turberuille.
               4 Robert Saintqui
                     •
                  ti
                     ••
                  .
               5 Richard Siward.
               6 Gilbert Vmfreuill.
               7 Roger Berkerowle.
               8 Reynald Sully.
               9 Peeter Soore.
               10 Iohn Fleming.
               11 Oliuer Saint Iohn.
               12 Williā Eaſterling, now for ſhortnes called S
                        •
                     radling.
               
            
            Thus was the Lordſhip of Glamorgan & Morgannoke wonne out of the Welchmens hands, whiche Lordſhip conteyned in length from R
                     •
                  mid bridge on the Eaſt ſide, to Pallekinan in the Weſt ſide 27. miles. The breadth from the Hauen of Aberthaw on the South ſide▪ to the confine of Breknokeſhire, about Morleys Caſtell, is 22. mi
                  •••
               
               ▪
            
            In this Prouince are neath vpon a Riuer of the ſame name Pontfaine, that is to ſay, Stone bridge, ſometimes called Cowbridge, Lantwid, Wenny▪ Dinwid▪
                Townes, and Caſtels, beſides Caer Phili, a moſt antient Caſtell & fortreſſe, which by reporte was erected by the Romanes, and Caerdid, theHumfrey L
                     ••
                  yd. principall Towne of the Shire, ſtanding vpon the Riuer Tafe, Engliſhmen tearme it Cardid or Gardife.
            
            Alſo, within the body of the ſaid Lordſhip, were eightene Caſtels, and 
                  •
               6. Knightes fées and a halfe, that helde of the ſame Lordſhip by Knights ſeruice, beſides a great number of frée holders. Alſo, the ſaide Lordſhip being a Lordſhip Marcher, or a Lordſhip Royall, and holden of no other Lordſhip, the Lordes thereof, euer ſince the winning of the ſame, owing their obedience only to the Crowne, haue vſed therein Iura regalia, with the triall of all actions, as well reall as perſonall, and pleas of Crowne, with authoritie to pardon all offences, Treaſon only excepted.
            
               King William▪ W
                  〈…〉
                
               Northumberland, where he repaired1091 Nevv Caſtell. Sarisburie. Anno reg. 5 ſuch Caſtels as the Scottes had impayred, and builded the newe Caſtell on Tine. Oſmond
                Biſhop of Sariſburie founded the Cathedrall Church of old Sariſburie, and on the morrow after the dedication thereof, the Stéeple was fiered by lightning.
            In England fell wonderfull abundance of rayne, and after1092 Great Froſt. Mathew Paris. Wil. Malme.
                enſued ſo great froſt, that horſſes and cartes paſſed commonly ouer great Riuers, which when it thawed, the Yſe brake downe many great bridges.
            
               Hugh Lupus Earle of Chester, ſente into Normandy forAbbey of Cheſter. 
               Anſelme, by his counſell to builde an Abbey at Chester of Saint Werbridge.
            
            King William lying ſicke at Glocester, for feare of death,Mathew Paris. promiſed to correct the wicked Lawes.
            He gaue the Archbiſhoprike of Canturbury to Anſelme,
               Anſelme Archbishop. and to his Chancellour Robert Bloet, the Biſhoprike of Lincolne▪
                but when the King had recouered his health, he was ſorie that he had not ſold the Biſhoprike of Lincolne.
            
            
               Malcolme King of Scottes comming into Englande, wasKing of Scottes flayne. met withall, and ſodeinly 
                  ••
               ayne, with his ſonne and heire alſo, by Robert Mowbray Earle of Northumberland.
            
            
               Iohn Biſhop of Welles, by noynting the Kings handes,Bishopricke at Bathe. Levves in Suffex. Anno reg. 6. 1093 Carelile repayred, and the Caſtell builded. Famine. 
                     
                        ••
                     
                     ▪ Beuerla. Thomas Rudburn.
                tranſpoſed his Biſhops ſeate to Bathe.
            
            
               William Waren firſt Earle of Surrey, and Gundred his wife, founded the Abbey of Lewes in Suſſex.
            
            King William builded againe the Citie of Carelile which was deſtroyed by the Danes 200. yeares before. He alſo builded a Caſtell there, and out of the South parts of England ſent men to inhabit.
            This yeare was a great famine, and after, ſo great a mortalitie, that the quicke were ſcant able to bury the dead.
            King William made great warres in Normandy againſt his brother Robert, through the whiche both England and Normandy were fore oppreſſed with exactions.Exactions. VV
                     •
                  l
                     •
                  chmen vvon Angle
                     •
                  ey.
            
            The Welchmen ſpoyled the Citie of Glocester with a

part of Shrewſburie and woonne the Iſ
                  •
               e of Angleſey.
            
            The Biſhopricke of Thetford was tranſlated to Norwich,
               Bishopricke at▪ Norvvich. Anno reg. 7. 1094 Northumberland ſpoyled. by Herbert Loſing, Biſhop there.
            King William ſent his brother Henry into Northumberland with a great power, bycauſe Robert Mowbrey Earle of that Countrey refuſed to come to the Kings Court: the Countrey was ſpoyled, the Earle was taken, and many were diſherited. Some had their eyes put out &c.
            King William with a great power entred Wales, but notKing VVilliam inuaded vvales. being able to followe the Welchmen among the hilles, he builded two Caſtels in the borders and returned.
            Great preparation was made by the Chriſtians to goe
                  Anno reg. 8. 1095 
                     〈…〉
                   to Hieruſalem. againſt the Infidels at Hieruſalem, Peter
                the Hermite being their firſt leader, and after Godfrey of Lorraine, called Godfrey of Bolleine.
            
            
               Robert Duke of Normandy tooke his iourney towards
                  Anno reg. 9. 1096 Normandy pavvned. An. reg. 10. 1097 Nice and Antioch vvoon. 
               Hieruſalem and layde Normandy to gage to his brother King William for 6666. poundes of ſiluer.
            The Dukes, Godfrey Beamonde and Robert, beſéeged the Citie of Niece, with 6000. horſemen, and 10000. footemen, and tooke the ſame, with the wife of Soliman, and his ſonnes. They alſo tooke the Citie of Antioch.
            
            King William with an armie of horſemen and footemen wente the ſeconde time into Wales, meaning to kill all the male kinde there, but he could vnneth kill or take any one of them.
            All the lands in Kent▪
                that ſometime belonged to Earle
                  Hector Boetius. Godvvin ſands. 
               Godwine, by breaking in of the Sea, were couered with Sands, and therefore is yet called Godwine Sands.
            
            King William was in Normandy▪
                and gaue himſelfe toExactions. An. reg. 11. 1098 An. reg. 12. 1099 Hieruſalem vvonne. warres there, ſo that with exactions and tributes he did not only ſhaue, but flea the people of England.
            
            
               Hugh, Earle of Shrewſburie was ſlayne in Angleſey by the Iriſhmen.
            
            The Chriſtians tooke the Citie of Hieruſalem, and placed there a King and a Patriarche.
            
               After King Wilham was come out of Normandy, he kept his Courte at Westminster in the new Hall, which he had then cauſed to be builded, the length whereof is 270. foote,VVeſtminſter Hall. P. Patauienſis.
                and the breadth 74. foote, and hearing men ſay it was too bigge, he anſwered, this Hall is not bigge ynough by the one halfe, and that it was but a Chamber in compariſonIo. Euerſden. of that he was about to make. A diligent ſearcher mightMathew Paris. Io. Rouſe. yet find out the foundation of the Hall which he had purpoſed to builde, ſtretching from the Thames ſide vnto the common ſtrééte.
            King William being a hunting in the new Foreſt, word was brought him that his people were beſéeged in Mayne: he forthwith tooke ſhipping, though he were vehemently perſwaded to the contrary, for that there was at that time a great tempeſt, to whome he anſwered, he neuer heard that any King was drowned. At this time he gote more honorVVord of VVilliam Rufus. Mathew Paris.
                than euer he did in all his life, for he chaſed his enemies, and returned with victory.
            In this Sommer, bloud ſprang out of the earth at Finchamstede
               Anno reg. 13 in Barkeſhire.
            
            King William on the morrow after Lammas day hunting1100 There ſtande
                     ••
                   a Chappell. King VVilliam ſlayne. Wil. Malme. Mathew Paris. Radulphus Niger.
                in the new Forreſt of Hampſhire, in a place called Chorengham, Sir Walter Tirell ſhooting at a Déere, vnawares hitte the King in the breſt, that he fell downe ſtarke dead, and neuer ſpake worde: his men (ſpecially that Knighte) gate them away, but ſome came backe agayne, and layde his body vpon a Colyars Cart, whiche one ſillie leane beaſt did draw vnto the Citie of Winchester, where he wasRadul. Cogſhal. buryed on the morow after his death, at whoſe buryall men could not wéepe for ioy.
            This King was taken out of the world in the middeſt of his vnrighteouſneſſe, who being wicked to his owne people and to ſtrangers, was moſt wicked to himſelfe.
            The Countreys about him he prouoked with warres: and England was ſo miſerably oppreſſed vnder him, that itIo. Rouſe. could not recouer, for he and his trayne ſpoyled and ſubuerted

all things. He reigned twelue yeares and eleuen monethes lacking eyght dayes.
            He gaue vnto the Monkes, called De Charitate, in Southwarke,
               Regiſter of Berna
                     •
                  dſey. the great newe Church of Saint Sauioure of Barmonds eye, and alſo Barmonds eye it ſelfe.
            He alſo founded of an olde Monaſterie of Monkes, aEx C
                     •••
                  
                goodly Hoſpitall in the Citie of Yorke, called Saint Leonards, for the ſuſtentation and finding of the poore, as well men as women. He gaue the Churche of Saint Peeter in the Citie of Bathe to be a Biſhops Sea, and the mother Church of Somerſetſhire.
            
         
         
            
            ¶ King Henry Beawclerke
            
            
            
               
                  HEnry brother to WilliamAnno reg. 1. Io. Rouſe. Rufus, and y• firſt of that name, for his learning called Beawclearke, brought vp in the ſtudie of the liberall artes at Cambridge, chieflye through the trauell of Henrye Nowborough Earle of Warwike who appeaſed all debates of that time to theThe. R
                     •
                  dborne. W. Malme. contrarie) obteyned the dominion ouer this Realme of Englande, and beganne his raigne the firſt day of Auguſt, in the yeare o
                  •
                
               
                  •
               ure Lorde 1100. and was crowned at Westminster on the fifth day of Auguſt, by Mawrice Biſhop of London, bycauſe at that timeGe
                     •••
                  . Dor
                     •
                  . 
               Anſelme Archbiſhop of Canturburie, was by perſecution of William Rufus exiled.
            This Henry borne at Selbe in Englande, was a noble Prince, ſtrong and mightie of body, high of ſtature, and amiable of countenance. He was excellent in wit, eloquent,

and fortunate in battaile, and for theſe thrée, he had thrée notable vices, couetouſneſſe, crueltie, and lecherie.
            He maryed Mawde the daughter of Malcoline King of Scottes, of whome he begate William, and a daughter named Mawde.
            
            At the beginning of his raigne, he reſtored the ſtate of the Cleargie, aſwaged the gréeuous payments, reduced againe Saint Edwards lawes, and amended them.
            He put out of his Court all nice and wanton perſons.
            He reformed the olde vntrue meaſures, and made aMeaſures reformed. W. Malme. Vlno, novv called a yard. W. Malme.
                meaſure by the length of his owne arme, whiche was then called Vlno, an Elle, and now the ſame is called a yarde, or metewand &c.
            He reſtored to his Subiects the vſe of lights in the night,Vſe of light in the night permitted. which lightes, and alſo fire, had him forbidden by his father to be vſed, after the ringing of a Bell, at eyght of the clocke at night.
            
               Edgar King of Scottes did homage to this Henry.
            
            This yeare Iordan Briſet Baron, the ſonne of Raufe, theSaint Iohns by Smithfielde ſonne of Brian Briſet founded the houſe of Saint Iohn of Hieruſalem, néere vnto London, by Smithfield.
            
            The ſame Iordan gaue fourtéene Acres of ground lyingClarken vvell. Regiſter of Clerken well. Ex Carta.
                in the field next adioyning vnto Clarken well, to build therevpon a houſe of Nunnes, wherein, he, with Murioll hys wife were both buryed in the Chapter houſe.
            
               Robert Shorthoſe Duke of Normandy, the Kings eldeſt1101 Anno reg. 2. brother, whiche was nowe returned from Hieruſalem, made warre vpon his brother Henry for the Crowne of England, who aſſembled a ſtrong armie, and landed at Porteſmouth, but by mediation a peace was made, on condition, thatTribute to Robert Shorthoſe. VVincheſter and Gloceſter brent. Liber Gloceſtr. Tevvkesbery builded. Cronica de Theoksbery.
                
               Henry ſhould pay thrée thouſand markes yearely to Duke Robert, and if the one dyed without iſſue, the longer liuer ſhould inherit. Winchester was brent the xvij. of May, and Gloceſter was brent the twentith of May:
            
               Robert Fitzham, who came with the Conquerour out of Normandy, with Sibell his wife, founded a new the Church

of Theukeſbery and was there buryed.
            
               Robert de Belaſine Earle of Shrewſburie, eldeſt ſonne to1102 Robert de Belaſme rebelled. W
                        •
                     l. Malme. Floriacenſ
                        •
                     s.
                
               Roger Mountgomery ſtrengthned the Towne and Caſtell of Shrewſbury, ſo did he the Caſtels of Bridgenorth, Tichile, and Arundell with vi
                  ••
               uals, and armed men againſt King Henry: but the King being warned thereof, he gathereth his power, and beſéegeth Bridgenorth, whiche Towne was yéelded vnto him. And this being knowne to them of Arundell, they forthwith ſubmitted themſelues, with condition, that their Lorde Robert de Belaſme might be permitted fréely to paſſe into Normandy. Alſo they of Shrewſbury ſent the keyes of their Caſtell, and pledges of their obeyſance, and then Robert, with his brother Ernulfus, and Roger of Poytiers abiured this land for euer.
            The Cathedrall Churche of Norwich was founded byMinſter of Norvviche. Anno reg. 3. Regiſter of Saint Barthelmew. Hoſpitall of S. Barthelmevv. 1103 Anno reg. 4. 
               Herbert Biſhop of Norwich.
            
            The Priorie and Hoſpitall of Saint Barthelmewe in Smithfield was founded by a pleaſant I eſter or Minſtrell of the Kings, named Reior, who became firſt Prior there.
            Before this time Smithfield was a layſtow of all drdure and filth: and the place where fellons and other tranſgreſſors were put to execution.
            
               Roberte Duke of Normandy comming into Englande, through the ſubtelty of King Henry his yonger brother, releaſedThe yonger brother begyleth the elder. to him the tribute of thrée thouſand Markes of Siluer.
            
               Hugh Lacy founded the Monaſterie of Saint Iohn at
                  Ex libre Lanthony Mathew Paris. Lanthony founded. Chro. Donmow.
                
               Lanthony, the Chanons of which place were ſince tranſlated by Miles high Conneſtable, and Earle of Here ford to a place néere vnto Glocester, then called Hide, ſince called Lanthony.
            
            
               Iuga Baynard Lady of little Donmow, cauſed Maurice Biſhop of London to dedicate the Church of Donmow which thePriorie of Donmovv in Eſſex founded by the VViddovv of Baynard that buylded Baynards Caſtell in London. had founded, and the ſame day ſhe gaue to it halfe a hide of land.
            This Lady Iuga was late wife to Baynard, that firſte buylded Baynards Castle in London.
            
            
               Great malice was kindled betwéene the two bréthren1104 Anno reg. 5. 
               Robert and Henry wherevpon deadly warre enſued.
            There appeared about the Sunne foure circles, and a blaſing Starre.
            King Henry remayned in Normandy, making ſtrong1105 Anno reg. 6. Saint Iohns in Colcheſter. warres vpon his brother Robert and Rorſia his wife.
            
               Eudo Dapifere, or ſewer to King Henry founded the Monaſterie of Saint Iohn in Colchester of blacke Channons, and thoſe were the firſt in England.
            
            
               Simon Earle of North-hampton; and Mawde his wife,Saint Andrevve in North-hampton. Ex Carta. 
                        •
                     o. Rouſe. 1106 Anno reg. 7. Elder brother ſeeketh fauour of the yonger. founded the Monaſterie of Saint Andrew in North-hampton.
            
            
               Robert Duke of Normandy came to his brother at Northhampton and friendly deſired him to beare brotherly loue foward him, but King Henry féeling his conſcience accuſing him, for obteyning the Kingdome by defrauding of his elder brother, and fearing men more than God, firſt he reconciled the Nobles of the Realme with faire promiſes, thinking afterwards to make amende for his great wrongs, by founding of an Abbey.
            The Duke returning into Normandy the King followed with a great power, where betwéene them were many ſore battayles fought, but at the laſt the valiant man Roberte was taken.
            
            This yeare appeared a blaſing Starre; from thrée of theA Blaſing Starre. Mathew Paris.
                clocke till nine. And on the Maundy Thurſday was ſéene two full Moones, one in the Eaſt, and another in the Weſt.
            The firſt Chanons entred into the Church of our Lady
                  T Rudborne. Saint Mary Ouery. Liber Roffenſis▪ 
                     
                        •
                     o. Reuerla. 1107 Anno reg. 8. in Southwarke, called Saint Mary Ouery, foūded by William Pountlarge Knight, and Wiliam Daneys, Normans. Aigedus was firſt Prior there.
            Whē King Henry had ſet in order Normady according to his pleaſure, he returning into England, brought with him his brother Robert; & W
                     •
                  rlham of Morton, & put them in perpetuall priſon, frō whēce ſhortly after, Duke Robert deceiuingThe yonger brother puttet
                     •
                   out the eyes of his elder. his kepers; ſought to eſcape; but he was takē as he fled, & by his brothers cōmandement had his eies put out, & kept

ſtreighter till his dying day.
            This yeare, the Priorie of the holy Trinitie, within1108 Priorie of the Trinitie in London. Liber trini.
                
               Aldgate of London, was founded by Matild the Quéene, in the Pariſhes of Mary Magdalen, Saint Michael, Saint Katherine; and the holy Trinitie, all whiche are nowe but one Pariſh of Chriſt Church, in old time called holy Roode pariſh.W. Dunthorne. She gaue to the ſame Priorie the port of Aldgate, with the ſtocke therevnto belōging, which was of hir demaynes, and is now called Aldgate Warde.
            King Henry with ſundry expeditions brought vnder him the Welchmen, and to pull downe their ſtouteneſſe, he
                  Anno reg. 9. W
                        •
                     it. Malme. Gerua. Doro, Flemings ſent into VVales. ſent all the Flemings that inhabited England thither, which of late were come hither, when great part of Flanders was drowned, and alſo in time of his father, by aliance of his mother, in ſo muche, that through their greate multitude they ſéemed gréeuous to the Realme, wherefore he ſente them ali with their ſubſtance and kindred into Roſe, a Cōuntrey of Wales, a
                  •
                into a
                  •
                ſtucke, that he mighte clenſe the Realme of them, and alſo ſuppreſſe the wildneſſe of the enimie, and not long after he made expedition thither, compelling the Welchmen to giue him for pledges the ſonnes of the Nobilitie, with ſome money, and much Cattell, and returned.
            
               Henry Emperour of: Rome ſente meſſengers into England, requiring to haue Mawde the Kings daughter giuen1109 An
                     •
                  . reg. 10. him in mariage, which was granted by the King, who then tooke thrée. Shillings of euery hide of lande through England.
            
            The King tranſlated the Abbey of Eoly into a Biſhopricke,A Taxe. Iohn Taxtor, Eelȳ a Bishoprick. Mathew Paris. 
                        •
                     ibermōn. Elie.
                and made Haruey Cruſt Biſhop of Bancor, Biſhop there.
            A Comete appeared after a ſtrange faſhion, for it was riſen out of the Eaſt, and aſtended vpwards.
            A great Earthquake was at Shreweſburie, and the water1110 Anno reg. 11 A Comete. Trent dried vp. Floria cenſis.
                of Trent at Nottingham was dryed vp from one of the clocke, till thrée.
            
               King Henry maryed Robert his baſtard ſon to Mawde,
               Floriacen. daughter and heire to Robert Fatzham, and made him the firſt Earle of Glocester, who after builded the Caſtels of Bristow
               Caſtels at Briſtovv and Cardife. Saint Iames at Briſtovv, Kensham. 1111 Anno reg. 12 Mathew Paris.
                and Cardeffe, with the Priorie of S. Iames in Bristowe, where his body was buryed. And his ſonne Earle William began the Abbey of Kenſham.
            
            King Henry went into Normandy to make war againſt the Earle of Angiew, whiche kept Maine againſte the Kings will, and ſpoyled the whole Countrey.
            
               William Baynard, vnder whome Lady Iuga helde theCro. Dun. title of Dunmow, by miſfortune loſt his Barony, and King Henry gaue it wholly to Robert the ſonne of Richard theRobert Fit
                     ••
                   Richard. ſonne of Gilbert Earle of Clare, and to his heires, togither with the honor of Baynards Castell in London, and the appurtenances. This Robert was Cupbearer or Butler to the King.
            Aboute this time, Gefferey Clinton, Treaſourer and1112 Anno reg. 13 Kenelvvorth Priory and Caſtell founded. Lib. Ken.
                Chamberlayne to King Henry the firſt, founded the Priorie at Kenelworth of regular Chanons. Geffery Clinton the yonger, confirmed to the Chanons all which Geffery his father gaue them, except thoſe landes which his father reſerued, to make his Caſtell and Parke on in Kenelworth.
            
            This yeare was a great mortalitie of men, and moreineMathew Paris. of Beaſtes.
            The Citie of Worcester, the chiefe Church, the Caſtell,1113 Anno reg. 14. Floriacen. Cro. Hautenprice. and all other buildings, one of the Monkes, with two ſeruants, and fiftéene Citizēs, were all brent the twentith day of July.
            The King ſubdued the Walchmen.
            
            The King cauſed all his Nobles to ſweare to William his ſonne.
            The tenth of October, the Riuer of Medway, by no ſmall1114 Anno reg. 15 Thames and Medvvay dried vp. number of miles, did ſo fayle of water, that in the midſt of the Chanell the ſmalleſt Ueſſels and Boates coulde not paſſe. The ſelfe ſame day the Thamis did ſuffer the like lack of water, for betwéen the Tower of London and the bridge, and

vnder the Bridge, not only with Horſe, but alſo a greate
                  Thomas de Wike. Walter Couen. Iohn Taxtor. William Sheepehead. Liber Roffenſis. Chicheſter brent. A blaſing ſtarre. 1115 Anno reg. 16 Liber trinitatis.
                number of men and children did wade ouer on foote, whiche defecte of water did endure the ſpace of two dayes.
            
               Chichester with the principall Monaſterie was brent.
            There was many ſtormes, and a blaſing Starre.
            This yeare through an hard Winter, almoſt all the bridges in England were borne downe with Yſe.
            
               Edgar ſometime King of England granted vnto thirtéene Knightes a portion of grounde without the walles of the Citie of London, lefte voyde in the Eaſt part of the ſame Citie,Knighten Gild, novv Portſoken vvard. togither with a gilde, which he named Knighten Gild, that now is called Portſoken warde, and now the Church of the holy Trinitie being founded within Aldgate of London by Mathild then Quéene, as is afore ſhewed. The ſucceſſors of thoſe Knightes, to wéete, Radulphus fitz Algede, Winiard le Douerſhe, &c. gaue the foreſayde Lands called Knighten Gild, to the ſame Church: but Othowerus, Accolinillus, Otto, and Gefferey Earle of Estſex, Conſtables of the Tower of London by ſucceſſion, with-helde by force a portion of the ſame lande, that is to ſay Eaſt Smithfield, néere to the Tower, to make a Uineyard, and would not depart from it by any meanes, till the ſeconde yeare of King Stephen, when the ſame was adiudged and reſtored to the Church of the holy Trinitie.
            
            King Henry hauing greate warres with Lewes King1116 Anno. reg. 17 Cro. Peter. of France, the Realme of England was ſore oppreſſed with exactions.
            The Towne of Peterborow with the ſtately Churche there, was burned downe to the ground.
            In March was excéeding lightning, and in December1117 Anno. reg. 18. Tempeſt and Earthquake. thunder and hayle: and the Moone at both times ſéemed to be turned into bloud.
            This yeare in Lumbardy was an Earthquake, continued fortie dayes, whiche ouerthrewe many houſes, and thatFloriacen. whiche was maruellous to be ſéene, a Towne was moued from his ſeate, and ſet a good way off.
            
               
               Mathild the Quéene, wife to King Henry of Englande,
               1118 Anno reg. 19. Mathew Paris. deceaſſed at Westminster, and was there buryed in the Reuoſtrie.
            She founded the Priorie of Chriſtes Church within the Eaſt gate of London, called Aldgate, and an Hoſpitall ofMathilds Hoſpitall. 
               Saint Giles in the fielde, without the Weaſt part of the ſame Citie.
            The order of the Templers began.Knightes of the Temple.
            
            Many ſore battayles were fought in France and Normandy betwéene the King of England and of France.
               1119 Anno reg. 20 1120 Anno reg. 21. The Kings children drovvned. W. Malme. Mathew Paris.
               
            
            King Henry hauing tamed the Frenchmen, and pacifyed Normandy, returned into Engalnde, in whiche voyage, William Duke of Normandy, and Richard his ſonnes, and Marye his daughter, Richard Earle of Chester, and his wife, with many noble men, and to the number of one hundred and ſixtie perſons were miſerably drowned, the Sea being calme.
            King Henry marryed Adelizia, the Duke of Louans
               1121 Anno reg. 22. daughter, at London: from thence the King with a great armie wente towarde Wales, but the Welchmen met him humbly, and agréed with him at his pleaſure.
            The Citie of Glocester with the principall Monaſterie, was brent againe, as before, and Lincolne was burned.1122 Anno reg. 23 Gloceſter brent Lib. Gloceſt. Mathew Paris. 1123 Anno reg. 24. VVarvvike vvith the Colledge.
            
            King Henry ſayled into Normandy, where he remayned long, trauelling to quiet that Countrey.
            
               Henry Earle of Warwike, and Margaret his wife, founded the Colledge of Saint Mary in y• towne of Warwike. And Roger de Belemound his ſonne Earle of Warwike, and Aeline his wife, tranſlated the ſame Colledge into the Caſtell of Warwike, in Anno 1123.
            At that time were nine pariſhes in Warwike, Saint Sepulcre, Saint Hellens,
                of theſe twayne were made one Priorie of Saint Sepulchre: Alhalowes, Saint Michaell, Saint Iohn, Saint Peter, Saint Lawrēce, Saint Iames, theſe fiue laſtLiber Warwic
                     ••
                  
                  ▪ Io. Rouſe. were ioyned to Saint Maryes, in Anno 1367. Saint Nicholas.
            
            
               
               Waleran Earle of Mellent is takē in Normandy by King1124 Anno reg. 25 1125 Anno reg. 26 Mathew Paris. Taxtor. Coyners punished. 
               Henry, and he with many other are impriſoned at Roane.
            
            
               Iohn Thremenſis Cardinall came into England, who inueying ſore againſt Prieſtes Concubines, was himſelfe detected of whoredome.
            The King cauſed all the Coyners of England to haue their priuie members cut off, and alſo their right hand, bycauſe they had corrupted the Coyne.
            
               Henry the fourth Emperour being dead (as it was ſaid)1126 Anno reg. 27. The Empreſſe returned into England. Giraldus Cambr.
                and Mawde the Empreſſe returning into England, dwelte with the Quéene in hir Chamber, bycauſe ſhe was ſuſpect of hir huſbands death, but ſome affirmed him to be long after in England, lyuing as an Hermite, and in the end to be buryed at Chester.
            
            King Henry held his Courte with great magnificenceFloriacen. in his Caſtell of Winſore, and there aſſembled all the nobilitie of his Realme, where when the Archbiſhop of Yorke woulde haue Crowned the King equally with the Archſhop of Canturbury, by the iudgement of all menne heArchbishop of Yorke vvith his Croſſe caſt out of the Kings Chappell. was repulſed, the bearer of his Croſſe, togither with the Croſſe, was throwne out of the Kings Chappell: for it was affirmed that no Metropolitane out of his owne Prouince might haue any Croſſe borne before him. The feaſt being ended, the King with all the States of the Realme togither came to London, and there at the Kings commandement, William the Archbiſhop, and the Legate of the Romiſh Churche, and all other Biſhops of the Engliſh Nation, with the Nobilitie, tooke an othe. to defend againſt all men the Kingdome to his daughter, if ſhe ſuruiued hir father, except that before his deceaſſe he begate ſome ſonne to ſuccéede him.
            The King alſo granted to the Churche of Canturburie, and to William and his ſucceſſors, the cuſtodie and Conſtableſhip of the Caſtell of Rochester for euer.
            The Archbiſhop of Canturbury aſſembled a counſell of Biſhops,1127 Anno reg. 28. Abbots and other Prelates at Weſtminſter, where they

determined many cauſes concerning Eccleſiaſtical buſineſſe: and the King with his counſell confirmed them.
            King Henry went with a warlike army into Fraunce, bycauſe1128 Anno reg. 29 
               Lodowike the French King defēded the Erle of Flaunders the Kings Nephew and enimy.
            At this time men had ſuch a pride in their haire, that theyMen vveare haire like vvomen. W. Malme. 1129 Anno reg. 30 Mathew Paris.
                contended with women in length of haire.
            King Henry helde a Counſell at London, wherein it was graunted him to haue the correction of the Cleargie, whiche came to an euill purpoſe, for the King tooke infinite ſummes of mony of Prieſts, and ſuffred them to do what they would.
            
               Robert Deolley Knight, great Coneſtable of England, was the firſt founder of Oſney.
            
            King Henry gaue his daughter the Empreſſe to Geffrey1130 Anno reg. 31 1131 Anno reg. 32 Rocheſter brent Richard Diuienſis 1132 Anno reg. 33 Carleil a Byshopricke. Geruaſius. Gualter Couen. London brent. Geruaſius Doro. Thomas Wikes.
                   Plantagenet Earle of Angiou.
            
            In the Moneth of May, the King beyng preſent, the Citie of Rochester was ſore defaced wyth fire.
            The King made a Biſhopricke at Carleil.
            
            
               Mawde the Empreſſe did beare to Geffrey Plantagenet Earle of Angiou a ſonne, and named him Henry, which when the King knewe, hée called hys nobles togyther, and ordayned, that his daughter, and the heires of hir body, ſhould ſuccéede him in hys Kingdome.
            In Whitſonwéeke, a great fire beginning at Gilbert Beckets houſe in Weaſt Cheape, conſumed a greate parte of London, from thence to Algate with the Priorie of Channons of the holy Trinitie, and many houſes of Office thereto belonging.
            An Earthquake in England.
               Earthquake.
            
            
               Henry Bloys Biſhop of Winchester, builded the HoſpitallLiber canonitrinitatis. of Saint Croſſe neare vnto Winchester. The ſame hadde béene a Hoſpitall in the Saxons time, but after ſpoyled by the Danes.
            
            There was greate darkeneſſe in England, and the Sunne1133 Anno reg. 34. VVorceſter brent. became like the Moone in the thyrd quarter.
            
               Worcester, as it had oft before chaunced, was ſore defaced with fire.
            
               
               Mawde the Empreſſe brought forth a ſonne named Geffrey, for which cauſe King Henrie went ouer into Normandie.
            
            
               Robert Shorthoſe King Henries brother died in the Caſtel1134 Anno reg. 35 Robert Short
                  
                     •
                  oſe died. 1135 Anno reg. 36 Death of King Henrie. Mathew Paris.
                of Cardife, and was buried at Glocester.
            
            King Henrie remayning in Normandie, vpō a day did eat Lampraies, wherof he toke a ſurfeite, and deceaſed the firſte day of December, Anno. 1135. when he had raigned 35. yeres 4. monthes: his bowels, braynes and eyes, were buried at Roan, the reſt of his bodie was pondered with ſalt, and wrapped in Bulles hydes, bycauſe of the ſtincke, which poyſoned them that ſtood about him. The Phiſition which being hyred with a great reward to cleaue his heade to take out ye brain, with the ſtinck therof died, ſo that he enioyed not the reward that was couenaunted. Thus among a gret many that king Henrie ſlew, this Phiſition was the laſt.
            King Henrie was buried at Reding, which he had founde
                  •
               . He alſo founded the Priorie of Dunstable, he conuerted a rich Colledge of Prebends in the Towne of Cirencester, into an Abbay of Chanons regular: he alſo builded
                  
                     •
                  . Leyland. there an Hoſpitall of Saint Iohn: and newe builded the Caſtel of Windſor with a Colledge there.
            (⸪)
         
         
            
            ¶ King Stephen.
            
            
            
               
                  STephen Earle of Morton,
               Anno reg. 1 W. Malme. Floriacencis. Gernaſius Do. Ypodigma. and of Boloigne, ſonne to the Earle of Bloys, & Adela, William Conquerours daughter, and nephew to king Henrie the firſte, claymed the kyngdome the ſeconde daye of December Anno. 1135.
            He comming into Englande, was repulſed by them of Douer, ſhutte out by them of Canturburie, but receiued of ye 
               Londoners, and Péeres of the land, admitted king, and crowned at Westminster on Saint Stephens daye by William Archbiſhop of Canturburie.
            
            This was a noble man and hardy, of paſſing comely fauour and perſonage, he excelled in martiall pollicie, gentleneſſe and liberalitie toward all men, eſpecially in the beginning: and although he had continuall warre, yet did he neuer burden his commons with exactions: But vniuſtly and contrarye to his othe made to Mawde the Empreſſe, daughterFire at London to King Henrie, he toke on him the crowne of England.
            
            
               Fire which began in the houſe of one Ailward neare Lō
                  don
               
                  Liber trinitatis London. Thomas Wikes. 1136 Exceſter beſieged. Ger. Dorobor.
                ſtone, conſumed Eaſtward to Algate, and Weſtwarde to Saint Erkenwalds ſhrine in Poules Church.
            King Steuen aſſembling a great armye of Engliſhmen and Flemmings entred into Deuonſhire, and beſieged the Caſtell of Excester a long time, whiche Baldwine de Riuers helde againſt him, but at length when they within the Caſtel wanted neceſſarie things to liue by, they compounded. Baldwine with hys wife and children are diſherited and expulſed the lande.
            A battayle was fought at Goher, betwixte Normans and Walſhmen, where a hundred and. xvj. perſons on bothe ſidesBattaile againſt the vvalchmen. were ſlaine, whoſe bodies laye in the fieldes, and were horribly torne and deuoured of Wolues.
            After this was made greate eruptions by the Walchmen, who deſtroyed Churches, Townes, Caſtels, corne, cattayle, ſlewe men, women and children, riche and poore, or ſolde thē in forraine countries.
            In October a ſore battayle was fought at Cardigan, in the which ſuch ſlaughter of men was made, that the men except which were led awaye captiue, there were of women taken and ledde away, that there remayned to the tenth a thouſād, their huſbands with their ſmall children partelye drowned, partly brent, partly ſlaine, ſo that the bridge being broken ouer the riuer of Tinde, there was a bridge made of mens bodiesAnno reg. 2. and horſſes drowned.
            In March King Steuen paſſed the Sea to ſubdue Normā
                  die,
               1137 Ypodigma. Rocheſter. Richard Diuienſis
                where he toke many Cities and ſtrong Caſtels.
            The thirde of June, Sainte Andrewe in Rochester was brent, with all the Citie, and the Biſhoppes and Monkes houſes.
            The fourth of June Saint Peters the Archbiſhops ſea inSaint Peters in Yorke. 
               Yorke, Saint Maries
                without the wals, and an Hoſpital whiche the Archbiſhoppe Thruſto
                     •
                  
                had builded, with 39. other Churches, alſo the Trinitie Church in the ſuburbes of the ſame Citie, within a ſmall time after were brent.
            
               Alſo Saint Peters Church at Bathe, and all the Citie, theThe Citie of Bath brent. Liber Roff. Geruaſius Dor
                        •
                     . Floriacenſis. Anno. reg. 3. 27. of June was brent. And the ſame moneth the citie of Leogere was conſumed with fire.
            
               England began to fall into great troubles, whych cauſed King Steuen to returne out of Normandy before he had finiſhed his buſineſſe there.
            Kyng Stephen beſieged Bedford and wonne it, then he wēt1138 Bedford beſieged. Floriacencis▪ Geruaſius.
                with a ſtrong power into Northumberlande, where he ſtayed not long, but went to Glocester, where the Citizens receyued him with greate reioycing: Miles the Kings Coneſtable broughte him into the Kings Pallace there, where all the Citizens were to him ſworne. From thence he wente to Hereford, bicauſe that he heard the Caſtel was holdē againſt him, and on Whitſonday he ſate crowned in the Churche of Hereford. When they that kept the Caſtell ſawe the Kyngs power to encreaſe, they yéelded themſelues. The King tooke alſo the Caſtell of Webheleyge, whych Geffrey Talbot hadde helde agaynſte hym. The ſame day that the Kyng departedHereford brent. out of Hereforde all beyond the Ryuer of Wye was brente by the ſaide Geffrey. The King returned to Oxforde, where he tooke Roger the Biſhop of Sarum, with the Byſhop of Lincolne and his ſonne Roger: the Biſhop of Eely eſcaping, went to the Caſtell of Vies and kept it againſt the King, but at lengthe it was deliuered.
            The ſame time Robert Earle of Gloucester renounced his allegeaunce to King Stephen, fortified Bristow and other Caſtells. Alſo Miles the Kings Coneſtable reuolted. WherforeBriſtovv beſieged. the Kyng beſieged the Caſtell of Bristow, but at length being wearyed, he tourned to other of the Earles Caſtels, and ſéeing hys enimyes ſtill encreaſing: he called out of Flaunders
               Anno reg. 4. Ypodigma. men of warre wyth Wylliam de Ypers their leader, whoſe counſell he chiefly followed.
            The ſame yeare Roger Byſhop of Saliſbury, a great builderGeruaſius Do
                     •
                  o. of Caſtelles and Houſes, departed this life. There was founde in hys Coffers fortie thouſande Markes of ſiluer, beſides much golde, and dyuers Jewels that came to the kings

hande, ſo that he hadde gathered treaſure, but wiſt not for whom.
            The Nobles ſent for Mawd the Empreſſe, promiſing hir
                  Mathew Paris. Geruaſius. Battaile of the ſtandarde. Cro. Hautenprice.
                the poſſeſſion of the realme according to their othe made to hir: In the meane time, Dauid king of Scots, promiſing to recouer the crowne of England for the Empreſſe Mawde hys Néece, in moſt cruell wiſe inuaded Northumberland, where by Thruſtone Archbiſhop of Yorke, the Scottes had an ouerthrow at Conton more than foure myles Northweaſt from Alnert
                     ••
                  
                and were ſlaine aboue x. thouſand.
            In the moneth of July Robert Earle of Glocester retourned1139 The Empreſſe returned into England. Geruaſius.
                into England, with his ſiſter the Empreſſe, and a gret armie, which arriued at Porteſmouth. The Empreſſe was receiued into Arundel caſtel, by Adelize late wife to king Henry, as then wife or Concubine to William Earle of Arundel.
            
            Earle Robert wente to Wallingforde, and thence to Glocester, and raiſed thoſe Countries.
            The king helde his ſiege before Marleborough, but aduertiſedMarleborough beſieged. of the Empreſſe arriuall, he haſted towardes Arundel▪
                where being by faire ſpéech pacified, he commanded his brother Biſhoppe of Winchester to bring the Empreſſe vnto Bristowe, and he himſelf followed Earle Robert with his army. The Empreſſe ſtayed at Bristow till October, and then went to Glocester, hir comming thither being knowen, Miles the high Coneſtable and many other nobles toke part with hyr againſt king Stephen.
            
            The king beſieged Wallingforde Caſtell, but profited not,VValingford caſtel beſieged. Floriacenſis.
                and therefore rayſing a Tower of woodde before it, ſtuffed it with men of warre, and went to win the Caſtell of Malmeſburie.
            
            The armye of Earle Robert wanne the Citie of Worcester▪
                brent the moſte part of it, and laden with the ſpoyle, departed thence▪
            
            The Shirife of that Citie in reuenge hereof, deſtroyed the towne of Sudley, and with the ſpoyle thereof retourned to Worcester.
            
            
               After this the King with a great army came from Oxford to Worcester, where he gaue the honour of high Coneſtableſhip,Anno. reg. 5. (being taken from Miles of Glocester) vnto William the ſonne of Walter Beauchampe, Shirife of Worcester, and then retourned to Oxforde and ſo to Saliſburie.
            
            The King went to Reading, and after with hys army towardes1140 Notingham ſpoyled. Geruaſius Doro.
                
               Ely, but the Biſhoppe fledde to Gloucester, to Earle Robert, and the King wanne the Caſtell of Ely.
            
            
               Robert Earle of Glocester with a gret power inuaded the towne of Notingham and ſpoyled it: the townes men were taken, ſlaine or brent in the Churches, wherevnto they fled. One of them more rich than the others was taken, and led
                  Anno. reg. 6. Notinghā brent▪
                to his owne houſe by his takers, to ſhewe them where hys treaſure lay, he bringing them into a low ſeller, whileſt they were buſie to break open lockes & Coffers, he conueyed him ſelf away, & ſhutting the doores after him, ſet ſire on ye houſe: and ſoothe théeues to the number of thirtie were brent, and by reaſon of this fire all the towne was ſet a fire and brent.
            Kyng Stephen beſieged Lincolne, againſte Ranulph Earle of Chester, but Roberte Earle of Glocester, came with a great1141 Lincolne beſieged. King Stephen taken. power and reſcued the ſame, chaſed the Kyngs armye, and tooke him pryſoner on Candlemas day, firſte he was had to Glocester, and after to Bristowe, & there committed to priſon.
            The Empreſſe reioycing at this hir good happe, departed from Glocester and came to Ciceste,r with Byſhops, Barons and other in greate number, from thence ſhe went to Winchester, where mette hir Lordes ſpirituall and temporall in great number, the Citie with the tower and Crowne of the Realme was deliuered into hir hands.
            The Biſhop of Winchester that was king Stephens brother,The Empreſſe obtayneth thè Crovvne. accurſed al that ſtoode againſt the Empreſſe, and bleſſed thoſe that tooke hir part. From thence ſhe departed to Wilton, where the Archbiſhoppe of Canturburie came and ſaluted hyr. When Eaſter was paſte, ſhe went to Reding▪
                where ſhe was receiued with all the honour that mighte be: thence ſhe went to Oxforde, where the Caſtell was deliuered vnto hyr

by Robert de Olly: then went ſhe to Saint Albons and was receyued with all honour.
            Here the Citizens of London came and yéelded their Citie to hir, wherevpon ſhe went to London, and ſo to Westminster, where ſhe being receyued with proceſſion, remained certain dayes taking order for the ſtate of the Realme.
            King Steuens wife, and many Péeres of the realm, madeYpodigma. Geruaſius Do. Floriacenſis. ſuite to the Empreſſe to haue the King reſtored to libertye, and not to the kingdome, promiſing to perſwade with hym to become a Monke: but ſhe woulde not heare. The Biſhop of Winchester requeſted hir, to giue vnto Euſtace his nephew, King Steuens ſonne, his fathers Earledome, but it woulde not be. The Citizens of London required hir to reſtore Kyng Edwardes lawes, but ſhe being puffed vp with pride, would not graunte theyr requeſte, wherevppon they conſpired to take hir priſoner, but ſhe aduertiſed hereof, fled with ſhame,The Empreſſe fledde. leauing behinde hir all hir furniture of houſholde and apparell.
            
               Henrie Biſhop of Winchester, caſting which way to deliuer his brother, perſwaded the Londoners to ayde him. The Empreſſe got hir to Oxforde, and frō thence to Gloucester, andYpodigma. Floriacences. Geruaſius. thē with hir aſſured friend Miles, again to Oxforde: & bycauſe ſhe truſted moſt in him, ſhe to do him honour, gaue him the Earledome of Heneforde, and now hauing got a great army, about Lammes wente againe to Winchester, and lodged in the Caſtel there. The Biſhop abaſhed of hir ſodayn cōming departed out at one gate as ſhe came in at another, he getting a great army with the help of the Londoners, beſieged the Citie, and the ſeconde of Auguſt committed the Citie to theVVincheſter brent. Geruaſius. Floriacenſis.
                fire, with the whiche the Nunry and houſes of office with more than twentie Churches, ſome write xl. and a greate part of the Citie, with the Monaſterie of Saint Grimbald, & the houſes thereto belonging, were brought to aſhes. About the exaltation of the croſſe, the Empreſſe being wearied of long ſiege, got hir to horſſebacke with hir brother Reginalde Earle of Cornewal, and many other.
            
               Earle Robert followed with a great number of Lords & knights, but the Biſhops men ſetting on them, ſlewe & tooke a great number.
            The Empreſſe fled to the Caſtel of Lutegerſhal heauy andThe Empreſſe fled. almoſt deade for feare: from thence ſhe was brought to the Caſtell of Vies, and from thence to Glocester, bound in a horſelitter like a deade carcaſſe.
            Earle Robert being purſued was taken at Stobbridge we
               Earle of Gloſter taken. Erle Waren, and many other, and preſented to the Quéene, as then new entred into Winchester.
            
            Earle Robert was deliuered to William de Ypers, who put him in priſon in the Caſtel of Rochester.
            
            
               Myles Erle of Hereford hardly eſcaped, and came to Glocester
               Earle of Hereforde fled. almoſt naked. The Biſhops men brent the Monaſterie of Nuns at Warwel, &c. the bookes and ornaments of the Nuns were taken and borne away, and men ſlaine euen before the Altar. Theſe things thus done, the Biſhops wroth was ſomewhat appeaſed, but his couetouſneſſe encreaſed, ſo that being prompted therto by the Prior of the newe Monaſterie in Winchester lately brent, he toke of the croſſe that was burnt. 500. poūd of ſiluer &. 30. marke in gold, thrée crowns, with as many 
                  •
               eats of fine Arabicke gold: fret with precious ſtones, all this he layde vp in his own treaſurie.
            King Stephen, and Earle Robert being ſtraightly kepte, at length through mediation of friends a peace was concluded, that they ſhold be deliuered, the king to his kingdome, and the Earle to his libertie.
            
               William Mandeuile fortifyed the Tower of London, andIohn Beu
                     ••
                  
                  ▪
                
               Robert Biſhoppe of London was taken at Fulham by Geffrey Mandeuel.
            
            The King and Earle being ſet at libertie, did not onely renew, but multiply their malice: the King repayred his power1241 and expences, the Earle went ouer the Sea to Geffrey Earle of Aniowe, whom he found occupyed in wars againſte certaine of his ſubiectes of Aniowe, ſo that he could not come into England with him, whervpō he taking Henry, eldeſt ſon

to Geffrey Earle of Aniowe, and Mawde the Empreſſe, with certaine choſen men of armes, retourned into Englande.
            
            King Stephen hearing that Earle Robert was gone outThe Empreſſe beſieged. of the realme and the Empreſſe to lye at Oxforde, with a gret power, came and beſieged hir a two monthes ſpace. Earle Robert with Henrie ſon to the Empreſſe and other his complices,VVarham Caſtell beſieged. landed at Warham, where he beſieged the caſtel, which was defended by Hubert de Lucy, who at length yéelded theThe Empreſſe flyeth. Geruaſiue.
                ſame. In the meane time the Empreſſe ſéeing that ſhe was voide of all helpe, with a womanniſh ſubtilitie deceiued the kings ſcout watch, clothing hir ſelf and hir company, fiue in number all in white, vpon a night wente ouer the Thamis a foote, which was then hard frozen, and white with ſnow: that night ſhe went to Walingforde, and the Caſtell of Oxford was yéelded to the king. After the winning of Warham caſtel, Robert went to viſit his ſiſter the Empreſſe, who was not a little ioyful to ſée him and hir yong ſon Henrie, whiche Henrie remayned at Bristowe for the ſpace of foure yeares, and thereAnno reg. 8. was brought vp in learning.
            King Stephen after the robbing of many churches, brenning1143 and robbing of townes and villages by the handes of ye Flemming ſouldiers, he and his brother Henrie Biſhop of Winchester, builded a caſtel of the Nunry at Wilton, to repreſſe the incurſions of them of Saliſburie. Earle Robert the firſt of July fel ſodainely vpon them in Wilton, and ſet the town onVVilton brent. King Stephen fledde. Anno reg. 9. Boxley. fire. The king with the Biſhop fled with ſhame, the Earles mē toke the kings people, & ſackt his plate and other things.
            
               Miles Earle of Herforde dyed, and his eldeſt ſonne Roger ſuccéeded him. William of Ypre, founded Boxley Abbay in Kent.
            
            King Stephen toke Geffrey Mandeuile Earle of Eſſex, at1144 Geruaſiue D
                     •
                  r
                     •
                  . 
               S. Albons which Geffrey could not be ſet at libertie til he had deliuered the Tower of London, with the Caſtels of Walden & Plecy. When the Erle was thus ſpoyled of his holdes, he toke the Church of Ramſey, and fortified it: as he beſieged the Caſtel of Burwel, he was ſmitten in the heade with a Darte, wherof he died. Robert Marmon was alſo ſlaine at Couentrit,
               
and Ernulfus Erle Mandeuiles ſon, that helde Ramſey church as a fortreſſe, after his fathers deathe was taken and banniſhed.
                  Anno reg. 10 1145 VVallingford beſieged. Anno reg. 11
            
            King Stephen beſieged Wallingford, but could not preuaile. The Earle of Chester was reconciled to the King, and was at this ſiege with him, but ſhortly after when he came to the Court, the king lying at Northampton, he was taken and kepte priſoner tyll he hadde rendered the Caſtel of Lincolne and other fortreſſes, whervpon he was the kings enimy euer after.
            
               Geffrey Earle of Aniowe ſent foure noble men with furniture1146 of warriours to Erle Robert, requeſting him to ſend ouer his ſonne Henrie, and if néede required, he would ſende him backe againe with all ſpéede. The Earle agréeing to his requeſt, brought the yong Henrie to Warham, where he tooke ſhipping towards his father, of whom he was ioyfully receiued, there he abode two yeares and foure monthes, in the meane time Earle Robert deceaſed, and was buried at Bristowe.
               Anno reg. 12 1147
            
            King Stephen entred Lincolne and there ware his crown, after whoſe departure from thence, the Erle of Chester came to recouer y• towne, but could not bring his purpoſe to paſſe,
                  Anno reg. 13 The Empreſſe vvent into Normandie. the Citizens ſhewed ſuch defence. The Empreſſe being weried with the diſcorde of the Engliſh nation, went ouer into Normandie, choſing rather to ſit vnder the defence of hir huſband in peace, than to ſuffer ſo manye diſpleaſures in Englande.
            
            The Quéene laye at Saint Austines in Canturburie, bicauſe1148 Anno reg. 14 S. Katherins. W. Dunthome. Liber trinitati
                        •
                      London.
                ſhe was deſirous to ſée the Abbay of Fe
                     •
                  urſham finiſhed, which ſhe and hir huſband had begonne to builde: ſhe alſo builded the Hoſpital of S. Katherine by the tower of London, for poore brethren and ſiſters.
            In the moneth of Maye, Henrie the Empreſſe ſonne,1149 with a greate companye of choſen menne of armes and other came into Englande, and takyng wyth hym Ranulph Earle of Chester, Roger
                Earle of Hereford and diuerſe

other, he went to Dauid king of Scottes, of whom he was ioy, fully receiued, and made knight. When king Stephen heard that Dauid Kyng of Scottes, with his ſtrength, and Henne ſonne to the Empreſſe with his Weſtern Lords, were togither at Carlile, he came to Yorke with a greate army, for feare they ſhould attempt any thing againſt that Citie, and ſo lay there the moneth of Auguſt: at length the one partye as wel as the other departed: but Euſtacius the Kings ſonne béeing made knighte, exerciſed manye cruelties in the landes of the Earles, that tooke parte wyth Henrie the Empreſſe ſonne.
            
               Henrie the Empreſſe ſon ſailed into Normandie. Al Englād
               
                  Anno reg. 15 1150 Anno reg. 16 Ex charta regia. 1151 Ypodigma. Geruaſiu
                        •
                     .
                was ful of trouble and noyſe of warre, ſet forth to fire and rapyne, through diſcorde betwixt king Stephen, and certaine Earles that toke part with Henrie the ſon of the Empreſſe.
            
               Robert Earle of Ferrers, founded the Abbay of Meriual.
            
            
               Geffrey Plantagenet Earle of Aniow, and Duke of Normandie, deceaſed, and left his ſonne Henrie his heire.
            King Stephen beſieged the Caſtell of Worcester, which heVVorceſter beſieged. Anno reg. 17 coulde not winne the laſt yeare, and when he ſawe now alſo that he coulde not obtaine his purpoſe, he builded two Caſtels before the ſame, ſtuffing them with garriſons, and wēt from thence, but by Counſel of Roberte Earle of Leicester, the kings Caſtels were ouerthrowen, & the Caſtel beſieged deliuered from daunger.
            A diuorcement was made betwéen Lewes king of France
               1152 Mathew Paris. Geruaſius Doro. and Elianor hys Quéene, bycauſe they were a kinne in the fourth degrée: moreouer, ſhe was defamed of adulterie with an infidel, &c.
            
               Henrie Duke of Normandie maried Elianor, (whō 
               Lewes king of Fraunce had deuorced from him) and had by hir a ſon named William.
            
            Kyng Stephen called a Parliamente at London, declaryng to Theobalde Archebyſhoppe of Canturburie, and the other Byſhoppes, howe he woulde vtterly diſherite Henrie duke of Normandie, and confirme his owne ſonne

               Euſtace to be his ſucceſſour by crowning him king: but the Pope had ſent a commaundement to the Archbiſhoppe, prohibiting him to crowne king Stephens ſonne, bycauſe his father had vſurped the kingdome, contrarie to his othe. Whiche thing (as was thought) was brought to paſſe by the ſubtile policie of Thomas Becket a Chaplaine borne in London.
            
            King Stephen and his ſonne, being not a little offended therewith, cauſed the Biſhops with their Primate to be cloſed vp in an houſe, threatning with terrors to extort of them that which with prayers or price they could not obtain. The Archbiſhop ſtiffely ſtanding in his purpoſe, ſome of the Biſhops through fear went from him, at length the Archbiſhop by a maruellous hap eſcaping, got ouer the Thamis, and ſo to Douer: and thence tranſporting ouer the ſeas, eſcaped the threates of the King and his ſonne, and depriued his ſon of his coueted honour.
            Quéene Mawde deceaſed, and was buried at Feuerſham.
               
                  Anno reg. 18 Norvvich increaſed. Chronicle of Brom▪ holma.
               
            
            The people of Norwich obtained of the king to haue Coroners & baylifes, for before yt time, they had no other Officer, but a ſergeant for the king that kept Courts, and after this, that is to ſay in the 37. yeare of Hemie the third, they had licence to incloſe that towne, with ditches got of ſundry hundreds▪ &c.
            
               Henrie Duke of Normandie furniſhed with an army came1153 into Englande and at his firſt comming wan the Caſtell and towne of Malmeſburie, from thenceforth Roberte the noble Earle of Leicester, began to take the Dukes part, and to furniſh him with things neceſſarie, a thirtie Caſtels or moe (through his counſel with them that kept them,) ſubmitted themſelues to the Duke: at length it was decréed y• the King ſhould talke with the Duke touching peace to be had: and ſo they met in a place wher y• 
               Thamis was moſt narrow, the one ſtanding on the one ſide, & the other on the other. After long talke they returned, the Duke to his men, & the king to his, and ſo laying down weapon, euery man departed in peace.
            
               Euſtace the kings ſonne was angry with hys father, for

agréeing to this peace, and therefore in a rage departed fromPolicraticon. Iohn Sarisburien. Iohn Taxtor. Mathew Paris. the Court towards Cambridge, to deſtroy that Country. Cō
               ming to S. Edmunds Burie, he was there honorablye receyued and feaſted, but when he coulde not haue ſuch money as hée demanded, to beſtow among his men of war, he went away in a rage, ſpoyling the corne in the fields belonging to ye Abbay, and caryed it into his caſtels thereby: but as he ſat him down to dinner, he fel madde vpō receiuing the firſt morſel, and miſerably died, and was buried at Feuerſham.
            
            The Duke beſieged Stamfort Caſtel, and wanne it, andStamforde Notingham, and Ipſvvich beſieged. then he went to Notingham and wan that. The King in the meane time beſieged Ipſwich and wan it. At length, thorough the great labour of the Archbiſhop of Canturburie and the other Biſhops, the king commanded the nobles to méet
                  Ex charta regia. Anno reg. 19 King Stephen adopted Henry. Ypodigma. 1154 at Winchester, where the duke being receiued with gret ioy, the King in ſighte of all men adopted him his ſon, and confirmed to him the principalitie of all Englande.
            
            The duke receiued him in place of a father, graunting to him al the dayes of his life to enioy the name and ſeate of the kings preheminence.
            Duke Henrie in the Octaues of the Ephiphanye, came togither with the king to Oxforde, where the Erles and Barons by the kings commaundement ſweare fealtie to Duke Henrie, ſauing the kings honor ſo long as he liued. This aſſurance being made, they departed aſunder, but ſhortly after they met againe at Dunstable, there to entreate of the ſtate and peace of the kingdome.
            Shortlye after Duke Henrie with king Stephen and certaine Lords of England came to Canturburie, and from thence to Douer, where they had communication with Theodrike Erle of Flaunders, & the Counteſſe the Dukes aunte. When the King and the Duke had diſmiſſed the Earle of Flaunders, and were turning towards Canturburie, the ſlaughter of the Duke was prepared by a conſpiracie of the Flemmings, which enuied both y• duke & peace: but behold ſodainly y• kings yō
               ger ſon Williā
                priuie with the conſpirators, on Barhā
                down

fel of his horſſe, & breaking his leg, he gathered all y• company about him in ſorrow. The duke in the mean time vnderſtanding the appointed treaſon, got him to Canturburie, and ſo eſcaped hys enimies hands: from thence by Rochester and London, he came to the ſea, and paſſed ouer into Normandie.
            
            
               William Archbiſhop of Yorke going to Yorke in the feaſte of Pentercoſt, was poyſoned at Maſſe, and dyed within fewe dayes after.
            In October the king met the Earle of Flaunders again at Douer, and talked with him. After the Earle was diſmiſſed, the king was taken with a ſodaine paine of the Iliake paſſion,K. Stephen died Ger
                        •
                     a. Doro. Ralph Cogſhal.
                and with an olde diſeaſe or running of the Emerodes, and there in y• houſe of the Monkes dyed the xxv. of October, when he had raigned xviij. yeres. x. monthes and odde days. He foūded the Abbays of Cogſhal in Eſſex, of Furnes in Lancaſhire, of Hurguilers, and Feuerſham in Kent, where hys body was buried. He founded an houſe for Nunnes at Carewe.
            
         
         
            
            ¶ King Henrie the ſeconde.
            
            
            
               
                  HEnrie the ſeconde, ſon of Geffrey Plantagenet and Mawde the Empreſſe, began his raigne ouer this realmeAnno reg. 1. of England, the xxv. day of October, in the yere of our Lord 1154. he was Crowned at Westminster the. xvij. daye of December, by Theobalde Archbiſhop of Canturburie: he was ſomewhat red of face, ſhort of body, and therwith fatte: of ſpeach reaſonable, wel learned, noble in chiualry, and fortunate in battayle: wiſe in counſel, one that loued peace, lyberall to ſtraungers, but hard to his familiars: vnſtedfaſt of promiſe, giuen to pleaſure, and a wedlocke breaker: by his manhoode and policie the crowne of England was much augmented, with the annexing of Scotland, Ireland, the Iles of Orcades, Boytaine, Peyters, Guyen, and other prouinces of Fraunce.
            
            
               
               Thomas Becket Archdeacon of Canturbury, was made the Kings Chancellour.
            He held his Chriſtmas at Bermonſey, where hauing conferenceGeruaſius Doro. with his Nobles for the ſtate of the Kingdome, he1155 promiſed to baniſh all Strangers. Wherevpon William of Ipres, and all the Flemings▪
                that had flocked into England, fearing the indignation of the newe King, departed the land. And the Caſtels that had bin builded to pill the riche and ſpoyle the poore, were by the Kings commandemente, and counſell of his Chancellor throwne downe.
            In March, Quéene Elianor did beare a ſonne at London called Henry after his father.
            King Henry was ſonne to Mawde the Empreſſe, whoſeLine of the Saxons reſtored. Gerua. Doro. Radulphus de dec
                        •
                     te.
                mother was Mawde Quéene of England, wife to King Henry the firſt, and daughter to Margaret Quéene of Scottes, who was daughter of Edward, which he begat of Agatha, the ſiſter of Henry the Emperoure. Edwarde was the ſonne of King Edmond named Ironſide: whoſe father was King Etheldred: whoſe father was the peaceable King named Edgar, the ſonne of Edmond, the ſon of Edward the ſeigniour, the ſonne of Alured &c.
            A counſell was holden at Wallingford, where the NoblesAnno reg. 2. Ger. Dorobor. were ſworne to the King and his iſſue.
            King Henry went ouer into Normandy, where with long1156 Anno reg. 3. ſéege he tooke diuers Caſtels, of Mirable, Chinon, and other, and obteyned the homage and pledges of all Aquitaine and Gaſcoyne.
            
            
               William the Kings eldeſt ſonne died, and was buryed at Reding.
            
            King Henry returned into England▪
                and then with an armie1157 King Henry vvent againſt the VVelchmen. Reedifyed Caſtels. Henry of Eſſex. went againſt the Welchmen, where he felled their wods, fortified the Caſtell of Rutland, and recouered many ſtrong holdes. He reedifyed the Caſtell of Baſingwirke &c. but he loſt many of his men, for Henry of Eſſex that bare the Kings Standerd, as he was aſſayled amongſt his enimies, let fall the Standerd to the ground, which encouraged the Welchmen,
               
and put the Engliſhmen in feare, ſuppoſing that the KingIocelyn of 
                     •
                  racland. had bin ſlayne.
            The King notwithſtanding got of a certayne King ofAnno reg. 4. 
               Wales and other Barons homage and hoſtages, and ſo rereturned.
            Quéene Elianor brought forth a ſonne named Richard, at Oxford in the Kings Pallace there.
            
               William Earle of Glocester was taken by the Welchmen
               Giraldus Cambre. in the Caſtell of Cardife.
            
            On Chriſtmas day King Henry ware his Crowne at1158 
               Winchester, where after celebration of diuine ſeruice, he ſet his Crowne vpon the Altar, and neuer ware it after.
            King Henry went into France, and at Paris was ioyfully receyued of King Lewes, who required to haue his daughter Margaret to be maryed to his ſonne Henry, which ſuite he obteyned, and King Henry obteyned that as Seneſhall to the French King he might enter into Britaine, and call afore him ſuche as made warre one againſt another, to appeaſe them, whereby he brought the Citie of Naunts to his dominion. An Earthquake happened in many placesEarthquake. through England: and the Riuer of Thamis was dryed vp, that at London men might walke ouer the ſame dryſhod.
            Quéene Elianor brought forth a ſonne named Geffrey.
               Anno reg. 5. Ypodigma.
            
            A new Coyne was made in England.
            
            King Henry tooke eſ
                  •
               uage of the Engliſhmen, the ſumme1159 Geruaſius. whereof grew to 12400. pounds of ſiluer. Of other Countreys ſubiect to him he gathered alſo an infinite exaction, & then paſſed towards Tholouſe with an huge army, and beſéeged that Citie from Midſomer til Hallontide. There were with him Malcoline King of Scottes, and a certaine King of Wales, and all the Earles and Barons of England, Normandy, Aquitaine, Angeow, & Gaſcoyne: but Lewes the French King ſo defended that Citie, that the Kings purpoſe was fruſtrate, and the ſéege rayſed.
            King Henry returned from Tholouſe, and Henry y• KingAnno reg. 6. 1160 of Englands ſonne, not ſeauen yeares olde, maried Margaret
               
the French Kings daughter, that was not yet thrée yearesGerua. Dor
                     •
                  . Anno reg. 7. 1161 Anno reg. 8. Thomas Wikes. 
                     ••
                  . Beu
                     ••
                  la. old.
            
               Mathew Earle of Bolonia married Mary Abbeſſe of Rumſey, daughter to King Stephen.
            
            
               Theobald Archbiſhop of Canturbury deceaſſed, and the Churche of Canturbury was voyde one yeare, one moneth, and fourtéene dayes.
            King Henry cauſed all his ſubiects to ſweare fidelitie to1162 Mathew Paris. his ſonne Henry concerning his inheritance. Thomas the Kings Chancellour tooke his othe, firſt, ſauing his fidelitie to King Henry the father ſo long as he liued. This Thomas was elected Archbiſhop of Canturbury, and when he was conſecrated, he forthwith refuſed to deale any more with matters of the Court, renouncing the Chauncellorſhip &c.
            There came into England xxx. Germaynes, as well men as women, who called themſelues Publicanes: their head andWilbel Nouobur. Ralphe Cogſhall▪
                ruler named Gerardus was ſomewhat learned, the reſidue very rude. They denyed Matrimony, and the Sacraments of Baptiſme, and the Lords Supper, with other Articles. They being apprehended, the King cauſed a Counſell to be called at Oxford, where the ſayd Gerard anſwered for all his fellowes, who being preſſed with Scriptures, aunſwered concerning their faith, as they had bin taught, and woulde not diſpute thereof. After they coulde by no meanes be brought from their errors, the Biſhops gaue ſentence againſt them, and the King commanded that they ſhould be marked with an whote Iron in the forehead, and whipped, and that no man ſhould ſuccour them with houſerome or otherwiſe: they tooke their puniſhment gladly, their CaptaynePublicans vvhipped. going before them, ſinging, Bleſſed are ye when men do hate you: they were marked in the forehead, and theyr Captayne both in the forehead and the chinne. Thus beingAnno reg. 9. whipped and thruſt out in the winter, they dyed with cold, no man reléeuing them.
            
               Robert de Mountfort accuſed his néere kinſman Henry
               1163 Ioc
                     •
                  lin of Bracland. of Eſſex of high treaſon before the Nobilitie, affirming that

he in an expedition into Wales, in a narrow and hard paſſage at Colleſhele, moſt fraudulently threwe away the Kings Standard, and with a lowde voyce pronounced him to be dead, and turned backe thoſe that came to y• Kings ſuccour. (Indéede the foreſayde Henry of Eſſex was perſwaded that King Henry was ſlayne, whiche vndoubtedly had come to paſſe, if Roger Earle of Clare had not with quicke ſpéede come to with his retinue, and rayſed agayne the Kings Standarde, to the encouraging of the whole army.) Henry withſtoode the foreſayd Robert, and denyed all his accuſations, whereby in proceſſe of time the matter came to be tryed by Combate. They met at Reding to fight, in an I
                  •
               eCombate at Reading. néere to the Abbey. Thither alſo came much people to ſée what ende the matter woulde come to. And it chanced that when Robert had manfully powred out many and heauie ſtrokes, Henry turning reaſon into rage, tooke vpon him the part of a challenger and not a defender, who whileſt he manfully ſtroke, was more ſtoutely ſtriken agayne, and endeuoring to conquer, was conquered himſelfe: he being ouercome, fell downe for dead, and when he was thought toHenry of Eſſex ouercome. haue bin ſlayne, at the inſtance of ſuche of the nobilitie as were of kinne to him, it was granted vnto the Monks thereFlores Hiſtoriarū. that his body ſhould be buryed, but afterward he reuiued, and hauing recouered his health, became a Monke in that place.
            
               London Bridge was new made of timber, by Peter of Colechurch
               
                  Anno▪ reg. 10 London bridge made of Timber 1164 Geruaſius Do.
                a Prieſt Chapleyne.
            
               Malcoline the Scottiſh King, and Reſus Prince of Southwales and other, did homage to King Henry and his ſonne Henry at Westminster.
            
            A Counſayle was holden at Claringdon, in preſence of the King and the Archbiſhops, Biſhops, Lordes, Barons, &c. wherein was recogniſed, and by their othes confirmed many ordinances, too long héere to recite, Thomas Archbiſhop of Canturburie being ſworne to the ſame, ſhortly after ſore repented, and 
                  ••
               ed the Realme, & went to the Court of Rome.
            
            
               The ſix and twentith day of January was a great Earthquake
                  Anno reg. 11 1165 An Earthquake. Mathew Pari
                        •
                     . Gerua. Doro. Anno reg. 12. in Eely, Norffolke, and Suffolke, ſo that it ouerthrewe them that ſtoode vpon their féete, and made the Belles to ring in the Stéeples.
            The King ſeaſed into his handes all the Archbiſhops goodes and rents, and baniſhed all his kindred.
            The King led an innumerable army againſt the Welchmen▪
               
               Radul. Cogſhal. of Flemings, Scottes, Pictes, Aniowans, and other, but with ſo great a multitude he could not ouercome them.
            The Welchmen tooke the Caſtell of Cardigan.
            
            In a certayne aſſéege at Bridgenorth, againſte Hugh de Mortimere, when the King was ſhotte at by one of the enimies, a valiant man Hubert de Saint Clere Conſtable of Colchester, did thruſt himſelfe betwixte the King and the danger of the ſtroke, and ſo receyued death for him, whoſe only daughter the King taking into his cuſtodie, he gaue hir in mariage to William de Languale, with hir fathers inheritance, who begate on hir a ſonne, bearing the name and ſurname of his Grandfather.
            Quéene Elianor brought forth a ſonne named Iohn.
            
            The King paſſed ouer into Normandy, and there holding1166 a counſell, appoynted a collection to be made through all his Countreys, two pence of the pound of mouable goodesA Taxe. for the firſt yeare, and one penny the pound for foure yeares after.
            
               Robert, ſonne to William Earle of Glocester deceaſſed.Anno reg. 13 1167
            
            The warre was renued betwixt the King of Englande, and the French King, for the Citie of Tholoſe: and Mathewe Earle of Bulloigne, brother to Philip Earle of Flanders manned ſixe hundred Shippes to haue come into Englande, but by ſuch preparation as Richard Lucy gouernour of England made, he was ſtopped well ynough.
            
               Mawde King Henries daughter was maryed to Henry
               Anno reg. 14 1168 Iohn Taxtor. Gerua▪ Doro. Ypodigma. Duke of Saxon.
            
            
               Conan Earle of little Britaine dyed, and left for his heire a daughter named Conſtance, which he had by the King of

               Scottes ſiſter, which Conſtance King Henry marryed to his ſonne Geffrey.
            
            
               Robert de Boſcue Earle of Leycester dyed. He founde
                  •
               
               
                  Anno reg. 15 1169 Sca. Cron. Gerendon. Leyceſter and Eaton. Sca. Cro.
                the Monaſteries of Gerendon of Monkes: of Leycester called Saint Mary de Prate of Channons regular: and Eaton of Nunnes, was founded by Amicia his wife, daughter of Ralph Montforde.
            
            King Henry cauſed the Caſtell of Warwike to be builded.
            
               Deruntius the ſonne of Morcardus, called Mack Murgh
               Giraldus Cambr. King of Leynster, being expelled out of his kingdome, came into Guyen to King Henry, hnmbly requiring 
                  〈…〉
                
               
                  ••
               r his reſtitution, who vnderſtanding fully the cauſe 
                  ••
               ereof, gaue frée licence to all Engliſhmen that woulde, to 
                  ••••
               e the ſayde Deruntius: wherevpon he returning into Englande, couenanted with Richard Earle of Chepstow, to g
                  ••
               e him his daughter in marriage, and with hir the ſucceſſion of his Kingdome, ſo that he would help him in the recouery of it: and ſhortly after he promiſed to Robert Fit
                     •
                   Stephen, and Mawrice Fitz Gerald large reuenues in Ireland for the like helpe.
            King Henry helde his Court at Naunts, where the BiſhopsAnno reg. 15. 1170 and Barons of Britayne being preſent, ſware their fidelitie to the King, and to his ſonne Geffrey: and then the King ſayled into England, but many of his company wereGiral. Cambr. drowned by the way.
            
               Robert Fitz Stephen firſt of all Engliſhmen after the ConqueſtEnglismnen tranſported into Ireland. entred Ireland the firſt day of May, with 390. men, and there tooke Wexford in the behalfe of Deruntius.
            
            King Henry cauſed his ſonne Henry borne at London
               Henry the kings ſonne Crovvned. to be Crowned by the handes of Roger Archbiſhop of Yorke, as he thought to the great quietneſſe of himſelfe and hys Realme, but it proued farre otherwiſe.
            
               Thomas Archbiſhop of Canturbury, by the mediation of Pope Alexander, and Lewes the King of France, was reſtored to his Sea of Caunturbury.
            
            In September, Richard Earle of Chepstow, ſurnamedGualteru
                     •
                   Couen.
               
               Strongbow, ſayled into Ireland with a thouſand two hundred men of warre, and by force tooke Waterford and Dub
                     •••
                  , and marryed Eue Deruntius daughter.
            
               Thomas Becket Archbiſhop of Canturbury, the xxviij. ofAnno reg. 17 1171 December was ſlayne by William Tracy Baron of Braynes, Reignolde Fitz Vrſe, Hugh Moruilt,
                and Richarde Briton Knightes.
            There was ſéene at S. Oſythes in Estſex a Dragon of aChro. Colcheſter. maruellous bigneſſe, whyche by mouing burned houſes.Ex Record.
            
            King Henry returned from beyond the Seas, and landed at Porteſmouth in the moneth of Auguſt.
            
               Nicholas Break eſpeare an Engliſhman, borne at Langley in the County of Hartford, ſonne to Robert a yonger brotherPope Adrian an Englishman. of the houſe of Breakeſpeares, (whiche Roberte after the death of his wife profeſſed himſelfe a Monke of Saint Albons, leauing his ſonne to prouide for his owne preferment) this yong man paſſed into France, was ſhorne a Monke, and after choſen Abbot: went to Rome, was conſecrated Biſhop of Alba, made Cardinall, ſente Legate to the Norwayes, where he reduced that nation from Paganiſme to Chriſtianitie, and after returned to Rome. When Anaſtaſius was dead, he was choſen Pope, by y• name of Adrian the 4. During his Popedome, he granted the regimente of Ireland
               King Henry Lord of Ireland. Geſta Abbat. Sanc
                        ••
                      Albani. Regi
                        •
                     trū m
                        •
                     n. Sancti Albani. Iohn Bale. Cimphriu
                        •
                     . Anno reg. 18. Giraldu
                        •
                      Cambr. Radul. Cogſhal. Geruaſius D
                        •••
                     .
                to the King of England, wherevpon King Henry hauing cauſed Richard Earle of Chepstow to giue into his handes all the land which he had conquered in that Realme, toke Shippe at Penbroke, and ſayled thither, where the King of Conach, Deruntius
                King of Corke, Morice
                King of Methe, the King of Vriell, Duvenald
                King of Oſſery, Duvenald
                King of Limerike, Machachelin, Ophelon, Machaleny, Othne
                     
                        •
                     hely, Gillemehelmach, Ocadeci, Ocaruell,
                with other Princes, and the Biſhops, ſubmitting themſelues and theirs to the King of Englande and his ſucceſſors, builded for him a greate Pallace at Dublin, where he helde hys Chriſtmas.
            
               The Church of Norwich, with the houſes thereto belonging was brent, and the Monkes were diſpercled.
            The King returned into England on Monday in the Eaſter1172 wéeke, & about the Aſcention tide ſayled into Normandy.
            
            At Andouer a Prieſt praying before the Altare, was ſtriken with thunder, and ſlayne. Likewiſe one Larke and his brother was brent to death with the lightning.Cro. Col
                     •
                  eſtre.
            
            King Henry the ſonne, with his wife, the French Kings daughter, were both togither Crowned at Winchester the ſeauen and twentith of Auguſt, by the handes of Rotrod Archbiſhop of Roane.
            
            King Henry the elder was aſſoyled of the death of Thomas
               Geruaſius. Anno reg. 19. the Archbiſhop, vpō his oth made, that he was not priuie to it.
            King Henry married the eldeſt daughter of Hubert
               117
                     •
                   Ypodigma. Earle of Morton, vnto his ſonne Iohn, ſurnamed without land. He alſo made Mary the ſiſter of Thomas Becket Abbeſſe of Berking.
            
            
               Henry the yonger rebelling in Normandy againſt KingHenry the yonger rebelled. 
               Henry his father, many Earles and Barons fledde ouer to him, whereby diuers ſtrong battayles were fought, as well in England as in Normandy, Poytow, Guyen, and Britaine. There tooke part againſt the father, Lewes King of France, William
                King of Scottes, Henry, Geffrey
                and Iohn his ſonnes, Robert Earle of Leycester, Hugh
                of Chester, and others.
            
               Robert Earle of Leycester with thrée thouſand Flemings comming into England, ariued at Walton, and after were receyued by Earle Hugh into Framilingham Caſtell. They brent the Caſtell of Hagoneth, the Citie of Norwich &c. but byIohn Taxtor. Anno reg. 20 
               Richard de Lucy the Kings Juſtice, both he, his wife, and as many Normans and Frenchmen as were with him were taken, but the Flemings were all ſlayne, or drowned. This battayle was fought without the Towne of S. Edmondſburie, néere to a place called S. Martins of Farneham.
            
            
               William King of Scottes with many Flemings entring into England, wan the Caſtels of Appleby, Brough, and Prideho
                     •
                  
                  ▪
               
            
            
               King Henry the elder, returning into England, in ſhorte time ſubdued his Rebels. The Citie of Leycester by his1174 Leyceſter brent. commandement was brent, the walles and Caſtell raced, and the inhabitants ſparcled into other Cities. Robert de Scoteuile, Radulph de Mandeuile, Barnard Bayllole, of whome Baynards Castell tooke the name, and William de Veſcy came to Newcastell, and after tooke King William
               King of Scottes taken priſoner. Ger. Dorobor. Baynardes Caſtell. Sca. Cron.
                priſoner, and ſent him to London, from whence King Henry tooke him and the Earle of Leycester with him into Normandy, and there impriſoned them at Roane, where King William compounded for his ranſome, and after was deliuered at Yorke for 4000. pound. The Nobles of Scotlande came no néerer than Pembles in Scotland to méete with their King, wherefore he tooke with him many of the yonger ſonnes of noble men in England that bare him good wil, and gaue them landes in Scotland, which he tooke from ſuche as were Rebels to him there. The names of thoſe Gentlemen that he toke with him, were Baylliol, Brewle, Soully, Mowbrey; Saintclere, Hay, Giffard, Rameſey, Lanudell, Biſey, Berkeley, Wellegen, Boys, Montgomery, Valx, Celenille, Friſer, Grame, Gurlay, and diuers other.
            The v. day of September, Chriſtes Church in Canturburye
               
                  Geruaſius Doro. Wil. Thorne. Canturbury brent. was burned, with certayne houſes of Office in the court.
            King Henry the ſonne, with his bréethren, & other, were reconciled to King Henry the father.
            The Archbiſhop of Canturbury held a Counſell in S. Peeters
               Anno reg. 21 1175 at Westminster on Sunday before the Aſcention day, at which Counſell were preſent all the ſuffragan Biſhops of his Prouince, Worcester except, that was ſicke, and ſo excuſed himſelfe, and y• Biſhop of Norwich which was deceaſed.
            A brother of the Earle Ferrers was in the night priuilyRoger Houed. ſlayne at London, which whē the King vnderſtoode, he ſware that he would be auenged on the Citizens: for it was then a common practiſe in the Citie, that an hundred or more inNight vvalkers in London, did murther all they met. a company of yong and old, would make nightly inuaſions vpon the houſes of the wealthy, to the intent to robbe them,

and if they found any man ſtirring in the Citie within the night, they would preſently murther him, in ſo much, that when night was come, no man durſt aduenture to walke in the Stréetes. When this had continued long, it fortuned that as a crew of yong and wealthy Citizens aſſembling togither in the night, aſſaulted a ſtone houſe of a certayne rich man, and breaking through the wall, the good man of that houſe hauing prepared himſelfe with other in a corner, when he perceyued one of the Théeues named Andrew Bucquinte to leade the way, with a burning brand in the one hand and a potte of coales in the other, whiche he aſſayed to kindle with the brand, he flew vpon him, and ſmote off his right hande, and then with a lowde voyce cryed Théeues, at the hearing whereof the Théeues tooke their flight, all ſauing he that had loſt his hande, whome the good man in the next morning deliuered to Richarde de Lucy the Kings Juſtice. This Théeſe vpon warrant of his life, appeached his confederates, of whome many were taken, and many were fledde, but among the reſt that were apprehended, a certayne Citizen of greate countenance, credite, and wealth, ſurnamed Iohn the olde when he coulde not acquite himſelfe by the waterdome, offered the King for his life fiue hundred Markes, but the King commaunded that he ſhoulde be hanged, which was done,Gualter Couen. and the Citie became more quiet.
            The Kings of England both father and ſonne did eateAnno reg. 22 1176 and drinke at one Table, lay in one Chamber, and wente togither to viſite the Tombe of Thomas late Archbiſhop of Canturburie, accompliſhing indéede the peace whiche they had promiſed.
            The King cauſed to be razed and ouerthrowne the Caſtels of Huntington, Walton, Groby, Tutſburie, Hay, and Treſt
               Caſtels razed. with many other, in reuenge of the harme the Lordes of them had done to him.
            This yeare 1176▪ after the foundation of Saint MaryRedulphus de diceto.
                  
Oueryes Church in Southwarke, the ſtone bridge ouer theThe ſtone bridge at London begon to bée buylded. Ex recordis Sāctae Mariae de Southwarke. Iohn Leyland.
                
               Thamis at London was begonne to bée founded. A Cardinall, and the Archbiſhop of Canturburie gaue a thouſande Markes toward the ſame foundation.
            In March the King called a Conuocation of the Cleargie at London, when the Popes Legate was ſet, and the Archbiſhop of Canturbury on his right hande, as primate of England, the Archbiſhop of Yorke diſdeyning to ſitte on the lefte hande, came and ſwapt him downe to haue thruſt his tayle betwixte the Legate and the Archbyſhop of Canturburie, whiche Archbiſhop of Canturburie béeing lothe to remoue, the other ſet his buttocke in his lappe, but he had vnneath touched hym with his bumme, when the Biſhops and other of the Cleargie and Laytie ſtepte to hym, pulled hym, threwe hym to the grounde, and beganne to lay on hym with fiſtes and battes, ſo that the Archbiſhop of Canturburie (yéelding good for euill) was fayne to defende the other Archbiſhop, who with his rent Coape gote vppe, and away ſtraight to the King with a greate complaynte: but when the trueth of the matter was once knowen, hée was well laughed at for hys remedye.
            
               Richard Strangbow Earle of Chepſtow, deceaſſed, and wasIohn Beuer. buryed at Dublin in Ireland.
            
            
               William Earle of Arundell alſo deceaſſed, and was buryed at Wimondham.
            
            
               William Earle of Glocester, bycauſe he had no ſonne toAnno reg. 23 Ypodigma. inherite his landes, and béeing loth to diſtribute them amongſt his daughters, he made Iohn the Kings ſonne his ſucceſſor.
            A ſhowre of bloud raigned in the Iſle of Wighte twoCron. Tinmouth. houres ſpace.
            The Church of ſecular Channons at Waltam, was by1177 Ypodigma. Geruaſius. the Kings commandement newe builded, and regular Channons placed there.
            
               After the death of Roſamund the Faire, daughter of Walter
               Roſamund. Lord Clifford, Concubine to Henry the ſecond at Woodſtoke, he tooke priuily King Lewes daughter of France, (that was marryed to his ſonne Richard Earle of Poytow) for his Leman, and had practiſed for a diuorce betwixt him and his Quéene Eleanor, wherevpon followed great diſcord betwixt the Kings of England and France, but méeting togither, they agréed vpon peace for a time.
            
               Richard Lucy the Kings Juſticiar layde the foundation of the couentuall Church in the honor of Saint Thomas, in1178 a place which is called Westwood, otherwiſe Leſnes, in the territorieLeſnes. Geruaſius. Walter Couen. Gerua. Tilberien.
                of Rocheſter, in the new Pariſh of Southfleete.
            
            This Richard Lucy builded the Caſtell of Anger in Eſtſex, in the dioceſſe of the Biſhop of London.
            
            The Citie of Yorke was brent.
            On Chriſtmas day at Oxenhall, in the territorie of Derlington,
               Anno reg. 25. 1179 Cron. vinmouth. in the Biſhopricke of Dureſme, the earth lifted vp it ſelfe in the manner of an high Tower, and ſo remayned from the ſpring of the day vnmoueable, vntil the euening, and then fell with ſo horrible a noyſe, that it feared the inhabitantes thereabout, and the earth ſwallowed it vp, and made there a déepe pitte, which is ſéene vntill this day. For a teſtimonie thereof, Leyland ſayth, he ſaw the pittes thereIohn Leyland. commonly called Helkettles.
            
            The tenth day of Aprill the Church of Saint Andrewe in Rochester was conſumed with fire.
            
               Richard Lucy departed this life in the Abbey of Leſnes, hauing changed his habite.
            The Uſurers in England were gréeuouſly puniſhed for
                  Anno reg. 26 1180 Vſuters punished. Gerua. Dor
                        •
                     .
                corrupting the Coyne, the whiche beſides other vexations were fettered two and two togither, and carryed in Cartes to the Kings Court.
            A new Coyne was ordeyned in England.
            
            
               Geffrey the Kings Baſtarde ſonne, reſigned the ByſhoprickeAnno reg. 27 1181 of Lincolne, and was made the Kings Chancellour.
            
               This yeare Giraldus Cambrenſis wrote his booke of theItinerarium Cambri
                     •
                   Giraldi. deſcription of Wales, wherein he noteth to haue happened in his time in the Prouince of Kemmeis, a yong man (borne in thoſe partes) to be perſecuted with Toades, as all within that Countrey had come crawling togither to vexe him,A man deuoured by Toades. and when innumerable numbers of them were killed by thoſe that kept him, and other of his friends and kinſmen,Geruaſius de mappa mundi. yet came they ſtill as if they had ſprong like Hydraes head numberleſſe: at length when his friends were wéeried with watching, they cauſed him in a Coffin to be hoyſed vp into an high trée that was ſhred of all the boughes, and made ſmooth: but there was he not preſerued from his venemous enemies, which aſſaulted him créeping vp into the trée, till they had eaten him to the bones that he dyed, his name was Seiſillus Elker her (that is) long legge.
            
               Barnewell with the Priorie, néere vnto Cambridge, was firedAnno reg. 28 1182 and brent.
            
               Robert Harding a Burgeſſe of Bristow, to whome King Henry gaue the Barony of Barkeley, builded the MonaſterieSaint Auſtins in Briſtovv. Anno reg. 29 1183 of Saint Auguſtines in Bristow.
            
            King Henry the elder went into France, and there made his teſtament.
            They of Aquitayne hated their Duke Richard for his crueltie, and were minded to driue him out of the Earledome of Poytow and Dukedome of Aquitayne, and to tranſpoſe thoſe eſtates to his brother King Henry the yonger, but when all men looked for victory to the yong King, heKing Henry the yonger deceaſſed. Giraldus Cambr-
                        〈…〉
                     . 1184 Gualterus Couen.
                fell miſerably ſicke, and dyed in the Caſtell of Limouicen, about the beginning of June, and was buryed at Roane.
            
            King Henry returned into England, and ſent many men of warre into Wales, for the Welchmen emboldned by the Kings abſence, had broken forth and ſlayne many Engliſhmen.
            
            The Abbey of Glastenbury was brent, with the Church ofGlaſtenbury brent. 
               Saint Iulian.
            
            
               Heraclius Patriarch of Hieruſalem came to King Henry,
               Anno reg. 31.
               
deſiring him of ayde agaynſt the Turkes, but the King bycauſe1185 Herac
                     ••
                  us the Patriarke. Gerua. Doro.
                of the crueltie of his ſonnes, was counſelled not to leaue his Dominions in hazard, and to goe ſo farre off: wherefore he promiſed the Patriarke▪ 50000. Markes of Siluer.
            This Patriarke dedicated the new Temple then buildedNevv Temple. in the Weſt part of London.
            
            King Henry ſente his ſonne Iohn into Ireland, that heIohn the kings ſonne Lord of Ireland. Ypodigma.
                might be made Lorde thereof. The Pope ſente him a Crowne of Peacocks feathers brayded with Golde.
            This yeare dyed Hugh Mortimere founder of Wigmor
                     •
                  
                Abbey.
            
               Mawde the Empreſſe, Mother to King Henry the ſecondThe Empreſſe deceaſed. deceaſſed: ſhe founded the Abbey of Bordeſley.
            
            
               Geffrey Earle of Britayne the Kings ſonne of England dyed
                  Anno reg. 32 1180 Geffrey Earle of Britayne dyeth. Giral. Cambr. Mathew Paris. Roger Houeden. Iohn Taxtor.
                at Paris, about the beginning of Auguſt, and was there buryed. He left iſſue two daughters which he had by Conſtance (daughter to Conan Earle of Britaine) who alſo at the time of his death was great with childe, and after brought forth a ſonne named Arthur.
            
            A great Earthquake threw downe many buildings, amongſt the which the Cathedrall Church of Lincolne was rent in péeces the fiue and twentith of Aprill.
            The Cathedrall Church of Chichester and all the wholeChicheſter brent. Citie was brent the twentith of October.
            Néere vnto Orford in Suffolke, certayne Fiſhers of the
                  Anno reg. 33 1187 A Fish like a man. Ralphe Cogſhall. Monument in Colcheſter.
                Sea tooke in their nettes a Fiſh hauing the ſhape of a man in all poyntes, whiche Fiſhe was kepte by Barthelinew de Glaunuile, Cuſtos of the Caſtell of Orford, in the ſame Caſtell, by the ſpace of ſixe monethes and more for a wonder: he ſpake not a word. All manner of meates he gladly did eate, but moſt gréedily raw fiſhe, after he had cruſhed out all the moyſture. Oftentimes he was brought to the Churche, where he ſhewed no tokens of adoration. At length when he was not well looked to, he ſtale away to the Sea, and neuer after appeared.
            
               The Kings of Englande and of France mette betwixt Giſors
               Anno reg. 34 1188 and Trye, where they tooke on them the Croſſe, and dyuers other with them. The King of England landing at Winchelſea, haſted towards North-hampton, where at Gedington,
               Richarde Sothwel▪ Rog Houed. 
                     •
                  n
                     •
                  iq
                     •
                   
                  
                     •••
                  erl. Gual. Coue
                     ••
                  . about eight or tenne miles from North-hampton he helde a Parliamente aboute the voyage into the holy land, where many Articles concerning that voyage were concluded, and the whole Realme troubled with paying of tithes towarde that voyage. The Christians were appoynted to pay aboue lxx. thouſand pound, and the Iewes lx. thouſand, without any delay: but by meanes of a diſcorde that fell betwixt the two Kings, that voyage was ſtayed.
            The Towne of Beuerley, with the Church of Saint Iohn
               Beuerley brent. Anno reg. 35 Geruaſius. 1189 there was brent the twentith of September.
            The Kings of England and of France, with Richard Earle of Poytow, the Legate and the Archbiſhops, of Canturbury, Roane, Rhenes, and Burges, mette at Naunts the ninth day of June. There Philip the French King required, that his ſiſter which had bin kept in England a two and twēty yeares,
                  
                     
                        •
                     odouicus vi
                        •
                     es▪
                   Death of King Henry the ſecond. mighte be reſtored vnto Earle Richard as his wife, and Earle Richard deſired the ſame, but King Henry denyed this requeſt, and ſo they departed a ſunder, and got them to armour. The French King and Earle Richard purſued the King of England ſo hard, that he was forced to yéelde toRichardus Cambr. all the requeſtes, as wel of the French King, as of his ſonne Richard. This was done at Giſors, and ſo departing came to Azai, where he fell ſicke, and departed this life the ſixth dayYpodigma. of July, in the yeare of our Lord 1189. when he had raigned xxxiiij. yeares, ix. monethes, and xij. dayes, and was buryed at Fonteuerard in the Monaſterie of Nunnes by hym founded. He founded the Priories of Douer, and of Stoneley, and Baſingwarke, and the Caſtell of Rudlan. He alſo began the ſtone Bridge ouer the Thamis at London. He left iſſue Richard and Iohn.
            
         
         
            
            ¶ King Richard Cuer de Lion.
            
            
            
               
                  RIchard the firſt borne at Oxford, for his valiantneſſe ſurnamedAnno reg. 1. 
               Cordelion, or with the Lions heart, the ſeconde ſonne of Henry the ſecond, began his raigne the ſixth day of July, in the yeare of oure Lorde 1189.
            He was bigge of ſtature, with a merrie countenance. To his Souldyoures fauourable: bountifull to his friends: to Strangers a gréeuous enimie: hard to be pleaſed: deſirous of warre: abhorring ydleneſſe: enclined to pride, lechery, and auarice.
            He comming from beyonde the Seas, landed at Southhampton
               Geruaſius Do. Mathew Paris. the twelfth day of Auguſt, and was Crowned at Westminster on the third day of September, by the hands of the Archbiſhop Baldwine.
            
            He commanded that no Iewes nor women ſhoulde be at his Coronation, for feare of enchantmentes whiche were wont to be practiſed: for breaking of whiche commmandement, many Iewes were ſlayne the ſame day.
            
               Elianor the olde Quéene, who at the commaundement of hir huſbande had bene long kept cloſe priſoner, was now ſet at libertie.
            The Archbiſhop of Canturburie being ſore offended wyth Erle Iohn the kings brother, for takyng to wife Iſabel counteſſe of Glocester, his cooſin in the thirde degrée▪ wrote a threatning letter to the ſame Iohn, commanding him not to touch the virgine, and to appeare at a peremptory day before him to aunſwere the matter.
            King Richard gaue the Caſtels of Berwike and Rokeſburgh to the Scottiſh king, for the ſumme of x. M. pound: he alſo ſold to Hugo de Puteaco Biſhoppe of Durham, his own prouince for a great péece of mony, and created him Erle of the ſame, and then ſayde in game, I am a wonderous crafteſman, I haue made a newe Earle of an olde Biſhoppe. He ſolde the Priorie of Couentrie, to Hugh Biſhoppe of Chester, for iij. C. markes, which Hugh with a power of armed men inuaded the Priory, chaſed the Prior away, beat the Monkes, lamed ſome, caſt ſome into priſon, and ſpoyling the other, droue thē away, brake the Hutches of the Churche, brente their Charters and priuileges.
            The King alſo fayned to haue loſt his ſignet, and made a newe, and then cauſed to be proclaymed, that who ſo euer woulde ſafely enioy thoſe things which before time they had inrolled, ſhoulde come to the newe ſeale, wherby it came to paſſe, that many which could not finde him in England, went ouer ſea to fine with him at his pleſure. He gaue his brother Iohn the prouinces of Notingham, Deuonſhire, and Cornewal.
            
            In this time were many robbers and out-lawes, among
                  Iohn Maior. Outlavves in England. the whiche, Robert Hoode & little Iohn renowmed théeues, continued in woods, deſpoyling and robbing the goods of the rich. They killed none but ſuch as would inuade them, or by reſiſtance for their own defence.
            The ſayde Robert entertayned an hundred tall men, and good Archers, with ſuch ſpoyles and theftes as he got, vppon

whome foure hundred (were they neuer ſo ſtrong,) durſte not giue the onſet. He ſuffered no woman to be oppreſſed, violated, or otherwiſe inoleſted: poore mens goods he ſpared, aboundantlye relieuing them with that, whiche by theft he gotte from Abbayes and the houſes of rich Carles: whome Maior blameth for his rapine and thefte: but of all théeues he affirmeth hym to be the Prince, and the moſte gentle théefe.
            Till this firſte yeare of King Richard the firſte, the CitizensMagiſtrates of the Citie of London, ſince before the Conqueſt. Robert Fabian.
                of London hadde bene gouerned by Portgraues, as Fabian ſometime an Alderman of London, in his Chronicle affirmeth: whoſe names with the lawes and cuſtomes of the Cittie then vſed, (he ſayeth) were recorded in an olde booke written in the Saxon tongue, called Domes daye, ſometime remayning in the Guilde Hal of London, but now embezeled.
            To this accordeth the Charter of the ſame Citie, granted by William the Conquerour, and diuerſe other Records, wherein I finde, that the chiefe Magiſtrate of the Citie ofPortgraue. 
               London, in the time of king Edward laſt before the Conqueſt, called the Confeſſor, was called Portgraue▪
                whoſe name was Wolfgare.
            
            In the time of William Conquerour, and William Rufus,
                     Liber trinitatis. W. Dunthorne. Prouoſt. Godfrey Mandeuile or Magnauile was Portgraue, & Richarde de Pare Prouoſt.
            In the time of King Henrie the firſt, Hugh Bouch Portgraue, and Leofſtanus Goldſmith Prouoſt.
            After them Awburie de Vere Portgraue, and Robert de Barquerel Prouoſt
            In the time of King Stephen, Gilbert Becket Portgraue, and Andrew Buchennet Prouoſt.
            In the time of King Henrie the ſecond, Peter Fitz Walter Portgraue.
            After him Iohn Fitz Nigelly Portgraue.
            After him Ernulfus Buchel Portgraue.
            After him William Fitz Iſabel Portgraue.
            
               Theſe Portgraues are alſo in diuerſe Recordes called Vicecomites or Sherifes, for that they then farmed the Sherifwike of the King, as the Shirifes of London doe at this day:Iohn Beuar. and ſome authors, as Iohannis Beuar and other, do cal them Domes men, or Judges of the Kings Court.
            This yeare the Citizens of London obtayned to be gouernedBaylifes. by two Baylifes, whiche in diuerſe auntiente records are alſo called Sherifes, for that they (like as the Portgraues) farmed the Sherifewike.
            They alſo obtained to haue a Maior to be their principal gouernour, and lieuetenaunte of the Citie, as of the Kings Chamber.
            The names of the firſt Baylifes or Shirifes, who entred at the feaſt of Saint Michael the Archangell, were as followeth.
            
               Sherifes.
               Henrie Cornehil.
               Richard Reinery.
            
            
               Maior.
               Henrie Fitz Alwyne.
               Fitz Leofſtan
            
            Goldſmith,The firſt maior. firſte Maior of London, and continued Maior during his life, that was foure and twentie yeares, as appeareth by a very antient Recorde ſometime pertayning to the Nunrye of Clerkenwel, contayning as a perfite regiſter, all ſuchRegiſter of Clerkenvvel. grauntes of landes as was made to them by anye, which hath diuerſe déeds, where vnto Henrie Fitz Alwyne firſt Maior of London is a witneſſe, dated the 1. 2. 3. 4. &c. of Richard the firſt.
            And for a more proofe, I finde recorded in the Guilde Hal,
               Conſuetud de Lō. in a booke called the Cuſtomes of London, a conſtitution or order howe Citizens ſhall procéede in buildings betwéene Citizen and Citizen, whyche conſtitution begynneth thus:
            In the yere of our Lord. 1189. the firſt yere of the raigne of king Richard, Henry Fitz Alwyne being Maior, who was the firſt Maior of London, it was prouided and ordayned &c. Other proofes might be ſhewed out of diuerſe auntiente Recordes, but theſe are ſufficient.
            
               King Richard betooke the guiding of this land to William1190 Gouernour of Englande VVilliam Bishop of Ely. King Robert toke his voyage ouer to Ieruſalem. Geruaſius. Ypodigma.
                   Longſhampe Biſhop of Ely, Chauncellour of England, and y• foure and twentith daye of Februarie, he tooke his ſcrip and ſtaffe at Canturburie, and the ſixth of Marche toke the Sea at Douer, and tranſported ouer.
            The ſecond of July the two Kings of England & of France met at Towers, and from thence ſet forward on their iourney towards Ieruſalem.
            
            The towne of Mawling in Kent with the Nunry was cō
               ſumed with fire.
            The Jewes in the townes of Norwich, Saint Edmunds Burie, Lincolne, Stamforde faire, and Linne, were robbed and ſpoyled.Ievves ſlevv themſelues. And at Yorke to the number of 500. beſides women and children, entred a tower of the caſtel, which the people aſſailing, the Jews profered money to be in ſafetie of their liues, but the Chriſtians would not take it: wherevpon their men of law ſayde to them, it is better for vs to die for our lawe, than to fall into the handes of our enimies: and they all agréeing to that Counſell, cut the throtes of their wiues and children, and caſt them ouer the walles on the Chriſtians heades: the reſidue they locked vp in the kings lodging, and burnt both the houſe and themſelues.
            
               Geffrey Archebiſhoppe of Yorke, retourning from Rome,
               Archbishop of of Yorke dravven from the Alter to priſon. Ralphe Cogſhall.
                and now conſecrated, arriued at Douer with his traine, whō 
               Matthew de Clare, by the commaundemente of the Kings chaunceller, entring with violence into the Church of Saint Martins le Grande in London, drew from the Alter, and ſo caried him to priſon.
            
               William Biſhoppe of Ely, builded the vtter wall aboute
                  Anno reg. 2. W. Di
                        ••
                     thorne. A ditch made about the tovvre of London. Richarde Sothwel.
                the Tower of London, and cauſed a déepe ditche to be made about the ſame, thinking he coulde haue cauſed the riuer of Thamis to goe rounde aboute it, but he beſtowed great coſt in vain
                  •
               .
            
               Sherifes.
               Iohn Herlion.
               Roger Duke.
            
            
               Maior.
               Henrie Fitz Alyne.
            
            
               King Richarde ſubdued the Ile of Cipers, and then ioyningMathew Paris. Rog Houed. Galf
                     •
                  id
                     ••
                   Viniſ
                     •
                  l. his power with Phillip the French Kings in Aſia conquered Acon, where there grewe betwéene the two Kings a gréeuous diſpleaſure: for which cauſe Phillip ſhortly departed thence, and comming into Fraunce, inuaded the Country of Normandie.
            
            
               Iohn brother to King Richard, toke on him the kingdomArbor Succeſsi
                     •
                  
                  nis. of England in his brothers abſence.
            
               Robert Earle of Leicester dyed in his iourney to Ieruſalem.
            
            King Richard reſtored to the Chriſtians the Cittie of Ioppa, and in manye battayles putte the Turkes to greate ſorrow.
            The bones of the moſt famous King of Brytaine, Arthur,
               
               1191 were found at Glastenburie, in a goodly olde ſe
                  •
               ulchre, about the which ſtoode two pillers, in which were letters written, which, by reaſon of the great barbarouſneſſe of the lāguage, and the fouleneſſe, no body coulde reade: vpon the ſepulture was a croſſe of leade, whereon was written, here lyeth theAnno reg. 3. noble king of Brytains Arthur.
               
            
            
               Sherifes.
               William Hauerell.
               Iohn Bucknote.
            
            
               Maior.
               Henrie Fitz Alwyne.
            
            
               William Biſhoppe of Ely, did commonlye ride with. 500.Iohn the kings brother rebelled horſſes, and gréeued Abbayes by meane of his lodging wyth them: he withſtoode Iohn the Kings brother, who ſayde, hée wiſt not if his brother Richard were aliue or not. To whom the Biſhop aunſwered, if King Richard be yet liuing, it were vntrueth to take from him the Crowne. If he be deade, Arthure the elder brothers ſonne, muſte enioye the ſame.
            King Richarde exchaunged Cipres, wyth Guy of Leſingham,
               1192 Ex anniles 
                     •
                  lie
                     •
                  
                  ▪ Vita G
                     ••
                  ng
                     •
                   c
                     •••
                  . for the Kingdome of Ieruſalem: wherefore the King of Englande a long time after was called King of Ieruſalem.
            
            
               The Biſhoppe of Ely legate to the Pope, Chauncellour
                  Roge
                        •
                      Houed. The Bishoppe put to his shifts▪ 
                  Geruaſius Doro.
                of Englande, and gouernour of the Realme, was forced to take the Tower of London for hys refuge, wherein Earle Iohn beſieged, him, at lengthe the Biſhoppe getting licence to depart went to Douer, but he was there forced to ſweare that he woulde not departe the Realme: yet béeing in a maruellous diſquietneſſe of minde, he putte off hys mannes apparell, & put on womans, meanyng ſo to eſcape: whyleſt hée goeth vppe and downe on the ſhore, bearing a webbe of clothe on hys arme as hée woulde ſell it, ſtyll wayting for a ſhippe, a ſorte of women pulled off his kerchiefe, and threwe him to the grounde, and after beate hym, and drewe hym along the ſandes, wherevpon great crye beyng made, the Burgeſies ranne, and with muche a doe, gotte hym from among them, and kepte hym ſtrayghtlye tyll he hadde obtayned licence to departe the Realme.Anno reg. 4
            
            Then the Archebiſhoppe of Rhoane, wyth the conſente of Earle Iohn, toke vpon him the rule of the lande as Uice
                  •
                Chauncellour.
            
               Sherifes.
               Nicholas Duke.
               Peter Newlay.
            
            
               Maior.
               Henrie Fitz Alwyne.
            
            King Richarde hauing knowledge that Phillip of1193 
               Fraunce inuaded Normandie, and that Iohn his brother hadde made himſelfe King of Englande, made peace with the Saladine for thrée yeares, and wyth a ſmall companye retourning homewarde, was taken priſoner by Leopolde Duke of Austria, who broughte hym to Henrie
               
                  Anno reg. 5. King Richarde taken priſon. the Emperour, and there kepte hym in priſon a yeare and fiue monthes. He was enuyed for hys valiauncie, in that he hadde ſhewed more proofe of hys prowes, than all the other had.
            
               Wolfangus Lazius, in hys booke de Romano Imperio, affirmeth that Leopolde of Austria, when he hadde taken king

               Richard, for ſome iniurie done to the houſe of Austria, héeKing Richard of England builded the vvals of Vienna compelled hym to builde the walles aboute Vienna, the chiefeſt Cittie of Austria, the whyche Wals wythin oure memorie defended all Germanie from the inuaſion of the Turke.
            
            The rumor being ſpredde that King Richarde was takenEarle Iohn rebelled againſt King Richard. as yée haue hearde, forth wyth the Frenche King and Erle Iohn made a greate conſpiracie togyther, meaning to take the Kingdome of Englande, herevppon a greate number of Flemmings were aſſembled at Witſa
                     ••
                  e, and an innumerable multitude of Flemmings readye to come ouer, but theyr meſſengers being taken, their treaſon was bewrayed.
            
               Elianor the olde Quéene cauſed the Sea coaſtes to bée watched ouer againſt Flaunders, but notwithſtanding Erle Iohn came ſecréetely into Englande, to rayſe the Walchmen and Scottes, but the King of Scottes woulde not ayde hym. The Walchmen in the partes about Kingstone and Windſore toke prayes abrode.
            The Frenche King entred Normandie, founde ſmall reſiſtaunce, wanne diuerſe Townes, Giſors was deliuered to him, then he haſted towards Roane, & beſieged it, but through the great induſtrie of Robert Earle of Leicester, he profited little there, and ſo returned into Fraunce▪
                Earle Iohn perceiuing his treaſon was diſcouered, fortifyed hys Caſtels and paſſed ouer into Fraunce, and ioyned with the Frenche King.
            
               Sherifes.
               Roger Duke.
               Richard Fitz Alwyne.
            
            
               Maior.
               Henrie Fitz Alwyne.
            
            King Richard ſent for his mother and the Archebiſhop of Rhoane to come vnto hym into Almayne, being nowe in greate hope to bée deliuered, and in the meane tyme the Archbiſhoppe of 
                  〈◊〉
                was made regent of England.
            
            
               The Kings friendes entreating for his deliueraunce, hisThe Kings raunſome. Geruaſius Doro. Radul. Cogſhal.
                ranſome was ſet at 100000. pound, to wit to the Emperour 100000. markes, to the Empreſſe 30000. markes: and to y• Duke of Austrich 20000. markes: wherevpon commaundemēt was directed from the kings Iuſtices, that al Biſhops, Prelates, Earles, Barons, Abbots, and Priors, ſhould bring in the fourth parte of theyr reuenewes towardes the kings raunſome, and beſids this, the cleargie brought in their golden and ſiluer chalices, and fléeced their ſhrines, all whiche was coyned into money.
            The order of the Cestercencies, did giue theyr wool for oneMathew Paris. Roger Houeden. yeare &c. all the money gathered for the Kings raunſome, to remaine in the cuſtodie of Hubert Archbiſhoppe of Canturburie, Richarde
                Biſhoppe of London, William
                Earle of Arundel, Hameline
                Earle of Warren, and the Maior of London.
            
            The King was reſtored to libertie, the moſt parte of hys raunſome being paide, and pledges left for the reſidue. In the mean time letters were intercepted of Erle Iohn which he had ſent into Englād touching treaſon, one Adam of Saint Edmund Cleark, being ſent by Erle Iohn, to prouide that his Caſtel might be fortified againſt King Richard, came to London, and dyned with Hubert Archbiſhoppe of Canturburie, where he bragged of Earle Iohns proſperitie, and familiaritieRecard
                     ••
                   ca
                     ••••
                  . with the French king, for y• which being ſuſpected, he was after dinner apprehēded by the Maior of Londō, who toke frō him his letters, and deliuered them to the Archbiſhoppe of Canturburie, who on the next morrow called a Coūſel of the Earles and Barons, and ſhewed them the letters, wherevpon they al c
                  •
               nſented that Erle Iohn ſhould be diſpoſſeſſed of all his lande in England and that his Caſtels ſhould be beſieged. The ſame day the ſame Archbiſhop and Biſhoppes excommunicated Earle Iohn and all his fauourers, whiche troubled the peace of the kingdome. And forth with the Archbiſhop1194 beſieged the Caſtel of Marleborough, which belonged to Earle Iohn, and toke it. After this he beſieged Notingham Caſtell.
            
               The King taking ſhip at Antwerpe▪
                landed a
                  •
                
               Sandwich, on
                  God
                        •••
                     
                     ▪ v
                        ••••
                     alfe Gerua. Doro. K. Richard the ſecond time Crovvned. Anno reg. 6. the. 12. of March, ſhortly after he beſieged the Caſtell of Notingham, and wan it, and after that the Caſtel of Tikehil▪
                and then rode to Winchester, wher he was again ſolemnly crowned on the xvij. of April. After this he called into his hands, all ſuch thing as hée had eyther giuen or ſold by patentes or otherwiſe, by whiche meanes he got a great ſum of money, and ſayled into Normandie the xij. of Maye, where hauing a great army, he tooke Taileburge and the countie of Angoleſme. Shortly after a peace was taken betwéene the two kings of England and Fraunce, the xiij. of June, and alſo by meanes of Elianor the old Quéene, Earle Iohn was reconciled to hys brother. King Richard gaue to him the Erledomes of Morton, Cornewal, Dorſet, Somerſet, Notingham▪ Darby, & Lancastre: y• Caſtels of Marleborough, & Luthegarſhal, with the forreſts andGual. Couen. appurtinaunces: the honor of Wallingford, Tikehil and Eye: the Earledome of Gloucester with the Earles daughter Iſabel▪
                though ſhe were a kin to him: but he kept certaine Caſtelles belonging to the ſaid Earld
                  •
               mes in his owne handes: he remoued from him hys Concubines, and toke to him his own wife, which he had not knowen of a long time before.
            
               Sherifes.
               William Fitz Iſable.
               William Fitz Arnolde.
            
            
               Maior.
               Henrie Fitz Alwyne.
            
            King Richard ſent meſſengers to the Pope, complayning vpon the Duke of Austrich, for miſuſing of him and his, as they came by diſtreſſe of weather throughe his Countrey: wherevpon the Pope excommunicated the Duke, and enioyed him to releaſe the 
                  ••
               uenaunts that he conſtrayned the King to make, and to ſende home the pledges: but the Duke refuſed this order contempning the Popes authoritie, who ſhortly after dyed, and was kept vnburied til his ſon had releaſed the Engliſh pledges that lay in hoſtage for the mony behinde of K. Richards ca
                  •
               nſome, and further ſware to ſtād to the iudgement of the Church for that offence of his father.
            
               
               Hugh Biſhoppe of Lincolne gaue to the king a thouſandeAnno reg. 7. markes for his mantell of Sables, which his predeceſſours were wont yearely to haue giuen them by the King.
            
               Sherifes.
               Robert Beaſaunt.
               Ioke de Ioſue.
            
            
               Maior.
               Henrie Fitz Alwyne.
            
            
               William Fitz Oſbert a Citizen of London, poore in degrée,VV. vvith the 
                     •
                  earde. Roger Houed. Wil. 
                        •
                     aruus. Iohn Taxtor. Gerua. Doro. Canturb. recordes. Gual. Couent.
                euill fauoured of ſhape, but yet verye eloquent, moued the common people to ſéeke libertie and fréedome, and not to bée ſubiect to the rich and mightie, by which meanes he drewe to him many great companies, and with all his power defended the poore mens cauſe againſt the riche. 52000. Londonors he allured to him to be at his deuotion and commandemēt. The king being warned of this tumult, cōmanded him to ceaſe from thoſe attemptes, but the people ſtill followed him, as they before had done: he made to them orations, taking for his theame this ſentence▪ 
               Haurietis aquas in gau
                     •
                  io de fontibus ſaluatoris, whiche is to ſay Ye ſhal draw in ioy, waters forth of the wels of your ſauiour. And to this he added: I am (ſayd he) ye ſauiour of poore men, yée be poore, & haue aſſayed long ye hard hands of rich mē: Now draw yée holſome water forth of my Wels, & that we ioy, for the time of your viſitatiō is come. This Williā
                was cōmaunded to appeare before the kings counſell to aunſweare for himſelfe in ſuche cauſes as ſhoulde be layde againſt him, where he appeared, but wyth1196 ſuch a multitude of people, that the Lordes were afrayde, and remitted him with pleaſaunte wordes for the time, appointing ſome priuliy when he was alone to apprehende him. He ſooke the ſtéeple of Bow Church in Chope, and fortified it with munition and victuals: The Archbiſhop of Canturburie then being at Londō
                with other Iuſtices ſent to him, and willed him to come forth of the Church & he ſhould haue his life ſaued: but he refuſed to come forth, wherfore y• Archebiſhop talking with the Citizens of London, called togither a great number of armed area leaſt any ſtur ſhould be made.

The Saterdaye therefore being the Paſſion ſondaye euen, the ſtéeple and Church of Bowe were aſſaulted, and William with his complices taken, but not without bloudſhed, for hée was forced by fire and ſmoke to for ſake the Churche: he was brought to the Archbiſhop in the Towre, where he was by ye Iudges condemned, and by the héeles drawn from thence to a place called the Elmes, and ther hāged with nine of his fellowes.
            This counterfaite friende to the poore, who named hymſelfeA falſe accuſer of his elder brother in the ende vvas hanged. to be the ſauiour, perſwading them againſt the riche, was a man of an euil life, a murderer, who ſlew one manne with his owne handes: a fornicatour, who poluted Bowe church with his Concubine: and amongſt other his deteſtable facts, one that hadde falſely accuſed his elder brother of treaſon whyche elder brother hadde in hys youtheAnno reg. 8. broughte him vppe in learning, and done manye things for his preferment. Yet after the death of this wicked malefactor, the ſimple people honoured him as a martyre, in ſo much that they ſtale awaye the gibbet whereon he was hanged, and pared away the Earth, that was be-bled with hys bloude, and kepte the ſame as holye reliques to heale ſicke men.
            King Richard graunted licence vnto Phillip Biſhoppe of Durham, to coyne mony in his Citie of Durham, which libertieRoger Houeden. none of his prediceſſours had enioyed of long tyme before.
            
               Sherifes.
               Gerard de Anteloch.
               Robert Durant.
            
            
               Maior.
               Henrie Fitz Alwyne.
            
            The Walchmen brake forth and did muche hurt by ſpoyling1197 of the Marches. The Archbiſhop of Canturburie callyng togither an army haſted thyther, beſieged the Caſtel of Polie, and toke it, and chaſed the enimies, eſtabliſhed peace, and returned.
            Riſe the Walch king departed this life.
            
               King Richard and the Earle of Flaunders confedered togither.Anno reg. 9. The French King entring vnwarely into Flaunders, was intercepted and taken by the Earle of Flaunders, but giuing pledges vpon couenaunt to make peace, he was ſuffered to depart. The viij. day of September they met at Liſte, where by mediation of the Archbiſhop of Canturburie, they toke a truce. The Archbiſhop of Roane returned from Rome, where he had complayned on King Richard, for taking from him a plot of ground, whereon he builded a ſtrong Caſtell, but at the requeſt of the Archbiſhop of Canturburie, the Kyng gaue him in recompence the towne of Deep.
            
            
               Sherifes.
               Roger Blunt.
               Nicholas Ducket.
            
            
               Maior.
               Henrie Fitz Alwyne.
            
            The Walchmen on the Marches toke booties, & did much1198 Geruaſius. hurt, but Hubert the Archbiſhop of Canturburie being Lorde thiefe Iuſtice, Lieuetenaunt, or Warden of England, found meanes to reſiſt them, ſo that they being fought with, were ouerthrowen, and fiue thouſand of them ſlaine. The Archebiſhop hauing got this victorie returneth to London, where calling togither a great number of the Nobles of the lande, he reſigned his office of being head ruler, in whoſe place theAnno reg. 10 Lord Geffrey Fitz Peter ſuccéeded in Auguſt.
            King Richard toke of euery Carucata, plough land, or hid of land through England fiue ſhillings. The French king was intercepted by the army of King Richard, ſo that with much adoe, he eſcaped into Cipres, his army was diſperſed, and almoſt an hundred Knightes taken, beſide other common ſoldiours, without number. The Charters which the king hadMathew Paris. before made with his new ſeale were chaunged.
            
               Sherifes.
               Conſtantine Fitz Arnolde.
               Robert de Beaw.
            
            
               Maior.
               Henrie Fitz Alwyne.
            
            
               Hubert Archebiſhop of Canturbnrie, through the procurement

of the Monks of Canturburie and by the cōmandement of the Pope, brake downe euen with the ground the ChapelColledge at Lambeth. or Colledge at Lambeth which his predeceſſors had founded, and he had finiſhed in the honor of Thomas Archbiſhoppe of Canturburie.
            
            King Richard tourned his armye againſt the Barons of119
                     •
                   K. Richaad vvō
                  ded to death. Paulus Aemeleus Gualterus Couen. Ralph Cogſhal.
                
               Poictow that rebelled againſt him, he ſet their Cities & towns on fire, ſpoyled their Countrey, & flew many of his aduerſaries cruelly, at the laſte came to the Dukedome of Aquitaine and beſieged the Caſtel of Chalne, and brought it to that, that they within offered to yéeld vpon conditions, but he woulde not ſo receiue them, but would haue them by force: whervpvn a certain yong man named Bertram de Gordon, ſtanding on ye Caſtel wall, leuelled a quarell out of a croſſe bowe and ſmote him with a venomed Darte, which ſtripe the king little regarded, but inuading the caſtel wan it, and put the ſoldiours in priſon. Of this wounde aforeſayde, he dyed the ſixth day of Aprill, in the yeare of our Lord. 1199. When he had raigned ix. yeres and ix. monthes, and was buried at Fonteuerard at his fathers féete, whom he confeſſed he had betrayed, his heart was buried at Roane, and his bowels at the foreſayde Chalne.
            
         
         
            
            ¶ King John.
            
            
            
               
                  IOHN brother to Richard aforenamed, beganne his raigne ouer the RealmeAnno reg. 1 of Englande the vj. daye of April, in the yeare of our Lord 1199. Of perſon he was indifferent, but of melancholie and angrie complexion. He being now in Normandie, ſailed ouer into England, & was crowned at Westminster on y• Aſcention daye. And at MidſomerRalphe Cogſhall. he returned again into Normandie with a great army, which al the Sommer ſeaſon contending againſt y• French, proued the worthyneſſe of ye enimies to be ſufficient ynough:Conſuetud de Lō. for Phillip king of Fraunce, in the quarrell of Arthur the ſon of Geffrey, Iohns eldeſt Brother, duke of Brytaine, made war vppon King Iohn in Normandie, and toke from him diuerſe Caſtels and townes.
            King Iohn granted the Shirifewike of London and Midleſex
               Sherife vvike of London let to ferme. to the Citizens thereof for. 300 pound yerely to be paid,

for that of auntient time it had bene ſo accuſtomed to be fermed, as king Henrie the firſt before he had graunted to the ſame Citizens, for. 300. pounde yearely. Alſo he gaue them full aucthoritie to choſe and depriue their Sherifes at theyr pleaſure.
            
               Sherifes.
               Arnolde Fitz Arnolde.
               Richard Fitz Barthelmew.
            
            
               Maior.
               Henrie Fitz Alwyne.
            
            King Iohn made a lawe, that no tunne of Wine of Poiters,
               1200 Price of vvines. Gual. Couen.
                ſhould be ſolde dearer than twentie ſhillings: of Anioye foure and twentie ſhillings: and of French wine fiue & twentie ſhillings, vnleſſe the ſame French wine were ſo good, that ſome woulde giue for it, ſixe and twentie ſhillings eyghte pence, but not aboue. A ſexter of wine of Poiters, no dearer than twelue pence, nor white wine aboue ſixe pence.
            King Iohn hauing made peace beyonde the ſea he required
                  Annoreg. 2 Taske. aide of his Realme of xxx. M. markes, wherefore an edict was made, that euery plow land ſhould pay thrée ſhillings, which troubled the lande very ſore, conſidering the eſcuage that went afore for euery Knights fée two markes, whiche before neuer payde aboue twentie ſhilling.
            The king being deuorced from his wife Iſabel, the EarleKing Iohn deuorſed. Mathew Paris. Ypodigma. Radul. Cogſhal.
                of Glocesters daughter, he paſſed ouer the ſea, paide thirtie M. markes to the French King, vanquiſhed his enimies, and returned into Englande with Iſabel his wife, daughter to the Earle of Angoleſme, and crowned hir Quéene at Westminster, on the eight of October.
            
               Sherifes.
               Roger Dorſet, Iames Bartelmew.
            
            
               Maior.
               Henrie Fitz Alwyne.
            
            King Iohn went to Lincolne, where he met with William
               King of Scottes did homage. King of Scottes, Rotland Lorde of Galloway, and many other noble men, who did to him homage on the one and twētith day of Nouember.
            
               A noble man of Aquitaine named Hugh Brune, rebelling1201 Hugh Brune rebelled. againſt King Iohn, inuaded diuers parts of the prouince, bicauſe the King had maried the daughter of the Earle of Angoleſme, whom the ſayd Brune had affied, and had in his cuſtodie, wherefore the paſſed ouer, and reſtrained the rebels from their attemptes.
            The 25. of June there aroſe a cruell Tempeſt of thunder,
                  Ypodigma. Annoreg. 3. Tempeſtes. lightning and hayle, with a vehemente raine, that deſtroyed corne, cattell, menne, and houſes, by brenning them &c.
            The 10. of July, another Tempeſt much like to the former hapned, ſo that the Medowes could not be mowed, and the hay that was downe was carried away by the outragious courſe of waters that ouerflowed the grounde, greate numbers of fiſhes through the corruption of the waters dyed, many bridges borne downe, corne and hay caried away, & many men drowned: ſo that al men thought a new deluge had bene come.
            
               Sherifes.
               Walter Fitz Alis.
               Simon de Adermanbury.
            
            
               Maior.
               Henrie Fitz Alwyne.
            
            King Iohn ſharplye warred vppon the Earle of March,
               1202 Radulphu
                     •
                   Cog. 
               Hugh Brune, and the Earle of Eue hys brother, who béeing not able to reſiſt, they complayned to Phillip king of France, as to their ſoueraigne and chiefe Lorde, who ſent ofttimes to King Iohn, mouing him to ceaſe from vexing them, but that woulde not ſerue, wherefore he was ſommoned by the
                  ▪ 
                  Annoreg. 4. Nobles of Fraunce as Duke or Earle of Aquitaine and Anioy, to come vnto the Courte of the Frenche King, and to ſtande to the iudgement of hys Péeres, all which Kyng Iohn denyed,K Iohn ſōmoned to the French Kings Court. wherevpon the ſame Courte adiudged hym to be depriued of all his landes, which he or his predeceſſours helde of the king of Fraunce &c.
            King Phillip forth with aſſembled an armye, and inuaded the Caſtel of Buteuant in Normandie, which King Richard
               
had buylded, he raſed it to the ground. He tooke the land of Hugh Gorney, and all the Caſtels there about. He tooke the Caſtell of Albomarle, with the County of Eue, and all the land to Arches, none reſiſting him. Alſo Arthure Earle of Britayne being made Knight by the French King, whoſeArthure Earle of Britayne taken. yonger daughter he had fianced, he being but ſixtéene yeres olde, wente to Hugh Brune, and Geffrey of Lucingnam, and with 250. Knightes, beſéeged the Caſtell of Mirable, in which Quéene Eleanor his Aunte was encloſed: but King Iohn came with a power, and deliuered his mother from daunger. He tooke there his Nephew Arthure, William de Brawſa, Geffrey de Lucingham, Hugh Brune, Andrew Caueny, Saluaricus de Mauleon, and diuers others.
            Great thunder and lightning, with hayle as bigge as Hennes egges &c.
            
               Sherifes.
               Normand Brundell.
               Iohn de Ely.
            
            
               Maior.
               Henry Fitz Alwyne.
            
            The waters encreaſed, and did much hurt in Englande.
               1023 Mathew Paris. Annoreg. 5. Earle of Britaine murthered Radul. Cogſhal.
                
               Arthure Earle of Britaine, from Falaiſe was broughte to Roane, and put in the Tower vnder the cuſtody of Robert de Veypont, where ſhortly after he was diſpatched of his life, ſome ſay by the hands of his Uncle Iohn.
            The King of France inuaded the Caſtels of Normandy, tooke Liſle, Dandely, with the Caſtell, and the Vale de Ruell, in the whiche were Robert Fitz Water, Sayer de Quincy, and many other. He toke the ſtrong Caſtell vpon Seyne, builded by King Richard, which had bin valiantly kept by the Conneſtable of Chester.
            
            
               Sherifes.
               Walter Browne.
               William Chamberlayne.
            
            
               Maior.
               Henry Fitz Alwyne.
            
            King Iohn doubting treaſon in his owne men, in December retourned into Englande, where he gathered greate

aydes of money.
            
               Elianor, daughter to the Earle of Poyters, that had bin1204 Ralph Cogſhal. Anno reg. 6. wife to Lewes King of France, and after to King Henry the ſeconde of Englande departed this life, and was buryed in Westminster.
            
            King Iohn ſente Embaſſadoures to treate a peace with the King of France, but he, bycauſe the worlde wente with him, woulde not agrée in any wiſe, except Arthure mighte be deliuered to him aliue, or if he were dead, he woulde haue his Siſter in mariage with all the lands on that ſide the Seas.
            Shortly after he tooke Falaiſe, Caen, and ſo forth all the Countrey to Barflot, Charburgh, and Dunfront, Roane, Vernoll, and Arches: and ſo proude Normandy, Angiow, Briteyne, Mayne, Poitow, and Thoraigne, were within a ſhort time deliuered to King Phillip.
            
            King Iohn marryed Iane hys Baſtarde Daughter to Lewlin Prince of Wales, and gaue with hir the Caſtell and Lordſhippe of Elingſmore, in the Marches of South-Wales.
            
            
               Robert Fitz Parnell Earle of Leycester, dyed without iſſue,Liber Bernewell. and then Simon de Mountford, and Sayer de Quincy deuided the Earledome betwixt them, bycauſe that Sayer de Quincy, and the Father of Simon Mountford had marryed the ſiſters of the ſayd Robert.
            
            
               Sherifes.
               Thomas Hauerell.
               Hamond Bronde.
            
            
               Maior.
               Henry Fitz Alwyne.
            
            The fourtenth day of January beganne a Froſt, whiche continued till the two and twentith day of Marche, ſoGreat Froſt. 1205 that the grounde coulde not bée tilled, whereof it came to paſſe that in Sommer folowing, a quarter of Wheate was ſolde for a Marke of Siluer in many places of Englande,
               Dearth of corne whiche for the more parte in the dayes of King Henry the ſeconde, was ſolde for twelue pence: a Quarter of Beanes or Peaſe for halfe a Marke: a Quarter of Otes for forty pence, that were wont to be ſolde for foure pence. Alſo, thenno A reg. 7.
               
money was ſo ſore clipped, that there was no remedie, but to haue it renued.
            King Iohn gathered greate armyes of menne to haue gone ouer the Seas, but béeing ſayled onwarde of his voyage, hée returned againe, and tooke eſcuage, two markes and a halfe of euery Knightes fée through Englande, pretending a quarrell agaynſte hys Barons, bycauſe theyIohn Taxtor. would not follow hym into the partes beyond the Seas.
            
               Sherifes.
               Iohn Walgraue.
               Richard Wincheſter.
            
            
               Maior.
               Henry Fitz Alwyne.
            
            The Earle of Saliſburie, the Kings brother, Geffrey the Kings ſonne begot on a Concubine, and many other1206 Ralph Cogſhall. Anno reg. 8. Knightes, were gone ouer before, but all in vayne: the charges was ineſtimable that had bin layde out aboute the preparation made for this iourney.
            Greate Thunders and Lightnings, bruſting out of theGreat Thunders Lightnings and hayle. Cloudes were ſéene, ſo that men thought the day of Dome had bin come, many men and women were deſtroyed, beſide Cattell, and houſes that were ouerthrowne, and burned. The Corne in the fieldes was beaten downe with hayleſtones as bigge as Gooſe egges.
            Aboute Maydestone in Kente, a certayne Monſter wasA ſtrange Monſter. founde, ſtricken with the Lightning, whiche Monſter had an head like an Aſſe, a belly lyke a man, and all other partes farre diſcordante from any one liuing thing. This deade body no man might vnneath come néere vnto for ſtenche.
            
               Sherifes.
               Iohn Holyland.
               Edmond Fitz Garrard.
            
            
               Maior.
               Henry Fitz Alwyne.
            
            King Iohn tooke the thirtenth parte of all mouable goodes, both of lay and religious through England, at which all men murmured.
            The ſeauen and twentith day of January a great winde1207 ouerthrew many houſes and trées, and a great Snow deſtroyed many beaſtes.
            The Monkes of Canturbury, by the aduiſe of the Pope,

elected Stephen Langton to be their Archbiſhop, and thenAnno reg. 9. Mathew Paris. Pope Innocent intending to obteyne the fauour of King Iohn towardes this election, bycauſe he knewe that he did make diligent ſearch for precious ſtones, ſent him an eloquent Epiſtle, with diuers precious iewels, which were of King Iohn well accepted: and Stephen Langton was conſecrate at Rome. Then the Pope ſent Letters to King Iohn, humbly exhorting him to receyue the ſayd Stephen Archbiſhop of Canturburie, being therevnto canonically elected, the rather bycauſe he was an Engliſhman borne, and a Doctour of Diuinitie &c. but King Iohn being greatly offended with the promoting of the ſayde Stephen, ſent men in armour to expell the Monkes of Canturburie, to the number of lxiiij. out of the Realme, and condemned them of Treaſon, the Monkes went into Flanders, and their goods, and landes of their Churche was confiſcate. Alſo King Iohn ſent threatning letters to the Pope, whervnto the Pope made a large anſwere.
            Quéene Iſabell was deliuered of hir firſt ſonne at Winchester, and named him Henry.
            
            
               Sherifes.
               Roger Wincher.
               Edmond Hardell.
            
            
               Maior.
               Henry Fitz Alwyne.
            
            The xxiij. of March, William Biſhop of London, Euſtachius
                Biſhop of Ely, and Malgor Biſhop of Winchester by the1208 England interdicted. Nicholas Triuet. Mathew Paris. Ralphe Cogſhall.
                Popes commandement executed the interdiction vpon the whole Realme, and they ceaſed through all England from miniſtring of Eccleſiaſticall Sacraments, ſauing to them that were in perill of death, and Baptiſme to Children. All the bodyes of them that dyed, were buryed like Dogges in ditches and corners. Many Biſhops, eſpecially they that pronounced the interdiction, fledde the Realme. The KingAnno reg. 10 ſet all the Biſhoprickes and Abbeys in the Realme into the cuſtody of lay men, and commanded all Eccleſiaſticall reuenues to be confiſcated. Alſo doubting leaſt the Pope

ſhould excommunicate him by name, or diſcharge the Nobles of England of their allegiance towards him, he laid holde vpon them, ſpecially ſuch as he had in ſuſpition, and tooke pledges of them.
            This yeare was graunted to the Citizens of London byMaior of London yearely choſen. the Kings letters patents, that they ſhoulde yearely chooſe to them a Maior.
            
               Sherifes.
               Peter Duke.
               Thomas Neale, the 28. of Septem.
            
            
               Maior.
               Henry Fitz Alwyne the 28. of October.
            
            
               Richard the Kings ſecond ſonne by Iſabell his wife was1209 Wil. Packington. borne.
            By the procurement of Stephen Langton Archbiſhop of Canturburie, licence was graunted to the conuentual Churches in Englande to celebrate diuine ſeruice once euery wéeke, but the white Monkes had not this priuiledge, bycauſe they had diſobeyed the interdiction.
            The Eſchequer was remoued frō 
               Westminster to Northhampton
               Eſchequer at Northhampton. by the Kings commandement. He alſo gathered a great armie, and wente towarde Scotland as farre as the Caſtell of Norham, where the King of Scottes came to him, and treated a peace, for the which he gaue 11000. Markes of Siluer, and deliuered his two daughters for a pledge.
            By the Kings commandement, through out all the Foreſtes of England, all the ditches were made playne ground,
                  Cro. D
                        ••
                     . Hedges breute. Homage of freeholders. VVelchmen did homage. and the hedges brent. After this, he tooke homage of all fréeholders, and ſware all men to his allegiance from twelue yeares old vpward. The Welchmen came to Woodstocke and did homage.
            A Clarke of Oxford by chance killed a woman, and then
                  Anno reg. 11 Oxford forſaken. ranne away, wherefore his thrée chamber fellowes whiche knew nothing of the matter, were hanged at the Townes end▪ which cauſed thrée thouſand Mayſters and Schollers to forſake the Uniuerſitie of Oxford, ſo that there taryed not one.
            
               A prodigeous ſight was ſéene one morning in the beginningRadulphus Cog. of Lent, the Clowdes ſéemed to fighte with the Sunne from the Sunne riſing till one of the clocke of that day.
            The Arches and ſtone bridge ouer the Thamis at London
               London bridge builded of ſtone Fx libro pontis 
                        •
                     ondinenſis. S. Mary Ouery was this yeare finiſhed by the worthie Merchants of London, Serle
                Mercer, William Alman, and Bennet Botewright. Mayſter Fowle a learned man, laſt Prior of Saint Mary Oueryes Church in his life time, reported, that at the firſt, being no Bridge at London, but a Ferie, the Feryer and his wife deceaſing, lefte the ſame Ferie to their Daughter, a mayden named Mary, who with the goods lefte by hir Parents,1. Leyland. and the profites which came by the ſayd Ferie, builded a houſe of Siſters, which is the vppermoſt end of Saint Maryes Church aboue the Quier, where ſhe lyeth buryed, vnto the which houſe ſhe gaue the ouerſight and profite of the ſame Ferie: but afterwarde the ſame houſe of Siſters was conuerted vnto a Colledge of Prieſtes, who builded the Bridge of Timber, and from time to time kepte the ſame in reparations: but conſidering the great charges in repayring, laſtly by the great ayd of the Citizens of London, & others, they builded ye ſame of ſtone. King Iohn gaue certayne vacant places in London to build on, for building and reparation of London Bridge. A Maſon being Mayſter of the Bridge houſe, builded from the foundation the Chappell on London Bridge, of his owne proper expences. Peter le Ioſue, William Blund, the 28. of September.Sherifes. Maior. Henry Fitz Alwyne, the 28. of October.
            
            The King commaunded all the Iewes both men and womenIevves ranſomed. to be impriſoned, and gréeuouſly puniſhed, bycauſe he would haue all their money, ſome of them gaue all they had, and promiſed more, to the ende they mighte eſcape ſo1210 many kindes of torments: amongſt whome, there was one which being tormented many wayes, would not raunſome himſelfe, till the King had cauſed euery day one of his great téeth to be pulled out by the ſpace of ſeauen dayes,

and then he gaue the King tenne thouſand Markes of Siluer, to the ende they ſhould pull out no more.
            In the moneth of June, the King leadeth an Armie intoAnno reg. 12 
               Ireland, expulſeth Hugh Lacy, and brought all Ireland vnder his ſubiection. He cauſed the Lawes of England to bée executed there, and money to be coyned according to the waight of Engliſhe money, and made there both halfepence,A mint in Ireland. and farthings: he returneth with great triumph in the moneth of September, and then rayſed a great TaxeTaxe. Nic. Triuet.
                vpon all the religious in England, whome he cauſed to pay ſuche a raunſome, and to ſpoyle theyr Churches, that the ſumme came to an hundred thouſande pounde, beſides fortie thouſand poundes of the white Monkes.
            Another fight betwixt the Sunne and the Clowdes was ſéene.
            
               Matild a noble woman, wife to William de Brawſe, andIohn Beuer-Ral. Cog ſhall. his ſonne and heire William, periſhed miſerably with famine at Windſore. William
                hir huſband changing his apparell paſſed ouer the Sea at Shoram, and ſhortly after dyed at Paris.
            
            
               Adam Whetly, Stephen le Grace, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Henry Fitz Alwyne the 28. of October.
            
            The Biſhop of Londons Caſtell called Stortford, is ouerthrowne,Stortford Caſtel 1211 Army into VVales. Mathew Paris.
                and the Kings houſe builded at Writle.
            
            The King went into Wales agaynſt Lewlin his ſonne in lawe, that had maryed his baſtard daughter, with a greate force, euen to Snowdon, and ſubdued all the Princes and nobles without any gaineſaying. He tooke xxviij. Pledges for their ſubiection, and returned. When he came at Northhampton, there met him meſſengers from the Pope, Pandolph,Legates from Rome. Anno reg. 13. and Durand, which came to make an vnitie betwixte the King and the Biſhop of Canturbury, with the Monckes which were baniſhed, but the King granting their returne, dented to make thē any amēds for their loſſe which they had ſuſteyned, or to reſtore their goodes which he had cōfiſcated, ſo that ye Embaſſadors returned without any end cōcluded:
            
               After this, the King tooke of euery Knight which wasA great Taxe. not with him in Wales, two Markes of ſiluer of euery ſhield.
            Pope Innocent abſolued all, both Princes and other, which pertayned to the Crowne of England, from their fide litie and ſubiection to King Iohn, and commanded them to eſchue his company.
            A heard of Harts comming forth of the Foreſt, lept allGual. Couent. into the Sea at the mouth of Seuerne.
            
            
               Sherifes.
               Iohn Fitz Peter.
               Iohn Garland, the 28. of Sep.
            
            
               Maior.
               Henry Fitz Alwyn the 28. of October.
            
            
               William King of Scotland being aged, was not able to
                  
                     ••
                  ber Bernewell. quiet the inner partes of his Realme, troubled with ſedition, wherefore he fledde to the King of England, and committed himſelfe, his Kingdome and only ſonne vnto his prouiſion, who making the yong man Knighte, wente into thoſe partes with an armie, and ſending forth his men into the inner partes of that Kingdome, he tooke Cuthred Mac William Captayne of the ſedition, and hung him on a paire of Gallowes, for he was of the old antient race of the Scottiſh Kings, who aſſiſted with the ayde of the Iriſh and Scottes, did exerciſe long enmitie againſt the moderne Kings of Scotland, as his Father Donald had done before him, ſometime ſecretely, ſometime openly: for the moderane Kings of Scotland confeſſe themſelues to be rather Frenchmen, as in ſtocke or lignage, ſo alſo in manners, language, and apparell, and hauing brought the Scottes vnto extreme ſeruitude, they admitte onely Frenchmen into familiaritie and ſeruice.
            The Welchmen tooke diuers Caſtels of the King of Englands,
               VVelchmen in
                  
                     •
                  aded England. 1212 cut off the heads of all the Souldioures, burned many Townes, and with a great pray returned.
            The King gathered a great armie, minding vtterly is deſtroy all the coaſtes of Wales, but when he came to Notingham, he cauſed the xxviij. pledges of the Welchmen to bePledges hanged.
               
hanged, and for feare leaſt his nobles ſhould rebell, he returned to London.
            
            An Hermite in Yorkeſhire, named Peter, propheſied openlyPeerce of Pomfre
                     •
                  
                of King Iohn, and ſayd that vpon the Aſcention day next comming, he ſhould be no King, but the Crowne ſhould be tranſpoſed to another: this Peter was apprehended, and put in priſon.
            The tenth of July at night, a maruellous and terrible
                  Anno reg. 14. London bridge perished vvith fire. Ex recordis Sāct
                        •
                      Mariae de Southwarke.
                chance happened, for the Citie of London vpon the South ſide of the Riuer of Thamis, with the Church of our Lady of the Chanons in Southwarke being on fire, and an excéeding great multitude of people paſſing the Bridge, eyther to extinguiſh and quench, or elſe to gaze, behold ſuddaynely the North part, by blowing of the South winde was alſo ſet on fire, and the people whiche were euen now paſſing the Bridge, perceyuing the ſame, would haue returned, butArbor ſucceſsic. Gualterus Couen. Wil▪ Packington. were ſtopped by fire, and it came to paſſe, that as they ſtayed, or protracted time, the other ende of the Bridge alſo, namely the South ende was fired, ſo that the people thronging themſelues betwixt the two fires, did nothing elſe exſpect or looke for than death: then came there to ayde them many Shippes and Ueſſels, into the which, the multitude ſo vndiſcretly preſſed, that the Shippes being drowned, they all periſhed, it was ſayde, through the fire and the Shipwracke, that there were deſtroyed aboute thrée thouſand perſons. William Packington writeth, that there were founde in parte or halfe brente thrée thouſande boydes, beſydes thoſe that were quite brente that coulde not bée founde.
            
               Randolph Eiland. Conſtantine Ioſue, the 28. of Septem.Sherifes. Maior. Henry Fitz Alwyne the 28. of October.
            
            King Iohn being now in extremitie, and minding to impute the faulte to them that would not appeaſe his furor aforetime, reprehended ſometimes one, and ſometimes anotherLiber Roffenſis. Gualter Couen. of his Nobilitie as Traytors, calling them iealous,

whoſe beddes (as he bragged) he had defiled, and deſ
                  •
               our
                  ••
                their daughters.
            The Chronicle of Dunmow ſayeth, this diſcord aroſe betwixteChr. of Dun. the King and his Barons, bycauſe of Mawde called the Faire, daughter to Robert Fitz Water, whome theMavvde the faire, daughter to Robert Fitz VValter. King 
                  •
               o
                  •••
               d, but hir father woulde not conſente, and there vpon enſued warre throughout England. The King ſpoyled eſpecially the Caſtell of Baynard 
               
                  •••
                
               London, and otherBaynards Caſtell throvvne dovvne. holdes and houſes of the Barons. Robert Fitz Walter, Roger Fitz Robert, and Richard Mount Fichet paſſed ouer into France, ſome alſo went into Wales, and ſome into Scotland,
               Robert Fitz VValter fledde into France. and did great domage to the King. Whiteſt Mawde the Faire remayned at Dunmow, there came a meſſenger vnto hir from King Iohn about his ſuite in Loue; but bycauſe ſhe would not agrée, the meſſenger poyſoned a boyled or po
                  •
               ched egge againſt ſhe was hungrie, whereof ſheMavvde the Faire poyſoned. dyed, and was buryed in the Quier at Dunmow.
            
            About thys tyme, the King of France waſted the King of Englandes landes beyonde the Seas, and the King of Englande
               1213 likewiſe waſted his: but at the length a truce was taken, and an a
                  •
               ne of the Sea being betwixte eyther hoſt, there was a Knight in the Engliſh hoſt that cryed to them of the other ſide, willing ſome one of their Knightes to iuſt a courſe or twayne: wherevpon without ſtay, Robert Fitz Walter made himſelfe ready, terried ouer, and gotte on hys Horſſe withoute any manne to helpe hym,Robert Fitz VValter his 
                     •
                  al
                     •
                  an
                     •
                  ie. and béeing readie agaynſte the face of his enimie, at the firſt courſe he ſtroke the other ſo harde with hys greate Speare, that Horſſe and Man fell to the grounde, and when hys Speare was broken, hée wente backe agayne to the King of France: by Gods tooth (quoth King Iohn) he were a King indéede that had ſuche a Knighte. Robertes friendes hearing that, knéeled downe, and ſayde, O King, hée is youre Knighte, it is Robert Fitz Walter: and theRobert Fitz VValter reſtored to the kings fauour▪
                nexte day he was ſente for, and was reſtored to the Kings fauoure, and by hys meanes peace was concluded, and

he receyued his liuings, and had leaue to repaire his Caſtels 
                  ••
               . Thrée the moſte for
                  〈…〉
                and valiaunte Knightes of Englande in thoſe dayes were Roberte Fitz Walter, Roberte Fitz Roger, and Richarde Mount Fichet.
            
            
               Pandolph the 
                  ••
               ga
                  ••
                
               
                  •
               ame to Douer, and admoniſhedMathew Par
                     •
                  s. Nic. Triuet. the King to reſtore Stephen Langton to his Sea of Caunturburie, and the Monkes vnto their Abbey: the King calling to minde the manyfolde daungers he was in▪ made promis by othe to be obediente to the Court of Rome. This was done the Monday before the Aſcention day
                  •
                Pandolph
                  
                     
                        •
                     al. Cogſhall. King Iohn reſigned the Crovvne. with the Nobles of the Realme came togyther at the houſe of the Templers by Douer, vpon the Aſcention euen, where the King, according as ſentence was giuen at Rome, did reſigne his Crowne, with the Realmes of England and Irelande into the Popes handes, whoſe Uicegerent was Pandolph aforeſayde; and confirmed hys gifte with a Charter, dated the xv. of May, in the viiij. yearePeter of Pomfret. Anno reg. 15 of his raigne. When the Aſcention day was paſt, he commanded the foreſayde Peter the Hermite to be fette out of the Caſtell of Corfe, to be bound to a Horſe tayle, drawne through the Stréetes to Warham, and there both he and his ſonne to be hanged.
            The ſeauententh of Auguſt, Stephen Langton ArchbiſhopStephen Langton returned. of Caunturburie, and all the other that were baniſhed, arriued at Douer, and wente to Winchester to the King, who méeting them in the way, fell flatte vpon the earth before their féete, and with teares beſéeched them to take pitie on hym, and of the Realme of Englande. The Archbiſhops and Biſhops likewiſe, with teares tooke him vp from the ground, and brought him vnto the do
                  •
               e
                  •
                of the Cathedrall Church, with the Pſalme of Miſe
                     •
                  ere abſoluedThe King ab
                     •
                  
                  ſolued. him: then the King tooke an othe to call in al wicked lawes, and to put in place the Lawes of King Edwards Deuine Seruice being ended, the King, the Archbiſhop, Biſhops, and Nobles dyned albat one Table.
            
               
               Richard Prior of Bermondſey, builded an houſe (againſte
                  Lib. Bermondſey. Saint Thomas Hoſpitall. the wall of the ſa
                  ••
                houſe of Bermondſey) called the Almorie or Hoſpitall of conuerts and children, in the honor of Saint Thomas.
            
            
               Gilo de Brawſe, the ſonne of William de Brawſe, receyued all his Fathers inheritance into his cuſtodie, togither with his Nephew, till the childe came to lawfull age.
            
               Henry Fitz Alwyne Fitz Leofſtam, Maior of London deceaſſed, who had continued Maior of London four and twentieHenry fitz Alvvin Maior of London xxiiij. yeares. Wil. Packington.
                yeares, ſince the firſt of King Richard the firſt, he was buryed in the Priorie of the holy Trinitie, néere vnto Aldgate.
            
            
               Martin Fitz Alis, Peter Bate, the 28. of September.
                     Sherifes. Maior. Lib. Bermond. A ditch about London. Chr. of Dunſtable.
                   Roger Fitz Alwyne, the 28. of October.
            
            The fiftenth of October, was begonne by the Londoners, the Ditche withoute the Walles of London, of two hundreth foote broade, cauſing no ſmall hinderance thereby to the Channons of Chriſtes Church néere vnto Aldgate, for that it paſſed through their ground.
            
               Geffrey Fitz Peter dyeth, chiefe Juſtice of Englande, andBishop chiefe Iuſtice. 1214 the Biſhop of Winchester in that office is placed, the Nobles of Englande murmuring, that a Stranger borne ſhoulde be made Ruler ouer them.
            Pope Innocent ſent his Letters to Nicholas Biſhop ofInterdiction releaſſed. Nic. Triuet.
                
               Tuſc
                     •
                  land his Legate, to releaſe the interdiction, whiche had continued ſixe yeares, thrée monethes, and fourtéene dayes.
            The ſeconde day of July, King Iohn ſayled towarde Brit
                     •
                  ne, intending to beſéege Naunts, in the whiche warres, he had the aide of Othe the Emperour, and of the Dukes of Lo
                     ••
                  ine, Brabant, and Holland, of Reignold Earle of Roloigne, and Ferrandis▪
                Earle of Flanders, ſo that there was a great fielde foughte, in whiche the Frenche King eſcaped narrowly, but béeing reſcued, hée tooke the foreſayde Earles, put Hugh de Bones to flighte, and droue the Emperoure out of the Fields, and then a truce

was taken betwixt King Iohn and the French King, for fiue yeares.
            The King returned from Poytow, and the Barons of theAnno reg. 16 Realme came to him at Saint Edmondſburie, requiring to haue the Charter of Henry the firſt confirmed, the which ifOlde Lavvc
                     •
                   required. he refuſed to do, they ſware by the high Alter they woulde make warre againſt him.
            Fiſhes of vnwonted ſhape were taken in England, for they were armed with helmets and ſhieldes, in outwarde ſhape they reſembled, and were like vnto armed Knightes, ſauing that they were farre greater in proportion.
            
               Salamon Baſing, Hugh Baſing the 28. of September.
                     Sherifes. Maior. Saint Edmonds bu
                        •
                     y brent. Iohn Taxtor. The Barons in armour. Searle Mercer, the 28. of October.
            
            Almoſt the whole Towne of Saint Edmondſburie was conſumed with fire.
            The King being lodged in the new Temple at London, there came to him the foreſayd noble men in warlike order, demaunding of him to confirme the liberties of King Edwards law and other: the King requiring reſpite till Eaſter, was fayne to put in ſureties the Archbiſhop of Caunturbury, the Biſhop of Ely, and other, to ſatiſfye all men in that behalfe, and then the noble men returned. The King in the Church of S. Paule at London, at the handes of William Biſhop1215 King Iohn croſſed to Ieruſalem. of London, tooke on him the ſigne of the Croſſe of the holy Land, by meane thereof to be in the better ſafegarde: the Earles of Chester and Darby did the like. In the Eaſter wéeke the noblemen in armour met at Stamford, and after at Barkley; whether came to them from the King, the ArchbiſhopAnno reg. 17 of Canturbury, William Marſhall,
                with other, to demaund of them what they would haue confirmed, and the Nobles deliuered to them a ſcedule, conteyning the olde lawes and cuſtomes▪ which except the King would graunt, they would take the Caſtels of his lands, & ſo compell him.
            The xvij. day of May being Sunday, the Barons came to London, and entred through Aldgate, in the ſeruice tyme, where they tooke ſuch as they knew fauoured the King, and

ſpoyled their goodes. They brake into the houſes of theIevves ſpoyled in London. Gualter C
                        •
                     uen.
                
               Iewes, and ſearched their coffers, to ſtuffe their owne purſes that had bin long emptie. After this, Robert Fitz Walter, and Geffrey de Mandeuill Earle of Eſſex, and of Gloceſter,
               VValles of Lō
                  don repaired. Ralph Cogſhal.
                chiefe leaders of the Armie, applyed all diligence to repaire the walles of the Citie, with the ſtones of the Iewes broken houſes. The Tower of London yet helde out, though there were few within to defend it. When it was noyſed that the Barons had London, all (except the Earles of Warren, Arundell, Chester, Penbroke, Ferrers, and Saliſburie, and the Barons, William Brewer, with other) wente to thoſe Barons that were agaynſte the King, who called themſelues the Armie of God, whereby ſuche a feare came on the King, that he durſt not péepe out of Windſore Caſtell: at length he appoynted to méete with the Barons in a Meddowe betwixte Stanes and Windſore,
               
                  Mathew Pari
                        •
                     . The King meeteth the Barons. whiche appoyntemente hée obſerued, and there graunted the liberties, withoute anye difficultie, the Charter whereof is dated, Giuen by oure hand in Runningmede, betwixt Stanes and Windſore, the xvj. of June, the xvij. of our raigne, vnto which, all the whole Realme was ſworne.
            Whiles the Barons returned home, the King béeing left almoſt alone, he ſente Pandolph the Legate with other to Rome, to the ende that by the Apoſtolicke authoritie, he mighte make fruſtrate the purpoſe of the Barons. Alſo he ſente Walter Biſhop of Winchester, and Iohn Biſhop of Norwich, with other, vnto the Realmes next adioyning, to procure him Souldioures, promiſing them lands,The Pope excommunicateth the Barons. and large poſſeſſions. By meanes of Pandolph, the Pope diſanulled the foreſayde Charter and liberties graunted, and alſo excommunicated the Barons. By the other meſſengers were procured a great number of men of warre,Rocheſter beſeeged. whiche landing at Douer, the King forthwith beſéeged Rochester, coneting to brenne the Bridge, that no ayde ſhould come to the beſéeged: but Robert Fitz Walter defended the

Bridge, and quenched the fire, neuertheleſſe after long aſſaulte the Caſtell was yéelded.
            As a greate number of Straungers were on the Seas, minding to haue landed at Douer, to haue aydedStrangers drovv
                     •
                  ed. Mathew Paris.
                the King againſte his Barons, through a ſuddayne Tempeſt they were all drowned, ſo that aboute the coaſt of the Sea, was caſt vp ſuche a multitude of men, women, and children, that the Aire was ſore infected with their putrified bodyes. It was ſayde that of fortie thouſande, there eſcaped not one aliue. The King had promiſed to this people, the Countreys of Norffolke, and Suffolke.
            
            
               Iohn Trauers, Andrew Newland, the 28. of September.Sherifes. Mator. Ralph Cogſhall. William Hardell, the 28. of October.
            
            King Iohn deuided his Armie, the one halfe whereof hée put vnder the leading of Sauarike de Maulion a Poictouin, Fulco
                a Norman, the Earle of Saliſburie his baſtard brother, Gerard de Sotingham a Fleming, and Walter Buca Brabander.
                He himſelfe went againſt the Northernmen. Sauarike beſéeged the Caſtell of Plaſhy, that belonged to Geffrey Maundeuill, the other gaue themſelues to waſte the Countrey about.
            On Chriſtmas day they ſpoyled the Abbey of Tiltey,
               Radul. Cogſhal. Liber Bernwel. and caryed away muche treaſure that there was layde vp in truſt by diuers of that Countrey. On New-yeares day they did the like at Cogſhall Abbey.
            From thence, they wente to Saint Edmondſburie, and ſo to the Ile of Ely, whiche Ile they beſéeged, bycauſe dyuersIle of Eely beſeeged. Knightes and Ladyes were fledde thither with their ſubſtance: and thoſe robbers entring the Iſle, ſpared neyther ſexe nor ſtate, but by tormentes compelled them to tell where their treaſure lay.
            About the Epiphany, Sayre de Quincy Earle of Winchester, and other, returned from beyonde the Seas, bringing with them one and fortie Shippes laden with Souldioures: and aboute the feaſt of the Purification

of our Lady they beſéeged Colchester Caſtell, but hearingColcheſter beſeeged. that the Barons that were at London made haſt to come and ſuccour that Caſtell, they went backe to Saint Edmondſburie.
            
            The King with his armie was long time on the Scottiſh Seas, and oft-times inuaded the Lands of his Barons in thoſe coaſtes, burning their Caſtels, and ſpoyling their goods, in whiche expedition he went ſo farre, that it was not well knowen what was become of him, in ſo much, that he was noyſed to be dead, and ſecretely buryed at Reding.
            
            
               Geffrey Mandeuill dyed at London of a wound receyued in Juſting: he was buryed in the Priorie of the Trinitie at London.
            
            The Pope excommunicated the Barons by their peculiarThe Barons excommunicate. names, but the Canons of S. Paule in London, and many other Eccleſiaſticall perſons, with the Barons that remayned at London, appealed againſt this ſentence, taking exceptions againſt it, as pronounced by falſe ſuggeſtion.
            The Barons ſent Sayre de Quincy and other, to Philip
               The Barons ſent for Lodovvike. King of France, earneſtly requeſting him to ſend his ſonne Lewes into this Realme, promiſing to make him King thereof, which the French King refuſed to do, till the Barons had ſente him 24. pledges of the beſt mens ſonnes in the Kingdome, and then he ſent them ayde. Gwalo the Legate1216 was ſent from the Pope into France, to forbid Lewes to go into Englande, but his perſuaſions nothing preuayled, wherefore he excommunicated them. Alſo the Abbot of Abbingdon renued the excommunication againſt the Barons, the Citizens of London, and the French, which came to their ayde. About Mid-lent the King beſéeged the Caſtell of Colcheſter, and after a few dayes it was deliuered to him by theColcheſter taken. 
               Frenchmen that kept it, with cōdition that they might depart frée, with all that belonged to them, and that the Engliſhmen ſhould be ſuffered to depart vpon reaſonable ranſome, notwithſtanding ye 
               Engliſhmen he put in ſtraight priſon. After the King had taken Hidingham Caſtell, belōging to Robert de Vere Earle of Oxford, he made haſt to beſéege Londō, but ye
               
               Londoners ſet open theyr gates, and were readie to méet with the King tenne miles of the Citie: the king vnderſtanding theyr boldneſſe and multitude, he withdrewe himſelfe, but Sauari
                     •
                   de Malione, being ſodainely ſet vpon by the Londoners, looſing many of his men, was ſore beaten and wounded almoſt to death.
            The Northren Lordes recouering their ſtrength, beſiegedYorke beſ
                     •
                  eged 
               Yorke, at length receiuing aboue a thouſand markes grā
               ted truce to the Citizens, till the Octaues of Pentecoſt.
            The Londoners alſo toke a lxv. ſhips of Pirates beſids innumerable other that were drowned, that had beſieged theAnno reg. 18 riuer of Thamis.
            
            In the meane time the king hauing knowledge y• 
               Lewes ment to come into England, he ſent ouer to the French King, y• Biſhop of Winchester, William Marſhal
                the elder, and other, to trie if they could perſwade the French king to ſtay hys ſon from that iourney, but they returned without audience. The King therefore marching along the ſea coaſt fortified his caſtels, and getting pledges of the fiue Ports, gathered a gret multitude of ſhippes of Yarmouth, Linne, Dunwich, and other hauens, fraught them with men of warre, and determined to encounter the Frenchmen by ſea, when they came to arriue in Englande, but by Tempeſt that aroſe from the North, thoſe ſhips were bruſed, drowned, or driuen into the South partsLevves arriued in England. of the ſea, Lewes hauing all his power readie at Cala
                     •
                  s, Graueling, and Whitſande, the Northeaſt winde comming aboute, he ſet forward toward England, and with ſome difficultie, bycauſe it was a ſide winde, he lāded at Stona, in the Ile of Thanet, the xix. day of May. King Iohn being then at Douer, bycauſe his ſouldiours were ſtraungers, durſt not go againſte Lewes, but fled towards Gilforde. Lewes
                went ſtraight to Cā
                  turburie, where he receiued both Caſtell and Citie into hys ſubiection, and after all the other Caſtels in Kent, Douer onlyKing Iohn flect
                     ••
                  . excepted, then came he to London, where he was honorablye receyued of the Nobles and Citizens, who altogither ſware fealtie to him, and did him homage at Westminster, after this

taking the Caſtels of Rygate, Guldforde and Ferneham, he haſted forward to take the King, who as he heard was at Winchester, and had raiſed vp the ſtandarde of the Dragon, as he had meant to giue battel to Lewes, if he came to offer it. But when king Iohn heard that Lewes approched, he layd down his Dragon, ſet fire on foure parts of the Citie and fled. TheDouer Caſtel beſieged. W
                        •
                     l. Packington.
                Citizens quickly quenched the fire and wente forth to méete Lewes, receiuing him ioyfully into theyr Cittie, and ſware fealtie to him. Here came to him in maner al the Erles and Barons of the realm: then taking the Caſtel of Odiham, and ye tower of London, he returned into Kent, & the xxij. of July he beſieged the Caſtel of Douer, and continued the ſame till the xiiij. of October: then Hubert de Brugh & Gerard de Scoting being not able longer to abide the aſſaultes, obtained truce, that they might ſend to king Iohn for ſuccor. Whileſt thys ſiege remained, king Iohn went about the land, conſuming with fire and ſword the poſſeſſions of the Barons.
            
               Alexander king of Scots and the Barons of the Northe came to Canturburie vnto Lewes. The king marched through Norffolke and Suffolke til he came to Lin, and appointing SauericeRadulphur Niger. Ralphe Cogſhall. de Maulion to be Captaine there, began to fortify the town: but here (as it is ſayd) filling his belly too much, as he was thereto greatly giuen, he got a ſurfeyt, and therwithal fel into a laſke, after his laſke left him he was let bloud at a towne in Lindſey called Lafforde, belonging to the Biſhop ofTho. R
                     •
                  dborne. 
               Lincolne. Here alſo when the meſſengers of them that were beſieged in Douer were come and had declared their caſe, the diſeaſe with griefe conceyued thereat encreaſed: moreouer,The kings treaſure drovvned. great ſorrow oppreſſed him, for that in his iourney he hadde loſt the ornamentes of his chapels, with other treaſure and cariages at the paſſage of Welstreame, where manye of hys houſholde ſeruauntes were drowned in the water and quicke ſandes, by reaſon they hadde vnaduiſedlye entred
                  Liber Bernewell. K. Iohn dyed. before the tyde was gone forth. His diſeaſe encreaſing, within fewe dayes he dyed in Newerke Caſtell, whiche belonged to the ſayde Byſhoppe of Lincolne, on the xix. of October,

               Anno. 1216. His ſeruauntes ſpoyled al that he hadde there with him, & fled away, leauing not ſo much as would couer his dead carkaſſe: but the Captain of that Caſtel cauſing hisMathew Paris. Flores Hiſtoriarū. body to be bowelled (by the Abbot of Croxton, who had bin y• kings Phiſition, both for the ſoule and body) prouided for it ſo honorably as he might. He was buried in the Cathedrall Church of Worcester. The Engliſh Chronicle printed byW. Caxton. Eulogi
                     ••
                  . 
               William Caxton, and other, report that king Iohn was poyſoned by a white Monke of Swinsteede Abbay in Lincolneſhire, for ſaying if he might liue halfe a yere, he would make a half peny loafe worth twentie ſhillings. To conclude, howſoeuer he died, certayne it is that hée raigned wyth trouble ynough (as by ye preemiſſes may appere) xvij. yeres. vj. months and odde dayes. He had iſſue two ſonnes Henrie & Richard,
               Iſſue of K. Iohn. and thrée daughters, Iſabel ye Empreſſe, Elianor Quéene of Scots, and Iane: he founded the Abbey of Boweley, in the new foreſt in Southamptonſhire: he builded the Monaſterie of Farendon, and the MonaſterieFarendon, Hales Godſtovv, and Snaresbrough. Ex charta regia. 10. Rouſe.
                of Hales Owen in Shropſhire, he reedifyed Godstowe, and Wroxhall, and encreaſed the Chapel of Knariſborough. (⸪)
         
         
            
            ¶ King Henrie the thirde
            
            
            
               
                  HEnrie born at Winchester,
                the eldeſt ſonne of Iohn, of the age of ix. yeares, beganAnno reg. 1. his raign the xix. of October, in the yeare. 1216. he was crowned at Gloucester on the xxviij. day of October, by Peter Biſhoppe of Winchester, and Iocelyne Byſhoppe of Bathe, in the preſence of Walo the Legate, Silueſter Byſhop of Worcester, Ranulph
                Earle of Chester, William Marſhall
                Erle of Penbroke, William
                Erle Ferrers, Iohn Marſhal,
               Mathew Paris. and many other, being crowned remained in the cuſtodie of William Marſhal Earle of Penbroke, by whoſe meanes al the nobles ſerued King Henrie much more faithfully than they had his father.
            
               Bennet Seinturer, William Bluntiuers the. 28. Sept.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Iames Alderman, the. 28. of October, for part of the yeare, and Salomon Baſing for the reſidue.
            
               
               Lewes toke the Caſtels of Berkhamsteede and Heneforde, &1217 after returned into Fraunce to fetch more ſuccour, and at hys returne beſieged Douer in vaine: for the Barons of England, that had taken part with him, going to Lincolne with a greatLiber Barnwel. army, were there taken on the xx. day of June, which miſfortuneLiber Col. S. Peter. Scala Crom. when Lewes vnderſtoode, he raiſed his ſiege from Douer, and came to London, and ſhutte vp all the gates ſaue one, but the Londoners at the comming of king Henries hoſte yéelded the Citie to him, wherefore he confirmed all the liberties that the Londoners had or were méete to haue: at lengthe the barons of Fraunce with one Euſtace le Moyne a gret man of Fraunce, hauing prepared a nauie of. lx. ſhips, ſet forward to come into Englād to y• aide of Lewes: but Hubert de Brugh Coneſtable of Douer Caſtel with a multitude of armed men and the ſhips of y• fiue Portes, met them on the Sea, where they ſlew Euſtace their leader: there eſcaped but fiftéen ſhips & al the other wer taken and drowned. When Lewes heard this, he wiſt not what to doe, wherevppon compelled by neceſſitie, he ſued for peace: at length, the Legate, Biſhops and nobles of Englande, méeting in an Ile néere vnto Kingstone, they had a treatie of peace togither, where the ſayde Lewes in preſence of them all was releaſed of the excommunication, and he renounced ſhe Realme of England, and ſo peace was reſtored the thirtéenth day of September. Lewes returnedLevves returned. into France. Frō the benefit of the abſolution and peace wer exempted Biſhops, Abbots, Pryors, and of al ye cleargy whyche had borne any fauour or good will to Lewes and the Barons were al depriued from the benefices by the Legate. Hugh Biſhoppe of Lincolne gaue a thouſande marke to the Pope, and an hundred marke to the Legate, whoſe exampleAnno reg. 2. many other did follow.
            
               Thomas Bokerel, Ralphe Elland, the. 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Searle Mercer, the. 28. of October.
            
            
               Simon de Montfort died at y• ſiege of Tholouſe, being hurtLib. Barnewel. Gualters Coro. 1218 with the ſtroke of a ſtone.
            
               Randulph Earle of Chester, Sa
                        •
                     r de Quincie
                Erle of Winchester,
               
               William de Albeneto Erle of Arundel, William Erle Ferrers,
                with the Barons, Robert Fitz Walter▪ Iohn Coneſtable of Chester▪
                and William Harcourt, with a greate traine toke their iourney toward Ieruſalem: Walo
                the Legate departed toward Rome, and Pandolph elected Biſhop of Norwich ſuccéeded Legate.
                  Anno reg. 3 Sherifes. Maior. 1216 Crom. 
                        ••
                     iter. Nicholas Triuet. Earle Marshall dyed. Anno reg. 4.
            
            
               Iohn Viell: Iohn le Spicer▪ the 28. of September. Searle Merce
                     •
                  , the▪ 28 of October.
            
            
               William Marſhal the elder Earle of Penbroke, gouernor of the kings perſon and of the realme died, and was burye
                  •
                at London in the New Temple, the xv. of Apryll, after whoſe death the kyng was gouerned by Peter Byſhop of Winchester.
            
            
               Richard Wimbledon: Iohn Viell the 28. of Septemb.
                     Sherifes. Maior. King Henry c
                        •
                     ovvned. Searle Mercer, the 28. of October.
            
            
               King Henry was crowned at Westminster by Stephen Langton Archbyſhop of Canturbury▪
                on the. xvij. daye of May▪ 
               Hubert de Burgo was made the kings chiefe Juſtice.
            The new worke of our Ladies Chappell at Westminster
               Nevve vvorke of VVeſtminſter Straungers banished. was begunne by kyng Henry.
            
            Proclamation was made, that all ſtraungers ſhoulde 
                  •
               
               
               
                  •
               oyde the realme, except ſuch as came with Marchaundiſe, and to make ſale of them vnder the kings ſafeconduct.
            
               Ranulphe the thirde Earle of Chester, Lincolne, and Richmond,
               Caſtels of Chart ley and Beſtrne buylded. Abbey of Delacroſſe. Annoreg. 5. Sherifes. Maior. 1231 Nicho. Tre
                        •
                     
                     ▪ Antiq. Calend. in Briſtollia
                and Lorde of Little Brytaine came out of the holy land into England, and builded the Caſtels of Carteley, Bestone, and the Abbey of Delacroſſe.
            
            
               Richard Renger: Iohn Viell, the 28. of Septemb. Searle Mercer, the 28. of October.
            
            The Frier Preachers, thirtéene in number, were ſente into Englande and hauing to their Prior▪ 
               Gilbert de Fraxineto in company of Beter de Roche Biſhop of Winchester, came to Canturbury, and there preſenting themſelues before the Archbiſhoppe Stephen, he commaunded the ſaide Prior t
                  •
                preach before him, and lyked him ſo well, that he euer a
                  •••
                loued their order. On Saint Laurence day they came to London,
               
and ſo to Oxford on the day of the Aſſumption, in whoſe ho
                  •
                or they builded an Oratorie, and alſo thoſe Schooles which ſince were called Saint Oxwards ſchooles, in whoſe pariſhe they tooke a place, and there for a time remayned, and after that remoued to the place without the walles, whyche the king aſſygned them.
            King Henry ſubdued the Welchmen which rebelled.
            The Noblemen graunted to the king twoo Markes of 
                  〈…〉
                of euery hide of lande.
            
               Iſabell the kyngs mother, without making hir ſonne orNicho. Triuet. his Counſell priuy to hir purpoſe, wente ouer into Fraunce, and there married with the Erle of March Hugh Bronne.
               
            
            King Henry gaue his ſiſter Iane to Alexander k. of Scots, who married hir at Yorke and Hubert de Brugh married the king of Scots ſiſter. William de Albeneto Erle of Arundel 
               
                  •
               yed comming from the holy Land, who was conueyed into England and buried at Wimondham, a Priory of his foūdation.
                  Anno reg. 6 Sherifes. Maior. 1222 Prouinciall Counſell. Radulphus Cog. Gual. Couen. Lib. Bermond.
               
            
            
               Richard Renger: Thomas Lambert, the 28. of Septemb. Searle Mercer, the 28. of October.
            
            A Prouinciall Counſell was holden at Oxforde, by Stephen Langton Archbiſhop of Canturbury, and his Suff
                  •
               agan Byſhops and others in the conuentuall Church of Oſney xv. days after Eaſter, wher wer degraded a Prieſt & a Deacon, the Prieſt for homicide, the Deacon for ſacriledge and theft committed. An other Deacon offending more déepely, denyed the profeſſion of Chriſtian Religion, and for the loue hée 
                  •
               are fo a Jewiſh woman, cauſed himſelfe to be circumciſed, folowing the Jewiſh rytes and cuſtomes: he was degraded,An Apoteſtate brent. A counterfaite Chriſt. and beyng left as a lay perſon and Apoſtata, was condemned and committed to the fyre▪ by the ſeruaunts of Falcatius, wherein he miſerably ended his life. There was alſo a yong man and two women broughte before them, the yong man would not come in any Church, nor be partaker of the Sacraments, but had ſuffered himſelfe to be crucified, in whom y• ſcars of al ye woūds were to be ſéene, in his hāds, head, ſide,Radulphus Cog. & f
                  •
               et, & he reioiced to be called Jeſus of theſe women & other.

One of the women being olde, was accuſed for be
                  •••
               
               ▪chingRadulphus Cog. Wal. Couentren. Nicholas Triues. the yong man vnto ſuch madneſſe, and alſo (altering hir owne name▪) procured hirſelf to be called Mary the mother of Chriſt. They being cōuict of theſe crimes and other, were adiudged to be cloſed vp betwéene two wals of ſtone, where they ended their liues in miſerie. The other womanCounterfaite Marie and Chriſt. being ſiſter to the yong man, was let go, bycauſe ſhe reue
                  •
               
               led the wicked fact.
            On Saint Iames day, the Citizens of London kept game
                  •
                of defence and wreſtling, néere vnto the Hoſpital of Matild,
               VVreſtling. Mathew Paris.
                where they got the maiſterie of the menne of the Suburbes. The Baylife of Westminster deuiſing to be reuenged, proclaymed a game to be at Westminster vppon Lammas daye, wherevnto the Citizens of London repayred, and when they had played a while, the Baylie with the men of the ſuburbs harniſed themſelues and fell to fighting, that the Citizens being foully wounded, were forced to runne into the Citie, where they rang the common Bel, and aſſembled the Citizens in gret number, and when the matter was declared, euery man wiſhed to reuenge the fact. The Maior of the Citie being a wiſe man and a quiet, willed them firſte to moue the Abbot of Westminster of the matter, and if he wold promiſe to ſée amendes made, it were ſufficient: but a certaineA tu
                     •
                  ult in London. Citizen named Conſtantine Fitz Arnul
                     •
                  e▪
                willed that all houſes of the Abbot and Baylie ſhould be pulled downe, whiche word being once ſpoken, the common people iſſued out of the Citie without anye order, and fought a ciuil battaile: for Conſtantine the firſte pulled downe many houſes, and of
                  •
               times with a loude voyce cryed in prayſe of the ſayd Conſtantine, the ioye of the mountaine, the ioy of the mountaine, God helpe and the Lord Lodowike.
            
            A fewe dayes after this tumult, the Abbot of Westminster
               
                  Cro. D
                        •
                     n. Abbot of VVeſtminſter pat to his shifts. came to London to Phillip Dawbney, one of the kings counſel, to complaine of the iniuries done to him, which the Londoners perceyuing, beſet the houſe aboute, and tooke by violence twelue of the Abbots horſſes away, cruelly beating of

his men, &c. But whiles the foreſayde Daubney, laboured to pacifie the vprore, the Abbot gotte out at a backe dore of the houſe, and ſo by a boate on the Thamis hardlye eſcaped, the Citizens throwing ſtones after him in great aboundāce. Theſe things being thus done, Hubert de Burgo, JuſticiarChief Iuſtice en tred the Citie of London vvith an army. of England, with a great armye of men came to the Tower of London, and ſent for the Maior and Aldermē, of whom he enquired for the principal aucthours of this faction. Then Conſtantine, who was conſtaunt in the ſedition, was more conſtante in the aunſweare, affirming, that he had done it▪ and that he hadde done muche leſſe than he ought to haue done. The Juſticiar tooke him and two other with him, and in y• morning earely ſent them to Falcatius by water, with a gret number of armed men, who brought Conſtantine to the gallowes,Cōſtātine vvith other hanged. and when he ſawe the rope about his necke, he offered for his life 15000. marks, but that would not ſaue him: ſo he was hanged with Conſtantine his nephew, & Galfride, that proclaymed his proclamation on the ſixtéenth of Auguſt.
            Then the Juſticiar entring the City with a great army,
                  Mathew Paris. Feete & handes. of many cut of. cauſed to be apprehended as many as he coulde learne to be culpable, whoſe féet and hands he cauſed to be cut off, which crueltie cauſed many to flée the Citie.
            The King toke of the Citizens 60. pledges, which he ſēt to diuers Caſtelles: he deſpoſed the Maior, appointing a Gardien or kéeper ouer the Citie, and cauſed a greate gybet▪ to be made, and after heauie threatnings, the Citizens were reconciled, paying to the king manye thouſande
                  Anno reg. 7 Tempeſtes and dearth. markes.
            On holy Rode daye was great Thunder and lightning throughout all England, and ſuch great flouds of water followed, with great windes and tempeſt, which continued tyll Candlemaſſe, that the yeare following wheate was ſold for xij. ſhillings the quarter.
            
               Richard Renger: Thomas Lambert, the 28. of September.Sherifes. Maior. Searle Mercer, the 28. of October.
            
            
               On Saint Andrewes daye a great Thunder ouerthreweGreat tempeſts. Churches, Caſtels, and houſes, ſo that ſcantly any body eſcaped frée from harme by this Tempeſte. A Knight and hys wife and eyghte menne of hys houſholde, with the fall of his houſe were ſlaine in Pilardestune a villedge of Warwickeſhire.
            
            In a Counſel holden at London the Archbiſhop of Canturburie
               1223 and other the nobilitie and Barons of the Realme, required the king to confirme the liberties for the whiche the warre was moued againſt his Father, and that himſelfe at the departing of Lewes out of Englande: ſware to obſerue where vppon forthwith the King ſente his letters to all the Sherifes of the realm, commanding them to inquire by the othes of twelue lawfull men in euery Countie, what liberties were in England in the time of King Henrie his grandfather, and to ſend the inquſition ſo made to London fiftéene dayes after Eaſter.
            
               Iohn de Brennes king of Ieruſalem, and chiefe maiſter ofK. of Ieruſalem. the Hoſpital there, came into England, and required ayde to winne Ieruſalem, but he returned with ſmal comfort.
            
               Leolyn Prince of Wales, founded the Caſtell of Mountgomerie,
               Tho. Wikes.
                and therewith certaine Engliſhmen in deſpighte of the King, attempted to conſtraine William Marſhall Earle of Penbroke, and other, to yéelde to them: but the whole CountreyAnno reg. 8. Sherifes. Maior. 1224 Mathew Paris. roſe in armour, and ouercame them.
            
               Iohn Trauers: Andrew Bokerel, the. 28. of September.
            
            
               Richard Renger, the. 28. of October.
            
            The Earle of Chester and other, roſe againſt the king, and hys Juſticiars, for the cuſtodyes of the Caſtelles and landes, whyche the Kyng demaunded of them.
            Wherefore the Archbiſhop of Canturburie and the Byſhops excommunicated al the perturbers of the king and the Realme.
            The Earle of Chester and his complices, perceyuing that the King had a greater number of men of armes then

they, and alſo fearing the excommunicatiō, came to the king at Northampton, yéelding their caſtels & honors which appertayned to the Crowne. Then the king layed ſiege about the
                  Ral. Cogſhall. Bedford caſtel beſieged. Caſtel of Bedforde, that Falcatius had long kepte by ſtrength, which ſiege he continued by the ſpace of eight wéekes, and toke the Caſtel on the fiftéenth of Auguſt, on which daye hée cauſed to be hanged to the number of 8
                  •
               . men of armes and other ſouldiours, Falcatius de Brent, who was fledde into Wales, hearing that the Caſtel was taken, and his men ſlain: vnder the conduct of the Byſhoppe of Couentrie, came to Bedforde and fel at the kings féete, requiring mercy. The Kyng deliuered him to Euſtace Biſhop of London, and the Caſtell was made an heape of ſtones. There was graunted to the King throughout Englande two ſhillings for euery carucat of land.Caruage grāted Gray Friers. Regiſtrum fratrumminoram.
               
            
            The Friers Minours firſt arriued at Douer nine in number, fiue of them remayned at Canturburie, and did there build the firſt Couēt of Fries Minours that euer was in England: the other foure came to London, and lodged at the preaching Friers the ſpace of fiftéene daies, and then hyred an houſe in Cornhil, of Iohn Trauers one of yt Sherifes, they builded there little Celles wherein they inhabited. The deuotion of the Citizens towardes them, and alſo the multitude of Friers ſo encreaſed, that they were by the Citizens remoued to a place in Saint Nicholas Shambles, whyche Iohn Iwyn Citizen and Mercer of London appropriated vnto the comunaltie of the Citie, to the vſe of the ſayde Friers, and became himſelfe a lay brother.Anno reg. 9.
            
            
               William Ioynar builded their quire, Henrie Wales ſometime Maior of London, the body of the Church: Walter Potter Alderman, the Chapterhouſe: Gregorie Rokſle the Dortar: Barthelmew of the Caſtel made the Refertorie.
            This yeare the King graunted to the comunaltie of the the Citie of London, to haue a common ſeale.
            
               
               Iohn Trauers: Andrew Bokerel, the. 28. of September.
               
                  Sherifes. Maior. 1225 Fifteene, Great charter confirmed.
            
            
               Richard Renger, the. 28. of October.
            
            The xv. part of al mens goods mouable within y• realm, as wel of the Cleargie as of the Laitie, was granted to the King to ayde him in his right beyond the Seas, and the king granted to the Barons and people, the liberties which they long time had ſued for: he cauſed charters to be made, and ſent into euery Country twaine, one of the common Liberties, and the other of the Forreſt.
            
               Richard the kings brother, and his vncle William EarleGaſcoin ſubdued. Anno reg. 10. of Saliſburie and many other, were ſent into Gaſcoigne, who ſubdued the ſame, and recouered Poyters.
            
            
               Roger Duke: Martin Fitz William, the. 28. of September.
               
                  Sherifes. Maior. 1226 Free vvarren free toll. Anno reg. 11
            
            
               Richard Renger, the. 28. of October.
            
            The King graunted to the Citizens of London frée warren, that is to ſay, frée libertie to hunt a certain circuit about the Citie. And alſo that the Citizens of London ſhoulde paſſe toll frée throughout all England, and that al weres in Thamis ſhould be plucked vp and diſtroyed for euer.
            
               Roger Duke: Martin Fitz William, the. 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior. 1227
            
            
               Richard Renger, the 28. of October.
            
            The King blaming the Citizens of London, bycauſe they hadde giuen to Lewes the Frenche King (nowe deceaſed) at his departure out of England. 500. markes, he compelled them to pay the like ſumme to him, beſide the, xv. parte of theyr moueables: and of the Burgeſes of Northampton hée toke 1200. markes.
            In a Counſell at Oxforde, the King proclaymed, thatCharters canceled. for as much as he was nowe of lawfull age, he woulde rule hymſelfe at hys pleaſure, and forthwith made all ye charter of ye Liberties & Forreſts to be fruſtrate, alledging, that they were graunted whiles he was vnder warde of other, and had not power of his owne bodie: ſo it followed, yt who ſo woulde enioy the liberties afore graunted, muſte renewe their charters of the kings new ſeale, with ſuch a price as the Juſticiar awarded them.
            
               
               Richard the Kings brother returned into Englande, & was made Earle of Cornewal at Westminster, Hubert de Burgo
                was made Earle of Kent.
            
            Shortly after the Barons declared vnto the king, that except he would reſtore the Charter of liberties of the Foreſt, which lately he had canceled at Oxford, they would compel him by the ſworde.
                  Anno reg. 12 Sherifes. Maior. 1228 Anno reg. 13
            
            
               Stephen Bokerel. Henrie Cocham the. 28. of September.
            
            
               Roger Duke the. 28. of October:
            
            The King corrected the meaſures and weyghtes, and made them bigger. In the Sommer was often greate thunder and lightning, which brent many houſes, and ſlew both men and beaſtes.
            
               Stephen Bokerell. Henrie Cocham the. 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior. 1229 Anno reg. 14
            
            
               Roger Duke the. 28. of October.
            
            
               Robert Lingham Biſhop of Saliſburie, by the Kings help, proſecuted the building of the newe Churche at Saliſbuburie, which his predeceſſour Richard did tranſlate.
            
               William Wincheſter. Robert Fitz Iohn the. 28. of Septem.
               
                  Sherifes. Maior. 1230 Mathew Paris. Darkeneſſe in Paules Churche.
            
            
               Roger Duke the. 28. of October.
            
            Upon the day of Saint Paules Conuerſition, when Roger Niger Biſhop of London was at Maſſe in the Cathedrall Church of Saint Paule, a greate multitude of people being there, ſodainely the weather waxed darke, that one coulde ſcantly ſée another in the Churche, and ſodainely an horrible Thunder clappe lighted on the Churche, that the ſame was ſhaken as though it ſhoulde haue fallen, and out of a darke cloude came ſuch lightning, that all the Churche ſéemed to be on fire, and ſuch a ſtincke that all men thought they ſhoulde haue died. Thouſandes of men and womenne ran out of the Churche, and being aſtonied, fell vppon the grounde voyde of al vnderſtanding, none of al the multitude taried in the Churche, ſaue the Biſhoppe and one Deacon, which ſtoode ſtil at the high Alter awayting the wil of God.Anno reg. 15
            
            King Henrie with a great army ſayled into Brytaine, wher

after ſpoylyng the Countrey, a peace was concluded.Anno reg. 15 Iohn Beuer. Sherifes. Maior. 1231
            
            
               Gilbert of Clare Earle of Glocester, dyed in Brytaine.
            
            
               Richard Walter: Iohn of Woborne, the. 28. of September.
            
            
               Roger Duke, the. 28. of October.
            
            
               Richard the Kings brother married Iſabel Counteſſe of Glocester, late wife to Gilbert Earle of Glocester lately deceaſed, and ſiſter to William Marſhal Earle of Penbroke: and the marriage being ſcantly finiſhed, the ſayde William died, and was buried in the new Temple at London by his father. His brother Richard ſuccéeded him in the Earledome.
            
               Leolin Prince of Wales, ſpoyled the lands of the BaronsNicho. Triuet. Anno reg. 16 that were on the borders of Wales wherefore the king gathered a great power at Oxford, and went againſt the Walſhmen, and builded the Caſtell of Matilde, which before hadde bene deſtroyed.
            The Jewes builded a Sinagoge at London very curiouſly,Ievves ſin
                     •
                  goge Iohn Shepeſhed.
                but the Chriſtians obtayned of the king yt it ſhould be dedicated to our bleſſed Lady.
            
               Michael of Saint Helen: Walter de Buffel, the. 28. of Sept.
               Sherifes. Maior. 12
                     •
                  2
            
            
               Andrew Bokerel Peperer, the 28. of October.
            
            
               Ranulph Earle of Chester and Lincoln dyed at Walingford, and was buried at Chester. Through manye complaintes made againſt Hubert de Burgo, chiefe Juſtice of Englande, the ſayde Hubert fled to the Chappel of Brendwood in Eſſex, wher he was taken, and the king ſent him to the tower of London. The morrow after Saint Martins day began Thunders very horrible, which laſted xv. dayes. Greate harme was done in London, by fire which began firſte in the houſe of Dauid Ionet Lumbard.
               Hiſtoria A
                     •
                  rea. Anno reg. 17
            
            
               Ela Counteſſe of Saliſburie widowe, founded the Monaſterie of Chanons at Lacok in Wilſhire, for William Longſpeye hyr late huſbande and William theyr ſonne and heyre.
            
               Henrie of Edmonton. Gerard Bat. the. 28. of Septem.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Andrew Bokerel Peperer, the 28. of October.
            
            
               The King remoued all his officers and counſellers, as1233 Pictauians placed about the King Mathew Paris. The likeneſſe of fiue Sunnes. well Biſhops as Erles and Barons, and ſent for Pictauians, whome he retained into his ſeruice, and committed to them the kéeping of the Caſtels and his treaſures.
            The vij. of April there appeared as it were foure ſunnes beſide the naturall ſunne, of a red colour, and a great Circle of Criſtal colour, from the ſides whereof went out halfe cyrcles, in the deuiſions whereof, the foure Suns wente forthe. There followed that yeare greate warre and cruell bloudeſheds, and generally great diſturbance throughout England, Wales, and Ireland.
            
            In the moneth of June in the South part of Englande byDragons. the Sea coſt were ſéene two great Dragons in the ayre, flying and fighting togither an whole daye, the one chaſing the other to the déepe Sea, and then were no more ſéene.
            The King being at Oxforde, Robert Bacon
                openly preachedRobert an I Roger Bacon. againſt Peter Byſhoppe of Winchester, for that he euilly counſelled the king to ſpoyle the Realme with Pictauians. Alſo Roger Bacon his brother both earneſtlye and pithelye perſwaded the king to leaue the counſell of the ſayde Peter. Alſo the Barons ſent meſſengers to the king, requeſting y•
               The Barons threat the King. he woulde put from him Peter Biſhop of Winchester and the Pictauians, or elſe they wold depoſe him from his kingdome, and create a newe.
            The King builded a faire Church and many houſes adioyningHouſe of conuerts. therevnto in the Citie of London, not farre from the Olde Temple: In the whiche houſe all the Jewes and Infidels that did conuert to the faith of Chriſte might haue vnder an honeſt rule of life ſufficiente lyuing, whereby it came to paſſe that in ſhorte tyme there was gathered a great number of Conuertes, whiche were baptiſed and inſtructed in the lawes of Chriſt, and did liue laudably vnder a learned man appointed to gouerne them. He alſo buildedHoſpitall at Oxford. Hiſto. Aurea. Anno reg. 18 Io. Rouſe.
                the Hoſpitall of Saint Iohn without the Eaſt gate of Oxforde for ſicke folke and ſtraungers to be relieued in.
            
               
               Simon Fitz Marie. Roger Blunt. the. 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Andrew Bokerell Peperer: the. 28. of October.
            
            
               Richard Marſhal and Leolyne Prince of Northwales, with a great force inuaded the Kings landes, and deſtroyed the1234 Salisburie brent ſame wyth fire and ſword, from the coaſtes of Wales to Saliſburie, which town alſo they ſet a fire. By the perſwaſion of Edmunde Archbiſhop of Canturburie, the king commaunded Peter Biſhop of Winchester to go to his Biſhopricke, and alſo expulſed all the Pictauians into theyr owne Countrey, andThe Pictaulans expelled. making peace with Richarde Marſhall and Lewyn Prince of Walles, he called againe his naturall ſubiectes and ſubmitted himſelfe to their counſel.
            
               Richard Marſhal in Ireland raiſing a warre there, by GeffreyNicholas Triuet. de Mariſco, was ſlaine and buried at Kilkeny, Gilbert
                his brother ſuccéeded him in the Earledome.
            This yere was a great dearth and peſtilence ſo that many
                  Mathew Paris. Couetous Archbishop. poore folke dyed for want of victuals, and the rich menne were ſtricken with couetouſneſſe y• they would not reticue them, amongſt whom is to be noted, Walter Gray Archebiſhop of Yorke, whoſe corne being fiue yeares olde, doubtyng the ſame to be deſtroyed by vermine, commanded to deliuer it to the huſbande men that dwelte in hys manors, vppon condition to paye as muche newe corne after harueſt, and would giue none to the poore for gods ſake. And it fortuned that when men came to a greate ſtacke of corne neygh the towne of Ripon belonging to the ſayde Archbiſhoppe, thereCorne ful of vermine. appeared in the ſheues all ouer the heades of Wormes, Serpentes and Toades, and a voyce was hearde out of the Corne mowe ſaying, laye no handes on the Corne for the Archebyſhoppe and all that hée hathe is the Diuelles, to be ſhorte, the Baylifes were forced to builde an highe Wall rounde aboute the corne, and then to ſette it on fire, leaſte the venomous Wormes ſhoulde haue gonne out and poyſoned the Corne in otherAnno reg. 19 places.
            
               
               Ralph Aſhwe. Iohn Norman the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior. 1235
            
            
               Andrew Bokerell Peperer, the 28. of October.
            
            The Jewes at Norwich ſtale a boy, and circumſiſed him, minding to haue crucified him at Eaſter, for the which facte they were conuicted both bodyes and goodes at the Kings pleaſure.
            
               Frederike the Emperour maried Iſabell the kings ſiſter.
            
               Walter Brune a Citizen of London, and Roſia his wife,Saint Mary Spittell. Anno reg. 20 founded the Hoſpitall of our Lady without Biſhops gate of London, a houſe of ſuche greate reliefe to the néedie, that there was found ſtanding at the ſuppreſſion 180. beddes for the poore.
            
               Gerard Bat. Robert Hardell the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior. 1236 Mathew Paris. Hiſto. Aurea. Wil. Packington.
            
            
               Andrew Bokerell Peperer, the 28. of October.
            
            King Henry tooke to wife Elianor, daughter to Raymond Earle of Prouince, ſhe was maried at Canturburie, and crowned at Westminster the twentith day of January. To this Coronation reſorted ſo great a number of all eſtates, that the Citie of London was ſcarce able to receyue them. The Citie was adorned with Silkes, and in the night with Lampes, Creſſets, & other lightes, without nūber, beſides many Pagentes, and ſtrange deuiſes which were ſhewed. The Citizens rode to méete the King and Quéene, béeing clothed in long garments, embrodered about with gold and ſilke of diuers couloures: their Horſes finely trapped in array, to the number of 360. euery man bearing golden or ſiluer cuppes in their hands, and the Kings Trumpetters before them ſounding. The Archbiſhop of Canturburie did execute the office of Coronation. The Citizens of London
               The Citizens of London Butlers. did miniſter Wine as Butlers. The Citizens of Wincheſter tooke charge of the Kitchen, and other Citizens attended their charges.
            
               Ioane the Kings ſiſter, wife to Lewlin Prince of Wales died at Hauering in Eſſex, and was buried at Tarent in Dorſet.
            
            About this time fell ſuche abundance of rayne the ſpaceHigh VVater. of two monethes, that the Thamis ouerflowed the banckes,

ſo that in the greate Pallace of Westminster men did row with wherries in the midſt of the Hall, and they rode on Horſebacke to their Chambers.
            A Parliament at Marton, wherein was made the Statutes
                  Anno reg. 21 Statutes of Marton. Sherifes. Maior. 1237 of Marton.
            
            
               Henry Cocham: Iordan of Couentry, the 28. of Septem.
            
            
               Andrew Bokerell Peperer, the 28. of October.
            
            By the Kings procurement, Octobon a Cardinall came into England as Legate from ye Pope the ſecond day of July.
            This yeare paſſed a ſtormie and troubleſome weather, and very vnhealthfull, ſo that no man coulde remember that euer ſo many folkes were ſicke of the ague.
            
               Iohn Scot laſt Earle of Gloceſter deceaſſed, and the CountreyAnno reg. 22 Nic. Triuet. Iohn Beuer. Sherifes. Maior. returned to the King for lacke of heires.
            
               Iohn Tolaſon: Geruas the Cordewenor, the 28. of Sept.
            
            
               Andrew Bokerell Peperer, the 28. of October.
            
            
               Simon de Mountfort, ſonne to Simon Earle of Mountford, for doubt that Quéene Blanche, mother to the French King was offended with him, fledde into England, and was made Earle of Leycester, and Steward of England, by King Henry, and had the Kings ſiſter Elianor, widdow of WilliamNicholas Triuet. Io. Beuerla. Marſhall giuen him to wife.
            
               Octobone being lodged in the Abbey of Oſney, the Schollers1238 Mathew Paris. Ypodigma. Legate put to his shiftes. of Oxford ſlew his mayſter Cooke, who was alſo the Legates brother, and the Legate for feare gate him into the Stéeple of the Church, where he held him till the kings officers comming from Abingdon, conuayed him to Wallingford, where he accurſed the miſdoers.
            
               Odo de Kilkenny, as Standerdbearer of the Schollers, was taken with twelue other, and caſt in priſon, and long after went from Saint Paules Church in London to the LegatesScholers did penance at London. Iohn Beuer.
                houſe (which was Durham place) vngirded, withoute gowne, bareheaded and barefooted, whereby they aſked him forgiueneſſe, and then the Legate reſtored them to their Uniuerſitie.
            A Scholler of Oxford fayning himſelfe madde, enterpriſed

to haue ſlayne the King in his Chamber at Wodstocke:
               King in darge
                     •
                  . Anno reg. 23 but he was taken, and after long empriſonment, plucked in péeces with Horſſes at Couentrie.
            
            
               Iohn Coders: Iohn de Wilehale, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior. Nicho. Triuet. 1229
            
            
               Richard Renger, the 28. of October.
            
            
               Simon de Mountfort, whome the King had made Earle of Leycester (after he had agréed with his elder brother Earle Almericus for the ſame Earledome) being alſo Steward of Gaſcoine, induced the King of England to recogniſe, that he would hold of the King of France the land of the Baſeles, the chiefe Towne whereof is Bayon, and was in times paſt a Kingdome of it ſelfe, and ſo by acknowledging to be of the fée of the King of France, excluded the King of Castile, who chalenged the ſayd fée to belong to the King of Spayne.
            
            The Tower of London was fortified, which the Citizens
                  Mathew Paris. Tovver of London. fearing leaſt it were done to their▪ detriment, complayned to the King, who anſwered that he had not done it to their hurt, but (ſayth he) I will from henceforth do as my brotherYpodigma. Anno reg. 24 doth, in building and fortifying of Caſtels, who beareth the name to be wiſer than I am.
            Quéene Elianor bare a ſonne named Edwarde at Westminster, the 22. day of June.
            
               Roger Bongye: Ralph Aſhwye, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior. 1240
            
            
               William Ioyner, the 28. of October.
            
            
               Richard Earle of Cornewall, the Kings brother, tooke his iourney towardes Ieruſalem, with many other noble men of England. Upon Saint Georges night, the ſtone gate and bulwarkeMathew Paris. which the King had cauſed to be builded by the TowerBulvvarke by the Tovver. of London, was ſhaken with an Earthquake, and fell downe, but the King commanded the ſame to be builded againe, ſtronger than before. Lewlin Prince of Wales deceaſed, and then betwixt his baſtard ſonne Griffin, & his legitimate ſon Dauid, nephew to ye K. of Englād by his ſiſter, great & gréeuous deſtructiō roſe for the principalitie, but at length Griffin being taken of his brother, was cōmitted to priſon.
            Many ſtrange and great Fiſhes came aſhore, whereof xj.

were Sea Bulles, and one of huge bigneſſe paſſed vp theMonſtrous Fishes. Riuer of Thamis, through the Bridge at London vnhurt, till he came as farre as the Kings houſe at Mortlake, where he was killed.
            Aldermen choſen in London, whiche had the rule of the Wards of the Citie, but were euery yeare changed.
                  Anno reg. 25 Aldermen in London. Sherifes. Maior. 1241
            
            
               Iohn Gifers. Michaell Tony the 28. of September.
            
            
               Gerard Bat the 28. of October.
            
            The Jewes were conſtrayned to pay twentie thouſand Markes at two tearmes in the yeare, or elſe to be kepte in perpetuall priſon.
            
               Gilbert Marſhall Earle of Penbroke, dyed without the Towne of Hereford, being bruſed in Turneament, and wasIohn Beuer. buryed at London in the new Temple. Walter his brother hardly obteyned the Earledome, bycauſe he procured that Turneament, contrarie to the Kings will and pleaſure. This Walter dying without iſſue, his heritage was diuidedNic. Triuet. betwixt the ſonnes of his fiue ſiſters.
            The walles and Bulwarkes that were newly builded about the Tower of London (in the building whereof, theBulvvarkes by the Tovver. Mathew Paris.
                King had beſtowed more than twelue thouſand Markes) were agayne vnrecouerably throwne downe as it were with an Earthquake, for which chance the Citizens of London nothing ſory, were much amazed, for they were threatned, that the ſayde walles and bulwarkes were builded in deſpight of them, to the end that if any of them woulde preſume to contende for the Liberties of the Citie, they might there be impriſoned, and to the ende that many mighte béeAnno reg. 26 layde in diuers priſons, many lodgings were made there, that no one ſhould ſpeake with another.
            
               Iohn Viell. Thomas Dureſme the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior. 1242 Nic. Triuet. Ypodigma.
            
            
               Roger Bongey the 28. of October.
            
            
               King Henry with a great armie ſayled into Normandy, purpoſing to recouer Poyters, Guine, and other Countreys, but after many bickerings, to the loſſe of Engliſhmen, he treated a peace.
            
               Elianor, daughter to Geffrey Earle of Briteyne, and ſiſter to Arthure, ended hir life priſoner in the Caſtell of Bristow.
            
            
               Iohn Fitz Iohn: Ralph Aſhwye, the 28. of September.
               Anno reg. 27 Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Roger Bongey, the 28. of October.
            
            
               Hugo de Albeneto Earle of Arundell dyed, and his inheritance was diuided among foure ſiſters Alſo Hubert de Burgo Earle of Kent dyed at his Manor of Banstede, and was buryed in the Church of the Friers Preachers at London, vnto the whiche Churche he gaue his noble Pallace atMathew Paris. 
               Westminster, whiche afterwardes the Archbiſhop of Yorke bought of them, and made it his Inne, ſince commonly called Yorke place, now White Hall.
            
            The Thamis ouerflowed the bankes about Lambeth, and1243 Great flouds. drowned houſes and fieldes, the ſpace of ſixe miles, and in the great Hall at Westminster men tooke their Horſebackes, bycauſe the waters ranne ouer all.Anno reg. 28
            
            
               Richard Earle of Cornewall maryed the thirde daughter of the Earle of Prouence.
            
            
               Hugh Blunt: Adam Baſing, the 28. of September.
               
                  Sherifes. Maior. 1244 Miſerable death of Griffin. Mathew Paris.
               
            
            
               Ralph Aſhnye Peperer, the 28. of October.
            
            
               Griffyne the eldeſt ſonne of Leolin Prince of Northwales, which was kept priſoner in the Tower of London, deuiſed ſubtilly how to eſcape: wherefore one night hauing deceyued the Watch, made of the hangings, ſhéetes, towels &c a long line, and put himſelfe downe from the toppe of the Tower: but as he was ſliding a good pace, with the weight of his body, being a very bigge man and a fatte, the rope brake, and he fell on his necke, whoſe miſerable carcaſe in the morning being founde by the Tower wall, was a pitifull ſight to the beholders, for his head and necke were driuen into his breſt betwéene the ſhoulders, the King hearing thereof, puniſhed the watchmen, and cauſed Griffins ſon y• was impriſoned with his Father to be more ſtraightly kept.
            The King tooke of the Citizēs of London 1500. Markes, for that they had receyued into their Citie agayne Walter

               Bokerell, who had bin baniſhed twenty yeares, notwithſtanding the Citizens had proued that before that time the ſaid Walter and his brother Andrew by their ſuite to the King, had gotten him to be reconciled and reſtored to the Kings fauour. Robert Groſted Biſhop of Lincolne, with otherRobert Groſted. Anno reg. 29. Prelates, complayned to the King of the waſte made of the Church goodes, by aliant Biſhops and Clearkes of this land, where vpon they were ſhortly voyded.
            
               Ralph Foſter: Nicholas Bat, the 28. of September.Sherifes. Maior. 1245 Anno reg. 30 Michaell Tonny, the 28. of October.
            
            Quéene Elianor brought forth a ſonne named Edmond.
            
            The King enlarged the Church of Saint Peters in Westminster, pulling downe the olde walles and ſtéeple, and cauſed them to be made more comely.
            
               Robert Ros being made a Templar, died, and was buryed at London in the new Temple.
            
               Robert of Cornehill: Adam of Bentley, the 28. of Sept.Sherifes. Maior. 1246 Iohn Giſers Peperer, the 28 of October.
            
            In the Dioces of Lincolne, there was a woman of noble birth, welfauoured and beautifull, which was maried to a rich man, and did beare him children, ſhe alſo got anotherMonſtruous. Anno reg. 31 Gentlewoman with childe, and begat thrée ſonnes of hir one after another, or euer it was knowen: the womens names were Hauiſia, and Lucia.
            
            
               Harold King of Man was made Knight at London.
            
            
               Simon Fitz Meger: Laurence Frowike, the 28. of Sept.
                     Sherifes. Maior. 1247 Queene Hyue. Cuſtomes of London. Iohn Giſers Peperer, the 28. of October.
            
            King Henry let to ferme the Queenehiue in London to Iohn Giſers, then Maior, and his ſucceſſours and comminaltie of London for euer, for the ſumme of fiftie pounde the yeare, to be payde at two payments, at Clarkenwell. Dated at Windeſore the xxxj. of his raigne.
            The Church of Saint Mildred in Canturburie, and a greatGer. Dorobor. part of that Citie was brent.
            A great Earthquake was in many places, eſpecially atEarthquake. 
               London about the banckes of the Thamis.
            
            
               The Coyne was ſo ſore clipped, that it was thought goodCoyne baſe. to change the ſame, and make it baſer.
            A great plague was in England, ſo that in September,Peſtilence. Mathew Pari
                        •
                     .
                there was euery day nine or tenne buried in the Churchyard of Saint Peter at Saint Albons.
            
            
               Elianor, Siſter to Arthure Duke of Briteyne, was buryedAnno reg. 32 W
                     •
                  l Waſion. Sherifes. Maior. 1248 at Ambreſburie, among the Nunnes.
            
               Iohn Viell: Nicholas Bat, the 28. of September.
            
            
               Peter Fitz Alwyne, the 28. of October.
            
            By reaſon of the embaſing of the Coyne, a great penurie followed.
            
               Robert Bacon preaching Frier, deceaſſed at Oxforde.
            
            The King required a great ayd of money whiche was denyed him, whereby (through counſell) he was forced toThe King ſelleth his Iev. vels. ſell his plate and Jewels to the Citizens of London.
            
            The Towne of Newcastell vpon Tine, was burned, bridgeEarthquake. and all.
            By a ſtrange Earthquake, the toppes of houſes wereAnno reg. 33 throwen downe, walles did cleaue, the heads of chimneys and Towers were ſhaken, but the bodyes and foundations did not moue.
            
               Nicholas Fitz Ioſey: Ge
                     ••
                  rey Wincheſter, the 28. of Sep.
               
                  Sherifes. Maior. 1249 Mathew Paris. A Mart at VVeſtminſter.
            
            
               Michael Tonney, the 28. of October.
            
            The King deuiſing how to exact money from the Citizens of London, made a mart at Westminster to laſt fiftéene dayes, and cōmanded that all trade of Marchandiſe ſhould ceaſſe in the Citie thoſe fiftéene dayes, which the Citizens were fayne to redéeme with two thouſande poundes. Beſides this, the King tooke victuals and wine, wherein could be found and payde nothing for it.
            Two Marchants of Brabant complayned to the King at
                  Mathew Paris. Strangers robbed, and Pirats hanged. 
               Winchester, that they had bin robbed by men of that Countrey, who had taken from them to the value of two hundred markes, which théeues they had ſéene in the Courte, wherevpō ſuch as were ſuſpected, were takē to be tryed by ye Countrey, but ye Coūtrey purged thē by oth, bycauſe they

were for the moſt part all infected and giuen to théeuerie▪ but the Marchants continuing their ſuite to the King, ſayd, that if they could not haue iuſtice, they woulde ſtay ſo much of Engliſhe Marchants goodes in Brabant. Then the King cauſed twelue men of Winchester to be choſen, who alſo did quit them that were accuſed, whiche thing when the King did ſée, he cauſed thoſe twelue to be impriſoned, and ſware, that in ſhort ſpace they ſhould be hanged as Théeues acceſſarie and periured, and cauſed other twelue to be empaneled, which laſt queſt found and confeſſed all, and appeached many, eſpecially of Hamſhire, which were hanged.
            Great diſſention aroſe in Cambridge betwixt the SchollersDiſcord at Cambridge. and Towneſmen, ſo that houſes were broken downe and ſpoyled, and many men wounded and ſlayne.
            In the Moneth of June fell great Raynes, eſpecially abouteAnno reg. 34 
               Abingdon, whiche caryed away many trées, houſes, beaſtes, milles, bridges, and one Chappell, not farre from Abingdon.
            
            
               Richard Hardell: Iohn Thollaſon, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior. 1250 Mathew Paris.
            
            
               Roger Fitz Roger, the 28. of October.
            
            The Friers Auguſtines beganne to inhabit at Wales at Wodhouſe.
            
            
               Boniface Archbiſhop of Canturburie in his viſitationMathew Paris. came to the Priorie of Saint Barthelmew in Smithfielde, where being receyued with Proceſſion in moſt ſolemne wiſe, he ſayd he paſſed not vpon the honor, but came to viſit them, vnto whome the Chanons anſwered, that they hauing a learned Biſhop, ought not in contempt of him toArchbishop of Canturbury viſiteth Saint Barthelmevves in Smithfield, beateth the Supprior and Channons. &c. be viſited by any other, which anſwere ſo much miſliked the Archbiſhop, that he forthwith fell on the Subprior, and ſmote him on the face with his fiſte, ſaying, indéede, indéede, doth it become you Engliſh Traytors ſo to anſwere me? Thus raging with othes not to be recited, he rent in péeces the rich Coape of the Subprior, trode it vnder féete, and thruſt him againſt a Piller of the chancell, that he had almoſt killed him, but ye Chanons ſéeing, that their Subprior

was almoſt dead, they ranne and plucked off the Archbiſhop with ſuch a violence, that they ouerthrew him backwards, whereby they might ſée that he was armed and prepared to fight. The Archbiſhops men ſéeing their mayſter downe (being all Strangers, and their mayſters countreymen borne in Prouance) fell vpon the Chanons, beate them, tare them, and trode them vnder their féete: at length the Chanons getting away as well as they could, ranne bloudy and mirie, rent and torne, to the Biſhop of London, to complayne, who bade them go to the King at Weſtminster, and tell him thereof: wherevpon foure of them went thither, the reſt were not able they were ſo ſore hurt: but when they came at Westminster, the King woulde neyther heare nor ſée them, ſo they returned without redreſſe. In the meane ſeaſon the whole Citie was in an vprore, and readie to haue rong the common bell, and to haue hewed the Archbiſhop into ſmall péeces, but he was ſecretly gotte away to Lambeth.
            
            The Friers of the order of Preachers through Chriſtendome, and from Hieruſalem, were by a common conuocation aſſembled togither at their houſe in Holborne by London, to entreate of their eſtate, to the number of foure hundreth.
            The King taking ineſtimable ſummes of money of all the rich mē in his Realme, tooke of one Aaron a Jew borne in Yorke 14000. markes for himſelfe, and 10000. markes forEnglish Ievves. A marke of gold or of ſiluer, vvas eight ounces. the Quéene, and before he had taken of the ſame Jew ſo much as amounted altogither to 30000. markes of Siluer, and two hundred markes of golde to the Quéene.
            In October the Sea flowing twice without ebbe, madeTempeſtes. ſo horrible a noyſe, that it was heard a great way into the land. Beſides this, in a darke night, the ſea ſéemed to be on a light fire, and the waues to fight one with another, ſo that the Mariners were not able to ſaue their Shippes: and to omitte to ſpeake of other, in one Hauen called Hureburne, beſides ſmall veſſels, thrée noble and famous Ships were ſwalowed vp of the waues. And at Winchelſea, beſides cotagesVVinchelſea drovvned. for ſalte, & fiſhermens houſes, bridges & milles, aboue

300. houſes in that Towne, with certayne Churches, through the violent riſing of the Sea, were drowned.
            A great Earthquake at Saint Albons on Saint Lucies day.
                  Anno reg. 35 Sherifes. Maior. 1251 Maior of London ſvvorne. Anno reg. 36
            
            
               Humfrey Beas: William Fitz Richard, the 28. of Septem.
            
            
               Iohn Norman, the 28. of October.
            
            King Henry granted, that where before time ye Citizēs of London did preſent their Maior before the King whereſoeuer he were, & ſo to be admitted, now he ſhould come only before the Barōs of ye Eſchequer, & they ſhould admit him.
            
               Lawrence Frowike: Nicholas Bat, the 28. of September.Sherifes. Maior. Adam Baſing, the 28. of October.
            
            A great drought from Eaſter to Michaelmas, for from the firſt of March, til the Aſſumption of our Lady, there fellNicho. Triuet. not ſo much as one drop of raine. The Shepeheards of France & England tooke their iourney towards the holy land,1252 Shepheards aſſembled. W. Packington. Anno reg. 37 Sherifes. Maior. 1253 Iohn Taxtor.
                to ye nūber of 30000. but their nūber vaniſhed in ſhort time.
            King Henry made Alexander King of Scottes Knight at Yorke, and gaue him his daughter Margaret to wife.
            
               William Durham: Thomas Wymborne, the 28. of Sept. Iohn Toloſon Draper, the 28. of October.
            
            The King tooke 40. ſ. of euery Knightes fée, to make his eldeſt ſon knight. He purchaſed the tenthes of all ſpirituall liuings at the Popes hands for fiue yeares, as it had bin in ayd of the holy land, but in déede it was to make his ſonne Edmond King of Naples and Sicill. The Liberties of London were ſeaſed by the meanes of Richard Earle of Cornewal, who charged the Maior that he looked not to the Bakers forLiberties of London ſeaſed. their ſiſes of bread, ſo that the Citie was forced to pleaſe the Earle with 600. markes, and were reſtored. The King empriſoned the Sherifes of London in the Tower a moneth and more, and after depoſed them of their office, bycauſe of the eſcape of Iohn Offrom that was vnder their warde in Newgate, for the death of a Priour that was the Kings ally.Ypodigma.
            
            A great Floud hapned in Holland, Lindſey, and Holdernes,
               Great floud. Anno reg. 38 Countreys of England, the tenth of October; which came vnto Alnigham, where through, a great portion of land, with houſes and people were drowned. Robert Groſted BiſhopRobert Groſtede.
               
of Lincolne, in Gréeke, Latin, and other languages, did by an Epiſtle reproue Pope Innocent, affirming, that theNicholas Triuet. W. Sheepeſhed▪
                Preaching Friers, & minorite Friers were infected with hereſies. This Robert Groſtede borne in Suffolke, this yeare deceaſed: he gaue al his bookes to ye friers Minors at Oxford▪
               
            
            
               Iohn Northampton: Richard Pickard, the 28. of Septem.
                     Sherifes. Maior. 1254 Edvvard prince of VVales. Richard Hardell Draper, the 28▪ of October.
            
            
               Edward yt Kings eldeſt ſonne wedded the Kings daughter of Spayne Elianor:
                his father gaue him the Earledome of Chester, and the gouernance of Guyen and Ireland.
            
            The Biſhop of Hereford in the Court of Rome, feigning himſelfe Procuratour for the Cleargy of England, bound the ſmall houſes of Religion in 100. or 200. markes the péece,Rodul. de Diceto. the greater houſes in 300. or 500. markes the péece. Saint Edmondſburie was bound in 700 markes, to be paide to certayneTaxtor; Anno reg. 39 Merchant ſtrangers, and all this money was collected to expulſe Manfred out of Naples.
            
            
               Ralph Aſhwye: Robert of Limon, the 28. of September.
                     Sherifes. Maior. 1255 Mathew Paris. Anno reg. 40 Ievves hanged. Nicholas Triuet.
                   Richard Hardell Draper, the 28. of October.
            
            Cxlij. Iewes were brought to Weſtminſter, which were accuſed of ye crucifying of a child named Hugh at Lincolne, xviij. of thē were drawne through the ſtréetes at Lincolne, and after hanged, ye other remained long priſoners. The Earles & Barons of England, with aſſent of the Prelates, cauſed proclamatiō to be made through all England, that the Charters of liberties & foreſts ſhould be kept: & at their inſtance, Boniface Archbiſhop of Canturbury accurſed all thoſe that ſhuld breake thē. Lewlin Prince of Wales, gathering a mighty 
                  •
               ād of mē, inuaded Cheſhire, which ye King had lately giuē to his ſon Edward, and deſtroyed all things with fire & ſword, till he came to the gates of the Citie of Chester, to repreſſe whoſe violēce, a valiant & famous Knight called Stephen Bancan was ſent of the K. with an army, who entring ye lands of a noble mā of Wales called Riſe, ſurnamed Vaghan, ye is, little, being circūvented & beſet of his enimies in mariſh groūds, was ſlain, the remnāt of his army likewiſe eyther ſlaine, or taken aliue, & put in bands, few excepted yt eſcaped by flight.
            
               
               Stephen Do: Henry Walmond, the 28. of September.Sherifes. Maior. 1256 Anno reg. 41 Richard Hardell Draper, the 28. of October.
            
            The Maior and diuers Aldermē of London, and the Sherifes, were depriued of their offices, and the gouernance of the Citie committed to other.
            The new worke of S. Paules Church in Londō, was begon.
            
               Michael Bokerell: Iohn the Minor, the 28. of September.Sherifes. Maior. 1257 Tpodigma. Richard Hardell Draper, the 28. of October.
            
            
               Hugh Bigot chiefe Juſtice of England, & Roger Thurkelby kept their Courtes in the Guild Hall of London, and puniſhed the Bakers vpon the Tomberell, and did many other things againſt the lawes of the Citie. Richard Earle of Cornewall went ouer into Almayne, and was there Crowned King of Almayne at Aquiſgrayne.
               King of Almayne.
            
            The ſixth day of July fell ſuch abundance of rayne, that many houſes, bridges, and trées were borne downe. TheBridges borne dovvne. Taxtor. VValles of Lō
                  don repayred. Anno reg. 42 Sherifes. Maior. 1258 King cauſed the walles of the Citie of London, whiche were ſore decayed, and deſtitute of Bulwarkes, to be repaired in more ſéemely wiſe than afore they had bin.
            
               Richard Owell: William Aſhwye, the 28. of September. Richard Hardell Draper, the 28. of October.
            
            For ſo much as the King had oftentimes promiſed the reſtitution of certaine antient lawes which he neuer performed, the Lords murmuring againſt him, held a Parliament at Oxford, which was after called the madde Parliament, bycauſe many things were there enacted, which turnedMadde Parliament. Tpodigma. Tvvelue Peeres. to the death of many nobles. In confirmation of theſe actes were choſen twelue Péeres, whiche had authoritie to correct ye breakers of them, the King his bréethren, the noble men and Barons, taking their oth to ſée the ſame obſerued. Shortly after, they baniſhed William of Valence, Galfrede,
               
               Strangers banished. 
               Gwydon, and Aylmer the elect of Winchester, all foure bréethren to the King on the mothers ſide, and other ſtrangers.
            Great dearth followed the wet yeare paſſed. A QuarterDearth of Corne. of Wheate was ſolde for fiftéene Shillings, and twenty Shillings, but the worſt was, there could be none found for money, where-through many poore people were cōſtrayned

to eate Horſe fleſh, and barkes of trées, but many ſtaruedCro. 
                     •
                  oueſham. for want of foode twentie thouſand in London as it was ſayd.
            A Iew at Tewkeſburie fell into a priuie vpon the Saterday,A Ievv drovvned. and woulde not for reuerence of his Sabboth be plucked out, wherefore Richard of Clare Earle of Glocester, kept him there till Munday, at which time he was foundeAnno reg. 43 Ex record. Tho. W
                     •
                  ke
                     •
                  . dead. Richard Clare
                Earle of Glocester dyed, and alſo his brother William by poyſon as was thought.
            
               Robert Cernehull: Iohn Adrien, the 28. of September.
                     Sherifes. Maior. 1259 A 
                        •
                     u
                        •
                     ke more. Richard Hardell Draper, the 28. of October.
            
            The King commanded a generall aſſembly at Powles Croſſe in London, where he in proper perſon commaunded the Maior, that the next day following, he ſhould cauſe to be ſworne before the Aldermen, euery ſtripling of twelueOth to the King. yeares of age or vpwardes, to be true to the King and hys heires Kings of Englande, and that the Gates of the Citie ſhould be kept with harneſſed men.
            Two Romaynes ſtriuing for prebends in Powles ChurchAnno reg. 44 at London, the one killed the other there.
            
               Iohn Adrian: Robert Cornehill, the 28. of September.Sherifes. Maior. 1260 Iohn Gyſors Peperer▪ the 28. of October.
            
            
               Iohn Duke of Briteine married Beatrice, King Henry the thirds daughter, and was made Knighte, and with him Baldwine Earle of the Iſle of Wight.
            
            This yeare was Sir Hugh Diſpencer made chiefe JuſticeHugh Bigot chiefe Iuſtice. Wil Packington.
                of England, and Nicholas of Ely Chancellour to ye King, and the Abbot of Peterborow Treaſourer of the Eſchequer, by ordinance of the Barons.
            The King repenting that he had at Oxford granted ſuch large Lawes and Liberties to the Nobles and people of the Realme, by counſell of Edward his ſonne, and Richarde his brother, he ſente to the Court of Rome to be abſolued of his oth. The Barons and Nobles of the Realme, helde aParliament. Parliament at London in the new Temple, and the King held himſelfe in the Tower of London.
            
            
               Reignold de Moun, Earle of Somerſet & Lord of Dunstere
               
                  Anno reg. 45 Nevvham. founded the Abbey of Newham in Deuonſhire.
            
            
               
               Adam Browning: Henry Couentry, the 28. of Septem.
               
                  Sherifes. Maior. 1261 King Henry abſolued.
            
            
               William Fitz Richard, the 28. of October.
            
            King Henry publiſhed at Powles Croſſe the Popes abſlution for him and all his that were ſworne to maynteyne the articles made in the Parliament at Oxford, and then he with the Quéene ſayled into France, to make a finall concord betwéene him, and the King of France for Normandy, where the compoſition was, that Normandy ſhould remaine to the French King, paying to the King of England and his3000. pound ſterling. Anno. reg. 46 Sherifes. Maior. 1262 The Barons in armoure. heires yearely thirtie thouſand pounds Turnoys, which is 3000. pound ſterling.
            
               Iohn Northampton: Richard Pickard, the 28. of Septem.
            
            
               William Fitz Richard, the 28. of October.
            
            The Barons of Englande (Simon de Mountfort béeing their chiefe) armed themſelues againſt the King, & all this yeare houered about London, and other places, without any notable acte of Rebellion, ſauing that they robbed aliants, and ſuche other perſons as they knewe to be againſte their purpoſe, eſpecially they ſlew the Iewes in all places. There was ſlayne Iewes at London to the number of 700. the reſtIevves ſpoyled for Vſurie. were ſpoyled, & their ſinagogue defaced, bycauſe one Iewe would haue forced a Chriſtian man to haue payde more thā two pence for the Uſurie of twentie Shillings a wéeke.
            
               Richard of Clare Earle of Glocester, ſon of Gilbert of Clare,
               Wil. Packington. Anno reg. 47 being with King Henry in France, deceaſſed, & was buryed at Tewkeſburie, and Gilbert his ſonne ſuccéeded him.
            
               Iohn Taylor: Richard Walbroke, the 28. of September.
               
                  Sherifes. Maior. 1263 Macy a French man Conneſtable of Gloceſter. Robert of Gloceſt.
               
            
            
               Thomas Fitz Thomas, Fitz Richard, the 28. of October.
            
            
               Sir Macy de Beſcile, a Frenchman, was by the King made Sherife and Conneſtable of Glocester, wherwith the Barōs being offended, they choſe to be Sherife and placed there a Knight of that Countrey called Sir William Tracy, which Sir William kéeping Court vpon a day in the Towne of Glocester, Macy
                the Frenchman, with a number of armed men came ſodeinely vpon him, drew him to the ground, and ſo to the Caſtel, and caſt him in priſon, whereof whē the Barons vnderſtoode, they ſent Roger Clifford, and Sir Iohn Gifford
               
with a great power to Glocester, who beſéeging the Caſtell,Cloceſter Caſtell taken by the Barons. brent the bridge, and entred at the laſt, where they tooke the ſaid Macy, with all his company, and for that a Carpenter frō the Caſtell with a quarell, had ſlaine an Eſquier of the Barons partie, Sir Iohn Gifford made the ſame Carpenter to leape from the top of the Caſtell, where-through he was cruſhed to death, Sir Roger Clifford tooke the kéeping of that Caſtell vpon him, and ſente Macy into the March, Sir Iohn Gifford tooke all Macies goodes at Sherestone, and elſewhere.
            
               Peter de Egblonuch a Frenchman, Biſhop of Hereford,
               Bishop of Hereford a French man. was drawne out of his Cathedrall Churche by Thomas Turberuill, and other, and ſent to the Caſtel of Erdeſley, where he and Sir Macy were both committed to ſafe ward: his treaſure was ſpoyled, and his Chanons ſent to priſon: and thus were Frenchmen ſerued through the Land where they mought be founde, by them that were on the Barons part.
            
               Simon de Mountfort with the Barons, pitched theyr Tents in Istleworth Parke. The Manor of Istleworth belō
               gingTho. Wikes. to Richard King of Almayne, was burnt by y• 
               Londoners. They alſo burned another houſe of his néere to Westminster.
            
            In this meane while, the King and Quéene remainedThe Queene chaſed. Nicho. Triuet.
                in the Tower of London, and when y• Quéene would haue gone by water vnto Windeſore, the Londoners getting them to the Bridge in great numbers, vnder the which ſhe muſt paſſe, cried out on hir, vſing many vile and reprochful words, threw durt and ſtones at hir, that ſhe was conſtreyned to returne againe to the Tower. The Citizens fortified the Citie with iron Chaynes, drawne ouerthwart theirStreetes of Lō
                  don chayned. Annales of Hyde.
                ſtréetes, munited the Citie, and did maruellous things.
            There was a peace concluded betwixte the King, and the Barons, with theſe conditions, that Henry, ſonne to the Kyng of Almayne, that tooke the Barons parte, and was in priſon, ſhoulde be deliuered, that

all the Kings Caſtels through England ſhould be put into the Barons hands, that the prouiſions of Oxford ſhoulde be kept, and that all Strangers within a certaine time ſhould depart the land, thoſe except, whoſe abode the faithfull perſons of the Realme with one aſſent ſhoulde accept: laſtly, that the Engliſhmen borne, and ſuch as were faithfull men to the Kingdome, ſhoulde order and rule the buſineſſe of the land vnder the King. But this notwithſtanding, certayne Knightes of the Kings part fortified the Caſtel of Windeſore with vittayles and armour. Edward the Kings ſonne came to Bristow, where diſcorde roſe betwixte his Knightes and the Towneſmen, ſo that the Towneſmen were minded to haue beſéeged the Caſtell: whiche when Edward vnderſtoode, he ſent for Walter Biſhop of Winchester that tooke the Barons part, that in his company he might go to the Court of his father, promiſing to perſwade his father to peace. Héerevpō going forth with y• Biſhop, til they came to Windſore, he entred the Caſtell, to the great miſliking of the Biſhop: but Edward ſhortly returned, and wente to méete Simon Earle of Leicester, that he with his adherents were cō
               ming to beſéege Windeſore Caſtell. Edward the Kings ſonne met with y• ſayd Simon about Kingston, and offered meanes of peace: but Simon truſting to Biſhop Walters counſell, deteyned Edward with him, and woulde not ſuffer him to depart till the Caſtell was yéelded, they that were within hauing libertie to departe whither they woulde, and the Strangers that minded to paſſe the Seas, had ſafeconducts granted them. Lewlin Prince of Wales confederate with Earle Simon, in the meane time, waſted the Countrey of Chester, and the Marches of the ſame, and ouerthrew to the grounde the Caſtles of Diffard and Gannoke. After this, a Parliament was holden at London, in the which, many that had held with the Earle, went to the Kings part, as Henry of Almaine, ſonne to Richard King of Romaynes, and other. The Kings partie being encreaſed, he wente to Douer, and endeuoured to haue gotte that Caſtell out of the EarlesAnno reg. 48 hands, but he trauelled in vayne.
            
               
               Robert Mountpiler: Osbert Suffolk, the. 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior. 1264
            
            
               Thomas Fitz Thomas Fitz Richard the. 28. of October.
            
            
               Lewes King of Fraunce, throughe procuring of Boniface Archbiſhop of Canturburie (who in politicke Sermons at Paris, as well at the Friers Prechers, as Minors, declared the doings betwixt the King of Englande, and the Earle of Leicester) toke vpon him to make a peace betwixte them: wherevpon the King of Englande, with his ſonne Edwarde, and diuerſe other of the Engliſh nobilitie, came to Paris aboute the xxij. of Januarie, but the Earle of Leicester, fearing ye 
               French Kings diſpleaſure for his mothers ſake, or ſome other cauſe not knowen, ſtayed at home in England and procéeded in hys buſineſſe: wherefore Roger Mortimer began to deſtroye the poſſeſſions which the Earle uf Leicester helde, againſte whō the Prince of Wales went, and beſieged the Caſtel of Radnore, and brought it to yéelde.
            
               Edward the Kings ſonne, after his returne from Paris, about Lent, toke his iourney toward the March, and paſſingThe Schollers and Burgeſſes of Oxforde the one ſpoyle the other. by Oxford, the Burgeſſes ſhut vp their gates againſte hym, whereby he was forced to lye at the kings Hall without the towne till the next morrowe and then departed. The ſchollers of Oxford being ſhut within the Towne, brake vppe the gate that leadeth toward Bea
                     •
                  monte, for which déede the Maior ſent ſome of them to priſon: and not long after, whyle the Schollers were at dinner, the Maior and Commons wyth banners diſplayde, thoughte to haue ſpoyled the Clearkes ere they had bin aware, but being eſpied, the Schollers ran togither, and with bowes and other weapons ſlewe and wounded the Burgeſſes and Commons, brake vp manye houſes, ſpoyling the goods, and ſet the houſes of the Portriues (William Spicer and Geffrey Hencley) on Fier, on the South ſide of the towne. Moreouer, bycauſe the Maior (Nicholas Kingſtone) was a Uintener, they brake vp the Uintry,Clarkes of Oxforde banished. dranke the Wines, and ſpoyled them, for the which facte the King cauſed the Clearkes and Schollers to be baniſhed the Uniuerſitie.
            
               
               Edward the kings ſonne toke the Caſtels of Hay & Huntington, belonging to the Earle of Hereforde, and the Caſtel of Brecon being alſo rendered to him, he deliuered to Roger Mortimer to kéepe, with the teritorie adiacent. Robert Ferrers Earle of Darbie (who toke part with Erle Simon) beſiegedVVorceſter beſieged. 
               Worcester, and entring by the olde Caſtel, ſpoyled the Citizens of their goods, and compelled the Jewes to be chriſtened.Gloceſter beſieged. The towne of Glocester, that before was taken by the Barōs, was now aſſailed by Edward the kings ſon, who entred ye caſtel by great force, & in the next morning by meanes of the Biſhop of Worcester, and Reignald Abbot of Glocester, a truce was taken betwixt the Barons in the town, and the Kings ſonne in the Caſtell: but ſhortly after, the Barons fled, and the Burgeſſes ſubmitting themſelues, were ſome of them hanged, the reſidue caſt in priſon, grieuouſly raunſomed, and the towne deſtroyed, from whence the Kings ſonne departed, ſpoyling and waſting the Country (contrarie to his othe made to the Barons) till he came to Oxforde, where he lodged in the houſe of the Frier Prēchers, and ioyned his power with the King his Father, who was lately come thyther to make his offering to Saint Friſwide (not fearing the ſuperſtitious opinion, yt if any King entred ye town, the Uirgin there would be auenged on him.) The Kyng hauing now with him his brother Richard king of Almaine, his ſonne Edward, William de Valence his brother on the mothers ſidē, and Iohn Cumyn of Scotland, with a multitude of Scottiſhmen, Iohn de Bailliol
                Lord of Galoway, Robert le Bruſe
                lord of Anandale, Roger de Clifford, Phillip de Marmiō, Iohn de Vallibus, Roger de Laborne, Henrie Percy, Phillip Baſſet, Roger de Mortimer,
                with an army went and beſieged Northampton,
               Nothamton beſieged. and the fourth of Aprill breaking the Wall, toke ye towne and in it fiftéene Knightes bearing Banners, Simon Mountfort the yonger, William de Ferrers, Peter de Mountfort, Baldwine Wake, Adam de Newmarche, Roger Bartrandi, Simon Fitz Simon, Berengario de Wateruile, Hughe Cubion, Thomas Maunſell, Roger Bonteuileyne, Nicholas
               
               Wake, Robert de Newenton, Phillip de Derby, Grimbald de Paunſevent: of whom Simon the yonger was ſent to Winchester, the reſidue to other places to be ſafely kepte. Other Knightes of meaner degrée were taken, to the number of. xl. and not a fewe Eſquires: from thence the king wente towardes Notingham, waſting with fire and ſworde the maner places of the Barons, and there he gathered his Lordes and great men.
            Earle Simon went to London, and from thence to Rochester,
               Rocheſter beſieged. whiche Iohn Earle Warren defended, the bridge and firſt gate wherof when he had wonne, being informed that the king was comming towards London, he lefte the ſiege & went backe to méete hym: but the king turning his waye from London toke the Caſtel of Kenington Kingston, which wasCaſtel at Kingſtone taken. the Erle of Glocesters, & then going to Rochester, chaſed away ſome that remayned at the ſiege, but ſlewe many moe: from thence he went to Tonbridge, the Caſtel whereof he toke, and the Counties of Glocester within it: leauing a garriſon there,Caſtel of Tonbridge taken. he went to Winchester, where he receiued thē of the v. Portes to his peace▪ & paſſing further to Lewes, was receiued into ye Priory, & his ſon into the Caſtel, wher whiles he remained, the Barons writ to him letters, as ye may read in Mathew Paris, & Nicholas Triuet but they taking no effect, ye Barons in armes approched towards Lewes, inuading ye kings peopleBattel at Levves. y• wer gone forth for forrage, wherof the king being warned, he goeth forth to méete thē with his army deuided into thrée ſorts. The firſt was led by Edward the kings ſon, hauing with him William de Valence Erle of Penbroke, & Iohn de Waren Earle of Surrey and Suſſex. The ſeconde was guided by Richard K. of Almain, wt his ſon Henrie. The third the K. himſelf had in gouerning. The Barons army was deuided into four wardes. The firſt led Henrie de Mountfort wt the Erle of Hereford. The ſeconde led Gilbert de Clare wyth Iohn Fitz Iohn & Williā de Moūtchance. The third in which the Londoners were, Nicholas Segraue. The fourth Erle Simō
                himſelf led with Thomas de Pelueſton. Edwarde the Kings

ſonne with hys battayle brake on his enimies that he made them to giue backe, of whom many were drowned.
            The Londoners were put to flyghte, whom whileſt the kings ſonne purſued for the ſpace of foure miles, he made great ſlaughter, but being ſeparate frō the reſt of the army, he weakened his part ſore.
            In the meane time manye of the Kings battayle were ſlaine, and the King of Almaine taken in a Windmil by SyrThe King of Almaine taken. 
               Iohn de Beuis, ſo was Robert le Bruis and Iohn Commyne, which had brought the Scottes King Henrie alſo hauing hys horſſe ſlaine vnder him, yéelded to the Earle of Gloucester,
               King Henrie taken. who ſent him priſoner to the Priory. Edward returning, is receyued with ſharpe battayle, and the Earle Waren, William de Valence, Grey de Leſmute,
                the Kings halfe brethren, Hugh Bigod with mē of armes to the nūber of. 400. Haberions gotte then the Caſtel of Pemſey, and when many were ſlayne on eyther ſide, the Lorde Edwarde ryding aboute the towne, ſound his father in the Priorie.
            In the meane time an aſſault being giuen to the Caſtle, which was valiauntly defended, the Barons withdrew thē: wherevpon the Lord Edward being greatly incouraged, and hauing gathered his people about him, woulde haue made a new battayle, ſo that the Barons ſued for peace, whiche by ye meanes of the Friers Preachers and Minors, was brought to paſſe, that on the Friday following, the Lords, Edwarde & Henrie, for theyr Fathers, of England and Almayne kings, deliuered themſelues to Earle Simon, vpon hope of quietneſſeEdvvard the Kings ſon taken and peace that might be concluded. On the Saterdaye the king licenced them that were aboute him to depart to theyr houſes, & writ vnto thē that were in Tonbridge Caſtel, that they ſhoulde not moleſt the Barons, as they returned homewardes: but they notwithſtanding being in armes, when they heard that the Londoners which were fled from the battaile were receiued into Croydon they haſted 
                  〈…〉
                
               
                  〈…〉
                
               
                  〈…〉
               
               
the kings ſonne was deliuered. There was ſlain in the battayle at Lewes, (which was fought on the xij. of May,) aboute
                  Robert of Gloceſt. VVeſtchepe in London brent. 4500. men. About that time a gret part of Westcheape in London was brent by treaſon.
            Erle Simon led the K. & his ſon Edward about with himW. Pakenton. Chro. Glaſton. till he had gotte all the ſtrong Caſtels of the lande into hys hands, and then put Richard King of Almaine in ye tower of London, and Edwarde the Kings ſonne in Douer Caſtle.
            In the mean time, Roger Mortimer, Iames Audeley, Roger Leyborne, Roger Clifforde, Haymo Leſtrange, Hugh de Turberuile, with many other, roſe againſt Simō, who to reſtrayne theyr boldneſſe, aſſociating to him the Prince of Wales, entred the Caſtell of Hereforde, and cauſed Edward the Kings ſonne to be brought thyther from Douer: after thys he wanne the Caſtell of Hey, whiche belonged to the Earle of Hereforde, and toke the Caſtel of Ludlow, and after waſtyng ye
               Caſtel of Ludlovv taken. landes of Roger Mortimer, goeth towardes Mountgomerie, & there taking pledges of peace of ye ſayd nobles, he turneth to the ſouth parts, to méete thē power, which was ſayd to come out of Fraunce to the kings ayde.
            Pope Vrbane ſent a Legate and Cardinall, the Biſhop of Sabrine, into Englande, but they might not enter the realm, the fiue Ports prohibiting them: wherevpon they called certain Engliſh Biſhops firſt to Amience, and after to Bulloigne, to whom he committed the ſentence of excomunication to be pronounced againſt the Citie of London, the fiue Portes; and al thoſe that troubled the King of Englāds peace: but the Byſhops diſſembled the matter.
            This yeare about the 20. of June a notable blaſing ſtarre appeared, ſuch a one as had not ben ſéene in that age, which riſing from the Eaſt with gret brightneſſe vnto the midſt ofBlaſing ſtarre. Nic. Triuet. Rober of Gloceſter Anno reg. 49 Sherifes. 
                        〈…〉
                     
                     ▪
                  
                the Semiſperie drew his ſtreame, it continued till after Michaelmas.
            
               Gregory Rokeſley, Thomas of Deford, the 28. of Septem. 
               
                  〈…〉
                
               
                  〈…〉
               
               
aroſe, for that Simond not only kept the king & other, as priſoners,The Earle of Gloceſter forſoke the Earle Leiceſter. but alſo tooke to himſelf the reuenewes of the kingdome, &c. which ſhould haue bene equally deuided amongſt them, ſo y• 
               Gilbert of Gloncester departing, ioyned to him in league the noble Knights of the Marches, whō Erle Simond had commanded to auoyde the Realme, but Iohn de Waren Earle of Surrey and Suſſex, & William de Valēce Erle of Penbroke, had brought a great power by ſea in the Weaſt parts of Wales, and arriuing at Penbroke, Earle Simon leading the king with him, went to Hereforde where he gathered a great power, to oppreſſe the ſayd knights: but while the Prelates laboured for peace, Edward the kings ſon being in ye Caſtel of Hereford is permitted to exerciſe himſelfe on horſſebackeEdvvard the kings ſon taken from his keepers in a medowe without the Citie by his kéepers, where after he had wearied diuerſe horſſes, and mounting on a freſh appointed for that purpoſe, he rode quite away, and paſſing the riuer of Wey, with two Knights and foure Eſquires, was folowed hard by his kéepers: but when they were aduiſed of the ſtandarts of Roger Mortimere and Roger Clifford comming to his reliefe, they returned, & he eſcaped to Wigmore. And this chaunced in the Whitſon wéeke. Lord Edward being thus eſcaped, gathereth an army, confederateth and ſubmitteth to him the Countreys of Hereford, Worcester, Salop, & Chester, with the townes, Cities and Caſtelles, he alſo winneth by force the Citie of Glocester, whiche Earle Simon had lately fortifyed, the townes men 
                  •
               led to the Caſtel, who xv. dayes after yéelded it, and departed. The Earle of Leicester wan the Caſtle of Monmouth, and layde it flat with the grounde, and entring into the lande of the Earle of Glocester called Glomorgan, méeting with the Prince of Wales
               Caſtel of Monmouth raced. comming to his ayde, they deſtroyed al with fire and ſword.
            
               Edwarde the Kings ſonne hearing that manye of Earle Simonds partakers were come to the Caſtel of Kenilworthe, takyng with him the Erle of Glocester he departed from Worcester, and came vpon them at a ſodaine, where he toke the Earle of Oxford, ſir William Mountchalſie, ſir Adam Newmarch,
               
               ſir Walter de Solenle and other: and Simon the ſonne of Earle Simon hardly eſcaped in the Caſtell. The Earle of Leicester hauing the King with him, returned out of South-Wales, and on Lammas daye came to Kemſey, a place of the Biſhop of Worcester, and there tarried the next day, Edwarde the Kings ſon returned from Kenelworth to Worcester, whoſe returne being knowne, Erle Simon departing from Kemſey, by vnhappy chaunce ſtayed in the towne of Eueſham, for on ye morrow being the ij. of Auguſt, Edward the kings ſon departed from Worcester paſſing the riuer neare to the towne called Cliue, cloſed vp the paſſage betwixt Earle Simon and Simon his ſon, who was at Killingworth. In the next mornyng Lord Edward approched néere to Eueſham on the one ſide, andBattaile of Euesham. 
               Gilbert Earle of Glocester on the other ſide, and Roger Mortimer on the two other ſides, whereby Earle Simon was ſo encloſed, that he muſt eyther fight or yéelde: on Friday therfore was the fifth daye of Auguſte, theyr armies encountred ech other in a large fielde without the towne, where the Earles part hadde the worſte: the Earle was killed in the fielde, and Henrie ſonne to Earle Simon, Peter de Mountfort, Hugh Diſpencer Juſtice of England, William de Mandeuile, Ralph Baſſet, Walter Greping, William de Yorke, Robert de Tregoze, Thomas de Hoſtile, Iohn de Be
                        ••
                     ocampo, Guido de Baylolle, Roger de Roulens, with ſir Iohn de Saint Iohn, ſir William de Verence, ſir Iohn de Inde, ſir William Troſſel, ſir Gilbert Einefielde,
                and other of meaner ſorte in great number, eſpecially of Walſhmen, for almoſt none of thē eſcaped thence, but they were ſlain at Tewkeſburie. Lords takenLords taken. Liber Eueſh.
                at Eueſham, ſir Vmfry de Boune, ſir Iohn Sainte Iohn ſir Simons ſonne, ſir Guy, ſir Baudwin Wake, ſir Iohn Veſſy, ſir Henrie Haſtings, ſir Nicholas Segraue, ſir Perce & ſir Roberte Mountfordes ſons, & many other, Simon de Mountfort ye ſon cōming too late to méete his Father at Eueſham, turned backe again to Kenilworth Caſtel, & the ſixth of September, he releaſedKing of Almain▪ deliuered. the King of Almain, his mothers brother, ſir Reimond Fitz Pierce, and many other.
            
               A Parliament was holden at Winchester, where all theA Parliament at VVincheſter. ſtatutes made at Oxforde were diſanulled, and all the goods of them that were againſte the king ſeaſed. London was in great danger to haue bin deſtroyed by the king, for diſpleaſure he had conceyued againſt ye Citizens, but the Citizens wholly ſubmitted both liues and goods vnto him. Eight perſons carrying the ſame ſubmiſſion toward Windſor, met Sir Roger Leyborne knight at Colbrooke, who turned them backe againe, and after they had diſcourſed the whole matter with, him, he willed them to deliuer to him their ſubmiſſion, and he woulde moue the King in it, whiche thing they did. After ſixe dayes thys Knight returned to the Citie, and ſayde the king had receyued their writings, willing them firſt to take away all the chaines that were in the ſtréetes of the Citie, and pull the poſtes out of the grounde that the ſame were fixed in, and bring both chaynes and poſtes to the Tower of London: then the Maior with fortie Citizens ſhould the nexte day following attende vpon the king at Windſor to confirme theyr wryting, and they ſhoulde goe and come ſafe: in witneſſe whereof he deliuered them the kings letter and ſeale, for the ſpace of foure dayes. The next daye the Citizens being at Windſore, attended at the gate vntill the king came from hunting, at whiche time he woulde not once looke on them. After the King was entred, they woulde haue followed, but they were forbidden: ſhortly after they were called into the Caſtell, where they were locked vp in a Towre with homely entertainment: the nexte day the king gaue vnto Prince Edwarde the Maior and foure Aldermen, ye reſt were committed to ſeueral priſons.Anno reg. 50 Sherifes. Maior. 1266 Pierce Longtofe. Robert Brune.
            
            
               Edward Blund: Peter Aunger, the. 28. of September.
            
            
               Thomas Fitz Thomas Fitz Richard, the. 28. of October.
            
            King Henrie came to Westminster, and there gaue vnto diuerſe of his houſholde ſeruauntes aboute the number of thrée ſcore houſholdes and houſes within the Citie, ſo that the owners were compelled to agrée & redéeme theyr houſes and goods, or elſe to auoyde them: then he made Cuſtos of

the Citie, ſir Othon Coneſtable of the Tower, who choſe Baylifes to be accomptable to him, Iohn Adrian, and Walter Haruy. After this the King toke pledges of the beſt mens ſonnes of the Citie, the whiche were put in the Tower of London, and there kept at the coſtes of their parents. By great labour and ſute made, al the foreſayde perſons whiche were in Windſor Caſtell, eight only except, were deliuered, and the king agréed with the Citizens for twentie thouſand markes to be payd, for the leauying of which fine, were taxed as wel ſeruauntes as houſholders, and many refuſed the liberties of the Citie to be quit of the charge.
            The Caſtell of Douer was yéelded to Edward the kings ſonne, into the which he put Guy de Mountfort to be kepte. The Counteſſe of Leicester, wife to Simond Mountfort, yéelded the Caſtel of Pemſey to K. Henrie hir brother, who forthwith baniſhed hir the realm of England for euer. About Alhalowntide the Quéene of England returned from beyonde the Seas, with hir came a Legate, named Othobone, who ſhortly after his comming, in counſel holden at Northampton, accurſed al the Biſhoppes and Prieſts that had ayded Earle Simon againſt the King, eſpecially he curſed by name, Walter of Worcester, Henrie
                of London, & Stephen of Chichester: and the Biſhop of Lincolne. Worcester ſhortly after deceaſed, the other
                  
                     •
                  . of Gloceſt. ther thrée went to Rome and were aſſoyled. The Legate alſo publiſhed the Popes Bull, for the tenthes of Churches to bée payde to the king for the next yeare. Sir Simond the yonger fled from Kenilworth Caſtel to the diſherited Knightes, who then were in the Ile of Oxholme, wher he remayned not lōg, for through meſſengers with faire promiſes, and hoſtages giuen by Edward the kings ſonne, he forſaking them, went to London to the king & his nobilitie, but being priuily warned of their guile, he made an eſcape & got ouer into Fraunce.
            
            The kéeper of Guy Mountfort about Eaſter being brybed, let him go, & went with him into Fraunce: this Guy wēt into Tuſcane and ſerued Earle Rufus, in whoſe war waxing famous, he obtained to haue his daughter in mariage.
            
               
               Robert Ferters. Earle of Darby Henrie Haſtings, Baudewinde
               
               Battaile of Cheſterfielde. 
               Wake▪ Iohn Der
                     ••
                  le and other with theyr power being in the Towne of Chesterfielde in Darbiſhire, there came againſt them Iohn Earle Waren, ſir Henrie of Almaine, ſir Waren of Baſingborne, and manye other Knightes, who on Whitſon euen met without the town on hunting, ſir Baudwyn Wake▪
                ſir Hen
                     •
                  y Haſtings ſir Gregory Caldwel, ſir Iohn Clynton, ſir Roger Maundeuil, ſir Richard Caldwel, and to y• number of. xxij. Knightes al vnder one ſpeare, al which they chaſed and put to flight: wherof when ſir Iohn Danuil being in the towne had vnderſtanding, he with a ſmall companye rode out, pierced through the hoſte, wounding many and eſcaped. Erle Waren entring the towne ſlew many a man, and toke the Erle Ferrers, who was ſicke of the goute, and had that day bene letten bloud: him they ſente to the Tower of London, from whence but lately he had bin deliuered. Henrie Haſtings and his company comming to Kenilworth, founde there ſir Iohn de Eynuile and many other valiant Knights. Sir William de la Knowe, and ſir Iohn de la Ware, had well ſtored ye Caſtel of all things neceſſarie. King Henrie haſtyngKenilvvorth Caſtel beſieged. thyther, beganne his ſiege the morrowe after Midſommer daye, whiche ſiege continued til Chriſtmaſſe after, for they within the Caſtell, not fearing his force which was great, ſet open theyr gates, and neuer cloſed them daye nor night, come who ſo would, they came to theyr coſt, ſo that many a man was ſlaine on both ſides, and manye were taken and raunſomed. At length the Legate, the Archbiſhop, & two other Biſhops, came to make accorde betwéene the king and the diſherited, and alſo them of the Caſtle: but the diſherits, nor they of the Caſtel would grant to the Kings will, wherfore the legate a courſed them and all that were of theyr accord: but they of the Caſtell, not regarding the Legate nor his curſing, in mockage therof, clothed a prieſt their ſurgeon. Phillip Porpeis, in a cope of white, & ſetting him on the Caſtel wal, as a white Legate againſt the red, made him to accurſe ye K. the Legate, & al their partakers. Whiles this buſineſſe laſted at Kenilworth, the diſherites toke ye Ile of Ely, &

ſtrengthned it in ſuch wiſe that they helde it long: they robbed Norffolk, Suffolke & Cambridgeſhire, they ſpoyled ye Citie of Norwich, & ranſomed ye rich men at their pleaſure. At Bartholmewtide, y• K. held a Parliament at Killingworth wherein by his Barons were choſen. vj. perſons, whiche being ſworne, choſe to thē other vj. theſe. xij. to make an accord betwéen the K. and the diſherits: ye firſt. vj. were, Walter Gefford Biſhop of Bath, Nicholas
                of Ely Bi. of Worcester, & Walter B. of Excester, Roger de Sumerey, Roberte Walronde,
                & Alayne de la Souch Barōs: theſe vj. choſe to them Gilbert E. of Glocester, Humfry
                Erle of Hereford, the B. of S. Dauids, ſir Iohn Bailiol, ſir Phillip Baſſet, and ſir Warayn de Baſingborne, if theſe xij. could not agrée, the Legate, & Henrie, ſon to Richard King of Almaine, ſhold be Umpiers, theſe met and agréed at the laſt.Anno reg. 51 Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Iohn Hinde: Iohn Walrauen, the. 28. of September.
            
            
               William Richards, the. 28. of October.
            
            By the kings cōmandement, ye Biſhops, Abbots, Priors, Erles, Barons & knights of ye realme were aſſēbled at Northampton on y• tweſday next before Alhalownday, ther to vnſtand and to confirme by ſtatute what the forenamed twelue ſtats had deeréed for the ſtate of ye kingdome, which was for y• Barons, y• none ſhould be diſherite, but ye 
               Mountfort & the Ferrers, y• other ſhould redéeme their lands wt money, at the hands of thē who had y• ſame in poſſeſſion of the Kings gift, ſo y• none payde aboue vij. yeres value, nor vnder iij. yeares value, which was the leſt, & this ſhal be aſſeſſed according to ye quātity of their treſpaſſe. The ſiege of Kenilworth yet continuing, they within the Caſtel began to be ſore troubled with ye flixe, and alſo wer without hope of ſuccour to come to thē, whervpō on S. Thomas day before Chriſtmaſſe they yéeldedKenilvvorth Caſtel ye elded. y• Caſtel to the K. with conditiō to depart wt life & lims, wt
               out loſſe of goods, or impriſonment, and not to be diſherited.
            Such of y• diſherited perſons, as liked not ye ordinaunce of Kenilworth, whoſe Captaine was Iohn Ciuille, after they had taken the Citie of Lincoln & ſpoyled the Iewes, they fled again to the Ile of Ely, whoſe comming abroade when the Kyng

with a great army hadde ſtopped. Edwarde the kings ſonne with bridges made of Hurdles and bordes, in place conuenient, as the inhabitaunts thereabout had inſtructed him, he entred vpon the Ile, ſome of them within yéelded them to him, y• other being diſperſed by flight. Whiles theſe thingsThe Erle of Gloceſter, toke the Citie of London. were a doing a newe trouble began, for the Earle of Glocester taking part with the diſherites, came with an army gathered in Wales, vnto London, the ſeauenth of April: therein he builded Bulwarkes, caſt ditches and trenches in diuerſe places.
            The king gathered an army at Windſor, & the v. of Maye,Annales of Hyde. he with an. 109. enſignes came towardes London, he pitched his tentes at Stratford, and tarried there the ſpace of one moneth, where many entreated to make peace.
            The vj. of June the Earle of Glocester, in peaceable maner rendred the Citie vnto the King againe, and then many that were diſherited were reconciled, at the inſtance of the Legate and the ſayde Erle. Foure that bare the cogniſaunce of the Erle of Darby were put in ſacks and caſt in the Thamis. Thomas Fitz Theobalde
                and Agnis his wife, ſiſter of ThomasMercors chapel. Becket Archbiſhop of Canturburie gaue to the maſter and brethren of the Hoſpitall, called Saint Thomas of Acres beyonde the ſeas, all the lande with the appurtenaunces that ſometime was Gilbert Beckets, father to Thomas Becket, in which land ye ſaid Thomas Becket was borne, to make there a Church.
            About Michaelmaſſe y• king came to Shrewſburie, to paſſeNicho. Triue
                     •
                  . into Wales, there to vanquiſh ye prince of Wales Lewlyne,
                who hadde ayded Simon Earle of Leicester▪
                but he ſending to thePeace vvith the prince of VVales. Anno reg. 52 king, granted him. xxxij. M. l. ſterling to haue his peace, & by the Legats means there was reſtored to ye prince, y• land of 4 Cantredes, which by law of armes the K. had taken from him.
            
               Iohn Adriant: Lucas Batecourt, the. 28. of September.
               Baylifes. Custos. 1268
            
            
               Alyn Souch, the. 28. of October.
            
            
               Othobone the Legate calling a counſel at London, ordayned many things in reformation of the Engliſh Church.
            
               Uariance fell betwene the felowſhip of Goldſmiths andA
                     •
                  yot in London. Taylors of London, cauſing great ruffling in the Citie, and many men to be ſlaine, for which ryot thirtéene of the chiefe Captaines were hanged.Parliament at Marleborovve. Anno reg. 53 Baylifs. Custos. Sokenreure Liber trinitatis Great Froſt. 1269 Nic. Triuet.
               
            
            The King helde a Parliament at Marleborow, in the whiche were made the ſtatutes of Marlebrige.
            
            
               Walter Haruey: William Dureſme the. 28. of September.
            
            
               Sir Stephen Edeſworth, the 28. of October.
            
            
               Thomas Wimborne.
            
            The riuer of Thamis was ſo harde frozen, from Saint Androwes tide to Candlemaſſe, that men and beaſtes paſſed on foote from Lambeth to Westminster: the Marchandiſe was caryed from Sandwich and other Hauens to London by lande.
            The 8. day of Aprill, Edmund the Kings ſonne marryed the daughter of William de Albemarle Earle of Holderneſſe, named Auelina, whyche was heyre to hir father and mother both, by reaſon whereof, he was to haue with hir the Countie of Deuonſhyre, and the Lordſhippe of the Ile of Wight, but he deceaſſed before both father and mother, and loſte all.Anno reg. 54 Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Thomas Baſing: Robert Cornhil, the 28. of Septemb.
            
            
               Hugh Fitz Thomas the 28. of October.
            
            The Nobles of England, by the Kyngs commaundement,Anuals of hyde Edmond Campion
                aſſembled at London, to treate of dyuers matters, amongeſt the whiche, one was, that all men ſhould before the JuſticesTho. Wikes. 1270 ſhewe by what right they held their landes, whyche matter did muche moleſt the people, vntill Iohn Warren Earle of Surrey appeared, who being aſked by what right he helde his landes, he drewe ſodainely out his ſword, and ſayde, by this I holde my Grandfathers lands, and with this I will kéepe them. Upon multiplying of wordes, the Earle ſlewe Allen de la Zouch, Lorde chiefe Juſtice of Ireland, before the other Juſtices of the Bench. And ſhortly after the ſame Iohn Erle of Surrey, by the othe of 25 Knights at Winchester, affirmed, that he did not commit that facte vpon any pretenced malice, neyther in contempte of the King, and ſo for the ſumme of 1200 markes was reconciled.
            
               
               Edward the kings ſonne with hys brother Edmunde andAnno reg. 55 many other nobles ſayling into Aſia againſt the infidels, by hys policie and manly Actes ſo demeaned himſelfe, that oftentimes he put the Turkes to great diſworſhip, for diſpight whereof they ſuborned a Saraſine to wounde him with a venemous dart, whereof he was long ſicke. Henrie ſonne to Richard King of Almayne as he went through Tuſcane, at Viterbe was ſlaine by Guy de Mountfort.
            
            
               Walter Potter: Phillip Taylour, the, 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior. 1271 W
                     •
                  . Riſhanger.
            
            
               Iohn Adrian Vintener, the. 28. of October.
            
            The ſtéeple of Bow in Cheape fell downe and ſlew manye people, men and and women.
            The eyghte and twentie of Januarie Richarde King of Almaine and Earle of Gornewall, brother to King Henrie deceaſed in the Caſtel of Berchamsteede, & was buried at Hayles an Abbey of his foundation.Anno reg. 56 Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Gregorie Rokeſley: Henrie Waleys, the. 28. of September.
            
            
               Iohn Adrian 
                     〈…〉
                  , the. 28. of October.
            
            Diuerſe 
                  •
               ournes 
                  〈…〉
                breake out of the hollow placesTho. de Wike. of the Earth, and ouerflowed a great parte of Canturburie Citie, the ſtreame wherof was ſo ſwift and violent, that it bare downe buildings and houſes, and drowned manye people.
            In June beganne a great ryot in the Citie of Norwiche,
               1272 W. Riſhanger. Riot at Norvvich. Anno reg. 57 through the which the Monaſterie of the Trinitie was burned, wherevpon the King rode downe, and making enquiry for the chiefe doers thereof cauſed. xxx. of them to be condemnemned, drawen, hanged and brent.
            
               Richard Paris: Iohn de Wodeley, the. 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Sit Water Haruy, the. 28. of October.
            
            King Henrie being ſicke, called before hym Gilberte
               
                  
                     •
                  iber trinitatis of Clare, Erle of Glocester, and cauſed him to be ſworn to kepe the peace of the lande, to the be houſe of Edwarde his ſonne, and then dyed the ſixtéench of Nouember, in the yere. 1272.

when he had raigned lvj. yeares and xxviij. dayes, he was buried at Westminster, whiche Church he had newly builded; he left iſſue, Edward his eldeſt ſonne, vnto whom hée haddeI. Treklon. giuen the Earledome of Chester, who ſuccéeded him in the Kingdome, Edmund his ſeconde ſonne vnto whom he had giuen the Earledome of Lancaster, and alſo after the death of Simond Mountfort and Robert Ferrers, the Erledomes of Leicester and Darbie, and two daughters, Beatrice and Margaret.
            
         
         
            
            ¶ King Edward ſurnamed Longſhanks.
            
            
            
               
                  EDvvarde the firſte after the Conqueſt, ſon to Henrie the third,Anno reg. 1 ſurnamed Longſhanke, beganne hys raigne the ſixtéenth day of Nouember, in the yeare. 1272. being then in y• parts beyond the ſea towarde1273 
               Ieruſalem. Of ſtature he was tall, and mighty of bodye, nothing groſſe: his eyes ſoméwhat blacke and in time of anger fierce, of ſuche noble and valiaunt courage, that he neuer fainted in moſt dangerous enterprices: of excellent witte and greate towardneſſe: he was borne at Westminster.
            
            
               Iohn Horne: Walter Potter, the. 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior. Anno reg. 2. 1274
            
            
               Sir Walter Haruy Knight, the. 28. of October.
            
            This yeare fell a great variaunce at Oxforde, betwéene the Northren and Iriſhmen, wherein manye Iriſhmen were ſlaine.
            The ſecond day of Auguſt, King Edward came into England from the Holy Lande, and on the fiftéenth of Auguſte, hée

with Elianor his wife were Crowned at Westminster by Robert Kilwarby Archbiſhop of Canturburie. At this Coronation fiue hundred great Horſſes were turned loaſe, catch them who could. Alexander King of Scottes did homage to King Edward. The King cauſed Leolin Prince of Wales to be ſommoned to his Parliament at Westminster, but he would not come, ſaying, he remembred the death of his father Griffen.
            
            
               Nicholas Wincheſter: Henry Couentry, the 28. of Sept.
               Sherifes. Maior. Anno reg. 3.
            
            
               Henry Welles, the 28. of October.
            
            On Saint Nicholas euen was great Earthquakes, lightnings and thunder, with a huge Dragon, and a blaſing Starre, which made many men ſore afrayde.
            In a Parliament at Westminster, Uſury was forbiddenVſury forbidden. Io. Rouſe.
                to the Iewes, and that they might be knowne, the King commanded them to weare a Tablet the breadth of a palme, vpon their outmoſt garments. He alſo ordeyned that Bakers making bread lacking weight aſſigned after the price of Corne, ſhould firſt be puniſhed by loſſe of their bread: the ſecond time by empriſonment: and thirdly by the Pillory: millers for ſtealing of corne, to be chaſtiſed by ye Tumberel.
            A rich man of France brought into Northumberland a Spaniſh Ewe as bigge as a Calfe of two yeares, which Ewe being1275 Firſt rotte of Sheepe. Hen. of Leyceſter. Tho. Walſing.
                rotten, infected ſo the Countrey, that it ſpread ouer all the Realme. This plague of moren, cōtinued xxviij. yeares eare it ended, and was the firſt rot that euer was in England.
            
            
               Lucas Batecourt: Henry Frowike, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Gregory Rokeſley Goldſmith, chiefe mayſter of ye Kings
            Mintes, the 28. of October.
            King Edward builded the Caſtell of Flint, ſtrengthned
                  Io. Rouſe. Caſtell of Flint. Anno reg. 4. Bocland. the Caſtell of Rutland, and other, againſt the Welchmen.
            
            
               Amicia Counteſſe of Deuonſhire, and Lady of the Iſle, founded the Abbey of Bocland, for Gilbert of Clare Earle of Glocester and Hereford hir Father, Iſabell hir mother, and Baldwine Earle of Deuonſhire.
            
            The eleuenth day of September, there was a generall1276
               
Earthquake, by force whereof, the Church of Saint Michael of the Mount without Glastonburie, fell to the ground, and péeces of many famous Churches in England fell, by force of the ſame Earthquake.
            
               Gregory Rokeſley, and the Barons of London, granted
                  Canter. Record. Ex Carta. Preaching Friers Church founded by Bainards Caſtell, before vvhiche time, their Church vvas in Holborne. and gaue to the Archbiſhop of Canturburie Robert Kilwarby,
                two lanes or wayes next the Stréete of Baynards Castell, and the Tower of Mountfichet to be deſtroyed, in the which place, the ſayd Robert builded the late newe Churche of the Blacke Friers with the reſt of the ſtones that▪ then were left of the ſayde Tower, for the beſt and choyſe ſtones the Biſhop of London had obteyned of King William Conquerour, to reedifie the vpper part of Saint Paules Church, that was then by chance of fire decayed.
            
               Iohn Horne: Ralph Blunt, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior. Anno reg. 5. 1277 Iohn Euerſden. Sherifes. Maior. Anno reg. 6. 1278
            
            
               Gregory Rokeſley Goldſmith, the 28. of October.
            
            The Statute of Mortmaine was enacted. Michaell Tony was hanged, drawne and quartered for Treaſon.
            
               Robert de Arar: Ralph Feuto, the 28. of September.
            
            
               Gregory Rokeſley, the 28. of October.
            
            King Edward gaue vnto Dauid, brother to Leolin Prince of Wales, the Lordſhip of Frediſham, which Dauid attended in the Kings Court, and did him pleaſant ſeruice, &c.
            Michaelmas tearme was kept at Shrewſburie.
            
            
               Iohn Adrian: Walter Langley, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior. Anno reg. 7. 1279
            
            
               Gregory Rokeſley, the 28. of October.
            
            The King builded a ſtrong Caſtell in Weast Wales, at Llhampaterne vaier.
            
            Reformation was made for clipping of the Kings coyne,Ievves executed. for which offence 267. Iewes were put to execution.
            The worthie Souldiour Roger Mortimer, at Killingworth,
               Round Table at Killingvvorth. Io. Rouſe.
                appoynted a Knightly game, which was called the Round Table, of an hundred Knightes, and ſo many Ladyes, to the which, for the exerciſe of armes, there came many warlike Knightes from diuers Kingdomes.
            
               
               Robert Baſing: William Mazaliuer, the 28. of September.
               
                  Sherifes. Maior. Anno reg. 8. Firſt halfe pence and farthings round. 1280 Pi
                        •
                     rce Longtofe.
               
            
            
               Gregory Rokeſley, the 28. of October.
            
            Where as before this time, the peny was wont to haue a double croſſe, with a creaſt, in ſuche ſorte that the ſame might be eaſily broken in the midſt, or into four quarters, and ſo to be made into halfe pence, or farthings, it was now ordeyned that pence, halfepence and farthings ſhoulde be made rounde, wherevpon was made theſe Uerſes following.
            
               
                  Edward did ſmite round peny, halfepeny farthing,
                  Robert Brune.
               
               The croſſe paſſes the bond of all throughout the ring.
               The Kings ſide was his head, and his name written,
               The croſſe ſide, what Citie it was in, coyned and ſmitten.
               To poore man, ne to prieſt, the peny frayſes nothing,
               Men giue God aye the least, they feast him with a farthing.
               A thouſand two hundred, foureſcore yeares and mo,
               On this money men wondred, when it first began to go.
            
            At this time, twentie pence wayed an ounce of Troy
               Regiſt. of E
                     ••
                  ry. weight, whereby the peny, halfepeny, and farthing, were of good quantitie.
            
               Thomas Boxe: Ralph de Lamere, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior. Anno reg. 9. Wilhel. Riſhanger.
            
            
               Gregory Rokeſley, the 28 of October.
            
            
               Dauid, the brother of Lewlin Prince of Wales, roſe againſt the King, and in the night ſeaſon brake into the houſe of Roger Clifford, when he was in his bed a ſléepe, on Eaſter day at night, and ſent him fettered in yrons as a théefe vnto Snowdon, to his brother Lewlin. He alſo raſed and laid flatte on the grounde, the Caſtell of Flint belonging to the King.1281 Sherifes. Maior. Anno reg. 10 Great Froſt and Snovv. Liber Roffenſis. Rocheſter Bridge, and fiue arches of London bridge borne dovvne.
            
            
               William Farrendon: Nicholas Wi
                     •
                  icheſter, the 28. of Sep.
            
            
               Gregory Rokeſley, the 28. of October.
            
            From Chriſtmas, till the purification of our Lady, there was ſuch great Froſt and Snow, as the olde men could not remember the like, wherethrough, fiue arches of London Bridge, and all Rochester Bridge was borne downe, and caryed away, with many Bridges more. Men paſſed

ouer the Thamis betwéene Westminster and Lambeth, and likewiſe ouer the Riuer of Medway, betwéene Stroude and Rocheſter, driſhod. Fiſhes in ponds, and birds in woods died for want of foode.
            Pirats of Zeland and Holland about Yarmouth and Donwich,
               1282 Io. Euerſden. Yermouth and Donvvich ſpoyled. Sherifes. Maior. Anno reg. 11 Corne ſold by vveight. did ſpoyle and robbe whoſoeuer they met, ſlew many men, and caryed away not a few Shippes with all ye goodes in them.
            
               William Mazelyuer: Richard Chigwell, the 28. of Sept.
            
            
               Henry de Waleis, the 28. of October.
            
            This yeare the Bakers of London were firſt drawne vppon Herdles, by Henry Waleis Maior, and Corne was then firſt ſold by weight.
            This Henry Waleis Maior of London, cauſed to be erectedThe Toune in Cornehill. Radul. Baldoke.
                a certayne houſe in one of the higheſt places of London, which houſe was called the Tonne vpon Cornehill, to be a priſon for night walkers, and other ſuſpitious perſons. He alſo by the Kings licence, cauſed to be builded an houſe called the Stockes, on the North ſide of Saint Mary Wolchurch inThe Stockes market. Cuſtomes of Lon.
                
               London, to be a market for fleſh and fiſh in the midſt of the Citie, and certayne houſes néere vnto Powles Church, the profites therof to be receyued by the Mayſters of the Bridge of London, towards the maintenance of the ſame Bridge.
            The King entred Wales with an army, appoynting hisWil. Riſhenger. Wil. Packington. footemen to occupy the enimies in fight, whiles his horſemen in a wing ſet on the rere battayle: himſelfe with a power kept his place, where he pight his golden Dragon, vnto the which as to a Caſtell, the wounded and wéerie might repaire: but Dauid fléeing, the King with his power followed, and as he paſſed by a wood, there iſſued out of the ſame a foure thouſand Welchmen, whiche inuading the Kings armie, made great ſlaughter, but at length the King marching through, by ſtrong hande entred the Caſtell of Oxe, and tooke Angleſey, where he loſt William de Awdley, Roger Clifford the yonger, and twelue other of his chiefeſt Captaynes.
            
               
               Iohn Peckham Archbiſhop of Canturburie ſendeth commandement1283 to the Biſhop of London, to deſtroy all the Sinagogues of the Iewes within his dioces. After the ArchbiſhopThe Ievves Sinagogues deſtroyed. writeth to him to tolerate them to build one Church in ſome open place in the Citie of London, where the King ſhould appoint, ſo they beſtow no great coſt, nor vſe their fond ceremonies.
            
               Ralph Blound: Anketin de Beteuile, the 28. of Septem.
               Sherifes. Maior. Anno reg. 12 Tho. Walſing. 1284 Wil. Riſhang. Nic. Bromfild.
            
            
               Henry de Waleis, the 28. of October.
            
            
               Leolin Prince of Wales, came downe from the Mountayne of Snowdon, to Mountgomerie, and was at length taken at Bwelth Caſtell, where vſing reprochfull words againſte the Engliſhmen, Roger le Strange
                ranne vpon him with the Sword wherewith he was girt, and cut off his head, leauing his dead body on the grounde. Sir Roger Mortimer cauſed the head of Lewlin to be ſet vpon the Tower of London crowned with Yuy.
            King Edward founded the Abbey of Vale Royall in Cheſhire.
               Hiſto. Auria. Io. Rouſe. He alſo remoued the Abbey of Aberconwey to another place, and there builded a ſtrong Caſtell againſt the Welchmen. He gaue diuers Caſtels of the Welchmen, to EngliſheChr. of Dun. Wil. Pakenham. Lords, and after tooke Dauid, Lewlins brother, with his wife, his two ſonnes, and ſeauen daughters, at Saint Moris, which Dauid was drawne, hanged, and quartered at Shrewſburie.
            
            
               Iordane Godchepe: Martin Box, the 28. of September.
            
            
               Henry Waleis, the 28. of October.
               Sherifes. Maior. Anno reg. 13
            
            
               Edward Prince of Wales, borne at Carnaruan in Wales.
            
            
               Laurence Ducket Goldſmith, and Citizen of London, gréeuouſly wounded one Ralph Crepin in Weaſt Cheape, and then fled into Bow Church: after that, certaine euill diſpoſed perſons, friendes to the ſayde Ralph, entred the
                  Cron. of Dunſta. Ducket hanged in bovv Church 1285 Church in the night time, and ſlew the ſayd Laurence lying in the Stéeple, and then hanged him vp, placing him ſo by the window, as if he had hanged himſelfe: vpon the which déede, enquirie being made: it was preſented, that he had

hanged himſelfe, for the which being drawne by the féete, he was buryed in a ditch without the Citie: but ſhortly after, by relation of a boy who lay with the ſaid Laurence at the time of his death, and had hid him there for feare, the truth of the matter was knowne, for the which, Alice, a woman that was chiefe cauſer of the ſayde miſchiefe, and xvj. menMurtherers hanged. Io. Euerſden.
                with hir, were then put in priſon, and afterwardes more, who all were drawne and hanged, ſaue the woman, who was burnt: theſe were of the poorer ſort, but the rich of that malicious company eſcaped for money. The Churche wasBovv Church interdicted. interdicted by the Archbiſhop, and the dore with the window was ſtopped vp with thornes, then the ſaid Laurence was taken vp, and buryed in the Church-yard.
            The great Conduit in Cheape was begon to be builded.
            
               Stephen Cornehill: Robert Rokeſley, the 28. of Septem.
               
                  Sherifes. Maior. Anno reg. 14 Liberties of London ſeaſed.
            
            
               Gregory Rokeſley, till the feaſt of Peter and Paule, and that day was the Citie ſeiſed into the Kings handes, and Ralph Sandwich appoynted Cuſtos vntill Candlemas, and then was choſen Iohn Briton vntill Saint Margarets day▪
            
            A Juſtes was proclaymed at Boston, in the faire time,1286 whereof one part came in the habite of Monckes, the other in the ſuite of Chanōs, who had couenāted after the JuſtesFaire at Boſton ſpoyled. Hiſto. Aurea. Tho. Walſing.
                to ſpoyle ye Faire. For the atchieuing of their purpoſe, they fired the Towne in thrée places. It is ſaid, that ſtreames of Gold, Siluer, and other mettall molten, ranne into ye ſea. The Captayne of this confederacie was Robert Chamberlaine Eſquier, who was hanged, but would neuer confeſſe his fellowes.
            Wheate was ſolde for xvj. pence, & xij. pence ye Quarter.
            
               Walter Blunt: Iohn Wade, the 28. of September.
               
                  Sherifes. Custos. Anno reg. 15 Yermouth, Donvvich, and Ipſvvich perished. Iohn Euerſden.
               
            
            
               Ralph Sandwich.
            
            On Newyeares day at night, as wel through ye vehemē
               cie of the wind, as violence of ye Sea, many Churches were ouerthrowne and deſtroyed, not only at Yarmouth, Donwich, and Ipſwich, but alſo in diuers other places of Englande, and

other Regions adioyning to the Sea, eſpecially in that part1287 of England which is called Meris land. Al the whole prouince was for the moſt part turned into a ſtanding poole, ſo that intollerable multitude of men were ouerflowed, and deſtroyed with the water.
            By reaſon of wrongs done by Paine Tiptot, Rice ap Merideth rebelled in Wales, and did much hurt, againſt whome came Edmond the Kings brother, and at the ſéege of Durſelan Caſtel, in vndermining of walles, with the ruines were ſlaine William Mountchenſey, Gerard de Inſula Banerers, Mounſire, Humfrey Haſtings Bacheler, and diuers other.
            
               Thomas Croſhe: Walter Hauteyne, the 28. of Septemb.
               Sherifes. Custos. Anno reg. 16 W. Packington.
            
            
               Ralph Sandwich.
            
            King Edward ſayled to Burdeaux, and from thence rode into France, where he was honourably receyued of Phillip le Beaw King of France. He baniſhed all the Iewes out of Gaſcoigne, and other his lands in France.
            
            The Sommer was ſo excéeding hote, that many men dyed through the extremitie thereof, and yet wheate wasHot former and cheape Corne. 1288 ſolde at London for thrée Shillings four pence the Quarter, and ſuche cheapenes of Beanes and Peace, as the like had not bin heard of.
            
               William Hereford: Thomas Stanes, the 28. of Septemb.
               Sherifes. Custos. Anno reg. 17 1289
            
            
               Ralph Sandwich.
            
            Great hayle 
                  •
               e
                  •
                in England, and after enſued great raine that the yeare following, wheate was rayſed from thrée pence the buſhell, to ſixtéene pence, and ſo encreaſed yearely, till it was laſtly ſold for twentie Shillings ye Quarter.
            The Citie of Carelile, the Abbey, with all the houſes belonging to the Friers Minors, was conſumed with fire.
            
               William Betayne: Iohn of Canterbury, the 28. of Sept.
               Sherifes. Custos. Anno reg. 18
            
            
               Ralph Sandwich. Which Ralph before Candelmas was depoſed from the Conſtableſhippe of the Tower of London, and in his place was putte Ralph de Barneuers Knighte, who was agayne remoued on theCuſtos of London, Conſtables of the Tovver. Monday after Candlemas daye, from the cuſtodie

of the Citie, and in his place was Sir Iohn de Briton.
            
            
               Rice ap Merideth was by the Earle of Cornewall in the1290 Kings abſence taken, drawne, hanged & quartered at Yorke.
            
            
               William de Breoſa called the ſenior, deceaſed at Find
                     ••
                  , and was buryed in the Monaſterie of Sele.
            
            
               Falke of S. Edmond: Salomon le Sotell, the 28. of Sept.
               Sherifes. Custos. Anno reg. 19
            
            
               Sir Iohn Briton.
            
            King Edward returning out of Gaſcoine, where he had remayned thrée yeares, two monethes, and eleuen dayes, was honourably receyued of the Londoners.
            
            King Edward held a Parliament at Westminster, where, in the tranſgreſſions of diuers Juſtices was tryed out, andIuſtices punished. Adam Meri. Cro. Dun. Radul. Baldoke. Scala Croni. Iohn Rouſe.
                puniſhed accordingly: ſome loſt their goodes, and then were baniſhed: ſome, as well of the bench, as of the aſſiſes, were ſent to the Tower, which with great ſummes of money obteyned libertie. Sir Thomas Weyland had all his goodes, both moueable and vnmoueable confiſcate, and was baniſhed: Sir Ralph Hengham, chiefe Juſtice of the higher bench, offered 7000. markes: Sir Iohn Loueter Juſtice of the lower bench 3000. markes: Sir William Bromtone
               1291 Juſtice 6000. markes. Of their Clearkes for their redemption: Of Robert Littelburie 1000. markes: Of Roger Leyceſter 1000. markes: Of Sir Salomon Ruſx, chiefe Juſtice of Aſſiſes, 4000. markes: Of Sir Richard Boylond 4000. markes: Of Sir Thomas Sodentone 2000. markes: Sir William Hopton 2000. markes: Of Robert Preſton 1000. markes: Sir Williā Saham Juſtice 3000. markes: Of a certayne Clearke of the Courtes, called Adam de Stratton, 32000. markes of olde money and newe, beſide iewelles without number, and pretious veſſels of ſiluer, which were found in his houſe, and a Kings Crowne, which men ſayde was King Iohns. Moreouer, the King conſtreyned the Juſtices to ſweare, that from thenceforth they ſhoulde take no pention, fée, or gifte of any man, except only a breakefaſt, or ſuch like preſent.
            He baniſhed all the Iewes out of England, giuing thē to

beare their charges, till they were out of his Realme, the number of Iewes then expulſed, were xv. M. lx. perſons.
            The Scottes by their Charter deliuered to King Edward
               Records. the Kingdome of Scotland, with the Caſtels, rightes and cuſtomes, the fourth day of June, that vpon due diſcuſſing the matter, it might be knowne who was lawfull heire therevnto.
            
               Thomas Romaine: William de Lier, the 28. of Septemb.
               Sherifes. Custos. Anno reg. 20 1292
            
            
               Iohn de Briton. Who was about Saint Margarets day remoued from the cuſtodie of London, and Sir Ralph de Bernouers was remoued from the Conſtableſhip of the Tower, and in their places put againe Ralph Sandwich, Cuſtos of the Citie, and Conneſtable of the Tower.
            
               Roger Bacon was buried on the eleuenth of June, in the grey Friers Church in Oxford.
            
            The wooll Staple was ordeyned to be kept at Sandwich.
            
            
               Ralph Blunt: Hamo Box, the 28. of September.
               
                  Sherifes. Custos. Anno reg. 21 Iohn Bay
                     ••
                  oll did homage for Scotland. Recordes.
               
            
            
               Ralph Sandwich.
            
            The eightenth of Nouember, King Edward ſate in his tribunall ſeate at Berwike, and hauing heard the aſſertions of the competito
                  ••
                of the Crowne of Scotland, he adiudged Iohn Bailliol to be true heire of Scotland, and therefore to enioy the ſame whole Kingdome, with the appurtenances, and aſſigned him to do him homage, which was performed at Worham the twentith of Nouember, and alſo on Saint Stephens day following at Newcastell.
            
            Quéene Elianor dyed at Herdeby, a Towne néere to Lincolne,
               1293 Queene deceaſſed. Walte. Hennig. Radul Baldoke. Charing Croſſe. Ghro. Dun.
                hir bowels were buryed at Lincolne, hir body was brought to Westminster, and there buryed: the King made at euery place where ſhe ſtayed, a coſtly Croſſe, with the Quéenes image vpon it, Charing Croſſe, the Croſſe in Weast Cheape of London, Dunstable, Saint Albons, Waltam Croſſe, and others.
            Great diſcord aroſe betwixt the Mariners of France, andThe Sinque Ports againſt the French. them of Porteſmouth and Yermouth, wherethrough the Engliſhmen ſuſteyned great loſſe, but they complayning to the

King, obteyned licence to reuenge their owne wrongs, and without ayde eyther of Wales, Scotland, or Ireland, wente to the Sea with ſixe hundred Shippes, and ſet vpon their enimies, and tooke two hundreth and fiftéene French Ships, and droue them to the Ile of Gerneſey, and after preſented them to the King.
            The ninth of July, a great part of the Towne of Cambridge,
               Cambridge brent. Iohn Euerſden.
                with the Church of our Lady, was conſumed with fire.
            The goodes as well Temporall, as ſpirituall of all religious people in England, were taxed, to pay the tenth part to the King.
            The Minories, a Nunnerie without Aldgate of London,
               The Minories. Ex Carta. Radul. Baldoke.
                was founded by Edmond Earle of Leyceſter, brother to king Edward. The ſame yeare the ſame Edmond and his wife and all the Engliſhmen were baniſhed out of the French kings dominion.
            
               Henry Bole: Elias Ruſſell, the 28. of September.
               
                  Sherifes. Custos. Anno reg. 22. Firſt Alderman in London.
            
            
               Ralph Sandwich.
            
            
               Nicholas Farrengdon was the firſt Alderman.
            Thrée men had their right hāds cut off in Weast Cheape, for reſcuing a Priſoner, reſted by an Officer of the Citie of London.
            
            
               Gilbert Earle of Glocester dyed, leauing iſſue thrée1294 daughters, and one ſonne within age, begotten of Iane his wife.
            
               Robert Rokeſley the yong corder: Martin Ambresbery
               Sherifes. Custos. 
               Ralph Sandwich. (the 28. of Sep.
            The thirtenth of October, being Sonday, all the Cleargie of England granted a Subſedie of the one halfe of their fruites and reuenues for one yeare to the King.
            In the quindene of S. Martin, the Juſtices Itinerants ſateAnno reg. 23 W. Packington. without London in the Biſhop of Couentries houſe, at y• ſtone Croſſe. Roger Pine eſden Captain to the Welchmē, ſp
                  ••
               led & burned the Marches. Great Snowes & winds did great harme in England. The water of Thamis ouerflowed the1295
               
bankes, & a great breach at Rotherheath beſides London, and ye low grounde about Bermondſey, and Tothill was ouerflowed.
            
               Henry Box: Richard Gloceſter, the 28. of September.
               
                  Sherifes. Custos. Anno reg. 24 Caſtel of Bevv marish. Iohn Rouſe. Ghro. Dun.
               
            
            
               Sir Ralph Sandwich.
            
            The King paſſing y• water of Conoway, and ſo forth into Wales with an army againſt the Welchmen, builded the Caſtell of Beawmariſh, in the Iſle of Angleſey. The Welchmen were cōſumed by famine: their woods were felled, and many Caſtels fortified, their Captayne was taken, & brought to London, and ſo for that time the warres ſeaſed.
            The Frenchmen arriued at Douer, ſpoyled the Towne,1296 Douer ſpoyled. and brente a great parte thereof, amongſt other they ſlewe Thomas of Douer, a Monke of great holyneſſe.
            The King cauſed all the Monaſteries in England to bée
                  Wil. Paken. Monaſteries ſearched. W. Sheepeſhed.
                ſearched, and the money in them to be broughte vp to London. He alſo ſeiſed into his hands all their lay fées, bycauſe they refuſed to pay to him ſuche a Taxe as he demanded. Moreouer, he cauſed the wooll and leather to be ſtayed in England, and there followed great dearth of corne and wine.
            There roſe a greate diſcorde at Oxforde, betwéene theDiſcord betvvixte the Clearkes and Tovvneſmen of Oxforde. Clearkes and Lay men, and all bycauſe of two varlets of diuers Countreys, which fell out about a ſmall matter, for vpon that occaſion, ſome tooke one part, and ſome another, and ſo all were deuided into partes, in ſomuch that learned and lewde by flockmeale ranne to the fight, and when the Schollers or Clearkes were gone out of their Hoſtles, the Laitie perceyuing either none, or elſe very fewe to be remaining at home, entred the Clearkes lodgings, and caryed away a great deale, & many kinds of ſtuffe, to the great & vnrecouerable damage of the Schollers. In this ſkirmiſh was ſlayne Sir Fulke of Neyrmouth, parſon of Pichelesthorne, and many other on eyther ſide. The King hearing thereof, ſente Juſticiaries to reſtore the peace, and to condemne the murtherers, which whē they came, forced the Towneſmen to pay the Scholers two hundreth poundes for domages done to them.
            
               
               Iohn of Dunſtable: Adam de Halingbery, the 28. of Sep.
               Sherifes. Custos. Anno reg. 25.
            
            
               Sir Iohn Breton. Was made Cuſtos of London by the King, Ralph Sandwich being remoued, and the morrow after Saint Barnabes day, all the Liberties were reſtored to the Citie of London, the Mairaltie excepted.
            
               Iohn Baliol King of Scottes contrary to his alegiance rebelled,Wil. Packington. Tho. Walſing. wherefore King Edward haſted him thither, and wonne the Caſtels of Berwike, and Dunbarre: he ſlewe of the Scottes fiue and twenty thouſand: he conquered Edenborough,
               1297 King Edvvarde vvon Bervvike. Regalles of Scotland. where he found the regall enſignes of Scotland, as Crowne, Scepter, and cloth of eſtate &c. In his returne, he called a Parliament at Berwike, where he receiued the fealties of all the great men of Scotland, and their homages.
            
               Thomas of Suffolke: Adam of Fulham, the 28. of Septe.
               Sherifes. Custos. Anno reg. 26.
            
            
               Sir Iohn Breton.
            
            King Edwarde offered to Saint Edwarde at Westminster, the Chayre, Scepter, and Crowne of Golde of the Scottish King.
            The King encreaſed the tribute of the woolles, talking for euery Sacke fortie Shillings, where before that time they payde but halfe a marke.
            The Scottes by the inſtigation of William Walleis, rebelled, and put the Engliſhmen to much trouble, and loſſe of many men.
            King Edward ſayled into Flanders, to reſcue Guy their Earle, which was gréeuouſly ouerſet by the French King, ſo1298 that he had wonne muche of his landes, but ſhortly after a peace was concluded for two yeares.
            The Eſchequer and the Kings Bench was remoued frō 
               London to Yorke.
            
            King Edward wanne the battell of Fankirke in Scotland, vpon Saint Mary Magdalens day, in whiche battell was
                  Nicholas Triuet. Tho. Walſing. Scala Croni. Battell at Faulkirke in Scotland. ſlayne more than twentie thouſand Scottes, and William Walleis their Captayne fledde. Anthony Beke, Biſhop of Dureſme had at this battell ſuch a retinue, that in his company were two and thirtie Banners.
            
               At this time, the Towne of Saint Andrewes was deſtroyed, no man there reſiſting.
            The Citizens of London hearing of the great victorieChro. Dun. obteyned by the King of Englande againſt the Scottes, made great and ſolemne triumph in their Citie, euery one according to their craft, eſpecially the Fiſhmongers, which with ſolemne Proceſſion paſſed through the Citie, hauing amongſt other Pageants and ſhewes, foure Sturgeons gilded, caryed on foure Horſes: then foure Samons of Siluer on foure Horſſes: and after ſixe and fortie Knightes armed, riding on Horſſes, made like Luces of the Sea: and then Saint Magnus with a thouſand Horſemē: this they did on Saint Magnus day, in honor of the Kings great victorie, and ſafe returne.
            This yeare, the King payde to the Marchants of Gaſcoigne 150000. pounds ſterling, for his brothers expences there.
            
               Richard Reffeham: Thomas Sely, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior. Chro. Dun. Anno reg. 27 
               Henry Waleis, the 28. of October.
            
            King Edward helde a great Parliament or counſell at Stepenheath by London, in the houſe of Henry Waleis Maior of London. Certayne perſons of the Citie of London brake vp the Tonne in Cornehill, and tooke out certayne priſoners, for the whiche nine of them were puniſhed by long empriſonment and great fines. It coſt the Citizens more than1299 20000. markes to purchaſe the Kings fauoure, and confirmation of their liberties.
            The xxix. of March, a vehement fire being kindled in the leſſer hall of the Pallace at Westminster, the flame thereofVVeſtminſter and the Kings Pallace conſumed vvith fire. Radul. Baldoke. Saint Martins in the Vintrie nevv builded. being driuen with winde, fired the Monaſterie adioyning, which with the Pallace were both conſumed.
            
               Saint Martins Church in the Uintrie at London was new builded, by the executors of Mathew Columbers. The king went to Yorke, and ſo into Scotland with a great power.
            A certayne rich Citizen of London deceaſing, a great nū
               berIo. Euerſden. of poore people were aſſembled to receiue his charitable

doale, amongſt whome ſuddaynely ruſhed in the ſonnes of150. Beggars murthered at London. 
               Belyall, coueting to ſnatch the money from the executors hands, but miſſing of their purpoſe, they fell on the poore people, murthering 129. and drowned 30. of them, bycauſe one of them had bewrayed their former wicked purpoſes.
            This yeare was made an Acte of common counſell forPrice of Pulterie. prices of victuals to be ſold at London, by conſent of the King and Nobilitie, concerning the price of Powlterie. A fatte Cocke for thrée halfepence: two pullets for thrée halfepence: a fat Capon for two pence halfepeny: a Gooſe foure pence: a Mallard thrée halfe pence: a Partridge for thrée halfe pence: a Feaſant four pence: a Heron ſixe pence: a Plouer one peny: a Swanne for thrée Shillings: a Crane for xij. pence: two Wodcocks for thrée halfe pence: a fatte Lambe from Chriſtmas to Shrouetide ſixtéene pence, and all the whole yeare after for four pence.
            
               Iohn Armenter: Henry Fingrie, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior. Anno reg. 28.
            
            
               Elias Ruſſell, the 28. of October.
            
            The King made cruell warre vpon the Scottes, and had of them a great victorie, and then they yéelded themſelues to his mercie.
            This Realme was troubled with falſe money, whicheFalſe Money. 1300 Wil. Riſhang.
                was called Crokden, and Pollard, coyned in partes beyond the Seas, and vttered for ſterling, ſo that many thereby were deceyued, whiche vpon Saint Stephens day was clouen in two, and was accompted but halfe the value. On Eaſter euen the ſame money was forbidden through all England, and after called in, and new coyned, to the Kings great aduantage.
            A ſodeine fire encloſed the Monaſterie of Glocester, theRob. of Gloceſter Cloyſter, Belfrie, the great chamber, with other buildings was conſumed.
            For the eſtabliſhment of the peace betwéene England and France, King Edward tooke to wife Margaret, ſiſter to PhilipWil. 
                        •
                     aking. le Bew then King of France: they were married at Canturburie.
            
            
               
               Lucas de Hauering: Richard Champes, the 28. of Septem.
               Sherifes. Maior. Anno reg. 29.
            
            
               Elias Ruſſell, the 28. of October.
            
            King Edward made his voyage againſt the Scottes, wherin he ſubdued a great part of the land, tooke the Caſtell of Eſtreuelin, with other, & made the Lords ſweare to him fealtie and homage. In the meane while, the Quéene was conueyed to London, againſte whome, the Citizens to the number of 600. rode in one liuerie of red and white, with the cogniſance1301 of their miſteries brothered vpon their ſléenes, and receiued hir four miles without the Citie, and ſo conuayed hir to Westminster.
            
            
               Robert Caller: Peter de Boſenho, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior. Anno reg. 30
            
            
               Sir Iohn Blound, the 28. of October.
            
            The King gaue to Edward his ſonne, the Princedome of Wales, and ioyned thervnto the Dukedome of Cornewall, and the Earledome of Chester. He kept his Chriſtmas in Scotland
               1
                     •
                  02 with a great armie, but at ye inſtance of the French King, he granted truce and returned. About the feaſt of all Saintes, the King ſent a great power into Scotland.
            
            
               Hugh Pourt: Simon Paris, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior. Anno reg. 31 Tho. de la More. 1033 Ex Record.
            
            
               Sir Iohn Blount, the 28. of October.
            
            The Scottes rebelling againſt King Edward, made William Wales their leader, wherefore the King hauing his Armie readie, paſſed by the Caſtell of Striueling, ouer the whole land, nonc offering them battayle, but fléeing before the ſword.
            This yeare, on the twelfth of March, before Iohn Blound Maior of London, William Leyre, Thomas Romaine, William
               
               Robert Fitz VValter acknovvledgeth his ſeruice done to the Citie of London. 
               Biton, Walter Finchingfeld, Hen. Gloceſter, Willi. Mazarar, Salamon Coteler, Iohn Wengraue, Iohn Darments, Nicholas Picote, Aldermen, Hugh Pourt, & Simon de Paris Sherifes, & before vj. men of euery ward of London, Roberte Fitz Walter
                acknowledged his ſeruice to the ſame Citie, and ſware vpon the Euangeliſtes, that he woulde be true vnto the liberties thereof, and maynteyne the ſame to hys power, and the counſell of the ſame Citie to kéepe &c.

The right that belōged to Robert Fitz Walter, Chaſtelein of London, Lord of Wedeham, were theſe:
            The ſayde Robert and his heires ought to be, and are chiefe Banerars of London in fée for the Chaſtelerie which he and his anceſters had by Castle Baynard in the ſaid Citie. In time of warre, the ſayde Robert and his heires ought to ſerue the Citie in manner as followeth: that is: The ſayd Robert ought to come, he being the twentith man of armes on horſebacke, couered with cloth or armour vnto the great Weaſt dore of Saint Paule, with his Banner diſplayed before him of his armes: and when he is come to the ſayd dore, mounted and apparelled (as before is ſayde) the Maior with his Aldermen and Sheriffes, armed in their armes, ſhall come out of the ſayd Church of Saint Paule vnto the ſayde dore, with a banner in his hande, all on foote, whiche banner ſhall be Gueles, the Image of Saint Paule Golde: the face, hands, féete, and ſword, of Siluer: and aſſoone as the ſayde Robert ſhall ſée the Maior, Aldermen, and Sheriffes come on foote out of the Churche armed with ſuch a Banner, he ſhall alight from his Horſſe, and ſalute the Maior, and ſay to him: Sir Maior, I am come to do my ſeruice which I owe to the Citie, and the Maior and Aldermen ſhall anſwere, we giue to you as to our Banerar of fée in this Citie, this Banner of the Citie, to beare & gouerne to the honor and profit of the Citie to your power: and the ſayd Roberte and his heires ſhall receyue the Banner and ſhall goe on foote out of the gate with the Banner in his hands, and the Maior, Aldermen, and Sheriffes ſhall follow to the dore, and bring a Horſe to the ſayde Roberte worth twentie pounds, which Horſe ſhall be ſadled with a ſaddle of the armes of the ſaide Robert, and ſhall be couered with ſendall of the ſaide armes. Alſo, they ſhall preſente to him xx. 
                  •
               . ſterling money, and deliuer to the Chamberlayne of the ſaid Robert for his expences that day. Then the ſayde Robert ſhal mount vpon the horſe which ye Maior preſented to him, with ye Banner in his hād, and aſſone as he is vp, he

ſhal ſay to the Maior, that he cauſe a Marſhall to be choſen for the hoſt, one of the Citie, which Marſhal being choſen, y• ſayde Robert ſhall commaund the Maior and Burgeſſes of the Citie, to warne the commoners to aſſemble togither, & they ſhal al go vnder the Banner of Saint Paul: and the ſaid Robert ſhall beare it himſelfe vnto Aldegate, and there the ſayde Robert and Maior ſhall deliuer the ſayde Banner of Saint Paule from thence, to whom they ſhall aſſent or thinke good. And if they muſt make any iſſue forth of the Citie, then the ſayd Robert ought to choſe two forth of euery warde, the moſt ſage perſonages, to forſée to the ſafe kéeping of the Citie, after they be gone forth. And this Counſell ſhall be taken in the Priorie of the Trinitie neare vnto Aldegate. And before euery towne or Caſtel whiche the hoaſte of London beſiege, if the ſiege continue a whole yeare, the ſayde Roberte ſhall haue for euery ſiege of the communaltie of London an hundred ſhillings for his trauell and no more. Theſe be the rights that the ſayd Robert hath in the time of war. Rights belonging to Robert Fitz Walter, and to his heires in the Citie of London, in the time of peace, are theſe (that is to ſaye) the ſayd Robert hath a Soken or ward in the Citie, that is, a wal of the Chanonrie of Saint Paul, as a man goeth down the ſtréete before the Brewhouſe of Saint Paul, vnto the Thamis, and ſo to the ſide of the Mill, whiche is in the water that commeth down from the fléete Bridge, and goeth ſo by London Walles, betwixt the Friers preachers and Ludgate, and ſo returneth backe by the houſe of the ſayd Friers, vnto the ſayd common wall of the ſaid Chanonry of Saint Paule, that is, al the pariſh of Saint Andrew, whiche is in the gifte of hys aunceſtours, by the ſaide ſenioritie: and ſo the ſayde Robert hath appendant vnto the ſayd Soken al theſe things vnder written, that he ought to haue a Soke man, & to place what Sokeman he will, ſo he be of the Sokemanrie (or the ſame ward) and if any of the Sokemanry be impleaded in ye 
               Guild Hall, of any thing that toucheth not the body of the Maior y• for the time is, or that toucheth the bodye of no Sherife,

it is not lawfull to the Sokeman of the Sokemanrie of the ſayd Robert Fitz Walter to demand a Court of the ſayd Robert, and the Maior and his Citizens of London, ought to grāt him to haue a Court and in his Court he ought to bring his iudgement as it is aſſented and agréed vppon in the Guilde Hal, that ſhall be giuen him. If any therefore be taken in hys Sokenry, he ought to haue his ſtockes and impriſonment in his Soken, and he ſhal be brought from thēce to ye 
               Guild Hall before the Maior, & there they ſhall prouide him his iudgement, that ought to be giuen of him: but his iudgement ſhal not be publiſhed till he come into the Courte of the ſayde Robert and in his libertie. And the iudgement ſhall be ſuch, that if he haue deſerued death by treaſon, he be tyed to a poſt in the Thamis at Woodwharfe, where boates are faſtened, two ebbings and two flowings of the Water. And if hée bée condemned for a common théefe, he ought to be ledde to the Elmes, and there ſuffer his iudgemēt as other théeues: and ſo the ſaid Robert and his heyres hath a great honor that he holdeth a gret Franches within the Citie, that the Maior of the Citie and Citizens are bounde to do him of right, that is to ſay, that when the Maior will holde a greate counſel, hée ought to call the ſayd Robert and his heyres to be with hym in Counſell, and of counſell of the Citie, and the ſayde Robert ought to be ſworne be of counſel with the Citie againſt all people, ſauing the King and his heyres. And when the ſayde Robert commeth to the Huyſtings in the Guilde Hall of the Citie, the Maior or his lieuetenaunt ought to ryſe againſt him and ſet hym down néere vnto him, and ſo long as he is in Guilde Hall, all the iudgemente oughte to be giuen by his mouth according to the Recorde of the Recorders of the ſayde Guilde Hall, and ſo manye weifs as come ſo long as he is there, he ought to giue them to the Baylifes of the town, or to whom he will, by the Counſell of the Maior of the Citie. Theſe be the Franchiſes that belonged to Roberte Fitz Walter in London, in time of peace, whiche for the antiquitie I haue here noted out of an old Recorde.
            
               
               William Combmartin: Iohn Burforde, the. 28. of Septem.
               
                  Baylifes. Custos. Anno reg. 32 Adam Meri. Graueſend Bishop of Londō.
            
            
               Sir Iohn Blound the. 28. of October.
            
            
               Richard Graueſend Byſhop of London deceaſed, who is reported by ſome to haue purchaſed the Charters and Liberties for the Citie of London in the yeare of our Lord. 1
                  •
               9
                  •
               . in the ſixtéenth yeare of King Richard the ſeconde. The vntrueth whereof I haue thought good thus muche in place to note.
            King Edward went into Scotland, and there beſieged the Caſtel of Striueline, which William Clifford kept the ſpace of 1304 Tho. de la More.. 90. dayes with ſundry valiaunt aſſaultes: but being able no longer to reſiſt, they put off their ſhoes, and with haulters about their neckes came forth of the Caſtel and fel proſtrate before the king, committing both liues and lims to his mercie, whom the King pardoned of life, but ſent them priſoners into England.
            
            The King returning out of Scotlande by the Citie of Yorke, commaunded the Courtes of the kings Benche and the Exchequer, which had now remayned at Yorke vij. yeares, to be remoued to theyr olde places at London.
            
            
               Roger Pares: Iohn de Lincolne, the. 28. of September.
               
                  Sherifes. Custos. Anno reg. 33 Dravv thy ſtaffe Adam Meri.
               
            
            
               Sir Iohn Blound, the. 28. of October.
            
            King Edwarde helde his Chriſtmaſſe at Lincolne, where he ordayned Juſtices of Traylebaſton againſte intruders into other mens landes, truce breakers, extortioners, murderers, and ſuche like offendours, by whyche meanes the Kings treaſure was maruellouſly encreaſed. Roger Brabaſon and Robert de Reuer ſatte at the Guilde Hall in London to heare the complaintes made concerning the foreſayde Articles of Traylebaſton.
            The Citizens of Norwiche made peticion vnto theNorvvich vvalled. Parliament Recordes. 1305 King, that lyke as it hadde pleaſed hym heretofore, to graunte them hys helpe and lycence certayne yeares for the wallyng aboute of theyr Towne, whiche tearme was nowe expyred, to graunte them a longer tyme,

the ſame being not yet finiſhed: wherevppon v. yeares were granted by him and his Parliament at Westminster.
            
            
               Iohn Leyland writeth that a Marchaunte of Norwich,
               I. Leyland. (whom he nameth not) builded a great part, almoſt halfe of that Wall.
            
               Robert Fitz Walter requeſted the king that the Fries ofFriers of the Sacke. A ſinagoge of the Ievves neare Baynards Caſtel in Londō 
                  Parliament recor.
                the Sacke (cōmonly called de Penitentia Ieſu) in London might aſſigne to the ſayde Robert one Chappel of olde time called the ſinagoge of the Iewes, neare adioyning to the place of the ſame Robert, which requeſt was graunted. Theſe Friers liued altogither by begging, and had of late multiplyed in number greatly, vntill the counſel at Lions, wherein it was decréed, that Friers beggers ſhould receyue none into their order, except Grey and White Friers. They wer alſo licenſed to enter into religion of larger rule, from the which time forth all mendicant Friers began to decreaſe, and were in ſhort time brought to nothing, except the Preching Friers.
            
               William Wales which had ofttimes ſette Scotland in gretVV. VVales in Scotland. trouble, was taken and brought to London with greate numbers of men and women wondring vppon him: he was lodgedAdam Merimo. in the houſe of William Delect a Citizen of London, in Fanchurche ſtréete. On the morrow being the euen of SainteTho. Delamore. Bartholmew, he was brought on horſſebacke to Westminster, Iohn Segraue
                and Geffrey, Knights, the Maior, Sherifes & Aldermen of London, and many other, both on horſſeback and on foote accompanying him, and in the gret hall at Westminster, he being placed vppon the South benche crowned with Laurel, for that he had ſayd in times paſt ye he ought to bear a Crowne in that Hall (as it was commonly reported) and being appeched for a traytour, by ſir Peter Mallorie ye kings Juſtice, he aunſwered that he was neuer traytour to ye king of England, but for other crimes whereof he was accuſed, hée confeſſed them, and was after headed and quartered. There was opened to the K. a conſpiracie, wrought by the Archbiſhop of Canturburie and diuerſe Earles and Barons againſt him, at ſuch time as he was in Flaunders. The Earle Marſhal

being examined of this, and being not able to purge himſelfe, made the king his heire, and put him in poſſeſſion of his landes to haue his grace, and thus doing, the Kyng gaue him again. 1000. pound land by the yeare during hys life.
            
               William coſine: Reignalde Thunderle. 28. of September.
               Sherifs. Custos. Anno reg. 34
            
            
               Sir Iohn Bloud, the. 28. of October.
            
            
               Robert Bruce an Engliſhman, preſuming by the righte of his wife to vſurpe the Kingdome of Scotlād, called a Parliament of the nobles of Scotland within the Church of the Friers1306 Minors in Domfries, where he ſlewe Iohn Comin, bycauſe he woulde not agrée to the treaſon, and ſhortlye after, to wit in the feaſt of the Anunciation of our Lady, in the Abbay of Scone, he cauſed himſelf to be ſolemnely crowned king by the Biſhoppes of Glaſco, and Saint Andrewes firſte, and the third day after by the Counteſſe of Bowan, bicauſe hir brother the Earle of Fife to whome by right of inheritaunce that office belonged, was then abſent in England.
            
            In the feaſt of Penticoſt king Edward honored his eldeſt ſonne, Edward of Carnaruan with the degrée of Knighthoode, and with him alſo moe than a hundred noble yong men, at Westminster.
            
            About the feaſt of the Natiuity of our Lady, the king wēt againe into Scotland, with a great army, hauing ſent his ſon Edward with Ayner de Valence Earle of Penbroke, Roberte Clifforde, Henrie Lacy,
                and many other noble knightes and gentlemen, at Whitſontide before, alſo he ſente before hym his Juſtices of Trayle Baſtō, two and two togither into euery Citie and place into which he woulde come, giuing thē power to kill traytours, drawe and hang periured perſons, burn ſuch as worke deceite, deſtroy the wicked, and ſet Engliſhmen in their places, and there were taken by them in the ſpace of two monthes by inquiſition of Juries, Hundreds & Thouſands, breakers of peace and conſpiratoures, amongſt the which Nigellus de Bruſe, brother to Robert de Bruſe, was drawne through Berwicke and hanged. Moreouer Chriſtopher
               
and Iohn Seyton brethren wer hanged: y• Counteſſe of Bowan was cloſed in a Cage, whoſe breadth, length, height, & depth, was eight foote, and hanged ouer the wa
                  ••
                of Berwike▪
                the Biſhop of Saint Andrews and of Glaſco, with the Abbot of Stone, were ſent to ſeuerall priſons in England.
            
            King Edward beſieged Simon Friſell in Lilyſcho, and tooke him and ſent him to London Tower, where he founde many Scottiſh Lordes in fetters of yron, amongſt whom was Thomas Morham with Herbert his ſonne, and Thomas Roy▪
                his Eſquire, who were all beheaded: Simon Friſel was hanged drawne and quartered: Earle Iohn de Athol bycauſe he was of the Kings bloud and an Engliſhman, was not drawn, but hanged and headed: Sir Iohn Wallers was ſente to the Tower of London and after hanged and headed: Lawrence de Megos Eſquire was taken at Douer & there beheaded. The Earle of Stratherne yéelded to king Edward, who condemned him to remaine during his life in yron fetters in the Caſtel of Rochester.
            
            At this time, and long after, King Edward had Scotland in ſuch good obedience, as he gaue of the landes thereof to hysEx charta regia. ſeruauntes and ſubiectes in England, with Markets, Fayres, and Warrens: amongſt others I haue ſéen vnder the broade ſeale of the ſayd king Edward a Manour called Ketnes in the Countie of Ferfare in Scotland; and néere the furtheſt parte of the ſame nation Northwarde, giuen to Iohn Evre and hysLord Evre. heires, anceſter to the Lord Eyre that now is, for his ſeruice done in thoſe partes, with market euerye Monday, fayre for thrée dayes euery yeare, at the feaſt of Saint Michael, and frée Warren for ye ſame, dated at Lauercost the. 20. day of October Anno regni. 34.
            
               Geffrey Cundute: Simon Bylet. 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Custos.
            
            
               Sir Iohn Blound, the. 28. of October.
            
            This yere Margaret Quéene, ſecond wife to Edwarde theRegiſtrum f
                     •••
                  rum 
                     •
                  inor
                     •
                  m. Anno reg. 53 firſt began to builde the quire of the Churche of the Gray Friers in London, to ye building wherof in hir life ſhe gaue. 2000. markes, and. 100. marks by hir Teſtament: Iohn of Brytai
                     •
                  
               
               
Earle of Richmond builded the body of the church: Lady Marie Counteſſe of Penbroke, Gilbert Clare
                Earle of Glocester, Margaret
                Counteſſe, Lady Elenor le Spencer, and Lady Elizabeth de Brugh ſiſters to the Gilbert de Clare, gaue greate ſummes of mony towards the ſame: Richarde Whitington, ſometime Alderman and Maior of London founded the Librarie there, in Anno. 1421.
            King Edward held his Chriſtmaſſe at Carlile, with a great multitude of Engliſh people, & in the month of January nextParliament at Carlile. 1307 following, he called a great Parliament to be holden at Carlile vpon the Octaues of S. Hillarie, to treat of matters cōcerning the ſtate of Scotland, wherevnto were ſomoned manye Lords both of the Spiritualtie & Tēporaltie, who either appearedParliament Records. in perſon or elſe by proxie. My ſelf haue ſéene and red an auntient regiſter of good authoritie, contayning ye names of lxxxvij. Erles and Barōs, xx. Biſhops, lxj. Abbots▪ & viij. Priors, beſides many Deanes, Archdeacons & other inferiour Clearks of ye Conuocation. The maiſter of the Knights of the Temple, of euery ſhire two Knightes, of euerye Citie two Citizens, and of euery borough two Burgeſſes, &c.
            
               Archbiſhop of Yorke.
               Biſhops:

                     Of Lincolne.
                     London.
                     Chicheſter.
                     Exceſter.
                     Hereford.
                     Salisburie.
                     Landaf.
                     S. Aſſafe.
                     Bangor.
                     S. Dauids.
                     Couentrie and Li
                           •
                        chfielde.
                     Bath and Wels.
                     Norwich.
                     Rocheſter.
                     Durham.
                     Carlile.
                     Elie.
                     Worceſter.
                  
               
            
            
               Abbots.
               Of S. Auguſtine in Cāterbury.
               Of Saint Edmunde.
               Saint Albane.
               Weſtminſter.
               Waltham.
               Eueſham.
               Saint Marie at Yorke.
               Peterborow.
               Ramſey.
               
                  Winchcombe.
               Gloceſter.
               Briſtow.
               Malmesburie.
               Glaſtonburie.
               Selby.
               Cyrceſter.
               Reding.
               Furney.
               Sawley.
               Alnewike.
               Saint Oſith.
               Barlyng.
               Tupholme.
               Byley.
               Dale.
               Newh
                     •
                  s.
               Croxton.
               Cokerſande.
               Saint Radegound.
               Tichfield.
               Torre.
               Holmcolthram.
               Welbecke.
               Hales.
               New Monaſterie.
               Iereual.
               Fountaines.
               Bella Land.
               Melſa.
               Kyrkeſted.
               Rupe.
               Rughford.
               Valeden.
               Grendon.
               Stanley in Arden.
               Pipwel.
               Combe.
               Baſing werke.
               Crokeſden.
               Croyland.
               Werdon.
               Wimondham.
               Wauerley.
               Coerteſey.
               Quarrera.
               Lotoley.
               Hyde.
               Wendon.
               Saint Agathe.
               Swineſhede.
               Stanley in Wilſhire.
            
            
               Barons.
               Edward prince of Wales.
               Henrie Lacy Erle of Lincolne.
               Ralph Mounthermer Earle of Gloceſter and of Hereford.
               Thomas Erle of Lancaſter.
               Humfrey Bohum Erle of Hereforde and Eſſex.
               Iohn Warren Earle of Surrey.
               Edmund Erle of Arundale.
               Iohn Brytaine Earle of Richemonde.
               Guy Bello Campo Earle of Warwike.
               Robert Vere Erle of Oxforde.
               Gilberte Vmframvell Earle of Anegos.
               Henrie of Lancaſter.
               
                  Aymer of Valence.
               Iohn Ferrers.
               Henrie Percy.
               Hugh Spencer.
               Robert Fitz Walter.
               William Latimer.
               Robert Clifford.
               Robert mount Alto.
               Iohn Haſtings.
               Iohn le Mare.
               Iohn de Ripaurs.
               Iohn de Mohun.
               Petrus de Malolacu.
               Rupart Fitz Pagani.
               Hugh Curtney.
               Edmund Deycourt.
               Iohn Saint Iohn of Lageham.
               Galfride of Geynual.
               Thomas Furniual.
               Robert Tony.
               Thomas Berkele.
               William de Bruſe.
               Peter Corbet.
               William Martin.
               Thomas Multon.
               Iohn ap Adam.
               Iohn Kyme.
               Iohn Segraue.
               Robert Fitz Roger.
               Hugh Veer.
               Walter Fauconbridge.
               Ralph Baſſet of Draiton.
               Roger la Warre.
               Iohn Paynel.
               Alexander Walliclo.
               Hugh Points.
               Roger Montnomere.
               William Rithre.
               Reignald Grey.
               Walter Muncy.
               Robert Scales.
               Adam Welles.
               Almarice de Amando.
               William Cantalupo.
               Iohn Engaigne.
               Gilbert Pechy.
               Iohn Glauering.
               William Leyburne.
               Iohn Bello Cāpo of Somerſet.
               William Grandſtone.
               Iohn Extuens.
               Iohn de Inſula.
               Iohn Sudley.
               Simon Mountacute.
               Walter Tey.
               Edmund Haſtings.
               Iohn Lancaſter.
               Iohn Saint Iohn.
               Henry Treygoz.
               Iohn Louel of Tichmerch.
               Alan la Zuſche.
               Henrie Teyes.
               Nicholas Segraue,
               Fulco Fitz Waren.
               Iohn Fitz Reignald.
               Geffrey Camuile.
               William Vauaſor.
               William Ferrer.
               Robert Grendon.
               Edmund Baron of Stafford.
               Ralph Fitz William.
               Thomas de la Roche.
               
                  Theobalde de Verdon the yonger.
               William Tuchet.
               Henrie Huſlee.
            
            In this Parliament many complayntes were made of y• oppreſſion of Churches & Monaſteries, by the Popes Chapleine named Williā Teſta Archdeacon of Araine in ye Church of Couentrie. The ſame Clearke was forbidden to vſe any moe ſuche extortions, and diuerſe ſtatutes were ordayned touching religious perſōs which had theyr principal houſes in other Realmes.
            There came to this Parliamente ſente from the Pope, a Cardinall called Petrus Hiſpanus, to treate, a mariage betwixte Edwarde Prince of Wales, and the Frenche
               The courſe of Fleete dike at London ſore decayed, vvhich ſometime bare ships of ſmal burden to Holborn bridge, to the great commoditie of the Citie in that vveſt part. kings daughter. And amongſt many other ſutes made ther, the Earle of Lincolne complayned, that whereas in times paſt, the courſe of Water running at London, vnder Holborne bridge and Fleete bridge into the Thamis, hadde bin of ſuche large breadth and deapth, that ten or twelue ſhips at once with Merchaundiſes were wonte to come to the forſayde bridge of Fleete, and ſome of them to Holborne bridge, nowe y• ſame courſe (by filth of the Tāners and ſuch other) was ſore decayed. Alſo by rayſing vp of Wharfes, but eſpecially by turning of the Water, which they of ye new Temple made to theyr milles without Baynardes Caſtel, and diuerſe other perturbations, the ſayde ſhippes nowe coulde not enter as they were wont and as they oughte, wherefore he deſired, that the Maior of London with the Sherifes, and certain diſcrete Aldermen, might be be appointed to ſée the courſe of the ſayde Water, and that by othe of honeſt men all the forſayde hindraunces might be remoued, and to be made as it was wont of old time, &c. Which was aunſwered and recorded, that Roger le Brabazon, the Coneſtable of the Tower, with the Maior and Sherifs are aſſigned, that taking

with them other honeſt and diſcrete men, they make diligente ſearche and inquirie, howe the ſayde riuer was in old time, and that they leaue nothing that may hurt or ſtop it, and to kéepe it in the ſame ſtate that it was wont to be.
            King Edwarde remayning all the Winter and SommerTho. Walſing. at Carlile, diſpoſed manye thyngs of Scotlande at hys pleaſure: but in the meane tyme Robert de Bruis going aboute the Countrey, ſlewe manye that woulde not obey hym, and he ſente with parte of hys armye two of hys brethren, Thomas that was a Knyghte, and Alexander a Prieſte, Deane of Glaſco, into another parte of the Countrey, that they myghte allure the people vnto them by gentle perſwaſions; whyche (by comming of Engliſhmen, vppon them, they) were taken, ledde to the Iuſtices, condemned, hanged, and headed at Carlile.
            
            Kyng EDVVARDE ſente meſſengers into Englande, commaundyng all that oughte hym ſeruice to bée readye at Carlile, wythin thrée wéekes after the feaſte of Saint Iohn Baptiſte▪
                but himſelfe being vexed with the bloudye Flixe, he ſente to his ſonne that he ſhoulde come with ſpéede to heare hys laſte words, whome among other thyngs hée counſelled to bée mercifull, iuſte, and conſtante in all hys wordes and déedes: hée commanuded hym not to bée too haſtye to take on hym the Crowne of Englande, tyll hée hadde reuenged the iniuries done by the Scottes, but to ſtaye in thoſe partes, and to cauſe hys Fathers boanes (beyng cloſed in a Cheaſte) to bée borne aboute wyth hym, tyll hée hadde gone thorow all Scotlande and ouercome hys aduerſaries. He alſo commaunded hym to honoure hys mother, and loue hys two brethren, THOMAS Earle Marſhall, and EDMVNDE Earle of Cornewall. Moreouer hée charged hym on hys curſſe, that he ſhoulde not preſume to call

home Pierce of Glauaſton, by cōmon decrée baniſhed, without common fauour: nor to ſpende. xxxij, M. 
                  •
               . of ſiluer, otherwayes than in the buſineſſe of the Holy Land, for the whiche purpoſe he had prepared it, and willed his heart there to bée buried.
            The king alſo called vnto him Henrie Lacy Earle ofWil. Pakington. 
               Lincolne, Guy Earle of Warwicke, Aymerde Valence
                Earle of Penbroke, and Robert Clifford Baron, deſiring them to bée good to his ſonne, and that they ſhould not ſuffer Pierce of Gauaſton to come againe into England, to ſet his ſon in riot: & the vij. of July he departed this life at Brugh vpō y• ſands, in the yere 1307. when he had raigned foure and thirtie yeares, ſeauen monthes, and odde dayes. He was buried at Westminster.
            
         
         
            
            ¶ Edward of Carnaruan.
            
            
            
               
                  EDvvarde the ſecond ſonne
               Anno reg. 
                     •
                  
                to the firſte Edwarde, borne at Carnaruan, beganne his raigne the vij. day of July, in the yeare of Chriſt 1307. he was fair of body, but vnſteadfaſt of maners, and diſpoſedCro. Dun. to lightneſſe, haunting the company of vile perſons, and giuē wholy to the pleaſure of the bodye, not regarding to gouerne his common weale by diſcretion and iuſtice, which cauſed great variaunce betwéene him and hys Lords. He foke to be of hys Counſell Patricke Earle of Lincolne, and Otho de Granſon with other. He ordayned Walter Reignald to be his Chauncellour, and cauſed Walter Langton Biſhoppe of Chester, to bring the King his fathers bodye from Carlile to Waltham Croſſe, and then to be arreſted by the Coneſtable of the Tower and ſent to Walling ford, there to bée ſhut vppe in priſon, and his goods confiſcate, bycauſe in hys fathers life time he had reproued him of his inſolent life. &c.

He alſo called out of exile Pierce of Gauaston a ſtraunger borne, whiche lately in his Fathers dayes, had for certaine cauſes bene baniſhed this land. He gaue to the ſayde Pierce the Earledome of Cornewal, the Iſle of Man, and the LordeſhippeCro. H
                     •
                  ntenpries W. Paking. Sherifes. Maior. of Wallingforde, otherwiſe aſſigned to Quéene Iſabel.
            
            
               Nicholas Pigot: Nigellus Dru
                     •
                  y, the 28. of September.
            
            
               Sir Iohn Blunt, the. 28. of October.
            
            A Parliamente was holden at Northampton, wherein it was ordayned, that his Fathers coyne, which was counted bace, ſhould not be refuſed vpō paine of life and lim, and that a fiftéenth of the Cleargie, & twentith part of the goods of the Layetie ſhould be giuen to the king.
            The. 27. of October King Edward the firſt was buryed at Westminster, at the heade of Henrie the third his Father, vnto the which Church he had giuen lands to the value of one hundred pound by yeare, twentie pounde thereof yearely to be diſtributed to the poore, Anthony Becke Patriarke of Ieruſalem and Byſhoppe of Durham doing the exequies.
            After the Ephiphanie of our Lorde, all the Templers
                  Adam Merimo. Knightes of the temple apprehended. Tho. de la More.
                in Englande were apprehended and committed to priſon in diuerſe places.
            The King went ouer into France and married Iſabel the French kings daughter at Bolloigne y•. xxij. of Januarie. There were preſent at that marriage, Phillip king of Fraunce, hys ſonne King of Nauar, the King of Almaine, and the King of Cicile, with many other. And on the xxiiij. day of Februarye, King Edward with his Quéene were crowned at Westminster, by Henrie Biſhop of Winchester, being admitted ſo to do by Robert Archbiſhop of Canterburie.
            
            The King offered firſte a pounde of Golde made like a King holding a ring in his hande, and after he offered a marke of Golde (whiche is eight ounces) made like a Pilgrime putting forth his hande to receyue the ring. Sir Iohn Bachauell Knyghte was thruſte to deathe at hys Coronation.
            
               The King gaue vnto Pierce of Guaston
                all ſuch giftes andGhro. D
                     •
                  n. Jewels as had bin giuen to him, with the Crownes of hys Father, his anceſtours treaſure, and many other things, affirming that if he could, he ſhould ſuccéede him in the Kyngdome, calling him brother, not granting any thing without his conſent. The Lords therfore enuying him, told the king, that the Father of this Pierce was a Traytour to the King of Fraunce, and was for the ſame executed, & that his mother was burned for a Witch, and that the ſaid Pierce was baniſhed for conſenting to his mothers witchcraft, and that hée had now bewitched the King himſelfe. They beſought the Kyng to heare therefore their petitions, whiche ſhoulde be both for his owne Honoure and for the wealth of his people.
            Firſt, that he woulde confirme and vſe ſuche auntiente1 Lawes and cuſtomes, as are contayned in the Charters of the Kyngs hys predeceſſonrs: and for that they woulde graunt him the twentith part of their goods, and be his true ſubiectes.
            Secondly, that he woulde take nothyng of any man, but2 at the price of the owner the ſame to be payde for to the vttermoſt.
            Thyrdlye that what ſoeuer was alyenated from the3 Crowne, ſince hys Fathers death, might be reſtoared therevnto again.
            Fourthly, that he would obſerue the oth he made before4 his Father, as of the reuoking of Peter Gauaſton, the proſecuting of the Scottiſh Warre, and that all that was amiſſe ſhoulde be amended, leaſte hys enymies reioyce at it, &c.
            That iuſtice and iudgemente mighte be done in the5 Lande, as well to the ryche as to the poore, accordyng to the auntiente and olde approued Lawes and Cuſtomes of Englande, and that no man ſhoulde bée reſtrayned by the Kyngs writte from proſecuting hys ryghte, or to

defend himſelfe by Law.
            Then the king taking counſell of Pierce, Hugh Spencer the Treaſurer, y• Chancellour and others, he appointed to anſwere the Barons at the Parliamēt on Hocday. The Barons being departed out of London, the Citie gates were ſhut vp and chayned, great watch kept, and Hugh Spencer made Coneſtable of London. The king with Peter of Gauaſton wēt towarde Wallingford Caſtel wyth a great company of ſouldiours as well ſtraungers as Engliſh, and Hugh Spencer taried ſtill at London. The Parliament on Hocday was kepte, the Kyng & Barons being there when they decréed the ſame Pierce ſhoulde be baniſhed the lande to departe on the morrowe after Midſommer day, neuer to returne agayne. The King gaue him two and thirtie townes and ſo manyePierce of Gauaſtone banished. Caſtels in Gaſcotgne, and great ſummes of money out of his Earledome of Cornwall during his life: the king accompanyed him to Bristow, ſēt him into Ireland, aſſigning him y• whole gouernment and reuenewes of that Countrey.
            The king ſente William Lorde Latimer with a hundred horſſemen to fetch Henrie Lacy Erle of Lincoln, but he being forewarned, kept himſelfe in his Caſtell, and ſo preuented theyr purpoſe, onely the Lord Latimer and he talked, and ſo departed.
            The king entended to giue Gaſcoigne to the French King, Scotland to Robert Bruis, Ireland
                and Wales to others, hoping thereby to haue ayde againſt his Barons.
            
               Robert Archbiſhoppe of Canturburie returned from Rome, and was reſtored to all his goods.
                  Anno reg. 2. Sherifes. Maior. 1309 Tho. de la More. Iohn Troklowe. Anno reg. 3.
            
            
               William Baſing: Iames Botener, the. 28. of September.
            
            
               Nicholas Faringdon Goldſmith, the. 28. of October.
            
            The king ſent for Pierce of Gauaſton out of Ireland: he lā
               ded at Kerneruan, on the euen of Saint Iohn Baptiſt, he Kyng mette him at the Caſtel of Flint with great ioy: and gaue to him the Earle of Glocesters ſiſter in marriage, they were maried at Barkamsteed, which cauſed him again to riſe in pride, ſcorning the Nobles of the Realme, and to abuſe the Kyng,

as before he had done, in conuaying the treaſure of theAnno reg. 3. Realme into forraine countreys, amongſt the which treaſure, he conuayed the table and treſtles of golde from the treaſurie of Westminster, and deliuered them to one Armery of Friſconband to be cōuayed into Gaſcoigne. The BaronsCro. pet. Coledge. therefore declared to the King, that except he would expell the ſayd Pierce from his company, they would riſe agaynſt him, as againſt a periured Prince, wherevpon, by the aduiceChro. Dun. of Pierce of Gauaſton, the King ſent for ayde into Gaſcoigne to the Earle of Foys, and y• Uicount of Henoy, and they came with thrée hundred horſemen through France, but Phillip the French King empriſoned the chiefe, and ſlew and hanged the other. Alſo, the King of England had word from Robert Bruſe of Scotland, & from Robert Fitz Thomas of Ireland,
                that they woulde not take part with the King againſt his Barons, wherevpon the King being wroth, fortifyed Windſore Caſtell, and beganne to build Towers and other ſtrange things.
            The Abbot of Saint Denis in France, béeing ſent Legate from the Pope to demaund the legacie that King Edwards father gaue to the holy land, did earneſtly requeſt King Edward to remoue from him Peter Gauaſton, with whoſe conuerſation all the world was as it were infected. Then the King appoynted a Parliamente at North-hampton, determining from thence to paſſe into Scotland the Barons came to this Parliament well furniſhed, but the King ſente them worde he woulde not come there, yet at the laſt he came to Stony Stratford, whither were ſente to him by the Barons, the Earles of Warwike and Clare, who requeſted him to come for his owne profite, and the commoditie of the Realme: at length he went in the habite of a Squire, and the Barons met him without armour, and in the ende louingly embraced, and were made friends, and the voyage to Scotland was reiourned til another time. After Michaelmas, the Parliament was holden at London, vnto the whiche Parliamente came Lewes the French Kings brother, with the Biſhop

of Poytow from the Kyng of Fraunce▪
                to entrenie vnitie betwixt the King and his Lordes: and there were diuers get ordinaunces made. And once agayne, though ſore agaynſt the Kings mind, he cauſed Pierce to obiure, with condition added by the Barons, that if he were founde agayne in any lande ſubiecte to the Kings dominion, he ſhoulde be taken as a common enimy, and condempned. This beyng done
                  •
                he paſſed into Flanders, and from thence to other Countries, ſéeking reſte, which he coulde not finde.
            
               Iames of Saint Edmond: Roger Palmer, the 28. of Sept.
               Sherifes. Maior. 1310 Anno reg. 4.
            
            
               Thomas Romaine the 28. of October.
            
            
               Pierce of Gaueston
                conceyuing a truſt in the friendſhippe of the King and the Earle of Gloucester▪
                whoſe ſiſter he had marryed, taking with him many▪ ſtraungers, returned into▪ 
               Englande▪
                And a little before▪ Chriſtmas he came to the Kyngs preſence, who fo
                  •
                ioy of his comming forgettyng all othes and promiſes, receyued hym as a heauenly gift.
            The King kept his Chriſtmas at Windſore, where Walter Langton Biſhop of Chester, and the Biſhop of Saint Andrews in Scotland, were releaſed out of priſon.
            The ſeconde daye of September at night, an horrible tempeſt of thunder happened, ſo that Hedges and Trées loſte their gréeneneſſe, and the Church of Middleton in Dorcetſnire, wyth the Stéeple, Belles, Ornamentes, and all other monuments of that place, were conſumed wyth the lightning, the Monkes being at Mattins.
            
               Henry Lacy Earle of Lincolne, and Coneſtable of Chester,
               W. Shep. dyed at London, and was buryed in the newe worke of Paules.
            
            
               Simon de Co
                     •
                  pe: Peter Blackney the 28. of September
               Sherifes. Maior. 10. Rouſe.
            
            
               Richard R
                     •••
                  am Mercer, the 28. of October.
            
            Bl
                  •
               ckeney deceaſſed, in whoſe place ſucceeded Iohn 
                  ••
                
               Combridge▪
               
            
            A Prouinciall Counſell was holden at London agaynſteTemplers condempned. Thomas Dele.
                the Templers in England, vppon Hereſie and other articles, where of they were accuſed, who denyed the facte, ſauing

one or two of them 
                  •
                notwithſtanding all did confeſſe, that they coulde not purge themſelues, and therefore were condempned to perpetuall penuance in ſeuerall Monaſteries, where they be haued themſelues very well.
            At Paris in Frauuoe liiij. of the Templers were brent, by1311 iudgement of the French King.
            
               Thomas who had maryed the daughter of Henry late Earle of Lancaster hel de in hys handes the Earledomes of Lancaster, Lincolne, Saliſbury, Leyoester, Ferra
                     •
                  s, the Libertie of Pickering, and the Honoure of Cokermore, beſides greate landes in Wales, and in the Earledome of Arthoys in France.
            
            King Edwarde wyth Peter Gauaſton hys companion, went to Yorke, where the King was lodged in the Palace of the Archebyſhoppe, and Peter in the Caſtle: they cauſed the Citie to be fortified, and the walles to be repayred, and ſent to Robert Bayliol of Scotlande for ayde againſte his Lordes, but Robert made anſweare, he woulde not forth of Scotland▪
                neyther woulde he diſquiet any man: the lyke aunſweare was made by the Welchmen. The Earles aſſembled at Bedford▪ 
                  Gilber
                Earle of Glocester being one of them, they came to London, and ordayned the Seas to be kept, leaſte ſtraungers ſhoulde enter to ayde the Kyng.
            After Eaſter the brother of Pierce of Gauaston was taken with greate treaſure whiche he hadde conueyed oute of the Kyngs Treaſurie: his ſhippe beyng toſſed wyth tempeſte on the Sea, was driuen where it was taken, and the treaſure was brought to London in Carles.
            About this time King Edward for his recreation tooke the Sea, leauing Peter of Gauaston at Yorke, where vpon the Barous brought their power, & entred the citie of Yorke, but Peter fled to Scarborough: then the Barons beſieged Scarborough, where they took him, and committed him to ye cuſtody of Aymerde Valence Erle of Penbroke, who brought him to the Manor of Dedington which is betwixt Oxford & Warwike▪
                
               
                  •
                there left him to be kept ſ
                  •
               fer but ye next day in y• morning

               Guy Earle of Warwike with a company of armed men, took▪ him from thence, and brought him to Warwike Caſtell: after deliberation taken, the Earles of Lancaster, of Warwike, and
                  Iohn Treklow. Pierce of Gauaſton beheaded. Anno reg. 5. of Hereford cauſed in their preſence in a place called Gaueſice or Blacke Lowe, the xix. of June his head to be ſtricken off: his body by the Frier Preachers was conuayed to Oxford▪
                and there kept more than two yeares, till the King cauſed the ſame to be tranſlated to his manor of Langley, and there in the Friers Church (which he had builded) to be buryed.
            
               Simon Merwood: Richard Wilford, the 28. of Septemb▪
               
               
                  Sherifes. Maior. 1312 Tho. de la More. The Roades vvonne by the Chriſtians.
            
            
               Sir Iohn Giſors Peperer▪ the 28. of October.
            
            Quéene Iſabell was deliuered of hir firſt ſonne named Edward at Windſore, the xiij. day of Nouember.
            The Knightes of the order of Saint Iohn Baptiſt, called Saint Iohn of Hieruſdlem, put the Turkes out of the Iſle of Roades, and after that wan vpon the ſayde Turkes dayly for a long time after. This Religion was greatly preferred by the fall of the Templers, whoſe poſſeſſion was giuen to them by a Counſell holden at Vienna.
               Anno reg. 6.
            
            
               Robert de Bruce gote againe almoſt all Scotland, the Caſtels with munitions (the Engliſh Garriſons being caſt out) he tooke agayne into his power. This yeare therefore
                  Tho. de la More. Hugh Spencer the yonger. by conſent of the Prelates, and certayne nobles, Hugh Spē
                  cer the ſonne was appoynted the Kings Chamberlayne in place of Peter of Gaueſton, whome they the rather preferred, bycauſe they knew the King hated him: neuertheleſſe, not long after, by his great diligence, he brought himſelfe into the Kings fauour. The Father of this Hugh béeing olde▪ was yet liuing▪ a Knight of great vertue, in counſell wi
                  •
               e, in armes valiant, whoſe confuſion and ſhamefull end he wanne vnto himſelfe by naturall loue though diſordinate towardes hys ſonne, who was in body very comely, in ſpirite proude, and in action moſt wicked, whoſe couetouſneſſe and ambition, by the diſheriting of widdowes and ſtrangers, wrought the death of the Nobles, the fall of the King; with the vtter deſtruction of himſelfe and his father,
            
               
               Iohn Lambin: Richard Wilford, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior. 1313 Tho. de la More.
            
            
               Sir Iohn Giſors Peperer, the 28. of October.
            
            King Edwarde gathering a greate power, marched towards Scotland, to breake the ſéege of Striueling Caſtell, and lodged himſelfe and his people there about in the fielde on the euen of Saint Iohn Baptiſt: neuer afore that time wasBattayle at Striuelin. ſéene the like preparation, pride and coſt in the time of war, as affirmeth Robert Paſton, a Carmelite Frier, being preſent,Robert Paſton. and taken of the Scottes, which he ſorowfully bewayled in his Heroycall Uerſe whiles he was priſoner. The firſte night (ſayeth he) yée might haue ſéene the Engliſhmen bathing themſelues in Wyne, and caſting their gorges: there was crying, ſhowting, waſſaling, and drinking, with other rioting farre aboue meaſure. On the other ſide, yée might haue ſéene the Scottes quiet ſtill, and cloſe, faſting ſhe euen of Saint Iohn Baptiſt, labouring in loue of the libertie of their Countrey. On the morow, the Scottes hauing gotten the moſt conuenient place in the fielde for victorie, made ditches in the grounde thrée foote déepe, and ſhe like in breadth, from the right wing of the army, vnto the leaſt, couering y• ſame with weake twigges or Herdles, and agayne ouer with Turffe and Graſſe, whiche was not of ſtrength to beare horſemen. The armie of the Scottes béeing deuided into certayne troupes, ſtoode not farre off from this dike, whiche was betwixt them and the Engliſhmen. On the other ſide, the Armie of the Engliſhmen comming out of the weaſt, the ſunne riſing, caſting his beames on their golden Targets, bright helmets, and other armoure, gaue ſuch a reflection, as was both wonderfull and terrible to beholde. In the firſt warde were the light horſemen, and heauie courſers. In the ſecond were the archers, and other footemen, who were appoynted for the chaſe of the aduerſaries. In the thirde was the King with his Biſhops, and other religious, amongſt whome was Hugh Spencer. The Horſemen of the firſt front making vpon their enimies, foundered with their foreféete into the ditch,

and laye ther
                  •
                tumbling, abiding the cruelty of the Scottes, who comming vpon them, ſlewe ſo
                  •
               e, and tooke a greate many richemen for raunſome. There was ſlayne Gilbert de Clare Earle of Glocester, (whome the Scottes woulde gladly haue kept for raunſome, if they hadde knowne him, but hée hadde forgotten to putte on hys coate of Armes:) wyth hym was flaine Sir Edmond Manly, Syr Roberte Clifford, Sir Paine T
                     •
                  ptofte, Syr Wyllyam Marſhall, Syr Giles Dargenton, and many other Knights and Eſquiers.
            There was taken Humfrey de Bohun▪
                Erle of Hereford, Iohn Segraue, Iohn Claueringham, William Latimer,
                Syr Roger Northbroke, bearer of the Kings Shielde or Seale, but Syr Rauf Mounthermer that had married Ioane of Acres Counteſſe of Glocester, the Kings ſiſter, beyng taken,Anno reg. 7. founde ſuche fauour, that his raunſome was pardoned, and hée returning into Englande, broughte backe wyth hym the Kings Shield or Seales but Syr Edmond Manly the kings Steward, drowned himſelfe in Banockeſborne.
            
            Almoſte thrée hundreth men of armes were ſlaine in that place, our archers killing manye of them, who ſéeyng the Scottes cruelly bent vppon our horſemenne falne in the ditche, ſhotte their arrowes wyth a highe compaſſe, that they mighte fall betwixte the armoure of theyr ennimyes, whyche was all in vayne 
                  •
                and when they ſh
                  •
               tte right forth they ſle
                  ••
                fewe of the Scottes, 
               
                  •
                by reaſon of their, armed 
                  •
               eaſtes, but many of the Engliſhemen, by reaſon of theyr naked 
                  〈◊〉
               .
            The King with the Biſhoppes and Hughe Spencer bée▪ tooke themſelues to flight 
                  •
                in whiche daunger of fléeyng, the King 
                  ••
               wed to God, that hée woulde buylde vnto the 
                  •
               oor
                  ••
                Earmelite 
                  •
               riers an houſe, in the whyche hée woulde place 
                  〈◊〉
                and twentie brethren, to be Students 
                  ••
                Diuinitie, whyche hée afterwardes performed in Oxforde.
            
            
               
               Ralphe Bald
                     •••
                  
                Byſhoppe of London deceaſſed, who inCro. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . Wil. Paſt
                     ••
                  . hys lyfe tyme gaue two thouſande Markes to the building of the newe worke of the Chappell on the Southe ſide ofNevve vvorke of Paules Churche in London. the Churche of Saint Paule in London, and lefte muche by hys teſtament to the ſame worke.
            In digging the foundation of this worke, were founde more than a hundreth heades of Oxen and Kine, whyche thing confirmed great lye the opinion of thoſe whych haue reported, that of olde tyme it hadde béene called The Temple of Iupiter, and that there was the Sacrifice of Beaſtes.
            
               Robert Gurdeine: Hugh Garron, the 28. of 
                     〈◊◊〉
                  
               
               
                  Sherifes. Maior. 1314 Victuall priſed.
            
            
               Nicholas Farendon Goldſmith, the 28. of October▪ 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
            
            The King cauſed hys Writs to bée publiſhed for prices of virtualles, that no Oxe 
                  ••
               alled 
                  〈◊〉
               , be ſolde 
                  〈◊〉
                more than foure and twentie ſhillings 
                  〈◊◊〉
               
               Anno reg. 8. Oxe for more than ſixtéene ſhillings 
                  •••
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                ſtall
                  •
               d Cowe at twelue ſhillings: another Cowe at tenne ſhillings: a
                  •
                fa
                  ••
               e Mutton corne fedde, or whoſe 
                  〈◊〉
                wel growne, 
                  •••
               wentie pence: another fatte Mutton ſhorne, at fourtéene, pence: a fatte Hogge of two yeares olde, at thrée ſhillings foure pence: a fatte Gooſe, at two pence halfepeny, in the Citie at thrée pence: a fatte Capon at twoo pence, in the Citie two pence halfepeny
                  •
                
               
                  ••
                fatte Henne at one peny, and in the Citie thrée halfpence
                  •
               : twoo 
                  〈◊〉
                a penny, in the Citie thrée halfepence: foure Pigeons for one peny, in the Cittie thrée Pigeous for a penny 
                  •
                ſoure and 
                  〈◊〉
               , egges a peny, in the City twentie egges a peny, 
                  〈◊〉
               .
            
               Stephen Abingdon: Hamond Chigwell, the 28. of Sept.
               Sherifes. Maior. Tho. Walſing.
            
            
               Sir Iohn Giſors Peperer, the 
                     •
                  8. of October.
            
            Notwythſtanding the Statutes of the laſte Parliament, the Kings Writs &
                  •
                
               
                  ••
                things were ſold dearer than before, 
                  ••
                fleſh could be had; Capons and Géeſe would not

be founde, Egges were hard to come by, Shéepe dyed of theVictuall deare. 1315 Chro. S. Alb
                        •••
                     .
                rotte, Swine were out of the way, a Quarter of Wheate, Beanes, and Peaſe, were ſolde for twentie Shillings, a Quarter of Malte for a Marke, a Quarter of Salt for 
                  〈◊〉
                and thirtie Shillings &c.
            
               Iohn Poydras, a Tanners ſonne of Excester, in diuersA Tanners ſonne claymed to be King. places of England named himſelfe the ſonne of Edward the firſt, and ſayd, that by a falſe nurſſe he was ſtolne out of his cradle, and Edward that now was King, put in his place: but ſhortly after he was conuict of his vntruth, and confeſſed that he did it by the motion of a familiar ſpirit which he had in his houſe in likeneſſe of a Catte, whome he had ſerued thrée yeares: for the which ſeruice he was hanged at North 
                     •
                  hampion.
            
            The King in a Parliament at Lincolne, gaue the rodde and 
                  〈◊〉
                of Marſhall vnto Thomas of Brotherton Earle of Norffolke his brother. He alſo reuoked the prouiſions beforeWil. Paſton. Tho. Walſing. made for ſelling of victualles, and permitted all men to make the beſt of that they had: neuertheleſſe, the dearth 
                  ••
               
               creaſed through the abundance of rayne that fel in Harueſt, ſo that a Quarter of Wheate, or of Salte, was ſold before Midſomer for thirtie Shillings, and after fortie Shillings.
            There followed this famine, a gréeuous mortalitie of
                  Anno reg. 9. Mortalitie of men. people, ſo that the quirke might vnneath bury the dead.
            The Beaſtes and Cattell alſo by the corrupt gr
                  •••
                whereof they fedde, dyed, whereby it came to paſſe, that the eating of fleſh was ſuſpected of all men, for fleſh of Beaſtes not corrupted was hard to finde▪ Horſſefleſh was counted great delicates: the poore ſtale fatte Dogges to eate: ſomeDogges flesh good meate. Children vvere eaten. (as it was ſaid) compelled through famine, in hidde places, did eate the fleſhe of their owne children, and ſome ſtale others which they deuoure
                  •
               . Théeues that were in priſons,Theeues in priſon deuoure one another. did plucke in péeces thoſe that were newly brought amōgſt them, and gréedily deuoured them hal
                  •
               e aliue. A Gallon of ſmall Ale was at two pence, of the better thrée pence, and the beſt four pence.
            
               The Londoners conſidering, that Wheate made in MaltVVheate forbydden to bee made into Ma
                     ••
                  
                was muche conſumed, ordained, that from thenceforthe it ſhoulde be made of other grayne, and alſo, that a Gallon of better Ale ſhould be ſolde j. 
                  •
                ob. and of ſmall Ale for j. 
                  •
                and not aboue.
            The King according to the Statute of London, ſente hys Writs through the Realme, commaunding, that as wel within the liberties as without, in Cities, Boroughs, Townes, and Uillages, a Gallon of Ale ſhoulde be ſolde for j. 
                  •
               . and that from thenceforth no Wheate ſhoulde bée made into Malt: whyche, if he had not the ſooner cauſed to be proclaimed, the greateſt parte of the people ſhould haue periſhed throughe famine.
            Earle Waren was excommunicate by the Byſhoppe ofCro. D
                     •••
                  . 
               Chichester for Adultrey, wherevppon the ſayde Earle came to the Biſhop with armed men, and foure more haſty than the reſte, threatned the Biſhoppe, wherevpon the Byſhops men fell on them, and tooke the Earle.
            
               Hamond Goodſheape: William Bodele: the. 28. of Sept.
               Sherifes. Maior. Tho. Walſing. 1316
            
            
               Stephen Abindon, the. 28. of October.
            
            There arriued in England by the Kings requeſt Gauſtelinus and Lucas de Fliſco, two Cardinalles, to make peace betwixte the Realmes of England and Scotland, and to reconcile vnto the King. Thomas Earle of Lancaster. They broughteIohn Trocklow. Tho. de la More. Bulles from the Pope to excommunicate the Scottes, except they returned vnto peace with the King of England. Theſe Cardinals wente into the North partes, to enſtall Lodowike Beomond, to whome the Pope (at the Kyngs inſtaunce) hadde giuen the Byſhopricke of Durham: and when they came neare vnto the Towne of Derlington, certayne robbers breaking out of a valley, Gilbert Middleton and Walter Selby beyng their Capitaynes, ſodaynelye ſette vppon the family of the Cardinals and of Lodowike
               Tvvo Cardinals robbed. on Wigeleſden More, robbed them of their treaſure, and carryed Lodowike Byſhoppe of Durham to Morpeth, where

they conſtrayned hym to paye a greate Raunſome: they broughte Henrye Beaumont to the Caſtell of R
                     •
                  ntforde, and there kepte hym tyll hée hadde payde a greate raunſome: but the Cardinalles came to Durham, where they tarryed a fewe dayes for aunſweare of the Scottes, and ſo vnder the Kings conducte they retourned to Yorke, and left their buſineſſe whyche they came for vndone. Gilbert Middleton after manye domages doneAnno reg. 10. to the Priory of Rymuth and other, was taken in his owne Caſtell of Nitforde, by Wyllyam Felton, Thomas Hetton, and Robert Horneclife, carryed to London. and there in the preſence of the Cardinalles drawne and hanged.
            The Cardinalles vnder certayne conditions, made peace betwixte the King and Thomas Earle of Lancaster, whyche conditions ſhortlye after were vniuſtly broken.
            Syr Goſſeline De
                     ••
                  uile and his brother Roberte, wythTheeues lyke Fryers. two hundred in the habite of Friers did many notable robberies, they ſpoyled the Byſhoppe of Durhams Pallaces, leauing nothing in them but bare walles, for the whiche they were after hanged at Yorke.
            
            
               William Cawſton: Raufe Balancer, the 28. of September
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Iohn Wengraue, the 28. of October.
            
            
               Margaret daughter to Philip, ſonne to Lewes Kyng of Fraunce, wife to Edwarde the firſte, deceaſſed the fourtéenth of Februarye, and was buryed in the myddle of the Quire of the Gray Fryers Churche at London.
            
            
               Edwarde de Bruis the King of Scottes brother, who by
                  Ioh. Trocklowe. Edvvarde de Bruſe beheaded the ſpace of thrée yeares hadde aſſaulted Irelande, and had crowned hymſelfe Kyng, was taken by Engliſhemen that were the King of Englandes Subiectes, and was beheaded at Dundalke.
            
            In that battel were ſlayne nine and twentie Baronets of Scotlande, and fiue thouſande and eight hundreth other, the Primate of Armakh béeyng chiefe Capitayne for the Kyng of England.
            
            This yeare was an earlye Harueſt, ſo that all the corneEarly Harueſt cheape corne.
               
was inned before Saint Giles daye. A Buſhel of WheateAnno reg. 11. that was before ſolde for tenne ſhillings, was ſolde for ten pence: and a Buſhell of Otes that before was eighte ſhyllings, was ſolde for eight pence.
            Earle Warrin tooke the wife of the Earle of Lancaster, and ſhut hir vppe in hys Caſtell, for that he ſayde ſhe was betrothed to hym before ſhe was marryed: the Earles had eyther of them a wife, but neyther of them cared for them.
            
               Iohn Prior: William Furneys, the 28. of Sept.
               
                  Sherifes. Maior. Barvvike betrayed.
            
            
               Iohn Wengraue, the 28. of October.
            
            Aboute Midlent the Towne of Berwicke was betrayed to the Scottes, throughe the treaſon of Peter Spalding, and other Engliſhemen, whome the Kyng of Scottes cauſed to be hanged for béeyng Traytors to theyr Countrey. The Caſtell held oute, till for wante of victualles they wythin were conſtrayned to delyuer it into the Scottiſhmens hands,The Scottes inuaded England. Richard South. Iohn 
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     ucklowe.
                who wanne alſo the ſame tyme, the Caſtelles of Harbotel, Warke, and Mydforde, ſo that they poſſeſſed the more parte of all Northumberlande, euen to Newecastell vppon Tyne, ſauing certayne Caſtels that were defended agaynſt them.
            In May they entred further into the lande, brenning al before them, tyll they came to Rypon, whyche Towne they ſpoyled, and tarrying thrée dayes, they receyued a thouſande Markes of thoſe that were gote into the Churche, bycauſe they ſhould not put the Town to the fyre, as they hadde done the Townes of Northallerton, and Borough Bridge, &c.
            In theyr returning backe, they brent Knareſburghe, and Skipton in Crauen, and all other afore them, carrying into Scotlande a maruellous multitude of Cattel, beſides pryſoners, men and women.
            The Yorkeſhiremen gathered togither to the number ofTho. Walſing. ten thouſād, & met with the Scots at the town of Mitton, ten

myles by Northweaſt from Yorke, where they loſte thréeW. Packington. thouſande, and were ouercome by the Scottes, whych when the Kyng hearde tell of, hée lefte the ſiege of Barwike, and haſted to méete the Scottes, but they returned an other way.
            The Pope ordayned, that Parſons ſhould haue but one Benefice the péece: wherevpon patrons ſtraight preſented newe Parſons to the reſidue.
            A greate morreyne of Kine hapned, which were ſo mortally infected, that Dogs and Rauens eating of the carrionA morreyne of Kyne. of the Kine, were poyſoned and did ſwel to death, ſo that no man durſt eate any Béefe.
            
               Iohn Pointell: Iohn Dallyng, the 28. of Sept.
               
                  Sherifes. Maior. The Scots bren the ſuburbs of Yorke. 1319 Adam Meri. Herdmen and vvomen goe tovvard Ieruſalem Anno reg. 13
            
            
               Iohn Wingraue, the 28. of October.
            
            The Kyng being at Yorke, the Scottes entered Englande, came to Yorke, and brent the Suburbs of the Citie, and tooke Sir Iohn of Brytaine Earle of Richemonde priſoner, wyth manye other.
            Many Herdes men and certayne women of England, and of other partes of the world, gathered themſelues togither, and woulde goe ſéeke the Holy lande, to kil the enemies of Chriſt, as they ſayde: but bycauſe they could not paſſe ouer the greate Sea, they ſlewe manye Iewes in the parties of Tholoſe, and Gaſcoyne, wherefore many of them were taken, and put to death.
            
               Simon Abindon: Iohn Preſton, the 28. of Sept.
               
                  Sherifes. Maior. Exchequer kept at Yorke. Wil. Paſton. 1390
            
            
               Hamond Chickwell Peperer, the 28. of October.
            
            The fiftéenth of October the Clearkes of the Exchequer wente towardes Yorke with the Booke called Domes Day, and other recordes and prouiſion that laded one and twenty Cartes, but wythin the ſpace of halfe a yeare in the Kalendes of Marche they dydde retourne agayne to London.
            
            The ſame yeare the Kings Juſtices fate in the Tower1320 of London, wherevpon Iohn Giſors late Maior of London and many others fled the Citie, for things they had preſumptuouſly

done, and knewe themſelues guilty. And at thisChro. Dun. tyme the Citizens acknowledged the right whiche they oughte to Robert Fitz Walter; and to his heires, for the Caſtle of Baynard.
            
            The Earle of Hereforde boughte of Sir William Bruis Knight, a portion of lande in the Marches of Wales called Gowers. Roger Mortimer
                the vncle, and Roger the nephew, not knowing of the foreſaide bargayne, had alſo bought the ſaide ground of the ſaid William Bruis. Alſo the Lorde Mowbray, who had married the daughter and heire of the ſayde William, claymed it by inheritance of his wife. Laſt of al, Hugh Spencer the yonger, had bought that land, and putte them all out, where through the foreſaide Nobles were ſore amoued, and Humfrey Earle of Hereforde complayned to Thomas Earle of Lancaster, whyche twoo Earles allured almoſt al the other Earles and Barons to take their part. Thomas Erle of Lancaster being their Captaine,The Barons i
                     •
                   armour. they came to Sherborne, and from thence with banners diſplayed to Saint Albons: from thence they ſent to the king being at London, requiring him to baniſhe the two Hughe Spencers, whyche were condemned by the comminaltie in many articles: which when the King woulde not graunte,Anno reg. 14 the Barons came to London, where at length, the KyngThe elder Spencer banished. graunted their petition, ſo that Hughe Spencer the elder was baniſhed, but the yonger Hugh fell to ſpoyling on the ſea, taking out of two Dronionds aboute Sandwiche, goodes to the value of 40000. poundes.
            
               Reignolde at Conduit: William Produn, the 28. of Sept.
               
                  Sherifes. Maior. Ievves and leapers poyſoned vvaters. Conradus Memdember.
               
            
            
               Nicholas Farendon Goldſmith, the 28. of October.
            
            Certaine Leapers, who had made couenaunt with the Iewes to poyſon all the Chriſtians in Europe, layde poyſon in Welles, Springs and Pittes, for the whiche there were many conuict and brēt. There died in Almain for this cauſe aboue twelue thouſand Iewes.
            
            About the feaſte of Saint Michaell Iſabell the QuéeneT. de la More. came from Canterbury to ye caſtle of Ledes in Kent, purpoſing

to haue lodged there that night, but ſhe coulde not be permitted to enter.
            The King herewith beyng offended, as beyng done inLeedes Caſtell beſieged. contempte of hym, calling to hym the Commons of Eſſex and London, beſieged the Caſtle, whyche belonged to Bartholomewe de Badelſmere, who, hauing lefte hys wyfe and chyldren therein, was gone wyth the reſte of the noble men to the ranſacking of the Spencers goodes.
            In the meane time they in Leedes Caſtle diſpayring of their ſafegarde, the noble men wyth their armye came to Kyngston in the Uigill of Saint Simon and Iude, demaunding (by the Byſhoppes of Canterbury and London, and the Earle of Penbroke, who were ſent betwéene them) that the King woulde gyue ouer hys ſiege, promiſing, that they after the nexte Parliament woulde delyuer the Caſtell into the Kyngs handes, and become obedient vnto him: but the Kyng woulde not graunte the noble mens petition, who beyng returned into other partes, the Kyng wyth muche laboure obtayned the Caſtell, and hanging ſixe of the chiefe of thoſe whome hée founde therein, he ſente the wife and children of Badleſmere to the Tower of London.
            
            Kyng Edwarde helde hys Chriſtmaſſe at Circister, and after Chriſtmaſſe leanyng Gloucester and Wircester, hée wyth hys armye wente to Shrewſbury and Bridgenorth. Both the Mortimers méeting the King, reuerently and peaceably ſubmitted themſelues vnto him. But the Kyng ſente themMortimer ſente to the Tovver. both to the Tower of London.
            
            
               Mawrice Barkeley, and Hugh Audley in like ſorte ſubmitting themſelues, he ſent to Wallingforde Caſtel.
            
               Humfrey Earle of Hereforde, Gilbert Talbot, Raufe Damary,
                and their adherents, fledde into the North to the Earle of Lancaster.
            
            Aboute the latter ende of February the Kyng gathered an hoſt and went agaynſt the rebels, and at Burton vppon

               Trent putte them to flighte. The King purſuyng them the ſixtéenth of March, the hoſtes mette agayne at Borowbridge, where Humfrey de Bohune (by a certayne Welchman, who ſtoode vnder the Bridge) being thruſte into the fundament with a Speare, dyed. There were taken in the fielde Thomas Earle of Lancaster, with the Lordes, Knights, and other to the number of 65. the 
                  〈…〉
                
               
                  ••
               uing themſelues by flight.
            Theſe by the iudgement o
                  •
                
               
                  〈…〉
               e H
                     ••••
                  el
                     ••
                  
                Earle of Carlile, were condemned.
            On the 
                  〈…〉
                twentith of Marche Thoma
                     ••
                   
                  Lancaster
               
               The Earle of Lancaſter beheaded. was b
                  〈…〉
               ed: Warin de Lile, Wyllyam 
                     ••
                  ochet. Thomas 
                     •••
                  duit, Henry Bradebourne, Wyllyam Fitz William the yonger, and Wyllyam de Cheyney 
               
                  ••
               rons, hanged and quartered at Pontfracte: Iohn Mowbray, Roger
               
               Ioh. Troklowe. W. Paking. 
               Clifford
                     •
                   Goceline Deynvile, drawne and quartered at Yorke. Bartholomewe Badleſmere
                at Caunturbury: Henry de Mountfort, Henry Willington
                at Bristowe: Iohn Clifforde, Roger Elinbrough
                at Glocester: Wyllyam Kerdyfe, Henry Chies
                at London: Frauncis de Aldham
                at Windſore: Thomas Culpeper
                at Winchelſe: Hugh de Audley
                the yonger, Iohn de Wyllyngton, Roberte Talbot, Iohn Maidut, Edmunde Heclude, Iohn de Sapy, Roberte de Wacheuile, Philippe de Labeche, Iohn de Becke, Henry de Laybourne, theſe tenne, and thrée ſcore and twoo Knightes more, were beſtowed in dyuers priſons.
            The Juſticiers of Trailebaston in Eſſex ſate vppon all
                  Cron. of Dunſta. Iuſtices of Trailebaſton. complayntes, excepte Aſſiſes touchyng pleas of féed landes, and others, in the Kyngs Benche to bée pleaded, who dydde abſtaine theyr handes from all kindes of giftes. And they dydde not onely refuſe the giftes, but alſo woulde not be called to the feaſtes and bankets of any man.
            The thirde Wéeke after Eaſter, a Parliament wasTho. de la M
                     •••
                  . gathered at Yorke, where Hughe Spencer the father

was made Earle of Winchester, vnto whome the Kyng gaue the Caſtell and Honour of Dunnington, whiche was parcell of the Earledome of Lincolne.
            
            Aboute the feaſt of Saint Iames, the King wyth a greatT. de la More. Hen. Elanforde. armye entred Scotland, but the Scottes hauing deſtroyed all a
                  •
               ore, were retyred beyond the Scottiſhe Sea. So that the King beyng oppreſſed b
                  •••
               mine, retourned into Englande,
               Addictions to Nich. Triuet. Anno reg. 15 whome the Scottes foll
                  〈…〉
                and in a place of the Forreſt of Blackamore they 
                  •
               et 
                  〈…〉
               ng, ſo that he hardly eſcaped. There were taken the Earle of Richemond and the Lorde of Silicico, the Frenche Kings Embaſſador, and many other: where vppon the Scottes ſpoyling al the Cou
                  ••••
               , and brenning euen to Yorke, they brent Ripon, & ſlew many Prieſts of the Colledge there: but in Beuerley they hurte not a man, for the, Burgeſſes and Cannons dydde redéeme the ſame wyth foure hundreth poundes of ſterling money. And ſo the Scottes by reaſon of Winter made retourne, being laden with ſpoyles.
            Thys yeare the Kyng made Syr Andrewe Herkley Earle of Carlile, and gaue hym landes in the Marches of Scotlande.
            
            
               Richard Conſtantine: Richard Hackeney, the. 28. of Sept.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Hamond Chickwell Peperer, the 28. of October.
            
            Aboute the feaſte of the Purification of our Lady, Andrewe de Herkeley late made Earle of Carlile, vnder colour of peace, fayned, that he woulde marry Robert Bruis his ſiſter. Wherevppon the King reputing him a Traitor, cauſed him to be taken by hys truſty friende Syr Anthony de Lucy, and after he was diſgraded of the Earledome by the taking away frō him the ſword, & cutting off his ſpurs,1322 & then hanged & quartred at Carlile: alſo the third of March his head was ſent to London, and his four quarters to foure ſeueral parts of this land.
            The. xxx. of May Aymer de Valence Earle of Penbroke Hugh Spencer
                the yonger, Robert Baldocke Archdeacon of Midleſex, ſir William Herle Knight, William de Aizewine
               
Cannon of Yorke, Galfride de Scrope,
                were for King Edwarde of England ſent to Newcastel vpon Ti
                     •
                  e, where they met with William Biſhop of Saint Andrewes, Thomas Ra
                        ••
                     d
                        •
                     
                  
                
               
                  ••
                Earle of Mourt, Iohn de Mete
                        •
                     h, Robert de Lowther,
                the Father Knights, and maiſter Walter de Tromant Clearke for the King of Scottes, there to talke of a final peace: but when that wold not be, they 
                  •
               et to a truce, which they agreed vpō for. xiij yeres, which was proclaimed about the xj: of June, dated atAnno reg. 16 
               Thorpe néere vnto Yorke.
            
            Thys yere Phillip King of Fraunce dyed, and his brother Charles ſuccéeded him.
            About the beginning of Auguſte king Edwarde being at Pikering, there came Ambaſſadors from the new French king, the Lorde Benuille and ſir Andrew de Florentia, to cite the King to come to doe homage for 
                  
                     ••
                  yon, Aquitaine, and other lands which he helde of him: and though Hugh Spencer the ſonne Lorde Chamberlayne, and Roberte Baldocke Lorde Chauncellour, had procured the ſayde Ambaſſadours not to declare theyr meſſage to the King yet when they ſhoulde depart they did it, admoni
                  •
               hing him to come. And the ſayd ſyr Andrew de Florence being a Notarie, made a publike inſtrument of the ſayde Citation and admonition.
            
               Iohn Grantham: Richard of Ely, the. 28, of Septem.
               Sherifes. Maior. Tho. de la More.
            
            
               Hamond Chickwel Peperer, the. 28. of October.
            
            The Frenche King made a proceſſe againſte the King of Englande. And Charles de Valoys vncle to king Charles of Fraunce a moſt deadly enimy to Engliſhmen, did ſea
                  •
               e on the Dukedome of Angue, and the Countie of Portowe vnto the vſe of his nephew the King. At the length going forward to the towne of Ryall, he founde it wel defended by Edmond of Woodstocke Earle of Kent, betwixte whome a finall truce being taken, to continue vntill ſuche time as it coulde be determined betwéene both the Kings as concerning peace, and the towne being yelded vp, both the armies departed home.
            The next Lent in a Parliament holden at London, Adam
               
               
               Tarleton Biſhoppe of Hereforde was accuſed of treaſon, butHenrie Blanford. 1323 by the Archbiſhops of Cāterburie, Yorke, and Dubline, and their ſuffragan Biſhoppes, he was taken from the Barre and had away: notwithſtanding inquiſition being made by lawefull men of that Country, they founde y• he had ayded the Mortimers with horſſe and armour againſt the King, wherevppon all hys Temporalities were ſeaſed into the kings hands. In this Parliament the king graunted at petition of y• Prelate, that all the bodies of the noble men that were hanged on gallowes, ſhoulde be taken downe, and buried in eccleſiaſticallAnno reg. 17 ſepulture.
            The King alſo aſked a ſubſidie of the cleargie and people, for the redéeming of Iohn Britaigne, Earle of Richmonde.
            
            
               Adam Tarleton Biſhop of Hereford, being depriued of all hys temporall goods, did hate the Spencers deadlye, ſo dyd Henrie Burwaſhe of Lincolne and their friendes, who withheldeTho. de la More. their handes only for reuerence of the King.
            On Lammas daye Roger Mortimer of Wigmore, byHenrie Blanford. giuing to his kéepers a ſléepe drinke, eſcaped out of the Tower, breaking▪ through the wal and comming into y• Kitchin neare adioyning to the Kings lodgings, and getting out of the toppe thereof, came to a Warde of the Tower, and ſo with cordes knitte ladder-wiſe, prepared afore hande by a friende of hys, got to another Warde, and ſo with greate feare got to the Thamis, and with his helper and two moe of his counſell paſſed the riuer, and auoyding the high wayes came to the ſea, and there finding a ſhippe, paſſed ouer into Fraunce.
            
            
               Adam of Salisburie: Iohn of Oxforde, the, 28. of Septem.
               Sherifes. Maior. 1324 Tho. de la More. Anno reg. 18
            
            
               Nicholas Farendon Goldſmith, the. 28. of October.
            
            The Kyng ſente Ambaſſadours to the French Kyng, the Byſhoppes of Winchester and of Norwiche, with Iohn of Brytaine Earle of Richmonde, to take order for the Dukedome of Brytaine, who after long debatings, toke a certayne forme of peace with the King.
            
               King Edwarde ſente the Quéene hys wife vnto hyr brotherThe Queenſēt
                     •
                   into Fraunce. the French Kyng, to eſtabliſhe the peace, who went ouer with a ſmall company. By hyr mediation a peace was fullye finiſhed, to witte, that the Kyng of Englande; ſhould giue to his eldeſt ſonne Edwarde, the Dukedome of Aquitaine, and the Earledome of Po
                     •
                  t
                     ••
                  e, and that the French Kyng ſhoulde receyue homage of hym: wherevpon Edwarde the Kings ſonne, wente ouer wyth a competent houſholde aboute the feaſte of Saint Mathewe, and did homage vnder certaine proteſtations, to his vncle the Frenche King.
            
               Bennet of Fulham: Iohn Cowſon, the. 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior. 1325
            
            
               Hamon Chickwel Peperer, the. 28. of October.
            
            Whiles the Quéene wyth hyr ſonne remayned in Fraunce longer than the Kings pleaſure was, and would not come agayne wythout Roger Mortimer and other Nobles that were fledde out of Englande, and eſpecially for the hatred ſhée bare to the two Hughe Spencers, the Kyng in diſpleaſure baniſhed them bothe, and all other that toke theyr partes, wherevppon manye fledde ouer the Seas to the Quéene, amongſt the whych was one a ſubtill Knyght, Sir Robert Walkefare, who ſlaying the Coneſtable of Corfe Caſtel, brake from them, where he had long line priſoner.
            Sir Oliuer Ingham Knight, whom the yong Duke Edwarde
               Oliuer Ingham. hadde made kéeper of Aquitaine, gathered a great armye, and inuaded the prouince of Aniowe, (whiche the Frenche King contrarie to couenauntes, dydde wythholde)Anno reg. 19 and broughte it wholby into the dominion of England.
            
            Moreouer the kings Nauie tooke a hundred ſhips of the Normans, and brought them into England, for which cauſe gret hatred grew betwixt the two kings and their Realmes.
            The Q. perceyuing that y• nobles of France, were corrupted with gifts ſent out of Englād, ſo that ſhe could truſt none of them, ſecretly conueyed hir ſelfe and hir ſonne to the Erle

of Heynalde, deſiring ayde of him who receyued and intreated hyr very honourably ſo long as ſhe remayned there.
            
               Gilbert Mordon: Iohn Cotto
                     •
                  , the. 28 of September.
               Sherifes. Maior. 1326
            
            
               Richard Betaine Goldſmith, the. 28. of October.
            
            
               Iſabel the Quéene made a mariage betwixt hir eldeſt ſon Edward, and Phillip the Earles daughter of Heynalde, and and then with hir: ſonne Edwarde, Edmunde of Woodstocke Erle of Kent, the kings brother, Roger Mortimer, and many other noble men that were fledde out of Englande, and Iohn brother to the Earle of Heynalde being Captaine, with ſtipedarie knightes, out of Almaine and Henalde, ſhe toke the ſeas with all hir power, whiche were to the number of MM. DCC. LUII. menne well armed, and arriued at Vrewel, or Orwel hauen beſides Harwich in Eſſex▪
                about Michaelmaſſe, whether immediately the Earle Marſhal, the Earle of Leicester, the Biſhops of Lincolne, Hereforde, Diuelyn, & Ely▪
                came, and being ioyned to the Quéene, made a great army:
                  Anno reg. 20. Queene Iſabel returned. the other Biſhops, ſpecially of Canturburie, ayded hyr with mony. When ſhe had refreſhed hir armye at Saint Edmondeſburie▪
                ſhe went forwardes purſuing hir enimies, whoſe goods ſhe applyed to hir owne vſe. The King requeſted ayde of the Citizens of London, who made him aunſweare, they wouldeThe King requeſted ayde. with due obedience honour the King and Quéene, and theyr ſonne, who was lawfull heyre to the Realme, and that they woulde ſhut theyr gates againſt all forraine traytors of the Realme: but they would not go out of their Citie to fighte, except they might (according to theyr liberties) return home againe the ſame day before Sunne ſette: which when the K. hearde, he fortified the Tower of London, and lefte there hysProclamation by the king. yonger ſonne Iohn of Eltham:
                he cauſed alſo to be proclaimed that euery 
                  •••
                ſhould reſiſt them that were arriued, and to inuade them to the vttermoſt of theyr powers (the Quéene with hir ſome Edward, and the Erle of Kent his brother only excepted) and wholoeuer coulde bring the heade of Roger Mortimer, ſhoulde haue a thouſande pounde. On the other ſ
                  •••
                it was proclaymed in the Quéenes behalfe, that al menProclimation by the Queene.
               
ſhould haue good peace, except the diſturbers of the Realm, to wit the Spencers y• father and the ſon, Robert Baldocke byſhop of Norwich the kings Chancellour, and theyr fautours: & whoſoeuer did bring to the Quéen the head of Hugh Spencer, ſhoulde haue a M. pound. The Citizens of London without reſpect of any, beheaded ſuch as they took to be the Quéenes enimies, among the whiche they beheaded one of their owne Citizens named Iohn Marſhal, bicauſe he was familiar with Hugh Spencer the yonger. They toke alſo Maiſter Walter Stapleton Biſhoppe of Excester, and on the. xv. day ofBishop of Exceſter beheaded. October beheaded him: the eight and twētith of March next following he was buried at Excester, with great ſolemnitie: and two of his ſeruauntes, a ſquire and a yeoman named William Atwall, and Iohn of Padington, at the ſtanderd in Cheape, bycauſe (as the ſaying was) he had gathered a greate army to withſtand the Quéene, they did alſo wreſt the keyes of the Tower of London out of the Coneſtables handes, and deliuered al the priſoners.
            
               Richard Rothing: Roger Chaunteclere, the. 28. of Septem.
               
                  Sherifes. Maior. Saint Iames.
            
            
               Richard Britaine Goldſmith, the 28. of October,
            
            Thys Richarde Rothing Sherife, builded the Pariſhe Church of Saint Iames at Garlike Hithe in London.
            
            The Quéen beſieged Bristow, which was ſoone rēdered toThe Queen beſieged Briſtovv hir, and the morrow after hir cōmyng, Hugh Spencer the elder was drawen & hanged in his armour, & then beheaded &Spencer the elder executed. Wil. Pakington.
                his body hanged vppe againe, and after foure dayes cutte al to péeces, and caſt to the dogges to be eaten, but his heade was ſent to Winchester.
            
            The King, Hugh Spencer the yonger, and Robert Baldocke, determyned to flée into the Ile of Lunday, whiche is in the mouth of the riuer Seuerne, twoo miles in length euery waye, verye fruitefull, pleaſaunte, and harde to conquer: but beyng in greate daunger on the Sea the ſpace of aThe King taken. Tho. de la More. Alexan. Netha
                        •
                     .
                wéeke, at laſte arriued in Wales, where they were taken the ſixtéenth daye of Nouember, in the Monaſterye of Neth. The Kyng was committed to Henrie Earle of Lancaster
               
his kinſman, who broughte hym to Kellingworthe Caſtell,The K. ſent to Killingvvorth. 
               Hugh Spencer, Robert Baldocke, and Symon Readyn; were broughte to the Quéene at Hereforde: the Earle of Arundell Iohn Daniel
                and Thomas Muchelden, by procurement of Roger Mortimer were beheaded before theyr comming.
            
               Hugh Spencer was condemned without aunſwere at Hereforde, where he was drawen and hanged vppon aSpencer the yō
                  ger executed. Gallowes thirtye foote hygh, and then headed and quartered on the foure and twentith of Nouember.
            
               Simon Reading was drawen and hanged on the ſame Gallowes, but ten foote lower.
            
               Robert Baldocke dyed in Newgate with manye torments.
            Theſe things beyng done, the Quéene wyth hyr ſonne Edwarde, Roger Mortimer and other, went to Wallingforde Caſtell a little before Chriſtmaſſe, and before the twelfth daye they came to London, where they were ioyfully receyued. On the morrowe after the ſayde feaſte, they helde a Parliamente, where by common decrée, they elected Edwarde hys eldeſte ſonne, and then ſente in the name of the whole Parliament thrée Biſhoppes, IohnK. Edvvard the ſecond depoſed. 
               Stratforde Biſhoppe of Winchester, Adam Tarleton
                Byſhoppe of Hereforde, and Henrie Byſhoppe of Lincolne, two Earles, two Abbottes, foure Barons, and euery Countie thrée Knightes, &c. vnto the Kyng at Kenilworthe. Adam de Tarleton
                Byſhoppe of Hereforde, being the chiefe in malice, dyd the meſſage, with many greate threates, declaring vnto hym theyr election, and required him to renounce the Kyngly dignitie and Crowne to hys ſonne: the Kyng aunſweared with teares, that hée was very ſorie that hée hadde behaued hymſelfe ſo euill towardes the people of hys Kingdome, but ſéeyng the matter was ſo vnrecouerable, he prayed them all to forgiue hym, and thanked them that they had choſen his eldeſt ſonne. The meſſengers renounce all homages and dueties due to

               Edwarde of Carnaruan
                late King: and Thomas Blunte Knight, ſtewarde of houſholde brake hys rodde, reſigned hys office, and ſhewed that the Kyngs houſholdehad frée libertie to departe, and then returned with the Kings aunſwere, and made the people ioyfull. He was thus depoſed, when he had raigned nintéene yeares, ſixe monethes, and odde dayes. He was deliuered to the cuſtodie of Henrie Earle of Leicester, and one hundred markes the moneth allowed for his charges in Kellingworth Caſtell.
         
         
            
            ¶ King Edward the thirde
            
            
            
               
                  EDvvarde the thirde borne at Windſor, abonte the age of. xiiij. yeares, after the depoſing of hys Father, beganne his raigne theAnno reg. 1 xxv. day of Januarie, in the yeare of our Lorde. 1326. He was crowned at Westminster, on the firſt day of February, by Walter Reignalds Archbiſhoppe of Canturburie. This Prince was endued with paſſing beautie and fauour, of wit prouident, circumſpect, and gētle of nature: of excellent modeſtie and temperaunce. He aduaunced ſuch perſons to dignities, as did moſt excel other in innocencie of life. In feates
                  
                     •
                  . de la More. Gual. Baker of Swinbroke. of armes he was very expert, as the noble enterpriſes by hym atchieued doe well declare. At the beginning of hys raigne, he was chiefely ordered by hys mother Iſabel, vnto whome was aſſigned ſo greate a Dowrie, that the thyrde parte of the Kyngdome didde ſcantelye remayne to hyr ſonne.
            
               The inhabitauntes of the Towne of Burie in Suffolke,
               
                  Regeſter of Burie. Iohn Prigton. The Abbay of Burie ſpoyled. aſſembled themſelues in warlike manner on Saint Lukes daye laſt before paſſed in the twentith yeare of Edward the ſeconde, and beſiged the Abbey of Burie, brent the gates, bet & wounded y• Monkes, bare out of the Abbey al the Gold, ſiluer, ornamentes, bookes, Charters, and other writings, with the aſſay of their coyne ſtampes, and all other thyngs pertayning to their minte, and all other goods, as Braſſe, Pewter, Iron, Leade. &c. They alſo brent many houſes about the Abbey, and in the Town, pertayning to the Abbot, with his manours in Berton, Packenham, Rugham, Oldhaw, Hernigeſburie, Newton, Whipsted, Westle, Riſeby, Ingham, Ferneham, Redwel, Haberdon, and others, with all the corne in the ſame manours, and droue awaye the horſſes, oxen, kine, ſwine, ſhéepe &c. They drewe ye monks out of theyr Abbey & put them in priſons, and after brought them againe to theyr Chapter houſe, where they forced them to ſearch Charters at theyr pleaſure, &c. For the whiche factes the malefactours were this yeare by vertue of the Kings commiſſion directed to Thomas Earle of Norffolke,
               Commons of Burie executed. Marſhall of Englande, Thomas Bardolfe
                and others, apprehēded and conuicted: nintéene of them wer hanged, and one preſſed to death. After this the whole inhabitauntes of the Towne, for that they had not ſtayde the malefactours of their enterpriſe in y• beginning (as they might haue done) wer amerced to pay ye Abbot toward his damages. 140000. pounde. Neuertheleſſe the Abbot and Couent at the kings requeſt, who was there preſent with his nobilitie, forgaue and remitted to them. 122333. pounde ſixe ſhillings eightBurie amerced. perice of the ſumme, and for the reſt vſed ſuche fauour, that if they truely payde 2000. markes in twentie yeares following, and obſerued their couenaunts for good order and quietneſſe, they forgaue them all the reſt.
            About thys time, the like ſtir was made againſte theRecord. eccleſia Chriſti Cantu. Monkes of Canterburie, whereof I fynde recorded as followeth.
            
               King Edward preparing an army into Scotland commā
               ded the Baylifes and Citizens of Canterburie, to furniſh him twelue horſſemen, and ſende them to Nowcastel, towarde which charge, the Citizens required ayde of the Monkes, who aunſwered them, that without the aſſent of the Kyng and theyr Archbiſhoppe, they would not agrée therevnto, for ſo much as the Kings of Englande had founded theyr churche in frée and perpetuall almes. Wherevpon, William Chilham Baylife, and many commons of the Citie, aſſembled themſelues in the Preaching Friers Churchyarde, conſpired and ſware againſt the Monkes as followeth.
            
               1 That they would ouerthrow the pentiſes, windowes, and milne, belonging to the Monkes.
               2 That no Citizen ſhould dwell in any houſe belonging to the Monks.
               3 That all rents belonging to the Monkes of Canterburie ſhould be gathered to the vſe of the commons.
               4 That no man ſhoulde ſende or ſel to the Monkes anye victuals.
               5 That they ſhould ſell all the horſſes and beaſts y• came into the Citie with cariage to the Monkes.
               6 That al ſuch Monks as came forth of their houſe ſhold be ſpoyled of their garments.
               7 That a trench ſhoulde be caſt, to ſtop all men from going in or comming out.
               8 That euery Pilgrime ſhold at his entring, ſwere that he ſhould make no offering.
               9 Alſo that euerye of thoſe commons aforeſayde ſhould weare on their finger, a ring of golde of thoſe that belonged to Thomas Becket.
               
            
            Syr Iohn the Earles brother of Henalt came to helpeCro. Pet. Coledge. Edwarde the thirde againſte the Scottes, with fiue hundred men of armes, whiche Henawders and the Engliſhmen fell out by chaunce on Trinitie Sonday at Yorke, where. 80. of the Lincolnſhire men were ſlaine, and buried vnder a ſtone in S. Clements Churchyarde in Foſegate.
            
            
               The King wente againſte the Scottes that were entredIourney tovvards ſcotland 
               Englande as farre as Stanhope Parke in Wardale, where they were beſieged thrée dayes, but they eſcaped. Iames Douglas one night ſecretly entring the Engliſh campe, came néere to the kings tent to haue taken or ſlain him, but his Chaplein being a bolde man and well armed, with ſome other beyng ſlaine, he with much adoe got backe vnhurte.
            
               Iſabel the Quéene being perſwaded that the Earle of Leicester too muche fauoured the olde King hyr huſbande,Tho. de la More. Walter Barker of Swinebroke. through the ſubtile deuiſe of hyr ſcholemaſter Adam Tarleton Biſhop of Hereforde, appointed that Thomas Gornay, and Iohn Maltrauers Knightes, hauing receyued him into theyr cuſtody, ſhould carrie him about whether they would, ſo that none of hys well willers ſhoulde haue acceſſe vnto him, or vnderſtand where he made any long abode. Theſe brought him out by nighte from Kenilworth, and firſte he is brought to the Caſtell of Corfe, then to Bristow, where for a ſeaſon he was kept ſhut vp cloſe in the Caſtel, vntil ſuche time as it was vnderſtoode of by certaine, Burgeſſes of the ſame Towne, who for the deliueraunce of the ſaid Edward, conueyed, themſelues ouer Sea: whoſe determination béeing knowne to his kéepers, in a certaine darke night they conueyed him thence to Berkeley. Theſe tormentours forced him to ride bareheaded: when he woulde ſléepe they would not ſuffer hym: neyther when he was hungry would they giue him ſuche meate as liked him, but ſuche as he lothed. Euerye worde he ſpake was contraried by them, giuing out moſte ſlaunderouſly, that he was madde. And to conclude, in all matters that they coulde imagine, they were contrarie to hys wyll, that eyther by colde or watchyng, or vnholeſome meates, or melancholy or other infirmitie, he myght languiſhe and dye. But contrariwiſe, thys man being of a good diſpoſition by nature, ſtoute to ſuffer, and patiente throughe Gods grace to abyde griefes, hée endured all the wicked deuiſes of hys enymies. For as touching poyſons whiche were miniſtred to him, by

the benefit of nature he diſpatched them away. Theſe Chā
               pions (as I ſayd) bring the olde king towardes Barkeley, being guarded with a rabble of Helhoundes, along by the graunges belonging to the Caſtell of Bristow, where that wicked man Gerney making a crown of Hey, put it on hys heade, and the ſouldiours that were aboute him mocked him, ſaying, Tprut, auaunt ſir King, making a kinde of noiſe with theyr mouthes, as though they had farted. Theſe doubting to meete ſome of hys friendes, bent theyr iourney ouer the Mariſh grounds, lying by the ruier of Seuerne. Moreouer diuiſing by all meanes to diſfigure him that hée mighte not be knowen, they determined to ſhaue as well the heare off hys heade as alſo off his bearde, wherefore comming by a little Water whiche ranne in a ditche, they commaunded him to alighte from his horſſe to be ſhauen: to whome being ſet on a Molehill, a Barbour came with a Baſon of colde Water taken out of the ditch, to whō 
               Edwarde ſayd, ſhall I haue no warme water? the Barber anſwered, this wyll ſerue: quoth Edward, will ye or nil yée I will haue warme water: and that he might kéepe his promiſe, he beganne to wéepe and to ſhed teares plentifullye, (as it was reported by William Byſhop, to ſir Thomas de la More knight.) At length they came to Berkeley Caſtel, where Edward was ſhutte vppe cloſe like an Ancher. Iſabel his wife taking it grieuouſly that hir huſbāds life was thus prolonged, made complaint to Adam Biſhop of Hereforde, fayning that ſhe had certayne dreames, the interpretation whereof ſhe miſliked. In like ſorte the Biſhop being in hys conſcience guiltie of treaſon, ſtoode in feare the like feare alſo ſtoke the heartes of other for the ſame offence, whom the Diuer had gathered together to that effect. Wherfore it ſéemed good to many of great dignity & bloud, as wel ſpiritual as temporal, yt al ſuch fear ſhould be taken away by ye death of Edwarde, whervppon letters were ſent to hys kéepers, blaming them for ſuffering him to enioy ſo much libertie, & nouriſhing him ſo delicately.
            
               Moreouer there is a priuie motion made to them, thatSophiſtical letter procuring the murder of the olde king. the death of Edwarde woulde not be miſliked vnto them: and in this pointe, the great deceyte of Sophiſters ſtoode in force, ſet downe by the Biſhoppe of Hereforde, who wrote thus: Edwardum occidere nolite timere bonum est: Kyl Edward do not feare it is a good thing.
                or thus:
            
               To ſeeke to ſhed king Edwards bloud, Refuſe to feare I counte it good.
            
            Thys ſaying is to be reſolued into two propoſitions, whereof the firſt conſiſting of thrée wordes, to witte, Edwardum occidere nolite, and the ſeconde of other thrée, that is, Timere bonum est, do ſéeme to perſwade very ſubtilly: but the receyuers of the letters not being ignorant of the Sophiſtical writing, chaunged the meaning thereof to thys ſenſe, Edwardum occidere nolite timere, and afterwarde ioyned theſe wordes bonum est. Nowe when the olde king was broughte to the Caſtell aforeſayde, he was very curteouſlye receiued by Thomas Lorde Barkeley, but after the tormentors had receyued letters concerning the gouernemente of the Caſtell, Thomas Lord of Berkley is commaunded to departe from thence, wherefore taking his leaue with ſighes, he goeth to his other dwelling places.
            After this the olde king was ſhutte vp in a cloſe Chamber, where with the ſtincke of the deade carkaſſes layde in a celler vnder him, he was miſerablye tormented manye dayes, in ſuche ſorte, that he was well nyghe ſuffocated therewith: and that the paine was almoſt intollorable, it appeared by the complainte he made on a certayne daye at the Chamber windowe, certayne Carpenters then working on the righte ſide thereof hearing the ſame. But theſe tyraunts perceyuing that this woulde not force hys death, one night being the xxij. of September, they came ruſhing in vppon him, as he laye in his bedde, with greate heauyeThe old king murdered. 
               
                  •
               eatherbeddes, as muche in weyghte as xv. menne coulde beare, wherwyth they oppreſſed and ſmoothered hym, into whom alſo they thruſt a plummers yron, being made redde

hotte vp into his bowels, throughe a certaine inſtrumente like to the end of a Trumpet, or gliſter pipe, put in at hys fundiment, burning thereby his inward partes, prouiding thereby leaſt any wound being founde in the kings bodye, they might be cauſed to aunſweare it. In this ſort was this ſtoute King oppreſſed, crying with a lowde voyce, ſo that many as well within the Caſtell as without heard it, perceyuing it was the cry of one that ſuffered violente deathe, which cauſed many of Berkeley (as they affirmed) to take cō
               paſſion thereof, and to pray for the ſoule of him that was then departing. Iſabel and the Biſhop, that their tyrannye mighte be hid, outlawed and baniſhed Thomas Gournay,
               The murderers fledde. and Iohn Maltrauers. Thomas fléeing into Marcels, thrée yeares after being known was taken and brought towards Englande, and was beheaded on the Sea, leaſt he ſhoulde accuſe the chiefe doer. Iohn Maltrauers (repenting himſelfe) lay long hid in Germanie.
            
            This yeare died Charles king of Fraunce the thirde brother, whiche was brother to the Lady Iſabel Quéene of Englande,
               K. Edvvards title to Fraunce. mother to King Edward the thirde, by whoſe deathe the ſucceſſion of the Kingdome of Fraunce came to the ſaid Edwarde: but it was vſurped and poſſeſſed by Phillip de Valoys vncle to the ſayde Charles; who dyd intrude himſelf by force.
            King Edward married Phillip the Earles daughter ofEdvvard the third married. 
               Heynalde, at Yorke the fiue and twentith of Februarie: ſhée was ſiſters daughter to Phillippe de Valoys aforeſayde.
            
               Henrie Darcy: Iohn Hauten the, 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior. 
               Hamond Chikwel Grocer, the 28. of October.
            
            A Parliament was holden at Northampton, in whiche 
                  •
               
               
                  Anno reg. 2. Parliament at Northampton. 1228 Peace vvith the Scottes. ſhameful peace was made betwixt the Engliſhmen and Scots; ſo that Dauid, the ſonne of Robert Bruis, ſcarce ſeuen yeres olde, married Ioan of the Tower king Edwardes ſiſter, at Berwike, the twelfth of July. Alſo the king made the Scottes,
               
charters, the tenour whereof was vnknowen to the Engliſhmen: but al was done as it pleaſed the olde Quéene, Roger Mortimer, and Iames Dowglas. The Scottes made manye tannting times againſt the Engliſhmen, for the fond diſguiſed apparel by them at that time vſed, amongſt the which was faſtened vppon the Church doores of Saint Peter towardes Stangate,
            
            
               Long beardes hartleſſe,Scottish taunts.
               
               Painted hoodes vvitleſſe,
               Gay coates graceleſſe,
               Makes England thriftleſſe.
            
            
               Adam Tarleton was made Biſhop of Worcester.
            
            In a Parliament at Saliſburie, the K. made thrée Erles,Parliament at Satisburie. Iohn of Eltam his brother Earle of Cornewal, Roger Mortimer
                Earle of the March, and Iames Butler of Ireland Earle of Ormond. From this Parliament the Earle of Lancaster, ye Lord Wake, Henrie Beamonde, Earle Marſhal, and other noble men did abſent thēſelues, not being far off frō thence in armour, for the whiche the King was highly diſpleaſed: notwithſtanding in Sommer following they ſubmitted themſelues vnto the Kyngs mercy, ſéekyng his fauour.
            
               Simon Fraunces: Henrie Combmartin, the. 28. of Sep.
               Sherifes. Maior. 
               Iohn Grantham, the. 28. of October.
            
            Certaine men of this land, to y• intent to try what friendsK. Edvvard the ſeconde bruted to be aliue. they had in England, craftily deuiſed that Edward the ſecond king of England was aliue in the Caſtell of Gorffe, but not to bée ſéene in the daye time, and therefore they vſed manye nightes to make ſhewes and maſkyng wyth dauncing vpon the towers and Wals of the Caſtel, which being perceyued by people of the countrey, it was thoughte there had bin ſome great king vnto whom they dyd theſe greate

ſolemnities: this rumour was ſpredde ouer all Englande, to witte, that the olde King was aliue, whence it came to paſſe, that the Earle of Kent ſente thyther a Fryer Precher, to trye the truth of the matter, who (as it was thought) hauing corrupted the Porter of the Caſtell with rewardes, isAnno reg. 3. let in, where he lay all the day in the Porters lodge verye cloſe, and whē night was come, he was willed to put on y• habit of a lay mā, and then was brought into the Hal, wher he ſaw (as he thought) Edwarde the Father of the king ſitting royally at ſupper with great maieſtie. This Frier being thus perſwaded, returned againe to the Earle of Kente, and reported as he thought, what he ſaw: whervpon y• Erle ſaide and affirmed with an othe, that he would indeauoure by all the meanes he coulde to deliuer his brother from priſon.
            The ſame yeare at the earneſt requeſt of ſome, the king1329 held a Parliament at Winchester, where by procurement of the olde Quéene, and Roger Mortimer, the ſayde Earle ofParliament at VVincheſter. 
               Kent, and manye other noble men and religious perſons, to witte, the prouincials of the white Carmilit Friers, and of the blacke Preaching Friers, and Frier Richarde Wliten were accuſed of conſpiracie, touching (as it was ſayde) the deliuerye of the Kings Father, which matter although it were but deuiſed fantaſie and a méere lye, yet the ſayde Earle for certaine confeſſions whyche he made, and for certayne letters which were founde about him, was there beheaded. The other, to wit, y• prouincials of the Predicants &Erle of Kent the kings vncle beheaded at VVincheſter. Carmilites, were baniſhed: but the Biſhop of London, was ſet at libertie. Robert de Taunton Prieſt, and ſome certain Carmilite Friers and predicants, were condemned to perpetual priſon.
            The death of the ſayde Earle was the leſſe lamented, bycauſe his familye and ſeruauntes had aboue meaſure afflicted the commons, in taking vp things (as they trauayled,) at the Kings price, paying nothing or verye lyttle for it.
            
               
               Richarde Lazer: Wyllyam Giſours, the 28. of Sept.Sherifes. Maior. Richarde Swanland, the 28. of October.
            
            There was a Parliament holden at Notingham, where Roger Mortimer was in ſuche glorie and honoure, that it was without all compariſon. No man durſt name him any other than Earle of Marche: a greater rowt of men wayted at his héeles, than on the Kings perſon: he would ſuffer the King to riſe to him, and would walke with y• King equally ſtep by ſtep, & chéeke by chéeke, neuer preferring y• King, but would go formoſt himſelfe with his Officers: he greatly rebuked the Earle of Lancaster, couſin to the Kyng, for that withoute hys conſent hée appointed certayne lodgings for Noble men in the Towne, demaundyng who made him ſo bolde, to take vppe lodgings ſo nighe vnto the Quéene, wyth whyche wordes the Coneſtable béeyng greatelye feared, appoynted lodging for the Earle of Lancaster one myle oute of the Towne: and lykewiſe were lodged the Earle of Hereforde, Iohn de Bohune
                of Estſex, highe Coneſtable of Englande, and others. By whyche meanes a contention roſe among the Noblemen, and greate murmuring among the common people, who ſayde, that Roger Mortimer the Quéenes Paragon, and the Kyngs Mayſter, ſought all the means he could to deſtroy the Kyngs bloude, and to vſurpe the Regall Maieſtie: whyche reporte troubled muche the Kyngs friendes, to wéete, William Mountacute, and other, who for the ſafegarde of the Kyng, ſware themſelues to be true to his perſon, and drew vnto them Robert de Hollande, who hadde of long tyme béene chiefe kéeper of the Caſtell, vnto whome all ſecreate corners of the ſame were knowne. Then vppon a certayne night, the Kyng lying without the Caſtel, bothe he and his friendes were brought by Torchlight through a ſecrete waye vnder ground, beginning far off from y• ſaid Caſtell, til they came euen to the Quéenes Chamber, whyche they by chaunce found open: they therfore beyng armed with naked ſwords in their hāds, went forwards, leauing the King alſo armed

without the dore of the Chamber, leaſt that his mother ſhould eſpie him: they which entred in, ſlew Hugh Turpinton Knighte, who reſiſted them, Mayſter Iohn Neuell of Horneby giuing him his deadly wound. From thence, they went toward the Quéene mother, whome they found with the Earle of March, readie to haue gone to bedde: and hauing taken the ſayde Earle, they ledde him out into the Hall, after whome the Quéene followed, crying Bele fits, bele fits, ayes pitie de gentil Mortimer, Good ſonne▪ good ſon, take pitie vpon gentle Mortimer,
                for ſhe ſuſpected that hir ſonne was there, though ſhe ſaw him not. Then are the keyes of the Caſtell ſent for, and euery place with all the furniture is yéelded vp into the Kings hands, but in ſuche ſecret wiſe, that none without the Caſtell, except the Kings friends vnderſtoode thereof. The next day in the morning very early, they bring Roger Mortimer, and other his friēds taken with him, with an horrible ſhout and crying (the Earle of Lancaster then blind, being one of them that made the ſhoute for ioy) towards London, where he was committed to the Tower, and afterward condemned at Westminster, in preſence of the whole Parliament on Saint Andrewes euen next following, and then drawne to the Elmes, and there hanged on the common gallowes, whereon he hung two dayes and two nightes by the Kings commandement, and then was buryed in the Grey Friers Church. He was condemned by his Péeres, and yet neuer was brought to anſwere before them, for it was not then the cuſtome, after the death of the Earles of Lancaster, Winchester, Glocester, and Kent, wherefore this Earle had that law him ſelfe, which he appoynted for other.
            The cauſes of his death laid againſt him were theſe.
            Firſt, that he was conſenting to the murthering of the Kings father.
            Secondly, for that he had receiued a great ſumme of money, whereby the Kings honor was greatly abated at Stanhope Parke, where he gaue a ſigne vnto the Scottes that

they ſhould flie.
            Thirdly, for that he cauſed certayne auntient déedes and Charters to be brent, wherein the King of Scots ſtood bound vnto the King of Englande: and eſpecially for that he had cauſed a contra
                  •
               t to be made betwixt the Kings ſiſter, and Dauid the ſonne of Robert le Bruis.
            
            Fourthly, that he had vnprofitably conſumed a greate deale of treaſure which he found in the kings treaſurie, and in the treaſurie of the Earles of Winchester and Glocester.
            
            Fiftly, for appropriating vnto himſelfe the wardes and mariages of all England.
            
            Sixtly, for being an euill counſeller to the King, and to the Quéene mother, and for being ouermuch familiarNo Iuſtice. with hir. There died with him his friends Simon de Burford Knight, brother to Sir William Burford that was Juſtice,Anno reg. 4. & Iohn Deuerell Eſquier, who was deſirous to haue made open confeſſion of the Kings fathers cruell death, but he could not be ſuffered. King Edward, the Biſhop of Winchester, Wil. Mountacute,
                and very few others paſſed ouer1
                     ••
                  0▪
                Sea, like as they had bin Merchants, hauing with hym ſcarſe xv. horſemen. He left Iohn of Eltham his brother Protector of the Realme. He returned againe about the beginning of April, and then helde a great Turniament at Dertford in Kent. The xv. of June was borne vnto king Edward,
               Turniament a
                     •
                   Dertford. Edvvard the blacke Prince borne. his firſt ſonne at Wodstoke, who was after named Edwarde the blacke Prince. The K. tooke into his hands all ye lands aſſigned to his mother, and only left hir a 1000. pound the yeare. About Michaelmas there was very ſolemne iuſting of all the ſtoute Earles, Barons, and Nobles, at London in Cheape, betwixt the great Croſſe, and the great ConduitTurniament in Cheape at London. Adam Meri. Ro. Auesbery.
                nigh Soper Lane, which laſted thrée dayes, where the Quéene Phillip, with many Ladyes fell from a Stage, notwithſtanding they were not hurt at all: wherefore the Quéene tooke greate care to ſaue the Carpenters from puniſhmente, and through hir prayer (whiche ſhe made an hir knées) ſhe pacifyed the King and Counſell,

whereby ſhée purchaſed greate loue of the people.
            
               Robert of Ely: Thomas Whorwode, the 28. of Sept.
               
                  Sherifes. Maior. Saint Lavvrence Pultney.
            
            
               Sir Iohn Pultney Draper, the 28. of October.
            
            This Sir Iohn Pultney, builded the Colledge in London, called Saint Laurence Pultney, and little Alhallowes, a Pariſh Churche in Thamis ſtreete, and alſo the CarmeliteRegiſt. Carmil. Friers Church in Couentrie.
            
            Such a wet Sommer, with excéeding rayne was thisLate Harueſt. yeare, that the Corne in the field could not ripe, ſo that in many places they began not Harueſt till Michaelmas. The houſe of Croxton got not in their Wheate till Hallontide,W. Sheepeſhed. and their Peaſe not before S. Andrewes tide. The Monkes on Alhallowen day, and Martelmas day, were ſerued with Peaſe gréene in the coddes, in ſtead of Peares and Apples.
            King Edward held a ſolemne Chriſtmas at Welles, whichAnno reg. 5. he continued till the feaſt of the Epiphany, where was manye ſtrange and ſumptuous ſhewes made.1331
            
            In the beginning of Auguſt, Edward Bailioll, ſonne and heire to Iohn King of Scottes, came into England, which Edward had bin before that time baniſhed out of Scotland. At his comming, he declared what right he had in the Kingdome. Henry Beawmont Earle of Bohune, Gilbert Vmfreuill
                Earle of Angus, Dauid
                Earle of Athels, Richard Talbot, Ralph
                Baron of Stafford, Fulx Fitz Williams,
                with many other noble men, affirming they had right of inheritance in Scotland, deſired licence and ayde of the King of Englande, to recouer the ſayd Kingdome and landes due to them, but the King hauing regard of the peace lately made, and alſo for his ſiſters ſake Quéene of Scottes, woulde not ſuffer them to leade an armie through his lande, wherefore the ſayde Lordes getting a Fléete of Shippes, entred the Sea, and ſayling toward Scotland, landed at Kinkehorne, where the Earle of Fife, and Robert Bruſe, Baſtard ſonne to Robert Bruſe, with tenne thouſand Scottes reſiſted them néere vnto Dunfermeling, but the Engliſhmen put them to

flight, and ſlew many. Afterward, to wéete on Saint Lawrence day, they had a ſore conflict at Gledeſmore, where two thouſand Engliſhmen ouercame fortie thouſand Scottes. By reaſon of the great throng of the multitude amongſt themſelues, fiue Earles, and many other were thronged to death. On the morrow, the Engliſhmen tooke the Towne of Saint Iohns, well furniſhed with victualles.
            The ſeauen and twentith of September, Edward Baylioll
               Edvvard Baylioll reſigned the Crovvne of Scotland to King Edvvarde of England. Sherifes. Maior. Hoſpitall at Leyceſter. was Crowned King of Scottes, but afterward he reſigned it to King Edward of England, and remayned vnder his protection many yeares after.
            
               Iohn Mocking: Andrew Aubury, the 28. of September. Sir Iohn Poultney Draper, the 28. of October.
            
            
               Henry Earle of Lancaſter and of Leycester, high Steward of England, founded the new Hoſpitall by the Caſtell of Leycester, wherein were one hundred poore impotent people prouided for with all things neceſſarie.
            
               Edward Baylioll, and the foreſayde Lords and NoblesAnno reg. 6. Iohn Maundeuill. continued the warres in Scotland, vnto whome came many other noblemen of the Realme of England voluntarily, ſeruing of their owne charges, and beſéeged Berwike.
            
            The King of England gathered a great power, and beſéeged1
                     ••
                  2 
               Berwike, which at length was yéelded for want of victualles. During this ſéege, the Scottes ſought many wayes to remoue the ſame, leuying a great army ouer all Scotland▪
                but comming to the ſéege, they could not bring their purpoſe to effect, yet ſtill prouoking the Kings army to battell, wherevpon at length the two armies appoynted to fight, and ſetting out vpon Halidowne hill, there commeth forth of the Scottes Campe a certayne ſtout Champion of greate ſtature, who for a facte by him done, was called Turnebull: he ſtanding in the midſt betwixte the two armiesCallenge of Combate. challenged all the Engliſhmen, any one of them to fight with him a Combate: at lēgth, one Robert Ven
                     ••
                  e Knight, a Nonffolke man, requeſting licence of the King, being armed, with his ſword drawne, marcheth toward the Champion,

méeting by the way a certayne blacke maſtife Dogge,Turnebull a callenger ouercome in combate. which wayted on the Champion, whome with his ſworde he ſuddaynely ſtrake, and cut him off at his loynes, at the ſight whereof the mayſter of the Dogge ſlayne, was much abaſhed, and in his battayle more warie and fearefull: whoſe left hande and head alſo afterwarde, this worthye Knight cut off. After this Combate, both the armies met, but they fighting ſcarce halfe an houre, certayne of the Scottes béeing ſlayne, they cloſed their armie (which was in thrée) all into one battayle, but at length fléeing, the King followed them, taking and chacing them into lakes and pittes, for the ſpace of fiue miles. There were ſlayne of them eyght Earles, 1300. Horſemen, and of common Souldioures 35000. at a place by Berwike, called Bothull, néere vnto Halidon.
            
            In the meane ſeaſon the Scottes had beſéeged the Caſtell of Kambrugh, in which at that time the Quéene was: but when they heard of the victorie aforeſaid, they lefte the ſéege and fledde. The Towneſmen of Berwike yéelded to theKing Edvvarde vvan Barvvike. King of England both the Caſtell and the Towne, who placing garriſons there, he ſent Edward Baylioll, and other nobles to kéepe the Realme of Scotland. Earle Patritius, in the next Parliament holden at Yorke made fealtie, and did homage vnto the King by oth, who receyued of the King for yéelding vp of Berwike vnto him, many honors and preferments: notwithſtanding this Earle returned againe to Rebellion, who holding Dunbar againſt the King, was beſéeged by William Mountacute Earle of Saliſburie.
            
            This yeare, William Elſing Mercer of London (obteyningRiſing Spittle. 1. Leyland.
                the Kings licence) made a new Hoſpitall of an olde houſe of Nunnes by Creeplegate, within the wall of London,
               
                  
                     •
                  iber trinitate. and placing Chanons Regular there, he became their firſt Priour, endowing the ſame with Lands for the reléefe of the poore and impotent.
            
               Nicholas Pike: Iohn Husband, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Iohn Preſton Draper, the 28. of October.
            
            
               
               Adam Tarleton, firſt Biſhop of Hereford, then of Worceſter,
               Anno reg. 7. is now tranſlated to Winchester.
            
            
               Edward Bayholl King of Scottes held a Parliamente at1333 
               Gallowey, to the which came the noble men of Englande, and made clayme for their landes and poſſeſſions whiche they had in Scotland, and ſo returned peaceably into their Countrey.
            King Edward kept his Chriſtmas at Wallingford.
            
            The Quéene was deliuered of a daughter named Iſabell at Wodstoke.
            
            The King ſommoned a Parliamente to be holden at Yorke, the ſame to begin on Monday the ſeconde wéeke of Lent, to the which Parliament, the King of Scottes, (called Conquerour) although he were warned to be there, yet he came not, but ſent meſſengers to excuſe him, to wéete, Henry de Bellemount, and William Montacute Earles, & certaine other Barons and Knightes, who ſignified that the King of Scottes Conquerour
                coulde not be there withoute great danger, for that certaine Scottes lay in the Ilands ready to do him domage.
            At the feaſt of Saint Iohn Baptiſt, the ſaid King of Scottes
               King of Scottes did homage. 
               Conquerour did his homage to King Edward of England at Newcastell vpon Tine, and not long after that King Edward tooke homage of the Duke of Briteine, for the Earledome of Richmont.
            
            In a Parliament at London it was tolde the King that the Scottes had taken Richard Talbot, & ſixe other knightes, and had ſlayne many footemen: wherefore the King tooke a fiftéenth of the Laytie, and a tenth of the Cleargie, to the intente the malice of the Scottes mought bée brideled.
            
               Iohn Hamond: William Hauſard, the 28▪ of September▪
               
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Sir Iohn Poultney Draper, the 28 of October.
            
            King Edwarde wente toward the Marches of Scotland, and wintered in thoſe coaſtes, but vnderſtanding that the Earle Daſſels was trayterouſly turned to the Scots, & Henry
               
               Bellemount beſéeged by the Scottes, he entred Scotland, and reyſed the ſéege, and then kept his Chriſtmas at Roxborow▪
               
               Anno reg. 8. Preſently after the feaſt of the Epiphany, the French King ſente meſſengers to King Edward, to wéete, the Biſhop of Aur enges, and certayne Lordes, to treate a peace for the Scottes, who wayted for an anſwere in Englande till Midlent, and then at Nottingham a truce was granted vnto them vntill the feaſt of Saint Iohn next comming, that in the meane time a Parliament might be holden of matters1334 concerning peace, and the ſtate of both the Kingdomes: in which Parliament holden at Yorke, it was decréed that the King ſhoulde paſſe with his armie through Scotlande, beyond the Scottiſh Seas, the which thing was quickly performed and done: but the Scottes deſirous to fight a fielde, they fayned that they woulde haue peace, to obteyne the which, many came aboute the feaſt of Saint Michaell, and chiefely the Earle of Daſcels, wherevpon it came to paſſe, that afterward the Earle of Morefe being taken priſoner at Edenborough, was ſente to be kept priſoner in England, and Richard Talbot was ranſomed for two thouſand fiue hundred Markes, but the Earle of Daſcels willing to ſhew that he was truly reuolted to the King of England, rode againſte the Scottes at the ſéege of a certayne Caſtell, and falling into the hands of his enimies, bycauſe he woulde not yéeld, he was ſlayne with thirtéene of his men.
            After the feaſt of Saint Michaell, the King continuing ſtill in the Marches of Scotlande, was dayly entreated by meſſengers from the French King, concerning ſome peace to be made.
            About the feaſt of Saint Martine, Edwarde Bohune, a noble man, was drowned in the marches of Scotland, for as he was driuing a bootie of Cattell ouer a Riuer, he felte himſelfe in danger, cauſing his guide to ride before hym through the water, where through the ſmoothneſſe of the ſtone whereon the water ranne, his guide not being able to take ſure footing fell downe, with his mayſter being armed,

and before any help could come, they were drowned in the bottome of the Channell.
            
               Iohn Archbiſhop of Canterburie went ouer the Sea to Phillip de Valoys King of France, requeſting of him the continuance of peace and amitie betwixt the two Kingdomes to be mainteyned. Secondly, that all Townes and Caſtels taken before time by his father, ſhould be reſtored to the King of England. Thirdly, that the ſayde French King ſhould ſweare neuer to giue ayde to the Scottes agaynſt the King of Englande: vnder which conditions, the two Kings of both Realmes ſhoulde prepare to trauell towardes the holy lande, and to fight agaynſt the enimies of Chriſt. But the French King accompted the King of Englande not worthie of his friendſhip, ſo long as he continued warres againſt the Scottes his friendes, whome he ſayde were iuſt men. Unto the ſeconde petition he woulde not otherwiſe conſente therevnto, than if all charges were repayde agayne which his father Charles de Valoys layde out in the warres of Gaſcoigne. Thirdly, he ſayde, that he was a friend and louer of iuſtice and equitie, whiche he woulde neuer ſwarue from, neyther for friendſhip, nor affinitie, but he woulde by all meanes he could, moleſt and vex all breakers of the peace of the Kingdome of Scotland: for (ſaith he) there ſhall neuer be perfecte peace and quietneſſe among Chriſtians, before the King of Fraunce ſitte in place of Judgement for the right of the Kingdomes of France, England, and Scotland.
            
            
               Iohn Kingſton: Walter Turke, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Reignald at Conduct Vintner, the 28. of October.
            
            Part of the Uniuerſitie of Oxford wente to Stamforde,
               Ro. de Auesbery. bycauſe of a variance▪ that fell betwéene the Northerne and Southerne Schollers.
            Upon Saint Clements night, through abundance of waters,Anno reg. 9. but ſpecially in the Thamis, all the Cattell and beaſtes néere therevnto were drowned, and the land made1335
               
vnfruitefull by ſalte waters.
            King Edwarde had a tenth of the Cleargie, and alſo 
                  ••
                the burgeſſes, and a fiftéenth of the commons.
            About the feaſt of Pentecoſt, he helde a Parliament atParliament at Northampton. Tho. de la More.
                
               Northampton, where leauing the Prelates, ſtates, and commons debating about matters, himſelfe ſecretely rode to Berwike, and there taking with him a few men of armes, he went to Saint Iohns Towne, whiche he ſtrengthned wyth trench and rampire, and ſente his Earles, with the King Conquerour, to make an inrode vpon the Countrey, and to ſée what Scottes they could finde would reſiſt them: butRo. de Auesbery. none durſt abide their comming, but hidde themſelues in hilles, wooddes, and mariſhes, and in the meane tyme many Earles and Barons came, and ſubmitted themſelues to King Edward, vpon conditions as followeth.
            Theſe be the poyntes agréed betwixt the counſell of the Kings of England and Scotland on the one partie, and Alexander Mowbrey, Geffrey Mowbrey, Godfrey de Roos, William Bulloke, and Euſtace de Loreyne, hauing full power from Dauid Stravulgi, Earle of Daſſels, and Robert Steward of Scotland, to treate, accorde, and affirme all poyntes enterparled, and to be enterparled betwixt the ſayde Kings, and the Earle, and Stewarde, as appeareth by their letters patents of eyther partie.
            Firſt it is accorded that the ſayd Earle Daſſels, the great men, and all other of the communaltie of Scotlande, whiche ſhall come in the ſame conditions, ſhal haue life and member, lands and tenements, fées and offices within Scotland, which they ought to haue by inheritance or right, thoſe except, which ſhall be ſurpriſed by common aſſent.
            Item, that they ſhall be pardoned of empriſonmente, and of all manner treſpaſſes by them done in the Realmes of England and Scotland from the beginning of the world, vnto the date of theſe preſents.
            Item, the Earle Daſſels, and Alexander Mowbrey, ſhall haue landes, tenementes, poſſeſſions, and fées in Englande,
               
which they had at their departure, after the homage done at Newcastell vpon Tine.
            
            Item, that the franchiſes of the Churche in Scotlande ſhall be mainteyned after the auntiente vſage of Scotlande.
            
            Item, that the lawes of Scotland in Borough Townes, Shriuewikes, within the landes of the King of Scotlande, be vſed after the antient vſages and cuſtome of Scotland, as they were vſed in the dayes of King Alexander.
            
            Item, that the offices of Scotland be miniſtred by people of the ſame Nation, yet notwithſtanding, that alwayes the king of Scotland may put ſuch officers in as ſhal pleaſe him, of what nation ſoeuer they be.
            Item, that all thoſe that within the conditions of the Earle Daſſels haue landes within the landes of the King of England in Scotland, ſhall haue agayne the ſame landes, tenements, poſſeſſions, offices and fées, as they had them at their departure, after their homage done at Newcastell vpon Tine, except thoſe that ſhall be forpriſed by common aſſent.
            Item, that▪ if they be empleded for their landes and tenements a
                  •
               oreſayd, that they haue their defences and recoueries in Court where they ought to haue.
            Item, as touching the demaund which the Earle Daſſels claymeth, that the King of England ought to acquite his lands in England▪
                which he hath in gage for eyght hundred markes, the King neyther ought, nor will do it, but as touching the Manour of Byphingdone, which the ſaid Earle layd to pledge for two hundred and fiftie poundes, it is accorded that if the ſayde Earle do come within one yeare, after the date of theſe preſents, and will acquite the Manoure, the King ſhall cauſe that hée haue the ſame Manoure.
            Item, as touching the Caſtell and Lands of Chilham, it is accorded that the ſayde▪ Earle be in the ſame point that hée was before at hys departure, and haue hys recouerie by lawe, and the Kyng promiſeth in good

fayth that he will cauſe that he may haue the land, without delaying eyther partie. And touching the lands which the ſayde Earle claymeth to haue in Norffolke, of the which he hathe Charters, it is accorded that hys Charte
                  ••
                béeyng ſéene of the Kinges Counſell, he wyll doe reaſon.
            
               
                  ••
               em, that in caſe any man ſurmiſe treaſon vpon the ſayd Earle, he may defend himſelfe by his body, according to the lawes and vſages of Scotland, and on the march
                  ••
               ; and that all thoſe that be within theſe conditions, haue the like graunt.
            Item, as to the pardon which William Ramſey Knight demandeth for the treſpaſſe by him done to William Lorde Mountagew, to wéete, for beating downe his Caſtell of Haghtordone, the ſame William ſhall be readie to do according to that that ſhall be aduiſed by the Kings of England and Scotland.
            
            Item, that the ſayd Stacie de Lorayne haue his landes and tenements which he ought to haue within the Realme of Scotland, and if any man haue treſpaſſed towardes him; he ſhall haue his recouerie by law. Written at S. Iohns Towne in Scotlande the eightéenth of Auguſt, Anno 1335.
            
               Walter Mordon: Richard Vpton, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Nicholas Wutton, the 28. of October.
            
            
               Phillip Quéene of England did beare hir ſecond ſonne named Wyllyam, at Hatfielde, who ſhortlye after dyed.
            Aboute the feaſt of the Epiphany, the King and theAnno reg. 10 Archbiſhoppe returned out of Scotland, to the buryall of Iohn of Eltham, Earle of Cornewall, brother vnto the King, who deceaſſed at Berwike in the moneth of October, and was buryed at Westminster. At whiche time,1336 Parliament at London. Duke and Erles created. W. Sheepeſhed.
                the King kepte a Parliamente at London, whiche beganne on the Monday after Saint Matthies day: and on the firſte Sundaye in Lente, hée made hys eldeſt

ſonne Edwarde Earle of Chester, and Duke of Cornewall.
               Tho. de la More. He made alſo ſixe other Earles, Henry of Lancaster (ſonne to Henry Earle of Lancaster) Earle of Darby, Hugh Audley
                Earle of Glocester, William Bohune
                Earle of Northhampton, William Montacute
                Earle of Saliſburie, William Clinton
                Earle of Huntingdon, Robert Vffurd
                Earle of Suffolke, to the which Robert he at that time gaue the manor of Baſe court, in the pariſh of Saint Giles without Cripplegate ofBa
                     •
                  bican at London. 
               London, commonly called to this day the Barbicane, bycauſe in old time ye ſame had bin a Burgekening, or watchtower for the Citie.
            The ſame day, the King made twentie Knightes, toWil. Shepeſhead. wéete, Sir Edward Mountacute, Thomas Somarton, Sir Iſle, Sir Darcy Richard, Sir Damuory, Sir Iohn Poultney, Sir de Mere, Roger Banant, Roger Hilary, Sir Bolingbroke, Sir Butterell, Sir Simon Swanland, William Scotte, William Baſſet, Robert Sodington, William Zouſtes, Sir Cogſhall, Roger Sangrauile, Thomas de la More mine Authoure,Tho. de la More▪
                and Iohn Strache.
            
            In the ſame Parliament it was enacted, that no wooll growing within the Realme of England, ſhould be tranſpoſedVVooll forbidden to be conuayed ouer the Seas. out of the ſame, but that it ſhould be made into cloth in England, and that all Fullers, Weauers, and Clothworkers of euery degrée, being ſufficiently inſtructed, and cunningPriuiledges giuen to Clothvvorkers. in their arte, from what Countrey ſo euer they came into England▪
                ſhould receyue and enioy certayne priuiledges, yea and moreouer ſhould liue at the Kings charges out of the Exchequer, vntill they had prouided commodiouſlie to liue by their art. Although this Statute ſéemed at the beginning to be nothing profitable, yet in ſhort time the arte of clothing increaſed ſo much thereby, that it was twentie times more vſed than before.
            Alſo it was enacted, that no man ſhould after that time buy any cloth that was made beyond the Sea, and that none ſhould weare any Furres, but ſuch as might diſpend one hundred pound by yeare.
            
               
               Iohn Clarke: William Curteis, the 28▪ of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Sir Iohn Poultney Draper, the 28 of October▪
               
            
            After the feaſt of Saint Michaell, a Parliament was holdenTho. de la More. Anno reg. 11 1337 at London, and a Connocation was aſſembled by the Archbiſhop, wherein the Cleargie graunted a tenth for thrée yeares, and the commons a fiftenth, in conſideration of the Kings warres which was hote in Scotlande, and alſo to reſiſt the French King, who made great bragges, and ſhewed great crueltie, for he outlawed, ſlew, and empriſoned all Engliſhmen, and confiſcated the goodes and Cattayles of all that were found in his Kingdome of France, threatning, that he would be reuenged for his friendes the Scottes.
            
            Moreouer, he left not ſo muche as one Towne or Caſtell in the Counties of Aquitayne, or of Poyters, that was not ſeized into his handes: wherevpon King Edward ſente into Brabant, to take vp all the woolles whiche Merchants had brought thither, and made ſale thereof for readie money.
            He alſo wrote Letters to the French King, exhorting him, that he woulde continue his olde amitie. Sir Walter Many béeing the Embaſſadour for the King of Englande, and deſirous to reuenge the bloud of two Engliſhmen that were ſlayne comming a lande for freſhe water, in a certayne Iſlande, called the Ile of Agnes, nigh vnto Flanders, he cauſed all that hée founde in the ſayde Iſland to be put to the ſworde, and tooke priſoner the Earle of Flanders brother, who was Captayne of the Ile.
            Certayne of the Iſland men béeing fled into a Church,Tho. Walſ
                     ••
                  g. were brent to the number of thrée thouſande, with the Church and all, by the Welchmen.
            
            The warres b
                  •
               eing thus as aforeſayde begonne betwixte the two Kingdomes, the rumour thereof came vnto

the Court of Rome, wherevpon the Pope ſent two Cardinalles for the reformation and ordering of the peace betwixte the two Kingdomes, who comming to Westminſter, declared before the King the cauſe of their comming, wherevnto the King anſwered, that although without all reaſon they dyd ſéeme to reſtreyne hym of right and equitie, for that hée ought to ſuccéede into the Kingdome of hys forefathers, the whyche hys aduerſarie Phillip de Valoys dyd denye hym, expelling, murthering, and empriſoning hys people, and taking away the Dukedome of Aquitayne, and Earledome of Poyters without cauſe, maynteyning the Scottes and other Rebelles agaynſte hym, yet theſe iniuries notwithſtanding, hée was contented if they coulde take order for the quiet enioying of Aquitayne and other fées belonging vnto hym, whiche hys predeceſſoures did enioy.
            Moreouer, for the diſmiſſing of all ayde that the French King ſhoulde gyue vnto the Scottes at any tyme of Rebellion, for the which he offered his money, and alſo the mariage of his eldeſt ſonne, and alſo to reſigne all ſuche rites and intereſt that he hadde to the Kyngdome of France.
            
            The Cardinalles béeyng greately comforted with this aunſwere, departed, hoping that all warres were nowe ended. They tooke with them Iohn the Archbiſhoppe of Canterburie, Richarde
                Biſhoppe of Durham, and Geffrey Lorde Scrope, who altogyther wente on meſſage with the Kynges aunſwere to the Frenche Kyng, hauing full authoritie to treate and conclude à peace.
            Theſe béeing ſo reaſonable offers, coulde not pacifye the furious minde of the Frenche King, who repoſed greate truſt in the Scottes, hopyng by them, and through theyr meanes, quite to diſpoſſeſſe, and to

diſherite the King of England of all the title he had.
            
               Walter Neale: Nicholas Crane, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Henry Darcy, the 28. of October.
            
            The King cauſed to confiſcate all the goodes of the Lonibards, and alſo of the Monkes of the order of Cluny, and Ciſteaux through the whole Realme.
            The King tooke wooll, to a certaine number of Sackes,Anno reg. 12 at a low price in euery Countrey: the number that was ſet vpon Staffordſhire, was ſixe hundred ſackes, price nine markes the ſacke of good wooll: but nothing was payde. Firſt the wooll was vniuerſally taken. Secondly, for the halfe, in whoſe hands ſoeuer it were founde, as well Merchāts as other. And the third time the King tooke a fiftenth of the comminalty, to be payde in wooll, price of euery ſtone (contayning fourtéene pound) two ſhillings.
            The King appointed alſo all the Corne and glebe lands1338 to ſerue for his warres.
            About Saint Margarets day, King Edward, with QuéeneRo. Auesbery. 
               Philip his wife, and a great army paſſed the Seas with a Nauie of 500. ſayle of Shippes into Flanders, and 
                  ••
                to Cullen.
            
            The fourth of October, fiftie Galleys well manned andSouth-hampton ſacked and brēt by the French 
                     •
                  irats. furniſhed, came to Southampton about nine of the clocke, and ſacked the Towne, the Towneſmen running away for feare, by the breake of the next day they which fledde by helpe of the Countrey there about, came againſte the Pirats, and fought with them, in the whiche ſkirmiſh were ſlayne to the number of thrée hundred Pirates, togither with their Captayne a yong Souldioure the King of Sicils ſonne. To this yong man, the French King had giuen whatſoeuer he got in the Kingdome of England, but he béeing beaten downe by a certayne man of the Countrey, cried Rancon, notwithſtanding the huſbandman layde him on with his clubbe, till he had ſlayne hym, ſpeaking theſe words, yea (quoth he) I know well ynough thou art a Fran
                  
                     •
                  on, and therefore ſhalt thon dye, for he vnderſtoode not

his ſpéech, neyther had he anye ſkill to take gentlemen priſoners & to kéepe them for their raunſome: wherfore the reſidue of thoſe Gennowayes, after they had ſet the towne a fire and brent it vp quite, fledde to their Galleyes, and in theyr fléeing certaine of them were drowned. After this the inhabitantes of the towne compaſſed it about with a ſtrong and great Wal.
            The King ſtill mayntayning his warres in Fraunce on the euen of the Annuntiation of our Lady▪ 
               
                  •
               j. galleyes▪ approching to the towne of Harwich they caſt fire therein, the force whereof by a contrarie winde was ſtayd, ſo that no gret harme was done thereby. Furthermore, in the ſame yeare about the feaſte of Pentecoſt, certaine Pirates of Normandie and Geno
                     •
                  , ſhipped in Gallenes and Pinaces, made a ſhew on the ſea about Southampton, as they woulde haue come alande, and threatned ſore to ſpoyle the towne againe, but perceyuing the towneſmen ready to reſiſt them, they returned to the Ile of Wight, but entred not, being put backe by the inhabitauntes, wherevppon they ſayled about the ſea coaſtes, ſéeking to lande in places leſſe defended, and after came to Hastings, where they brente fiſhers cotages with theyr boates, and ſlewe many men. Alſo they made greate ſhewes many times againſt the Ile of Thanet, Douer, and Fulkestone but in thoſe places they did little harme, excepte to poore fiſhermen: thence they ſayled about to the hauens of Cornewall and Deuonſhire, doing in all places much harme to the fiſher men, and ſuche ſhippes as they founde vnmā
               ned they fiered. At length they entred Plimouth Hauen, where they brent certain great ſhippes and a great parte of the towne: theſe were met by Hugh Curtney Earle of D
                     •
                  
                  
                  
                     •
                  onſhire, a knight of foure ſcoure yeares olde, being accompanyed with manye ſouldiours of his Countrey, who hauing loſt at the firſte fronte a fewe of his men whiche were ſlaine by the quarrels of the French, ioyned to fighte wyth them hande to hande, and ſlaying many of the Pyrates vpon drye lande, chaſed the reſidue which fled to take their

Galleys, and being not able to come nigh them by wading, they 
                  ••
               ere drowned in the 
                  •
               ea to the nūber of fiue hundred New
                  •
               s being brought to the King lying in Brabant, that diuers Parts of Englande were ſpoyled with the Pirates, hée declared to his friends, to wit the Marques of Iult
                     •
                  cence, and a cer
                  ••••
               e Cardinall, what great cauſes he had to reuenge himſelf vpon them, and in the end, was aunſwered by the Cardinal as followeth.
            The kingdome of Fr
                     ••••
                  
                (ſayde he) is compaſſed about with 
                  •
                thr
                  •
               ed of 
                  ••
               lke, whiche can not be broken, by all the ſtrength of the kingdome of Englande, wherefore my Lorde king, you muſt ſtay for the comming of the Dutchmen, and other your friendes and confederates, the greater part wherof you now 
                  •
               a
                  •
               l
                  ••
               . The King raking great diſdaine hereat, ſtaying nothing at al
                  •
               , ſaid, that he woulde ride into the land of Fraunce with Banner diſplayed, and y• ther he wold l
                  •
               ke for that mightie power of the French men, and that hée woulde eyther winne the ſame againſt any man that ſhould with
                  〈…〉
                
               
                  〈…〉
                or elſe 
                  ••
               neſtly dye in the fielde.
            
               
                  〈…〉
                Po
                  ••••
               et Hugh M
                  •
               betel▪ the 28. of Septem.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Hence Dar
                     ••
                  
                  ▪ the▪ 
                  
                     •
                  8. of October.
            
            King Edward wintere
                  •
                at Antwerp where Quéene Philip was deliuered of hir thirde ſon Lionel after Erle of Vl
               
                  ••
               er. The king toke vppon him to be lieuetenauute of theKing Edvvarde made vicegerē
                  
                     •
                   of the Empire. Empire from the D
                  •••
                of Bauare, who helde himſelfe as Emperour.
            A ſodaine inundation of Water at Newcastle vpon Tine
               
                  Richard South. Nevvcaſtel drovvned. 1339 bare downe a péece of the Towne Wall, a ſixe pearches in length neare to a place called Walkenew, where. 
                  •
               20▪ men & women were drowned.
            In the U
                  •
               g
                  ••••
                
               Saint Matthy king Edwarde beganne to ryde with Banner diſplayed, and twelue thouſand men of armes, againſt the Frenche King, burnyng Townes and Caſtels whereſoeuer he came. In the firſt night being verye darke, Geffrey Lord Scrope one of the Kings Juſtices,

led one of the Cardinals, to wit Bertrand de Mount Fa
                     ••
                  ntyne, of the title of our Ladie, vp into an high Tower, ſhewing hym the whole lande about towarde Fraunce, for the compaſſe of fiftéene leagues, to be in euery place on 
                  •
               re, (ſaying theſe wordes,) ſir, doth not this ſi
                  ••
               en threed wherwith Fraunce is compaſſed, ſeme to you to be broken: the Cardinall aunſwering nothing, fel downe as deade for ſorowe and feare.
            In thys ſort king Edward made 
                  •
               ourneyes into France dayly, continuing the ſpace of fiue wéekes, and cauſed 
                  •
               y
                  •
               
               ▪ armye to trauell in ſuch ſort, that they deſtroyed the whole, Countrey of Cambray, Tourney, Vermode
                     •
                  , and Landenewe▪
                excepting thoſe Cities which wer ſword to him wt churches and Caſtels. The inhabitauntes of the Countrey fledde, neyther was there anye man that durſt reſiſt his enterpryſes, althoughe the Frenche King had gathered greate armies within the Walled Cities, himſelf lying in the ſtrōg Towne of Saint Quintines, what time the Brabanders had determined to returne home againe, and were entred into theyr iourney, being forced there vnto, partlye by wante of victuals, and partlye by the coldneſſe of Winter whyche▪ grew on faſt.
            The French king vnderſtanding thereof, beganne to moue himſelfe with hys armye towarde the campe of the king of England, who gladly loking for his comming, called back again the Brabanders, & hauing receyued letters frō the Frenche King, that he woulde ioyne battayle againſt hym, he ſent him worde back againe, that he woulde ſtay for him thrée dayes, wherefore on the fourth daye the Kyng loking for the Frenche Kings comming, whiche woulde come no nearer them than two miles off, breaking bridges and felling of trées, that the King of Englande mighte not followe hym, he fled to Paris, wherevpon king Edwarde returned by Hanonia in Brabrant, where he continued almoſt the whole Winter.
            
               
               William Thorney: Roger Froſham, the. 28. of Septe
                     •
                  .
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Andrewe Awbery Grocer, the. 28. of October.
            
            In this Winter time king Edwarde grewe into greate friendſhippe with the Flemmings, who prepared themſelues at all times to ſhewe their ſelues as good ſubiectes vnto him, ſwearing to doe homage and fealtie, vppon condition that he would call himſelfe King of Fraunce, and in token thereof would from thence forth giue armes with Flouredeluces, for otherwiſe they durſte not obey him, for feare of the Popes curſe, which was to be layde vppon them, if at any time they rebelled againſt the King of Fraunce. Wherefore by the co
                  ••••
               ll of his friends, the Flemmings, and conſent of his noble men, he agréed there vnto, and tooke vppon him both the name and armes of the King of France. He alſo toke Flaunders vnder his gouernement, the people wherof long after in all matters were to him obedient, as vnto the King of Fraunce Conquerer. As touching the title and and armes aforeſayde, the Frenche king ſayde to certayne Engliſhmen ſent vnto him, our couſin (quoth he) doth wrongfully beare quartered armes of England and Fraunce, whiche matter notwithſtanding doth not much diſpleaſe vs, for y• he is deſcended from the weaker ſide of our kin, and therfore as being a Batcheller we woulde be content to graunt him licence to beare part of our armes of Fraunce: but wheras in his ſeales and letters patents he nameth hymſelf as well King of Englande, as of Fraunce, and doth ſet the firſte quarter of his armes with Leopardes, before the quarter of Liles, it doth grieue vs very muche, making apparaunt to the beholders, that the little Iſlande of Englande, is to be preferred, before the great kingdome of France. Unto whom ſir Iohn of Shordich knighte made aunſwere, that it was the cuſtome of men in thoſe dayes, to ſet the title and armes of theyr progenitors, before the armes and title of the righte deſcending of their mother: and thus of dutie and reaſonAnno reg. 14 (ſayde he) doth my Lord the King of Englande preferre hys armes.
            
               King Edwarde being thus buſied, the Mariners of the Cinque Ports, embarked themſelues in Pinaces and ſmal beates wel appointed, who after the feaſt of S. Hillarie arriued at Bononie vpō the ſea coaſt, the weather being ſo cloudie and darke that they could ſcarſely be perceyued to be in the hauen, they brent in the lower towne nintéene galleys and four great ſhippes, and twentie ſmall boates with all theyr tackling, and all ſuche houſes as were ſcituate nyghe to the ſea coſt, amongſt which was one great houſe full of dares, ſayles, weapons, and other neceſſaries, ſufficiente to furniſh ninetéene galleys, and men for thē: at ye length in a ſkirmiſh betwixt the townes men and the Engliſhmen, many of the land men were ſlaine.
            About the beginning of Februarie king Edwarde returned into Englande, came vnto Gaunt, where the Quéene layIohn of Gaunt. Parliament a
                     •
                   VVeſtminſter. 1340 in childbed of hir fourth ſonne named Iohn he helde a Parliament at Westminster▪
                wherein the Temporalty granted hym euery ninth fléece of Wool, euery ninth lambe, and euery ninth ſheafe of all ſorts of corne, and the cleargie gaue him a newe tenth.
            Immediatety after Eaſter, the Earles of Saliſburie and Suffolke, being accompanyed but with a fewe men, gaue an aſſault to the Towne of Lile in Flaunders, which Town was confederate with the French King, but they chaſing the Frēch men too far within the gates, the Percolices being let fal, they were beſet with a multitude of men of armes, and being taken, they were conueyed into Fraunce, fettered and ſhackeled with yron, although they had 
                  ••
               orne to be true priſoners: they were drawen in a Cart through the middeſt of euery Citie, Towne, Uillage and Hamlet, with greate ſhoutes and cryes, rayling on them: and at length béeing brought to the preſence of the French King, he woulde haue moſt ſhamefully ſlaine them, had he not bin otherwiſe perſwaded by the counſel of the King of Boemia.
            
            King Edward kept his Whitſontide at Ipſwich, for that he intended from thence to take his paſſage into Flaunders,
               
but being certified that the French king had ſent a great Nauie of Spaniſh ſhips, and alſo the whole fléete of Fraunce, to ſtoppe his paſſage, he cauſed his ſhips of the Cinque Ports and other to be aſſembled, ſo that he had in his fléete great and ſmall. 260. ſhippes. Wherefore on the Thurſdaye before the matiuity of Saint Iohn Baptiſt, hauing a proſperous winde, he began to ſayle, and the nexte daye in the euen of the ſayde feaſte they eſcried the French Fléete lying in Swine Hauen. Wherefore the King cauſed all his Fléete to come to Ancker. The next day being the feaſt of S. Iohn Baptiſt, 
               
                  •
               arly in the morning, the French Fléet deuided themſelues into thrée parts, and remoued themſelues as it were a myle, approching towards the kings Fléete. Whiche when the king perceyued, about nine of the clocke hauing the winde and ſunne on his backe, ſet forwarde and met his enimies as he woulde haue wiſhed, wherewithall the whole fléete gaue a terrible ſhoute, and a ſhowre of arrowes out of long woodden bowes ſo powred downe on the French men, that thouſandes were ſlaine in that méeting, at length they cloſed and came to hand blowes, with Pikes, Powle ax
                  •
               s, & ſwordes, and ſome threw ſtones from the toppes of ſhippes wherewith many were brained. The greatneſſe and heigth of the Spaniſh ſhippes cauſed many Engliſh men to ſtrike many a ſtroke in vaine: but to be ſhort, the French ſhippes being ouercome, and al the men ſpente of the firſte parte, the Engliſhmen entred and tooke them. The French ſhippes were chayned togyther in ſuche ſort, that they coulde not be ſeparated one from another, ſo that a fewe Engliſhmen kepte that part of the Fléete: wherfore they ſet vpon the ſecond ward, and with greate difficultie gaue the charge, whiche being done, was ſooner ouercome than the firſte, for that the French men leauing their ſhips, many of them leapt ouer borde.
            The Engliſhmen hauing thus ouercome the firſt and ſeconde parte of the Fléete, and now hauing night drawyng

on, partly for want of light, and partly for that they were wearie, they determined to take ſome reſt till the next morning, wherefore that night xxx. ſhippes of the thirde crewe fled awaye, and a greate ſhippe called the Iames of Deepe
                thinking to haue carried away a certaine ſhip of Sandwiche, belonging to the Prior of Canterburie, was ſtayde: for the Saylers ſo ſtoutely defended themſelues by the helpe of the Earle of Huntingdon that they ſaued themſelues and theyr ſhip, from the Frenchmen. The fight continued al the night, and in the morning the Normans being ouercome and takē, there wer found in the ſhippe aboue. 400, men ſlaine. Moreouer the king vnderſtanding that xxx. ſhips were fledde, hée ſent fortie ſhips well appointed to followe them, ouer the which he made Iohn Crabe gouernour: but what good ſpéede he had is not knowen.
            In the firſte companye of ſhippes that were taken they founde theſe conquered ſhippes, the Deniſe, the George, the Chriſtopher, and the blacke Cocke, all whiche ſhips were taken by Erenchmen at Sluce, and carried into Normandie. The number of ſhippes of warre that were taken, was about. 200. and. 30. barges: the number of enimies ſlaine and drowned were aboue fiue and twentie thouſande and of Engliſhmen about foure thouſand, among whom were foure Knightes, ſir Thomas Mortimer the Kings couſin, ſir Thomas Latimer his ſon, ſir William Butteler of Seortkorne, and ſir Thomas Poynings.
            
            About the ſame time the Scots came with a great power into Englande, burning and ſpoyling all the Marches by fire and ſworde, and when they were returning wyth a great bootie of Cattayle, they were neuer withſtoode by the Nobilitie of the Marches, but the common people wold not ſuffer them ſo to paſſe, ſet vpon them, toke theyr bootie from them, and ſlewe manye of them, and toke more than. 80. Scots of good reputation, whome they kept from raunſome, for the whiche fact the Noble menne of the Marches were

highly diſpleaſed.
            About Lammas certaine French Pirats gaue an aſſault to the Ile of Wight and ſodainly entred it, but ſir Peter Ruſſel Knight, méeting them with the people of that Ile, put them backe again, and made them to flée, ſtaying manye of them, in the which ſkirmiſh the ſayde knight was wounded wherof he dyed. Theſe Pirates ſayled thēce toward the coaſt of Deuonſhire, and comming to Teygnemouth, they ſette fire on the Towne and brent it: from thence they ſayled towardes Plimouth, which towne was ſo defended, that they coulde not hurte it, but burnt the farmes and fayre places nigh adioyning, and toke a knight priſoner, whom they caried with them.
            The ſame yeare king Edward beſieged Turney, but vpon entreatie made by the Frenche, a truce was taken from Michaelmaſſe til midſommer, wherfore the king comming to Gaunt in Flaunders, ſtayed there, looking for money out of England, which came not.
            
               Adam Lucas: Bartholmew Maris, the. 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Andrew Auburie Grocer, the. 28▪ of October.
            
            King Edwarde with eight of his men, fayning that hée woulde ride abrode for his pleaſure, ſecretly came into 
                  •
               elande, where taking ſhippe, after he had ſayled thrée dayes and thrée nightes, on Saint Andrewes day at night aboute the Cock crowing, he entred the Tower of Londō
                by water, being wayted on by the Earle of Northampton, Nicholas Cā
                     tilopo, Reignalde Cobham, Giles de Bello Campo, Iohn de Bello▪ Campo
                Knightes, William Killesby and Phillippe Weſton Prieſtes: earely in the morning, he ſent for his chā
               cellour, treaſurer, and Juſtices then being at London, and the Biſhop of Chichester being his Chauncellour, and the Biſhop of Couentrie his Treaſurer, he put out of office, minding alſo to haue ſent them into Flaunders, to haue ben pledges for money he owed there: but the Biſhoppe of Chichester declared vnto him what daunger might inſue to hym, by the Canons of the Churche: whervpon the King diſmiſſed

them out of the Tower: but as concerning the high Juſtices, to witte, Iohn Lorde Stoner, Robert Lord Willowby, William Lorde Scharſhel, and eſpecially Nicholas Lord Bech, who before that time was Lieutenant of the Tower of London, and ſir Iohn Molens▪
                Knight, with certaine marchaunt men, as Iohn Poultney, William Pole and Richard his brother, and the Chauncellours chiefe Clearkes, to witte, Maiſter Iohn de Saint Paule, Michael Wathe, Henrie Stafforde, and certaine of the Exchequer, as Maiſter Iohn Thorpe, with many other moe, the king commaunded to be impriſoned, ſome in one place, ſome in another, neyther woulde he ſuffer them to be diſcharged thence, til hée were throughlye pacified of his anger conceyued for not ſendyng the money whiche ſhoulde haue ſerued at the ſiege of Torney.
            This yeare about Chriſtmas, Henrie Biſhoppe of Lincolne, and Geffrey Lord Scrope, chiefe Juſticiar to the kyng and his chiefe Counſeller dyed at Gaunt.
               Anno reg. 15
            
            King Edwarde kept his Chriſtmaſſe at Gildforde, and after that a great Juſting at Reading. Alſo at Candlemaſſe hée kept a greate iuſting at Langley, for the honor of the noble men of Vaſcon
                     •
                  a, which he trayned vp there in feates of war. He made Robert de Bourſier Knight Lord Chancellour of Englande, and Robert Parnike Knighte Treaſurer, the one to ſuccéede the other. Alſo he ſent out Juſticiars thatIuſtice of Tral
                     •
                   baſton. ſhoulde ſet in euerye ſhire, to enquyre concerning the collectours of the tenthes and fiftéenthes, and of wools, and to ouerſée al officers. And bicauſe the Citie of London would not ſuffer that any ſuch officers ſhould ſet as Juſtices within theyr Citie as inquiſitours of ſuche matters contrarie to theyr liberties, the King prouided that thoſe Juſtices ſhoulde holde theyr Seſſions in the Tower of London, to make inquiſition of the domages of the Londoners: but bycauſe the Londoners woulde not aunſwere there, vntill theyr liberties were fully confirmed, neyther anye ſuche confirmation

coulde be had eyther of the King, or his Chauncellour touching Writs and Charters in the Towre, there roſe thereof ſuche a greate tumulte, that the Juſticies appointed there to ſit, fayned that they woulde holde no ſeſſion there, till after Eaſter. Wherevpon the king being highly offended for the ſayde tumult, and deſirous to know the names of them that had rayſed it, coulde not vnderſtande but that they were certaine meane perſons, who claymed theyr liberties: wherevpon the King being pacified of his troubled minde, forgaue all the offences committed by the Londoners, the Juſtices breaking vp all theyr ſitting touching the ſayde place.1
                     •
                  41 Parliament at London.
            
            This yeare within the quindene of Eaſter a Parliamente was holden at London wherein the Earles and nobles of the Realme, with the commons and others, amongſt other things requeſted, that the Charter called Magna Carta, and Carta Foresta, with all other liberties béelonging to the Churche and kingdome ſhould be obſerued, and that the officers and chiefe Rulers of the Kings houſe ſhoulde be choſen by the Péeres of the Realme, in the Parliament: but theſe peticions the king would not confirme, nor could not abide to heare talked off.
            About the beginning of the moneth of Julye, Kyng Edwarde receyued letters from Lodowike Duke of Bauarie, vſurper of the Romaine Empyre, in the whyche pretendyng friendſhippe betwixt him and Phillip the French King, hée ſignifyed that thoſe warres whyche the King of England had begonne in Fraunce, did greately miſlike him, and therefore deſired that there ſhoulde be concorde and amitie betwixte the Kings of both Realmes, the whyche to bée performed, he offered to beſtowe ſome labour, requeſtyng Kyng Edwardes letters of aucthoritie thereof to treate and to conclude a truce for one yeare or twaine, towarde the ende of whiche letter, he addeth theſe wordes: The deputation, and Lieutenauntſhip whiche we gaue vnto you, we do for

diuerſ
                  •
                and ſundry cauſes reuoke again. Dated at Frankeford the fourtéenth of June in the ſeauen and twentith of 
                  •
               ure raign, and of our Empire the fourtéenth. To the which letters, king Edwarde wrote an inſcription, in ſorte as followeth.
            To the renoumed Prince Lodowicke, by the grace of God Romaine Emperour, alwayes Auguſtus, Edwarde by the ſame grace king of Fraunce and Englande, and Lorde of Ireland, &c.
            
               Richard de Barking: Iohn de Rokeſley, the. 28. of Sept.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Iohn of Oxford Vintener, the. 28. of October.
            
            This yeare Iohn Maluerne, fellowe of Oriall Colledge in Oxford, made and finiſhed his booke entituled The Viſions of Pierce Plowman.
               Tho. de la More.
            
            King Edwarde gaue the Earledome of Cambridge to Iohn Lord Henault, vncle to Quéene Phillip, and after keptAnno reg. 16 his feaſt of Saint Katherine at Newcastel, and his Chriſtmas alſo. Untill this time Dauid king of Scottes threatned to leuie an armie and to enter the lande, wherevpon king Edwarde entred Scotland, and followed after Dauid, who fled before him beyonde the Scottiſh ſea, waſting and ſpoyling al as he went, except Caſtels and Mariſhes, in the which the Scottes togither with Dauid theyr king hyd themſelues. And William Mountacute Earle of Saliſburie, hauing gotten1342 a greate fléete, entred an Iland belonging to Scotlande, where moſt victoriouſlye he conquered it, and the ſame Ile being called the Ile of Man, the kyng gaue it to the Conquerour franckelye and fréely to be poſſeſt, and cauſed hymKing of Man. to be called and crowned king of that Ile. Then King Edward returning towards the ſouth parts, kept ſolemn torneymentes at Dunstable, beyng accompanyed wyth 230. Knightes.
            The ſame yeare was a Parliamente at Westminster, wherein the Archbiſhoppe of Canterburie was reconcyled

to the King, before whom the Archbiſhoppe ſware that althoughe the Kyng by hys counſell and conſente hadde done homage to the French King for the Dukedome of Aquitaine, and the Earledome of Poytowe, yet he neuer conſented therto as to be anye hurte or preiudice to the Kyng, or that by hys counſel he myghte incurre fauoure, or ſéeke to pleaſe the French King, but for that preſente tyme he thoughte it beſte to be done, both for the obtayning of peace and alſo for the profit of the Kyng and Realme. After this Parliament the king commaunded Florences of golde to be made at the Tower of London, that is to ſaye, the peny of the value of ſixe ſhillings eight pence, the halfe penye of the value of thrée ſhillings foure pence, a farthing worthe twentyeFlorences of golde. Sherifes. Maior. Anno reg. 17 pence.
            
               Iohn Louekyn: Richard Rifling bury, the. 28. of Septem.
            
            
               Simon Fraunces Mercer, the. 28. of October.
            
            In a Parliament at Westminster, in the moneth of May, the religious men that were poſſeſſours of Lands, graunted to the king, towards the maintenaunce of his warre, al their iewels and plate, as wel ſiluer as gold, horſſes, carts, & wagons, whervpon the kings treaſure was notably enriched. The ſame yeare auctoritie was giuen to the kings eſcheters,1343 to enquire and certifye the Counſell of al ſuch perſons, which helde of the King any landes in Capite, or by anyA general ſuruey of the vvhole realme of England. other fée, to the value of one hundred ſhillings, and that the names of all ſuche ſhoulde be enrolled and giuen vp for recorde. Alſo certaine other were put in aucthoritie to ſignifie howe many ſufficient and able bow-men were in euerye ſhire: alſo what other ſufficient men were able to beare armour for the defence of theyr Country, and to ſée them practiſed with ſuche kinde of weapon wherein they had beſte ſkill: and being thus aſſembled in all parts of the Realme, ſpeciallye ſuche as were of lawfull age, commaundemente was giuen out, that they ſhoulde be readye at the Kyngs commaundemente to fyghte agaynſte theyr enimies.
            
               King Edwarde and his nobles perceyuing the derogationRo. de Aueſbury, Gual. Homingford. that was done to the realme by ſuch reſeruations, prouiſions and collations of benefices, as the Pope practiſed here in England, wrote to him, requiring him, that ſith the Churches of Englande had bene founded and endued by noble and worthy men, to the ende the people might be inſtructed by people of their owne language, and that he beyng ſo farre off, coulde not vnderſtande the defaultes, yet hys predeceſſours and he, more than had bene vſed, by diuerſe reſeruations, prouiſions, and collations made to diuerſe perſons, ſome ſtraungers, yea and ſome enimies to the Realme, whereby the money and profits were carried forth, theyr cures not prouided for, according to the founders mindes, they therefore vpon due conſiderations therof ſignifyed to him, that they coulde not ſuffer ſuch enormities any longer, and therefore beſought him to reuoke ſuch reſeruations, prouiſions and collations wholy, to auoyde ſuche ſlaunders, miſchieues, and harmes, as mighte enſue, and that the cures might be committed to perſons méet for the exerciſes of the ſame: beſéeching him further, wythout delay to ſignify his intention, ſith they ment to beſtow their diligence to remedie the matter, and ſée that redreſſe might be had. Giuen in ful Parliament at Westminster, the xviij. of May in the yeare. 1343.
            
               Iohn Steward: Iohn Ayleſham, the. 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Iohn Hamonde, the. 28. of October.
            
            Many being called to ayde the King againſt the Scots, but not being ready, they contributed their money, wherewith the king might hyre ſouldiours in place of them that remayned at home.
            King Edward cauſed to be called togither a great many
                  Anno reg. 18 Tho. Walſing. 1344 Round Table at VVindſore▪
                of Artificers, to the Caſtell of Windſore, and began to builde an houſe whiche was called the Rounde Table, the floure wherof, from the Center or midde point into the compaſſe, was an hundred foote, and the whole Diameter. 200. foote & the Circunference thereof is. 600. foote and thrée quarters.

The ſame time Phillip de Valoys king of Fraunce, buyldedRound Table in Fraunce. Scala Croni.
                a Rounde Table in his Countrey, to the ende he mighte allure the menne of Warre of Germanie and Italie, and ſo to kéepe them from the Kyng of Englandes Rounde Table.
            Kyng Edwarde in ſuccour of Iohn Mountfort Duke ofTh
                     •
                  . de la More. 
               Brytaine, and of his wife and children, who then remayned in the kings cuſtodie, ſent the Earles of Northampton and of Oxforde, Hugh Spencer
                and Richard Talbot Knightes, and maiſter William Kilesby Clearke, euerye one of them hauing vnder them many mē of armes and archers, into Britaine, who entred there-into, in deſpight of al theyr enimies whych reſiſted them, making many conflictes. They toke as well walled Townes as other, with diuerſe Fortreſſes and Caſtelles, both by aſſaulte and ſurrender, by whiche meanes they had the whole Countrey vnder theyr ſubiection, conquering till they came to the Towne of Morleis, where Charles de Bloys mette them wyth a greate armye. Therfore in the Champion grounde nygh vnto Morleys theBattayle as Morleys. two armyes made greate and moſte ſtoute battayle, wherin the worthineſſe of both ſortes dyd full well appeare: for they fought ſo ſtout on both ſides, that in the firſt conflict it chaunced as the like had not bene ſéene: for the chiefe Captaines, Charles de Bloys, to whom the Frenche king hadde giuen the Dukedome of that Countrey, and William de Bohune Earle of Northamton, who for the defence of ye right of Iohn de Mountfort, naturall heire and Duke of that lande, the king of Englande had made a generall ouer the army of the Engliſh men, who foughte ſo long wyth hande ſtrokes in the fielde that daye, that no manne but a lyar coulde giue more prayſe to the one than to the other. Thrée tymes that daye they beyng wearied on both ſides, wythdrewe themſelues to take breathe, and then fell to it again with Speare and ſhielde, and ſworde and Targe, but in ye ende the right worthy and ſtoute Charles de Bloys, his men

fléeing away, was alſo forced to flée himſelfe, wherevppon after many ſlaine on both ſides, the victorie fell to the Engliſhmen.
            
            
               Geffrey Wichingham: Thomas Legge, the. 28. of Sep.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Iohn Hamond, the. 28. of October.
            
            King Edwarde ſente ouer Henrie Earle of Darbie, ſon to the Earle of Lancaster his couſin, with more than fiue hundered men of armes, amongſt whom was the Earle ofRo. Auesbery▪ Anno reg. 19. 
               Penbroke and Walter de Many, with manye Archers, into Gaſcoigne, with Ralph Baron of Stafforde, Seneſhal of Gaſcoigne, who being come thyther, the ſayde Earle made fiftie Knightes of his armye, and after wanne manye walled Townes and Caſtelles, making many worthy ſkirmiſhes, and at length won the towne of Dagu
                     •
                  lown by aſſaulte, to the kéeping wherof they appointed Ralph Stafford, afterward they appointed thrée iourneys toward other townes, as eſpecially to Brigerecke (ſo called for the ſtrength thereof, and alſo called the Chamber of Fraunce) and alſo to ye town of Saint Iohn de Laruel, and to many other greate and ſtrong townes well fortified, which with great toyles and diuerſe daungerous aſſaultes they wan: where the Earle of Darbie and his ſouldiours vndermining the Towers and Wals of the ſayde towne, were very ſore aſſaulted by them whiche defended.
            Thus he Conquered Cities, Townes, Caſtelles and Fortreſſes, to the number of one hundred and fiftie, bringing a greate parte of Gaſcoigne vnder ſubiection, euen to Tolouſe, vnto the whiche Citie he did no domage, neyther to the inhabitantes therof, but that he made them wonderfully afrayde: as certaine of them tolde me, (ſayeth my aucthour,) their fear was ſuch, that the religious people were conſtrayned to beare armour, and the Prior of the CarmeliteTho. de la More. Friers of our Lady of Tolouſe, hauyng a Banner of our Ladye in Golde ſet in a fielde of ſiluer, diſplayed the ſame, prouoking thereby many to take armour.
            
               About the ſecond ſonday in Lent, the Earles being fully fraught with bootie, priſoners, gold and ſiluer, they returned towardes Burdeaux, where Iohn de Valoys eldeſt ſonne to the French king, being accompanyed with a great number of hyred Dutche ſouldiours, beſieged the Towne of Agnlowne, and the Captaines thereof the Earle of Stafforde and other ſo entrenched the ſame Towne, that without greate daunger, the Engliſhmen coulde haue no acceſſe vnto them: but the Earle of Darby bet awaye them that beſieged the Citie, and e
                  •
               t ſoones new victualled the ſame, notwithſtanding they were not able to raiſe the ſiege, bycauſe they hadde ſo entrenched themſelues without the towne, who refuſing to fight in the fielde, would aunſwere, that they came not to pitch a fielde, but to beſiege a Town: wherefore they continued the ſame ſiege vntil the decollation of Saint Iohn, but vnderſtanding then that the King of England chaced his Father Phillip very ſore at Grecie, and fearing, that he ſhoulde come verye late to the ayde of hys Father, he gaue vppe the ſiege, ſetting all his tentes on fire, and fled in the darke, but the Earle of Stafforde wyth hys power purſued them, cut off theyr tayle, tooke a greate manye of theyr horſſes, and priſoners, and retourned.
            After this certaine bowmen are muſtered in England, appointed to be ſente ouer ſea, who commyng ouer, are layde in garriſon fordefence of the Countrey. Alſo twenty thouſande ſackes of Wooll are graunted to the king. Moreouer Geffrey de Harecourte a Norman, came to the King, requiring ayd againſt the French king, who wrongfully withhelde hys landes from him: at his firſt comming he did fealtie, and ſware homage to king Edward, but afterward he reuolted.
            
               Thomas of Hatfielde the Kings Secretary, by meanes ofTho. Walſing. the Kyngs letters to the Pope was admitted Byſhoppe of Durham, and when certaine of the Cardinalles ſayde,

that the ſayd Thomas was a light perſon, and a lay man, the Pope anſwered, truly if the king of England at this timeAnſvvere of the Pope. had made his requeſt for an Aſſe, he ſhould haue obteined it.
            The ſame yeare dyed Adam Tarleton, Biſhop of Winchester, that had bin long time blind, after whome ſuccéeded William Edendon, Treaſourer of England.
            
            This man founded the Monaſterie of Edendon, the religiousLiber Edendon. bréethren whereof were called Bonhomes.
            
            The ſame yeare dyed Henry Earle of Lancaster, father to Henry Earle of Darby, and was buryed at Leycester, in the Monaſterie of Channons, the King, and both the olde and yong Quéenes being preſent, with Archbiſhops, Biſhops, Earles and Barons, in manner of all the lande, whoſe ſonne was then in Gaſcoigne doing chiualrous actes.
            This yeare, the Scottes to the number of thirtie thouſande, William Dowglas being their leader, entred into Westmerland, and brent Carelile, Penreth, with many other Townes, wherefore the Biſhop of Carelile, with Thomas Lucy, Robert Ogle, and a great number, compaſſed them in the night ſeaſon, and with lightes and noyſe ſo diſquieted them, that they neuer durſt go out for victuals, nor giue their bodyes to ſléepe, but at the laſt Alexander Stragan ſtoutely prepared to go out for victualles, whome the BiſhopScots ouercome and Robert Ogle mette, and with a ſpeare thruſt him through the body, ſo that the Scottes were ſoone after ouercome and ſlayne.
            
               Edmond Hemenhall: Iohn of Gloceſter, the 28. of Sept.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Richard Laget, the 28▪ of October.
            
            This yeare was the firſt cōgregating, and firſt Cuſtos or gardian of the fraternitie of the Grocers in the Citie of London elected.
            The Earle of Northampton, and the other Lordes in Briteine
               Anno reg. 20 committed certayne Caſtels wonne by them in Briteine, to the ſafekéeping of faithfull Captaynes and Souldioures, and then returned into England.
            
            King Edward prepared to make a voyage into Normandy,
               1346
               
his Nauie being readie to tranſport him from Porteſmonth
               King Edvvard ſayled into Normandy. and Porchester, with the Earles of Northampton, Arundell, Warwike, Harecourt, Huntingdon; Oxenforde, and Suffolke, the Biſhop of Durham, and Mayſter William Killesby Clerke, euery one of theſe leading a great armie of Souldioures, well appoynted, were embarqued, and wayted for the winde, from the firſt of June, to the fifth of July, and thenTho. de la More▪ Tho. Walſing. Ro. de A
                     •
                  esbury. hauing a good winde, they beganne to make Sayle with the number of one thouſande Shippes of burthen and Pinaces, and on the thirtéenth day of July, they landed at Hogges in Normandy, where on the ſhore of the Sea, King Edwarde made his eldeſt ſonne Knighte, and alſo Prince of Wales, and immediately the Prince made Knightes, Mortimere, Montacute, Roſe, and other.
            That night the King lodged in the Towne of Hogges, and the next day the Towne was brent by the Armie.Hogges in Normandy brent.
            
            The night following, King Edward lodged in Mercels, where he ſtayde fiue dayes, during whiche time, all the Countrey, with the Towne of Barbefleete, was by his men conſumed with fire. From thence they departed to Veloygus, which they ſet a fire: then they went to Senet combe de Mount, whiche is nigh the Sea, and to Garantam, thence to Serius, and to Saint Lewes, paſſing along vnto the Towne of Turney, waſting all with fire, and that night the Kyng lodged at Carmalin, then to Gerin, being a Religious houſe belonging vnto Cane, leauing nothing behinde them vnſpoyled.
            Afterward they made an aſſaulte, and entred the CitieCane in Normandy beſeeged by Edvvard the third. of Cane, making their entrance by a Bridge whiche was ſtrongly defended.
            There was ſlayne an hundreth thrée and fortie Knightes, among the whiche was the Earles of Ewe, and Camberlin de Tankeruill, with dyuers other Captaynes, whyche were ſente into England, and the Lady Abateſſe of Cane: and of them of the Citie, were ſlayne aboue one thouſande thrée hundred.
            
               At this Citie the armie remayned ſixe dayes, and the ſpoyle thereof they ſolde to thoſe Marriners whiche followed the coaſt as the King went. Then they wente to the Monaſterie in the Towne of Toward, a very ſtrong thyng, and well defended. Afterwarde, they came vnto Argons by nighte, burning ſtill as they wente, till they came to the Citie of Licens, where they founde the Cardinalles of Clarimount, and of Naples, and one Archbiſhop, who offered the King a treatie of peace, and there the King continued thrée dayes, refuſing to treate of peace. Then they wente to Lestentnoland, and to the Towne of Briue, and lodged at New Burge, and after at Selelefe vpon Sayne, and there the Welchmen 
               
                  ••
               amme through the water of Segan, and béeing reſiſted by the inhabitantes, they ſlewe many of them. Then they paſſed nigh to the Towne and Caſtell of Pount Darch, béeing ſtrong places, and not ſautable. Thys nighte he lodged at Lury vpon Segan, nigh vnto the good Towne of Louars, whiche they did burne. After, they paſſed by the Towne and Caſtell of Gaylon, whiche they tooke, and brente, and lodged at Lingeuie, whiche is nigh the good Towne and Caſtell of Vernon, whiche they touched not, and there they firſt entred into France, and the ſame night they brente the Caſtell of Roche Blanche, whiche ſtandeth on the other ſide of Segan, and lodged at Fremble vpon Segan. After that, they paſſed by the Towne de Maunt, lodging that night at Oporne. On the nexte day they paſſed to Frigmas, and the nexte daye to the good Towne of Poecie, where béeyng a Bridge to paſſe ouer the Riuer of Segan, the Frenche had ſpoyled it, but the Kyng cauſed it to bée reedifyed: and the nexte daye they came vnto Amias, where were thrée greate Armies appoynted to kéepe the King from paſſing that way: but hée making a greate conflicte with them, ſlewe thrée hundreth of them at the firſte charge, put the reſidue to flighte, and ſpoyled their Tentes, burning thrée hundreth and two Cartes and▪ Wagons ladē with Croſſebowes, Quarels, Armor, & victuals:

the King ſtaying there two dayes, they went to Greſile nigh vnto Pountoys, then to Antell: the next day they paſſed by the Citie of Wenneys, which they touched not, and ſo by Tr
                     •
                  ſolours at the water of Some where they lodged. The next day they wan the Towne of Poys, and brent the Caſtell. From thence they went to Aregnus, then to Achen, where they lodged. The next day they came to Noell vpon the Sea ſide: the Frenchmen of Dabuile and the Countrey came to the f
                  ••
               rdes ſide to hinder their paſſage, with whome the King had a ſore conflict, but the enimies were put to the worſſe, and more than two thouſand ſlayne, and the Towne of Croytoy taken and brent, and aboue thrée hundred Germanes ſlayne. The next day they followed the King on the Riuer of Some, and on the banckes ſide where the King with his hoſt were lodged, came trauelling Phillip de Valoys the French king,Tho. de la More. with the Kings of Boheme and Malegre, leading an army of men innumerable, deuided into eight great battels. King Edward ſent to the French King, offering him frée paſſage ouer the Foorde, if he would come and chooſe a place apt to fight a field in: but this Phillip would not fight, but went to another place of paſſage. On the morrow King Edward remoued to Creſifield, where ye armie of the French King met him. The King therefore ſet his ſonne the Prince of Wales to gouerne the vaward: The middle warde the Earle ofBattayle of Crecy. 
               Northampton: The third he tooke to guide himſelfe.
            The army of the Frenchmen were deuided into nine troupes. The vaward was committed to the King of Boheme. The French King commaunded his banner called Oliflam
               The French Banner of oyly flame ſignifyed no mercy more 
                     •
                  han fire in oyle. to be ſet vp, after which time it was not lawfull vnder payne of death to take any man to ſaue his life.
            This banner, that it might differ from his ſtandard, had in it Lillies of gold very broade.
            On the other ſide, King Edward commanded his Banner to be erected of the Dragon, which ſignified fierceneſſe, and crueltie to be turned againſt the Lillies.
            Theſe armies being thus appoynted, ſtoode in the fielde

from one of the clocke, vntill the euening. Aboute the Sunne ſetting, after the armies had iuſted, they beganne by ſound of Trumpettes to giue ſigne of battayle, but they themſelues felt the force of the Engliſh Archers, and as for their Quarels, they fell ſhort a great way. Moreouer, their footemen being placed among their owne horſemen, were by them (when they were gaulled with the Engliſh ſhotte of arrowes) ouerrunne and troden vpon, that a great outcrie was made as it were to the Starres, and the whole forme of the array was broken, and they fighting with the Engliſh armed men, are beaten downe with Poleaxes.
            In this ſo terrible a bickering, the Prince of Wales being then but ſixtéene yeares olde, ſhewed his wonderfull towardneſſe, laying on very hotely with Speare and Shield. This battell dured thrée partes of the night, in the which time the Frenchmen gaue fiue great aſſaultes againſte oure men, but at the length they being conquered, ranne away.
            On the morrow, there came four armies of freſh Souldioures to the French ſide, and making ſemblant as though their part had ſuffered no harme, they come againſt the Engliſhmen, and gaue them a freſh battayle. On the other ſide, the Engliſhmen withſtoode them very ſtoutely, and after a ſharp conflict they forced their foes to flie, and in chacing of them togither with them that were ſlayne in the conflict, they ſlew thrée thouſand men in the ſayd two dayes. There were ſlayne in the battayle of Crecy, the Kings of Boheme and of Maiorica, the Archbiſhop of Zanxinus, the Biſhop of Noyone, the Dukes of Lorayne, and Burbon, the Earles of Alanſon, Harecourt, Awmarle, Sauoy, Nois, Mountbilliard, Niuars, and of Flanders, with the graund Priour of the Hoſpitall of France, and foure thouſand men of armes, beſide common ſouldioures without number.
            The third day after, King Edward paſſed by the Abbey of Mounteney, and the next day they came to the Towne of Mountney, and from thence to the Nunrie of Saint Ioce, and after they paſſed ouer a Foorde, and came to Newcastell,
               
where they ſtayde two dayes, and from thence they came to Caleis, which preſently they entrenched to beſéege, beingKing Edvvarde beſeeged Caleis. the fourth day of September.
            
               Iohn Croydon: William Clopton, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Geffrey Witchingham, the 28 of October.
            
            The French King in this meane time ſent a number of Genoways, and other hired Souldiours, vnto Dauid King of Scottes, earneſtly requeſting him that he would inuade England with all his force: wherefore about the ſeauenth of October, he with a mightie power entred England, paſſing along by Berwike, which was ſtrongly defended by the Engliſhmen, and ſo ranging ouer the Forreſt of Alnewike, they wonne a certayne Mannour place called Luden, belonging to the Lord Walter Wake, who yéelded himſelfe on conditionSir VValter VVake and his ſonnes cruelly ſlayne by the Scottes. to be ranſomed, where Selby a Knight, béeing deſirous by law of armes to ſaue his life, he was taken, which when it was knowne to Dauid, he commanded him to be ſlayne: but Selby intreated for him, that he mought bée brought aliue to the preſence of Dauid, who hauing obteyned his requeſt, he falleth downe before Dauid, requeſting his life for raunſome, but he was agayne adiudged to dye. The malice of the Tirant was ſuche, that he commaunded two of the children of the poore Knight to bée ſtrangled in ſight of their father, and afterwarde himſelfe béeing almoſt madde for ſorrow, was beheaded.
            From thence the Scottes paſſed forwarde, waſting along the Countrey, wherein were many Farmes belonging to the Monaſterie of Durham, and comming within two miles of Durham, they tooke certayne of the Monkes, which they kept priſoners for their raunſome, making couenant with the reſidue for a certayne ſumme of money and corne to redéeme theyr Mannoures from ſpoyling. The Engliſhmen of the Marches fléeing before the face of the enimie, William de la Zouch, Archbiſhop of Yorke, Uizegerent to the King in the Marches, calling togither the Biſhop of Carelile, the Earle of Anguiſe, the Lord Mowbrey, the Lord

Percy, the Lord Neuell, and other of the North, with all their ayde, togither with the Archers of Lancaſhire, went towards the armie of the Scottes, and on the euen of Saint Luke, mette them at a place called Bewre Parke, 
               
                  •
               éere Neuels Croſſe. The Scottiſh Nation not accuſtomed to flée, withſtoode them ſtoutly, and hauing Headpéeces on their heads, and Targets on their armes, preaſing ſore vpon the Engliſhmen, they abode the brunt of the Archers: but the men of armes which were in the forefronts, gaue their enimies many deadly woundes. The Marſhall of the Scottes, Earle Patrike, who had the charge of the rereward, when he perceyued his men to be beaten downe, he fledde away with other that were priuie to his cowardlineſſe: he being fled, the reſidue of the Scottes continuing faithfully with theyr King, ſtoode about him like a round Tower, kéeping hym in the middle, who ſo continued till there was ſcarſe fortie of them left aliue, of the which not one of them coulde eſcape away. At length, Dauid their King béeing taken priſoner by Iohn Copland, the reſidue aboute him béeing taken or▪ ſlayne, the Engliſhmen purſued the chace after them whiche were fledde, ſlaying and taking them as farre as Prudihow and Corbridge. In this great battayle were takenKing of Scottes taken. 
               Dauid de Bruſe King of Scottes, the Earle of Mentife, the Earle of Fife, the Lorde Maleolin Fleming, the Earle Wixton, William Dowglas, William de Lemingſtone, Walter de Halliburton, Iohn Dowglas, Dauid de Anade, Iohn de Saint Clere, William Mowbray, Dauid Fitz Robert, William de Ramſey, Adam Moygne, Iohn Stewarde, Roger de Kirkpatrike, Iohn Hume, & Wil. Morrey knights, Iames Sudelflour, Iames Loren, Henry Delker Baronets. There were ſlaine in this battell the Earle of Morife, the Earle of Straterne▪
                alſo Alex. Stragy, Iohn de Haliburton, Hen▪ de Ramſey, Naſo de Ram
                     •
                  ey, Adā Nilkenſon, Thomas Boid, Iohn Stiward, Allen Stiward, Dauid Delahay, Edward Kethe, Iohn Crawford, Iohn de Kindeſey, Philip de Maldrē, Hen. Ramſey, Alex. Morey, Hum. de Boys, Gil. Inchmarten,
               
               Robert Maltallent, and his brother Humfrey Kirkepatrike, Iohn Strange, and Patrike Hearing Knightes. There were many ſlayne in the chaſe, but there were no more coate armours found in the mayne battayle than we haue reckned.
            This battayle was fought on the ſeuentéenth of October. The priſoners were conuayde to London about Chriſtmas, Dauid le Bruce except, which might not trauell by reaſon of two deadly woundes in his head with arrowes, but the ſeconde of January he was brought vp, and conuayed from Westminster to y• Tower of London, in ſight of all the people, and there lodged in the blacke nouke of the ſayd Tower, néere to the Conneſtables gard, there to be kept.
            While theſe things were done in England, the King wasAnno reg. 21 Tho. de la More. buſied at the ſéege of Calleys, which Towne is ſcituated in the marches of Artoys, being cloſed aboute with a double wall, and a double ditche, hard on the ſhore of the EngliſheCalleis deſcribed. Sea, right ouer againſt the Caſtell of Douer. And there is longing to the ſame Towne an Hauen, wherein Shippes may lie very ſafe withoute danger. This Towne was ſometime with the Caſtell thereof very ſtrongly built by the force and valiantneſſe of the Romanes, for after that Iulius
               Caleys builded by the Romanes. 
               Caeſar had broughte all France vnder his ſubiection, hée built Calleys in Artoys, and the Caſtell of Chipstowe in Venedocia, or Southwales, and the Caſtel of Douer in Kent, what timeCaſtels of Chepſtovv in vvales, and Douer in Kent, built by the Romanes. he had conquered Britayne. King Edward caſt a ditch aboute his Camp, and layde his Nauie of Shippes againſt Caleis Hauen, to the intente that the Frenchmen ſhould make no inuaſions vpon his Souldioures, neyther they within receyue any victualles by water. The Norman Pirats at ſundry times tooke fiftéene of his Shippes, whereof ſome of them they caried away for their owne occupying, the other they brent, and Sir Thomas Haclut, with Sir William Borton Knights, as they were ſailing into England, were taken priſoners on the Sea.
            King Edward hauing fortified the ſéege, lay without giuing1347 any aſſault, knowing that it was not poſſible to fight

with his enimies without great loſſe of men, conſidering the deapth of the ditches, and heigth of the walles: neyther woulde he erect any engins againſte the Towne, for there wanted firme grounde where vpon to place them. Beſides that, if he ſhould beate downe the walles, yet were the ditches ſo déepe, and full of ſalt water, let in on euery ſide, that they were able to withſtande all the world, with little ſtrength and defence.
            On that ſide of the Towne on which the Bolloners were wont to victuall Caleis, that is along on the Sea ſide, and eſpecially when the Shippes could not be ſuffered to paſſe by Sea, but alongſt the ſhore with ſmall boates, the Earle of Northampton made a Rampire, wherewith he kept awayA Rampire builded at Caleis. and beate backe ſuch boates, and afterwarde when the Admirall of France had purpoſed to come with his Shippes of warre to fight againſt our Engliſh Shippes that lay at the ſéege, thinking that in the meane time whileſt they were a fighting, the ſmall Boates ſhould paſſe to Caleis with victualles, the ſayd Earle of Northampton méeting with him valiantly, put him to flight.
            This ſéege during in ſuch ſort, from the feaſt of the Natiuitie of our Lady, and all the whole winter, with a great part of the ſommer, and ſtill waxing ſtronger and ſtronger, on Monday next before the feaſt of Saint Iames, the Frenche King came to the Caſtell of Gyſnes, with his eldeſt ſon Iohn,
               The French King came to reiſe the ſeege of Caleis. and the Kings ſonne of Boheme, and a great power, to haue remoued the ſéege from Caleis. Alſo the Emperour (promiſing by oth, that he would remoue the ſéege eyther by warre or peace, or at the leaſt, he would victuall them that were beſéeged) came with his armie towards the Engliſh Camp, and lodged ſcarſe a mile from thence, requeſting by meſſengers a treatie of peace. He ſent the Duke of Detenes, and the Earles of Bulone and Darminake, who parleing with the Duke of Lancaster, and the Earles of Northampton and Huntington, touching a truce, could not obteyne their conſente, whervpon after they had exerciſed a little warlike iuſting,

they returned to their Tentes. The ſecond day following, the French King offered the King of England a day of battell,The French King profered battayle. which the King on certayne conditions accepted very gladlye. In the meane ſeaſon, they which were beſéeged, made knowne their ſtate to the French King, by ſignes and tokens, for at his firſt comming, they within the Towne ſet vp his auntient on the chiefeſt Tower of the Caſtell, and alſo they ſet out Banners of the Dukes and Earles of France, and a little after the ſhutting in of the euening, they made a great light on the toppe of one of the higheſt Towers, which was towards the armie of the Frenchmen, and therewithall they made a greate ſhoute and noyſe wyth Trumpets and Drommes: the ſecond night they made the like, but ſomewhat leſſe: the third night a very ſmall fire, giuing forth therewith a ſorrowfull voyce, ſignifying thereby that their ſtrength touching the kéeping of the Towne, was quite ſpent and done: and the ſame night they tooke in all their flagges and antients, except their Standart. At the laſt, the day of battayle drew on, againſt which tyme, there came out of England and Dutchland, toward the helpe of King Edwarde, ſeauentéene thouſande fighting men, wherevpon the French King betimes in the morning of theThe French King fleeth. ſecond day of Auguſt, making fire in his Tentes, he fledde, whoſe tayle the Duke of Lancaster, and Earle of Northampton
               Wil. Norwell. cutting off, they ſlewe and tooke many of them. When they of Caleis perceyued thys, they tooke their Standart downe, and with greate ſorrow caſt it from the Tower downe into the ditch, and on the Saterday following, IohnCaleis is yeelded. de Vienna their Captayne, a man very ſkilfull in warlike affayres, opening the gates of the Towne, came out to theThe order hovv Caleis vvas yeelded. King of England, ſitting on a little nagge, for that he being lame on his féete could not well goe, with an halter about his necke, with the other burgeſſes and ſouldiours following on foote, bare headed, and bare footed, hauing halters about their neckes. The Captayne comming thus before the King, offered him a warlike ſword, as vnto the chiefeſt

Prince of armes amongſt all Chriſtian Kings, and as one that had taken that Towne from the mightieſt Chriſtian King by noble cheualrie. Then he deliuered to him the keyes of the Towne. Thirdly, he requeſting of him pitie, aſked pardon, and deliuered him the ſword of peace, wherewith he ſhould giue right iudgement, ſpare and forbeare the humble and lowly, and chaſten the proude harted.
            The King receyuing that which was offered him, ſente the Captayne with fiftéene Knightes, and as many burgeſſes into England, enriching them with large giftes. The common ſort of people, and ſuch as he found in the towne, being ſomewhat refreſhed with the Kings almes, he commanded to be ſafe conducted to the Caſtell of Guiſnes.
               Guiſnes.
            
            After the taking of the Towne of Caleis, the Souldiours at the Kings commandemente tooke the Mannour ofMarkes. Hoy. 
               Markes, and of Hoy, and with great difficultie they built in them Fortes, ſetting in order where walles wanted Hoggeſheads filled with ſtones againſt the enimies, whileſt the walles were a building within. Immediately after the taking of Caleis, there began in thoſe partes a generallBloudy Flix. peſtilence of the Flix, cōming frō the Eaſt partes, into many other partes of the world, wherevpō it came to paſſe, that a great multitude of people died. This peſtilence gaue occaſion y• certayne Cardinals were ſent on ye behalfe of the French King, to craue a truce from that time, vnto the feaſt of Saint Barnabe next following, which was agréed vpon on the 28. of September.
            
               Adam Brapſen: Richard Bas, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Thomas Leggy Skinner, the 28. of October.
            
            The truce being takē as afore is ſaid, K. Edward built aCaſtell at Riſebanke builded. Caſtel at Riſbanke, betwixt ye towne of Caleis, and the Hauēs mouth, to the intent to kéepe off all ye enimies force of ſhips frō the ſaid towne: and he made Captaine of the towne Sir Iohn Mongomery, and thence conueying the Quéene & his eldeſt ſonne, with a great company of noble men, he tooke hys iourney towardes Englande by water, and béeyng

on the Sea, he was beaten with ſuche a Tempeſt, that héeKing Edvvard returned from Caleis into England, not vvithout great danger of drovvning. loſt many of his Shippes, and hardly eſcaped himſelfe, notwithſtanding he came on land the fourtéenth of October, and came to London.
            
            This peace being made, it ſéemed through England as a new Sommer had followed, bycauſe of the plentie of allCommodities of peace. things, for there was no woman of any name, but ſhe had ſome of the priſes of Cane and Caleis, or of other Cities beyondeAnno reg. 22 the Seas, whereof the matrones being proude, did bragge in French matrones apparell.
            At the feaſt of Eaſter, Iames Dowglas, who was taken at Durham in the warres, and brought to London wyth the1348 King of Scottes, was licenced to departe home agayne, ſwearing to the King peace and fealtie, who afterwarde liuing peaceably in the marches, and being requeſted by William Dowglas to ride a hunting with him, was by him comming behind his backe moſt trayterouſly ſlayne.
            After Eaſter, the King held a Counſell, wherein it was decréed that none of his ſeruantes ſhould take vp any victualles of any man againſt his will, nor but that he payde for it ready money, vpon payne to be puniſhed and baniſhed the Courte, Richarde Talbot high Stewarde of the Kings houſe being appoynted to fée execution of that Proclamation.
            The Earle of Ments was racked, areigned, and conuicted, for that contrary to his faith and homage ſworne to the King of Englande, he did againe beare armes agaynſte him, and for that fact he was drawne, hanged, and quartered. To this Counſell came two Earles and two Clearkes ſente from the Princes electours, ſignifying that their election was made to the King, for the dignitie of the Kingdome of Almayne. Theſe meſſengers the Kyng receyuedKing Edvvard elected King of Almayne. with due honour, but aunſwered them, that hée woulde not take ſo great honour vppon hys ſhoulders, vntill hée had the Crowne of France, due vnto him, in peaceable poſſeſſion.
            
               A little after Eaſter, there were great Juſtings holdenIuſting at Lincolne. at Lincolne by the Duke of Lancaster, where were preſente many Ladyes, with the Counteſſe, and alſo certayne meſſengers ſente from the King of Spayne, for the Lady Ioane, daughter to the King, that ſhould be maryed to their Mayſter the Kings ſonne, whome hir huſbande méeting, ſhe dyed of the great Peſtilence, ſo that he followed hir to the graue.
            The ſame yeare, King Edward with his eldeſt ſonne the Earle of Warwike, and the Biſhop of Winchester went to Caleis, from whence the King ſente the Duke of Lancaster to Denemere, to receyue in his behalfe fealtie and homage of the Earle of Flanders 
               
                  •
               hich thing was by the ſayd Earle perfourmed.
            
               Henry Picard: Simon Dolſeby, the 23. of September.
               
                  Sherifes. Maior. Tho. de la More. Great Peſtilēce. Tho. Wa
                        •
                     ſing.
               
            
            
               Iohn Loueken Fiſhmonger, the 28. of October.
            
            There beganne amongſt the Eaſt Indians and Tartarians a certayne Peſtilence, which at length waxed ſo generall, infecting the middle region of the ayre ſo greatly, that it deſtroyed the Saraſins, Turkes, Sirians, Palestinians, and the Gretians, with a wonderfull, or rather incredible death, in ſo much that thoſe peoples béeing excéedingly diſmayde with the terrour thereof, conſulted amongſt themſelues, and thought it good to receyue the Chriſtian Faith and Sacramentes, for they had intelligence that the Chriſtians whiche dwelte on this ſide the Gréekiſh Sea, were not ſo greatly (more than common cuſtome was) troubled wyth ſickneſſe and mortalitie. At length this terrible ſlaughter paſſed ouer into thoſe Countreys which are on this ſide the Alpes, and from thence to the partes of France which are called Heſperia, and ſo by order along into Germany and Dutchland. And the ſeauenth yeare after it beganne, it came into England, and firſt beganne in the Townes and Ports ioyning on the Sea coaſtes, in Dorſetſhire, where, euen as in other Countreys, it made the Countrey quite voyde of inhabitantes, ſo that there were almoſt none left aliue.
            
               From thence it paſſed into Deuonſhire, and Somerſetſhire, euen vnto Bristowe, and raged in ſuche ſort, that the Glocesterſhiremen woulde not ſuffer the Bristowmen to haue anye acceſſe vnto them, or into their Countrey by anye meanes: but at length it came to Gloce
                     ••
                  or, yea and to Oxforde, and London, and finally it ſpread ouer all England and ſo waſted and ſpoyled the people, that ſcarce the tenth perſon of all ſortes was lefte aliue: when Church yardes were not ſufficiente and large ynough to burie theyr dead in, they choſe certayne Fields appoynted for that purpoſe.
            
               Gualter Mayny, Lord of Mayny, borne in Cambray, who ſerued in company of Henry Duke of Lancaster in his greatRecords of the Garter. actes of Gaſeoyne and G
                     •
                  ien, after this time made Knight of the Garter in England, hauing a reſpect to the danger that might fall in time of this Peſtilence then begonne in England, if the Churches and Church-yardes in London might not ſuffiſe to bury the multitude, he purchaſed a péece of ground called Spittle Croft (for that it belonged to the Mayſter and bréethren of Saint Barthelmewes Spittle) conteyningRegiſter of the Charterhouſe. Ex Carta. thirtéene acres and a rodde, without the barres of Weast Smithfield and cauſed the ſame to be encloſed, and dedicated by Ralph Biſhop of London, in the which place in the yeareCharterhouſe Church-yard by London. following, was buryed more than fiftie thouſand perſons, as is affirmed by the Kings Charters which I haue ſéene, and alſo by an inſcription fixed on a ſtone croſſe in the ſame place. And in memorie thereof, the ſame Gualter Mayny cauſed vpon the ſame grounde a Chappell to be builded,Anno reg. 23. and after founded the ſame to be an houſe of Charterhouſe
                  Ro
                        •
                     de Auesburie. Charterhouſe at London founded. Monkes.
            Alſo about the ſame time, one Iohn Cory, procured of Nicholas, Prior of the Church of the Holy Trinitie néere vnto Al
                     •
                  gate, one toſt of ground néere vnto East Smithfield, for the buriall of them that dyed, that it mought be called the Church yard of the Holy Trinitie▪
                which ground he cauſed to be encloſed, and dedicated by Nicholas Northbroke Biſhop of London, in the which place▪ King Edward the third,

by conſent of the ſayd Prior and Couent, founded the AbbeyNevv Abbey by the Tovver of London founded. Liber trinita Lond. Lib. Eaſtminſter.
                of Saint Mary of Grace in the yeare 1359. placing therein an Abbot and Monke of the order of Cisteaux, whiche were white Monkes, and named the place Eastminster.
            
            All ſutes and pleading in the Kings Bench, and other places, for a ſeaſon ceaſſed.
            Uery fewe noble men dyed, among whome departed Iohn Mountgomery, and his Lady: the Lord Cliſteles Captayne1349 of Caleis dyed at Caleis, and was buryed in the white Friers at London. Of the common people, togither with Religious and Clearkes, there dyed an innumerable ſorte, for no man but God onely knewe how many. There dyed from the firſt of January, to the firſt of July, in the Citie of Norwich 57374. perſons, beſides Eccleſiaſticall MendicantsNorvvich. Regiſt. of Norwich An
                        ••
                     . eccleſi. 
                        •••
                     . Yermouth. and Dominikes. There was buryed in the Church and Church-yard of Yermouth, in one yeare 7052. men and women, before which time the Perſonage there was worth 700. markes by yeare, and afterwardes was ſcarſe worth fortie pounde the yeare. This note was certified to King Henry the ſeauenth, in the 
                  ••
               . of his raigne, and the ſame is written on the gates of the Church of Yermouth. This great Peſtilence began at London about the feaſt of All Sainctes, in y• yeare 1348. What time this Peſtilence had waſted all England, ye 
               Scots▪
                greatly reioycing, mocked & ſware oft-times by the vile death of y• 
               Engliſhmen, but y• ſword of Gods wrath departing frō thence, ſlew & cōſumed the Scots in no leſſe nū
               bers, than it did the other. It alſo waſted the Welchmen, and within a while paſſed ouer into Ireland, where it deſtroyed a great nūber of Engliſh people that dwelt there, but ſuche as were right Iriſhmen borne, y• dwelt in the hilly countreys, it ſcarcely touched, ſo that few of thē died therof. This plague cōtinued ſometime in one place, ſometime in another, vntill the yeare of our Lord 1357. The ſame yeare for a truce or finall peace to be concluded, the B. of Norwich, the Earle of Northampton, the Earle of Stafford, Richard Talbot, Walter Mayny
                Knightes, ſayled ouer the Sea into France, whom y•
               
               Frenchmen met peaceably, but they would not agrée to a 
                  ••
               
               nall peace, vnleſſe that Caleis were reſtored to thē againe, which would not be granted: and the truce whiche was taken for a yeare was ſo continued. But the Earle of Flanders, who would not in any caſe receyue conditions of peace, vnleſſe the French King were quite forſaken, notwithſtanding his ſolemne oth, not long after entred into Flanders with a great power of Frenchmen, burning and killing where euer he came: but the people of the Countrey with a few Engliſhmen withſtoode him ſtoutely, and gaue him a ſore ſkirmiſh, in the which, beſide that many Frenchmen were ſlayne, the Earle himſelfe was forced to flie, for the whiche worthy acte, many Knightes were made, amongſt the which was Iohn de Filebert, and Engliſh man.
            In the feaſt of the Natiuitie of Saint Iohn, the Quéene was purified at Windeſore, where were ſolemne Iuſtes, and running at the Tilt, at the which, Dauid King of Scottes
               Iuſtes at VVindſore. was preſent, and the Earle of Ewe, the Lord Tankeruill, Lord Charles de Valoys, and many other Strangers captiues, who by the Kings licence were permitted to runne alſo at the Tilte, at the which paſtime the price of the field was adiudged to the Earle of Ewe. After in Sommer ſeaſon, theſe Strangers paſſed their time in hunting, in the company of the King, and other nobles of the Realme, at Claringdon in Wiltſhire nigh Saliſburie, and in diuers other Forreſtes.
            Whiles the King was thus occupyed, the Frenchmen notwithſtanding the truce, entred the marches of Britaine, but the ſonnes of Sabater, with a few other, who went out a forraging, tooke Thomas Dagworth Knight, a man of great experience, who but with a few men, to wéete, ſixtéene armed men, entred the woodde againſt theſe robbers, and inuaded them, ſlaying to the number of thrée hundred, but at the length being ſtricken fiue times in the face with Quarels,Sir Thomas Dagvvorth ſlayne. all his men being firſt ſlayne, he himſelfe was thruſt through the body with a ſword.
            
               
               Adam of Burie: Ralph of Linne, the. 28 of September.
               Sherifes. Maior. Ro. Auesbery. Adam Mer
                     •
                  .
            
            
               William Turke Fiſhmonger, the. 28. of October.
            
            About the feaſt of Saint Michael, more than 120. perſons of Sealande, and Hollande, comming through Flaunders vnto London, ſometime in the Church of Saint Paule, ſometyme in other places of the Citie, twice in the day, in the ſighte of all people, from the loynes, vnto the héeles, couered in lynnenA bloudy Proceſſion of publicans. clothe, all the reſt of their bodies being bare, hauing on theyr heades hats with red croſſes before and behinde, euery one in their right handes a whip with thrée cordes, eache corde hauing a knotte in the middeſt, beat themſelues on theyr bare bloudie bodies going in proceſſion, foure of them ſinging in theyr owne language, all the other aunſwering them.
            The ſame yeare the Earle of Lancaster, the Barons of Stafforde and Greystocke, alſo the heires of the Lordes Percy and Neuel, and the Lord Burniual, with Barthelmew Burwaſh, and diuerſe other, about the feaſt of Al-ſaintes, paſſed ouer ſea into Gaſcoign, to delay the furious vprore that Iohn de Valoys ſonne to the French king had made in that dukedome; greatly ſpoyling and waſting the ſame. Alſo the kings counſel ordained, that none of the kings Juſtices during the time of their offices, ſhoulde receyue any fée, gift, or reward of any man, except it were of the king himſelfe.
            Alſo thys yeare in the Countie of Oxforde, nyghe vntoA Serpent vvith tvvo heades in Oxfordshire. a towne called Chippingnorton, there was founde a Serpent hauing two heades, and faces like women, and being ſhaped after the newe tyre of that time: another after the manner of the old attyre, and it had great wings, after the manner of a Flyndermouſe or Bat.
            About the feaſt of Al-ſainctes, kyng Edwarde beyng accompanyedK. Edvvarde ſayled tovvards Flaunders. with the Earle of Lancaster, and Southfolke, and diuerſe others, paſſed ouer the ſeas into Flaunders, and thēce leading his armie towardes Fraunce, the French men made meanes vnto him to renewe their truce: and nowe the Earle of Flaunders ſubmitted himſelfe the thirde time vnto

the kings mercie and dominion. Then the king returning toward Englande, to ſolemnizate the tranſlation of S. Thomas the Confeſſour and Biſhoppe of Hereforde, dyd wyth his preſence and Nobilitye honoure the ſame, to the greate expences of Nicholas Cantulupus Baron, and couſin to the ſayde Saint Thomas: during whiche feaſte and ſolemnitie, it was ſignified to the King by the Secretaries of Emericus of Padua, who was a féed manne to the king ofCalleis like to haue bin betrayed. 
               Englande, that on the fourtéenth day of Januarie nexte comming, Geffrey Cherney Knight, and manye other Frenche men ſhoulde be receyued into Caleis, vnto whom the ſayd towne was ſolde by the ſayde Emericus: but the Towne beyng preſentlye reſcued by king Edwarde, the ſayde Emericus of Padua with other Genoways cōtinued in Caleis, beyng maintayned there at the coſtes of the Frenche king againſte the king of Englande, when he beſieged it, who alſo after the yéelding of it to the King of England, being pardoned bothe of life and lymme, from thenceforth continued and dwelte as a féed man of the kyngs in the ſayde Towne for the defence thereof. At that tyme the ſayde Geffrey was Lorde of Matas, a man more ſkylfull in warfare than anye Frenche man in Fraunce. Wherefore he was greatelye eſtéemed, euen to the time of his death. This craftie deuiſer indeuored by his letters, wherin he made promiſe of large giftes of golde, and other ſophiſticall perſwaſitions, quite to ſubuert the fayth and loyaltie of the ſayde Emericus.
            
            Finally, thys craftie deuiſer agréed with this falſe man, that for twentie thouſande French crownes he ſhoulde lette in the Frenche menne to the Towne, and as muche as laye in hym, delyuer vppe to the Frenche menne both the Towne and Caſtell. This bargaine being moſt traytorouſly, made by othe and breaking of ye Sacrament betwixt them, yet all this notwythſtanding, he wrote letters vnto the Kyng touching the ſtate of the whole matter, but verye priuilye, howe that hée was readie to ſhewe friendſhippe

to the Frenche menne, yet meanyng to make fruſtrate theyr purpoſe, whereby they ſhoulde be conuicted of breakyng the truce, and alſo manye of them ſhoulde be taken to bée raunſomed, wherefore kyng Edwarde ſpéedilye paſſed ouer, beyng accompanyed wyth hys eldeſt Sonne, the Earle of Marche, and a fewe other, commyng before the tyme appoynted for the yéeldyng of the Towne certayne dayes. ThereforeAnno reg. 24 hée beyng come to Callayes, hée ſayde certayne men of armes wythin the Uaultes whyche were betwixte the outter gate and the inner parte of the Caſtell, buyldyng a thinne and ſtender Wall before them newelye ſette vppe, not made of Playſter, but of counter
               
                  •
               ayte matter, whyche ioyned to the other Wal, craftilye deuiſed and made like the olde worke, ſo that no manne woulde Judge that that anye were encloſed therin. Alſo he cauſed the maynepoſtes of the drawe bridge to bée ſawed almoſte in ſunder, yet in ſuche ſort, that 
                  ••
               me
                  •
                horſſemen mighte ryde ouer it: and for the purpoſe he hadde a greate ſtone, whiche was layde vppe in a hole made in forme of an Arche, beyng in the foreparte of the Tow
                  •
               e hangyng ouer the Bridge, in whyche hée appoynted a Faythfull Souldiour ſhould bée in the tyme to throwe downe▪ the ſayde ſtone vppon the Bridge, that wyth the fall thereof, the Bridge beyng halfe cutte in two, ſhould be broken in ſunder, and ſo that hole where the ſtone was layde, ſhoulde bée wrought in ſuche ſorte, that hée wythin ſhoulde perceiue throughe the hole howe manye dyd enter in 
                  ••
                
               
                  ••••
                were made priuie to this practiſe, neyther did many knowe of the kings preſence or of the prince of Wales, who when they had wroughte thys feate, ſecretely conueyed themſelues into the Towne. The daye before the tyme of delyuerie of thys Towne, Geffrey Cherney 
               
                  •••••
                fifteene of his faithfulleſt menne wyth the g
                  ••
               a
                  •••
                parte of the golde whiche was to be payde, who ſhoulde alſo 
                  ••
               y
                  •
                the faythe

of Emericus, and the order of the Caſtell, who ſearching euery where, in euery Tower and corner whiche they could finde open, coulde perceyue nothing contrarie to theyr lykyng, wherevpon on the next day in the morning, they ſet vp the French kings ſtanderde in the higheſt Towre of the Caſtell, and the auntientes alſo of Geffrey, and of other Lordes vpon other Towers and places. Then the people of the Town who kept common watch and warde, not knowing of this ſecrete deuice, were gretly terrifyed therwith, in ſo muche that they taking weapon in hande, beganne to giue a charge againſt the Caſtell: by and by the French men who hadde entred the day before, toke Thomas Kingſtone, then fléeing awaye, quite ignoraunt of that whiche was deuiſed, and forceably they ſet him in the ſtockes. Then certaine of them being ſent out to the French men their companions and maiſters, who laye without in ambuſhes ſhewed them the auntients and ſtanderd ſet vp, and all to be well, euen as they woulde haue it, haſtning them forwarde to come to the defence of the Caſtell, againſte the townes men: wherfore they ryſing from their lorking places, aduaunced themſelues in pride and bragging, and came by heapes in at the gates of the Caſtell. The townes men perceyuing this, had muche adoe to forebeare their handes from them, had not their chiefe leaders withdrawen them from it, leaſt ſome daunger ſhould haue happened to them that laye hid: by and by thoſe that laye hid cloſed vnder the Arches of the Walles, prepared themſelues to breake out vpon their enimies. In like ſorte alſo he that with the great ſtone man ſhut vp in the hole, after that he ſée ſo many entred in▪ 
               
                  •••
               éeming that his fellowes were ſufficient to ouerthrowe the
                  •
               , with that great ſtone put to his cuſtodie hée brake the drawe bridge, by the whiche the enemies had entred in, but being once in, coulde not goe that waye out againe: when the ſtone was thus downe, and had diſcharged the thing for the which it was layde vp, & the French men deceiued by that pollicy, they wer encloſed ſafe ynough. At the

noyſe of this ſtone and the bridge that brake, theſe armed men of whom before I ſpake, breaking downe their counterfaite wall, behinde the which all the deceyte was hyd, they preſently ſet themſelues in order to inuade the French men, bidden to a bitter breakfaſt. The conflict was ſharp for a good ſeaſon, but at the length the enimies being ouercome, yéelded themſelues to the pleſure of the conquerours. They which were without and had not entred, as ſoone as they perceyued theyr companions to be deceyued, fled, after whome the king with ſcarce ſixtéene men of armes and as many Archers followed a pace, the runnawayes not knowing what company woulde followe them: many in thys chaſe were wearied, and many moe ſlaine, and in a ſmall time the king ouercame daungerous and great labours: but at length, when it was vnderſtoode by them that fledde, howe fewe there were that chaſed them, foureſcore armed men turned them againſt the king. I dare not aſcribe thysTho. de la More. boldneſſe of the king in chaſing of his enimies, to hys wiſedome, but only to the ſ
                  •
               outneſſe of his minde, the whiche is wel knowen through Gods grace to be brought to good effect by his meanes, though the daunger were neuer ſo gret: for when he perceyued that the French men had turned thē
               ſelues to withſtande him, he caſte away the ſcaberde of hys ſword, and comforting his men about him, ſetting them in good order, exhorted them to play the men luſtily. The Archers being placed in the Marche againſt the ſides of the enimies ſtoode on dry Hilles, which were compaſſed aboute with quag-myers and foggie places, that neyther horſſemen nor footemen might approch them, but they ſhould rather be drowned in mud than come néere to hurt them: theſe alſo did the king comfort, ſaying to them (doe well you Archers) play the men luſtily, and knowe that I am Edwarde of Windſor. Then the preſence of the king, and neceſſitie of the matter, ſtyrred vp theyr hartes to doe well: the Archers vncouering theyr heades, ſtripping vp theyr ſléeues, bente themſelues to beſtow theyr arrowes in ſuch ſort that they

might not be loſte: and as the French men drewe towardes thē, they ſaluted thē after with their arrowes. The armed men of both partes ſtoode in order to fighte vppon a long and narrowe cauſewaye, the bredth whereof was not able to receiue ſcarce twentie men of armes in a fronte, hauing on both ſides thereof the Mariſhe, in the whiche the Archers were placed, who gauled and wounded theyr enimies on the ſides, fléeing as thicke as hayle. The kyng and his men before, wyth the Archers on the ſide, ſlewe and tooke a greate manye: and manye of them ſtoode ſtoutlye to it, till at the length by the comming of the Prince of Wales, the Frenche were putte to flighte: after a long chaſe in purſuing the enimies, they returning backe againe to Caleis, numbred thoſe which were fledde, as well as thoſe whiche were taken, and they founde, that for the taking of the Caſtell (as the priſoners reported) there came a thouſand men of armes, and ſixe hundred armed men, but they which ſerued, were aboue thrée thouſand: among thē which were taken, was Geffrey Charney and his ſonne, Edwarde1
                        •
                     50 de Renty, Robert Danquile, Otto de Gulo, the Baron of Martingham, Baldyne Saylly, Henrie de Prees, Garinus Baylofe, Peter Renel, Peter Dargemole, Euſtace de Riplemount
                and manye other, Lordes, Knightes, and Baronets, who were chaſed and ranne away with theyr auntientes, as the Lorde de Mountmarice, alſo Laundas, who maried the Lady Saint Paule Counteſſe of Penbroke in England▪
                alſo ye Lord Fenas, the Lorde Planckes, and another Euſtace de Replemount. There were ſlaine in the ſkirmiſh the Lord Henrie de Boys, the Lord Archibalde, & many others, whoſe names the Conquerors were not able to certifie. Thus by pollicie and deuiſed treaſon the aucthours therof came to death and deſtruction: neither Euſtachius himſelfe eſcaped ſcot frée frō the ſnares, for he within a while after being taken by the French men, was burned aliue with a hotte yron, and degraded frō the order of Knighthood by the cutting off his héeles, and depriuing of his tong by alſitiō: afterward, he was hā
               ged

vp, and laſte of all beheaded and quartered, receyuing iuſt puniſhment for his treaſon and falſe forſwearing.
            This yeare the Lord Fur
                     •
                  uall giuing a raſh enterpriſe vpon his enimies, was taken priſoner in Gaſcoign. Not long after king Edwarde prepared to make a voyage into France, but the Earle of Lancaster, returning out of Gaſcoigne, ſignied that there was a truce taken by him, by reaſon whereof the paſſage prepared by the king was layde aſide.
            This yeare on Saint Georges day, the kiug held a great
                  Tho. de la Mor
                        •
                     . Great feaſt at VVindſor of Saint George. & ſolemne feaſte at his Caſtel of Windſor, where he had augmented the Chappell which Henrie the firſte and other hys progenitors kings of England had before erected of eight Canons: he added to thoſe eight Chanons, a Deane, & fiftéene Chanons more, and. xxiiij. poore and impotent Knightes, with other miniſters and ſeruauntes, as appeareth in his
                  Tho. Walſing. Ex charta regia. Firſt founders of the noble order of the Garter. Records of the Garter.
                Charter, Dated the two and twentith of hys raigne. Beſides the king, there were other alſo that were contributors to the foundation of this Colledge, as followeth.
            
               1 The ſoueraigne King Edward the thirde.
               2 Edward his eldeſt ſonne Prince of Wales.
               
               3 Henrie Duke of Lancaster.
               
               4 The Erle of Warwicke.
               
               5 Captain de Bouch.
               
               6 Ralph Erle of Stafforde.
               
               7 William Montacute Erle of Saliſburie.
               
               8 Roger Lord Mortimer Erle of March.
               
               9 Sir Iohn de Liſle.
               10 Sir Bartholmew Burwaſh.
               11 Sir Iohn Beauchampe.
               12 Sir Iohn de Mahune.
               13 Sir Hugh Courtney.
               14 Sir Thomas Hollande.
               15 Sir Iohn Grey.
               16 Sir Richard Fitz Simon.
               
                  17 Sir Miles Stapleton.
               18 Sir Thomas Walle.
               19 Sir Hugh Wrotheſley.
               20 Sir Nele Lering.
               21 Sir Iohn Chandos.
               22 Sir Iames de Audley.
               23 Sir Othes Hollande.
               24 Sir Henrie Eme.
               25 Sir Sechet Dabridgecourte.
               26 Sir William Panell.
            
            Al theſe togither with the King were clothed in gownesTho. de la More. of Ruſſet, poudered in gartiers blew, wearing the like garters alſo on their right legges, and mantels of blewe, withFirſt feaſt of Saint George. ſcutcheons of Saint George. In this ſort of apparell they being bareheaded, heard Maſſe, which was celebrat by Simon Iſlipe Archbiſhop of Canterburie, and the Biſhops of Winchester and Excester, and afterwardes they went to the feaſte, ſetting themſelues orderlye at the Table for the honoure of the feaſt, which they named to be of Saint George the Martyre, and the choſing of the Knightes of the Garter.
            In the Sommer following, variaunce ryſing betwéene the fléetes of Englande and Spaine, the Spaniardes beſette the Brytaine Sea, with foure and fortie great ſhips of warre, with the whiche they ſonke ten Engliſh ſhips comming frō 
               Gaſcoigne towardes Englande after they had taken and ſpoyled them, & thus their former iniuries being reuenged, they entred into Sluce in Flaunders.
            
            King Edwarde vnderſtanding hereof, furniſhed his nauie of fiftie ſhippes and Pinaces, forecaſting to méete wyth the Spaniardes in theyr returne, hauing in his companye the Prince of Wales, the Earles of Lancaster, Northampton, Warwicke, Saliſburie, Arundale, Huntington, Glocester, and other Barons and Knightes with their ſeruauntes and Archers, and vpon the feaſt of the decolatiō of Saint Iohna, about EuenſongRo. de Auesbery. time, the Nauies met at Winchelſea, wher the great Spaniſh veſſels ſurmounting our ſhippes and foyſtes, like

as Caſtels to cotages, ſharply aſ
                  •
               ayled our men, ye ſtone & quarels flying frō the the tops, ſore & cruelly wounded our mē, who no leſſe buſie to fight alofe with launce and ſword,Battaile on the Sea. & with the foreward manfully defende themſelues, at length our archers perced theyr Arbalisters with a further retch thā they coulde ſtrike againe, and thereby compelled them to forſake their place, and cauſed other fighting from the Hatches to ſhade themſelues with tables of the ſhips, and compelled them that threwe ſtones from the toppes, ſo to hyde thē, that they durſt not ſhew theyr heads, but tumble down: then our men enfring ye 
               Spaniſh Ueſſels with ſwords & Halberds, killed thoſe they met, wtin a whyle make voyd y• veſſels & furniſh them wyth Engliſh men, vntil they being beſet with darkneſſe of the night, could not decern the. xxvij. yet remayning vntaken: our men caſt ancker, ſtudying of the hoped battayle, ſuppoſing nothing finiſhed, whileſt any thing remayned vndone, dreſſing the wounded, throwing the myſerable Spaniards into the Sea, refreſhing themſelues with victualles and ſléepe, yet committing the vigilant watche to the armed bande. The night ouerpaſſed, the Engliſhe men prepared (but in vaine) to a new battayle, but when the ſunne began to appeare, they viewing the ſeas, coulde perceyue no ſigne of reſiſtaunce, for xxvij. ſhippes fléeing away by nighte, lefte xvij. ſpoyled in the euening, to the kyngs pleaſure, but agaynſte theyr wil.
            The King returned into England with victorie and triumphe, the King preferred there. 80. noble ympes to the order of Knighthoode, greatlye bewayling the loſſe of one, to witte ſir Richard Goldesborough Knight.
            Thys yeare Phillippe de Valoys Frenche
                Kyng,Phillip the frēch king died. deceaſed, and hys eldeſt Sonne Iohn was crouned.
            
               Iohn Notte: William Worceſter, the. 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Richard Killingburie, the. 28. of October.
            
            Two hyred ſouldiours of the Kyng of Armenia, came into Englande, into the preſence of the King, where they ſhewed the letters of the aforeſayde King of Armenia, wherein

it was ſignified that the one of them, to witte, Iohn de Viſcount, a man borne in Cipres, had ſlanderou
                  •
               ly charged the other, that is Thomas de la Marche, a Frenche man borne, and baſtarde ſonne to Phillippe late King of Fraunce, ſaying that the ſayde Thomas ſhoulde haue receyued of the Turkes a certaine ſome of Golde, for the betraying the armye of the Chriſtians vnto the Emperour of the Turkes: and for the proofe of this ſlaunder, this Iohn chalenged a combat wyth the ſayde Thomas, to be tryed by the iudgement of Edward King of Englande, and that by him (as by a moſte worthy Prince,) all ſtrife ſhoulde be ended. For this therefore were theſe two worthy ſouldiours appointed to fight, which they performed within the liſtes of the Kings Pallace at Westminster, on Mondaye nexte following after the feaſte of Saint Michael, where Thomas, in declaration of hys innocencie, in that he was accuſed of, ouercame his enimye, but yet killed him not, for he could not, bycauſe he was not able to wounde hym beyng ſo armed▪ with anye kynde of piercing weapon, except it were in hys face, whiche was bare. For after that they hadde runne at the Tilte, and foughte on foote, as they were ſtriuing togither on the grounde, wyth certaine prickes bothe ſhorte and ſharpe, then called Gadlings, being cloſed in the ioyntes of hys righte Gauntlet, the ſayde▪ 
               Thomas ſtrucke the ſayde Iohn in the face, and ſore wounded hym: but on the other ſide Iohn hadde no ſuche ſhorte kinde of weapon, wherewyth hée myght hurte Thomas face, and therefore cryed out aloude moſte horribly, whervpon by the kings commaundemente the combatte was ended, and the victorie adiudged to Thomas, who gaue the ſayde Iohn, being thus ouercome, to the Prince of Wales for a Captiue, and offered by his owne armoure to Sainte George, in Sainte Paules Churche at London, wyth greate deuotion. Theſe matters beyng thus finiſhed, the Cipres▪
                man is manumitted and fette at libertie as a frée man againe. And Thomas
               
thinking boldely to goe into the preſence of his brother the Frenche King, toke hys iourney thyther, and at his comming, founde the ſayde King and the nobilitie of Fraunce, greatlye offended, and in indignation againſt him, for that he agréed that the combat ſhoulde be tried before the King of England. Wherefore Thomas thinking ſecretly with himſelfe howe to winne the falſe friendſhip of his brother, being deſirous to ſhewe that therein hée hadde done well, among all other things he greatelye prayſed the nobilitie of Edwarde and his worthy fame ſpredde ouer al the worlde, and alſo the iuſtice whiche he vſed in iudging, not accepting the perſon of the manne of Cipres, (yea thoughe he loued the Kyng himſelfe verye well) neyther ſuffered him to be preferred before me, whiche am a Frenche manne, and brother, and friende to thée my Lorde Kyng of Fraunce▪
                iudge ouer the ſayde King Edwarde my aduerſarie. Alſo the Earle of Ewe hyghlye prayſed the King of England, for that hée hadde receyued greate comforte and commoditye at hys handes during the tyme of hys Captiuitie in Englande, ſhewing alſo howe farre that good Kyng hadde baniſhed enuie and hatred from hys hearte, who at a time of iuſtyng, beyng in the fielde at that exerciſe, and the Kyng alſo, was commaunded by the Kyng hymſelfe to beare awaye the price and pricke from them all. Theſe commendations did the Frenche Kyng enuie at▪ and for indignation, he moſte wickedlye commaunded the ſetters forthe of thoſe prayſes to be beheaded. And for to colour the matter the better, he fayned that the Earle vſed too muche familiaritie with the Quéene his wife, and that his brother was guiltie of treaſon againſte the king of Fraunce, bycauſe he committed his cauſe and the combat to be tryed by the iudgement of the king of Englande. After he had thus murdered his brother, he tormented his wife to death by famine, who was daughter of the noble King of Boheme, lately ſlaine in battayle by Geffrey.
            
            
               
               William Edington Biſhoppe of Winchester, and treaſurerGroates and halfe groates. Anno reg. 25 Tho. Walſing. Hiſto. Au
                        ••
                     a.
                of England, a wiſe man, cauſed a newe coyne called a Groate, and halfe Groate to be coyned, but theſe were of leſſe wayght than the pence, called Eſterlings, by reaſon wherof victualles and merchandice became the dearer thorough the whole realme.
            After the Octaues of the Purification of our Lady, in aParliament at VVeſtminſter. Parliament holden at Westminster, Henrie
                Earle of Lancaster was created Earle of Lincolne, Leicester, Derby, Groſmount and Ferrers, and Duke of Lancaster, vnto whome alſo was giuen great priuiledges, ſuche as neuer any Erle had before his time. Alſo Lionel of Antwerpe the kings ſonne is made Earle of V
                     •
                  star in Irelande, Iohn
                of Gaunte his brother is made Earle of Richmonde, and Ralph Baron of Stafforde, is made Earle of Stafforde.
            
            In the Lent following Walter de Maine, and Roberte Herle Captain of Caleis, rod into France, making gret praes and doing great domage, brought away gret ſtore of beaſts,A fat Covv ſixteene pence. 1351 ſhéepe, and ſwine, ſo that at Caleis a fat Cowe was ſcarcelye ſolde for ſixtéene pence ſterling. About Eaſter the Duke of Lancaster departing from Caleis marched alongſt the Sea coaſtes of Artoys, and Picardie, brent the ſuburbes of Bulloign, but aſſaulting the Town he preuayled not, for that only the ladders were too ſhort. Therefore he waſted the Cities of Tirwin, and the hauen, alſo the Townes of Fauconbridge and Staples, and in the ſame hauens he brent aboue. 120. ſhips of diuerſe moulds. After this brenning the Champion Countrey, he rode vnto Saint Omers, and winning by force manye Fortreſſes, with a great pray and many priſoners he returned to Caleis. About the feaſt of Saint George things proſpered wel in Gaſcoine, for the Marſhal of France, with a greate number of armed men ſpoyled the Countrey about S. Dangel, where Edmond Roſe a Norffolke man was Captayne, who with the gariſon, valiauntly encountred the enimies, flew many of them, and toke the ſayde Marſhal and manye other nobles of Fraunce, chaſing aboue 400. Knightes.
            
               The ſame yeare the Spaniſh ſhippes by a treatie of peace came into Englande, where the laſt yeare they were reſtrayned, but nowe a truce was taken for twentie yeares, betwixt England▪
                and Spaine, and a truce betwixt Englande and Fraunce for one yeare, whiche the French men brake, by reaſon of taking the Caſtel of Guiſnes, as in the next yeare ſhall be ſhewed.
            
               Iohn Wroth: Gilbert of Steineſhorpe, the. 28. of Septem.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Andrew Auberie Grocer, the. 28. of October.
            
            About this ſeaſon the old coine of gold was changed into a new, the olde Noble was worth muche aboue the taxed rate of the newe, and therfore the Marchauntes boughte the olde and conueyed them out of the Realme to the greate loſſe of the king and kingdome, to the whiche there was a remedie prouided, by the chaunging of the ſtampe.
            About the beginning of Januarie, the French men béeing occupied about y• repayring of ye wals of Guiſnes town, being afore that time deſtroyed by the Engliſh men, ſome mē of armes of Caleis vnderſtanding their doings, deuiſed how they might ouerthrow the work, & it was done in this ſort. There was an Archer named Iohn Dancaſter, in priſon inAnno reg. 26 the Caſtel of Guiſnes, before that time takē, who not hauing wherwith to pay his raunſome, was let loſe, with condition that he ſhoulde worke there amongſt the French men.The getting of Guiſnes by the Englishe. This fellow chaunced to lye with a Laundres, a ſtrumpet, and learned of hir where beyond in the principal ditch, from the bottome, there was a▪ Wall made of two foote broade ſtretching from the bottome to the brimme of the ditche within forthe, ſo that being couered with Water it coulde not be ſéene, but not ſo drowned, but that a man going alofte theron, ſhoulde not be wette paſte the knées, it beyng made for the vſe of Fiſhers: and therefore in the middeſt it was diſcontinued for the ſpace of two foote: and ſo the Archer (hys Harlot ſhewyng it to hym,) he meaſured the heygth of the Wall wyth a thréede. Theſe things thus known, one day ſlipping down from the Wal, he paſſed

the ditche by that hydden Wall, and lying hidde in the Mariſh till Euening, came in the night neare vnto Cale
                     ••
                  
                  ▪
                where tarrying for the cleare daye, he then wente into the Towne (for elſe he might not:) here he inſtructed them that were gréedie of praye and to ſcale the Caſtell, howe they might enter the ſame▪ they cauſed ladders to be made to the length by the Archer appointed. Thirtie mē conſpyring togither, clothing themſelues in blacke armour without any brightneſſe, they went to the Caſtell by the guiding of the ſayde Iohn de Dancaſter, and clyming the Wall with their ladders, they ſlewe the watchmen, and threwe them down headlong beſide the Wall: after this, in the Hall they ſlew many whom they founde vnarmed, playing at the Cheſſe and Hazarde. Then they brake into the Chambers and Turrets vpon the Ladyes and Knightes that laye there aſléepe, and ſo were made maiſters of all that was within: and ſhutting all their priſoners into a ſtrong Chamber, being bereft of all their armour, they toke out the Engliſh men that had bin taken the yeare before and there kept in priſon, and after they hadde relieued them well with meate and drinke, they made them guardens ouer them that had them in cuſtodie: and ſo they wanne all the Fortreſſes of the Caſtell, vnknowen to them that were in the Towne, (appointed to ouerſée the repayring of the broken Wals) what had happened to them within the Caſtell. In the morning they commaunded the workemen in the Towne to ceaſe from theyr workes, who therevppon perceyuing that the Caſtell was wonne, ſtreyghte wayes fledde, and the newe Castilians▪
                ſuffered the Ladyes to depart on horſſebacke, wyth theyr apparell, writings, and Munimentes, where they oughte to holde theyr fées: and the ſame daye there came from Caleis to theyr ayde ſuche perſons as they ſente for, by whoſe ayde they kepte the Caſtell: and aboute thrée of the clocke there came two Knightes, ſente from the Earle of Gu
                     •
                  ſnes, who demaunding

a truce, willed to know of them that were thus entred the Caſtel, who they were, to whom they belonged, and by whoſe aucthoritie they kept the Caſtell ſo taken in the time of truce, wherevnto they aunſweared, that being intruded, they woulde not declare to any man theyr purpoſe, til they had tryed a longer poſſeſſion: and therefore on Saint Mawrice day, the Abbot (the King being buſie in Parliamente,) the French men being ſente from the ſayde Earle of Guiſnes, declared, how in preiudice of the truce, the ſayd Caſtel was taken, and therefore by right of mutuall fayth it ought to be reſtored vnto them. The king aunſwered, that without hys knowledge that enterprice was made, and therefore hée gaue commaundemente to his ſubiectes, that none of them ſhoulde deteyne the Caſtell of Guiſnes, but deliuer it vnto the lawfull Lordes thereof. The meſſengers being returned1352 home, and reporting what they had done, the Earle of Guiſnes commeth to the Caſtel, demanding of them within, as at other times, in whoſe name they kepte it. Who conſtantly affirming that they kepte it in the name of Iohn Dancaſter, he required to knowe if the ſame Iohn were the King of Englandes liegeman, or woulde obey him: who anſwearing that he knewe not what meſſengers hadde bin in Englande, the Earle offered for the Caſtle, beſides all the treaſure founde in it, many thouſands of Crownes, or poſſeſſions for exchaunge, and a perpetuall peace with the king of France. To this they aunſweared, that before the takyng of that Caſtel they were Engliſh men by nation, but by theyr demerites banniſhed for the peace of the king of Englande, wherefore the place which they thus helde, they would willingly ſell or exchaunge, but to none ſooner than to theyr naturall king of Englande, to whom they ſayde, they woulde ſell their Caſtel, to obtaine their peace: but if he would not buy it, then they woulde ſell it to the King of Fraunce, or to whome ſoeuer would giue moſt for it.
            
               The Earle being thus ſhifted of from them, the king of Englande boughte it in déede, and ſo had that place whyche he greatlye deſired. This Fortreſſe was wont to ſtoppe vppe the paſſage into the higher Countrey, gyuing to ſome greate ſuertye from the Forragers, that were to iſſue forth of Caleis. The Counſell of Fraunce therefore wiſhing to haue that Caſtell agayne, or to builde another of like vtilitie, for the defence of the Countrey thereaboutes, they ſente for Geffrey Charney latelye redéemed out of Engliſhe Captiuitie, with aucthoritie to builde and fortifye as followeth.
            To them that trauayle from Guiſnes to Caleis there was a place on the lefte hande ſtrong, but decayed, hauyng a Churche, in which certaine Nunnes were reſident, and it was called Lalbastie: this place was ſo neare to Guiſnes,
               Lalbaſtie fortified. that the Engliſhe menne ſtandyng without the gate of theyr fortreſſe might ſhoote to it. Thys Monaſterie of Nunnes mighte eaſilye be made defenſible, for it hadde high Wals like a Caſtell, and a highe Towre, and verye large for a ſtéeple, and beyng ſcituate in a mariſhe grounde, it mighte with ſmall labour be compaſſed with a ditche. This place the Engliſhe men hadde ſpared for deuotion ſake, vntil that the forſayde Geffrey, in breache of truce, wyth a mightye power beſieged Guiſnes, and remoued the Nunnes from the Churche, making a Caſtell of the Church, and fenſing the Walles with rampire and ditch: and this was about Pentecoſte, in whiche ſeaſon the Waters not impeaching hym, his people myghte worke in the Mariſhe. They wythin the Caſtel therefore being beſieged, were vnneth able to come abroade wyth theyr boates by the ditches that were ful of Water, and by the Mariſh vnpaſſable and alſo full of Water, neyther they of Caleis coulde victuall them by anye manner of meane, by reaſon of the ſiege, and wardyng that was kepte at Lalbastie. They that were thus beſieged oft times ſailed out and fought with thē of Lalbastie, but ſlue very few, ſometime with arrows, & ſometime wt other weapons:

at length, vpon a day appointed, the Caliſians, with thē of Oye & Markes on the one part, and they within Guiſnes on the other, met, ſet on their enimies, ſlew many, and chaſed many away, and finally ſet fire and brent vp Lalbastie, andLalbaſtie brent and raſed. diſmanteling the walles, made all plaine with the groūd.
            This yeare, the Duke of Lancaster going into Spruce, by the aduiſe and ordinance of the King, his daughter was diſpouſate in England to William Duke of Zeland, eldeſt ſonne to Lewes Duke of Bauire, that intruded vpon the Romane Empire.
            This yeare, about the fiftéenth of Auguſt, Walter Bentley
               VValter Bentley, and Robert Knolles make a voyage into France. Captayne, Robert Knolles, and other, in the marches of Briteine, valiantly encountered their enimies, where in a fight doubtfull for a good while, were ſlayne the principall Marſhall of France, alſo the Lords of Quintin, of Cur
                     ••
                  noke, of Richmont, of Mount Albon, of Legenell, of Launey, of Montbech, of Vile Chastel de la March, and other Knightes, in number 140. and Bachelers, to the number of fiue hundred, whoſe coatearmours were brought away: the number of commōs were not compted. There were takē the Lord of Bruſebeke, ſonne of the Marſhall Bertram, alſo Triſtram de Maleis, alſo the Lord of Maletret, the Uicount of Comaine, Geffrey de Graues, William de la Vall, Charles Darcheſill, Iohn de Bauſe,
                and other Knightes, with Bachelers, aboue 130. This armie of the Frenchmen, vnder the conduct of the ſayde Marſhall, of purpoſe deuiſed by him, was ſo beſette on the backehalfe, with the ſtéepeneſſe of a Mountayne, that flie they could not, to the end that hope of flight being takē from them, their courage to fight might ye more encreaſe. There were many of thoſe Knightes ſurnamed of the Starre, whoKnightes of the Sta
                     ••
                  e. in their profeſſion had conſpired neuer to turne their fearefull backes to their enimies, of which number of Knightes, there were among them ſlayne and taken, numbred xlv. From that dangerous encounter few eſcaped vnhurt, and among other, the foreſayd Walter Bentley Captayne was ſore wounded, who commanded thirtie archers to be condemned,

for that in the greateſt heate of the fight they fledde.
            The Earle of Stafford alſo entered into Gaſcoigne, where encountering with a greate armie of the Frenchmen that were iſſued forth of the fortreſſe of Gagent, he diſcomfited, tooke, and chaſed them: about the Natiuitie of our Lady there was taken that valiant Knight▪ 
               
                  
                     •
                  ruſe Gaude, and ſeauen Knightes of the Starre. Shortly after, dyed Iohn Dediaſeles, and Thomas Wale, Knightes of greate valor.
            
               Iohn Pe
                     •
                  che: Iohn Stotley, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Adam Francis Mercer, the 28. of October.
            
            The ſame yeare, it being heard that Pirats troubled the Seas, there were ſeauen Shippes of warre ordeyned, certayne Pineſſes attending vpon them: ouer the whiche were Admiralles, Thomas Cooke, and Richard Tottleſham Knightes, who ſcoured the Seas about the coaſt of Picardie and Normandie, but before the feaſt of Saint George, they returned as they wiſhed.
            Whileſt theſe things were a doing by Sea and Lande, Otto, ſonne to the Duke of Brunſwike, the French Kings féedOtto of Brunſvvike chalengeth to combate vvith the Duke of Lancaſter before the French King at Paris. man, ſent letters to the Duke of Lancaster, being returned out of Spruce, by the tenour whereof he accuſed him, affirming, that as he returned out of Spruce by Colein, he malitiouſlie informed the Coleners, that the ſayd Otto went about by ſtealth to haue taken him priſoner, and to haue preſented him to the French King, adding héerevnto, that bycauſe he neuer meant any ſuch taking of him, he was ready in declaration of his good name, by a ſingular Combate onely in the French Kings Court, to proue the Duke of Lancaster a lyar touching the ſayd Article. The Letters were not ſealed, and therefore, leaſt it might haue bin thought follie to haue giuen credite to the letter, deliuered by a ſeruant, the Duke ſent vnto Otto two Knightes to learne the cauſe of the chalenge, and to demaund thereof his letters patentes, ſealed with his ſeale of armes, which Knightes accompliſhing

the effect of their iourney, and returning with ſpéede, the Duke ſent to the French King for a ſafe conduct for himſelfe and his men, and with much ado obteyning it, he went to Paris, where in the liſtes, in preſence of the French King, the King of Nauarre, and the Duke of Burgoigne, and many Péeres, and other of the Realme of France, he mounted on his ſtéede in ſéemely wiſe, readie in all ſignes, without default, to trie the Combate, and ſo ſtayde till his aduerſarie was readie, and the voyce of the Herault and Canton to be had by their common othe, for the aſſurance of his word, and to obey the Law. On the contrary parte, the ſayde Otto ſcarcely was ſet on his Horſe, & was not able decently to ſet on his helmet, nor to wéelde his Speare (or elſe he fayned) whoſe vnableneſſe béeing perceyued by the French King, the King of Nauarre, and other, the Kyng tooke the quarrell into hys handes, wherevpon Otto was commaunded firſt to departe the liſtes, and ſo wente hys way, but the Duke abode ſtill within them. After this, by commandement of the Frenche King, Otto ſware that he ſhould neuer after that day appeach the Duke of Lancaster of that Article: and ſo from thence the Duke returned home by Zeland.
            
            After the Epiphanie, a Parliament was holden at Westminſter,
               
                  Anno reg. 27 Parliament at VVeſtminſter. wherin, an ordināce was made at the inſtance of the Londoners, that no knowne where ſhould weare frō thenceforth any hoode, excepte reyed or ſtriped of diuers coulours,Apparell appoynted to harlots. nor Furre, but garmentes reuerſed or turned the wrong ſyde outwarde, vppon payne to forfeyte the ſame.
            This yeare, the dearth of Corne by them of Ireland, and the Iriſhmen that brought in Corne to ſell vnto diuers Hauens of the Realme, was a
                  •
               waged, to the great reléefe of the people.
            King Edward altered the Chappell, which his progenitors before had founded of Saint Stephen at Westminster, into a Colledge of twelue ſecular Canons, twelue Uicars, &

other Miniſters accordingly, and endewed it with reuenewes,Saint Stephens Chappell at VVeſtminſter. Ex Carta. 1353 to the ſumme of fiue hundred pound by yeare.
            The morrow after Saint Matthies day began a Parliament, wherein it was ordeined that the Staple of wooll before kept in Flanders at Bridges, ſhould from thencefoorth be holden in diuers partes of England, Wales, and Ireland, as atStaples of VVoll to be kept in England. 
               Newcastell, Yorke, Lincolne, Canterbury, Norwich, Westminster, Chichester, Winchester, Excester, Bristow, and Carmarden.
            
            The Earle of Northampton went into Scotland wyth a great company of armed men, and Archers, where he rode through the marches, and enforced ye Caſtell of Loghmaban, and other fortreſſes to yéeld, and tooke the Scottes that were layde in ambuſhes. He alſo held a treatie of peace with the Scottes, who gladly would haue redéemed their King, and made a perpetuall peace with the Engliſhmen▪
                but yet ſo as the King of Scottes ſhould not hold his land of the King of England.
            
            
               William Weld: Iohn Little, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Adam Francis Mercer, the 28. of October.
            
            
               Innocent the 6. for the deſire of peace, ſent the Cardinal of Bononi to Caleis, to heare the treatie of the finall peace betwixtTreatie of peace. the Kingdomes of England and France, to whome repaired the Counſellours of both Realmes, with full authoritie to treate and conſtitute the conditions of the ſame peace, and at length they agréed vpon this poynt, that the King of Englande ſhould reſigne all his right that he had to the Realme of France, and remitte it to the French King, and ſhould haue therefore the Dutchie of Aquitayne, and the Counties of Artoys and of Guiſnes, for him and his ſucceſſors Kings of England, without that he ſhould holde theCounties. ſame of the French King in any manner of wiſe. To theſe conditions the King of England gaue his conſente, and for the aſſurance of the couenants, Embaſſadoures are ſente to the Sea of Rome from eyther Realme. On the King of Englands
               Anno reg. 28. behalfe went the Biſhop of Norwich, the Duke of Lancaster, the Earle of Arundell, and other knightes, who going

to Auinion, there came to them the Archbiſhop of Rohan, the Duke of Burgoigne, Geffrey Charney,
                and other of the French Kings Counſell: all theſe were receyued in great honor: many Cardinalles and Biſhops met the Duke of Lancaſter, who brought him for the ſpace of two miles vnto Auinion, and to the Popes Pallace: at length in the Conſiſtorie of the Pope, he with the Cardinalles and Embaſſadoures being preſent, the cauſes of their meſſage was declared, and the Embaſſadoures of England requeſted to haue the couenants cōfirmed, which had bin concluded at Caleis: to whom the Frenchmē
                anſwered, that gladly they would haue peace, but touching Aquitaine, and the foreſaid Countreys, as they ſayde, the French King could not, nor they might giue their aſſents that the ſame ſhoulde be alienated from the entire body of the Kingdome, to the which, as well the King as they had taken an oth to maynteyne, but yet they could be contented that the profitable dominion of the ſayd Duchy and Countreys ſhould be deliuered, and come to the King of England, as his aunceſters had Aquitayne, but ſo yet as the regalitie of the Crowne of France ſhould euer be reſerued. The Engliſhmen requeſted that theſe ſayd dominions ſhould1354 be abſolutely, and without any condition reſtored to the King: anſwere alſo was made to the reaſon of the Frenchmen, touching the oth of their King and themſelues, whereby they were bound to conſerue the integritie of the honour of their Kingdome, to wéete, that the Pope for the benefite of peace might aſſoyle them from the ſaide othe, and this as to certayne articles premitted, it ſhoulde be very well done: but yet nothing was done that might be offorce to the furthering of the peace. And ſo the Embaſſadoures without effect returned home, the Biſhop of Norwich excepted, that deceaſſed, and was buried there, to whome ſuccéeded Thomas Percy.
            
            The King of Nauarre through a brawle rayſed, ſlewe Charles de Spayne, Marſhall of France, wherevpon to auoyd the diſpleaſure and puniſhment of the French King, he fled

into his owne Countrey, ſending his Unckle vnto the Duke of Lancaster with Letters, humbly beſieching him that he woulde come into Normandie to his ayde and defence, and to receyue an oth of fidelitie and amitie of hym againſt all men. The Duke therefore getting licence of the King, aſſembled togither a great Nauie at Southampton, where when the Duke was readie to haue made Sayle, Knightes that he had ſente into Normandie, came backe to view the truth of this buſineſſe, by whome it was notifyed to the Duke, that the ſayde King of Nauarre hys Couſin, was reconciled to the King, and ſo the Dukes voyage was ſtayde.
            The Friers Augustines Church in London was reedified by Humfrey Bohun Earle of Hereford and Estſex, whoſeFrier Auguſtines Church in London. Ro de Auesberie. Diſſention at Oxford. 
                     
                        •
                     iſto. Auria.
                body was buryed in the Quire of the ſame Church.
            A great diſſention fell in Oxford, betwéene a Scholler and a Uintner, for a quart of Wine, ſo that the Scholler poured the Wine on the Uintners head, & brake his head with the potte, by reaſon whereof, a great conflict was made betwixt the Schollers of the Uniuerſitie, and the Lay men of the Towne, in the which, many Lay men were woūded, and about twentie ſlaine. Theſe troubles continued the ſpace of two dayes, and then the Religious men of the Towne labouring to make peace, the Lay men purſued a Scholler, and wounded him to death, yet that day the tumult was appeaſed, but on the morrow, the people of the Uillages about Oxford, being cōfederate with the Lay men of the Towne, came with great force, and erected a blacke Banner, whervpon, the Schollers fled to their Colledges, but the Lay mē breaking vp the dores, ſlew many of them, and threw them into their priuies: they cut and rent their Bookes, and bare away what they liſted. By this meanes the Uniuerſitie was diſſolued, the Schollers (ſauing of Marton Colledge) went to their friends, & ſo continued more than a yeare. Many, both Schollers and Lay men were enditedCitizens of Oxford endited. by y• Kings Juſtices, amōgſt y• which, four burgeſſes y•
               
had bin Maiors of Oxford, were ſente to the Tower of London.
            
            
               William Totingham: Richard Smelt, the 28. of Septem.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Thomas Leggy Skinner, the 28. of October.
            
            About the xx. of Nouember, K. Edward held a ParliamētRo. Auesbery. at Westminster, in the which was granted towards the recouerie of his title in France, fiftie Shillings of euery ſacke of wooll to be tranſported ouer the Seas for the ſpace of ſixe yeares then next following, by meanes whereof, the King might dayly diſpend during the ſaid ſixe yeares, more than 1000. markes ſterling, for by the cōmon opinion, ther were more thā an 100000. ſackes of wooll yearely into foraigne lands tranſported, ſo that during thoſe ſixe yeares, the ſayd grant extended to fiftéene hūdred thouſand pounds ſterling.
            King Edward helde a great Juſting at Wodstoke, for honour
                  Anno reg. 29 Iuſting at VVodſtock. of the Quéene, who was then purifyed of hir ſonne Thomas.
            After Gaſter, in a Parliament at Westminster, the King1355 tooke the quarell of Oxford into his hands, and ſauing euery mans right, he forgaue the Schollers all the whole treſpaſſe,Ro. de Auesburie. ſo that in the Sommer following, the Uniuerſitie beganneVniuerſitie of Oxford reſtored. agayne to flouriſh, and the King gaue to the Chancellour of Oxford the only view of the aſſiſe of Bread, Ale, and Wine, and all other victualles, excluding the Maior vtterly from that office. The communaltie of the Towne gaue to the Uniuerſitie 250. poundes for amends, ſauing vnto them neuertheleſſe the actions which they had vnto euery ſingular perſon of the Towne.
            In this Parliament, the proceſſe of the iudgement made againſt Roger Mortimer Earle of March, was reuoked, ſoEx Recordis. that the yong Roger Mortimer, ſonne to Edmond Mortimer, was reſtored to the title and poſſeſſions of the Earledome of March, as Couſin and heire to his Grandfather.
            King Edward being about Sandwich, on his iourney towardesKing Edvvard
                     •
                   ſayled into France. 
               France, and the Prince of Wales at Sutton in Deuonſhire, on hys voyage towardes Aquitayne, looking for a proſperous winde, by the ſpace of fortie dayes or more, all

things elſe being readie, the French King had his armie
                  •
                deuided in ſundrie places about in the Hauens of Normandie, and other partes, to empeach the landing of the King and Prince, and ſo long they lay there, that the Frenchmen with their hired Souldioures did fowly waſt their owne Countrey, and conſumed ſo many thouſands of Crownes out of the French Kings coffers vaynely, that in the ende he being néedie, payde not his people, and ſo he was forſaken of them, that when King Edward waſted France, the French King had not men to encounter him, but fledde before him, as he followed, brenning his owne Townes, and deſtroying victuals, that the King ſhould find neyther harborough nor meate.
            After the moneth of Auguſt, the King of England, and the Duke of Lancaster, with ſeauen thouſand armed men, and their retinue, entered France, and by the ſpace of nine dayes iourney, as they went, waſting all by fire that came in their way, and returning to Caleis, the King heard that the Scots entred by ſtealth, and had taken the Towne of Berwike, theBervvike taken by the Scottes. Baron of Graystoke being in the armie with the King, to whome the charge of that Towne had bin committed, wherevpon the King haſted vnto Berwike, and within fiftéene dayes recouered the Towne againe, being deliueredBervvike taken by the Englishmen. vnto him, life and libertie to depart, being giuen vnto them that were found therein.
            After this, he paſſed through Scotlande vnto the Scottiſh Sea, but bycauſe victuals fayled for his armie, the King giuing them licence, they all returned towarde Englande. There followed on the tayle of the armie, by the ſpace of twelue miles, Robert Herle, Almerike de ſaint Edmond, Robert de Hildeſley, and other, whome the Scottes in the night ſeaſon found aſléepe and at reſt, doubting nothing of any miſaduenture, wherefore they gaue a cruell aſſault vppon them, with an hideous noyſe and cry, where after long reſiſtance, Robert de Hildeſley, and Iohn Branceſter Knightes were taken priſoners, Robert Herle and Almerike hauing

much ado to eſcape, for the ſaid Knightes perceyuing the Scottes to be too ſtrong for them, thought with themſelues, that their Lords being Barons, of whome they held in fée, would redéeme them, and ſo wylie withdrawing, deliuered them from the Scottes captiuitie.
            The Duke of Lancaster being appoynted chiefe Admirall of the Engliſh Nauie, landed it at Hogges about the feaſt of Saint Barthelmew, and from thence, rode towards Normandie, being accompanied with Philip, brother to the King of Nauarre, who deſired aide of the ſayd Duke, and requeſted him to come to help him. At this ſeaſon, the French King hauing the King of Nauarre, Geffrey Harecourt,
                and diuers other noble men in greate ſuſpection, touching the Realme and Kingdome, bidde them all to a feaſt, where he tooke the ſaide King of Nauarre, and caſt him in priſon, and murthered the reſt of the noble men, ſauing Geffrey Harecourt, whome he cauſed to be beheaded with an axe.
            The King of Nauarre being thus empriſoned, his brother Phillip ſeaſed many Caſtels and holdes into his hāds which were in Normandy and there about, ſtrongly fortifying them with men and victualles, through the help of the Duke of Lancaster, being manned as well with Engliſhmen, as with the men of the ſame Countrey, to withſtande the Frenchmen.
            
            
               Walter Foreſter: Thomas Brandon, the 28. of Septem.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Simon Frances Mercer, the 28. of October.
            
            The ſame time, when the King paſſed ouer to Caleis and France, his eldeſt ſonne Prince of Wales, hauing with him the Earles of Warwike, Suffolke, Saliſburie, and Oxforde, tooke ſhipping in the beginning of October, at Sutton Hauen in Deuonſhire, and luckely ſayled, and landed at Burdeaux, where he was honourably receyued by the Biſhop and Cleargie, being accompanyed with all the common people in the firſt Sonday of that moneth. The Monday following, the Prince going out, lodged two miles from Burdeaux, in the Caſtell of Vrnoun. On the nexte daye, he paſſed

through a ſtreight woodde, and ſo through the middle of the Towne of Lougan, ſometimes walled, but nowe defaced: and ſo paſſing on a long iourney, he loſt many Horſſes, and came at length to the ſtrong Caſtel of Dandert. On Thurſeday he came to the Citie of Beſas, hauing in it a Cathedrall Church, and a couent of Friers Minors. On Friday Proclamation was made in the armie, that euery man ſhould beare the armes of Saint George, and it was ſaid that his enimies bare the ſame alſo. On Saterday he paſſed to the Caſtell of Nan, where ſtand thrée Caſtels of thrée Lordes, whereof one ſheweth a farre off. On Friday the twelfth of that moneth, his armie paſſed the lands of Wordiux, whiche are belonging to the Earle of Flux, this dayes iourney being long and tedious, he loſt many of his Horſſes in the waſt grounde called the Laundes. Two miles from the Towne of Areule, he diſplayde his Banners, and deuided his armies into diuers troupes. In the vaward, wherein was thrée thouſand men of armes, were the Earle of Warwike high Conneſtable, Reignold Cobham, Lord Marſhall, Lord Beawchamp, a Somerſetſhire man, the Lord Clifford, and the Lord Thomas of Hampton, belonging to the Auntients, and with them ſeauen Barons of Gaſcoigne. In the middleward, wherin were ſeauen thouſand men of armes, beſides Clearkes and Pages, there was the Prince himſelfe with a double Auntient, the Earle of Oxford, the Lord Barthelmew Burwaſh, the Lorde Iohn de Lile, the Lorde Wilowby, the Lord Le Ware, ye Lord Maurice Barkeley, ſon to Thomas Lord Barkeley then liuing, very old, the Lorde Iohn Bourſers, Lord Iohn Roſe the elder of Burdeaux, Captayne de la Buſch, the Lord Camount, the Lord Mountferraunt, with their Auntients. In the rerewarde was foure thouſand mē of armes, cōmitted to the charge of the Earle of Suffolke, the Earle of Saliſburie, and the Lord Nemers, who led the Bernences. In the whole armie was of mē of armes, Clearkes, Pages, Archers, Brigants, & other, aboue 60000. men, and this day was Ienken Barefort, and diuers other

made Knightes, and the village of Aurule, with thrée other villages (wherof Wil. Lord Raymond was Captaine) were deliuered vp vnto ye Prince, wherin he lodged his armie, & reſting there two dayes, as many as would wer ſuffered to go out, & tooke victuals, and brenned their enimies coūtrey. On Tueſday, they lodged in ye towne of Mount Clere, where ye Caſtel belonging therevnto was giuē vp to the Prince, & after he left it againe to the Frenchmen, by the reaſon of fire which brake vp in the towne, wherevpon, the Prince went out into the field, & lodged in his tentes, euer after refuſing to lie in any towne. This day hauing taken thrée Townes, & brenning them, he made Knightes Gilotus de Straton, and diuers other. Alſo Iohn de Lile ſtricken with a Quarell at Austage, died. On Wedneſday & Thurſeday he lay ſtil, & on Friday he came before the ſtrōg town of Loegeron, where he lodged in his tentes. On Saterday he came before Placence, a very faire towne, & a ſtrong, the inhabitants whereof fled away into ye Caſtell, where the Earle of Moleſni, and many Knightes were takē by Captaine de la Bouch, and the Lord Mountferrant, & de Loachis, who was y• day made Knight. On Sonday S. Lukes day, they ſtaid at Ewant, & taking the fort of Galian by force, they ſet it on fire, & brent it. On Monday caſting fire in the townes of Placence, they paſſed along, leauing the towne of Beal Marchi on the right hand, & lodged before the Towne of the Archbiſhop of Anfer, called Le Baſe. On this day, Richard Stafford, brother vnto the Earle of Stafford, led his men with his Antient towards ye towne, & on the next day being Tueſday, ye town was yéelded vnto him, & bicauſe it belōged to ye Church, the Prince would not ſuffer any mā to enter into it, excepting certain perſons appointed of purpoſe, for the deliuering of victuals. On Wedneſday they leauing ye faire town of Eſcamount, on ye left hād, they came before the noble towne of Merand, belonging to ye Earle of Commege, which was ful of armed ſouldiours, & the Prince lodged in the great Monaſtery of Bartons, in ye which Abbey, there was not ſo much as one liuing creature foūd.

On Thurſeday they lay ſtill, doing no harme to the ſayde Abbey. On Friday they went out of the faire and rich Coū
               trey of Arminake, & entred the Coūtrey of Austerike, through the which, the paſſage was very hard & hilly, and lodging at Saxaunt a towne, they ſet it on fire, contrarie to the cōmandement of ye Prince. Al that day, and thrée dayes following, they paſſed alongſt by the high hilles of Aragon. On Saterday, they came to the towne of S. More, where ye rereward of the army lodged in a great Monaſterie of blacke Monkes, which were all fled away: the middleward at Vilfrankes, and the vaward at Tremaine: theſe villages being very rich, and full of victualles, had no man in thē, for all the inhabitants were fledde. Sonday, the xxiiij. of October, they paſſed a certaine foord, and entred into the lands of ye Earle of Comenge, which reached vnto Tolouſe, but theſe Coūtreys wer waſted with fire & ſword, and leauing on the left hand the Towne called Sannetere in Austrike, they paſſed by the ſtrong Citie of Winbers, where Pope Iohn the 22. remouing the blacke Monkes, erected a Biſhops ſea, and they were lodged in a great & rich towne called Sotanco, belōging to ye Earledome of Comenge, where was a couēt of friers Minors: & burning this towne, on Monday they paſſed through a goodly wide countrey, very plaine, & ſo came to the townes of S. Foy, and S. Litz. On Tueſday they reſted, and on Wedneſday being the feaſt of Simon & Iude, the armie paſſed through ye Riuer of Geroūd, being a water very fierce, ſtony, & terrible: & again the ſame day, through ye Riuer of Arage, much more dangerous, & came vnto Tolouſe: before that time, neuer durſt any horſemā paſſe ouer theſe waters, wherefore ye people of this coūtrey being wonderfully made aferd, could not tell what to do, for being ſodeinly takē, they could not flée: that night, the Prince lodged at Falgard, a little towne, one mile from Tolouſe. On Tueſday, they came vnto the faire & great town called Mount Gistard, being parte of the inheritance of the Lord Almerike de la Foſſad, the which Towne the Frenche King had taken frō him, bycauſe he was ye King of Englands
               
féed man. Faſt by the ſayde Towne were twelue Windmilles, the which they ſet on fire all at once. There were taken two eſpies, that certified the Prince that the Earle of Arminake was at Tolouſe, and the Conneſtable of France at Mount Maban, four leagues from Tolouſe. On Friday, they paſſed on towards Auinion, by the good towne of Baſige, and the towne called Franke, and the whole armie lodged at the great Towne called Auion
                     •
                  t, and the middleward and rereward lay in one ſide of the ſuburbes, and the vaward lay on the other ſide of the Towne, which the Towneſmen perceiuing, fled euery one. There was about this Towne twenty Windmilles, which they ſet on fire. On Saterday the laſt of October, they lodged in the great Towne called Clastalnannar, where a Church of Chanons, a couēt of Friers Minors, and another of Carmelites, with an Hoſpitall, and a Uillage called Les mauns de Pucels, with a couent of Friers Auguſtines, were al cōſumed with fire. On Sonday, the feaſt of All Saincts, the armie reſted, out of the which army, certaine going to take booties, they tooke a little towne, the inhabitants whereof to be ſpared from ſpoyling, gaue them x. M. Florens of golde. On monday, they marched along by the Townes of S. Mathele Port, and the great Towne called Vilkapinch, and frō thence, they entred the Countrey of Carkaſon, and the Prince lodged at a little Uillage called Alſe. On Tueſday they came to Carkaſon, a faire towne, rich and well built, bigger than London. Within the walles, betwixt the towne of Senburge, and the Citie being double walled, there ranne a goodly water, which paſſed vnder a faire ſtone Bridge, at the foote whereof, were foure couents of Religions, of ye which, the Friers ran not away, but the other fled into the Citie. The whole armie was lodged in the towne, which abounded with Muſkadell, and all other delicate victuals: this day, the ſonnes of the Lord Libret, and Mayſter Baſſet, with Rowland Daues, and many other, were made Knightes. On Wedneſday & Thurſeday, the armie lying ſtill in the Towne, and hauing made a truce, they parlied

with them of the Citie concerning a peace, the CitizensCarkaſon in France burned. offering for ſauing the Towne from burning 250000. of golden Souſes: the Prince anſwered, he came not for gold, but to take Cities and Townes, togither with their inhabitantes, and the nexte day commanded the Towne to bée brent. On Friday, the Towne being brent, the army departed, leauing on the left hand the Caſtell of Botenake vntouched, paſſing through the champion Countrey, burning Townes called La Rustican, and all the Countrey thereabout. On Saterday they trauayled through a great wind and duſt, leauing on the lefte hande a great poole of freſhe water, béeing in compaſſe aboute thirtie leagues, and is called Caſibon. They came to a Towne called Silony, whiche was yéelded to the Prince, and therefore neuer touched: and the Prince was lodged that night at a good Towne called Canet. On Sonday the eyght of Nouember, they paſſed the water of Sandey, partly at the Foord called Chastel de Terre, and partly ouer a Bridge, and ſo trauayled betwixt high hilles, vnto the great Citie of Narbon, whereof that Countrey taking his name, is called Gallia Narbonenſis. This Citie was very ſtrong, and well walled, hauing in it a great Cathedrall Church: alſo, a notable Caſtell, belonging to the Biſhop, and a very ſtrong Tower for the Earle of the ſame Towne. It had alſo a Suburbe called a Borough, much bigger, and better built, than the Borough of Carkaſon. In the Borough, were foure Couents of Religious perſons. Betwixt the Borough and the Citie, there runneth a water called Ande, comming from Carkaſon, and runneth into the Greekiſh Sea. Betwixt the Citie and the Borough are two Bridges of ſtone, and the third of timber, built with ſtorehouſes for diuers Merchandiſes. The Prince was lodged in the houſe of Carmelite Friers. On Tueſday the Borough béeing ſet on fire, the army paſſing to the water ſide, wente ouer it in diuers places. From thence, they went and lodged at the Towne and Caſtell of Ambion. On Wedneſday they trauelled an euill iourney,

and hurtfull to the Horſſe for lacke of water. On Thurſeday, Theodorike Dale, Porter of the Princes Chamber, was made Knight: thence the Army paſſed by a good towne called Vlmes: the middleward paſſed vnto the good Towne of the Earle of Lile, called Arnile, where they lodged that night. The Prince lay at the Friers Minors, where was greate abundance of Muſkadell, béeing prouided for the Counteſſe of the Ile, which was all ſpoyled. This daye alſo, the good Towne of Pipions was deſtroyed, with the Caſtell thereof called Redote. On Friday, the army paſſing by a long ſtonie way, lodged at Lamian. On Saterday, returning backe towarde Gaſcoigne, they lefte on their right hand the great poole of Eſbone, and Carkaſon, and all the iourney that they wente before, and the rereward lodged at a good Towne called Abier, and the middleward at Puch
                     •
                  iancies, where a Caſtell béeing defended, withſtoode them a ſeaſon, but at length was wonne, and the Prince lay beyonde the Bridge, by a faire running water, on both ſydes whereof, the Countrey was ſpoyled with fire, togither with the good Towne of Peſaunce, where the vawarde was lodged y• night. On Sonday they trauelled a▪ long iourney, bycauſe the Prince ſhould be lodged in the great Abbey of our Lady de Prolion, where in ſeuerall Cloyſters, did liue 100▪ Predicants, wherevnto, the Prince was deuoutely receiued. In y• day, the army ſet on fire ye towne of Lemeins, where there was far greater Couents of Religions, than at Carkaſon. Alſo, they brent the faire Towne called Falanges, vnto which towne belonged xxj. Windmilles. They brent alſo the townes of Vnlard, & Serre, with all ye whole Coūtrey lying theraboutes. On Monday the middleward lodged at the good towne called Dealpuhbon, which long time was defended, but at length gotten by force, the Caſtell whereof yéelded, vnto the which Towne and Caſtell, the Prince cō
               manded that no harme ſhould be done by fire. On Tueſday earely paſſing ouer ye riuer of Beſeile, they entred into a coū
               trey which was broade. About one aclocke, they came before

a great Abbey called Bourgbon, where the Earle of Fluxens with great ioy receyued the Prince, he being newly eſcaped out of priſon from Paris, where he had laine by the ſpace of two yeares: and the ſaid Earle remained from that time faithful to the Prince. This day they rode in the Lordſhips and ſeigniories of the ſame Earle, by the Townes of Maſell and Colmon, and on the right hand they paſſed by the greate Towne of Saint Canole, and the high Caſtel called Hautripe: but on this day they brent nothing for reuerence of the foreſaid Earle and his Uineyards, but paſſed agayne ouer the water of Arage, leauing alſo Tolous as they did at the firſt: but then one mile on the left hand, and now four leagues on the right, and the middle ward was lodged in the great Towne of Mermount, which togither with the Caſtell was brent. On Wedneſday, they paſſed by the Caſtell of the Earle of Flux▪
                called Mounthane, at the foote whereof, all the horſemen paſſed ouer the great water of Geround, and there tooke the Towne and Caſtell of North, then leauing the Riuer of Gerond on the left hand, and ſo paſſed vnto the towne of Marconaw, which they tooke: then they returned ouer the Riuer againe, and tooke the ſtrong Towne of Carbone. On Thurſeday ye armie reſted. On Friday word was brought to the Prince that the French were vp, and had gathered a great force, which they had deuided into fiue great battels, being in the field not far from them, wherevpō our men ſet themſelues in battayle aray, about one mile from the place where they lodged, and béeing now readie to fight, ſome one of the Souldioures by chance ſtart a Hare, wherevpon a great ſhout was made, which the enimies hearing, they ſente out fortie light Horſemen, to ſée what was the cauſe thereof, who drawing nigh to the Engliſh armie, and perceiuing them to be ſet in battayle aray, returned backe againe, and declared what they had ſéene: wherevpon preſently the whole armie of Frenchmen fled with great feare. The ſame day, Barthelmew Burwaſh, Iohn Chandos, and Iames de Audley, with xxiiij. light horſemē, were appointed

ſcoutes, & comming to y• tayle of y• 
               Frenchmen, they toke priſoners xxxij. Knightes & gentlemen, amongſt whome, they toke the Erle of Romeme, alſo they ſlewe many Carters and Wagoners. The Prince lodged in ye towne of Muwoſe. On Saterday they marched to the Caſtell of Oradrie, in which Caſtell the Prince lodged, and in the morning they brent it. On Sonday the two and twentith of Nouember, about euening, they perceyued that theyr enimies were on the other ſide of ye gret Hil harde by the great towne of Gemount, ſo that the Engliſh men being be-nighted, ſent out. lx. lyghte horſſemen, and certaine bowmen vnto the righte hande of the towne called Auremount, where finding. 400. menne of armes of the Coneſtable of Fraunce, they chaſed them out of the Towne, and ſlewe and toke many: the middle Warde lodged at Auremount, and the Uawarde at Colimont. Earelye in the morning the Wagoners being commaunded to remayne in the Towne of Auremount, all the reſidue being deuided into troupes, went into the fielde, wayting for the comming of theyr enimies, all in vaine: for the Prynce taking the Towne of Gamount, was tolde that his enimies fled away at midnight. On Tweſday the armye lodged in the fielde, and for lacke of Water, their horſſe were faine to drinke Wyne, whereof it came to paſſe, that the nexte daye their horſſes were ſo drunke they coulde not goe right forth, and many of them dyed. On Saint Katherines daye, wyth muche a doe they came to Water, and leauing the Towne of Florence on theyr righte hande, they paſſed to the greate towne called Silard, and the middle warde was lodged at a Towne called Realmount, which they toke by maine force, and therefore brent it. On Thurſday they reſted. On Fryday they trauayled a long iourney, by Walled townes and ſtrong Caſtels, the middle warde lodged at Serde. On Saterday they paſſed ouer a certaine Water with great difficultie, and through woods, till they came to a good Towne called Meſin. On Sondaye the Prince reſted, and toke homage and othes of the Towneſmen. Monday Sainte Andrewes
               
daye trauelling a long iourney, they came to the Towne of Tolows, where were thrée Caſtels. On Tweſday the prince trauelled to the Caſtel of Melan, wher he lodged. On Wedneſday the Prince came to Regla, wher his horſſes and Wagons paſſed throughe the riuer of Gerond. In thysAnno reg. 30 towne of Regla, the Prince appointed diuerſe Barons and ſuche like to Winter in diuerſe places of the Marches, to the intente they ſhoulde kéepe the inland parts of Gaſcoigne againſt the French men.
            The Prince of Wales touching theſe matters aforeſayd, and for other conſiderations alſo, cauſed a newe coyne of golde to be made in Gaſcoigne, being buſied himſelfe aboute the repayring of ſuch things as were decayed and throwen downe. And in this ſeaſon, there ſprang vp a fooliſh fantaſie in the French mens heades, that the King of Englande was come into Normandie, the cauſe of which rumour roſe vppe, for that the Duke of Lancaster, after that he had fortifyed the ſtrong places belonging to the King of Nauar, whiche were in the Ile of Constance and other places, did direct his iourney towardes Brytaine, whereof he was newly made chiefe Captaine. Another cauſe was this, Phillippe brother to1356 the King of Nauar, came into England, and earneſtly craued ayde of the King, againſt the Frenche King, who kept hys brother in priſon, that he mighte by force of armes reſtoare all ſuch lands vnto him as were wrongfully withholden from him, wherevpon hée offeryng to doe homage and fealtie, he hadde (of the Kings appoyntmente,) Miles Stapleton, a manne of great integritie, and in martiall affayres very ſkilful, him (I ſay) the king appointed to be his faithful felow. Theſe men with two thouſande men well appoynted trauelling throughe Normandie, toke townes and Fortreſſes, burning diuerſe of them, paſſing along tyll they came to a Caſtell nine leagues diſtaunte from the Citie of Paris: neyther did they a
                  •
               lake theyr trauayle, vntil they hadde forced theyr enymies to enter into a yearelye

truce. By this meanes a great report and no leſſe fear filled the heartes of all French men, whiche report at length came to the eares of the Prince lying at Regla, wherefore he gathering all the power he had with him in hys Dukedome, to the intent to méete hys Father, whiche he muſte doe by trauelling through Fraunce, he came at length to Brugetat, where he was certifyed that the Earle of Armenia, woulde after his departure haue ſpoyled the Countrey, and for that intent had prouided a greate bande of men: wherefore hée ſent backe to the gouernour of Gaſcoigne, vnto Barnarde de Libret, and other. From thence the prince went into France, through the coaſtes of Barny and Lymon, ſtil encouraging his men againſt their enimies, ſending before him Iohn Chandos, Iames Dawdeley, and other complices, to trye out the ſtate of their enimies countrey, leaſt perhappes ſome crafty ambuſhment might ſodainely aſſaulte our men, afore they were ware. He himſelf remouing his campe euery day, and now being entred into Pictauia, his eſpies broughte worde that the French king had gathered a greate armye, beyng now in Aurelian, who alſo knewe of the Princes comming, for he ſente out eſpies to diſcouer our armye, amongſt whō 
               Griffin Micco of Chambly, petie Captaine of two hundered men, méeting with other eſpies, came to his coaſte: for oure eſpies toke thirtie of thē, and ſlew the reſidue, ſo that there was not one of them lefte to carrye worde what was become of theyr fellowes. Our eſpies procéeded towardes Romerentine, where méeting with the Lord Crone, and Lord Briſgande, they ſette vppon them and ſlew them, their chief Captaines being forced to flée to a caſtle, and hauing taken their lodging in a town, the prince commanded that on the morning a great aſſault ſhould be giuen to thē of ye Caſtell. The day folowing our men being al armed, paſſed through the ditches, & came vnto ye wals of the Caſtel, ſome applied to ſcale ye wall with ladders, ſome burne the gates, and entring, ſlew a gret many of the chief men, but ye Lords before named fled vnto the principal tower of ye caſtel: but ye prince

determined not to depart, til they that were beſieged, were eyther taken or yéelded: at length the Caſtell being vndermyned, the men beſieged, with all humilitie yéelded vp the Caſtell. After this the ſpies declared that the Frenche King was come downe to Turon, to prouide armies to go againſt the Prince, of the which tydings the Prince being gladde, he pighte his tentes againſte the Frenche King, but could not paſſe the riuer of Leger, by reaſon of greate floudes, and the Frenche King hadde broken all the bridges, to the intent there ſhoulde be no paſſage betwixte the Prince and the Duke of Lancaster, whoſe armyes might wel euerye nyght perceyue eache others fiers in the Campes: but the Prince folowing alongſt the riuer of Legers Eaſtwarde, he pyghte hys tentes neare vnto Turon, where loking for the Frenche Kyng foure dayes, hoping to fighte with him, for that hée was diſtaunte but one league off, he vnderſtoode that the Frenche King was retyred backe to Blamia, ten leagues off: paſſing ouer by a Bridge the Riuer of Legers at a place vſed betwixt two ſtrong Townes, and ſo towarde Poyters. This retyring of the Frenche king certifyed, the Prince returned backe, intending to haue mette him in his waye, whych he coulde not doe: yet croſſing ouer all, as he imagined the nerer way, he ſette vpon the tayle of his enymies, and cut frō them the Earles of Inyni and Winters, and alſo the Marſhall of Burgonie, theſe being takē, died, as was thought, through the great toyle they had taken: night drawing on, our men gaue themſelues to reſte in a wood, intending the next day to take theyr iourney towarde Poiters, and by the waye they were certifyed that the Frenche King, with greate prouiſion prepared himſelfe to battayle, and drew nigh to our tents:The Batayle of Poyters. the Prince therefore committed the vawarde of the armye to the Earles of Warwick and Oxford, the middle ward was guided by the Prince, and the rerewarde was led by the Earles of Saliſburie and Suffolke. In all the whole armye of the Prince there was not aboue foure thouſande menne of armes, one thouſande armed ſouldiours, and two thouſand

Archers. The pompous nobilitie of the French men drewe nygh, greatly diſdayning the ſmall company of the Engliſhe men, for they had in number eight thouſande fighting ſouldiours, they had alſo ſeuen auntients. At this matter a gret many of our men murmured, bycauſe of late, a great part of our army was ſent to defende Gaſcoigne. There was among the French men a certaine Scotte called William Douglas, a man of great force and practiſe in the Warres: this manne did the French king make Knight, and bycauſe he knewe he woulde be a deadly enimie to the Engliſh men, he gladlye hearkned to his aduices. This William was Captain ouer two hundred Scottes: theſe men vnderſtoode wel that it was the cuſtome of the Engliſhe men in thoſe dayes to fighte on foote, in which point they followed the Scottes, and the Scots alſo prouoked the French king and other French men to fight in like maner. The French king obeying his fooliſh counſel, gladly agréed vnto his ſayings, wherevpon he ſente lighte horſſemen into the Cittie, that they ſhoulde ſuffer no man to make any chaſe, but only. 500. horſſemen well appointed to come out againſte the Archers, in the beginning of the conflict, and to runne them ouer and to treade them vnder theyr horſſe féete: but theſe performed not that whiche was commaunded them, as it appeared by the ſequele thereof. The armies being ſet in a readineſſe on both ſides for to fighte early on Sonday in the morning, which was notable fayre, beholde there came the Cardinall of Petragoren, and charged the prince, in the name of God who was crucified, that it mighte pleaſe him to deferre the warre for a tyme, both for eccleſiaſticall peace, and alſo for the ſparing of Chriſtian bloud, and to the ende there might be a treatie had of peace, the whiche he promiſed ſhoulde be performed wyth great honour on both ſides. The Prince neyther feared nor refuſed peace, but modeſtly agréed to the requeſt of this Father. All this day nowe being appointed for the obtaynyng of peace, the army of the French men encreaſed by the number of a thouſande men of armes, and alſo of other. On the

morrowe after, the Cardinall came againe from the Frenche king, in his behalfe to requeſt a truce, which ſhould endure for one whole yeare, the whiche the Prince denyed, yet at the importunate ſute of that Cardinal, he graunted a truce to continue till Chriſtmaſſe next comming. Therefore the Cardinall returning to the Frenche King, requeſted him of pledges for the truce, but the Marſhall Dawdenam, Geffrey de Charney, & Douglas the Scot, perſwaded him that by common reaſon it coulde not come to paſſe that the Engliſh men ſhoulde at that time preuayle, and eſpecially, bycauſe they were but fewe, and in a ſtraunge Countrey, & wearyed out miſerably with their toyle in trauel, & therefore not ableto indure ſo great a number of the French men of Fraunce, who ſtood in defence of theyr own lande. The Prince of Wales being certified, that the Captaines of the French, wold haue no kind of peace, but ſuch as they could get by force of armes, & calling his men togither, he made to them an Oration firſt in generall, and then to his Archers as followeth: your mā
               hoode (ſaith he) hath bin alwayes known to me, in great dā
               gers, which ſheweth yt you are not degenerate frō true ſons of Engliſh men, but to be deſcended from the bloude of them which heretofore were vnder my fathers dukedome, & his predeceſſors kings of Englande, vnto whome no labour was paineful, no place inuincible, no ground vnpaſſable, no Hil (wer it neuer ſo high) inacceſſible, no tower vnſcaleable, no army inpenitrable, no armed ſouldiour, or whole hoſtes of men was formidable. Their liuely couragiouſneſſe tamed the French men, the Ciprians, the Siracuſians, the Galabrians, & the Plestinis, and brought vnder the ſtiffe necked Scottes, and vnruely Iriſh men, yea and the Walſh men alſo, which could wel indure all labour. Occaſion, time, and daungers, maketh of feareful, verye ſtrong and ſtoute, and doeth manye times of dull witted men make wittie: honour alſo, and loue of the Countrey, and the deſire of the rich ſpoyle of the French men, doth ſtirre you vp to follow your fathers ſteps▪
               
Wherefore follow your auntients, and wholy be intentiue to follow the commaundement of your Captaines as well in minde as in body, that if victorie come with life, we may ſtill continue in firme friendſhip togither, hauing alwayes one will, and one minde: but if enuious Fortune (whych God forbidde) ſhoulde let vs at this preſente, to runne the race of all fleſhe, and that we ende both life and labour togither, be you ſure that your names ſhall not want eternall fame and heauenly ioy, and we alſo with theſe gentlemen our companions, wyll drinke of the ſame cuppe, that you ſhal doe, vnto whom it ſhal be an eternal glorie and name, to haue wonne the nobilitie of Fraunce: but to ouercome (as God forbid) is not to be aſcribed vnto the daunger of time, but to the courage of the men. Hauing ſpoken theſe words, he perceyued that there was a Hill harde by, whiche was planted on the toppe with hedges and ditches, the inſide whereof was very playne, and a paſture fielde on the one ſide thereof, with manye roughe buſhes, and on the other ſide it was all planted with vines, and the reſidue was playne, in the top wherof he did imagine the armye of the French to lye betwixt our men and the Hil. There was gret and lowe vallyes, and a péece of mariſh ground. One company of the Prince finding out a narrowe paſſage, entred the valley and toke the Hyll, where among the buſhes they hidde themſelues, taking the aduantage of the place. The fielde wherein our men laye, to witte, the vawarde and middle warde, was deuided from the playne where the Frenche armye laye, with a long hedge and ditche, the one ende whereof dyd reache downe to the Mariſhe aforeſayde: that of the Hyll nexte the Mariſhe, the Earle of Warwicke kept, Captaine of the vawarde. In the vpper part of the hedge, toward the hanging of the Hil, there was a gret gap, from the whiche a ſtones caſt ſtoode our rereward, ouer the whiche the Earle of Saliſburie was Captayne. Oure enymies perceyuyng oure Princes auntiente to bée diſplayed, and ofttymes to bée remoued from place to place,

and by reaſon of the Hill to be ſome time quite out of ſighte, they iudged that the Prince fledde, yet Douglas the Scotte and Marſhal de Clarimount, ſayde that it was not ſo, but Marſhal Dawdenam being deceiued in his owne opinion, thought otherwiſe, crying out ſtill to followe and chaſe the Prince now fléeing, and with him alſo Douglas, to the intēt to get preferment and a worthy name of his new warfare: but Clarimount to waſhe awaye the euill opinion whiche was conceyued of him touching his fidelitie, was the more vehement to perſwade them forwarde, for vnto them the charge of the vawarde was deputed: before theſe went out, as the faſhion was, certaine to chaſe and to iuſte, againſte whom certain that wer vnder the Hill of our vaward came to méete Marſhal Dawdenam, who ſtaying to ſée the end of the iuſting, kept himſelfe from encountring. In the meane time Clearimount thinking to come out by the gap in the hedge, and ſo to come at the backe of our vawarde, and to compaſſe them in, met with the Earle of Saliſburie, who perceyuing his comming and purpoſe, ſuſpected his whole intent, and ſo they whiche gouerned our rereward, making haſte to take the gap, and kéepe the enimie from paſſing that way, ſuſtayned the firſt charge of the battayle. Then began a terrible méeting betwixte the armed menne, who laide on loade with ſwordes and ſpeares, neyther dyd the Archers ſlacke theyr duetie, but lying in ſafe trenches, ſtart vp aboue the ditche and ſhot ouer the hedge, preuayling more with their arrowes, than they did that fought in armes: thus our rerewarde ſlaying the enimies, who came ſtragling to the gap, and the vawarde which lay on the hanging of the Hil, towarde the Mariſh, being gouerned by the Earle of Warwicke, were alwayes readye and met with the French men, beating them downe. The Archers of the vawarde were placed in the Mariſhe, out of daunger from the horſſemen, yet for al that they did preuaile there ſomewhat, for ye horſemen were appointed to no other purpoſe but to ouerrunne the Archers. The Earle of Oxforde conſidering the diſcommodity

that might enſue therof, departed from the Princes ward, and leading with him the Archers, ſette them on the one ſide of the French men, commaunding them to ſhoote at yt hinder partes of the horſſes, by meanes whereof the horſſes being gauld and wounded, fel to tumbling with them that ſat on their backes, or elſe turned backe and ran vpon them that followed after, making great ſlaughter vpon their own maiſters. The horſſemen being thus beaten backe, the Archers retyred towardes the place from whence they came, ſhooting & gauling the ſides of the French men which fought right ouer againſt them: by this time the force and heate of the battayle beganne to be in prime, when as the Earles of Warwicke and Saliſburie, like fierce Lions endeuored of purpoſe which of them ſhold dung the land of Poyters moſt with French mens bloud. Nether was the wiſe Counſeller Thomas Daſſord of Suffolke ydle at that ſeaſon, who righte worthylie in all his actes behaued himſelfe, being experte and ſkilfull in actiuitie. For he continually running from ward to warde, and into all troupes and companies, comforted & ſtyrred them vp with good words to doe well, hauing a gret regarde that the youthfull ſorte of luſtie ſouldiours beyng to bolde vppon their good heartes and courage, ſhoulde not without regarde go out too farre, and placed the Archers at ſundry times to great aduantages, and oftentimes as leaſure would ſuffer him, he woulde encorage vp the minds of the ſouldiours. Clarimount was ſlaine, William Dowglas alſo being wounded fledde, hauing with him a fewe Scots of hys bande, with Archebald Dowglas hys brother: our men retiring, put themſelues in good array, and our vaward and midle-warde ioyned themſelues togither, by and by there marcheth forth a newe armye of the French men, the whiche the eldeſt ſon of the French king, Dolphin of Vienna, brought forth. The order and array of this army was more terrible & fierce than the ſhewe of that which was laſt oppreſſed, yet for al that coulde not it make our men afrayde, who were ſharp ſet, and very deſirous of honor, & alſo of reuenge, both

for themſelues, & their fellowes, whiche a little before were ſlayne and wounded. And therefore boldely they goe to it on both ſides, makyng ſhowts and noyſes, crying out, Saint George to borrow, or Saint Denis be for vs. Within a while they were come to fight man to man, & euery man readye to dy, fight now to ſaue theyr lyues, neither doth ye Lion make the Wolf afraid, or the Tegre is more terrible to the ſimple beaſt, than our luſty gentlemen were to their enimies, who chaced them, & ſlew them like as the Wolues chace & kil Shéepe. And though that this battel withſtood our men more than the firſte, yet, after they had loſt a great many of their men, they had ſuche a deuiſe, that they ſaued manye, and yet, not by running away, but by a faire retreate, whiche the Frenchmen are accuſtomed to vſe. But our men conſidering, that the victorie of the field was doubtful, as long as the French King mighte be in preſence wyth his armye, who lay there halfe hid in a Ualley, they woulde not afterward, when they had chaced any that fled, go out of the field, but the worthy man Maurice Barkley, ſon of Thomas Barkley, had no regard there vnto, who for ye ſpace of two houres togither with his men, neuer ſpared, but wold be ſtil in the forefront of the battayle, inuading his enimies wt the firſte, This Maurice being in ye midſt of y• 
               Dolphens guard ſowed blowes among them, firſt with a ſpeare, than with a ſword, & at length he being al alone compaſſed wt the multitude, & forely wounded, he was taken priſoner. In the meane time our mē carryed thoſe which were wounded of their camp, & laide thē vnder buſhes & hedges out of y• way, other hauing ſpent their weapons toke y• ſpeares & ſwords frō them whō they had ouercome: & the Archers lacking arrowes, made haſt to draw them frō pore wretches y• were but halfe dead: there was not one of thē all, but eyther he was wounded or quite wearied with gret labor, except. 400. mē who kéeping yt chief ſtandart, wer appointed to méete y• 
               French king. The Dolphin being thus put to flight, one came to y• 
               Frenche K. & ſayd, my Lord K. the field is fallen to the Engliſh men, and your eldeſt ſon hath withdrawen himſelf: vnto whō y• 
               Frēch
               
King anſwered with an othe, y• he would not y• day forſake y• field vnleſſe he were taken or ſlain, & ſo by y• means carried away by force: wherfore the auntiente bearers are cōmā
               ded to march forwards, after whō followed two gret cōpanyes of armed mē into a wide fielde, ſhewing themſelues to our men, & ſtruck a gret feare into their heartes, in ſo much y• they were out of hope to conquire any more. The whyche thing a mā of great wiſedome ſtanding by ye prince ſignified wt a howling voyce, (ſaying alas we poore wretches are ouercome,) but the prince hauing a great truſt and ſaith in Chriſt, checked him, ſaying, thou lieſt thou daſtardly fellow, for thou canſt not ſay yt we can be ouercome as lōg as I liue. Captain de la Buche, a noble man in al affayres, as ſoone as he perceyued the armes of the French King, marching forth of their tentes, aſking licence of the Prince departed awaye with lx. ſouldiours, and a hundred Archers, whom many of our men thought to haue fled away: wherfore our ſouldiors (excepting the chiefe Captaines) being quite out of hope of victorie, committed thēſelues wholy to the mercie of God. Then the Prince cōmanded his Auntient bearer ſir Walter Woodland, to march foreward toward his enimies, and wt a
                  •
               ew freſh men he ioyned battayle with ye gret army of the French king: by & by they ſounde their trumpets, one giuing anſwere to another, they made ſuche a noyſe y• the Wals of Poyters ſoūded wt the Eccho therof like a wood, in ſuch ſort y• a man would haue thought y• the hils had bellowed out to ye valleys, & that ye clouds had giuē forth a moſt terrible thū
               der, to ye which ther wāted no cruel lightnings, whyleſt the ayre ſhone on ye bright armour & ſpears daſhing againſt ſhining harneis. Thē came on the cruel cōpany of croſbowmē, making a darkneſſe in y• ſ
                  •
               ies with yt multitude of quarels which they ſhot, againſt whō came a worthy cōpany of Engliſh bowmen: out flyes alſo Darts of Aſhe which met wt the enimy afar off: but ye 
               Frēch army being ful of diuers troups, & many armed mē defēding their breſts with their ſhields, procéede forwarde againſte their enimies: wherefore oure

Archers hauing emptied their quiuers in vain, being armed only with ſwords and Targets, are fayn to encounter with them that were laden with armour. Then beſtirreth hymſelfe the worthye Prince of Wales, cutting and hewing the French men with a ſharp ſword. In the mean time Captain de la Buch marcheth a compaſſe about, vnder the hangyng of the Hil, which he with the Prince a little before forſoke, and priuily compaſſing about the fielde, at the length commeth cloſe vnder the place where the Frenche Campe laye, from thence he aſcended to the toppe of the Hill that waye, whiche the French men had beaten with theyr trauayle, and ſo ſodainely breaking forth vnloked for, and ſhewing by the enſigne of Saint George that he was our friend, the Prince with great courage giueth a freſhe charge on the French armye, being deſirous to breake their ranckes, before the captaine aforeſayde, ſhoulde ſet on the ſide of the battayle. The Prince luſtilye encountring with his enimies goeth into the middle of the throng, and where he ſéeth moſt companye there hée layeth aboute hym on euerye ſide.
            In the meane time on the other ſide, his friends which ſerued with Captaine de la Buche, were at the backes of the enimies, beating down and killing without pittie, and the Archers alſo placed for the purpoſe ſhot ſo thick, wounding the backes and ſides of the French men, in ſuche ſorte, that the forme of the battayle was quite ſpoyled, neyther could they put themſelues in order or array any more. This was the courage of the Prince, who at the lenghth thruſteth thorough the throngs of them, that guarded the Frenche Kyng, then ſhoulde you ſée an auntient beginne to nod and ſtumble, the bearers of them to fall downe, the bloud of flaues and Princes ran mingled togither into the waters whiche were nigh. In like ſort the Bore of Cornwal rageth, who ſéeketh to haue none other way to the French Kings ſtandard, thā by bloud only: but when they came there, they met wt a 
                  •
               ōpany of ſtout men to withſtand them, the Engliſh mē fight, the Frenche men alſo lay on, but at length Fortune making

haſt to turne hir whéele, the Prince preaceth forewarde on his enimies and like a fierce Lion beating down the proud, he came to yéelding vp of the French Kyng. The French men being ſcattered abroade in the fieldes of Poycers perceyuing that the ſtandard with the flouerdeluce was beaten down, fledde with all ſpéede towards the Towne, which was not farre off, the Engliſhe menne perceyuing them to be fléeing, though themſelues were eyther ſore wounded or wearied, followed them in chaſe euen to the gates of Poyters wher in a great ſkirmiſhe and verie daungerous, they ſlewe a great number of French men. At the laſt our mē being called back by retreate with ye ſound of trumpet, & aſſembling togither, there were diuerſe Pauilians and tentes ſet vp in the fieldes, and the whole company being throughlye comforted wyth this victorie, gaue theyr whole endeauour to prouide for them that were wounded, for the quiet reſt of them that wer wearied, for ſafe kéeping of them that wer taken priſoners, and for the refreſhing of them that were almoſte famiſhed, vntill they had ful vnderſtanding who and how many were wanting, among them which were founde halfe dead, was founde the Lord Iames Dawdeley, by reaſon of his broade bucklet, and being caried in the armes of his ſouldiours, was brought to the Princes lodging, and the Prince hymſelfe riſe from his ſupper, and came to him, and cauſed him to be ſtripped and layd in a ſoft bedde, and being ſomewhat better come to his remembraunce, the Prince comforted him, ſwearing vnto him that he had the Frenche King yéelded vnto him, whiche newes when the languiſhing Noble man hearde, he ſtreight wayes reuiued. The Prince returning to the French King, willed him not to deny that to bée an vnworthy déede of his that roſe from his ſupper to comfort him that was almoſt deade, who ſpared not hys owne bloude to purchaſe victorie. After that they hauing had ſome talke concerning the warres whiche Iames Dawdeley made, the Frenche king ſayde that amongſt all other ſtoute Champions, which valiauntly that day behaued themſelues,

he did gretly wonder at the noble déeds of that knight, and he ſpake not muche more in all his ſupper, but what he ſpake to the Prince, who comforted his noble praye. Such like wordes, it is ſayde that the French king ſpake: Although it be our chaunce to fall into an euerlaſting ſorrowe, yet for all that we thoughte it good to refrayne from the ſame by a kinde of meaſure, for though we be vnder ſubiection by law and righte of war vnder our noble couſin, yet are we not as raſcals, or faint harted runne-awayes, or taken lying hidde cloſe in a corner, but after the maner of the fielde by the end and ſucceſſe of warre, where we were as readie to dye as liue for iuſtice ſake. And in the ſame fielde were many richmen taken, whoſe liues were reſerued for raunſome, the fainte harted and lewde chaſed away, but the worthyeſt and ſtouteſt were ſpoyled of theyr liues. This battayle of Poyters was fought on the ninetéenth day of September.
            The nexte day after the battayle, al the priſoners were numbred, to wit the French king, alſo Phillip his ſonne, the Archbiſhop of Senon, the Erle of Pontue, the Erle of Longuile▪
                the Earle of Ewe, the Erle of Tankeruile, the Earle Daunter, the Earle of Vendadour, the Earle of Slauncer, the Earle of Wademount, the Earle of Vandome, the Erle of Iuyny, the Erle Don Martin, the Earle of Selabruſe, the Earle of Saſſo, Vicount Nerbon,
                the Lord Daubeny, Marſhal Dawdenam, the Lord Guinc
                     •
                  arde de Angle, Seneſhal de Seintong, the Lord Mores Mawnimet, the Lord Leonard de Guilhoy, the Seneſhal of Poyters, the Lord great Maiſter, the chiefe maiſter of the Hoſpitall of Spaigne, the Lorde of Saint Tigre, the Lorde Damboyd Seneſhal of Annar, the Lorde Tower, the Lord Dars, the Lorde Durual, the Lorde of the Towne of Ernell, the Lorde Maugeler, the Lorde Planke, the Vicount de Belimount, and the Lorde of Suly: there were alſo the bodyes founde of many that were ſlayne, as the Duke of Burbon, the Duke Daſines, the Coneſtable of Fraunce, Marſhal de Garimount,
                the Lorde Geffrey de Charney, the Lorde Pounce, y• Biſhop of Chaloner, the Lord of Laundas, yt Lord Ripemoūt▪
               
               
the Lord Chaneny, the Lorde Io
                     •
                  e, the Lord Nele, the Lord Aunger, the Lord de Mount Iohn, the Lord Dargenton, the Lorde Grooſe, the Lorde Ruas, the Lord Rochechicheward, the Lord de Vilem. The Prince bought all the priſoners & Captiues of them that kept them, and carryed them wyth him to Burdeaux, there to remain in ſafe cuſtodie, during his abode there.
            
               Richard Notingham: Thomas Doſſel, the. 28. of Septem.
               Sherifes. Maior. 
                     ••
                   1
                     •
                  57 Anno reg. 21
            
            
               Henrie Picarde Vintener, the. 28. of October.
            
            
               Edward Prince of Wales returning into Englande wyth Iohn the French King, Phillip his ſon and many other pryſoners, arriued at Plymouth▪
                on the fifth of May, and the. 24. of Maye entred London with them, where he was receyued with greate honour of the Citizens, and ſo conuayed to the kings pallaice at Westminster, where the King ſitting in his eſtate in Westminster Hall, receyued them, and after conueyed the French King to a lodging, where he lay a ſeaſon: and after the ſayde French King was lodged in the Sauoy, (which then was a pleaſant place belonging to the Duke of Lancaſter.) In the Winter following were gret and royal iuſtes holden in Smithfielde at London, where many knightly ſights of armes wer done, to the gret honour of the king & realm, at the which were preſent the Kings of England, Fraunce, and Scotlande, with many noble eſtates of all thoſe Kingdomes, wherof the more part of the ſtrangers were priſoners.
            
               Henrie Picarde Uintener, Maior of London, in one day dyd ſumptuouſlye feaſte Edwarde King of Englande; Iohn
                King of Fraunce, the King of Cipres (then arriued in England) Dauid king of Scottes, Edward
                Prince of Wales, wyth many noble men and other, and after the ſayde Henrie Picarde kepte his Hall againſt all commers who ſoeuer, that were willing to play at Dice and Hazard. In like maner the Lady Margaret his wife did alſo kéepe hir Chamber, to the ſame intente. The King of Cipres playing wyth Henrie Picarde in hys Hall, dyd wynne of hym 50. markes, but Henrie being verye ſkilfull in that arte, altering hys

hande did after win of the ſame king, the ſame. 50. markes, and 50. markes more, which when the ſame king began to take in ill parte, although he diſſembled the ſame, Henrye ſaide vnto him, my Lord and King be not agrieued, I couet not your golde but your play, for I haue not bid you hyther that I might grieue you, but that amongſt other things I might trie your playe, and gaue hym his money agayne, plentifully beſtowing of his owne amongſt the retinue: beſides he gaue many riche giftes to the King and other Nobles and Knightes, whiche dyned wyth hym, to the greate glorie of the Citizens of London in theſe dayes.
            
               Stephen Candiſh: Barthelmew Froſtling, the. 28. of Sep.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Sir Iohn Stody Vintener, the. 28. of October.
            
            This ſir Iohn Stody gaue vnto the Uinteners of London all the quadrant wherein the Uinteners Hal now ſtandeth with the tenements round about, from the lane yet called Studis Lane, where is founded thirtéene houſes for xiij. poore people whiche are there kept of charitie rent frée.
            About Halowntide, Dauid le Bruce king of Scots was deliuered from the long impriſonmēt of a. xj. yeres, in the caſtel of Oldiham, his raunſome being ſet, a 100000. markes to be payde the next ten yeares following.
            
               Normandie and Brytaine were ſoare ſpoyled and waſted
                  Tho. Walſing. Anno reg. 32 Rob. Knovvles by Phillippe the King of Nauers brother, Iacob de la Pipe, and Roberte Knowles, wyth manye other Engliſhe menne whyche were Captaynes of that companye, who raged in warlike ſorte in theſe Countryes, the ſpace of thrée yeares and more, contrarye to the Kyng of Englandes pleaſure. Thys Roberte Knowles béeyng a meane man of birth became Captaine of many ſouldiours, and did manye maruellous actes.
            
               Iſabel daughter to Phillippe the fayre, king of Fraunce
               1358 now wife to King Edward the ſecond, deceaſed, apnd Riſinges
               Regiſtrum fratrum minorum. 
               iuxta London, the. xxij. of Auguſt, and was buried in the Grey Friers Quire at London, in a Tombe of Aliblaſter.
            
               
               Iohn Barnes: Iohn Buris, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior. Anno reg. 33
            
            
               Iohn Louekinſtoke Fiſhmonger, the 28. of October.
            
            
               Iohn of Gaunt the Kings ſonne (by diſpenſation) tooke to wife Blaunch, dauhter of Henry Duke of Lancaſter his kinſwoman.
            The French King vnder coulour of peace, offered to King Edward Flanders, Picardie, Aquitayne,
                and other lands, which the Engliſhmen had ranged through and ſpoyled, for the perfourmāce wherof, meſſengers were ſent into France, but the Frenchmen would not perfourme the offer, wherfore King Edward being angrie, with a Nauie of Shippes paſſed the Sea to Caleis, wherefore deuiding his armie into thrée partes, committed one companie vnto Henry DukeKing Edvvarde inuaded Burgundie. of Lancaster, another to Prince Edward, and the third he reſerued to himſelfe, and ſo paſſed into Burgundie.
            
            In the meane ſeaſon, the Normans with a ſmall Nauie1359 Frenchmen arriued at VVinchelſea. arriued at Winchelſey, and partly brent the Towne, and ſlew ſuch as did withſtand them, wherefore the Prelates of England aſſembled from all partes in armour to withſtande them, but when they had prepared themſelues to battayle, the French were gone.
            
               Simon of Benington: Iohn of Chicheſter, the 28. of Sept.
               Sherifes. Maior. Anno reg. 34. 1360
            
            
               Simon Dolſeby Grocer, the 28. of October.
            
            King Edward with his power rode through France, by Picardie, Artois, Roan, Champaine, and ſo to Briteine, deſtroying the Countrey before him. And héere is to be noted, that the fourtéenth day of Aprill, and the morrow after Eaſter day, King Edward with his hoſt lay before the Citie of Paris, which day was full darke of miſt and hayle, and ſo bitter colde, that many men died on their Horſſe backes with the cold, wherefore vnto this day it hath bin called the blacke Monday. The King of Nauarre vexed ſore the marches of Normandie. Thus was the Realme of France miſerably beſet on all ſides. At the laſt, a finall peace was concluded onPeace vvith France. this condition, that King Edward ſhould haue to his poſſeſſion, the Countreys of Gaſcoine, Gwyen, Poytiers, Limoſin, Baleuile,
               
               Exantes, Caleis, Gwiſnes, and diuers other Lordſhips, Caſtels, Townes, and all the Landes to them belonging,Tho. Walſ. without knowledge of any ſoueraigntie or ſubiection for the ſame. This peace being confirmed by writing and by oth, King Edward came into England, and ſo ſtreight to the Tower to ſée the French King, where he appoynted his raunſome to be thrée millions of Florences, and ſo deliueredFrench King releaſſed. him of all impriſonment, and brought him with great honor to the Sea, who then▪ſayled ouer into France.
            
            
               Iohn Denis: Walter Berney, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Iohn Wroth Fiſhmonger, the 28. of October.
            
            King Edward the 24. of Januarie beganne a Parliament at Westminster, where the forme of the agréement was redde, and allowed of all eſtates, where the King on the laſt of Januarie cauſed his Nobles to ſweare to holde andAnno reg. 35 1361 kéepe the ſayde agréement, eſpecially thoſe as well Prelats as other that were not at Caleis, where he ſware, and other that were there with him.
            A great dearth & peſtilence hapned in England, which was called the ſecond peſtilence, in which died Henry D. of Lancaster
               The ſeconde mortalitie. in March at London, and was buryed at Leycester, in the colegiate Church which he had founded, with a Deane, twelue Chanons, Prebendaries, as many Uickers, and other miniſters accordingly.
            There dyed alſo Reginald Lord Cobham, and Walter
               Lib. Lichfield. 
               Fitz Waren, valiant and famous Knightes, and fiue Biſhops, to wéete, Reginald of Worcester, Michael
                of London, Thomas
                of E
                     •
                  lie, Iohn
                of Lincolne, and Robert of Cicester. To Worcester was preferred Iohn of Barnet: to London, Simon Sudburie:
                to Ely, Simon Langham:
                to Lincolne, Iohn Bokingham:
                to Cicester, William Linlinere.
               
            
            
               Leonell Earle of Hulster by his wife, and ſonne to King Edward, went into Ireland to recounter the Iriſhmen that vexed the Engliſh.
            
            
               Edward Prince of Wales tooke to wife by diſpenſation the Counteſſe of Kent, daughter vnto Edmond Earle of Kent,
               
brother to King Edward the ſecond: ſhe had bin before wife vnto Thomas Holland and before that, ſhe was wife to the Earle of Saliſburie, and diuorſed from him.
            A route of the great company of the Engliſhmen were cō
               manded to depart out of France, and they diſcomfited in Anuerne the Frenchmen, and tooke diuers priſoners of the nobles of France that had bin afore takē of the Engliſhmen, and there was ſlayn Iaques de Burbon, and the Countie of Salbrig. Alſo a route of Britons, part of the great company aforeſayd, were diſcōfited in Limoſin alias Garet, by Wil. Felton knight, of England, & at that time Steward of ye Countrey for K. Edward.
            
            
               William Holbech: Iames Tame, the 28 of September.
               
                  Sherifes. Maior. Sore rempeſt of vvinde.
            
            
               Iohn Peche Fiſhmonger, the 28. of October.
            
            The King helde his Chriſtmas at Windſore, and the xv. day folowing, a ſore and vehemēt Southweaſt wind brake forth, ſo hideous, that it ouerthrew high Houſes, Towers, Stéeples, and Trées, and ſo bowed them, that the reſidue which fell not, but remayned ſtanding, were the weaker.
            The firſt fiue dayes of May, at London in Smithfield, were
                  Anno reg. 36 Iuſting in Smithfield. Juſtes holden, the King and Quéene being preſent, and the moſt part of the Chiualrie of England and France, and of other Nations, to the which came Spanyards, Cipriets, and Armenians Knightly requeſting the King of Englands ayde againſte the Pagans that had inuaded their confines. The1362 Firſt Staple of vvool at Caleis. ſtaple of wools, notwithſtāding the oth receiued of the King of England, and other great men of the land, is ſent to Caleis.
            
            In the feaſt of the Apoſtles, Peter and Paule, King Edward at Westminster by his Charter, gaue to the Abbot of Westminster, and Couent, two Stagges of his Ueniſon, yearely to be taken in the Foreſt of Windſore.
            
            
               Edward Prince of Wales, about the feaſt of Saint Margaret,
               Edvvard the Kings eldeſt ſonne Prince of Aquitayne. at Westminster, in preſence of the great men of ye Realme, receyued of his father the principalitie of Aquitayne, fealtie and homage firſt made to him, but yet he left not the principalitie of Wales, the Duchie of Cornewall, the Counties of Chester and Kent.
            
            
               
               Simon Iſlip, Archbiſhop of Canterburie did ordeyne, thatPrieſtes became theeues, for lacke of liuing. 
                     •
                  
                more ſhould not be giuen to Prieſtes for their yearely ſtipend, than thrée pound, ſixe ſhillings, eyght pence, whiche cauſed many of them to ſteale.
            
               Iohn of Saint Albons: Iames Andrew, the 28. of Sept.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Stephen Candiſh Draper, the 28. of October.
            
            The ſixtéenth day of October, began a Parliamente at London, which continued till the feaſt of Saint Brice, the thirtéenthTho. Walſing. of Nouember, on which day the King was borne, hauing now accompliſhed the 50. yeare of his age, wherevppon, he pardoned ſuch as were giltie of Treaſon to his perſon, releaſſed priſoners, reuoked outlawes, and at the petition of the commons, he commanded pleas to be vſed in Engliſh, and not in French, as they had continued ſince the Conqueſt. He made Leonell his ſonne, Earle of Hulster, then being in Ireland, Duke of Clarence: and his ſon Iohn, Earle of Richmond, he made Duke of Lancaster: and Edmond his ſonne, he made Earle of Cambridge.
            
            In the ſaide Parliamente was granted to the King forSubſedie of vvoolles. thrée yeares following, ſixe and twentie ſhillings, eyght pence, of euery Sacke of wooll to be tranſported beyond the Seas.
            
               Ioane Quéene of Scottes, and wife to Dauid Bruſe, and ſiſter to King Edward the third, dyed, and was buried in the grey Friers Church at London by hir mother.Sea. Cro.
            
            A Prieſt in London was murthered, and being cutte in four quarters, was caſt contemptuouſlie in foure partes of ye Citie, y• doers wherof were not knowne what they were.
            Sir Iohn Cobham Knighte, founded the Colledge ofCobham Colledge. Anno reg. 37 1363 Three Kings came into England. The French King dieth. 
               Cobham in Kent.
            
            The French King, the King of Cipres, and the King of Scottes, came all into England to ſpeake with King Edwarde, who receiued them with great honor, and gaue them great giftes, the Kings of Cipres and of Scotland returned home ſhortly, but the French King fell ſicke at London, whereof he ſhortly after died.
            
               A Froſt in England laſted from the midſt of September,Great Froſt. Adam Merim
                        •
                     .
                to the moneth of Aprill.
            
               Richard Croydon: Iohn Hiltoft, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior. Cro. col. reg▪ 
                  
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  x
                     •
                  .
            
            
               Iohn Not Peperer, the 28. of October.
            
            This yeare, the Caſtell of Quinborough was builded by King Edward.
            
            The ninth day of Aprill, died Iohn King of France, at theAnno reg. 38 1364 
               Sauoy beſide Westminster, through griefe of minde, that the Duke of Angiow one of his pledges had deceyued him, and came not into England, according as he had promiſed and ſworne. His corps was honourably conueyed to Douer, and ſo to Saint Denis in France, where he was buried.
            
               Iohn de Mitford: Simon de Mordon, the 28. of Septem.
               Sherifes. Maior. Anno reg. 39 1365 Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Adam of Bury, Skinner, the 28 of October.
            
            
               Ingram, Lord of Cowſie, married Lady Iſabell the Kings daughter, at Windſore.
            
            
               Iohn Bukulſworth: Thomas Ireland, the 28. of Septemb.
            
            
               Iohn Loukin, Fiſhmonger. Adam of Bury Skinner.
            
            The 28. of January, Iohn Louekin Fiſhmonger, was elected Maior, and Adam Bury remoued by the Kings commandement.
            The King commanded that Peter pence ſhould no more
                  Anno reg. 40 Peter pence forbidde. be gathered nor payde to Rome. Saint Peters pence is the Kings almes, and all that had twentie peny worth of good, of one manner cattell in their houſe of their owne proper, ſhould giue that penie at Lammas.
            The third day of Aprill was borne at Burdeaux Richard,
               
               1366 ſonne to Edward the blacke Prince, who was after King of England, by the name of Richard the ſecond.
            
               Iohn Ward: Thomas at Lee, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Iohn Louekin Fiſhmonger, the 28. of October.
            
            This Iohn Louekin Stockfiſhmonger, four times Maior of London, twice by election, and twice by the Kings appointment,Iohn Leyland. for that he was borne in the Towne of Kingston
               Hoſpitall at Kingſton vpon Thamis. vpon Thamis, he builded there a Chappel called Magdalenes, 
               
                  •
               o the which he ioyned an Hoſpitall, wherein was a Mayſter,

two Prieſtes, and certayne poore men: and for that theSaint Michael
                     •
                   Church in Crooked Lane builded. pariſh Church of Saint Michaell by Crooked Lane of London, in whiche Pariſh he then dwelled, was a very ſmall and homely thing (ſtanding in part of that ground, where now of late the Perſonage houſe is builded) and the groūd therabout a filthie plot, by reaſon of the Butchers in Eastcheape, who made the ſame their Leſt haw, he on the ſame grounde builded the faire new pariſh Church of Saint Michaell, now ſtanding, and was there buried in the middle of the Quire, vnder a faire Tombe of Stone, with the images of him and his wife grauen in Allablaſter vpon the ſame Tombe. He alſo (as writeth Iohn Leyland) founded a Colledge to the ſame Church néere therevnto adioyning. The ſayde pariſh Churche of Saint Michaell, hath bin ſince encreaſed Eaſtwarde, with a new Quier, and ſide Chappels, by Sir William Walworth Fiſhmonger, and Maior of London (as ſhall be ſhewed in the fourth yeare of King Richard the ſecond.) Alſo, the Tombe of Iohn Louekin was remoued, and a 
                  •
               lat ſtone of grey Marble, garniſhed with plates of Latin, and an Epitaph, was layde vpon him, as it yet remayneth.
            
               Edward Prince of Wales, taking compaſſion vpon Peter
               
                  Tho. Wall. Anno reg. 41 The Baſtard brother disheriteth the lavvful. 1367 King of Spayne, who was driuen out of his Kingdome by Henry his Baſtard brother, entred Spayne with a great puiſſance, and in a battell at Nazers, the third of Aprill, put to flight the foreſayde Baſtard, ouercame his power, and ſlew ſixe thouſande of his men, where there was taken thréeſcore perſons of name, and two thouſande of the common Souldioures, whiche done, he reſtored the ſayde Peter to his former dignitie, and returned home with greate triumph and victorie, but not long after, Henry the Baſtarde,The Baſtard brother; murthereth the lavvfull. whiles King Peter ſate at a Table, ſodeinly thruſt him thorough with a Speare, and inuaded the Lande by Treaſon, which by open warre he could not do.
            
               Iohn Tornegold: William Dikeman, the 28 of Septem.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Iames Andrew Draper, the 28. of October.
            
            The Frenchmen▪
                tooke diuers Townes and Caſtels in

               Poytow, that belonged to the King of England, and to the endeAnno reg. 42 they mighte the more effectually deceyue the King of England, the French King ſent him word, that he was readie to pay the reſidue of his fathers raunſome, and to perfourme the conditions of peace. Alſo, he ſente him Wines out of1368 
               Boheme, and other preſents, in token of loue, but it fortuned whiles the Embaſſadors were in the Kings preſence, the lamentable newes were brought of the forcible inuaſion of the Frenchmen in Poytow, whiche when the King hearde, heSutteltie of Frenchmen. commaunded the Embaſſadors to gette them home with their deceiptfull preſents, to their deceiptfull Lord, whoſe mockes he woulde not long leaue vnreuenged. The Embaſſadoures returning home, were mette by the menne of Caleis, who tooke their Wines, and other goodes from them.
            
               Robert Girdler: Adam Wimondham, the 28. of Sept.
               
                  Sherifes. Maior. Anno reg. 43 Third Peſtilence. Dearth of Corne. 1369
            
            
               Simon Mordin Stockfiſhmonger, the 28. of October.
            
            The thirde mortalitie or Peſtilence was this yeare, whereof dyed Blaunch, Duches of Lancaster, and was buried in Paules Church at London.
            
            This yeare was a great dearth of Corne, ſo that a Buſhell of Wheate at London was ſolde for two ſhillings ſixe pence, of Barlie twentie pence, of Otes twelue pence.
            The xv. of Auguſt died Quéene Philip, wife to Edwarde the third, and was buried at Westminster.
            
            
               Queneſborough, Kingston vpon Hull, and Saint Botolphes, alias Bostowne, made Staples by Parliament.
            The Kings ſonne Iohn Duke of Lancaster, and Humfrey Bohan Earle of Hereford, with a greate Armie wente into France, where they little preuayled, bycauſe an huge Armie of Frenchmen had pitched their Tentes vppon the toppe of Chalke hill, néere vnto Caleis, ſo ſtrongly, that they coulde not be ſette on withoute greate loſſe and dammage, but ſhortlye after, Thomas Beawchampe, Earle of Warwike, arriued at Caleis wyth a number of choſen Souldiers, at whoſe comming, the Frenchmenne
               
leauing their tentes and victualles, fledde away, neuertheleſſe, he paſſed forth, ſpoyling and waſting the Iſle of Caws with fire and ſword, but as he returned towarde Caleis, he fell ſicke, whereof he dyed, and the other Captaynes returned without honor.
            
               Iohn Piel: Hugh Holditch, the 28. of September.
               
                  Sherifes. Maior. Anno reg. 44 The King borovved great ſummes. 1370
            
            
               Iohn Chicheſter Goldſmith, the 28. of October.
            
            King Edward borowed of the Prelates and other, many great ſummes of money, ſaying, he would beſtow the ſame in defence of the Church and Realme, but about Midſomer he ſente a greate armie into France, whereof Sir Roberte Knowles was generall, a man, who before time had fortunately handled the beyond ſea warres, ſo long as they were ruled by his counſell, but toward Winter, the yong Lords ſayde they ought not to be ſubiect to him who was not ſo noble of birth as they, and ſo diuiding themſelues into diuers companies, Sir Robert Knowles departed into Briteine to his owne Caſtels which he had conquered. The Lords being ſo diuided, the Frenchmen ſet vpon them, tooke priſoners whome they liſted, and ſlew the reſidue.
            A great part of Gaſcoigne fell from the Prince, bycauſe of the ſtrange exactions he layde vpon them: alſo ſickneſſe encreaſing vpon him, he returned into England with his wife and his ſonne Richard, and reſigning into his fathers hāds the gouernement of Gaſcoigne.
            
            The Monaſterie of Abingdon, fiue miles from Oxforde, was ſpoyled by them of Oxford, togither with the ArtificersMathew Parker. of Abingdon.
            
            
               William Walworth: Robert Gayton, the 28. of Septem.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Iohn Barnes Mercer, the 28. of October.
            
            This Iohn Barnes gaue a Cheſt with thrée lockes, and a thouſand Markes, to be lent to yong men vpon ſufficienteA Cheſt vvith three lockes, and neuer a penie. Anno reg. 45 1371 gage, ſo that it paſſed not one hundred Markes: and for the occupying thereof, if he were learned, to ſay at his pleaſure Deprofundis, for the ſoule of Iohn Barnes: if he were not learned, to ſay Pater noster: but how ſo euer the money is lent,

at this day the Cheſt ſtandeth in the Chamber of London without money or pledges.
            In a Parliament at London, the King demaunded of theGreat ſubſedie. Adam Meri.
                Cleargie and Communaltie, a ſubſedie of 50000. pounds, for the leuying whereof, Chauntrie Prieſtes, and ſmall benefited were taxed. Alſo, the Biſhops were remoued from the offices of Chanceler, Treaſurer, and Priuis Seale, and Lay men put in their ſtéede.
            
               Robert Hatfield: Adam Staple, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior. Anno reg. 46 1372
            
            
               Iohn Barnes Mercer, the 28. of October.
            
            
               Iohn, Duke of Lancaster, and Edmond Earle of Cambridge, returning out of Gaſcoigne, brought with them two daughters of Peter late King of Spayne, whome afterwards they tooke to be their wiues: the Duke maried the elder, and from that time wrote himſelfe King of Castile.
            
            The Engliſhmen fought a battaile on the Sea with theBattayle on the Sea. 
               Flemings, and tooke fiue and twenty ſhips laden with ſalt.
            The Frenchmen beſéeged Rochell, to the remouing whereof, was ſent the Earle of Penbroke, with a number of men of armes, vpon whome fell the Spaniſh Nauie in the Hauen of Rochell, who ſlew and tooke the Engliſhmen, and burnt their Nauie. The Earle and many noble men were caried into Spayne, togither with the Kings money. King Edwarde with a great Nauie entred the Seas towardes Rochell, to haue reſcued the ſame, but the winde being contrary, with heauie chéere he returned agayne, hauing ſpente in thys preparation (as it was ſayde) nine hundred thouſande pound.
            
               Iohn Philpot: Nicholas Brember, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior. Anno reg. 47 1373
            
            
               Iohn Piel Mercer, the 28. of October.
            
            
               Iohn Duke of Lancaster entred France with a ſtrong power, and paſſed through the Realme without battayle, but in the Deſerts and Mountaynes of Aluerne, for lacke of victualles, many of his armie dyed: from thence, he went to Burdeaux, and brought ſcantly fortie horſſes backe with him: it was commonly talked that he loſt thirtie thouſande

Horſſes in that vnluckie voyage. It was a great miſerie
                  
                     •
                  bo. Walſing. to ſée the poore ſtate of the men of warre, ſuche as were Knightes of great wealth in their Countrey, hauing loſt men and Horſſes, were glad to begge from dore to dore, and found no reliefe, for the Countrey was deſtroyed, and not manured, by reaſon whereof, ſuch dearth was in that Countrey, that victualles could ſcant be gotten for any money. The Duke yet wintered. The tenth of Aprill following, a day of battayle was appoynted betwixte him and the Duke of Aniow at Tholouſe. In the meane time, truce was taken till the twentith of May next following, but the King of England knew nothing of it. When the day came, a great power of armed men for the French appeared, the which the Duke of Aniow had aſſembled, but yet that daye paſſed without battayle, to the great ſhame and reproch of the Engliſh, for the Frenchmen ſayd, they were ready in fielde the day appoynted to looke for their comming, that came not at all, wherefore they ſpake many reprochfull wordes againſt the Engliſhmen, calling them falſe cowards, and ha
                  ••
                leſſe. And ſuch was the end of that iourney.
            
               Iohn Northwold Mercer of London, was ſlayne at the Blacke heath, for whoſe ſake, began great debate among the Craftes of London, at the White Friers in Fléeteſtréete, for him, and Sir William of Windſore.
               Lib. Maior & vic. Lon.
            
            The Cleargie granted to the King tenthes, and th
                  •
                Laytie a fiftéenth.
            
               Iohn Awbrey: Iohn Fiſhed, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior. Anno reg. 48 1374
            
            
               Adam of Bury Skinner, the 28. of October.
            
            
               Iohn Duke of Lancaster came againe out of Gaſcoigne, after whoſe departure, almoſt all Gaſcoigne fell from their allegeaunce, which they had couenaunted with the King 
                  ••
                
               England, ſauing Burdeaux and Bayon.
            
            
               Iohn Duke of Lancaster, William
                Earle of Saliſbu
                     •••
                  
                  ▪ 
                  Reignold
                Lord Cobham, with Simon Sudbery and other aſſembled at Brudges to treate a peace betwéene y• Real
                  •••
                of England and France, where mette with them the Duke 
                  •
               
               
               Aniow, and many other Nobles of France. This treatie continued almoſt two yeares, and ended without concluſion of peace, but on a truce.
            
               Richard Lions: William Woodhouſe, the 28. of Septem.
               Sherifes. Maior. Anno reg. 49 1
                     •
                  75
            
            
               Iohn Walworth Fiſhmonger, the 28. of October.
            
            The ſixtéenth of Aprill died Iohn Haſtings, Earle of Penbroke, comming into Englande, after he had raunſomed himſelfe for a great maſſe of money, which he neuer payde. The Iſle of Constantine was deliuered to the French King, to the great detriment of Englande, for whiche cauſe afterward Sir Iohn Anſley appeached Thomas Catrington of Trenſon. A great heate was in England, ſo that many bothA ho
                     •
                  e ſommer. men and women died thereof.
            
               Iohn Hadle: William Newport, the 28. of September.
               
                  Sherifes. Maior. Anno reg 50 Good Parliament.
            
            
               Iohn Ward Grocer, the 28. of October.
            
            A Parliament, commonly called the good Parliament, was holden at Westminster, in the which▪ when a Subſidie was demaunded, anſwere was made by Peter de la Mare, Proloc
                  •
               tor of the Parliamente, that the King néeded not the ſubſtance of his poore Subiects, if he were well and faithfully gouerned, which he offered to proue effectually, and promiſed that if it were found that the King had néede, his ſubiects ſhould be readie moſt gladlye to help him according to their power.
            The Knightes required to haue the Lord Latimer with1376 other, remoued from about the King, whome they ſayd did giue him euill counſell, whiche being done, certaine Prelates, Earles, and other, were ordeyned to gouerne the King, who then was an olde man, but this endured not long. The commons alſo requeſted to haue remoued out of the Kings houſe, a certayne proude woman called Alice Perce, who by ouermuch familiaritie that ſhe had with the King, was cauſe of muche miſchiefe in the Realme, ſhe excéeding the manner of Women, ſate by the Kings Juſtices, and ſometimes by the Doctours in the Conſiſtories, perſwading and diſſwading in defence of matters,

and requeſting things contrarie to law and honeſtie, to the great diſhonor of the King.
            Alſo Richard Lious and Adam of Bury, Citizens of London,
               Adam Bury late Maior. Richard Lions late Sherife, a Goldſmith. were accuſed by the commōs, of diuers fraudes and deceipts, which they had done to the King: Richard Lions for money did wiſely compoūd and eſcaped, the other conuayde himſelfe into Flanders, but Sir Peter de la Mere, who tolde the troth, was at the inſtance of Alice Pierce condemned to perpetuall priſon at Notingham.
            
            The eyght day of June, Prince Edward departed out ofBlacke Prince deceaſſed. Adam Meri
                        •
                     o.
                this life, who was in his time the floure of Chiualrie: he was buried at Canterbury, and then King Edwarde created Richard ſonne of Prince Edward, Earle of Chester, Duke of Cornewall, and Prince of Wales, and bycauſe the King waxed féeble and ſicklie, he betooke the rule of the lande to Iohn of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster.
            
            The Earle of Warwickes men made a great ſpoyle of theEuisham ſpoyled. Abbey of Euiſham, and the tenementes thereto belonging, beating and ſleying many of the Abbots men, but by the King an agréement was made betwixt them, but no full ſatiſfaction.
            
               Iohn Northampton: Robert Laund, the 28. of Septem.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Adam Staple Mercer, the 28. of October.
            
            In a Parliament at London, there was granted ſuche a taxe as neuer was heard of before, to wit, of euery Lay perſonA great taxe. both man & woman, aboue the age of fourtéene yeares, four pence, and of euen Religious perſon, both man and woman, that had any Eccleſiaſticall promotion, twelue pence, and of them that had no promotion, four pence, except the four orders of begging Friers: and alſo the Statutes of the good Parliament were diſanulled, and the abiured perſons reſtored.
            The Londoners at S. Iohns Inne of Ipres, being ſtirred vpThe Londoners meant to haue ſlayne the Duke of Lancaſter. with furie, ſought to kill the D. of Lancaster, for a certayne proud word which he ſpake againſt their Biſhop, & they had brent his Manour of Suuoy, if the B. had not ſtaid their rage:

this was called the wood Saterday: the Duke fledde to Kenington beſide Lamheth, wher Richard the Prince remayned, he made lamentable complaintes vpon the Citizens, forThe Maior and Aldermen of London depoſed. the which, the King cauſed Adam Staple Maior, to be put downe, and in his place Nicholas Brember was elected on the 21. day of March. Alſo, the Aldermen were depoſed, and other ſet in their places, & Sir Iohn Minſterworth Knight, and other were drawne and hanged.
            About this time, roſe vp in Oxford a certayne Northren
                  Adam Meri. Iohn VVicklefe. man called Iohn Wickleffe, a Doctour of Diuinitie, who in Scholes, and elſewhere, held certayne concluſions, contrarie to the publike ſtate, eſpecially againſt Monkes, and other Religious men that had poſſeſſions: his companions dwelling togither, were apparelled in long garmentes downe to the héeles of ruſſet, going barefooted &c.
            King Edward ended his life at his Manour of Shene, theKing Edvvard deceaſſed. Nevv Abbey. Iohn Rouſe.
                xxj. day of June, in the yeare 1377. when he had raigned 50. yeares, four monethes, and odde dayes▪ whoſe body was buried at Westminster. He builded the Abbey of our Lady of Grace by the Tower of London. He newly builded S. Stephens Chappell at Westminster: the Caſtell of Windſore, and the Nunrie of Dertford. He alſo founded a Maſondieu for the poore in the Towne of Caleis.
            
         
         
            
            ¶ Richard of Burdeaux.
            
            
            
               RIcharde the ſecond, borne at
               Anno reg. 1. 
               Burdeaux, the ſonne of Prince Edward, being but eleuen yeares olde, beganne his raigne the xxj. daye of June, in the yeare of our Lord God 1377. and was Crowned at Westminster the ſixtéenth day of July, by the hands of Simon Sudbury, Archbiſhop of Canterburie.
            
            Before his Coronation, he ſet agréement betwéene the Duke of Lancaster, and the Citizens of London, and ſet at libertie Sir Peter de la Mere, who as is aforeſayd, was by inſtigation of Alice Perce caſt in priſon.
            In beautie, bountie, and liberalitie, he farre paſſed all his progenitours, but was ouermuch giuen to reſt and quietneſſe, louing little déedes of armes, and for that he was yong, was moſt ruled by yong counſell, and regarded nothing the counſels of the ſage and wiſe men of the Realme, which thing turned this Land to great trouble, and himſelfe to extreame miſerie, as is by theſe Uerſes declared.
            
               
               When this King firſt beganne to raigne, the Lawes neglected were,Vox clamantis. Iohn Gower.
               
               Wherefore good fortune him forſooke, and th'earth did quake for feare.
               The people alſo whome he pollde, againſt him did rebell,
               The time doth yet bewayle the woes, that Chronicles do tell.
               The fooliſh counſell of the lewde, and yong he did receyue,
               And graue aduiſe of aged heads, he did reiect and leaue.
               And then for greedie thirſt of Coyne, ſome ſubiectes he accuſed,
               To gayne their goodes into his hands, thus he the Realme abuſed.
            
            The King at his Coronation made foure Earles, Thomas
               Earles created. of Woodstocke, King Edwardes yongeſt ſonne, Earle of Buckingham & Northampton. To him he gaue 1000 Markes yearely out of his Treaſurie, til he had prouided him lands to that value. Thomas Moubray Earle of Notingham, Gifford Angoliſme,
                a Gaſcoigne, Earle of Huntington, to whome he likewiſe gaue 1000. Markes the yeare, out of his Treaſurie, till he had prouided him Landes to that value: and Henry Percy Earle of Northumberland.
            
            On S. Peters day, the Frenchmen with 50. Ships arriuedThe Tovvne of Rye ſpoyled. The Ile of VVight taken. at Rye, and ſpoyled the Towne and brent it. The ſame time the Scottes brent the Towne of Rokeſborow. In the kalendes of September, the Frenchmen tooke the Ile of Wight, ſauing the Caſtell, which Sir Hugh Tirell kept manfully. When the Frenchmen had ſpoyled the Countrey, they tooke 1000. Markes of the inhabitants, to ſpare their houſes vnbrent.
            After taking of the ſaid Ile, the Frenchmen entring theirThe Frenchmen lye before VVinchelſea. Galleys againe, coaſted the Sea ſtrond, till they came ouer againſt the Towne of Winchelſea, and vnderſtanding that the Abbot of Battaill was come thither to defend it, they ſent to him, that he ſhould redéeme the Towne: the Abbot anſwered, that he néeded not redéeme the thing which he had not loſt, the Frenchmen then requeſted there might be ſente forth to fight mā to man, or a more number, to trie the matter in view of armes, but the Abbot anſwered, he was a Religious man, and therefore not lawfull for him to admitte anye ſuche petition, and that he came not thither to fighte, but to defend the Towne & Countrey. Theſe things being

heard, the Frenchmen ſuppoſing that the Abbot and his people wanted courage, they aſſayled the Towne with ſuch inſtruments of warre as caſt forth a farre off, whereof they had plentie, not ceaſſing from noone till euening: but by the proweſſe of ye Abbot, and ſuch as were with him, the French preuayled nothing. In the meane time, whileſt they were buſie thus at Winchelſea, they ſent part of their company vntoThe Tovvne of Haſtings brent by Frēchmen. 
               Hastings, where finding the towne almoſt emptie, they brent it. The Frenchmen perceyuing they could do no good at Winchelſea, departed from thence, and left it as they found it.
            
               Andrew Pikeman: Nicholas Twiford, the 28. of Sept.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Sir Nicholas Brembar Grocer, the 28. of October.
            
            The ſame yeare, the Frenchmen comming vp at y• towne of Rotingdon in Suſſex, néere to the Towne of Lewes, whereTho. Walſing. the Prior of Lewes, with a ſmall companie met them, and byThe Prior of Levves taken by Frenchmen. a multitude of Frenchmen that came vpon him, he was taken, and ledde to their Shippes, with two Knightes, to wéete, Sir Iohn Falleſley, and Sir Thomas Cheynie, and a Squire, called Iohn Brokes. There died in this battayle almoſt an hundred Engliſhmen: the Frenchmen therefore with all their Nauie returned home, being 37. Galleys, eyght Caruales of Spayne, and certayne Barkes: ſtreightwayes therefore as they came to land, ſome of them went vnto the ſéege, that was about Arde, and by treaſon, which alwayes is familiar to them, the kéeper of that Caſtell being an Almayne, to wéete, the Lord of Gunney, deliuering to them the Towne, they ſtreight got the Caſtell alſo, for the which the ſame kéeper being taken by Sir Hugh Caluerley, kéeper of Caleis, was ſent into England, and committed to priſon.
            A Parliament was holden at London, which ended about Saint Andrewes tide, in the whiche Parliamente, Alice Peres was baniſhed the lande, and all hir moueable goodesAlice Peres banished. being forfeited to the Kings vſe.
            There was graunted to the King of the Cleargie twoTvvo tenthes granted by the Cleargie. tenthes to be payde that yeare, with condition, that from thenceforth the King ſhould not extort from his ſubiectes by

ſuch petitions or demaundes but liue of his owne, and continue his warre, for as it was aunſweared there, his owne goods pertayning to the crowne, ſufficed both to the finding1378 of his houſe, and mayntayning of his warres, of the ſame were beſtowed by fitte miniſters, and for the kéeping of the money, two Citizens of London were appointed, William Walworth, and Iohn Philpot. The Engliſh men hearing of a number of Spaniſhe ſhippes to remayne at ſluce for wante of winde, aſſembling a great companye of armed men, and a great nauie, meant to take the ſeas, their chiefe Captaynes were Thomas of Woodſtocke Erle of Buckingham, the duke of Brytaine, the Lord Latimer, the Lord Robert Fitz Walter, ſir Robert Knowles, and many other valiaunt perſonages, who being entred the Sea, taſted Fortune diſfauourable, for by a tempeſtuous winde that roſe, theyr ſhippes were ſcattered in ſunder, theyr maſtes are broken downe, theyr ſayles rent, and many of the ſmall veſſels that were victuallers were drowned, at length, the ſhippes got togither againe, and arriued in Englande, and being nowe rigged are eftſoones freight with men, and to the Sea they go. About y• ſame time, ſir Hugh Caluerley making a iourney towards Bulloign, found a Barge in y• hauen of ye town, y• bare ye name of the towne, & another that was the French Kings & a xxvj. other veſſels more and leſſe, all the which with a great part of the ſuburbes of Bulloigne, he cauſed to be diſpoyled, taking with him whatſoeuer was there to be deſired, with certayne priſoners: he droue afore him alſo a gret bootie of ſhéepe and beaſtes, whiche he founde paſturing néere the towne, which might well ſerue to victuall Caleis for a great time: he recouered the ſame day the caſtel Marke, of which through negligence before had bin loſt.
            The Engliſh fléete whereof we ſpake, returned without any great good ſucceſſe, they toke an eyght Spaniſh ſhippes in the Brytiſh coaſtes neare to Brest, and more had takē if there buſineſſe had bin ſo well done, as was pretended: and therefore the fléete returned home, ſo toſſed with ſtormes and

contrarie weather, and after with inteſtine diſcorde, that it ſéemed there wanted among them gods fauour. The Lorde Percy (this fléete remaining for the mending of his ſhippes, whileſt the other were abrode) went now to the ſea, wyth a great ſhip and ſome ſmaller veſſels, and méeting with fiftie ſhips laden with French wares and marchandize, of whiche ſome were of Flaunders, ſome of Spaine, he ſet on them al, who beholding his bolde enterprice, and thinking that he hadde ſome ayde at hande gaue ouer to make reſiſtaunce, and ſo xxviij. eſcaping by flight. xxij. yéelded themſelues to the ſayd Thomas Lord Percy Sir Hugh Caluerley with a power ſecretly armed, wente to the towne of Staple, where the fayre was then, to the which were come manye Merchauntmen from Bulloigne, Mutterel, Amience, and Paris, where he falling on them that were vnarmed, ſlewe many, toke many to be put to their ranſomes, ſacked al the goods, and ſet fire in the town, ſo that it was wholy conſumed, few places excepted. This done, he returned to Caleis with his men in ſafetie, bringing from that faire wares which turned to the greate profit of the Caliſians many yeares after.
            The men of Winchelſe and Rie, gathered a gret number of people togither, and imbarqued themſelues towardes Normandie, deſirous to requite ye loſſes which before they had receiued, and ſo in the night arriuing in a Town called Peters Hauen, entred the ſame, ſlaying ſo many as they met, & thoſe whom they thinke able to pay raunſome, they carry to their ſhippes: they ſpoyled the houſes with the Churches, where they founde many rich ſpoyles which ſometime had bin by the French men fet from Ric, and eſpecially the belles and ſuch like, which they ſhipped, ſet the reſt on fire, and thē they land at Wilet, not far from thence, wher they practiſed ye like cheuance, & ſo with theyr riche ſpoyle returned home.
            About the ſame time Iohn duke of Lancaster requeſted ye ye mony granted to the K. by ye cleargie & laitie; might be cō
               mitted to his cuſtodie, affirming yt he would kepe ye enimies of from the coaſtes of England, by the ſpace of one yeare with

yt mony, & moreouer bring to paſſe ſome further great commoditie, to whoſe importunate petitiō the Lords, although againſt theyr willes agréed. They appoint therfore ye firſte day of Marche to méete in counſel, in which euery of thoſe ſhold go forth on this iourney: & leaſt ye ſea ſhould in ye mean time want thoſe y• ſhold kéepe it, there wer. ix. ſhips hired of thē of Baion, to defend ye ſea & land frō incurſions of the Frēch & others. Theſe ſhips being furniſhed with ſufficiēt nūbers of armed mē, wein a ſhort time coaſting ye ſeas, met the nauy & marchandice of ye 
               Spaniards, & entring battayle with them, in ſhort time take. xiiij. of their ſhips laden wt wines & other marchandize, & returne to England ioyfully: vnto ſir Robert Knowles captain of Brest, they giue the firſte fruites of theyr pray, an C. tunne of their beſte wines as they paſſed by him homewardes. In the meane time Henrie ye baſtard, calling himſelf King of Spain, hearing y• they of Baion, had done ſuch harme vnto his people, & that the D. of Lācaster had prepared a gret nūber to enter ye ſea, he was ſore afraid, thinking ye he minded not only to defēd the ſea, but rather to ſéeke his kingdome, which by right of his wife ye lawful inheritour of Spaine, he ment to chalenge: wherfore ye ſaid Henrie cōmanded a nauie to be prepared of al his land yt he might ſtay the ſaid D. from entring his country, & if he might, to take him priſoner, which happily they had done, if ye king of Portingale wt almoſt an inumerable nūber had not entred ye kingdome of Spain, ye ſelf ſame time yt the baſtard Henrie prepared him ſelfe againſt ye D. but the D. deferring his iourney from day to day, they y• wer appointed captains ouer the nauie we certain mē of war, got thē to ye ſea, there to ſtay for the Dukes comming, eſtéeming it more glorious to liue on the ſea by prayes taking frō the enimies, than to liue by ſpoile of their owne countreymen at home. When they had certain dayes wa
                  •
               ted vp & downe the Seas, the Spaniardes met with them with an armed company of men, ſo that either part in hope of pray ioyned togyther in fighte, but oure menne hauyng the winde and weather contrary to them, loſt the victory to

theyr enimies, ſome eſcaping by flight, and ſome being taken, amongſt the which ſir Hugh Courtney a noble Knight was one.
            About the ſame time Iohn Mercer a Scotte,
                gathering togither no ſmall number of French men, Scots, and Spaniards, ſet vpon certaine ſhips of Scaborow, toke them and led them into Scotlande, this he did in reuenge of his Fathers iniurie, who was before taken by the Engliſh men, and kept priſoner in the Caſtel of Scarborow.
            
            
               Iohn Philpot a Citizē of London, a mā of iolly wit, & very rich in ſubſtance, conſidering the want of ye Duke of Lancaster and other Lords that ought to haue defended ye realm,Anno reg. 2. and lamenting the oppreſſions of the inhabitauntes, hyred wyth his owne money, to the number of a thouſand ſouldiours, the whiche mighte take from the ſayde Iohn Mercer both his ſhippes and goods, whiche he had by reuenge takē, and defended the Realme of England from ſuche incurſions: and it came to paſſe within a ſmall time, that his hyred mē toke the ſayde Iohn Mercer with all his ſhips, which he had violently taken from Scarborow, and fiftéene Spaniſh ſhippes that were laden with muche riches, and were with hym in ayde at that preſent. There was greate ioy made among ye people, all men prayſing that worthy mans bountifulneſſe and loue towards the king. The Earles and Barons ſéeing ſo laudable an acte, atchieued by Iohn Philpot, tooke it grieuouſly, althoughe they knewe themſelues guiltie, firſte they ſecretly lye in awayte, to do him ſome diſpleaſure, and after they ſpake againſt him openly, ſaying it was not lawfull for him to doe ſuch things without the counſell of the King and Realme, certayne of the Lordes but the chiefe being Hugh Earle of Stafforde that rehearſed theſe things thus againſt him, were aunſweared by the ſame Iohn Philpot, ſir, know (ſayth he) that I neyther ſente my money nor men to the daunger of the Seas, that I ſhoulde take from you, or your fellowes, the good renoume of Chilualrie, and winne it to me, but being ſorrowfull to ſée the peoples myſerie,

in my Countrey, whych nowe through your ſlouthfulneſſe, of the moſt noble Lady of Nations, is brought to lye open to the ſpoyling of euerye vileſt nation, when there is not one of you that doth put hys hande to the defence thereof. I haue therefore ſet forth my ſelfe and mine, for the ſauing of my nation and Countrey: the Earle had not to aunſwere.
            The. xi. of Auguſt, certaine wicked perſons of the KingsMurder in the Church of VVeſtminſter. Tho Walſing.
                houſe being armed, at high Maſſe tyme entred the Churche of Westminster Abbay, and there ſet vppon two valiaunt Eſquiers, Iohn Schakel and Robert Hawley, whyche had eſcaped out of the Tower of London, to the ſayde Abbay, for refuge of Sanctuarie: they ſlewe the ſayde Robert Hawley in the quire before the Priours ſtal, and ſlewe a Monke which intreated them to ſpare the ſayde Robert in that place. Syr Ralph Ferreis▪
                and ſir Alan Buxule, Captain of the Tower (ſome ſay the Lord Latimer) wer the captaines of this miſchiefe.
            The aforeſayd two Eſquires, Robert Hawley and Iohn Shakell, in the battayle of Nazers in Spaine toke the Erle of Dene poiſoner, who deliuered vnto him his ſō for a pledge: and bycauſe they would not preſent the ſayde Earles ſon to the King, who woulde giue them little or nothing for hym, the foreſayde Allen Buxule with other were ſent to do thys myſchiefe, who ſlewe the one, and caſte the other in priſon.
            
               Iohn Boſeham: Thomas Cornewalis, the. 28. of Septem.
               
                  Sherifes. Maior. Iohn Philpot his charitie.
            
            
               Sir Iohn Philpot Grocer, the. 28. of October.
            
            This Iohn Philpot Maior of London, gaue to the ſame Citie certaine tenementes, for the which the Chamberlain payeth yearely to xiij. poore people, euerye of them ſeauen pence the wéeke for euer, and as any of thoſe thirtéene perſons dyeth, the Maior appointeth one, and the Recorder another.
            The Scottes beganne to Rebell, and a Squire of theirs,1379 Tho. Walſing. called Alexander Ramſey, with fortye perſons, in a nighte

toke the Caſtell of Berwicke, but the ninth day following, the Erle of Northumberland recouered it, and ſlew the Scots▪
                that were therein.
            The Marchauntes of London wickedly ſlew a rich marchaunt of Genua, for that he woulde carry to a better market the ſpices that he had promiſed to bring into this Country, the doers wherof were after apprehended, and ſome for that fact executed, as after ſhal appeare.
            So great a mortality of men hapned in the North partsPeſtilence in the North. Tho. Walſ.
                of England, as neuer had bin ſéene before, which the Scots ſéeing raunged: through and ſlewe with the ſworde, them that were ſicke of the plague, and ſo purſued them that had not the plague, that they droue out of the Countrey almoſt all the able men.
            In a Parliament at London, it was decréed, that eueryeTaxe. Duke ſhould pay ten markes to the King, the Archbiſhops the like, Earles, Biſhops and mitered Abbots ſhoulde giue ſixe markes, and euery Monke. xl. pence, no religious perſon, man or woman, Parſon, Uicar, or Chapleine eſcaped this taxe. Iohn Mountfort Duke of Brytaine, returned to his countrey, where he was receyued with great honour.
            A buſhel of Wheate was ſolde for ſixe pence: a gallon of
                  Anno reg. 3. VVheat and VVine cheape. white Wine ſixe pence, and a gallon of red Wine for foure pence.
            
               Iohn Heyliſdom: William Barret, the. 28. of September.
               
                  Sherifes. Maior. Tho. Walſing. S. Iohn Arūdale drovvned.
            
            
               Iohn Hadley Grocer, the. 28. of October.
            
            
               Iohn of Arundale, brother to the Earle of Arundale, was ſent to helpe the Duke of Brytaine, with manye other noble knightes and Eſquires, who beginning their voyage wyth ſpoyling their own Countrey, rauiſhing wiues, widowes, and Uirgins, and robbing of Churches, were by tempeſte driuen on the rockes of a certaine Iſlande in Ireland, when they were al moſt miſerablye drowned, with their treaſure and prouiſions which was of ineſtimable value. Sir T. Baniſter,
               Cro. Matoris Lon. ſir Roger Trumpington, ſir Nicholas K
                     •
                  riel, ſir Thomas Dale, ſir Iohn Sentcler and ſixe other knightes periſhed

there the ſixtéenth of December.
            In a Parliamente at London was graunted to the Kyng1380 a tenth of the Eccleſiaſtical perſons, and a fiftéenth of the ſecular, vpon condition that no other Parliament ſhoulde be holden from the Calendes of March til Michaelmaſſe.
            A combat was foughte at Westminster in the kings preſence,A combat at VVeſtminſter. betwéene Iohn Auſley knight, and Thomas Catrington Eſquire, whom the forſayde knight had appealed of treſon, for ſelling the Caſtel of Saint Sauiours, whiche the Lord Chandos had builded in the Ile of Constantine in France, and the knight ouercame the Eſquire.
            
               Thomas of Woodſtocke Earle of Buckingham, Thomas Percy, Hugh Caluerley, Robert Knowles,
                Lorde Baſſet, ſir Iohn Harleſton, William of Windſore, approued and tryed Knightes, were ſent with a great power to ayde the Duke of Brytaine, who were conuayed to Caleis, and from thence rode aboute throughe Fraunce, ſpoyling the Countrey, and ſlaying the people to the borders of Brytaine, and entred the ſame without loſſe, eyther of man or beaſt.
            In this iourney ſir Iohn Philpot, Citizen of London
               Iohn Philpot his good ſeruice deſerued great commendations, who hyred ſhips for them of his owne charges, and with his own money releaſed the armour which the ſouldiours had gaged for their victuals, more than a thouſand in number.
            The Scottes entred Comberlande, Westmerlande, and ye forreſt of Engelwood, ſlewe the inhabitauntes, droue away the Cattle, and robbed the Market and Towne of Penreth, and whiles the Earle of Northumberland prepared to haue bene reuenged, the king ſent letters to the contrarie. Iohn Vian
               
                  Anno reg. 4. French men tooke VVinchelſey. knight with the French kings galyes toke the town of Winchelſea, put the Abbot of Battaile to flight and toke one of his Monkes.
            He alſo brent the Townes of Apledor and Rie about the leaſt of Saint Laurence.
            
            The eight of September foure Galeys of Fraunce came to Graueſende, and burnt a great part of the Towne.
            
               
               Walter Ducket: William Knighthoode, the. 28. of Sept.
               
                  Sherifes. Maior. Guns inuented. Polidor. Sebaſtian Munſter
               
            
            
               William Walworth Fiſhmonger, the. 28. of October.
            
            About this time the making of Gunnes was founde, by a certaine Almaine, who hauing the pouder of Brimſtone in a Morter which he had beaten for a medicine, and couered with a ſtone, as he ſtroke fier, a ſparke chaunced to fal into ye ponder, wherby a flame out of the morter raiſed the ſtone a great height, whiche after he had perceyued, made a Pype of yron, and tempered the ponder with other, and ſo finiſhed that deadly engine, as reporteth Blondus, and R. Volaterianus, the firſt that vſed ſhot, to their behalfe and profit, were the Venetians againſte the inhabitauntes of Genoa. During the Parliament at Northampton, beginning the firſt of Nouember, was hāged Iohn Kirby that ſlue the merchāt of Genoa, whom he ſpake of before.
            In this Parliamente an excéeding greate Taxe was demaunded,1381 Great Taxe. which afterwardes was cauſe of greate diſturbaunce: Of all religious perſons men and women ſixe ſhyllings eight pence, ſecular prieſts as muche, and euery perſon, man or woman, foure pence to the King, whiche was payde.
            It was alſo ordayned, that euery couple wedded, ſhould paye two ſhillings, for euery foote of Beaſt, and alſo homegilde, but this was neuer aſked.
            By means of which payment, in ye Sommer following, the commons of Kent and Eſſex, ſodainely rebelled, they beingCommons rebelled. Iohn Bal his Sermon. Tho. Walſing.
                animated therevnto by Iohn Ball a ſeditious Prieſte, who in hys ſermons vſed to take for his Theame, When Adam dalfe and Eue ſpanne, who was then a Gentleman, &c. Affirming that al men were made a like by nature, and therefore ought to laye away the yoke of bondage, that they might enioye the wiſhed libertie, &c. too ſhamefull, ſedicious, and damnable to bée taughte, whyche neuertheleſſe ſo pleaſed the common people, that they cryed hée ſhould be Archbiſhoppe of Canterburie, and Chauncellour of England.
            
            
               This rebellion began at Dertford in Kent, in manner asRebellion begā at Dertford. Cro. S. Albons.
                followeth. The Collectours appointed to gather the foreſayd groats or pole mony, comming into the houſe of Iohn a Tiler, demanded ye ſame for him, his wife, hys daughter, & other hys family: but the Tilers wife denied to pay for hir daughter, ſaying ſhe was vnder age. Thē ſayd yt Collector, that ſhal I ſoone wit, and toke the mayde violently, and diſhoneſtly ſearched whether ſhe were of age or no, wherwith the mother made an outcry, hyr huſbande being in ye towne at worke. When tidyngs came to him, he caughte his lathing ſtaffe in his hande, and ranne réeking home, where he reaſoning with the Collectour who made him ſo bolde, the Collectour being a proude fellow, let flye at the Tiler, but the Tiler voyding the ſtroke, ſmote the Collectour on the heade wyth his lathing ſtaffe, that the braynes fell out, where throughe great noyſes aroſe in the ſtreates, and the poore people being glad, euerye man arrayed hym to ſupport this Iohn Tyler. Thus the commons drewe togither and went to Maidstone, from thence backe againe to Blacke Heath, and ſo forth to London, and entred the Citie on Corpus Christs day, where they deſtroyed many goodly places of theRebels entred London. Sauoy S. Iohns. Highburi brent nobles and other, as the Sauoy, Saint Iohns by Smithfielde, the Manour of Highburie by Yſeldon, and the Temple where the Prentiſes of law were lodged for the encreaſe of theyr ſtudie. They ſet out of the Tower of London (where the King was then lodged) Simon Sudburie Archbiſhoppe of Canterburie,
               The Archb. of Canterburie. The priour of S Iohns a Frier & Iohn Legge beheaded. Lorde Chauncellour of Englande, Robert Halles
                Priour of Saint Iohns, and Treaſurer of England, William Apelto
                        •
                     
                  
                a Frier Minor the Kings confeſſour, and Iohn Legge a Sergeaunt of the Kings, and beheaded them on the Tower hill: they beheaded diuerſe other in manye places, as ſir Iohn Cauendiſhe Lorde chiefe Juſtice of Englande, the Priour of Sainte Edmundeſburie, and other. Rychard Lions a famous Lapidarie of London, was drawen out of his houſe and beheaded in Chepe. They beheaded all men of Law, as wel prentices, and vtter Bareſters, as Juſtices, and al Jurers

that they might get into their hands, they ſpared none whom they thought to be learnes, were it neuer ſo little, eſpeciallye if they founde anye to haue penne and ynke, they pulled of hys whoode, and all with one voyce of trying out, as they had bin ſo many Diuels, hale him into the ſtréetes and cut of his head.
            They alſo beheaded all Flemmings, not ſparing anyeFlemmings beheaded. for reuerence of the church or other place, where they found them: they ſet thirtéene forth of the Frier Austines Church, and ſeauentéene out of another Church in London▪
                they tooke two and thirtie in the Vintrie, and many other here & there in the Citie and Southwarke, all whiche if they coulde not plainly pronounce Bread and Chéeſe, but Brot and Caus, loſt their heades▪ They ſpoyled all bookes of law, recordes, and monuments they coulde méete withall, and ſet al priſoners at libertie.
            The king to pacifie their furie, offered them peace, onEſſex men pacified. condition they woulde ceaſe from burning of houſes and ſlaughter of men, whiche the Eſſex men toke, and returned home, but the Kentiſhe men remayned burning and ſlaying as afore. Wherevppon the King ſent ſir Iohn Newton
               The K ſent to VVat Tiler. Knight, to Wat Tiler their Captaine, to intreate him to come and talke with him about his owne demaundes: the Knight doing his meſſage, Wat Tiler aunſwered that hée woulde come at hys owne pleaſure, neuertheleſſe he followed ſoftly, and when he came neare Smithfielde, where the king aboade his comming, the ſame Knighte was ſent againe to méete hym, and to knowe his requeſtes, but Wat Tiler ſéeing the knight come néere vnto him on horſſeback, ſayde it hadde become hym better to bée on foote in his preſence: the Knighte aunſwered that it was no harme, 
                  •
               ith himſelfe was alſo on horſſebacke, therewith Watte Tyler drewe his dagger, and offering to ſtrike, called the KnightThe 
                     ••
                  outneſſe of VVat Tiler. traytour. The knighte aunſweared that he lyed, and drew his dagger. The King ſéeing the Knighte in daunger, comaunded hym to alighte one foote and to deliuer his dagger

vnto Watte Tiler, and when his proude minde woulde not be pacifyed, but woulde néedes runne on the Knighte, there came to the King the Maior of London William Walworth,
                and manye other Knightes and Eſquires, affirming it to be a ſhamefull reproche if they ſhoulde permitte the Knyghte to be murdered: Wherevppon the Kyng taking boldeneſſe vpon hym, commaunded the Maior to arreſte the Rebell, whiche Maior being a man of incomparable boldeneſſe, ſtreyght arreſted hym on the head, in ſuche ſorte that he aſtonyed hym: and forthwyth they whyche attended on the Kyng inuironed the Rebell, and thruſte him in, in diuerſe places of his bodye▪ with theyr weapons, and then drewe hym from among the peoples féete, into the Hoſpitall of Saint Bartholmewe, which whenVVat Tiler areſted & ſlaine. the commons perceyued, they cryed out that theyr Captaine was trayterouſlye ſlayne, but the King rode to them, and ſayde, what meane you to doe, I am your King, I wil be your Captaine, followe me into the fielde, there to haue whatſoeuer ye will require. They therefore followed hym into the fieldes wythout the ſuburbes towards Yſeldon, and in the meane time the Maior rod into the Citie, rayſed the Citizens, and ſhortly returned with a thouſande wel armed men, Sir Robert Knowles being theyr leader. The King &The Citizens of Lon. deliuered the King. other in hys companye reioyſing of this vnlooked for ayde, ſodainelye compaſſed the multitude of the commons wyth fighting men, which commons forthwyth throwing downe bowes, billes, and all other their weapons, fel themſelues to the grounde, humbly crauing pardon, which was graunted, and Charters deliuered to the Captains of euery ſhire, who then departed home. The rude multitude being thus diſperſed, the King made William Walworth Maior, Nicholas Brember, Iohn Philpot and Robert Lande Aldermen of London▪
                Knights in Smithfield▪
                and vpon the ſaid Hil were created the Erles Marſhal and Penbroke. And a little after Nicholas Twiforde, and Adam 
                  〈…〉
               rmen of London were made Knightes.
            
               
               Iacke Straw being taken, when at London he ſhoulde byThe cōfeſſor of Iacke Stravve. iudgement of the Maior loſe his heade, confeſſed as followeth.
            The ſame time (ſayth he) that we came to Black Hea
                     •
                  h, when we ſent for the King, we purpoſed to haue murdered all the Knights, Eſquiers and gentlemen that ſhould haueConſpira
                     •
                  ie of the Rebels▪
                come with him, and to haue ledde the king royally vſed, vp and downe, that with the ſight of him, al men eſpecially the common people mighte haue come vnto vs the mor
                  •
                boldelye, and when we had got togither an innumerable multitude, we woulde haue ſodainly put to death in euery Countrey, the Lords and maiſters of the common people, in whom mighte appeare to be eyther counſell or reſiſtance againſte vs: and ſpeciallye we woulde haue deſtroyed the Knightes of Saint Iohns, laſtlye we woulde haue killed the King himſelfe, and all men that hadde 
                  •
               in of any poſſeſſion, Biſhoppes, Monkes, Chanons, Parſons, to be briefe, wée woulde haue diſpatched: onlye begging Fryers ſhoulde haue liued, that might haue ſufficed for miniſtring the Sacramentes in the whole Realme, for we would haue made Kings, Wat Tiler in Kente, and in euerye other ſhire one. But bycauſe thys oure purpoſe was hyndered by the Archbyſhoppe, we ſtudyed howe to bring him ſhortly to hys ende.
            Againſte the ſame daye that Wat Tyler was killed, we purpoſed that euening (bycauſe that the poore people of London ſéemed to fauour vs) to ſette fire in foure corners of the Citie, ſo to haue brent it, and to haue deuided the riches at our pleaſures amongſt vs. He added that theſe things they purpoſed to haue done, as God ſhould helpe him at the end of his life.
            After thys confeſſion made, hée was beheaded, and hys heade ſette on London Bridge by Wat Tilers and many other.
            The principal leaders of the commons were Wat Tiler▪
               
               Principal Captaines.
               
the ſecond Iack Straw, the third Iohn Kirkby, the fourth Ale
               ̄
               Iacke Stravv beheaded. 
               Threder, the fifth Thomas Scot, y• ſixth Ralph Rugge: theſe and many others were leaders of the Kentiſhe and Eſſex mē. At Mildenhall and Bury in Suffolke, was Roberte Weſtbrom▪
                that made himſelfe king and was moſte famous after Iohn Wraw, who being a prieſt wold not ſet crown vpon crown, but left the name of king and crowne to the ſayde Roberte. At Norwichē 
                  Iohn Lerceſter
                a Dier exerciſed the name and power of a king, til he was taken and hanged for his pains. Here I thinke good to note ſome Epiſtles of Iohn Ball and others, wyth ſome ſhort notes of their Diuelliſh demeanor, vnder the colour of zeale and conſcience, and ſo to ende thys matter.
            
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              IOhn Bal Saint Marie Prieſt, gre
                                 •
                              teth wel all maner of men,Epiſtle of I. Bal
                                    •
                                  ye may read an other in Tho. of VVa
                                    ••
                                 ingham nevv in Print. and biddeth them in the name of the Trinitie, Father, Son, and holy Ghoſt, ſtande manlike togither in truth, and helpe truth, and truth ſhal helpe you: now raigneth pride in price, couetiſe is holde wiſe, leacherie without ſhame, gluttonye without blame: enuie raigneth with treaſon, and ſlouth is taken in greate ſeaſon. God doe bote, for now is time Amen.
                        
                        
                           
                              IAcke Milner asketh helpe to turne his Mil aright, hee hatheEpiſtle of Iacke Milner. grounden ſmal, ſmal, the kings ſonne of heauen he ſhal pay for all: loke thy Mill go right with foure ſayles, and the poſte ſtande in ſtedfaſtneſſe, with right and might, with skill and with wil, let might helpe right, and skil before wil, and right before mighte, then goeth our Mill arighte: and if might goe before righte, and will before skill, then is oure Mill miſdight.
                        
                        
                           
                              IAcke Trewman doeth you to vnderſtande that falſeneſſeI leaue out Iack Carter, and this is Iack Trevvmans Epiſtle. and guile hath raigned too long, and trueth hath bin ſette vnder a locke, and falſeneſſe raigneth in euery flocke, no man maye come trueth too, but hee ſings Si dedero: ſpeake, ſpende, and ſpeede, quoth Iohn of Bathon, and therefore ſinne fareth as wilde floude, true loue is awaye that is ſo good, and Clearkes for wealth wurcheth them woe: God do bote, for now is time.
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               When theſe rebels burned the Sauoy, one of them tookeOne of the rebels by his felovves, caſt into the fire. a goodly ſiluer péece and hid it in his boſome, but another had ſpyed him and tolde his fellowes, which hurled hym & the péece of plate into the fire, ſaying: we be zealous of truth and Iuſtice, and not théeues and robbers.
            Two and thirtie of them entring the ſeller of the Sauoy,
               xxxij. of the rebels mured vp. drunke ſo muche of ſwéete Wines that they were not able to come out, but were ſhutte in with wood and ſtones that mured vppe the doore, they called and cryed ſeauen dayes, and were heard of many, but none came to helpe them and ſo they dyed there.
            After a number of them hadde ſacked the new Temple,The ende of the Rebels. what with labour, and what with wine, they lay down vnder the wals and howſing, and were ſlaine like ſwine, and one of them killed another for olde grudge and hatred, and others alſo made quicke diſpatch of them.
            
               Watte Tiler being killed, Iacke Strawe and other theyr principal Captaines hanged, the hope and confidence of the commons decayed, but bycauſe the mindes of the King and Nobles was yet wauering, ſéeing the people readie to miſchiefe, they graunted to them Charters of manumiſſion and ſuffered them to departe, the whiche being done, the king cauſed an army to be aſſembled from London, and ſente into al Countryes that thoſe who were his friendes ſhould make haſte to come to hym to London, furniſhed with horſſe and armour, and it came to paſſe that wythin thrée dayes he had a. xl. thouſande horſſemen about him in ſéemely ſort armed, he muſtered them on Blacke Heath, himſelfe ryding on a greate courſer, with hys ſtandarde borne before hym, when therefore ſo myghtye an armye was aſſembled, the Kyng was aduertiſed that the Kentiſhe men had eftſoones conſpyred, wherevppon hée forth wyth ſette forewarde, but by the mediation of the Nobles and greate men of Kente that vndertooke for them, he was ſtayde and paciſied wyth them, and then firſte Iuſtices were ſente to ſéeke and inquire

of malefactours, and that Countrey became quiet at the ſight of them. Then the Maior of London ſitting in iudgement, cauſed the malefactours to be tryed, as well of the Citie as alſo of Kente, Eſſex, Southſex, Norffolke, and Suffolke and other Countryes, that might be taken within the liberties of the Citie, and all thoſe whome he founde guiltie of the foreſayde Treaſon, he cauſed to hoppe headleſſe, among the which were Iacke Strawe, Iohn Kirkeſty, Alen Threder, &c. alſo Iohn Starling of Eſſex, that gloryed to haue beheaded the Archbiſhoppe, was beheaded hymſelfe.
            The king remayned nowe at London, nowe at Waltham, with a greate armye of armed menne, conſidering what was to be done for the commoditie of the realme. At length the Counſell thoughte good to ſende the Kings commiſſion into euerye ſhire, for the reſiſting of the diſquieters of the peace of the kyngdome. Theſe commiſſions did muche comforte the faythfull ſubiectes, and troubled the falſe, for they were nowe compelled to ſéeke corners, that before toke vpon them to doe all things abroade, lawyers nowe durſt come forth of their dennes, and thoſe which before fledde from the tyrannie of the time, looked for th
                  •
               ſe that nowe feared iudgement and iuſtice to bée done on them.
            The commons being thus feared, but not in all places alike, they of Eſſex gathering a newe multitude togither at Byllarica, a village neare to Hatfielde Peuerell, decréed eyther to inioye lybertye gotten by force, or to dye in fyghting for the ſame, they ſente to the Kyng then béeyng at Waltham meſſengers to knowe if hée thoughte good to permitte them to inioye their permittedAnno reg. 5. lybertie, lyke to theyr Lordes, and that they ſhoulde not be cōpelled to come to Courts but only to gret Léetes twice in the yeare, vnto the which the King anſwered thus. Oh miſerable and hateful both to Land and Sea, not worthy

to liue: Do yée require to be equall to your Lordes? yée were worthy to be put to moſte ſhamefull death: But fith yée are come as Meſſengers, yée ſhall not dye nowe, to the ende yée may declare your anſweares to your fellowes: declare to them therfore on the Kyngs behalfe, that as they were Huſbandmen and bondmen, ſo ſhall they remaine in bondage, not as before, but more vile, without compariſon far, vnto thys. Whileſt we lyue, and by Gods ſufferaunce ſhal gouerne the Kingdome with Wit, Strength, & goods, we wil endeuour our ſelues, to kéepe you vnder, ſo that the duety of your ſeruice, may be an example for poſteritie, and that your matches both preſent, and that ſhall ſuccéede, may euer haue before their eies, and as it were in a Glaſſe, your miſery, and to you matter to curſe, and feare to commit the like. When the Meſſengers were gone, there was ſente ſtraightwayes into Eſſex, Thomas
                of Woodſtocke Earle of Buckingham, and ſir Thomas Percy brother to the Earle of Northumberlande, to repreſſe the boldneſſe of the ſayde commons. Theſe Commons hadde fortified themſelues wyth ditches and carriages: neuertheleſſe, although there was a great number of them, with ſmall buſineſſe, they were ſcattred into the woods, where the Lordes encloſed them, leaſt any of them might eſcape: & it came to paſſe, that v. C. of them were ſlain, & viij. C. of their horſes taken, the other y• eſcaped this ſlaughter, being gottē togither, haſted to Colchester, & began to ſtir the towneſmen to a new tumult, and when they profited not there, they weut to Sudbury, but the Lord Fitz Walter & ſir Iohn Harleſtone followed them, and ſlewe as many of them as they liſt, & ſhut vp the reſt in priſons. The king came to his Manour of Hauering at Boure, & after to Chelmeſford, where he appointed ſir R. Triſilian his Iuſtice to ſet & enquire of the malefactours, wherfore y• 
               Eſſex men ſéeing the euils y• hung ouer their heades, there came aboue. 500. humbly to the King barefooted & bareheaded, beſéeching him of pardon and mercie. To whom pardon was graunted, with condition, to delyuer the ſtyrrers of the

ſayd trouble. It came therefore to paſſe, that many were committed to worde, vpon whome, the Iuſtice charged xxiiij. men of their conſcience to ſay the truth, and many being condemned, were put to execution, by drawing and hanging, nine or tenne being hanged on one beame. The Iuſtices that before had ſitte in Eſſex, Kent, London, and other places, for all the multitude that were to be executed, vſed to head the commons, till now it ſéemed not a kinde of death anſwerable to ſo many and manifeſt crimes. Theſe things were done in Eſſex, the King being preſent: the like by his Iuſtices was done in other Countreys.
            
               Iohn Ball Prieſt being taken at Couentrie, was broughtIohn Ball hanged. to Saint Albons, and there before the King condemned, drawne and quartered, the fiftéenth of Iuly. He woulde not aſke the King forgiueneſſe, but vtterly deſpiſed him.
            
               Iohn Rote: Iohn Hinde, the 28 of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Iohn Northampton Draper, the 28. of October.
            
            About the feaſt of All Sainctes, a Parliamente was beganne, which endured long, to ſmall purpoſe, by reaſon of contention among the Lords, eſpecially the Duke of Lancaster, and the Earle of Northumberland, whoſe quarrell in the ende was taken vp by the King, and then the Lordes procéeded to treate of the Kings buſineſſe and the Realmes, but they lingered ſo long in vayne, that nothing was brought to effect, for hearing of the new Quéenes comming to Caleis, the Parliamēt was proroged. There were diuers of ye Nobles ſent to méete the Bride, and ſhe was conuayde with all the glorie of the world vnto Douer, many both of hir Countrey, and alſo of England, attending on hir.
            After the feaſt of the Epiphany, all the Nobilitie of the1382 Realme aſſembled at London, to be preſent at the Kings mariage, and to do their ſeruice according to the cuſtome of euery one in auntient time vſed. This Uirgin namedThe King maried. 
               Anne, the daughter of Veſelaus King of Boheme, is at Westminster conſecrate to the Kings wife, and by the Archbiſhop of Canterburie is Crowned Quéene. There were Iuſtes

kept for the honor of ſuch a ſolem
                  •••
               ation, certayne dayes togither, in which, both the Engliſhmen ſhewed their force, and the Quéenes Countrey men their pro
                  •
               eſſe.
            In this Quéenes dayes, began the deteſtable vſe of piked ſhoes, tied to their knées with cheines of ſiluer and gilt. Alſo,Piked shoes, high heads, and long tayled govvnes, vvith vvomen riding aſide firſt vſed in England. noble women vſed high attire on their heads, piked like hornes, with long trayned Gownes, and rode on ſide Saddles, after ye example of the Quéene who firſt brought that faſhion into this Land, for before, women were vſed to ride aſtride like men. The ſolemnitie of the mariage being ended, the Parliament is now begon againe, in which, many articles are proponed and decréed, to wéete, of admitting Strangers to ſell perſonally their wares, without impeachment of the Merchants of Englande: of the abrogating of Fi
                  ••
               res, and ſiluer garniſhing of girdles &c. of the price of Wines, that is, that the Tonne ſhould not excéede ſixe Markes &c.
            
               William Vfford Earle of Suffolke, in this Parliament, 
                  ••
               
               ing elected by the Knightes of the Shires, to pronounce on their behalfes the buſineſſe of the Realme, the very day and houre in which he ſhould haue executed the buſineſſe he had taken in hand, as he was going vp the ſtaires that ledde vp into the Chamber where all the Nobilitie of the Realme ſate, he ſodeinly fell downe, and among his mens handes that were about to holde him, he yéelded vp the ghoſt, although being very merie, and féeling no euill, a little before, as euen at that inſtant he had entred Westminster Hall, of whoſe ſodeine death, not onely all the Nobles of the Realme were greatly amazed, but all the meaner ſort, for in all his life time he had ſhewed himſelfe amiable to al men. After his death, the Parliament was ended, after the Merchants of England had granted to the King a ſubſedie, theCuſtome of vvoolles. cuſtomes of wooll for foure yeares next enſuing; whiche the commons called Le M
                     ••
                  tot. In this Parliamēt, the Lords and commons requeſting it, Sir Richard Scrope Knight was ordeyned as the man which in excellent knowledge and inflexible

iuſtice, had not his like for his calling in this realm. Sir Hugh Segraue Knight was made L. Treaſourer.
            
               Edmond Mortimer Earle of March, departed this life inAnno reg. 6. 
               Irelande, after he had brought that land all in manner vnto peace & quietneſſe, hauing gouerned it moſt nobly & wiſely.
            About the feaſt of S. Iohn Ante port latine, all the nobles of the Realme were called to London, and other that of cuſtome were wont to be called, although y• Lent before ther had bin another Parliament, as before we haue ſhewed, in which, by the petition of the Knightes of the Shires, IohnIohn VVravv hanged. Wraw Prieſt, that was leader of them that did riſe at Mildenha
                     •
                  e and Burie, was adiudged to hanging and drawing, though many beléeued that he woulde haue bin redéemed with money. The xxj. of May was a great Earthquake inEarthquake. 
               England at nine of the clocke, fearing the hearts of many, but in Kent it was moſt behement, where it ſoncke ſome Churches, and threw thē downe to the earth. There followed alſoHiſto. Auri
                     •
                  . another Earthquake the xxiiij. of May in the morning before the Sunne riſing, but not ſo terrible as the firſt. Sir Richard Scrope is depriued of the Chācellorſhip, which he had gouerned lawdably, & Rob. Braybroke B. of London, is made Chancellor. There arriued in a great tempeſt, a Shippe called a Carike, at Sandwich, an huge veſſell, and ſo fraught with riches, that ſhe might haue furniſhed the want of al the land, if the enuie of the inhabitants would haue permitted, but y• Merchāts of Lōdon hauing much old wares, as frutes, ſpices, oyles, & ſuch like, they cōpounded with ye 
               Ienewayes to forſake y• Hauen, & to paſſe ouer into Flanders, & ſo for y• couetouſnes of a few, y• whole Realm ſuſteined great hinderāce.
            
               Adam Bawme: Iohn Sely, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Iohn Northampton Draper, the 28. of October.
            
            About the feaſt of S. Thomas the Apoſtle, great raynes and inundations of waters chanced, ſo that the water roſe foure times more in heigth than before, drowning vp Uillages and Cattell, deſtroying Bridges and Milles.
            The Fiſhmongers in London, through ye counſell of Iohn
               
               Northampton then Maior▪ 
               William Eſſ
                     •
                  x, Iohn More, andStirre againſt Fishmongers. 
               Richard Northburie, were greatly troubled, hindred of their liberties, and almoſt deſtroyed, by congregations made againſt them: but in a Parliament at London, by the Kings1383 Charter patent, they were reſtored to their liberties.
            About the moneth of May, the Biſhop of Norwich ſayled ouer the Seas into Flanders with a greate power, where he wanne the Townes of Graueling, Brugh, Dunkerke, and Newport.
            
            Whileſt theſe things are thus doing in Flanders, the King of England and his Quéene, with their Bohemians, viſited the Abbeys of this Realme, to the whiche, their comming was very chargeable, for they came with an exceſſiue number, all which came to take, but not to giue.
            The Scottes taking occaſion of the time, for that a greatAnno reg. 7. number were gone ouer with the Biſhop of Norwich, entred into Northumberland, and did much hurt to the inhabitants, taking prayes in euery place, and leading away the people priſoners, and carying them into Scotland: they tooke the Caſtell of Warke vpon the Riuer of Twede, and brent it.
            
               Simon Winchcombe: Iohn Moore, the 28. of September.
               
                  Sherifes. Maior. Parliament at London.
            
            
               Sir Nicholas Brembar Grocer, the 28 of October.
            
            About the feaſt of All Saincts, a Parliament was holden at London, in which, the halfe fiftéenth was granted to the King by the Laytie, and ſhortly after the halfe of a tenth by the Cleargie, a portion of which money, the Lords of the North demaunded, bycauſe in this Parliament they were appointed to defende thoſe partes againſt the irruptions of Scottes, to whome, anſwere was made by Sir William Wikeham, Biſhop of Winchester, that they were made for that cauſe, of poore men, rich mē and Lords, that they might the more franckly kéepe the Scottes, and that the King and Lords of the South partes ſhould be the leſſe troubled. And bycauſe the Scottes came not to this Parliament, according to couenant, and beſide that did diſpleaſures vnto the inhabitants of the North parts, it was decréed by this Parliament,

that vnto faithbreakers, faith ſhoulde be broken againe, and that a choſen power ſhould be ſent thither, forth of Englande, vnder the leading of Thomas of Woodstoke, toThomas of VVoodſtocke ſent againſt the Scottes. wéete, a thouſand Launces, and two thouſand Archers, to reſtreyne their attemptes. Theſe things being knowne, the Scottes being afrayde of themſelues, in the ende of the Parliament came, and were deſirous to entreate of peace or truſe, but the Engliſhmen hauing tried their falſehoode ſo often times, woulde neyther treate, nor compounde with them, but commanded them to returne home, and warned them to ſaue their heads as well as they might, and to defend their rightes. The Scottes being returned, the Lordes of the North tooke vpon them to defende the Countrey, till Thomas of Woodstoke Earle of Buckingham were readie to come with a greater power.
            The King tooke the temporalities of the Biſhop of Norwich
               Temporalties of the Bishop of Norvvich ſeaſed. into his hands, bycauſe he was diſobedient to his commandement when he ſent to haue ſtayde him from his iourney into Flanders, and the Knightes that were ouer with him were put in priſon, till they were redéemed with gold.
            King Richard held his Chriſtmas at his Manour of Eltham, and with him his Quéene Anne.
            
            After Chriſtmas, Iohn Duke of Lancaster, which before Chriſtmas went ouer into France to treate of peace betwixt the Realmes, returned into England bringing with him an abſtinence of warre till the feaſt of Saint Iohn Baptiſt, at1384 what time he was to returne to treate againe, and to confirme the peace if it might be agréed vpon betwixt ye Kings.
            The night of the Purification of our Lady, great Lightning and Thunder happened, that put men in great feare: and ſhortly after Iohn Northamptō, otherwiſe called Combartowne, that had bin the yeare before Maior of London, that with his ſeditions had filled the Citie full of comber, attempted new troubles, for in contempt of the Maior that was elected for that yeare, Sir Nicholas Brembar Knight, he went vp and down with a multitude of ſeditious people

to gard him, not once, but oftentimes, to the terrour of manie, and when the ſaid Brembar Maior woulde haue withſtanded his attemptes, the fauourers of the ſaid Iohn Combertowne were turned into ſuche a furie, that a Cobler, which in his owne eſtimation ſéemed to be Maior, required the voyces of the communalty, for which cauſe, by the counſell of Sir Robert Knowles Knight, he was drawne out of his houſe, and committed to priſon, as a ſtirrer of inſurrection, which acte for that time ſtaide the commotion of the commons, that were ſayd to haue conſpired at that time to haue murthered the elect Maior, and many other worthie men.
            When Lente aproched, Iohn Duke of Lancaster, with his brother Thomas of Woodstoke, Earle of Buckingham, and an innumerable number of Knightes, Eſquires, and Archers, went toward Scotland, but ſtayde in the North till all the victualles in the Countrey were conſumed: he did more hurt to the inhabitants, than the Scottes had done before, at length, about the feaſt of Eaſter, he entred Scotland, but did little good.
            The cuſtodie of the Caſtell of Douer was vacant, by the death of Robert Aſhtonwald, then was made Conneſtable thereof Simon Burley.
            
            After Eaſter, the Nobles came to a Parliament at Saliſburie,
               Parliament at Salisburie. whither a certaine Iriſh Frier, of the order of the Carmelites, or white Friers, a Batcheler of Diuinitie, named Iohn Latimer, haſted, and accuſed the Duke of Lancaſter,
               Duke of Lancaſter accuſed. that he had deuiſed the Kings death, which Frier, was committed to Sir Iohn Holland Knight, till a day that was aſſigned him to make proofe of that he had ſayde, but the night before the day giuen to the Frier, the ſayde Sir IohnA Frier tormē
                     ted to death. Holland, and Sir Henry Greene, Knightes, put a corde about the Friers necke, and with the ſame corde tying him by the ſtones, hanged him vp from the grounde, laying à ſtone of great weight vpon his bellie, till they by tormente had made an ende of his life. The morrow after, they 
                  •
               a
                  •
               
               ſed

the Friers body to be drawne through the Towne as a Traytor, that they might put away all ſuſpection, that he were put to death wrongfully: but it is to be wondred at, that neyther Eſquire, Yeoman, nor Grome, or any other of meane eſtate, would harme the Frier, but the Knightes did it themſelues, they were Judges, Officers, and Executioners, and this was the fruite of this Parliament, excepte that the King aſked and had of the Laitie halfe a fiftéenth, and of the Cleargie halfe a tenth.
            About this time, bycauſe the Scottes ceaſſed not to do diuersAnno reg. 8. domages to the Northumbers, the Earle of Northumberland Henry Percy,
                prepareth to inuade Scotland, and to requite domage for domage, which enterpriſe accompliſhed, the Earle was no ſooner returned, and ſent home his army, but that the Scottes came againe, and heaped vp domage vpon domage in the Countrey.
            This Sommer, Sir Iohn Philpot, Knighte, and a moſtSir Iohn Philpot deceaſſed. noble Citizen of London, that trauelled for the commoditie of the Realme more than all other, and both with expences laide forth, and good affection borne, had oftentimes reléeued the King, departed this life, leauing none behinde him his like in good affections.
            About the beginning of Auguſt, the Duke of Lancaster went into France, to treate with the Frenchmen of peace, or elſe of truce to be had, the Duke with his company of noble men remayning long there, when it was thought that he ſhould haue brought glad and ioyfull newes to his Countrey, he returned with knowledge of warres, to followe the beginning of the next Sommer, the truce to endure but
                  •••
                the firſt day of May, and ſo he returned, after he had ſpente 500000. Markes of Siluer.
            Many of the Nobles aſſembled at Reading, to repreſſe theIohn Northampton conuict, and committed to perpetuall priſon. ſeditious ſturres of Iohn Northampton, late Maior of London, that attempted greate and heynous enterpriſes, of the whiche he was conuict, hys owne Chapleyne vttering manye thynges that hée wente aboute and hadde

deuiſed as well to the hinderance and harme of the King, as of the Citie of London, and when ſentence ſhoulde haue bin pronounced againſt him, the King being preſente, the wicked man made exclamation, and mainteyned that ſuch iudgemente ought not to paſſe in abſence of his Lorde the Duke of Lancaster, but yet the Juſtice vſed ſuch words, Iohn (ſayth he) the naughtie déedes that are obiected agaynſte thée, thou oughteſt to refell by battayle, or elſe by the lawes of the land to be drawne, hanged, and quartered, and when he ſtoode mute, nor would vtter one word, it was déecréede that he ſhould be committed to perpetuall priſon, and his goodes to be confiſcate to the Kings vſe, and that he ſhoulde not come within one hundred miles of London during his life, he was ſente therefore to the Caſtell of Tintagell in the confines of Cornewall, and in the meane ſpace the Kings ſeruants ſpoyled his goodes, Iohn More, Richard Northbery, and other, were likewiſe there conuict, and condemned to perpetuall priſon, and their goodes confiſcate to the King, for certaine congregations by them made againſt the Fiſhmongers in the Citie of London.
            
            
               Nicholas Exton: Iohn French, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Sir Nicholas Brembar Grocer, the 28. of October.
            
            About the feaſt of Saint Martine, a Parliament was holden at London, in the whiche nothing was done worth the memorie, but that which ſtill was in hand, and exacting of money of the Cleargie and common people, to mainteine the men of warre. And beſides this, there was a Combate fought in liſtes betwixte an Eſquire of Englande, and one ofA Combate fought. 
               Nauarre, that had accuſed the Engliſh Eſquire, whoſe name was Iohn Welch, of Treaſon to the King and Realme, but the effect was, that when he was Captayne of Cherbrugh he forced the wife of this Nauaroys, as the ſayde Nauaroys being afterward ouercome, and being readie to ſuffer death, did 
                  •
               
               penly confeſſe, for the which cauſe, by the Kings iudgemēt, he was drawne and hanged, although the Quéene and many other did make earneſt interceſſiō to haue his life ſaued

The Parliament was not yet ended when newe 
                  •
                cameBervvike loſt, and vvo
                     •••
                   againe. out of the North of the taking of Berwike Caſtell by the Scottes, the cuſtodie whereof, the Earle of Northumberland, Sir Henry Percy did poſſeſſe, by right of his predeceſſors. The Scottes by mediation of money, got entrance into that Caſtel, by one that was put in truſt with kéeping of it. The Duke of Lancaster that loued not the Earle, was glad of this happe when he knew it. It came to paſſe therefore by the Dukes procurement, that the Earle was condemned by iudgement of the Lords there preſent, the which execution was within a ſhort while after releaſſed. The Earle of Northumberland, through the Kings fauour reſtored to his life and poſſeſſions, without any long delaye
                  •
               , prepareth al furniture of warre to beſéege and winne the ſayd Caſtell of thē that were within it, and after he had gathered a mighty armie, he ſodeinly beſéeged it, and after he had layne about it a certaine time, it was compounded betwixt them without, and them within, that they within ſhould forſake the Caſtell, and haue their liues and moueable goodes, and for ſurrendring the Caſtell, they ſhould haue of the Earle two thouſand markes of Engliſh money, and by this meanes did the Earle recouer the Caſtell foorth of the Scottiſhmens hands.
            Through certaine yong men brought vp with the King,Tho. Wal
                     •
                  . there aroſe great diſſention betwixt him and the Duke of Lancast
                     •
                  r; who departed from the Court, and wente to his Caſtell of Pomfret, whiche he had fortified, but by meanes of the Kings mother, this diſcorde was appeaſed for a time.
            The third of May was an Earthquake.1
                     •
                  85 The King entred Scotlande▪
               
            
            King Richard▪
                with a great armie entred Scotlande, but the enimies would not ſhew themſelues, wherfore he brent the Countrey and returned. The eightéenth of July there was an Earthquake. Sir Iohn de Vienne that ſerued the French King, was ſent into Scotland with a great multitude of Shippes and men of warre, that ioining with the Scottes,
               
they might in
                  •
               e
                  •
               t all England, and that whilſt they might
                  •
                draw the power of this Realme that way forth, the Frenche King with his Nauie and army, might the more at liberty enter other partes of the Realme, few or none being left at home to prohibit them their entrie. The arriuall of the ſayd Iohn being knowne in England, the King with all the Nobilitie prepared themſelues to make a iourney thither:The King maketh a iourney into Scotland. there came flocking vnto the King ſuch a number of Knightes, Eſquires, and Archers, as the like had not bin heard of in thoſe dayes, in ſo much, as the number of Horſſes amoū
               ted to thrée hundred thouſand, as they were iudged. The King reioyced héereat, as well he might, but the reioycing was ſhortly darkened at Yorke, by fierceneſſe of Sir Iohn Holland the Kings brother, that ſlew the Lord Ralph Stafford,
               Ralph Stafforde 
                     •
                  ayne. ſonne to the Earle of Stafford, in the way as he went to the Quéene, whoſe ſeruant of houſhold he was, and greatly in fa
                  •
               eur with hir, and he was no leſſe beloued of the King, as he that had bin brought vp with him, and bin his playfellow from his tender age, where the King taking greate indiguation, determined to purſue the ſayd Sir Iohn Holland: he cauſed therefore his goodes to be cōfiſcate. But Sir Iohn Holland fledde to Beuerley, there to enioy the libertie of the Church. The Lady Iane the Kings mother, ſente to intreate him for hir other ſonne, and his brother, but when the meſſengers were returned to Wallingforde, and that the mother could perceyue no hope of grace to be gotten in that behalfe of the King, ſhe tooke it heau
                  ••
               ie, and fell ſicke, andQueene Iane the Kings mother dyed. within foure or 
                  ••
               ue dayes departed this life, hir body being ſeared and cloſed in Leade, was kept at Wallingford, till the Kings returne forth of Scotland, then to be buried at Stanford, in the Church of the Friers Minors.
            In the moneth of Auguſt, the King of England with a mightie power entred Scotland, to whoſe force the Scottes and Frenchmen perceyuing themſelues not able to matche, they ſéeke to get them into the wooddes & places where they might be out of the way. The Engliſh army then, the which

there hath not bin ſéene a fairer, ſtronger, or greater, rideth through the Countrey, that was deſtitute of inhabitantes, 
                  ••
               yd of Cattell, & wanting victualles, for the land was left deſolate (as our men confeſſed) that they ſaw not ſo much as a bird, Owles only excepted. They found gréene Corne on the grounde, very faire and plentifull, whiche they eyther eate vp with their Horſſes, or treade downe with theyr féete, but the enimies fléeing battayle, our men did nothing to be accompted of, but brent the Abbey of Melroys, and theMeltoys and Edenborough brent. Towne of Edenborough, with ſuch houſes as they found by the way. When our armie was come to Edenborough, and that victualles fayled them, many of them beganne to ware ſicke, and ſome to die for hunger, wherevpon, the King returned with his armie into England. While King Richarde was in Scotland, the Scottes and Frenchmen entred into Englande, brenning Townes, taking ſpoyles, and leading away many priſoners, returned home into their Countrey.
            
               Iohn Organ: Iohn Churchman, the 28. of September,
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Sir▪ Nicholas Brembar Grocer, the 28. of October.
            
            The Souldiers of Caleis went ſecretly forth into France, and got a bootie of four thouſand Shéepe, and thrée hundred head of great beaſtes, which they draw to their holdes.
            About the feaſt of Saint Martine, there was a Parliament at London, in which, the Laytie granted to the King a fiftéenth and a halfe, with cōdition, that the Cleargie ſhould giue a tenth and a halfe, William Courtney, Archbiſhop of Canterbury ſtanding there againſt, ſaid, the Church ought to befrée, and in no wiſe to be taxed by the Laytie, whiche anſwereA bill put againſt the Cleargie for their temporalties. ſo moued the commons, that they forthwith preſented to the King a bill againſt the Cleargie of the Realme, mouing him to take from them their temporalities, and thereby to abate their pride, but the King hearing the inordinate cryings out on this ſide, and the iuſt anſweres of the other, he commanded that the Bill ſhould be cancelled, and ſuch inordinate petitiōs to ceaſſe, ſaying, that he would preſerue the Churche during his time, in as good ſtate

as he found it, or in better. The Archbiſhop therefore hauing made the Cleargie priuie, wente to the King, and declared to him that he with his Cleargie of their whole conſents and frée willes, had prouided for his vſes a Tenth, which graunt the King ſo thankefully receyued, that hée openly affirmed, that he had rather haue this frée graunt, than any other foure times double, that were conſtreyned.
            The eleuenth of Noueinber, Robert Vere, Earle of Oxford,
               States created. was made Marqueſſe of Diuelin in Ireland: Thomas
                of Woodstocke, Duke of Glocester: and his brother Edmonde, Earle of Cambridge, Duke of Yorke: Michaell de la Poole
                Chancellour of England, was made Earle of Suffolke, and had giuē him by the King a thouſand markes by the yeare. The Earle of March, Mortimer,
                was proclaymed heire apparantLib. Peter. col. to the Crowne. Alſo, King Richarde at the earneſt requeſt of the Biſhops, reſtored to the Biſhop of Norwich his temporalities which he had holden from him manye yeares. King Richard, with Quéene Anne his wife, kept their Chriſtmas at Eltham, whether came to him the King of Ermony, vnder pretence to reforme peace betwixte the Kings of England, but what his comming profited, he onely vnderſtoode, for beſide innumerable giftes that he receyued of the King and of the Nobles, the King granted to him a Charter of a thouſand pounds by yeare during his life. He was (as he affirmed) chaſed out of his Realme by the Tartarians, and for that cauſe he got great giftes of the Chriſtian1386 Priuces. About the feaſt of Eaſter, Iohn Duke of Lancaſter, with a great company of Knightes, Eſquires, and Archers, prepareth to go into Spayne, which was due to him by the inheritable righte of his wife the Lady Conſtance, daughter ſometime to Peter, King of Castile and Lion, ſo that now he meant to challenge it eyther with conſente of the inhabitants, or by law of armes. He with a greate power tooke the Seas, and landed in Spayne, at the Hauen of Greyne, on the euen of Saint Lawrence, with all his Nauie in ſafetie.
            
               At the ſute of the King of Spayne, King Richard releaſſed out of priſon Iohn Northampton, Iohn More, and Richarde Norburie.
            
            The Londoners fearing y• comming of the French K. ranne to their walles, & pulled downe houſes néere about ye Citie.
            About Michaelmas, the Nobles came to the Parliamēt at London, with great numbers of armed men, to the ende they might be readie to withſtand the Frenchmen who were comming, but through contrarie windes returned.
            The King created Robert Vere Marqueſſe of Irelande,
               Robert Vere Duke of Ireland Duke of Ireland.
            
            Not lōg after this, Michaell de la Pole was by y• Knights of the Parliament depoſed from his Chancellorſhip, and amerced to pay to the King 20000. Markes, but the King cauſed this to take ſmall effect.
            
               William Stondon: William More, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Nicholas Exton Fiſhmonger, the 28. of October.
            
            
               Richard Earle of Arundell, and Tho. Mowbray Earle of Notingham, went to the Sea, of the which, the firſt was made Admiral, & vpon y• Uigill of our Lady the Annuntiation, a great Nauie of Flanders, France, & Spayne, fraught with mē of1387 warre, & diuers engins, was diſcouered, with whome, the Earles encountred, and tooke of them 100. ſhips and more, the which conteined xix. M. Tonnes of Wine, whiche theyRochell VVine taken. brought to diuers parts of England, wherby Wine was then ſold for thirtéene ſhillings four pence the Tonne.
            
               Robert de Vere Duke of Ireland for ſooke his wife, a yong Lady noble & faire, borne of the Lady Iſabell, daughter to y• noble K. Edward, & maried another that came with Quéene Anne forth of Boheme: ſhe was called in the vulgar tong of hir Conntrey Lancecrona. The Lordes tooke indignation héerewith, eſpecially the Duke of Glocester, Unkle to ye yong Lady that was forſaken. The Duke of Ireland ſtudied how to take the Duke of Glocester out of ye way. Eaſter was now paſt, the time, in whiche the Duke of Ireland ſhoulde haue tranſported into Ireland, but leaſt there ſhoulde be too muche

ſturre in the Realme among the Lords, the King as it were to bring him to the water ſide, goeth with him into Wales, as not to leaue him, but there to kéepe him, that they might deniſe how to take away the D. of Glocester, the Earles of Arundell, Warwike, Darby, & Notingham, with other. There were with thē the Earle of Suffolke, Michaell at Pole, Robert Treſilian
                Juſtice, & many other, which no more ſlowly than the D. of Ireland, conſpired the death of the ſaid noble mē. After a great time was paſſed, the King, as if the Duke of Irelāds iourney had bin forgotten, returned with him and the other forth of Wales, to the Caſtell of Notingham, there to treate ofAnno reg. 11 the death of the ſaid noble men: there therfore he ſent for diuers from Lōdon, whome he knew would be readie to which way ſoeuer they ſhould be moued: he called thither alſo all the Sherifes and Juſtices of the Realme, and there interdited the Lords of many crimes which the King had imagined againſt them. In the meane time, the rumor of this doing came to the Lords eares, whervpon firſt of all ye Kings Unkle, the D. of Glocester, that he might mitigate the Kings diſpleaſure, before the Biſhop of London, and manye other Nobles, ſwearing vpon the Euangeliſtes, tooke it vpon his oth, that he neuer had imagined any thing to the kings hinderance, or done any thing to his diſpleaſure, except that he had not giuē good countenāce to the D. of Ireland, nor would héereafter giue him any, who had diſhoneſted his kinſwoman, the which he firmelie had determined to reuenge.
            
               William Venor: Hugh Forſtalfe, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Sir Nicholas Exton Fiſhmonger, the 28. of October.
            
            The D. of Glocester calling togither ſecretly the Earles of Arundell, Warwike, & Darby, that were in like danger of cō
               demnatiō, if they prouided not the more ſpéedily, he diſcouereth to thē the matter: they therfore gathering their armies togither, determine to talke with the King vpon the premiſes. Contraryly the King for his party did deliberate howe he might take each of thē by themſelues out of the way, and firſt he ſent to the Caſtell of Rigate, where the Earle of Arundell
               
lay, the Earle of Northumberland with many other ſo arreſt him, who perceyuing a great nūber of mē of warre about him, fearing to do that he was commanded, departed without doing his errand for which he came, after whome, there were ſent many that by night ſhould haue takē him, or haue ſlaine him, but a meſſenger ſent frō the D. of Gloceſter, preuēted their cōming, that cauſed him to ride al night, ſo that in the morning he was come to Haringey, hauing paſſed with his army a xxx. miles, not without great trauayle, where he found aſſembled the D. of Glocester, & the Earle of Warwike, with a great power of men. The K. being enformed of this aſſembly in Harneſey wood, as is ſaid, demāded of his familiars what was to be done in this caſe, but in y• end, by the mediation of thē that came betwixt thē, the matter was brought to this iſſue, that y• Lords ſhould come to Westminſter to receiue anſwere before y• King of thoſe things, the Biſhop of Ely, with many other mē of worthy credit, taking an oth for y• Kings part, that no fraude, deceipt, or peril, ſhould be prepared. Whē the Lords had prepared thēſelues according to ye couenant, the foreſaid mediators for peace ſent thē word, yt treaſon was deuiſed by an ambuſh laid for thē, in a place called the Mewes, néere to Charing Croſſe, & therfore willed thē not to come, but with ſure hand, whervpō they ſtayd there, & the K. demanding why the Lords kept not couenāt, the B. of Ely anſwered, bycauſe (ſaith he) there is an ambuſh laid of a M. armed men or more, in ſuch a place, contrary to the couenant, and therefore they neyther come, nor repute you to be faithfull: the King moued forthwith, ſware he knew of no ſuch thing, and therefore commanded the Sheriffes of London, that going to the Mewes, they ſhoulde kill, if they founde any aſſembled there for that cauſe, but Thomas Treuit, and Nicholas Brembar Knightes, had ſecretly ſente away the armed men to London: the King therefore ſent agayne to the Lords, who ſtreightwayes came to Westminster with a ſtrong power, agaynſt whoſe comming, the King adorning himſelfe with Kingly robes, with Crowne

and Scepter, entreth Westminster Hall, where the Biſhop of Elie, Lord Chancellour, ſpeaking for the King, demanded the cauſe of their aſſembling of ſuch a power, whervnto the Lords anſwered, that it was done for the Kings profit, and the Realmes, to plucke from him the Traytors whiche he kept about him, whome they named to be Robert de Vere Duke of Ireland: Alexander Neuell
                Archbiſhop of Yorke: Michaell at Pole, Earle of Suffolke: Robert Triſilian,
                a falſe Juſtice: Nicholas Brembar, a falſe Knight of London: and therevpon they threwe downe their gloues, ſwearing that they would proſecute it by battayle: nay ſayth the King, it ſhall not be ſo, but in the next Parliament which was appoynted to be holden the morrow after the Purification of our Lady, all this was pacified for that time.
            A maner of exhalation in likeneſſe of fire, appeared in y•
               Strange likeneſſe of fire. Iohn Leyceſter.
                night in many places of England, which went with men as they went, and ſtayde as they did, ſometime like a Whéele, ſometime like a Barrell, ſometime like a Timberlogge, but when many went togither, it appeared to be farre off.
            The Lords departing frō the K. notwithſtanding kept togither, which ſéemed great wiſdome in them, for the D. of Ireland in the partes of Chester & Wales, had aſſembled a great nūber, whoſe Captaine was ye Conneſtable of Cheſter, Thomas Moleneux,
                a mā of great wealth, & hardy. The D. of Ireland with ſuch a multitude haſted towards London, yt ioyning with the Londoners, he might make thē both as it were an inuincible army, but ye D. of Ireland riding forth in ſtately & glorious array with ye armie, thinking none durſt haue encountred him, ſodeinly as he loked on the one ſide, he beheld where the hoſt of the Lords was ready not far frō them tarying his cōming, in the midſt of the valley, with which ſight, his heart ſtreightwayes fayled, and he ſaid, friends, I muſt flie, for a greater puiſſance ſéemeth to be yōder, againſt you they haue no quarell, ſo ye I being ſhifted away, ye ſhall eſcape wel ynough, & forthwith ſetting ſpurres to his horſe, he fléeth away. There was then ye foreſaid Tho. Moleneux y•
               
prepared himſelfe to the battayle, for the Lordes were not yet al come to that place, who when he had fought a while, being awearied, entred the riuer which was there by. Amōg other ſir Thomas Mortimer knighte, exhorted him to come vp, or elſe he would ſhoote him through in the riuer: if I do come vp ſayth Thomas Moleneux, wilt thou ſaue my life, I doe make no ſuch promiſe (ſayeth he) but eyther come vp or yu ſhalt ſteight die for it. To whō (he anſwered) ſuffer me to come vp and let me fight eyther with thée or ſome other, and dye like a man. As he came vp, the knight caught him by the Helmet, and plucked it off his heade, and ſtreighte wayes with hys dagger ſtrucke hym into the braynes.
            The Duke of Ireland fléeing, came to the riuer of Thamis, and forced his horſſe to enter, in the which being made of an horſſeman a ſwimmer, he gotte to the other ſide: his horſſe, Helmet, gauntlets and breſt plate came to the ſhare of the Lordes, ſo that he was thoughte long after to be drowned▪ but he got ouer into Flaunders.
            
            The Archbiſhoppe of Yorke fledde, and Robert Treſilian, and Michael de la Pole got him to Caleis. The Lords béeing returned from the battayle, which had bin nere to Burforde, faſt by Bablack, made great ioy for the ouerthrowe of their enimies, but muche lamented the eſcape of the Duke of Ireland.
            
            A heade of Earthe was made at Oxforde by Arte of Negromancie, that at a time appointed, ſpake theſe words, Caput decidetur, The head ſhall be cut off, Caput Eleuabitur; The heade ſhall be lift vp: Pedes eleuabuntur ſuper caput, The feete ſhall be lift aboue the heade.
               
            
            Diſſention fel at Oxford betwéen the Sotherne and Welch men, on the one parts, and Northerne Schollers on the other, where through manye were ſlaine, and the more part went to their Countryes, wherfore the Chauncellour was depriued, and Doctour Nicholas Brightwel Deane of Newerke in Leicester was made Chancellour.
            The Lordes haſted to London, where the king kepte hys

Chriſtmaſſe in the Tower of London, they hauing aſſembl
                  •
                an army of neare hande. 40000. the morrowe after Chriſtmaſſe day came to London and muſtered in the fields, where they might be ſéene of thē in the Tower: the Londoners were then in greatfeare, waying diuerſe perils as the Kings diſpleaſure, if they opened their gates to the Lords, and if they ſhut them forth, the indignatiō of the vndiſcrete multitude. The Duke of Glocester with other entred the Tower, and hauing a little talke with the King, they recited the conſpiracie, wherby they had bin indited, and they ſhewed forthe alſo th
                  •
                letters, which he had ſente to the Duke of Irelande, that he ſhoulde aſſemble an armye to their diſtruction. &c. in the ende the King promiſed on the nexte morrow to come to Westminster, and there to intreate at large for reformation of all matters.
            In the morning the King came to Westminster, wher after a little talke, the Nobles ſayde that for his honour and commoditie of his Kingdome it was behouefull, that the traytours, whiſperers, flatterers, and vnprofitable people were remoued out of place, and that other mighte be placed in theyr roomes, which when the King had graunted, they iudged that Alexander Neuell Archbiſhoppe of Yorke, Iohn Forde Biſhoppe of Durham, Frier Thomas Ruſhoke the Kings Confeſſour Biſhoppe of Chichester, ſhoulde be baniſhed. They expulſed alſo the Lorde Souch of Haringworth, Burnel
                and of Beamount, Albery de Vere, Baldwine de Bereforde, Richard Aderburie, Iohn Worth, Thomas Clifford, and Iohn Louel knights, not as altogither diſmiſſed but to appeare at the next Parliamēt: there were certain Ladyes alſo expelled the Courte, as vnprofitable. They arreſted Simon Burley, William Elmham, Iohn Beauchamp of Holte ſtewarde of the kings houſe, Iohn Salisburie, Thomas Treuet, Iames Barnes, Ni. Dagworth, and N. Brember Knightes. They toke alſo the Chaplens Richarde Clifforde, Iohn Lincolne, Richard Mitforde & Nicholas Slake Deane of y• kings Chapel, & Iohn Blake an Aprentice of the lawe, all whyche

was ſent to diuerſe priſons.
            The thirde day of Februarie a Parliament was begon at Westminster, to y• which the Lords came with a ſufficiente army, & this Parliament continued vntil the feaſt of Pentecoſt.1388 The xj. of Februarie was Robert Treſilian Juſtice of y• Kings Bench, a Corniſhman areſted at Westminster, wher he had laine hid in ſanctuarie, and was the ſame day drawn from the Tower of London to Tiborne, and there, with a great adoe was hanged: conſequently by iudgemente of the Lords, Nicholas Brembar Knight, was put to the like execution. After which Iohn Salisburie, & Iames Barnes knights were by iudgement of the Parliament drawn and hanged, then Iohn Beauchampe of Holt the Kings ſtewarde, whome the King purpoſed to haue made Baron of Bridgenorth, was drawen and hanged. Iohn Blake Eſquire was hanged and drawne, and Iohn Vske a Sergeaunt at armes was drawn and hāged. Laſtly on the fifth of May ſir Simō Burley Lord Chamberlayne to the King, and Coneſtable of Douer, was beheaded, although the Earle of Darbie did what he coulde to ſaue him, for the which great diſſention roſe betwixt hym and the Duke of Glocester.
            
            There was condemned alſo in the ſame Parliamente theſe Juſtices, Roberte Belknape, Iohn Holte, Roger Fulthorpe: and William Brough, Iohn Locton, Richarde Graye, Juſtices, with the Lordes before fledde, were all baniſhed.
            There was granted to the King, of the Cleargie half a tenth and of the Laytie half a fiftéenth, and of the Marchāts twelue pence of the pounde, thrée ſhillings of the Tunne, liij. ſhillings foure pence of the ſack of Wool. The Duke of Glocester, and ſir Iohn Cobham, aſked pardon of the Abbot of Westminster, for violence done in ye ſanctuarie of Westminster, in the taking of the Juſtice Triſilian. The laſte ſaue one of May there were deliuered out of the Tower W. Elmhame, T. Treuet, and Nicholas Dagworth Knights. Alſo the firſt of June, Iohn Holand the Kings brother was created Erie of Huntington.
            
            
               The thirde of June, the king in the Church of Westminſter renewed the othe, which he toke when he was crowned, and all the Lordes ſware homage and fealtie to him, and all the Biſhoppes did excommunicate all thoſe that would go about to hinder the ſtatutes of this laſt Parliament, or y•
               Anno reg. 12 great Charter.
            After Whitſontide Richarde Earle of Arundale, with a companye of valiaunte men wente to the ſea, and foughte with certain ſhips of his enemies, taking drowning▪ or brē
               ning. lxxx. ſhippes, he entred into the Ile of Beas, which he ſpoyled, and brent.
            The ſame yeare the Scottes prepared themſelues that as ſoone as the truce was exſpired they mighte be readie to inuade the North partes, and with a great army entred Englande, committing gret ſlaughters of people and toke booties in euery place, and ledde away manye priſoners, and burned▪ Townes, and approched to Newcastel vpon Tyne, and picht theyr Tentes not farre from thence. There was then in the ſame Towne ſir Henrie Percy the yonger, and Syr Ralph his brother, both deſirous of warlike renowme, and ſore enimies to the Scottes. Thys ſir Henrie came vpon them on the ſodayne, and aſſayled them in the campe, making greate ſlaughter of them: William Douglas alſo chiefe Captaine of the Scottes, beholding the thing that a thouſande times he hadde wiſhed, that is, ſir Henrie Percy within his Campe, rydeth againſte him, but was ſlayne by the ſayde Henrie, and then commeth the Earle of Dunbar with an exceſſiue number of Scottes, and toke the ſayd Henrie, with his brother Ralphe, ſlaying many Engliſhe menne in that place: but yet the Scottes loſte manye of theyr beſte men.
            Thys battayle was at Otterborne, the ſoareſt fought thatBattaile at Otterborne. Iohn Belandine. Iohn Maior. 
                        •
                     . Froſert. 
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     h. Rudborae. Parliament at Cambridge. euer was betwéene Engliſhe menne and Scottes (ſayeth Froyſert)
            The ſeauenth of September a Parliament was holden at Cambridge, in which were newe ſtatutes ordayned for

ſeruauntes wages, for beggers, for weapons not to be born, of playes or games none to be vſed but ſhooting, of the ſtaple to be brought from Middleborow to Caleis, &c. and in the ende a tenth of the Cleargie and a fiftéenth of the Laytie.
            
               Thomas Auſtine: Adam Carlehul, the. 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Sir Nicholas Twyforde Goldſmith, the. 28. of October.
            
            The ſixth of October as ſir Iohn Treuet rode wyth the King to the kings lodging, whiche was at Bernewel, as he forced his horſſe too much with the ſpurres, the horſſe falleth and breaketh the inner parts of the rider, who liued tyl the next day.
            King Richard diſcharged the olde officers of his Courte,1389 and alſo his Counſellours, appointing other at his pleaſure: he toke the Seale from Thomas Arundale Archbiſhop of Yorke, and deliuered it to William Wickam Byſhoppe of Winchester, and made him Chauncellour: the Biſhoppe of Excester his Treaſurer: and Edmund Stafford Kéeper of the priuie Seale.
            A truce was graunted for thrée yeares betwixt Englande and Fraunce.
            
            A fighting among Gnats at the Kings maner of Shine, where they were ſo thicke gathered, that the ayre was darkned with them: they fought and made a great battaile. Two partes of them being ſlayne, fel downe to the grounde, the thirde part hauing got the victorie flew away, no mā knew whether. The number of the deade was ſuch, that mighte bée ſwepte vppe wyth Beſomes, and Buſhels filled wythAnno reg. 13 them.
            
               Michael at Pole ſometime Earle of Suffolke, and Chauncellour of England deceaſed at Paris.
            
            
               Iohn Walcotte: Iohn Loueney, the. 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Sir William Vener, Grocer, the. 28. of October.
            
            In the moneth of Nouember, Iohn Duke of Lancaster came from the parties beyonde the ſeas into Englande, after he had abidden in Spaine and Gaſcoigne, thrée yeares ſpace, who in Spaine firſt taſted great miſfortunes, yet in the ende

brought his matters to very good caſe, not with the force of men, but by the fauour of God: for when he came firſte to yt partes of Spaine with an armye ſufficient ynoughe, through wante of victualles, they firſt dyed through hunger, and after through flixe, ſo that 1000. famous knightes of hys armye dyed miſerably, the reſidue leauing the Duke, fled to the French army.
            King Richard with his Quéene Anne held their Chriſtmaſſe at Woodstocke, and the Duke of Lancaster in the Caſtle of Hertforde. The ſame time Iohn Haſtings Earle of Penbroke, as he was deſirous to Juſt, he was ſtroken about the priuie partes, by the Knight that ranne againſt him, called1390 ſir Iohn Saint Iohn, where he dyed.
            In a Parliamente at London it was ordayned that none ſhoulde purchaſe prouiſions at the Popes hands: ther was graunted to the King xl. ſhillings of euery ſack of wool, and of the pound ſixe pence. Iohn Duke of Lancaster was made Duke of Aquitaine, by the Rood and Bonet, which the King gaue him, and Edward the Duke of Yorkes ſonne was made Earle of Rutlande, to whom the king gaue the Caſtell of Okam.
               Anno reg. 14
            
            A great Peſtilence in the North parts of England, ſo that in a little ſpace a. 1100. were buried in the Citie of Yorke.
            
            A Merchant of Dertmouth waged the Nauie of ſhips, of the Ports, of his own charges, 34. ſhips laden with Wine, to the ſumme of. 1500. Tunne.
            A wofull variaunce roſe in Oxforde, for the Welche and Southerne Schollers aſſaulted the Northerne, whereby many murders were done on each ſide, and a fielde was appointed, but by helpe of the Duke of Glocester it was appeaſed, and the Welch men banniſhed.
            
               Iohn Francis: Thomas Viuent, the. 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Adam Bawme Goldſmith, the. 28. of October.
            
            The. x. xj. and. xij. of October the King helde a greate Courte at London, in the Biſhops Palace and a greate inſting in Smithfield, to the whyche Courte came many ſtrangers

forth of Fraunce, Almain, Zealand, and many other parts, bringing with them horſſes and armour, in which paſtimes there was giuen firſt the Badge of the White Harte wyth golden chaines and crownes. And vpon Saint Edwardes day the King helde his feaſte in his Regalibus, ſitting crowned at maſſe with his Scepter. &c. and likewiſe the Quéen, and they ſat likewiſe at the table at Kenington crowned, at which ſolemnitie were preſente the Earle of Sainte Paule, and hys wyfe, ſiſter to the Kyng of Englande, and the Earle of Ostreuaunt who was made Knyghte of the Garter.
            The Duke of Glocester toke hys iourney toward Spruys,
               1
                     •
                  91 but being toſſed with infortunate ſtormes, driuen nowe hyther, nowe thyther, was ſo farre diſtant of hope, that he diſpayred of life, and at length after he had paſſed the Barbarous coaſtes of Denmarke, Norway and Scotlande, he arriued in Northumberlande, and came to the Caſtel of Tinmouth where hauing refreſhed himſelf certain dayes, he toke his iourney towards his maner of Plecy.
            
            Such a mortalitie increaſed in Norffolke, and many other Countries, that it was not vnlike to the greate peſtilence, within Yorke, there dyed a. xj. thouſand perſons.
            The Citizens of London toke out of the Orphans cheſte.Anno reg. 15 2000. markes to buye victualles, and the. xxiiij. Aldermen eache of them layde out twentie pounde to like purpoſe of buying corne, which was beſtowed in diuerſe places, where the poore mighte buye it at an appointed price, and ſuche as lacked money to pay downe, put in ſuretie to pay in yt yeare following.
            A Brewer that dwelt at the ſigne of the Cocke in Westcheape by the little Conduite, neare vnto Powles gate, was murdered in the night time by a théef that came in at a gutter windowe, as it was knowne long after by the confeſſion of the ſame théefe, when he was at the Gallowes to bée hanged for fellonie, but the Brewers wife was firſte brente therefore, and thrée of his men drawne to Tiborne and there hanged wrongfully.
            
               
               Iohn Chadworth; Henrie Vamer, the. 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Sir Iohn Hinde Draper, the. 28. of October.
            
            A Parliament began at London on the Friday next after the feaſt of Al Saintes, wherin halfe a tenth by the Ceargie, and halfe a fiftéenth by the Laitie was granted to the king, which mony ſhould ſerue for the treatie to be had for peace with the French men, whiche treatie the Duke of Lancaster ſhould proſecute.
            King Richarde with Quéene Anne his wife, foure Biſhoppes, as many Erles, the Duke of Yorke, many Lords, and fiftéene Ladyes, helde a royall Chriſtmaſſe at Langley neare to Saint Albons. The ſame Chriſtmaſſe day a Dolphin came forth of the ſea and playde himſelfe in the Thamis at London, to the Bridge, for ſhewing hapily the tempeſts that were to follow within a wéeke after, the which being ſéene of the Citizens and followed, was with much difficultie intercepted, and broughte againe to London, ſhewing a ſpectacle to many, of the height of his bodye, for he was ten foote in length. Theſe Dolphins are fiſhes of the ſea, yt followe the voyces of men, and reioyce in playing of inſtrumentes, and are wont to gather themſelues at muſicke. Theſe when they play in riuers, with haſtie ſpringings or leapings, do ſignify Tempeſt to follow. The ſeas containt nothing more ſwift nor nimble, for oftentimes with theyr ſkippes, they mount ouer the ſayles of ſhippes.
            The King ſent to the Londoners requeſting to borrowe of1392 Tho. Walſing. them one thouſande pounde, whiche they ſtoutely denyed, and alſo euil entreated, bette and néere hand ſlew a certain Lumbard that woulde haue lent the King the ſayde ſu
                  ••
               me, which when the King heard he was maruellouſly angried, and calling togither almoſt all the nobles of the lande, hée opened to them the malitiouſneſſe of the Londoners, and cō
               playned of theyr preſumption, the whyche noble men gaue counſell, that their inſolencie ſhoulde with ſpéede be oppreſſed, and theyr pride abated. By the Kings iudgement therefore was the Maior of London and the Sherifes, with other

of the beſt Citizens arreſted, the Maior was ſente to Windſor Caſtel, and the other to other priſons, til the King with his counſell ſhould determine, what ſhould be done with them, and there it was determined, that from thenceforth the Londoners ſhoulde not choſe nor haue anye Maior, but that the King ſhoulde appointe one of his Knightes to be ruler of the Citie: their priuiledges were reuoked, their liberties adnulled, and their lawes abrogated. The king then appointed to be Warden of the Citie a certayne Knighte called ſir Edwarde de Dalingrige, but he was quicklye depoſed by the King, bicauſe men ſaid he fauoured the Londoners, and Baldwin Radinton was conſtituted in his place. In the meane time, throughe ſute of certaine Knightes, butAnno reg. 16 ſpecially of the Duke of Glocester, the King is ſomewhat pacified, and by little and little abateth the rigor of his purpoſe, calling to minde the diuerſe honors, and the greate giftes he had receyued of the Londoners, wherevpon he determineth to deale more mildely with them, and to call them to ſome hope of grace and pardon, he ſendeth commaundement to them to come to Windſore, there to ſhewe their pryuiledges, liberties and lawes, whyche being there ſhewed ſome of them were ratifyed and ſome condemned, but they could not obtaine the Kings full fauour, till they had ſatiſfied ye King of the iniuries whiche was ſayd they had done, the King at thys aſſembly at Windſor, hadde got togither almoſt all the Lordes, and ſo greate in army, that the Londoners had cauſe to be afrayde thereof, aboute the whiche preparation he was at greate charges, for the whiche it was ſure that the Londoners muſte pay. They therefore not ignoraunte that the ende of theſe things was a money matter, ſubmitted themſelues to the Kings pleaſure, offering ten thouſand pound. They were yet diſmiſſed home to returne againe, vncertaine what ſatiſfaction and ſum they ſhoulde pay.
            When the Citizens were returned, and that the nobles

and other were gone home: the King hearing that the Londoners were in hauens, and diſmayde, he ſayde to his men, I wil go (ſayth he) to London, and comforte the Citizens, and will not that they any longer diſpayre of my fauour, which ſentence was no ſooner knowne in the Citie but al menne were filled with incredible ioy, ſo that euery of them generally determined to méete him, and to be as liberal in gifts as they were at his coronation. The king therefore as hée came from Shine in Surrey to London, with Quéene Anne his wife. On the xxj. of Auguſt, the principall Citizens rode to méete them at Wandeſworth, and at Sainte Gorges Churche in Southwarke they were receyued with proceſſion of Rob. Braybroke Biſhop of London, and all his Cleargie of the Citie, who conuayed him through London, the Citizens, men women and children in order méeting the King, and doing him honor, attended on him to Westminster. As he paſſed the Citie the ſtréetes were hanged with cloth of golde ſiluer and ſilke. The Conduite in Chepe ran with red & white Wine, and by a childe Angel-like he was preſented with a very coſtly crowne of golde, and the Quéene with another. A table of the Trinitie of gold was giuen to the King, valued worth eight hundred pounde, and another to the quéen of Saint Anne▪
                bycauſe hir name was Anne, with diuerſe other giftes, as horſſes, trappers, plate of golde and ſiluer, clothes of gold, ſilke, veluets, Baſons and Ewers of gold, alſo golde in coyne, precious ſtones, and iewels, ſo rich, excellent, and beautifull, that the value and price mighte not well be eſtéemed, and ſo the Citizens recouered their auntient cuſtomes and liberties, and then the kings Bench from Yorke, and the Chauncerie from Notingham, was returned to London. And it was granted to them that they might chooſe them a Maior as before time they had done. The Londoners beléeued y• by theſe giftes they had eſcaped all daunger, and that from thenceforth they ſhould be quiet, but they wer deceiued, for they wer cōpelled to giue the K. after this 10000, pound, collected of the cōmons in gret bitterneſſe of minde,

and ſo the troubles of y• Citizens came to quietneſſe, which trouble the Dolphin in Thamis at Chriſtmaſſe laſte paſt did happily ſignifie a far off. W. Caxton & Robert Fabian report theſe troubles to happen through a fray in Fleetſtreete, about an horſſe loafe taken out of a Bakers baſket, by a yeoman of the Biſhop of Saliſburies, and that the ſame troubles were pacified, and liberties again reſtored by meanes of Richard Graueſend Biſhop of London, in rewarde wherof the Citizēs repaire to the place of burial in the midle Ile of Saint Pauls Church &c. but all that is vntrue, for at this time Rob. Brabroke was Biſhop of London, and Richard Graueſēd had bin Biſhop, and deceaſed in the time of Edward the firſt, in Anno. 1303 almoſt 90. yeares before this time. Moreouer the place of burial in Saint Paules, whervnto the Maior and Citizens of London haue repayred, is of William, who was Biſhop of London in the time of William Conqueror, who purchaſed the firſt Charter of the ſaide king William, for ye ſame Citie as I haue before declared.
            
               Gilbert Maghfelde: Thomas Newington, the. 28. of Sep.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Sir William Stoudon Grocer, the. 28. of October.
            
            Albeit Vere was created Erle of Oxforde, in a Parliamēt at Winchester, and William Scrope Uizechamberlaine, the ſame William Scrope bought of William Mountacute Erle of Saliſburie the Ile of Man, with the crowne, for the Lorde of this Ile is called king, and it is lawful for him to be crowned1393 with a crowne of Golde: ſir Iohn Euers Knighte Coneſtable of Douer, and the Kings ſtewarde died ſodainely, and T. Percy brother to the E. of Northum. was made the kings ſteward in his place yt was before the kings vnderchamberlaine. T. Beamond was made Coneſtable of Douer. CertainAnno reg. 17 théeues brake into the Chappel of our Lady at the Pewe at Westminster, & toke out of it many iewels & muche treaſure. Alſo ſhortly after ye ſame théeues brake into ye Churche of S. Iohn of Clerkenwel. The dukes of Lanc. & Glocester paſſed ouer into France, to make ſomewhat of ye truce, or to conclude a final peace betwixt ye kingdoms: but it was not ſo brought to

paſſe, as it was wiſhed, by reaſon of the Frenche Kings ſickneſſe.
            In September, lightnings and thunders, in manye places of England did much hurte, but eſpeciallye in Cambridgeſhire, the ſame brent houſes and corne neare to Tolleworke, & in the towne it brent terribly.
            
               Drewe Barentine: Richard Whittington, the. 28. of Sep.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Sir Iohn Hadley Grocer, the. 28. of October.
            
            Such aboundaunce of water fell in October, that at Bury in Suffolke, the Church was ful of Water, and at Newmarket it bare down wals of houſes, ſo that men and women hardly eſcaped drowning. The ſame yeare Lorde T. de Ros,
               1394 as he returned forth of the Holy Lande, in the Citie of Paphos in the Ile of Cipres, through intemperauncie of the ayre departed this life there. In the Octaues of S. Hillerie, a Parliament was holden at London, in whiche a ſubſidie was demaunded for the King that was minded to go into Irelande, wherefore the Cleargie graunted to him a full tenth if he would paſſe thyther, and if he went not, they graunted him but halfe a tenth. Certaine Lordes of Scotlande came into England to get worſhip by force of armes. The erle of Marre challenged the Earle of Notingham, to iuſt with him, and ſo they rode togither certaine cources, but not the ful chalēge, for the Erle of Marre was caſt both horſſe and man, and two of his ribbes broken with the fall, ſo that he was borne out of Smithfielde, and conuayed towarde Scotlande, but died by the way at Yorke Sir William Darrel Knight, ye Kings Bā
               ner bearer of Scotland, challēged ſir Pierce Courtney knight the kings Banner-bearer of Englande, and when they had rū certain courſes, they gaue ouer without concluſiō of victory. Then Cockborne Eſquire of Scotland challenged ſir Nicholas Hawberke Knight, & rode v. courſes, but Cockborn was borne ouer horſſe and man. The ſeauenth of June Quéene Anne dyed at Shine in Southerie, and was buried at Westminster.
               Anno reg. 18 The K. toke hir death ſo heauily, that beſides curſing the place where ſhe dyed, he did alſo for anger throw down

the buildings, vnto the whiche the former Kings beyng wearyed of the Citie, were wonte for pleaſure to reſorte.
            About the moneth of Auguſte proclamation was made that all Iriſhmen ſhoulde auoyde the realme and gette them home before the feaſt of the nauitie of our Lady, on pain of life.
            
               William Bramſtone: Thomas Knowles, the. 28. of Sept.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Sir Iohn Froyſh Mercer, the. 28. of October.
            
            King Richard went ouer into Ireland, and ye Duke of Glocester with him, and the Earles of March, Notingham and Rutlande. The Iriſh men being afrayde of ſuche preparation as was made, durſt not ſhewe themſelues openly, but with ſecrete aſſaultings they often troubled the Kings army, yet when the Engliſhmen preuayled, many Lords of the land ſubmitted themſelues to the King, of which ſome the Kyng helde wyth hym, leaſte they ſhoulde attempte ſome new ſtyre.
            The King helde his Chriſtmaſſe at Dublin in Irelande, & after that feaſt held a Parliament there: alſo the ſame time the Lord Warden of England called a Parliamēt at London, to the which came (being ſent forth of Ireland) the Duke of Glocester, the which before al the ſtates ſhewed the Kings néed, who had now ſpent his treaſure amongſt the Iriſhme ſo that a tenth was granted by the Cleargie, and a fiftéenth by the1395 Laytie. This voiage being chargeable to the King, came to ſmall effect, for after Eaſter he was forced to returne again into England, to appeaſe certaine troubles, begon by ſir Rycharde Sturry, ſir Thomas Latimer, ſir Lewes Clifforde, ſyr Iohn Montacute and other.
            This yeare England ſuffered great loſſe by Pirates, of ye Quéene of Donmarke, who ſpoyled Marriners & Merchāts,Anno reg. 19 eſpecially the men of Norffolke that aſſembled a multitude togither, & toke vppon them to fight with them, but the enimies preuayling, many of them were ſlaine, and verye many taken priſoners, were reſerued to grieuous redemption,

with loſſe of twentie thouſande poundes, which they had a borde with them to make their merchandice.
            
               Roger Elles: William Sherington, the. 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Sir William More Vintener, the. 28. of October.
            
            In the month of Nouember King Richard cauſed the body of his deare friend Robert de Vere Duke of Ireland, to be brought from Louaine, & after to be buried in the Priorie of Colne in Eſſex, with ſolemne funerals, which he honored wt his preſence, & cauſing the Co
                  ••
               en of Cipres, wherin his body being embalmed lay to be opened, y• he might behold his1
                     ••
                  6 face, & touch him with his fingers openly ſhewing the loue to the dead carkaſſe, which he ought to it being aliue. Iohn Duke of Lancaster, to whom the K. had giuen the Duchie of Aquitaine, when he nowe had laide forth an eſtimable ſumAnno reg. 20 of treaſure in thoſe partes, to purchaſe the good wils of thoſe Countreymen, & ſhould haue his deſire, he was ſodainelye called home by the K. who returning into England came to Langley, where the K. held his Chriſtmaſſe, & was receyued of the K. with honor, after taking his leaue of the Courte he made haſt to Lincolne, where he toke to wife Katheren Swinford. This yeare according to the couenaunt before made & eſtabliſhed betwixt the kings of England & Fraunce, the ſayde Kings mette at the place by Caleis which was appointed for them to talke in, wher they concluded a peace, toke a corporal othe, to performe the ſame. And K. Richard toke to wyfe Iſabel the little daughter of the French king, being but ſeuen or eight yeares old. In a Parliament at Westminster, Robert Bolgnope, Iohn Holt, William Brough
                Knightes of the Bathe, were reuoked out of Ireland and pardoned, theſe wer men of law and Judges.
            
               Thomas Wilforde: William Parker, the, 28. of Septem.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Sir Adam Bawme Goldſmith, the. 28. of October.
            
            And Richard Whittington the ſixth of June.
            The tenth of Nouember, the K. was marryed at Caleis wt great ſolemnitie, & ſhortly after returned into England. The xiij. of Nouember the quéene came to London through Southwarke,
               
& ſuch a multitude of people went to ſée hir, that vpon1
                     •
                  97 
               Lon. bridge nine perſons were crowded to death, of whom y• Prior of Tiptor in Eſſex was one, & a worſhipfull matrone of Cornehil was another. After Chriſtmaſſe a Parliamēt was holden at Lond. in which the D. of Lancaster cauſed his iſſue which he had by Katheren Swinford, to be made legitimate. Alſo Thomas ſon of the D. of Lancaster & the ſaid Katheren, was created E. of Somerſet, the D. gaue him to ſurname Bello Fortie or Bewfort. There was graunted to the K. halfe a tenth by the Cleargie. This yeare when the realme of England ſéemed to inioy the chiefeſt peace y• might be, by reaſon of the Kings marriage, & the great riches y• were heaped vp togither by the ſame, & by the reaſon of y• truce of. 30. yeares eſtabliſhed & the preſence of ſo many noble men as y• like no forrain realme was able to ſhew, ſodainely all things were troubled and brought into a turmoyle, whiles the King atAnno reg. 21 
               Plaſhy in Eſſex, vpon a ſodaine toke his vncle the D. of Glo. by force of armes, he ſuſpecting no ſuch thing, & cauſed hym to be conueyed to Caleis, there to be kept in priſon, and cauſed the Earle of Warwicke to be arreſted and impriſoned, the ſame day that he had biddē him to dinner, notwithſtanding that he ſhewed him very good countenance, and had promiſed him great friendſhip, beſide that he deceiued the E. of Arundale, wt faire words, (who was wel able to haue defended himſelf, & to haue deliuered his friends, the D. of Glocester & the E. of Warwick▪
               ) who notwithſtanding he yéelded himſelf quietly, he ſent him to the Ile of Wight, there to be impriſoned vntil y• Parliament. And to y• end there ſhould be no cō
               motion among y• cōmons for the impriſoning of the nobles he cauſed to be proclaymed y• the apprehenſion of them, was not for any old diſpleaſure, but for new tranſgreſſions committed againſt y• k. ſhortly after he cauſed y• ſaid nobles to be indited at Notinghā, & ſuborned ſuch as ſhold appeach thē in the next Parliament, to wit Ed Erle of Rutland, T. Moubery,
                E. Marſhal, Tho. Holland E. of Kent, Iohn Holland
                Erle of Huntington, Tho. Bewford
                Erle of Somerſet, I. Mountacute
               
               
Earle of Saliſburie, and Thomas Spencer, & William Scrope, the Kings Chamberlayne. And in mean yeſeaſon the Kyng aſſembled togither to guarde his parſon, many malefactors of the Countie of Chester which kept watch and warde both day and night about him. Then the K. cauſed a greate and generall Parliament to be ſummoned at Westminster, when he cauſed a great Hall to be builded in the midſt of the Pallaice betwixte the Clocke tower, and the doore of the greate Hall. This Parliament began aboute the fiftéenth of September, at the beginning whereof Edwarde Stafforde Byſhop of Excester L. chanceller, made a propoſition or ſermō, in the which he affirmed that the power of the K. was alone and perfect of it ſelf, & thoſe that impeached it were worthye to ſuffer pain of the law: to this Parliament al the Nobles came with their retinue in armes, for feare of the King: the prelocutours were Knights, in whō no goodneſſe at al could be found, but a natural couetouſneſſe, vnſatiable ambition, intollerable pride, and hatred of the truth, their names wer Iohn Buſhy, William Bagot and Thomas Grene. Theſe requiredTho. Walſ. chiefely to haue the Charters of pardons reuoked & diſſanulled: and Buſhy ſayde to the K. bycauſe we are charged to ſay what they be that haue committed any offence againſt your maieſtie, & regall aucthoritie, we ſaye that Tho. duke of Glocester & Richard E. of Arundale, in the. xviij. yeare of your raigne, haue trayterouſly compelled you, by mean of the new Archbiſhop of Canterburie then Lord Chancellour, to graunt to them a commiſſion to gouerne your Realme, and to diſpoſe of the ſtate thereof, to the preiudice of youre maieſtie and royaltie. The ſame daye was that commiſſion diſſanulled with all Articles dependyng therevppon. Alſo the generall pardon graunted after the greate Parliament by them procured, and one ſpeciall pardon for the Erle of Arundale were reuoked.
            Alſo there was a peticion made by ye commons, I. Buſhy ſpeaking for them, that the generall pardon procured and gotte forthe, the Archebyſhoppe of Canterburie then Lorde

Chancellor procuring it ſhould be diſanulled, and he to be iudged a Traytor for granting to it, wherevpon the Archbiſhop roſe and would haue anſwered, but the King ſayde, to morrow to morrow, but he came not into the Parliament houſe againe: the King ſaid, that he would deliberate of the commons petition.
            Alſo it was eſtabliſhed, that any Traytor conuicted, to ſtand againſt the Kings regalitie, ſhould be adiudged worthie to ſuffer puniſhment to be appoynted for ſuch offence.
            Alſo it was enacted, that criminall cauſes from thenceforth-ſhould be determined in euery Parliament, and then licence being had to depart, a great ſturre was made as is vſed, wherevpon the Kings Archers, in number four thouſand, compaſſed the Parliament houſe, thinking there had bin in the houſe ſome broyle or fighting, with their bowes bent, their arrowes ſet in them, and drawing, readie to ſhoote, to the terrour of all that were there, but the King héerewith comming, pacified them. On the next day, the Prelates were inioyned, vpon payne of loſing their temporalities, that they ſhould the ſame day agrée vpon ſome procurator, to conſent in their names to al things in that Parliament to be diſpatched, and the King had theſe words: Sir Iohn Buſhy, bycauſe many deſire that I would explane the fiftie perſons exempted in y• general pardon, I wil briefely, that what man ſoeuer deſireth this, is worthie of death: firſt, bicauſe he fléeth: ſecondly, bycauſe I haue excepted thoſe that are to be impeached in this Parliament: thirdly, bycauſe other of their aſſociates hearing thē oppreſſed, would be afraide where no feare is. On the next day, the Archbiſhop of Canterbury commeth to the palace to appeare in the Parliament, but the King commanded him by the Biſhop of Carelile, that he ſhoulde returne to his houſe, and from thenceforth he appeared not. The Prelates made Thomas Percy the Kings Steward of houſhold, their procurator, to conſent in all things in this Parliament to be done. Alſo Sir Iohn Buſhy had theſe words, our ſoueraigne Lord

the King, bycauſe the ſecond Article in the Parliament is for puniſhmente to be appoynted for ſuche as violate the Kings royall authoritie, I beſéech your grace that you will authorice me by way of appealing, of accuſing, or impeaching, with licence to make declaration from one to the reſt ſo often and when to me and to my fellowes it may ſéeme expedient, and it was graunted, then Buſhy had theſe words: I accuſe Thomas of Arundell, Archbiſhop of Canterbury, of thréefold treaſon.
            Frſt, of the commiſſion in granting the regiment or gouernement of the Realme to Thomas Duke of Glocester, and to Richard Earle of Arundell at his inſtance, who rather bycauſe he was your Chancellour, ſhould haue refuſed it.
            Secondly, for that vnder pretext of that trayterous commiſſion, they trayterouſly vſurping the iuriſdiction of your regalitie, or royall authoritie, held a ſolemne Parliament trayterouſlie in preiudice of your regalitie.
            Thirdly, bycauſe that by the ſayde trayterous vſurping, Sir Simon de Burley, and Sir Iames Barnes Knightes, and faithfull lieges to you, were trayterouſlie murthered, and put to death, of which things, we your commons demaund iudgement, worthie of ſo high treaſon, to be terribly pronounced by you, and bycauſe the Archbiſhop is a man of great conſanguinitie, affinitie, power, and moſt politike witte, and cruell nature, for the preſeruation of your eſtate, and the whole Kingdomes, by the petition of this preſent Parliament, I require that he may be put into ſafecuſtodie, vntill the finall execution of his iudgemente.
            The King héerevnto anſwered, that for the excellence of his dignitie he would take deliberation till the next morrow, and all other that were put into the ſame commiſſion, he pronounced them to be his faithfull liege people, and voyd from that treaſon, and eſpecially Alexander Neuell, late Archbiſhop of Yorke, and then Sir Edmond of Langley. Duke of Yorke, Unkle to the King, and Sir William Wikeham
               
Biſhop of Winchester, that were put into the ſame commiſſion, with teares fell downe on the ground before the King, and gaue him humble thankes for that grace and benefite beſtowed on them.
            Alſo on Saint Mathewes day, the Earle of Rutland, the Earles of Kent, Huntington, Notingham, Somerſet, and Saliſburie, with the Lordes Spencer and Scrope, in a ſute of redde Gownes of Silke garded, and bordered with white Silke, and embrodered with Letters of Golde, proponed the appeale by them to the King at Notingham, before ſet foorthe, in the which, they accuſed Thomas Duke of Glocester, Richard
                Earle of Arundell, Thomas
                Earle of Warwike, and Thomas de Mortimere, Knight of the premiſed treaſons, and of an armed inſurrection at Haringey Parke, trayterouſlie attempted againſt the King, and putting in ſureties for the proſecuting of their appeale. Richarde Earle of Arundell was arreigned in a redde Gowne, and a Scarlet whood, and forthwith the Duke of Lancaster ſayde to the Lorde Neuell, take from hym hys girdle and whoode, and ſo it was done, and héerewith the Articles of appeale béeing to the ſayde Earle declared, with a valiaunt and a bolde mynde, hée denyed that hée was a Traytor, and required the benefite of the pardon, proteſting that he would not goe from the fauour of the King and his grace. The Duke of Lancaster ſayde to hym, thou Traytor, that pardon is reuoked. The Earle anſwered, truely thou lyeſt, I was neuer Traytor. Alſo, the Duke of Lancaster ſayde, why diddeſt thou purchaſe thy pardon, the Earle anſwered, to eſcape the tongues of myne enimies, of whome thou arte one, and verily, as farre forth as toucheth Treaſon, thou haſt more néede of pardon than I. The King ſayde, make anſwere vnto thyne appeale. The Earle anſwered, I ſée well that theſe perſons haue accuſed me of Treaſon, ſhewing the appealementes▪ but truely, they all lye, I was neuer Traytor, but I aſke alwayes the benefyte of my pardon, the whyche youre Grace

granted to me within theſe ſixe yeares now laſt paſt, being of full age, and of your francke good will and proper motion. Then ſayd the King, I did ſo grant it that it ſhould not be againſt me: then ſayde the Duke of Lancaster, then the graunt auayleth not. The Erle anſwered, truly of that pardon I know leſſe than thy ſelfe, that was then on the further ſide the Seas. Then ſaid Sir Iohn Buſhy, that pardon is reuoked by the King, the Lordes, and vs his faithfull people: the Earle anſwered, where be thoſe faithful people? I know thée well and thy company how ye are gathered togither, not to deale faithfully, for the faithful people of the Realme are not héere, and therefore the people do lamente for me, and well I know that thou haſt bin euer falſe. And then Buſhy and his fellowes cried out, Behold ſoueraigne Lord and King, how this Traytor goeth about to reyſe ſedition betwixt vs, and thoſe people that are at home. The Earle anſwered, ye lye, I am no Traytor. Then roſe the Earle of Darby and ſayde, didſt not thou ſay thus to me at Huntington, where we were firſt aſſembled togither to riſe, that it was the beſt afore all things to take the King. The Earle ſayd to the Earle of Darby, thou lyeſt on thy head, I neuer thought of my ſoueraigne▪ Lorde the King, but that that was good, and for his honor. Then ſayd the King, didſt not thou ſay to me in time of thy Parliament, in the Bath behinde the White Hall, that Sir Simon de Burley was worthie of death for many cauſes, and I anſwered, that I knew no cauſe of death in him, and yet thou and thy fellowes didſt trayterouſlie put him to death, and then the Duke of Lancaſter pronounced iudgement againſt him in this manner: Richard, I Iohn, Steward of England iudge thée to be a Traytor, and I condemne thée to be drawne and hanged, to be beheaded and quartered, and thy lands, tailed and not tailed, from thée and from thine heires of thy body deſcending, to be confilcate: then the King for reuerence of his bloud, commanded him only to be beheaded, and then was he ledde to the Tower hill, and there beheaded, and was buried at the

Auguſtine Friers in London. Alſo the ſame day, the King appoynted the Lord Cobham (accuſed by the commons) to be arraigned. Alſo vpon the Saterday, Sir Thomas de Mortimer was ſommoned, vpon payne to be baniſhed as a Traytor, within ſixe moneths to come to be tried in iudgement: and then ſaide the King, peraduenture the Earle of March can not take him, and therefore I will ſo long ſtay for his certificate out of Ireland.
            
            Alſo, a declaration was made, that all benefices or gifts, granted or alienated by thoſe that were already condemned, or after were to be condemned in this Parliament, and other whatſoeuer, graunted ſith the tenth yeare of this Kings raigne, ſhould be reuoked. Alſo, on Monday following, the certificate giuen in of the Earle of Notingham, then Captayne of Caleis, in whoſe cuſtodie the Duke of Glocester was, that the ſame Duke might not be brought to be tried in iudgement, bycauſe he was dead in his cuſtodie at Caleis: at the petition yet of the ſaide appellents, the ſame ſentence was pronounced againſt him, which had bin pronounced earſt againſt the Earle of Arundell.
            
            Alſo, the Archbiſhop of Canterbury, firſt his temporalities being confiſcated, was baniſhed the Realme. On the Tueſday, Rikell, on of the Kings Juſtices, borne in Ireland, read certayne confeſſions drawne in writing vpon the ſaid treaſons put forth, affirming, that the ſame were the confeſſions of the ſaid Duke, by him put forth or diſcouered, and written with his owne hand.
            Alſo, the Earledome of Chester was aduanced to the honor of a Duchie, by annexing thereto the Lands of the ſayd Earle of Arundell confiſcate.
            Alſo the ſame day, the Earle of Saliſburie made requeſt to haue a Scire facias graunted to him againſt the Earle of March, for the Lordſhip of Denbigh in Wales, and the King anſwered therevpon that he would take deliberation. Alſo on the Wedneſday, it was ordeyned, that the Lands of the ſayde Earle of Arundell, annexed to the Duchie of Chester,
               
ſhould enioy the liberties of the ſame Duchie, excepted that to the Welchmen of thoſe partes, their olde Lawes and cuſtomes ſhould ſtill remayne, and be continued.
            Alſo, it was ordeyned, that ſuch as gaue eyther counſell, ayde, or fauour to the children of them that were condemned, or that ſhoulde be condemned in this Parliamente, ſhould be puniſhed as Traytors.
            On Friday, the King appoynted a prefixed day to the Archbiſhop of Canterbury, to wéete, the third of the ſixt wéeke, to depart the Realme.
            Alſo it was ordeyned, that all the Lords Spiritual and Temporall, ſhould ſweare inuiolably to obſerue whatſoeeuer in this Parliament were enacted, and that the cenſures of the Church ſhould be pronounced by the Prelates againſt all thoſe that ſhould go againſt the ſame.
            Alſo, the Earle of Warwike was arreigned, and his whood being taken off, and the appeale read, as he had bin ſome miſerable old woman, confeſſed all things conteyned in the appeale, wéeping, wayling, and howling, to be done trayterouſly by him, and ſubmitting himſelfe to the Kings grace in all things, ſorowing that euer he had bin aſſociate vnto the appellants. Then the King demanded of him by whome he was allured to ioyne with them, and he anſwered, by Thomas Duke of Glocester, and the Abbot of Saint Albons, and a Monke recluſe in Westminster, and euer beſought the King of grace and mercie, and the King granted him life to be led in perpetuall priſon out of the Realme, his goodes moueable and vnmoueable to be confiſcate, as the Earle of Arundels had bin, and the King commanded that he ſhould be had to the Tower of London, and after, to be conuayde 
                  •
               uer to the Caſtell within the Iſle of Man, vnder the wardſhip of William Scrope, then Lord of the ſayd Ile, to remayne there in perpetuall priſon, and on the morrow, the King granted to him & his wife fiue 
                  •
               . Markes yearely during their liues. Alſo, the writ of Scire facias was granted to the Earle of Saliſburie, againſt the Earle of March, for the

ſayd Lordſhip of Denbigh, fiftéene dayes reſpite being giuen to put in an anſwere. Item, it was ordeyned, that thoſe which ought money to Rochester Bridge, ſhould be put in execution for the payment, to the vſe of the ſame Bridge. Alſo, Henry Bolenbroke Earle of Derby, ſonne and heire ofDukes created. 
               Iohn of Gaunt D. of Lancaster, was created D. of Hereforde. Edward
                Earle of Rutland, was created Duke of Aumarle. Thomas
                Earle of Kent, Duke of Surrey, the Earle of Notingham, Duke of Norffolke. Iohn
                Earle of Huntington, Duke of Excester. Iohn
                Earle of Somerſet, Marques of Dorſet. Thomas Lorde Spencer, Earle of Glocester. The Lorde Neuell Earle of Weſtmerland. Thomas Percy
                Earle of Worceſter. William Scrope,
                L. Treaſourer, Earle of Wiltſhire. Sir Iohn Mountagew,
                Earle of Saliſburie. The K. added the armes of K. Edward the Confeſſor to his, & bare them togither part for pale, and then the Parliament was proroged till the octaues of S. Hillary, then to be holden at Shrewſburie.
            
            
               Iohn Woodcocke: William Askam, the 28. of Septemb.
               
                  Sherifes. Maior. VVeſtminſter Hall repaired.
            
            
               Sir Richard Whitington Mercer, the 28. of October.
            
            King Richard cauſed the great Hall at Westminster to be repaired, both the walles, windowes, and ruffe, with a maruellous worke, and great coſtes, whiche he leuied of Strangers baniſhed out of their Countreys, who obteyned licence to remayne in this Coūtrey, by the Kings Charter which they had purchaſed with great ſommes of money.
            King Richard kept his Chriſtmas at Liechfield, and then1398 tooke his iourney towardes Shrewſburie, where the Parliament lately proroged, began againe, in the which it was ordeined, that all Statutes ordeyned at Westminster in the xj. yeare of y• Kings raigne, ſhould be reuoked & diſanulled, & al y• articles of the ſame, and the heires of thē that were adiudged in y• ſaid Parliament, ſhould be recōciled, and reſtored to all their lands, inheritances, & poſſeſſions: excepted, y• they ſhould haue no clayme againſt the with-holders of the profiles, and reuenues of thoſe lands in the meane time. On the morrow it was ordeyned that the heires of them whiche were iudged and conuicted in the foure Articles

of high treaſon, ſhould not enioy the Lands, nor any poſſeſſions of their progenitors, but ſhould be excluded from all and euery action and clayme for euer.
            The firſt Article of high treaſon was this, if any man, of what condition ſoeuer he were, did imagin the kings death.
            The ſecond Article was, if any man ſhould haue an imagination to depoſe the King.
            The third, if any man did ride armed within the Realm of England, in manner of warre againſt the King.
            The fourth was, if any mā diſclaymed y• kings homage.
            Alſo the ſame day, the Lord Cobham was arraigned, to make anſwere vnto two Articles of high treaſon.
            The firſt was, that he the ſayde Lorde Cobham was in counſell to make one commiſſion againſt the ſtate of the King, and likewiſe, that he vſed the ſame commiſſion in doing iudgement againſt the Kings will, and to the preiudice of him.
            The ſeconde, that he ſate in iudgement to iudge Sir Simon de Burley, and Iames Barnes, Knightes of the kings, in his abſence, and againſt his will: and vpon this, he was cō
               uict and iudged to perpetuall priſon within the Ile of Ierſey.
            
            On the morrow, Henry Duke of Hereford accuſed ThomasThe Duke of Hereford accuſeth the Duke of Norffolke. Mowbray Duke of Norffolke, of certaine words by him ſpoken, as they rode betwéene London and Brayneford, tending to the diſhonor of the Kings perſon, which the Duke of Norffolke vtterly denayd to haue ſpoken, where vpon, a Combate was granted them by the King to be fought atA Combate is granted. 
               Couentry, vpon the ſeauentéenth of September.
            A fiftéenth and a halfe was granted, and the cuſtomes of woolles, fiftie Shillings of euery Sacke of euery Engliſhman borne, and thrée pound of euery Stranger.
            This Parliament ended, the King viſited many places in the Weaſt part of England, as Worcester, Hereford, Bristow, and other places, to wéete, Glastonbury, and Bath.
            
            After this alſo, the King cauſed a Theatre to be made atAnno reg. 22 
               Bristow, for a Combate to be fought betwixt two Scottes, to

wéete, the one béeing an Eſquire appellant, and the other a Knight defendant, and the appellant was ouercome and hanged: but after this time, he made a great and maruellous ſtrong Theatre at Couentrie for the Combate betwixte the Duke of Hereford, and the Duke of Norffolke, and gaue them day for the fight, the ſixtéenth of September, to wéete, the feaſt day of Saint Edith, at which day and place, a great concourſe and aſſemble of people was there gathered out of all partes of Englande. When the ſayde Champions appeared in the Liſtes, readie to fighte, the King commanded them to be quiet and not to fight, and then the Kyng ſitting in hys royall apparell within his Tente girt with his Sworde, hée commanded hys decrée to bée proclaymed, and thys was the Kings decrée, that Henry Duke of Hereforde, for hys diſobedience towardes the King,Dukes 
                     •
                  anished. ſhoulde bée baniſhed for tenne yeares, and likewiſe the Duke of Norffolke to be baniſhed for euer out of England, taking of his reuenues a thouſand Markes by yeare, till the Towne of Caleis were repaired.
            
               Iohn Wade: Iohn Warner, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Sir Drew Barrentine, Goldſmith, the 28. of October.
            
            At the feaſt of Saint Michaell, the King cauſed ſeauentéene Counties in East England to bée indited, and layde to theyr charges, that they had bin agaynſte him, with the Duke of Glocester, the Earles of Arundell and Warwike, wherefore, hée ſente honourable men to induce the Lords, both Spirituall and Temporall, to make a ſubmiſſion by writing, ſealed with theyr owne handes, acknowledging themſelues to bée Traytors to the King, though they neuer offended him in word or déede. Moreouer, he compelled all the Religious Gentlemen and commons, to ſetBlancke Charters. their Seales to blanckes, to the ende he might as it pleaſed him oppreſſe them ſeuerally, or all at once: ſome of the commons payde a thouſande Markes, ſome a thouſande pounde &c.
            Alſo, he ordeyned through euery Prouince in Englande,
               
that all Gentlemen, and mē of ſubſtance, ſhould be ſworneVn
                     •
                  cuſtomed othes. firmely to maynteyne according to their poſſible power, all the Statutes, Articles, and Conſtitutions ordeyned in the laſt Parliament.
            On Newyeares day, néere vnto Bedforde, a very déepe water which ranne betwixt the Townes of Swelstone, and Harleſwode, ſtoode ſodeinly ſtill, and deuided it ſelfe, ſo that by the ſpace of thrée miles, the botome remained drie, which wonder, many one thought, did ſignifie the deuiſion of the people, and falling away from the King, whiche hapned ſhortly after.
            
               Roger Mortimere Earle of March, and of Vlstar in Ireland,
               Earle of March ſlaine in Irelād. Cro. Pet. Coledge. W. l. Wilum.
                lying there in a Caſtel of his, there came on him a great multitude of wilde Iriſhmen to aſſayle him, and he iſſuing out, fought manfully, till he was by them hewen to péeces, whoſe death the King determined to reuenge.
            About Candlemas, dyed Iohn of Gaunt D. of Lancaster, at the Biſhop of Elyes Inne, in Holborne by London, and wasDuke of Lancaſter deceaſed. 1399 honourably buryed in S. Paules Church at London, his ſonne Henry Duke of Hereford being then beyond the ſeas.
            About Whitſontide, King Richard with a Nauie of 100. Ships, ſayled from Milford Hauen, towards Ireland, and arriuedKing Richarde ſayled into Ireland. at Waterford on the laſt day of Maynfrem whence, he marched with his armie of thirtie thouſande, to Kilkenny, foureſcore miles within the Countrey, and there remayned xiiij. dayes, tarying for Edward Duke of Aumarle. On Midſommer euen he went from thence toward Mackmore, whoAnno reg. 23 remayned amongſt the woods with 3000 mē, right hardy, and ſuch as ſéemed but little to feare the Engliſhmen. At the entring of the woods, the King commanded fires to be vſed, ſo that many a houſe, and many a village was brent, & there the King made the Duke of Herefords ſonne Knight, with ten other. 2500. Pioners were appoynted to fell the woods, and make wayes for ye 
               Engliſhmen. The Iriſhmē
                feared greatly the ſhot of the Engliſhmen, but yet with their Dartes they aſſayled, and ſlewe diuers as they caught them at aduantage.

The Unkle of Mackmore came in and yéelded himſelfeThe Vnkle of Mackmore ſubmitted to King Richard. to the King, with a withie about his necke, and many other naked and bare legged, did the like, all which, the King pardoned. After this, the King ſente to Mackmore, promiſing him, that if he would come in as his Unkle had done, with the withie about his necke, he ſhould be pardoned: but he vtterly refuſing, ſayd, he would fight to death in defending his right, for he knew the Engliſhmen wanted victualles, and more than they had brought with them could not be bought for Gold or Siluer. There was already ſuch ſcarcitie, that there were ſome four, ſome ſixe, that had but a ſmall lofe of bread to liue by the day, and ſome that eate not a grayne in fiue dayes togither. The King therefore departed the 28. day of June, toward Diuelin, at what time Mackmore ſent a beggar, with notice to the King, that hée would be his friend, and aſke him mercy, or elſe, if it pleaſed him to treate of peace, to ſend ſome noble mē to him: whervpon the Earle of Glocester was ſent, who led with him the reregard wherof he was captayne, being two C. Lances, & a M. Archers: betwixt two woods farre from the Sea they mette with the Iriſh. Mackmore
                himſelfe rode on a whiteMackmore a good horſeman. Horſſe, without ſaddle or other furniture, that coſt him (as was ſayde) foure hundred Kowes, whiche Horſſe he ranne downe the hill, that the beholders reported they neuer had ſéene Hare nor Déere to haue runne ſo ſwiftly. In hys righte hande he bare a Darte greate and long, whiche he threwe excéeding well. He was a mightie ſtrong man of perſonage. There the Earle and hée talked a good whyle, aboute the murthering of the Earle of March, and after of other thynges, but agrée they coulde not, and ſo departed.
            The Earle aduertiſed the King what he had foūd, which was nothing, but that the enimie woulde crie mercie, ſo as he might be ſure to haue peace without other griefe, otherwiſe, he would (ſo long as he liued) defend himſelfe: wherefore, the King (in his wrath) not knowing what lette

might happen, ſware, that he would neuer depart Irelande, till he had him eyther aliue or dead. The hoſt diſlodged for lacke of victualles, they were a thirtie thouſands at their comming ouer, that lay then at Diuelin fiftéene dayes, the King forthwith deuiding his armie into thrée partes, ſente them out to ſéeke Mackemore, promiſing an hundreth Markes to him that could bring him in, which offer was well hearkened vnto, for it ſounded well, but he could not be caught: and the ſame day, Edwarde. Earle of Rutlande, Duke of Aumarle, Conneſtable of Englande, arriued with an hundreth Sayle, of whoſe comming, the King was verie glad, though he indéede had taried long, and mighte haue come muche ſooner. They remayned ſixe wéekes at Diuelin, and heard no newes out of Englande, the paſſage was ſo dangerous, the winde béeing contrary, and tempeſtes ſo greate, at length, came a Shippe with heauie newes, how the Duke of Hereforde, and now by the deceaſſe of his father Duke of Lancaster, was arriued in England at Rauenſpore
               The Duke of Hereford returned into Englande. beſide Wadlington, in Yorkeſhire, and had beheaded William Scrope Earle of Wilſhire, Treaſourer of Englande, Iohn Buſhy, Henry Greene,
                and other, and had cauſed Thomas Arundell, Archbiſhop of Canterbury, to preach againſte King Richarde, who alſo ſhewed a Bull procured from Rome, promiſing remiſſion of ſinnes to all thoſe whiche ſhould ayde the ſayde Henry, in conquering of his enimies, and after their death, to be placed in Paradiſe, which preaching, moued manye to cleaue to the Duke. Upon this newes the King being perſwaded to make haſt ouer, the Duke of Aumarle ſayde, it was better to ſtay till hys Shippes mighte bée brought togither, for there were but an hundreth readie to make Sayle, wherevpon, Iohn Mountacute Earle of Saliſburie, was ſente with a power, whileſt the King going to Waterforde mighte gather hys Fléete, who promiſed within ſixe dayes to haue followed hym. The Earle of Salesburie landed at Conwey, where hée was ſoone aduertiſed, howe the Duke

had taken the more parte of Englande, and that all the Lords were got to him, with more than thréeſcore thouſand men. The Earle of Saleſburie cauſed to ſommon the Welchmen, and them of Cheſhire, to come to him, ſo that (wéening the King had bin arriued at Conwey) within foure dayes there were come togither fortie thouſand men, ready to goe againſt the Duke of Hereford, where they ſtayd fourtéene dayes, but when they ſaw the King came not, they ſtealed away, and left the Earle of Saliſburie in manner alone, ſo that vnneath he had a C. men with him. The Duke of Hereford aduanced towards the Earle of Saliſburie, who withdrew him into Conwey. The King through euill counſellKing Richard returned out of Ireland, and landed at Milford Hauen. ſtayd after the Earles departure eyghtéene dayes, and then arriued at Milford Hauen, from whence, about midnight following, deſguiſed like a Prieſt, for feare to be knowne, with thirtéene perſons only, who went to Conwey, thinking the Earle of Saliſburie had there helde the fielde. There were with him the Dukes of Excester and Surrey, and the Earle of Glocester, that continued faithfull vnto the laſt houre. There were thrée Biſhops alſo, of which, two did not like good men, the Biſhop of Lincolne, and Saint Dauids, but the third continued faithfull, that was, the Biſhop of Carelile. He had alſo two Knightes, Stephen Scrope, and William Fireby, and Ianico, a Gaſcoigne. The King rode ſo warely, that he came to Conwey at the breake of the daye. Great ſorrow and lamentation was made by the King and the Earle at their méeting, for that the Earles hoſt was diſperſed and gone, ſome to the Duke, and ſome otherwayes. The Duke of Aumarle, Conneſtable, and chiefe gouernour of the Kings armie at Milford, immediately whē the Kings departure was knowne, he ſayde to the Souldiers, let vs ſhift for our ſelues mayſters, for the King is fledde, wherevpon euery man truſſed, and away. Sir Thomas Percy Steward of houſhold, talking with the Conneſtable, alſo departed, and tooke their way through Wales. The Welſhmen ſéeing ſuch diſorder, aſſembled them togither, and ſpoyled

the Engliſhmen of all their goodes, and ſent them packing in their dublets, with white ſtaues in their hands, for there rode héere tenne, héere twentie, héere fiftie, héere an hundred, and ſo the Welchmen comming downe the Mountaynes, the Engliſh loſt that they had. The King had many Horſſes of beyond the Sea broode, and great riches in apparell and iewels, which was in the kéeping of Sir Thomas Percy, who with the Conneſtable came to Duke Henry of Hereford, and more than fiue hundred of their companye, all naked, whome the Welchmen had deſpoyled, and beaten well. The King being at Conwey in great diſcomfort, ſent the Dukes of Excester and Surrey, to Henry Duke of Hereford and Lancaster, to know what his meaning was, himſelfe remayning ſtill at Conwey in great perplexitie, and with him the Earle of Saliſburie, the Biſhop of Carelile, Sir William Ferebe Knight, Sir Stephen Scrope mine Author, and another Frenchman, in all but xvj. perſons, then was newes brought to the King how his Conneſtable had demeaned him, and likewiſe his Steward, that had cauſed his riches to be brought aland, and going through Wales with it, the Welchmen had taken it. The King then by the aduiſe of the Earle of Saliſburie departed from Conwey vnto Beawmareis, a ten miles off, and from thence, he went to Carnaruan. Beawmaris was a ſtrong Fortreſſe if it had bin manned and victualled. Carnaruan is a faire Towne, and a ſtrong Caſtell, but theſe were vnprouided of all things, ſo that for fiue or ſixe nightes he lay very hard and baſe, and for victualles, there was none, wherefore he returned againe to Conwey, where he ſore lamented his eſtate. The Dukes of Excester and Surrey entring the Citie of Cheſter, which Duke Henry had taken, were brought ſtreight to the Caſtell to the Duke, who was glad to ſée them, and forthwith aſked the Duke of Excester what newes, who tolde him from poynt to poynt, what ſhame and diſhonour it woulde be to him, if he dealt ſo vniuſtly towardes his Prince, and that through him he were depoſed: hée therefore demaunded

an
                  •
               were with ſpéede: but the Duke of Lancaster was as ſlow to diſpatch him, and tolde hym he ſhoulde not goe for one wéeke, and that the King was not well aduiſed to ſende hym and his fellow, béeing men of ſuch calling, ſith he had other ynow of meaner eſtate to do the meſſage: ſo they remayned to their great diſcomfort. The Duke of Excester, Duke Henry ſtill kepte in hys company, but the Duke of Surrey was committed to ſafekéeping within the Caſtell of Chester.
            
            There is a Caſtell ſixe miles from Chester, called Beston Caſtell, builded on a Rocke, verye ſtrong by ſcituation, therein were an hundred men of armes, choſen and able men, but not diligent, for they deliuered it to the Duke, where they might well ynough haue kept it, the aſcending is ſo ſtéepe: it was victualled for ſixe yeares. There was founde within it Coyne better than an hundred thouſande Markes, beſide other Jewels, which King Richard cauſed to be kepte, to the value of two hundred thouſande Markes, all which Duke Henry tooke wyth him, and returned to Chester, and there taking counſell of his friendes what was beſt to bée done, the Archbiſhop of Canterburie ſayde, that ſith the Kyng was in Wales, whych was a Countrey ſtrong, by reaſon of the Mountaynes, ſo that it was impoſſible for an Armie to paſſe wyth bagge and baggage, hée thought it beſt to ſende vnto King Richarde, and to make hym beléeue that hée ſought nothing but peace, and a Parliamente to bée made, wherein, thoſe that had offended in putting to death his Unkle the Duke of Glocester, ſhoulde bée puniſhed, and ſo from thenceforth the King and the Duke to be good friendes, and that it ſhould be at the Kings pleaſure to appoynte the day and place for thys Parliamente, for withoute thys ſhifte, it ſhoulde bée vnpoſſible for the Duke to gette hym into his handes, for hée mighte departe by Sea when hée woulde, hauing retayned at Conwey Shippes for that purpoſe.
            All the other Lords aſſenting to this counſell, the Duke

appoynted the Earle of Northumberland to go to the King with four hūdred Launces, and a thouſand Archers, which Earle, when he came to Flint Castell, had it deliuered to his hands: from thence he haſted to Rudland, which was alſo giuen ouer to him: then laying vnder a rocke two great embuſhments of his people, with commandemente to kéepe that paſſage, he went with fiue other in his company by the Sea coaſt, till he came before the Towne, and then he ſent an Herault to the King for a ſafeconduct, to come to his preſence, to declare his meſſage from the Duke about an agréement, which ſafeconduct being granted, he paſſed the water, and entred the Caſtell of Conwey, where he founde the King, and the Earle of Saliſburie. he declared to them that peace woulde be made if he would be a good Judge and a true, and cauſe thoſe that ſhould be named, to be tried by iuſtice at a certayne day of Parliament at Westminster, which he and the Duke ſhould holde togither, and that the Duke might kéepe his place of high Judge as his father and other aunceſters before him had done, for the ſpace of one hundred yeares. Thoſe that he would haue to be tried by the Law, were the Duke of Excester, the Duke of Surrey, the Earle of Saliſburie, the Biſhop of Carelile, and Thomas Marke, which fiue, had giuen the King counſell to put his Unkle y• Duke of Glocester to death, and then if it ſhould pleaſe him to pardon the Duke his wrath, he would be readie to come to him on his knées to aſke him mercie, and ſo they might goe to London togither, or the one one way, and the other another. The Earle offered to ſweare that all this ſhoulde be perfourmed, and that the Duke had aſſured him by oth to ſtand to it. The King liking that it ſhould be at his libertie to go eyther in companie with the Duke, or alone vnto London, purpoſed to take the offer, and ſo to pretend ſome excuſe for his going alone, after he ſhould méete with the Duke, as lacke of victualles, or ſuch like, and ſo to take a byway thorough Wales, and there to rayſe a power, he accorded to goe to the Duke, and then (Maſſe being celebrate) the Earle of

               Northumberlande ſware vpon the hoſt, that the Duke ſhould holde all that he had tolde the king. The Earle haſted the king forwarde to horſſebacke, but the King prayed the Erle to go before vnto Rutland, there to prepare dinner. The erle rode a pace till he came where he mighte ſée his people vnder the mountaine, whom he muche commended for obſeruing his commaundement.
            The King paſſing the water rode a four miles before he came to the Rock, where when he ſawe the ambuſhes wasK. R. betraye
                     •
                  
                  ▪
                ſore abaſhed, knowing well he was betrayed by the Earle, for he was in ſuch a place as he coulde not eſcape. The Sea beating on the one ſide, and the Rock kéeping him in on the other, and if he ſhoulde haue fled backe, they woulde haue caught him, or he could haue come to Conway, for he had not paſt thrée and twentie in all of his company. The K. diſſē
               ding the Rocke, the Earle came and knéeling down excuſed the matter, ſaying▪ he hadde cauſed thoſe people to come to guarde his perſon, but the king tolde him, fewer wold haue ſerued, and that it was contrarie to his othe, for he had promiſed to haue but ſixe in his company, and ſayde therefore that he would goe backe to Conway, but the Earle aunſweared, that nowe ſith he had him, he would leade him to the Duke as he had promiſed ten dayes ſince, and ſo he cauſed Breade and Wine to bee broughte and offered the king who durſt not refuſe it, and after leaping on horſſebacke againe they rode to Rutlande to dinner, and after to Flinte, where they lay that night.
            The Morrow being the two and twentie day of Auguſt, the King got him to the Caſtell Wals, where he beheld the D. with al his hoſt of an hundred thouſand men comming by the ſands. there came before that were departed from the army, the Archbiſhop of Canterburie, ſir Thomas Percy and the Earle of Rutland from whom the Duke had taken the office of Coneſtable, more for a colour, than for diſpleaſure, for they bare the Dukes order, and not the Harte, whyche was the kings, the Archbiſhoppe entred firſte, and after the

other with a great traine, they went vp to the dungeon, and then the King came downe from the walles, vnto whō they did reuerence lowlye on their knées, the King toke them vp, and drew the Archbiſhop apart, and they two talked lōg togither, but the Earle of Rutland kept him aloof. They toke horſſe againe, and rode towards the Duke that now approched neare. The Kyng went vp againe to the walles, lamē
               ting ſore when he ſaw the Dukes hoſte within two bowe ſhootes of the Caſtell, who compaſſed it rounde about down to the ſea. The Earle of Northumberland wente forthe to the Duke, who after long talke, concluded that the duke ſhould not enter the Caſtel before the King had dyned, for he was faſting: ſo the Earle returned, and the King was ſet to dynner, with whome ſate his aſſured friends the Earle of Salisburie, and the Biſhop of Carlile, ſir Steuen Scrope, and Feribe, they ſat long and eate little, for they had no haſte to riſe.
            After dinner the Duke entred the Caſtel all armed, his Baſenet excepted. King Richard came downe to méete the Duke, who as ſoone as he ſaw the King, fell downe on hys knées, and comming neare vnto him, he knéeled the ſecond time with his hat in his hand, and the king then put off his hoode, and ſpake firſt, faire couſin of Lancaster yée are righte welcome. The Duke bowing lowe to the grounde anſweared, my Lord, I am come before you ſent for me, the reaſon why I wil ſhew you. The cōmon fame among your people is ſuche, that yée haue for the ſpace of twentie or two and twentie yeares, ruled them very rigorouſly, but if it pleaſe our Lorde I will helpe you to gouerne better. The Kyng aunſwered, fayre couſin of Lancaster, ſith it pleaſeth you, it pleaſeth mée wel.
            The Duke ſpake as yée haue heard to the king, he ſpake alſo to the Biſhop of Carlile, to ſir Stephen Scrope, and to Feribe, but to the Earle of Saliſburie he ſpake not, whereby the Earle perceyued that the Duke hated him deadly.
            The duke with an high ſharp voyce, bad bring forth the Kings horſſes, and then two little nagges not worthe fortie

franks, were brought forth, the King was ſet on the one, and the Earle of Saliſburie on the other: and thus the Duke brought the King from Flinte to Chester, where he was delyuered to the Duke of Glocesters ſonne, and to the Earle of Arundales ſonne that loued him but a little, for he had put theyr fathers to death, who ledde hym ſtrayghte to the Caſtel.
            The thirde day they went to Nantwich, and the next daye to newe Castle, and there the Earle of Warwickes ſon mette thē, and ſo iournying forth, the next day they came to Stafford, & after they departed to Lichfield, where the K. thought to haue eſcaped, ſlypping downe into a Gardaine out of a Windowe of a great Tower, but he was eſpyed and thruſt into the Tower againe: from Liechfielde the Duke went to Couentrie, but before they coulde come thyther the Welchmen did them much harme and ſlew many of them, and the Engliſhmen, when they by great chaunce coulde take anye of the Welchmen, they tyed them to their horſſe tayles, and drewe them after them, through ways ful of ſtones, & cauſed them to die miſerablye. The Duke paſſed from Couentrie to Deintrie, the next day to Northampton, from thence to Dunstable, & then to Saint Albons, and a fiue or ſixe miles before hys comming to London, the Maior and the Companyes in their lyueries, with greate noyſe of Trumpets mette the Duke, doyng more reuerence to hym than to the Kyng, reioycing that God had ſente them ſuche a Prince, that had conquered the Realme within one monthes ſpace. When the Duke came within two miles of the Citie, the duke cauſed the hoſte to ſtay, and then ſaid to the commons of the Citie. My maiſters beholde here youre King, conſider what yée will doe wyth him. They anſwered they woulde he ſhould be ledde to Westminster, wherevppon he was deliuered vnto them, and they ledde him to Westminster, and from thence by water to the Tower of London.
            
            
               The D. entred into London by ye chief gate; & rode through Cheape to Sainte Paules, where he was after lodged in the Biſhops Pallace fiue or ſixe dayes, and after at Saint Iohns, without Smithfield, where he remained. xv. days, from thēce he remoued to Hertforde, where he abonde thrée wéekes, and then came backe to London, to hold the Parliament, that began the firſte Wedneſday of October in Westminster Hall, which they had hung and trimmed ſumptuouſly, and hadde cauſed to be ſet vp a royall chayre, in purpoſe to choſe a new king, neare to the whiche the Prelates were ſet, and on the other ſide ſat the Lords, and after the commōs in order, firſt ſat the Duke of Lancaster, then the Duke of Yorke, the Duke of Aumerle, the Duke of Surrey, the Duke of Excester, and a Marques, then in order the Earles of Arundale, Norfolke, March, Stafford, Penbroke, Saliſburie and Deuonſhire, the Erles of Northumberlande and Westmerlande ſat not, but went vppe and down, and oftentimes knéeled as it fell in doing theyr offices. The Archbiſhop of Canterburie made a Sermon and toke for his Theame▪ 
               Habuit Iacob benedictionē a prē ſuo, which ſermon being ended in latin, a Doctour of the law, ſtoode vp and red an inſtrument, in the which was contained, that K. Richard had by his owne confeſſion diſabled himſelfe to be worthy to raigne, and that he woulde reſigne the crowne to ſuch a one as was ſufficiente to rule, this inſtrument being red, the Archbiſhop perſwaded thē to procéede to the election of a new K. & perceyuing they were al cōtented, for ther wer not paſt four perſons that wer of king Richards part (& they durſt ſay nothing (he aſked each of thē whō they wold haue to their King, whether the Duke of Yorke or not? and they aunſwered no, he aſked if they would haue his eldeſt ſon the D. of Aumarle, and they ſayd no? he aſked if they would haue his yongeſt ſon, and they ſayd no? and ſo of diuerſe other, thē ſtaying a while, he aſked if they wold haue the D. of Lancaster, and then they aunſwered they would haue none other. This Diamounde, being made thrice, they drew certain inſtruments and charters, and red them in preſence of all that

were there. Thē ye Archbiſhops cōming to the Duke, fell on theyr knées declaring to him how he was choſen King, and willed him to take regarde if he would conſent thereto. thē the D. being on his knées roſe & declared y• he accepted the realm, ſith it was ordayned by God. Thē ye Archbiſhop red what yt new K. was bound vnto, & with certain ceremonies ſigned him with the croſſe, thē he kiſſed the Achbiſhop, and they toke the ring, with which the Kings be wedded to the realme, and bare it to the Lord Percy, that was Coneſtable, who receyuing it, ſhewed it to al the aſſembly, and then put it on the kings finger, the King then kiſſed the Coneſtable, and then the Archbiſhops led him to the 
                  〈◊〉
                Royal, and y• K. made his prayers on his knées before it, and after ſpake vnto them all, firſt to ye Prelates & then to the Lords & al other, & ſo ſet him down in the ſeate, & thus he was inueſted, and K. Richard put down, he ſat a good while & kept ſilence and ſo did all the reſt for they were in prayer for his proſperitie in his gouernement, & when they had ended, wher the offices were voyde, the K. created the Lord Percy Coneſtable, and toke him the ſtaffe. Then was choſen Ralph Earle of Westmerland Marſhal, Iohn Skirley Chanceller, ſir Richard Clifforde kéeper of the priuy ſeale, & many other officers were newely confirmed. After this the Arcbiſhoppe ſpake certayne things in latin, praying for y• Kings proſperitie and the realmes, and after ſpake in Engliſh, exhorting all other there preſent to pray the like, and then euery man ſat down. Then the king roſe & made his eldeſt ſon Prince of Wales, then the Lords were ſworne to be true to the Prince, as before they had done to his Father: hys ſeconde ſonne was there made Duke of Lancaſter. Thus was king Richard depoſed when he had raigned two and twenty yeres, thrée monthes, and odde dayes.
         
         
            
            ¶ Henrie of Bolengbroke
            
            
            
               
                  HEnrie the fourth, ſon to Iohn of G
                     •
                  unte DukeAnno reg. 1. of Lancaster, was ordayned king of Englād, more by force than by lawfull ſucceſſion or election: he began his raigne the 29. of September, in the yere of our Lord God 1399. And was crowned at Westminſter the xiij. of October, by Thomas Arundale Archbiſhop of Canterburie. The Dukes of Yorke, Surrey, Aumarle, and the Earle of Glocester bare the Canapie ouer him, ſir Thomas Dimmocke was champion, and rode thrée times about the Hall. This was a noble & valiaunt Prince, and after the Ciuill warres were appeaſed, ſhewed himſelfe louing to his ſubiectes. He made Henrie his ſonne Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwal, Erle of Cheſter, and heyre apparaunt to the crowne.
            
               William Waldren: William Hyde, the. 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Sir Thomas Knowles Grocer, the. 28. of October.
            
            
               After the ſolemnitie of the coronation, the Lords & commons ſtreight procéeded to the Parliamēt. In which it was inquired out of the death of the Duke of Glocester, & how hée had bin murdered at Caleis by the Duke of Norſfolke, vpon y• Kings commaundement. King Hent
                  •
               e created hys eldeſt ſ
                  ••
               ne Prince of Wales Duke of 
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                and Earle of Cheſter, duke of Aquitaine. In this Parliament it was ordained that the ſtatutes made in the Parliament holden in the, 21. yere of king Richard at Westminster, and after proroged vnto Shreweſburie, with all the circūſtances to be adnulled, reuoked, made voyde, and vtterly blotted out. Alſo that the Parliament holdē at Westminster, in the xj. yere of K. Richard be holden firme and ſtable. Alſo that the Lords & other perſōs which were iudged forth in the Parliament holden the 21. yere of King Richard, & their heires that be deade, ſhoulde be wholy reſtored to their poſſeſſions without any 
                  •
               uing liuèrie thereof to be made, excepted that the Lords and other ſhal haue nothing of ye iſſues receiued in ye mean time. The 
                  •
               . gaue to the E. of Northumberland ye Ile of Man, to be holdē of the K. by ſeruice, to beare the ſword wt which he entred into England. And to the 
                  •
               . of Westmerland he gaue the Coūtie of Richmond Alſo Judgement was giuen againſt the Appellauntes of the Duke of Glocester in this maner: The Lords in this preſent Parliament by ſhe Kings aſſent, iudge that the Dukes of A
                     ••
                  erle Surrey, and Excester now preſent and were appellantes, ſhal lo
                  •
               e thryr names of Dukes, and h
                  •
               
               nors from hēceforth, togither with the dignities of Dukes, & that the Marques Dorſet, that is preſent, loſe hys name of Macques, & the E. of Glocester which is preſēt, loſe his name for him and his heires, as ye aboue named perſons do theirs, & that al
                  •
                the caſtels, poſſeſſions or manor's which they had of thē that belonged to thoſe whom they appelled frō ye day of y• arreſt of the D. of Glocester, & the other Lords, or after at any time, ſimply, & without fauour or mercie, they ſhal loſe thē: & that al other caſtels, poſſeſſiōs, manours, Lordſhips, & liberties; which they helde of the Kings gift,

that day or after ſh
                  •
               ld reſt in the kinge grace from ye h
                  ••
               re, and that all letters patents and Charters, whiche they or any of them, had of y• ſaid names, Caſtels, Dominions, poſſeſſions and liberties ſhold be ſurrendered vp, into ye Chancerie there to be canceled, and that they ſtand in ſtate whiche they had in name and poſſeſſion before the ſaide daye 
                  •
               f the ſayde arreſt.
            The King to ſhew to all men in all Countries about by what right and title he had taken vpon him the crowne and realme, ſent Ambaſſadours to Rome, Iohn Treneuant
                Byſhop of Hereforde, Iohn Cheyne Knighte, and Iohn Cheyne Eſquire. Into Fraunce he ſent Walter Tricklowe Byſhop of Durham, Thomas Percy
                Erle of Worcester, and William Heron. Into Spaine Iohn Trenor
                Biſhop of Saint Dauids, and fir William P
                  •
               t Knight: Into Almaine the Biſhoppe of Bangor with other.
            The Scots in time of the Parliament taking occaſion by the abſence of the Northren Lordes, and bycauſe the ſame tyme the North parts were ſore oppreſſed by a great Pe
                  •••
               
               lence, entred as enimies into thoſe parts, and toke the Coſtell of Warke, and kept the ſame a certain time, but at lēgth ſpoyled and 
                  ••
               terly ruinated it, and many other miſchients they did in the Country. Thomas Manbery duke of Norffolk which was exiled, dyed at Venide, in his returne from Ieruſalem. Alſo the Duches of Glocester dyed, and hir ſonne & heir
                  •
                Humfrey dyed of the peſtitence when hée was ſent for forth of Irelande.
            
            The King helde his feaſt of Chriſtmaſſe in his Caſtel of Windſor, where Iohn Holland late Duke of Excester & Erie of Huntington, Thomas Holand
                late Duke of Surrey & Earle of Kente, Edwarde late Duke of Aumerle, and Earle of Rutlande ſonne to the Duke of Yorke, Iohn Mountacute
                Eri
                  •
                i
                  •
                
               Sabſburie, Thomas Spencer,
                ſir Ralph Lumley, ſir Thomas Blunt, ſir Benedict Cely Knights, with other that fauoures King Richarde, conſpired againſt King Henrie, and appointed priuily to murder him, vnder the colour of Juſting and

other paſtimes pretended. And the time approching of theyr purpoſe, they ſent meſſengers to London with letters to the Duke of Aumerle, that he ſhoulde not fayle to come at ye day appointed with his company, to helpe to do the feate whervnto he was ſworne: but his minde being altered, hée bare the letters ſtreighte to his Father the Duke of Yorke, who cauſed a number of his men forthwith to carrye his ſon to the King, where he ſhewing his letters, the King woulde not beléeue them: but the ſame morning came the Maior of London to the Court, and informed him of the matter, whervpon the King made no tariance, but got him forth toward London, in companye of the Maior and other. But before the King coulde gette London on his backe, his enimies were come to Windeſore, and entred the Caſtell with an armed band of. 400. mē, on the fourth of Januarie at night, where vnderſtanding that the King was eſcaped theyr hands, being ſore amazed, they withdrewe from Windeſore, vnto Sunning, a certaine manour neare to Reading, where the Quéene wife to King Richarde then lay, where they perſuaded hyr houſhold, that King Richarde was eſcaped out of Romfrete 
               
                  •
               aſtel, and they would go to him: from thence they went to Walling forde, and after to Abingdon, mouing the people to take armes vppon them, and to goe méete their King Richarde. After this they came to Farindon, in the vale of White Horſſe in Barkeſhire, and the ſame daye to Circester, on the xij. day late in the eneni
                  •
               g, and there harbored, with a greate number of men of ar
                  •
               es and many Archers: ther they bruted that K. Richard was eſcaped forth of priſon, and that hée was there with them, and to make their words tō haue the more credite, they had got a Chaplaine of King Richardes called Madeleine, ſo like to hym in all proportion and fauor, that one could vnneth be deſcerned from the other: many times (ſayth mine aucthour) I haue ſéene him in Ireland ride with the King his Maſter, ſo faire a Prieſt and goodly a perſon, he had not lightly ſéene. They put him in armoure with a Crowne on his Helmet, ſo as all men mighte take

him for King Richard. On the morrow being Wedneſday, the people of that towne miſliking of their procéedings, fought againſt them, and at length toke the chiefeſt of them and ledde them to the Abbay there, and put them in a fayre chamber, vnder ſafe cuſtody. And on the Thurſday the ſaid Lordes fearing the people, imagined howe to eſcape out of theyr handes, and cauſed ſome of their ſeruauntes to ſette fire on certaine houſes in the Towne, thinking that therevppon the people woulde departe from them, and ſéeke to ſtaunche the fire: but it chaunced contrarie, for the people turned into a maruellous rage againſt them, ranne vppon them with great violence, and drew them into the market place, and there they beheaded the Duke of Excester, the Duke of Surrey, and the Earle of Saliſburie, the thirde day after the Epiphanie
                  •
                their ſeruauntes that were with them were by and by taken, and as priſoners bound and brought to Oxforde, and on Monday following were beheaded in the Caſtell there, to the number of .xxvj. perſons. Alſo ſir Thomas Blount Knight, was beheaded with them. The wéeke nexte following, was beheaded Thomas Spencer Earle of Glocester at Bristow: and about the ſame time was beheaded Iohn Holland Earle of Huntington brother to King Richard on the mothers ſide, at Plaſhy in Eſſex: not long after was ſir Barnarde B
                     •
                  ocas beheaded at London, and a Prieſte named Iohn Maudelen, that was like King Richarde, and another Prieſt called William Feribe. The Biſhoppe of Carlile was impeached and condemned of conſpiracie, but was pardoned.
            The ſixth day of Februarie King Henrie cauſed ye blank Charters, made to king Richard, to be brent, at the ſtandert in Cheape of London.
            
            King Richard was impriſoned in Pomfrait Caſtel, where xv. dayes and nightes they vexed him with continuall hunger, thirſte and colde, and finally bereft his life, with ſuche a kinde of death as neuer before▪ that time was knowen in Englād. He dyed the xiiij. day of Februarie, whoſe body was

brought to the tower of London, and ſo through the Cittie to Paules Church bare faced, where he ſtoode thrée dayes for all beholders, and had ſeruice, where king Henrie was preſent. From thence he was carryed to Langley, and there buried in the church of ye Friers Preachers. Upō his death the famous and excellente Poet Iohn Gower, wrote certaine verſes, which may be engliſhed thus.
            
               O Mirrour for the world meete,
               which ſhouldſt in Golde be bette,
               By which all wiſe men, by foreſight,
               their prudent wittes may whette.
               Lo, God doth hate ſuch rulers, as
               here vitiouſly do liue:
               And none ought rule, that by their life,
               doe ill example giue.
               And this King Richarde witneſſeth wel,
               his ende this plaine doth ſhew,
               For God allotted him ſuch ende,
               and ſent him ſo great woe,
               As ſuch a life deſervde: as by
               the Cronicles thou mayſt know.
            
            The King with a great armye went into Scotlande, ſpoyled1400 the Country and returned to Yorke, wher two Knights, the one a Frenchman, the other an Italian, chalenged to fighte within liſtes againſt ſir Iohn Cornewall, and Iames of Artois, which two ſtraungers were ouercome in battaile, andChalenge of cōbat at Yorke ſir Iohn Cornewal obtaining the Kings fauour, maried the kings ſiſter, that had bin wife to ſir Iohn Holland Earle of Huntingdon.
            
            The Welchmen taking occaſion by the Kings abſenceThe VVelchmen rebel. when he was in Scotlande beganne to rebel, by the ſettyng on of Owē Glendouerdew ſon to Griffyth Vichā
                an eſquier of Wales, & ſo called Glendour, bicauſe his dwelling was in a place called Glēdordwy, for Glyn in Welch is a vale, and Dor is water, bycauſe the place was in a dale, at the ſide of ye water

or Riuer of Dew in the Pariſh of Corwrn, in the Countie of Mer
                     ••
                  neth in Northwales. He ſerued King Richarde, at the tyme of his oppreſſion by Henrie Duke of Lancaster, at Flint Caſtell.
            The firſt cauſe of this ſtirre was about a péece of land in controuerſie betwixte him and the Lord Reignolde Gray of Ruthiue, for when he ſaw his cauſe not fauoured, firſte hée began to ſpoyle the landes of the ſayde Lord Gray, whereof the king being certified, went with an army into Wales: but the Welchmen fledde to the mountaines, the King brente the Countrey, ſlew the people with whom he mette, and returned with a great pray of Cattaile.
            
               Iohn Wakel: William Ebot, the, 28. of September.
               
                  Sherifes. Maior. Anno reg. 2. Geffrey Chavvcer chief Poet of Brytaine.
            
            
               Sir Iohn Frauncis Goldſmith, the. 28. of October.
            
            
               Geffrey Chawcer, the moſt excellent Poet of Englande, deceaſed the xxv. of October, who was buried at Westminster, where of late at the charges of one maiſter Bridgeham, is made ouer him a faire monument, on the Southſide of the Quire: his workes for the moſt part are publiſhed in print by ſir Iohn Thinne Knight, and ſomewhat increaſed by my trauell in the laſt impreſſion.
            Not long after deceaſed the like famous Poet, Iohn Gower,
               Iohn Govver a moſt excellent Poet of Englād who lyeth buried in Sainte Marie Oueries Church in Southwarke. He new builded a great part of that Church, and cōpiled thrée famous bookes. The firſt in Latine, Vox Clamā
                  tis. The ſecond in French Speculum Meditantis: The third in Engliſhe Confeſſio Amantis, which laſt booke is in Print, the other hard to come by: of the firſt I haue ſéen thrée very faire copies, but of the ſeconde I neuer ſawe any one.
            The Emperour of Constantinople, came into Englande, to requyrs ayde agaynſte the Turkes, whome the King wyth ſumptuous preparation mette at Blacke Heath, vpon Saint Thomas daye the Apoſtle, and brought him to London, and paying for the charges of his lodging, preſented him with giftes worthy for one of ſo high degrée.
            
               Soone after came newes, that the King of Leto had 
                  •
               lain in battayle Baſſacke the ſonne of the noble Balthazardan, 
               
                  •
                deſtroyed Ieruſalem, and all the Countrey rounde aboute. And bycauſe he had by Gods grace ſo ouercome contrarye to his opinion, he became chriſtened and 60000. men of his ſecte.
            The Emperour of Constantinople, hearing this, was very1401 The Emperour returned. gladde, and departed out of Englande, being honored by the King with precious giftes.
            The fiue and twentith day of July, Iſabel late wife to K.Iſabel late vvife to K. R. returned into Fraunce▪
                
               Richarde, not yet twelue yeares of age, departed from Douer towardes Caleis, and ſo into Fraunce to hyr Father.
            Owen Glendouerdew we his Welchmen did much harme to the Engliſhmen and returned.
            There was founde in the Kings bedde clothes, an yronK. H. eſcapeth 
                     •
                   great daunger. with thrée ſharp pikes, ſlender and round ſtanding vpright, layde there by ſome Traytour, that when the Kyng ſhould haue layde him downe, he might haue thruſt himſelfe vpon them.
            This time was vſed excéeding pride in garmentes, gownes with déepe and broade ſléeues, commonlye called poke ſléeues, the ſeruauntes ware them as well as theyrTho. Walſ. Aditions to polic▪
                maiſters whiche mighte well haue bene called receptacles of the Diuel, for what they ſtole, they hidde in their ſléeues, whereof ſome hung downe to the féete, and at leaſte to the knées, ful of cuttes and iagges, whervpon were made theſe
                  Anno reg. 3▪
                verſes.
            
               Now hath this lande little neede of Bromes,
               To ſweepe away the filth out of the ſtreete:Th
                        •
                     . Hoc
                        •
                     li
                        ••
                     
                     ▪
                  
               
               Sen ſide ſleeues of pennileſſe gromes,
               will it vp licke be it drie or weete.
               O England ſtand vpright on thy feete,
               ſo foule a waſte in ſo ſimple a degree
               Baniſh, or it ſhal 
                     •
                  ore repent thee.
            
            William Venor: Iohn Fremingham, the. 28. of Septem.Sherifes. Maior.
            
            Sir Iohn Chadworth Mercer, the. 28. of October.
            
               The Conduit vpon Cornehil in London was made, which before time had bene a priſon, called the Tunne in Cornehill▪
                wherevnto, nightwalkers that were taken in ſuſpition of fellonie, or other treſpaſſes, were committed.
            In the moneth of March appeared a blaſing ſtarre, firſt betwixt the Eaſt and the North, and laſt of all putting firie beames towards the North, foreſhewing peraduenture the effuſion of bloud, about the partes of Wales and Northumberlande.
            
            
               Owen Glendouerdew with his Welchmen, waſted y• lands1402 of the Lord Reignalde Gray, tooke him priſoner, and ſlewe many of his people.
            Certaine men affirmed King Richarde to be aliue, andConſpiracie againſt K. Henrie that he ſhould ſhortly ſhew himſelf openly, & reward them y• wer faithful vnto him. But after a certain prieſt was taken at Warwike, who had written ye names of many, which were the aucthours of theſe troubles, both the hope and feare of this conſpiracie vaniſhed. The Prieſt was drawen hanged and quartered. Alſo Walter Waldocke late Priour of Lande a Priorie in Leicesterſhire, bycauſe he confeſſed he knew euill againſt the king and did conceale it, was likewiſe hanged and headed. Moreouer certaine gray Friers were taken, of the whiche one Richard Friſeby, doctour of Diuinitie, beingA ſtout Frier executed. aſked what he would do if K. Richard were preſent, anſwered, that he woulde fight in his quarrel againſt any man, euen to the death, wherfore he was condemned, drawen, and hanged in his religious habit and wéede.
            At Daneburie in Eſſex, vpon Corpus Christi day, the Diuell appeared in likeneſſe of a Gray Frier, who entring the Church, raged inſolentlye, to the greate feare of the Pariſhioners: and the ſame houre with a tempeſte of whyrlewinde and thunder, the toppe of the Stéeple was broken downe, and halfe the Chauncel ſcattered abrode.
            Shortlye after, ſir Roger Claringdon Knighte, a baſtard ſonne to Edward the blacke Prince, and wyth him a

Squire and a yeomanne were beheadded, and eyghte Graye Friers hanged and beheaded at London, and two at Leicester, all whiche hadde publiſhed King Richard to bée aliue.
            
               Owen Glendouerdew, with a company of Welchmen inuaded all the ſhires that bordered neare vnto hym, wherefore ſir Edmund Mortimer wyth manye Knightes and Eſquiers wente out to encounter with Owen, ſtronger than he was of the Countrey: but when it came to martial affayres, their owne Archers turned theyr handes againſte them, whome they ſhoulde haue defended. There were flayne aboue eleauen hundred of our men. Sir Edmunde Mortimer was taken, and the Welchwomen, when ye battayle was done, vſing the deade carcaſſes to ſhamefullye to bée ſpoken, woulde not ſuffer them to be buryed without great raunſome.
            The Kyng went wyth a greate power into Wales, to purſue Owē Glendouerdew, where he profited nothing, but loſte muche, for the Welchmen conuayed themſelues into vnknowen places: wherefore the King conſtrayned by neceſſitie, returned into Englande, after he had ſpoyled & brent the Countrey.
            The ſame time the Scottes cruelly entred into England, for they ſuppoſed all the Lords beyond Humber to be occupyed in the parties of Wales, but the Erles of Northumberlande, Henrie Percie,
                and his ſonne Henrie with the Earle of Dunbarre, (that a good whyle agone hauing forſaken the Scottes, had ſworne to be true to the King of England) with a number of armed men & plentie of archers, ſodainly came to reſiſte the Scottes as they woulde haue retourned home, after they hadde ſpoyled and brente the Countrey, but nowe vppon a ſodayne theyr waye was forelayde, ſo that they muſte néedes abyde and take a place to fighte vppon: they choſe therefore a mountaine neare to the Towne of Wollor, called Halydowe Hill, in the whiche they place themſelues wyth theyr armed

men and Archers, which when our men beheld, leauing the way in which they ſtoode againſt the Scottes, they clynie the hill that ſtoode ouer againſt the Scottes, and without delaye of time, our Archers placed in the valley, ſet their arrowes againſt the Scottes battayle, that they might by ſome means force them to come downe: on the other ſide, the Scottiſhe Archers let flye at our men, who yet after they felt the grieuous waighte, and as it had bin a ſhower or tempeſt of the arrowes ſhotte by the Engliſhmen, they fledde. The Earle Dowglas perceyuing his men ſo to flée, for he was their generall leader, tooke hys Speare, and manfullye wyth a multitude came down the Hyll, truſting doubtleſſe in his armour and ye armour of hys complices that hadde bin thrée yeares in makyng, and forced himſelfe to runne vpon the Archers, whiche when the Archers ſawe, they ſtepped backe, and ſhotte ſo fiercely, that they pierced the armed mens bodies, ſtroke throughe theyr Helmets, ryued their Speares, and rente theyr armoure wyth lyghte adoe. Earle Dowglas hymſelfe was wounded in fiue places, the reſidue of the Scottes that were not come beſide the Hyll, turnyng backe from the arrowes that flewe, fledde awaye, but theyr flyghte nothing auayled them whileſt the Archers followed them, but that they were compelled to yéelde themſelues. Earle Dowglas alſo was taken, and manye drowned in the Riuer of Tweede, whyleſt they knewe not the Fourdes, to the number of fiue hundered (as was ſayde.) In thys battayle no Lorde, no Knighte, nor Squire, gaue anye ſtroke to the enimyes, but onely God gaue the victorie to the Engliſhe Archers, the Lordes and armed menne béeyng onelye lookers on. That daye the flower of the Scottiſhe Chi
                  •
               alrye was taken, to witte, the Earle Dowglas, Murdake the eldeſt ſonne of the Duke of Albanie, that was heyre apparente to the Realme of Scotlande: The Earles of Murrey, Angus, and Orkeney, the Lordes of Mountgomorie, Erskin, and Gram, with manye other Knyghtes▪
               
to the number of foureſcore, beſides Eſquires & Yeomen, whoſe number was not knowne. There were ſlayne of Barons, the Lord Gordon, the Lord Iohn of Swinton that was falſe to both the Realmes &c. This battayle was fought on the fourtéenth of September.
            
               Richard Marlow: Robert Chicheley, the 28. of Septemb.
               Sherifes. Maior. Anno reg. 4.
            
            
               Sir Iohn Walcot Draper, the 28. of October.
            
            
               Edmond Mortimere which before was taken by Owen Glendouer dewe, now profeſſed to take Owens part againſt King Henry, and did contract mariage with the daughter of the ſayd Owen.
            
            In a Parliament at London which beganne the morrow after Michaelmas day, and laſted ſeauen wéekes, there was granted to the King a tenth and a halfe of the Cleargie, a tenth of the borough townes, and a fiftéenth of the commōs through the Realme.
            The meſſengers that had bin ſent for Ioane, late wife to Iohn of Mountfort Duke of Briteyne, returned with hir into England, and landed at Falmouth in Cornewall. The King met with hir at Winchester the ſeauenth of February, where they were married in the Churche of Saint Swithen. The ſixe and twentith of February ſhe was Crowned at Westminster.
            
            In the Sommer following, by the Townes of Bedforde
               1403 and of Brokleſward, Monſters were ſéene oft-times mornings and euenings to come out of the woods, vnder diuers coulours, in the likeneſſe and ſimilitude of mē of warre, which met one with another, and ſéemed to fight cruell battayles, which although they that were a farre off might ſée, yet they that were néere hande could not ſée nor finde, whiche thing deceyued▪ many that coueted to approch & come néere.
            
               Henry Percy▪
                the yonger, did ſodeinly ſhew himſelfe to be the Kings enimie, vnto whome ioyned Thomas Percy Earle of Worcester, Unkle to the ſayde Henry: and to make their conſpiracie excuſable, they did write vnto the ShiresBattayle at Shrevvsburie. about, that they pretended nothing againſt the alleageance

nor fidelitie which they ought to the King, neyther to gather to any other ende an armie, but only for the ſauing of their perſons, and for the better gouernement of the common wealth, bycauſe the payments and taſkes graunted to the King for the ſafe cuſtodie of the Realme, were put to ſuch v
                  •
               es as they ought not to be, and were vnprofitably conſumed and waſted.
            Moreouer they complayned, that bycauſe of the euill ſlanders which their enimies had made of them, they durſt not perſonally appeare in the Kings preſence, vntill the Prelates & Barons had intreated for them, that they might be permitted to purge themſelues before the King, and bée lawfully iudged by their péeres, ſo that many that ſaw theſe letters, did praiſe their diligence, & extoll their fidelitie towards the common wealth. But the King being diſquieted with theſe doings, that he might appeaſe the communaltie, he wrote to them, that he maruelled much, that ſéeing the Earle of Northumberland, & Henry his ſon had receiued the moſt part of the paymēts & ſummes granted to him by the Cleargy & cōmunaltie, for y• defence of the Marches of Scotland, what occaſion they had to make ſuch manifeſt ſlanders &c. but the yong Henry Percy puting his cōfidence in the ayd of Owen Glendouerdew, and Edmond Mortimer Earle of March, with the Welchmen, and men of Cheſhire, publiſhed that King Richard was aliue, and was with them, whom if any mā would ſée, they ſhould without delay come in armour to y• Caſtell of Leycester which declaration made diuers variable motiōs in the hearts of many, & cauſed thē to wauer. King Henry conſidering all things wiſely, gathered togither as many as he could, and came ſodeinly into the parties where the Rebels kept their rage, and when Henry ſaw vpon a ſodein the Kings banner, and was euen ready to haue ſcaled y• towne of Shrewſburie he ſtreightwaysShrevvsburie beſeeged. deſiſted frō the aſſault of the towne, and ſaid to his men, we muſt now néedés turne our weapons vpon them that come againſt vs: ye ſée the Kings Stādert: neither cā we, though

we would, ſéeke any ſtartinghole, ſtand to it manfully therfore, for this day ſhall eyther bring vs all to promotion and honor, if we ouercome, or elſe if we be ouercome, it ſhall deliuer vs frō the Kings malice: for it is a more comely thing to die in battell for the cōmon wealth, than after battell to die by the ſentence of condemnation by the enimie: & with that, 14000. of the beſt mē that wer with Henry, made vow & promiſe to ſtand by him ſo long as breath would ſerue, & they tooke the field that was commodious for them, and the King & his men lay in the field right againſt thē. The bowmen of Henry Percy began the battell, whoſe arrowes fell not vpon the ground, but vpō the bodies of the Kings ſouldiers, and the Kings archers ſhot as fiercely againſt their enimies, ſo that on both ſides many were ſlaine, and many thouſands fledde, thinking the King had bin ſlaine: but the Earle of Dunbar withdrew the King from the place that he ſtoode in, which was a good turne for him, for the foreſayde Henry Percy, & Earle Dowglas the Scot (than whome was neuer man more ſtoute) raged ſo, that the Kings StandertTho. Wal
                     •
                  
                was ouerthrowne, and thoſe about it ſlaine, among whome was ſlaine Humfrey Earle of Stafford, Sir Walter Blunt the Kings Standertbearer, Sir Nicholas Langford, Sir Iohn Clifton, and the two bréethren Genetels, with many other Knightes & Gentlemen, and of the cōmons on both ſides about 5000. ſlaine. Henry the Prince was woūded in y• faceTitus 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  ▪
                with an arrow. In the meane ſeaſon Hen. Percy, whileſt he went before his mē in the battel, preaſing vpō his enimies, was ſodeinly ſlaine, which being knowne, the Kings enimies fled, but the Earle Dowglas was takē, and alſo Tho. Percy Earle of Worcester, with Sir Richard Vernon, and the Baron of Kinderton, and many other were taken. This battell was fought on Mary Magdalen euē, néere vnto Shrewſburie, in a place called Old field, alias Bull field. On the Monday following, were cōdēned & beheaded at Shrewſburie y• Earle of Worcester, the Barō of Kindarton, and Sir Ri. Vernon. The body of Hen. Percy was deliuered to the L. of Furniuale to be

buried, but the King cauſed the ſame body to be taken by, and to be repoſed betwéene two Milſtones in the Towne of Shrewſburie, there to be kept with armed men, and afterward to be headed and quartered, commanding his head and quarters to be caried vnto diuers Cities of the Kingdome.
            The Earle of Northumberland with a ſtrong power was comming towards his (as men thought) or at the leaſt towards the King, but the Earle of Westmerland, and Robert Waterton had gathered a great armie, and had entred to méete him ſodeinly, but he taking none of them both to be his friends, returned vnto the Caſtell of Werworth.
            
            When all things were ſet in a ſtay at Shrewſburie, the King went towards Yorke, where, when he was ſetled, hée ſent to the Earle of Northumberland, commanding him to diſmiſſe his company, and to come to him, and the Earle at the Kings commandement came to him on the morrow after Saint Lawrence daye, but the King receyued him not friendly, but as one that ſued for pardon, and pardoning him of his life, committed him to ſafe cuſtodie.
            The Britons Amorikes, the Lord of Caſſels being their leader,Plimmouth ſpoyled by the Britons. Anno reg. 5. inuaded the Towne of Plimmouth, ſpoyled and brent it, and went their way frée, but immediately the Weſterne Nauie, vnder the conduct of William Wilford Eſquire, in the coaſt of Briton, tooke fortie Shippes laden with Iron, Oyle, Sope, and Wine of Rochell, to the number of a thouſand Tonne, and in returning backe agayne, he brent forty Shippes, and at Penarch the ſayd William arriued with his men, and burned Townes and Lordſhips the ſpace of ſixe leagues, and ſet the Towne of Saint Mathew on fire, and their Milles about the ſaid Towne.
            
               Thomas Falconer: Thomas Poole, the 28. of September.
               
                  Sherifes. Maior. Frenchmen inuade the Iſle of VVight.
            
            
               Sir William Askham Fiſhmonger, the 28. of October.
            
            A little before Chriſtmas, the Frenchmen came into the Iſle of Wight, boaſting that they would kéepe their Chriſtmas there, and when a thouſand of the Frenchmen were entred

into the Iland, and driuing flockes of Cattell towarde the Sea, ſodeinly there came vpon them a company of the Iland men, that forced them to leaue their pray behinde them, and to get them gone (with ſhame ynough) to theyr Shippes, with no ſmall loſſe of their men.
            In a Parliament holden at London after the Octaues of the Epiphany, the Earle of Northumberland was reſtored to his former eſtate and dignitie. And in this Parliamente was graunted vnto the King an vnaccuſtomed taſke, very heauie and paynefull for the inhabitants, the manner of which taſke the grannters thereof would haue to be kept ſecret for euermore: and vnder that condition only it was graunted, that it ſhould not be any example to them that ſhould come after, and that there ſhould remayne no record thereof, but the ſame forthwith to be brent.
            The Frenchmen about that time came before the Ile of1404 Frenchmen come to the Ile of VVight. 
               Wight with a great▪ Nauie, and ſente certayne of their men to demaund in the name of King Richard, and of Quéene Iſabell, a tribute or ſubſedie of the inhabitants: who anſwered, that King Richard was dead, and the Quéene, ſometime his wife, was ſent home to hir parents, withoute condition of any tribute: but if the Frenchmens minde were to fight, they willed them to come vp, and no man ſhould let them for the ſpace of ſixe houres to refreſh themſelues, but when that time were exſpired, they ſhould haue battayle giuen to them, which when the Frenchmen heard, they went away, and did nothing.
            The Lord of Caſſels in Briteine, arriued at Blacke poole, twoDertmouth inuaded by the French. mile out of Dertmouth with a great Nauie, where of the ruſticall people, whome he euer deſpiſed, he was ſlayne. There were takē that day thrée Lords, & twenty Knightes of name, and the vplandiſh people preſenting their captiues to the King, returned with their purſſes full of gold.
            In the moneth of Aprill, the Cleargie granted vnto the king a tenth. All the ſommer following, Owen Glendouerdewe
               Ovven Glendouerdevve. and his Welchmen, robbe, burne, and deſtroy the

Countreys adioyning vnto them: he tooke many captiues, and ſlew many Engliſhmen: he layde flatte certayne Caſtels that he had taken, and ſome he kept for hys owne defence.
            The Flemings and Briteines tooke certayne Shippes of oures laden with Merchandizes, and ſlew or hanged all the marriners.
            The olde Counteſſe of Oxforde, (mother to Robert de Vere Duke of Ireland, who as we ſayde before died at Louaine) did cauſe ſuche as were familiar with hir, to brute throughout all the parts of Estſex, that King Richard was aliue, and that he ſhould ſhortly come and chalenge his old eſtate and dignitie. She cauſed many Harts of Siluer, and ſome of Gold, to be made for badges, ſuch as King Richarde was wont to beſtow on his Knightes, Eſquires, & friends, that diſtributing them in the Kings name, ſhe might the ſooner allure the Knightes, and other valiant men of the Countrey, to be at hir will and deſire. Alſo, the fame and brute whiche dayly was blazed abroade by one William Serle, ſometimes of King Richards Chamber, that the ſame King Richard was in Scotland, and tarried with a power of French and Scottiſhmen, cauſed many to beléeue that he was aliue. This William Serle had forged a priuie▪ Seale in the ſaid King Richards name, and had ſent diuers comfortable letters vnto ſuch as were familiar with King Richarde, by which meanes, many gaue the greater credite to the Counteſſe, in ſo much, that ſome religious▪ Abbots of that Countrey did giue credite vnto hir tales, who afterward were taken af the Kings commandement, and empriſoned, bycauſe they did beléeue and giue credit to the Counteſſe in this behalfe, and the Counteſſe had all hir goodes confiſcate, & was cōmitted to cloſe priſon: and William Serle was drawne frō 
               Pomfret, through the chiefeſt Cities of England, & put to death at London. About the feaſt of S. Iohn Baptiſt, at the Kings commandement, the Earle of Northumberlād came to Pomfret, & brought with him his Nephues, & nephues ſonnes, by which doing he mitigated the mindes of many, whiche

thought that he had giuen the yong men counſell to rebell. There came alſo with him William Clifford Knight, who brought with him that William Serle K. Richards chamberlain, whom we ſpake of before, who by a wile he had caughtAnno reg. 6. and apprehended, by which doing, the King held him excuſed, and pardoned him, for that he had kept the Caſtell of Berwike againſt the Kings will and pleaſure.
            
               William Louth: Stephen Spilman, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Sir Iohn Hinde Draper, the 28. of October.
            
            About the feaſt of Saint Faith, the King called a Parliament at Couentry, and ſent proceſſe to the Sheriffes that they ſhould chooſe no Knights nor burgeſſes that had any knowledge in the lawes of the Realme, by reaſon wherof, it was called the Lay mans Parliamēt. Theſe piked out KnightsLay mans Parliament. and Burgeſſes, could deuiſe none other way to reléeue the Kings lacke of money, but to depriue the Cleargie of their temporall lands and goodes: but Thomas Arundell Archbiſhop of Canterbury made anſwere, that the Cleargie did alwayes giue the King as much as the Lay people did, conſidering that they did of
                  ••
               er giue the King tenthes, than the laytie gaue fiftéenes: and moreouer, that more of their Tenants did ſerue the King in his warres, thā of the Tenants of the lay fée: and beſides this, they prayed for the proſperitie of the King, and of all them that faithfully ſerued him. And whē the ſpeker of ye Parliamēt ſaid with a loud voice, that he little regarded ye prayers of the Church, the Archbiſhop of Cāterbury anſwered: then (quoth he) I know to what end the fortune of the Realme will come, whē the ſuffrages of ye Church are not ſet by, wherwith ye Godhead is wont to be appeaſed: ſurely that Kingdome neuer cōtinueth ſtable y• is voyde of prayer & deuotion: notwithſtanding, thinke not that thou ſhalt without puniſhmēt take away the poſſeſſiōs of the Church, for if the Archbiſhop of Canterburie liue, thou ſhalte haue euill taking of any thing that is his. Then the Archbiſhoppe roſe vppe, and knéeled downe before the Kyng, deſiring hym to conſider howe gratiouſlie,

and by Gods fauour he had atteyned to the Kingdome▪ that he would cōſider his firſt promis, which was, that he would preſerue vnto euery man their right and title ſo farre as lay in him. He alſo willed him to remember the oth which he voluntarily made, which was, that he would honor and defend the Church, and Miniſters thereof, wherefore he deſired him to permit and ſuffer the Church to enioy the priuiledges and liberties which in time of his predeceſſors it did enioy, and to feare that King, by whome all Kings doe raigne.
            When the Archbiſhop had ſaid theſe and like words, the King commanded him to go to his ſeate againe, and ſayde, that his intent and purpoſe was to leaue the Church in as good ſtate or better than he found it. And then the Archbiſhop ſpeaking to the Knightes and burgeſſes, ſayde: you, and ſuch like as you be, haue giuen ſuch counſell vnto our King, and to his predeceſſors▪ to confiſcate the goodes of theIn Edvvard the thirds time. Celles whiche the Frenchmen and Normans did poſſeſſe in England, and ſayd, that by them he ſhould heape vp great riches, as in déede they were woorth many thouſands of gold: notwithſtanding it is moſt true that the King at this day is not the richer thereby of halfe a Marke, for you haue extorted, or at the leaſt begged them out of his handes, and haue appropriated the ſaide goodes vnto your ſelues, ſo that it may be coniectured that your requeſt to haue our temporalities, is not for the Kings profite, but for your owne couetouſneſſe: for without doubt, if the King (as God forbid he ſhould) fulfill your wicked purpoſe, he ſhould not be one farthing the richer the next yeare following: and ſurely, I will ſooner let my head be cut off, than that the Churche ſhould be deſtitute of the leaſt right that perteyneth to it &c.
            The Cleargie granted a tenth and a halfe, and the commons two fiftéenes, on condition the Lord Furniuall ſhould receyne it to ſpend in the Kings warres.
            The ſame time ſuch abundance of water brake ſodeinly ouer the bankes in Kent, as was neuer ſéene the like in

thoſe partes, whereby were drowned Beaſtes and Cattell without number: neyther did England only bewayle theyr loſſes, but alſo Zeland, Flanders, and Holland, ſuſteyned the like, by the great exceſſe of waters.
            This yeare died William Wikeham Biſhop of Wincheſter,
               Colledge at Oxford. by whoſe charges and trauell, the Cleargie of England was much encreaſed, for he builded a notable Colledge in Oxford, for the encreaſe of learning, where he placed the Warden and his company, to the number of lxx. beſides children, ſeruants, and tenne Prieſtes, to kéepe dayly ſeruice, enduing the ſayd company with ſufficient lands.
            He beganne the foundation of a new Colledge at Winchester,
               Colledge at VVincheſter. and in ſixe yeares finiſhed the ſame, where he placed the like number of Schollers to learne their Grāmer, and other principles, to be ſent afterward to his other Colledge at Oxford. Theſe two Colledges are called the new Colledges, dedicated to our bleſſed Lady.
            He builded the great body of the Church of Saint Swithens in Winchester, where the Sermons are made, & where his body is enterred, a very princely worke: neyther did he for all this diminiſh any thing of his ordinarie houſholde charges, and fedde (as the writing engraued on his Sepulchre ſheweth) both rich and poore. He deceaſſed at the age of foureſcore yeares. He dyed rich, for beſide that he gaue to his kinſefolke and to the poore, he gaue ſomewhat to euery Church in his Dioces. He gaue many things to the King, and to his owne ſeruants, and to his Colledges: neyther do I doubt but yt he that thus liued, is now with God, whome I beſéech to reyſe vp many like Biſhops in England.
            
            
               Iohn Leyland writeth (by the reporte of Doctor London)Iohn Leyland. that this William Wikeham was borne at Wickham in Hampſhire, and was ſonne to one William Perot, pariſhe clarke there, of which place he tooke his ſurname: and that one Mayſter Wodale of Wickham brought him vp at ſchole, where he learned his Grammer, and to write faire. After this, the Conneſtable of Winchester Caſtell, at that time a

great ruler in Hampſhire, gote Perot, alias Wickham
                of W
                     •
                  
                  dall, and made him his Clearke. Edward the third comming to Winchester Caſtell, liked Wickham, and tooke him to ſeruice, and vnderſtanding that he had mind to be a Prieſt, made him firſt Parſon of Saint Martins in London, and then Deane of Saint Martins le Graund, and then Archdeacon of Buckingham. He made him alſo ſurueyor of his buildings, as of Windſore, Quinborow in Kent, and other buildings. After this, he preferred him to be bearer of the priuie Sealt, mayſter of the Wardes and Forreſts, and Treafourer of the Kings reuenues in France, then Biſhop of Winchester, Chancellour and Treaſourer of England, as it very manifeſtly (ſayth Iohn Leyland) appeareth by writing.
            The blacke Prince ſcant fauoured Wickham, wherefore Wickham procured to kéepe the Prince in battell out of the Realme, but at length Iohn of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, and Alice Peeres, Concubine to Edward the third, cauſed him to be baniſhed the Realme, and then he dwelled in Normandy and Picardie ſeauen yeares, Edward the thirde yet liuing, but he was reſtored about the ſecond yeare of Richard the ſecond, of whome he had a generall pardon.
            Aboute the feaſt of Saint Valentine, the ſonnes of theBarle of Marches ſonnes. Earle of March were taken out of the Caſtell of Windſore, and ledde away into Wales to Owen Glendouerdewe, but ſhortly after were recouered againe. The Smith that made the keyes, by the which they that conuayde them got into them, had firſt his hands, and then his head cut off.
            The Lady Spencer, Siſter to the Duke of Yorke, and widow of Thomas Lord Spencer, before executed at Brestow, being apprehended, and committed to priſon, accuſed hit brother the Duke of Yorke to be chiefe author, in ſtealing away of the Earle of Marches ſonnes, wherefore the ſayde Duke was kept by Sir Iohn Pelham in the Caſtell of Pemſey till the next Parliament.
            After the feaſt of the Purification of our Lady, the King aſſembled his Barons at London, to treate of the gouernement

of the Realme, and to haue ayde of money to be giuen him, but the Nobles would not at that time obey his requeſt. In the Lent following therefore, the King cauſed the Cleargie and the Barons to aſſemble at Saint Albons for the matter aforeſayd, but by reaſon the Nobles ſtroue againſt him, there was nothing done, and ſo departed on Palme ſonday.
            About the fiftéenth of March, in a fight betwixt the Engliſhmen
               1405 Conſpiracy againſt King Henry by the Archbishop of Yorke & other. and Welchmen, the ſonne of Owen Glendouerdewe was taken, and fiftéene hundred with him were taken or ſlayne.
            
               Henry Percy Earle of Northumberlande, Richard Scrope
                Archbiſhop of Yorke, Thomas Mowbray
                Earle Marſhall, Thomas Lord Bardolph, and other, cōſpiring againſt King Henry, aſſembled togither the Citizens of Yorke, and many other, to ſtand with them for the commoditie of the Realm. And to animate the commons to be the readier vnto this buſineſſe, they ſet articles vpō the dores of the Monaſteries & Churches of the ſame Citie, written in Engliſh agaynſte the King, bycauſe he had put downe King Richard, offering themſelues for thoſe articles to liue and die, which cauſed great number of people to reſort to them: but Ralph Neuill Earle of Westmerland that was not farre off, togither with Iohn Duke of Lancaster the Kings ſonne, being enformed of theſe things, gathered an armie with ſpéede to goe againſt the Archbiſhops company, but all was in vayne, for the Archbiſhops power was farre greater than theirs, wherevpon, the Earle of Westmerland ſente meſſengers, to enquire of the Archbiſhop the cauſe of ſo great an aſſembly in armour, contrarie to the Kings peace, wherevnto the Archbiſhop anſwered, that he tooke nothing in hand againſt the Kings peace, and he was in armour and munited with men, only for feare of the King, whome he could not ſafely come vnto to ſpeake, but his purpoſe (he ſaid) was good and cōmodious both for ye King & Realme, if happily they would know it: & thē he ſhewed a ſcedule, in which ye articles were

conteyned, which when the Earle of Westmerland had read, he with word and countenance prayſed the Biſhops holy and vertuous intent, and promiſed, that he and his would proſecute the ſame with the Archbiſhop. The Archbiſhop being glad of this, beléeued the Earles words, & perſwaded the Earle Marſhall, being vnwilling therevnto, to go with him to a place appointed to talke togither, to whome they with like number came, and the writing with the Articles was read ouer: ſtreightway the Earle and they that were with him gaue their aſſent to theſe articles, then ſayde the Earle being ſubtiller than the reſt, behold the labour that we haue takē in hand is come to ſuch end as we would haue it, and the people hath now bin long in armour, let ſome of your mē beare word vnto the people to go their way home, and to lay downe their armour, and euery mā to fall to his occupation, and accuſtomed labour: in the meane ſeaſon we, in token of concord will drinke togither, that the people on both ſides ſhall ſée it, and without delay, after they had takē each other by the hands, a Knight was ſent on the Archbiſhops behalfe, to beare word to ye people that it was peace, and to command euery man to lay downe their armour, and to go to their owne home. The people beholding ſignes of peace, & the Lords drinking togither, being awéeried with the vnaccuſtomed trauell of war, turned the reines of their bridles homewards, and ſo it came to paſſe y• whē the people of ye Archbiſhops ſide went away, ye nūber of the aduerſaries increaſed as before it was appointed, & the Archbiſhop did not perceiue yt he was betrayd, vntill ſuch time as ye Earle arreſted him: he arreſted the Marſhall alſo, and many other with him, to all which it was promiſed yt they ſhould haue no harme, but that promiſe was not kept, for both the ArchbiſhopArchbishop of Yorke beheaded. & the Earle Marſhall were beheaded when the King came to Yorke the morrow after Whitſonday. After this, whē the King had puniſhed the mē of Yorke at his pleaſure, he ſet forth with an armie to purſue the Earle of Northumberland, and Thomas Lord Bardolph, and tooke all maner of

munition with him, and an armie of 37. thouſand fighting men. The Earle of Northumberland perceyuing the Kings intent, gote himſelfe to Berwike with thrée hundred horſſe, and frō thence into Scotland. The King being bent againſt the Earle of Northumberland, went to Berwike, from whence the Earle fledde into Scotland, and the Lord Bardolph with him, whome Dauid Lord Fleming the Scotte receyued into alliance. The King vnderſtāding that the Earle was fled, he commanded them in the Caſtell to render it vnto him, whiche when they refuſed to do, the King cauſed a greate Gunne to be ſhotte, whiche ouerthrewe parte of a Tower, wherevpon they of the Caſtell gaue ouer, and ſubmitted themſelues to the King, who cauſed ſome of them to be beheaded, and the reſidue to be ſent to priſons. After this, the Caſtell of Alnewike, and the reſt of the Earles Caſtels, were with ſmall ado rendred to his handes, with which ſucceſſe, the King being encouraged, went ſtreight into Wales, where contrarywiſe nothing proſpered with him, wherefore he returned, looſing Charets, Cartes, and Wagons to the number of 50. with his Treaſure, ſo that comming backe to Worcester, he ſent for the Archbiſhop and Biſhops, and declared to them his miſfortune, deſiring thē to help him: to whome the Archbiſhop anſwered, that he woulde talke with the Cleargie in that matter. In the meane ſeaſon the Frenchmen came to ſuccour the Welchmen with 140. Shippes: they l
                  •
               nded in Milford Hauen, hauing loſt almoſt all their horſſes for lacke of freſh water. The Lord Barkley, and Henry Pay burnt fiftéene of thoſe Shippes in the ſame Hauen. Theſe Frenchmen beſéeged the Towne of Carmarden, and tooke it, graunting to the inhabitants all their moueable goodes, and to goe whether they would.
            The ſame time the foreſayde Lorde Barkley, ThomasAnno reg. 7. Swinborne, and Henry Pay, tooke fourtéene Shippes of the French, in the whiche they tooke the Steward of France, and right Captaynes more.
            The Towne of Reystone in Hartfordſhire was brent.Reyſton brent.
            
            
               
               Henry Barton: William Groome, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Sir Iohn Woodcocke Mercer, the 28. of October.
            
            This yeare, all the Weares in Thamis from the TowneVVeares in the Thamis and Medvvay deſtroyed. of Stanes in the Weaſt, vnto the water of Medway in the Eaſt, by the Maior and communaltie of London, were deſtroyd, and the trunckes brent, for the which, great plea and diſcord followed betwéene Thomas Arundell Archbiſhop of Canterbury, and other Lords and Knightes of the one party, and the Maior and communaltie on the other partie, but the Citizens preuayled by vertue of their Charter and Statutes.
            A Parliamente beganne, whiche laſted nigh oneParliament. A great taske. 1406 whole yeare, for after the Knightes of the Parliament had long delayde to graunt to the King a ſubſedie, yet in the ende being ouercome, they granted the taſke demanded. The Prieſtes and the Friers that liued of almes, were forced euery one to pay halfe a marke.
            
               Henry Percy Earle of Northumberland, & the L. Bardolfe, by the counſell of Dauid Fleming, fled into Wales, for he had declared to them, that the Scottes had conſpired to deliuer them vnto their owne King, in exchange for other priſoners, and for this doing of Dauid Fleming, the trayterous Scottes flew him, and reyſed ſuch a ciuill warre amongſt thē
               ſelues, that in the ende they were conſtreyned to requeſt truce for a yeare, which when they had obteyned, the Scottes ſente Iames, the ſonne of Robert King of Scottes, being butThe King of Scottes ſonne and heire taken on the Sea. nine yeares olde, towardes France, there to be brought vp, and to be inſtructed in the pleaſant eloquence of the French tongue, whome certayne marriners of Cley in Norffolke tooke on the Seas, and with him a Biſhop, and the Earle of Orkney, to whome his Father had committed him: and they brought him into England, and deliuered him to the King, who forth with burſt out into a laughter, and ſayde, ſurely the Scottes mighte haue ſente him to me, for I can ſpeake French. The Biſhop eſcaped and fledde, but the Earle of

               Orkeney, and the ſayde Iames the yong ladde, was ſent to the Tower of London, where he remayned priſoner till the ſecond yeare of Henry the ſixth, whiche was aboue eightéene yeares.
            The Frenchmen came to help Owen Glendouerdew with 38. Shippes, whereof 8. were taken, full of armed men, the reſt eſcaped into Wales, but not long after were taken fiftene Shippes laden with Wine and Waxe.
            Whileſt the Parliament yet continued, the Duke of Yorke was reſtored to his olde dignitie, whome many men thought to haue bin dead in priſon.
            
               Edmond Holland Earle of Kent, married the Duke ofAnno reg. 8. 
               Millaynes daughter in the Priory of Saint Mary Ouery in Southwarke.
            
            
               Nicholas Wootton: Geffrey Brooke the 28. of Septemb.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Sir Richard Whittington Mercer, the 28. of October.
            
            
               Iohn Couentry, and Iankin Carpenter, executors to thisVVhittington Colledge founded. 
               Richard Whittington, with his goodes builded Whittington Colledge in London, and a great part of the Hoſpitall of Saint Barthelmew in Smithfielde. He builded the Library of the Grey Friers, and the Eaſt end of the Guild Hall in London, with diuers ſmall conduites, called Boſſes, and the WeaſtNevvgate builded. Gate of London called Newgate.
            
            Alſo Iankin Carpenter, one of the executors to the Worſhipfull Knight Sir Richard Whittington aforenamed, of his owne coſtes and charges, cauſed to be paynted aboute the Cloyſter of Saint Paules Church in London, a moſt excellent monument, or remembrance of Death, the originall patterne whereof, was ſometime deuiſed by Machabre, a Doctor of France, and therefore called The Daunce of Machabre, which Daunce was richly paynted about Saint Innocents Cloyſter in Paris, with Metres in French, ſignifyingThe Daunce of Death, commonly called the Daunce of Paules. the ſpéeches of Death to all eſtates, and their ſeuerall anſweres againe to Death, all whiche being tranſlated into Engliſh by Iohn Lidgate, Monke of Bury, was as afore ſayde richly paynted in the ſayd Cloyſter of Saint Paules Church,

and therefore commonly called The Daunce of Paules.
            
            
               Henry Pay, and other with him of the fiue Portes, withTho. Walſ. fiftéene Shippes, tooke an hundred and twentie Shippes, which lay at ancker in the Sea of Briteine, laden with Iron, Salt, Oyle, and Rochell Wine.
            This Sommer, through corruption of the ayre, ſo great a Plague was ſhedde vpon mens bodyes, as was not ſéene the like in many yeares in this land, ſo that men might ſay
            
               The South windes warme did blow, with heate peſtiferous,Peſtilence.
               
               And Peſtilence did beare great rule in Cities populous.
            
            For at London in ſhort while it conſumed aboue thirtie thouſand men and women, and in the Countrey Townes great mortalitie fell among the huſbandmen, ſo that great houſeholds dyed cleane vp, and the houſes were emptied.
            About the fiftéenth day of Auguſt deceaſſed Sir Roberte Knowles Knight, at his Manour of Sconethorp in Norffolke,
               Sir Robert Knovvles. Iohn Leyland.
                he was brought to London, and there honourably buried in the white Friers Church which he had newly reedifyed and builded.
            This Sir Robert Knowles had bin a moſt valiant Captayne in the warres of France, during the raigne of Edward the third, and Richard the ſecond, whoſe force the Realme of France both felt and feared, ſo did the Dukedome of Briteine,
               Regiſter of Bermondſey. and all the people from hence to Spayne. Of him in his life were made Uerſes in Latin, which may be engliſhed thus,
            
               O Robert Knowles, moſt woorthy of fame,Verſes.
               
               by thy proweſſe France was made tame:
               Thy manhoode made the Frenchmen to yeeld,
               by dint of ſword, in towne and field.
            
            This Sir Robert Knowles founded in the Towne ofColledge and Hoſpitall at Pontfract. 
               Pontfract a Colledge to the honor of the holy Trinitie, with an Hoſpital ioyned therevnto. In the which Colledge was placed a Mayſter, and 6. or 7. Prieſtes, and in the Hoſpitall 13. poore men and women. He was once minded to haue made this Colledge at his Manour of Sconethorp, but at the requeſt of Conſtance his wife (a woman of meane birth,

and ſomtime of a diſſolute life afore hir mariage, he turned his purpoſe, and made it in the very place of Pontfraite, wher ſhe was borne, enduing the ſame with 180. pound lande by yeare. He alſo builded the faire new greate bridge at Rocheſter, ouer the riuer of Medeway, with a Chappel and a chauntrie at the Eaſt end therof. In the which chappel was ſometime a table hanging, wherein was noted the benefactours to that Bridge, as followeth.
            Sir Roberte Knoles founder of the Trinitie Chappell at Rochester Bridge, Conſtaunce wife to Knowles.
            
            Sir Iohn Cobham Lord, principall benefactour to the making of Rochester Bridge: Margaret wife to Cobham.
            
            
               Thomas Boucher Cardinall.
            
               Iohn Morton Archbiſhop.
            
               Henrie Chicheley Archbiſhop.
            
               Thomas Langley Biſhop of Durham.
            
            
               Iohn Langedon Biſhop of Rochester.
            
            
               Thomas Arundale Archbiſhop.
            Sir Iohn Cornewal.
            
            Lord Fanhap.
            
            
               Richard Whittington.
            
            
               William Cromer.
            
            
               Geffrey Boleyne Maior of London.
            
            
               Iohn Darby Draper, Alderman of London.
            
            
               William Midleton Mercer of London.
            
            
               William Martin Juſtice.
            Sir Willlam Nottingham chiefe Barron of the Exchequer.
            
               William Wangforde.
            
            
               Iohn Buckingham Biſhop of Lincolne.
            
            
               Iohn Kempe Biſhop of London.
            
            Sir William Richal.
            
            Sir Iohn at Pole.
            
            All theſe had giuen money or landes towards the building and repayring of the ſayde Bridge.
            
               Iohn Warner a Merchaunt of Rochester, made the newe

coping of Rochester Bridge: and William Warham Archbyſhop of Canter burie, made the yron pikes and bars aboute the ſame coaping.
            This ſommer Henrie Prince of Wales beſieged the Caſtel of Abrustwich, but not long after Owen Glendouerdew
               Anno reg. 9. Sherifes. Maior. entred into it, and placed new kéepers.
            
               Henrie Pontfract: Henrie Halton, the. 28. of September.
            
            
               Sir William Stondon Grocer, the. 28. of October.
            
            In Nouember a Parliamente being called at London, a taxe of money was leuied of the whole Realme.
            This yeare was a ſore and ſharpe Winter, and ſuche aboundance of Snow, which continued, December, Januarie, Februarie and March, ſo that almoſte all ſmall Byrdes dyed through hunger and colde. Whiles the King helde a great Counſell at London with the nobles of the Realme, Henrie Earle of Northumberlande, and Thomas Lorde Bardolfe came againe into England, who after long iournying, when they came to the Towne of Thriske, they cauſed to bée proclaymed, that who ſo woulde haue libertie, ſhoulde take vp armour and weapon and follow them, whervpon much people reſorted to them: but ſir Thomas Rockley Sherife of Yorkeſhire, with other Knightes of that Countrey went againſt them, and at Bramham Moore nere to Haſewold, fought with them a great battayle, and ſlew the Earle, whoſe head was ſtreyght wayes cutte off. The Lord Bardolph was ſore wounded and taken aliue, but dyed ſhortly after. This battayle was fought on the xviij. day of February. The Erles head was put on a ſtake, and caryed openly through the Citie1408 of London, and ſet on London Bridge. The Biſhop of Bangor was taken with the Lordes, but pardoned of his lyfe, bycauſe he was not founde in armour. The King wente to Yorke, and there condemned ſuch as tranſgreſſed, confiſcated their goods, pacified the Countrey, hanged the Abbot of Hayle, who had bin in armour, and returned to the South partes againe.
            
               Upon the ſeuenth of September there were ſuche flouds of rayne, as the olde men of that age had neuer ſéene before. Edmunde Hollande Earle of Kent whileſt he beſieged the Caſtell of Briake in Brytaine, he was wounded with an arrowe of a croſſebowe in the heade, notwithſtanding he toke the Caſtel and deſtroied it to the ground, and not long after his braines rotted, and he died.Anno reg. 10 Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Thomas Ducke: William Norton, the. 28. of September.
            
            
               Sir Drew Barentine Goldſmith, the. 28. of October.
            
            Aboute the feaſte of Al Saintes the Cardinall of Burges came into Englande, being ſente from the Colledge of Cardinalles, to informe the King and Cleargie, of the vnconſtaunte dealing of Pope Gregorie, as alſo he had informed the Frenche King and his Cleargie and realme, to the end that thoſe two Kings might ſette to theyr helping handes, to induce the ſayde Gregorie to obſerue the othe he hadde made, and that by the magnificence of thoſe two Kings, cō
               corde mighte be made in the Church, vnto the whiche buſineſſe the Frenche Kyng hadde gladlye graunted, and ſente meſſengers vnto Pope Gregorie, who notwythſtandyng1409 was obſtinate. The Kyng of Englande when hée vnderſtoode the Cardinalles meſſage, hée commaunded that curteſie and gentle entertaymente ſhoulde be gyuen hym, and offered to beare hys charges ſo long as hée woulde abyde in Englande. After the feaſte of the Epyphanye, the Archebyſhoppe of Canterburie cauſed to aſſemble at London, all the Cleargye of the Realme to choſe perſonages méete to go to the general counſel holdē at Piſa, where vnto were choſen Roberte Holam Biſhop of Saliſburie, Henrie Chiſeley
                biſhop of Saint Dauids, and Thomas Chillingdon Prior of Christes Churche in Canterburie, and the Kyng had ſente before Iohn Coluile Knighte, and mayſter Nicholas Rixton Clearkes, wyth letters to be giuen to thē. And in ye letter to the Pope it was writtē, moſt holy father, &c. if ye prouidēce of ye Apoſtolike ſea wold vouchſafe to

conſider how gret harme and danger is ſprong vp through out the whole worlde, vnder pretence of Sciſme, and chiefly the deſtruction of Chriſtian people, whiche aboue the nū
               ber as men ſay of 200000. are periſhed by the raging of dyuerſe warres, that haue riſen in ſundry partes of the world, and euen now of late, to the number of thirtie thouſande, which (by reaſon of the diſſention had vpon the Biſhoprick of Leons, betwixte two which do ſtriue and contende the one in the aucthoritie of the true Pope, and the other by the aucthoritie of the Antipope) were in ſlaughter fielde (a lamentable thing to be ſpoken) ſlaine and diſtroyed. Truely the Apoſtolike ſea woulde be in greate heauineſſe of heart, and woulde rather forſake the honor of the Apoſtolicall ſea, thā then to ſée from henceforth ſuch wicked ſlaughter to be committed, and woulde take example of the true mother, who before King Salomon, rather choſe to giue place, than that the childe ſhoulde be cutte in péeces, &c. thus muche of the Epiſtle ſente by the Kyng of Englande to the foreſayde Gregorie.
            
            This yeare was a great play at the ſkinners Wel, nere vnto Clearkenwel beſids Londō, which laſted viij. days, & was of matter from the creation of the world: there were to bethe ſame, the moſt part of the nobles and gentles in Englād: and forthwith after beganne a royall iuſting in Smithfielde, betwéene the Earle of Somerſet and the Seneſhall of Henalt, ſir Iohn Cornewall, ſir Richard of Arundale, and the ſonne of ſir Iohn Cheyne, againſt other Frenchmen.
               Anno reg. 11 Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Iohn Lawe: William Chicheley, the. 28. of September.
            
            
               Sir Richard Marlow Ironmonger, the. 28. of October.
            
            
               Thomas Beuforte Erle of Surrey was made Chanceller, and Henrie Scrope was made Treaſurer.
            In a Parliament holden at London, in the Lent ſeaſon,1410 the Knights and Burgeſſes preſented to the King a Bill in this forme:
            To the moſt excellent Lord the King, and al the Nobles in this preſent Parliament aſſembled, your faithfull Commons

humbly do ſhewe, that our ſoueraigne Lord the king may haue the Temporall poſſeſſions and landes, whych byTh. Walſ. the Biſhoppes, Abbots, and Priors, are proudely ſpent and waſted in this Realme, which woulde ſuffiſe to finde 150. Earles, 1500. Knightes, 6200. Eſquiers, and 100. Hoſpytals more than now be, &c. but when they went about to declare out of what places, thoſe great ſummes were to be leuied, wherby the forſayde ſtates ſhould be endued, they wā
               ted in theyr accompte: wherefore the King commanded thē that from thenceforth they ſhoulde not preſume to moue any ſuch matter.
            Upon the euen of Saint Iohn Baptiſt the kings ſonne being in Eastcheap at ſupper, after midnight, betwixt two and thrée of the clocke, a great debate hapned betwéene his men and men of the Courte, laſting an houre, til the Maior and Sherifes with other Citizens ceaſed the ſame: for the which afterward the ſayde Maior, Sherifes, and Aldermen, were ſent for to appeare before the Kyng, to aunſweare: at whych the King with his ſonnes, and diuerſe other Lordes, were highly moued againſte the Citie, where through William Gaſcoigne chiefe Juſtice, enquired of the Maior and Aldermen, for the Citizens, whether they woulde put them in ye Kings grace, wherevnto they aunſwered, they had not offē
               ded the Kyng nor his ſonnes, but according to law ſtanched the debates: then the King ſeeing it woulde be none otherwyſe, forgaue altogither, and they departed. King Henrie founded a Colledge at Battelfielde in Shropſhire, where he ouercame
                  Anno. reg. 12 Battelfield founded. Sherifes. Maior. 1411 Guilde Hal in Londō builded. ſir Henrie Percie and other.
            
               Iohn Penne: Thomas Pike, the. 28. of September.
            
            
               Sir Thomas Knowles Grocer, the. 28. October.
            
            About Eaſter the Guilde Hall in London, was begun to bée made newe by the forſayde Maior and Aldermen. The Cuſtos or Gardian, with the brethrē of the Grocers in Londō, purchaſed their Hall in Cunihope Lane, for 320. markes, and thē 
               
                  •
               aide the foundation therof on the tenth of May.
            
               Iohn Prendergeſt Knight, and William Long, kept the

ſeas from Pirates and Rouers, ſo that the paſſage by Sea was quiet, but by the ill willers they were accuſed of theft & robberie themſelues, whervpon the Knight toke Sanctuarie at Westminster, where he could not haue an houſe or cotage to hide his heade, for that the ſame was forbidden by the King, ſo that he was forced to lye in a Tente whiche he ſet vp in the Church Porch, and to haue men to watch him in the nighte ſeaſon, for feare of his enimie: but his fellowe William remayned on the ſea, vntill the Admirall had prepared ſhippes readie, and went in perſon to fetch him, whiche he coulde not doe, till he promiſed him by his fidelitie, that he ſhoulde haue no harme, which promiſe notwithſtā
               ding, William was impriſoned in the tower of London. The Earle of Arundale, the Earle of Kime, ſir Robert Vmfreuile, ſir Iohn Oldecaſtle Lord of Cobham, ſir Iohn Gray, and other warlike power, and a greate number of Archers were ſent into France to the ayde of the Duke of Burgoine, againſt the Duke of Orleaunce, which at Saint Elo beſide Paris incoū
               tred with the enimyes, vpon whom they had a noble victorie, wherfore they were bountifully rewarded by the Duke of Burgoine, and then returned into Englande.
            
            A Squire of Wales named Rice ap Dee, which had long time rebelled againſt the King, was brought to London, and there drawen, hanged and quartered.Anno reg. 13
            
            
               Iohn Raynwel: William Cotton, the. 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Sir Robert Chicheley Grocer, the. 28. of October.
            
            After the feaſt of All Saintes a Parliamente was begun at London.
            
            The King cauſed a newe kinde of Nobles to be made1412 whiche were of leſſe value than the olde by foure pence in the noble.
            King Henrie foūded the Colledge of Fodringhey in Northamptonſhire: Henrie
                the fifth gaue it lande of Priories of Monkes aliantes by him ſupreſſed.
            
               A Goldſmith and his man of Fleete in London were bothe murdered by night, in the Duke of Yorkes place without Temple barre, and were caſt into the riuer of Thamis.
            
            About the fiftéenth of Auguſt the King by determination of the Counſel appoynting to ſend help to the Duke of Orleaunce, ſent his ſecond ſonne Thomas Duke of Clarence, Edwarde
                Duke of Yorke, and Thomas Earle of Dorſet, and many valiant men, wyth a ſtrong power to helpe to the Duke of Orleaunce, againſt the Duke of Burgonie, or euer al y• other were returned, whiche a while agoe went ouer with ye erle of Arundale to ayde the Duke of Burgonie, ſo that many men maruelled of the ſodaine chaunge, that in ſo ſmall a tyme the Engliſhmen dyd ayde and aſſiſte the two contrarie parts: notwythſtandyng the foreſayde Nobles wente forewardes and arriued in Normandie, where when the Duke of Orleaunce did not méete them at the tyme appointed, they brent hys townes, and ſpoyled his Countrey, and tooke manye holdes.
            At length, thoughe late, the Dukes of Clarence and of Orleance, mette and talked togither. And the matter was ſo entreated of betwéene them, that our menne ſhoulde deſyſte from raungyng throughe the Countrey, and refrayne from robberie, which when our men hadde graunted, they departed into Aquitaine to Wynter there, and the Duke of Orleaunce wente home to hys Countrey.Anno reg. 14
            
            
               Ralph Leuenhynd: William Seuenocke, the. 28. of Sep.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Sir William Waldren Mercer, the. 28. of October.
            
            About this tyme the Lorde Herle Marſhall of Fraunce, with manye other noble men and men of armes, to the number of foure thouſande, beſieged a certayne holde in Aquitaine, whyche was in the kéepyng of Iohn Blunte
               
Knight, who with thrée hundered that ayded hym, putte to flight the whole army of the Frenchmen, and toke twelue of their men of name, and other gentlemen to the number of 120.
            Kyng Henrie kept his Chriſtmaſſe at his manour of Eltham, being ſo ſore ſick, that ſometime men thought that he had bin dead: notwithſtanding it pleaſed God that he recouered his ſtrength againe a little.
            After Chriſtmaſſe he called the Nobles of ye realm togither to a Parliament at London, but he liued not to the end therof, for now after the great and fortunate chaunces hapnedTitus Liuius to him, and being deliuered of all Ciuill diuiſion, hée was taken with ſickneſſe, of the which he languiſhed til his appointed houre, during which ſickeneſſe, ſome euil diſpoſed people laboured to make diſſention betwéene the King and the Prince his ſonne, by reaſon wherof, and by the acte of youth, which he exerciſed more than meanely, and for the great recourſe of people vnto him, of whom his Court was at all times more aboundant than the King his father, the King ſuſpected that he would preſume to vſurpe the crown, he being aliue: which ſuſpitious iealouſie was occaſion that he in part withdrewe his affection and ſingular loue from the Prince. But when this noble Prince was aduertiſed of his fathers iealouſie, he diſguiſed himſelf in a gown of blew 
                  •
               atten, made full of ſmall Oylet holes, and at euery Oylet the néeble wherwith it was made hanging ſtil by a thréede of ſilke. And about his arme he ware a dogges coller ſet ful of S S of golde, and the Tirets of the ſame alſo of fine gold. Thus apparelled, with a great companye of Lordes and other noble men of his Court, he came to the king his father, who at that time laye at Westminster, where at his cōming (by his owne commaundement) not one of hi
                  〈…〉
               panye auaunced himſelfe further thā the fire in the Hall, notwithſtanding that they were greatly and ofte deſired to the contrarie, by the Lordes and great eſtates of the Kings Court: and that the Prince had commanded, to giue the leſſe occaſion

of miſtruſt to the King his father, but he himſelfe only accompanyed of the kings houſe, paſſed forth to the king his Father, to whom after due ſalutation) he deſired to ſhewe the intent of his minde in ſecrete manner. Then the Kyng cauſed himſelfe to be borne in his chayre into his ſecrete chamber (bycauſe he was deſeaſed and might not goe) wher in the preſence of thrée or foure perſons, in whom the King had moſt confidence, he commaunded the Prince to ſhewe the effect of his minde: Then the Prince knéeling down before his Father, ſaide to him theſe wordes, moſt redoubted Lord and Father, I am this time come to your preſence, as your liegman, and as your ſonne naturall, in all thyngs to obay your grace as my ſoueraigne Lord and father. And whereas I vnderſtand yée haue me ſuſpect of my behauiour againſt your grace, and that yée feare I would vſurpe your Crowne againſte the pleaſure of your highneſſe, of my cō
               uerſation youre grace knoweth that if yée were in feare of any man, of what eſtate ſoeuer he were, my duetie were to the endaungering of my life to puniſhe that perſon, therby to race that ſore from your hearte. And then howe muche rather oughte I to ſuffer death to bring your grace from the feare that yée haue of me that am your naturall ſonne, and your liegeman. And to that intente I haue thys daye by confeſſion and receyuing the Sacramente, prepared my ſelfe, and therefore moſte redoubted Lorde and Father, I beſéeche you in the honour of God, for the eaſing of youre harte, heretofore your knées to ſlea me with this dagger, and at that worde wyth all reuerence he deliuered to the king hys dagger, ſaying my Lorde and Father my lyfe is not ſo deſirous to mée, that I woulde liue one daye that ſhoulde be to you diſpleaſure▪ nor I couet not ſo much my life as I doe your pleaſure and welfare, and in your thus doing, here in the preſence of theſe Lordes, and tofore God at the daye of iudgemente I clearelye forgiue you my deathe. At theſe wordes of the Prince, the King taken with compaſſion of hearte, caſt from him the dagger, and imbracing

the Prince kiſſed him, and with effuſion of teares ſaide vnto him, my right deare and hartily beloued ſonne, it is of trueth that I had you partly ſuſpecte, and as I now perceyue, vndeſerued on your partie: but ſéeing this your humilitie and faithfulneſſe, I ſhall neyther ſlay you, nor from henceforth haue you any more in miſtruſt, for no report that ſhall be made vnto me, and thereof I aſſure you vpon mine honor. Thus by his great wiſedome was the wrongfull imagination of his Fathers hate vtterly auoyded, and hymſelfe reſtored to the Kings former grace and fauour.
            After thys, as was reported by the Earle of Ormonde (to the tranſlatour of myne author Titus Liuius) the king gaue to his ſonne the Prince, diuerſe notable doctrines, & inſignments, among which eruditiōs, one is this: the King lying grieuouſly diſeaſed, called before him the Prince his ſonne, & ſayd vnto him: My ſonne, I feare me ſor
                  •
                after my departure from this life, ſome diſcord ſhal grow & ariſe betwéene thée and thy brother Thomas Duke of Cla
                     •
                  ence, whereby the realme may be brought to deſtruction and miſerie, for I knowe you both to be of greate ſtomacke and courage▪ Wherefore I feare that he throughe his high mynde wyll make ſome enterpriſe againſt thée, intending to vſurpe vpon thée, whiche I knowe thy ſtomacke maye not abyde taſily. And for dreade hereof, as ofte as it is in my remembraunce, I ſoare repente me, that euer I charged my ſelfe wyth the Crowne of this Realme. To theſe wordes of the King the Prince aunſweared thus: Righte redoubted Lorde and Father to the pleaſure of GOD your grace ſhall long continue with vs, and rule vs both: but if God haue ſo prouided that euer I ſhall ſuccéede you in thys Realme, I ſhall honour and loue my brethre▪ aboue all menne, as long as they be to me true, faythfull and obediente, as to theyr ſoueraigne Lord, but if anye of them fortune to conſpyre or rebell againſte mée, I aſſure you I ſhall as ſoone execute iuſtice vppon one of them, as I ſhall

vpon the worſt and moſt ſimpleſt perſon within this your Realme.
            The Kyng hearing thys aunſweare, was therewith maruellouſlye reioyced in hys mynde, and ſayde: My deare and wel beloued Sonne, wyth thys aunſwere thou haſte deliuered me of a greate and ponderous agonye: and I beſéeche thée, and vppon my bleſſing charge thée, that like as thou haſte ſayde, ſo thou miniſter iuſtice equally, and in no wiſe ſuffer not them that be oppreſſed long to call vpon thée for Juſtice, but redreſſe oppreſſions, and indifferently, and wythout delay, for no perſwaſion of flatterers, or of them that bée partiall, or ſuche as vſe to haue their handes repleniſhed wyth gyftes, deferre not Juſtice vntill to morrowe, if that thou mayſte doe iuſtice thys daye, leaſte (peraduenture) GOD doe Juſtice on thée in the meane tyme, and take from thée thyne authoritye: remember, that the wealth of thy body and thy ſoule, and of thy Realme, reſteth in the execution of Juſtice, and doe not thy Juſtice, ſo that thou be called a Tyraunte, but vſe thy ſelfe meanely betwixte Juſtice and mercie in thoſe things that belong to thée. And betwéen parties do iuſtice truely and extreamely to the cō
               ſolation of thy poore ſubiects that ſuffer iniuries, and to the punition of them that be extortioners and doers of oppreſſiōs, that other therby may take example: & in thus doing, thou ſhalt obtayne the fauour of God, and the loue and fear of thy ſubiectes, and therefore alſo thou ſhalte haue thy Realme more in tranquillitye and reſte, whiche ſhal bée occaſion of greate proſperitie wythin thy Realme, whyche Engliſhmen naturally do deſyre: for ſo long as they haue wealthe and Ryches, ſo long ſhalte thou haue obeyſaunce: and when they bée poore, then they bée alwayes readye at euerye motion to make inſurrections, and it cauſeth them to rebel agaynſt theyr ſoueraygne LORDE: for the nature of them is ſuche,

rather to feare loſing of theyr goods and worldly ſubſtaunce, than the ieoparding of theyr liues. And if thou thus kéepe them in ſubiection mixed with loue and feare, thou ſhalte haue the moſte peaceable and fertyle Countrey, and the moſte louyng, faythfull, and manlye people of the Worlde: whyche ſhall becauſe of no ſmall feare to thyne aduerſaries. My ſonne when it ſhall pleaſe God to call me to the waye decrede for euerye Worldely creature, to thée (as my ſonne and heyre) I muſte leaue my Crowne and my Realme, whyche I aduiſe thée not to take vaynelye▪ and as a manne elate in pryde, and reioyced in Worldlye honour, but thinke that thou arte more oppreſſed wyth charge, to puruie for euerie Perſon wythin the Realme, than exalted in vaine honoure of the Worlde. Thou ſhalt be exalted to the Crowne, for the wealthe and conſeruation of the Realme, and not for thy ſingular commoditie and auaile: my Sonne thou ſhalte be a miniſter to thy Realme to kéepe it in tranquilitie and defende it. Like as the harte in the myddeſt of the bodye is principall and chiefe thyng in the bodye, and ſerueſh to couet and deſire that thyng that is moſte neceſſarie to euerye of thy members, ſo (my Sonne) thou ſhalte be amongſt thy people as chiefe and principall of them to miniſter, imagine and acquire thoſe thyngs that maye be moſte beneficiall for them. And then thy people ſhall be obediente to thée, to ayde and ſuccoure thée, and in al things to accompliſhe thy commaundemēts, like as thy members laboure, euerye one of them in theyr office to acquire and get that thing that the hearte deſireth, and as thy hearte is of no force and impotent without the ayde of thy members ſo without thy people, thy raygne is nothing. My ſonne thou ſhalt feare and dread God aboue all things, and thou ſhalt loue honour and worſhip him wt all thy hearte, thou ſhalte attribute and aſcribe to hym all things wherein thou ſéeſt thy ſelfe to be well Fortunate, 
                  •
               ée it victorye of thyne enymies, loue of thy friendes,

obedience of thy ſubiectes, ſtrength and actiueneſſe of body, honor, riches, or fruitefull generations, or any other thing whatſoeuer it be, that chanceth to thy pleaſure. Thou ſhalt not imagine that any ſuch thing ſhoulde fortune to thée, by thyne acte, nor by thy deſert, but thou ſhalte thinke that all cōmeth only of the goodneſſe of our Lord. Thus yu ſhalt with all thine heart, prayſe, honour, and thanke God of all hys benefits that he giueth vnto thée. And in thy ſelfe eſchew al vaineglorie and elation of heart, following the holeſome counſell of the Pſalmiſt, (which ſayeth) Non nobis Domine non nobis, ſed nominituo dagloriā
                (which is to ſay) Not vnto vs Lord, not vnto vs, but to thy holy name be giuen laude and praiſe. Theſe & many other admoniſhments and doctrines this victorious king gaue vnto this noble prince his ſonne: who with effect followed the ſame, after the death of his father: whereby he obtained grace of our Lorde to attaine to gret victories and many glorious and incredible conqueſts, through the helpe and ſuccour of our Lord, whereof he was neuer deſtitute. The king his father drawing to his end, after due thankes giuen, and ſupplications made to God, gaue his benediction to the Prince his ſonne, and ſo yéelded to God his ſpirit, the. xx. day of March Anno. 1412. when he had raigned. xiij. yeares, ſixe moneths and odde dayes. He was conueyed by water to Feuerſham, and from thence by lande to Canterburie and there buryed.
            (⸪)
         
         
            
            ¶ King Henry of Monmouth.
            
            
            
               
                  HEnrie the fifth began his raigne yt xx. day of MarchAnno reg. 1. Titus Liuius. in y• yere. 1412. This Prince excéeded the mean ſtature of men, he was beautiful of viſage, his necke long, bodye ſlender and leane, and hys bones ſmal: neuer the leſſe he was of maruellous greate ſtrength, and paſſing ſwifte in running, in ſo much that he with two other of his Lords without bow or other engine, would take a wilde Buck or Doe in a large Park: he delighted in ſōgs & muſical inſtrumēts, in ſo much y• in his chappel amōgſt other his priuate prayers, he vſed certaine Pſalmes of Dauid tranſlated into heroycall Engliſh méeter, by Iohn Lydgate, Monke of Bury.
            
            Whilſt his father liued, beyng accōpanyed wt ſome of his

yong Lords & gentlemen, he wold waite in diſguiſed araye for his owne receyuers, and diſtreſſe them of theyr money: and ſometimes at ſuche enterprices both he and his company wer ſurely beaten: and when his receiuers made to him their complaints, how they were robbed in their comming vnto him, he wold giue them diſcharge of ſo much mony as they had loſt, and beſides that, they ſhould not depart from him without great rewards for their trouble and vexation, eſpecially they ſhould be rewarded that beſt hadde reſiſted hym and his company, and of whom he hadde receyued the greateſt & moſt ſtrokes. But after the deceaſe of his father, was neuer any youth, or wildnes, that might haue place in him, but all his actes were ſodainely chaunged into grauitie and diſcreation.
            To this noble Prince (by aſſent of the Parliamente) all1413 the eſtates of the realme, after thrée dayes offered to do fealtie before he was crowned, or had ſolemnized his othe, wel and iuſtly to gouerne the common weale, which offer, béefore was neuer found to be made to any Prince of England.
            
            The King gaue them all generallye thankes, for theyr good mindes towardes hym, and therewyth exhorted them to the zeale of the publike proſperitie and honoure of the Realme. If anye man hadde offended hym, he pardoned theyr treſpaſſe, and deſyred heartily of GOD, that if hée ſhoulde rule and doe all things well to the honoure of GOD and the proſperous commoditie of the Realme, that then God woulde ſuffer him to be Crowned. But if hys fortune ſhoulde bée to doe otherwyſe, that then GOD ſhoulde take hym to hys mercye, and ſuffer hym rather to be buried than to enterpriſe the charge of the Realme.
            The ninth day of April he was crowned at Westminster, by Thomas Arundell Archebyſhoppe of Canterburie, after whyche Coronation, he called vnto hym all thoſe young Lords and Gentlemen that were the folowers of his yong

actes, to euerye one of whome he gaue rich and bounte
                  ••
               s giftes, and then commanded that as many as would chāge their maners as he intended to doe, ſhould abide with him in his Courte, and to all that woulde perſeuer in theyr former light conuerſation, he gaue expreſſe commaundemente vpon paine of their heades, neuer after that day to come in his preſence.
            About this time Thomas Duke of Clarence, the Kings brother, came from the coaſtes of Aquitaine, who (as we ſaid before) was ſent to ayde the Duke of Orleaunce, againſte the Duke of Burgoine.
            
            A great part of the Citie of Norwich was brent, with allTho. Walſ. the houſe of the Frier Preachers, and alſo two Friers of that order. Sir Iohn Oldcaſtle, at that time Lorde of Cobham, for diuerſe pointes touching the Sacrament, before the Archebyſhoppe of Canterburie, the Biſhops of London, Winchester & other, was conuict and committed to the Tower of London, out of the which he brake ouer the walles in the night and eſcaped, about the feaſt of Simon and Iude.
            
            
               Iohn Stutton: Iohn Michel, the. 28. of September.
               Sheriſes. Maior.
            
            
               Sir William Cromer Draper, the. 28. of October.
            
            
               Richard the ſecond, ſomtime king of England, which was at the firſt enterred in the church of the preaching Friers of Langley, was takē vp and royally buried at Westminster with no ſmall charges to the King. The K. kéeping his Chriſtmaſſe at his manour of Eltham (vij. miles from London) was warned y• certain had conſpired againſt him, eyther to haue taken, or ſodainly ſlain him & his brethren on Twelfth day 
                  •
               t night, whervpon the king ſent word to the Maior of Londō, yt he ſhould arreſt all ſuſpitious perſons: wherevpon the Maior forthwith cauſed euery Aldermā in his ward to kéep great watch, and about tenne of the clocke at nighte wente hymſelfe wyth a ſtrong power, to the ſigne of the Are wythoute Byſhoppes Gate, where they apprehended the man of the houſe, called Iohn Burgate Carpenter and vij. other, & ſent them to Eltham, where they confeſſed before the Kyng

that they were confederate with Sir Iohn Oldcaſtell to fight againſt him and his Lords in Saint Giles fielde aboue Holborne. On the morrow after the Twelfth day, the KingKing Henry kept the field by S. Giles vvithout Holborne. re
                  •••
               ued priuily to Westminster, and with a greate armie kept the fielde of S
                     •••
                  t G
                     •
                  les, for he was warned that Sir Iohn Oldcaſtell▪
                and Sir Roger▪ Acton, woulde be in the ſame field on the next day following with fiue and twentie thouſand people▪ and the ſame night were taken more than foureſcore men in armour of the ſame faction. Alſo the King being told of an am
                  ••
               ſhment gathered in Harengay Parke, 
               
                  ••
               nte thither certayne Lordes▪ who tooke many, among whome, was one William Murl
                     •
                  
                a rich 
                  •
               aultmā, or Bruer of Dunstaple, who had his two Horſſes trapped with Golde following him, and a paire of gilt Spurres in his boſome; for he thought to haue bin made Knight on the morrow by the hande
                  •
                
               
                  ••
                Sir Iohn Old
                     ••
                  ſtell. The twelfth of January, thréeſ
                  ••
               r
                  •
                and nine of them were condemned of treafo
                  ••
               
               Many men hanged, and ſome brent in Ficket
                     •
                   field. at Westminster, and on the morrow after ſeauen and thirtie of th
                  ••
                were dr
                  •••••
                from the Tower of London to Newgate, and ſo to Saint G
                     ••••
                  
                  ▪
                and there in a place called Fickets fielde, were all hanged▪ and 
                  •
               e
                  ••
               ien of them brent Gallowes and 
                  ••
               . The xix. of January, were drawne and hanged Sir Iohn Be
                     •
                  erley Prieſt, Iohn B
                     ••
                  gate Carpenter, a Text writer in S
                     ••••
                   Iohns ſtréete, and a Glouer on London bridge, and ſhortly after, Sir Roger A
                     ••
                  on Knight was taken, who on the tenth of February, was drawne, hanged, and buryed vnder the Gall
                  •
               wes.
            The twentith of February, deceaſſed Thomas Arundell Archbiſhop of Conterburie.
               Anno reg. 2.
            
            The King taking compaſſion vpon Henry Percy a yong1414 man (who by his Grandfather Henry Percy Earle of North
                     ••••
                  erland, was caryed into Scotland, after the death of his father, who was ſ
                  •
               aine in the battell of Shrewſburie, when this yong man was then but a child) commanded thē that were of his kindred, and néereſt friends, to ſolicite for his reclayming home agayne out of Scotland, minding not only

to honor him by calling him home agayne, but alſo to 
                  •••••
                him Earle of Northumberland.
            
            In the moneth of May, a Parliament was begon at Leycester,
               Parliament at Leyceſter. Porter of the Tovver executed. and there was a Porter of y• Tower of Lōdon drawne, hanged, and headed, whoſe head was ſent to London, and ſet ouer the Tower gate, for conſenting to one that brake out of the Tower, named▪ 
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . In this Parliamente, Iohn the Kings brother was made Duke of Bedford, Humfrey
               
               Dukes created. his brother Duke of Glocester, and Richard, brother to the Duke of Yorke, was made Earle 
                  ••
                
               Cambridge. To this Parliament came the Embaſſadors of the French King, and alſo of the Duke of B
                     ••
                  g
                     ••
                  dy, but not with like in
                  •••
               te and purpoſe, for the D. of 
                  
                     •••
                  g
                     •
                  ndy deſired ayde againſt the 
                  •
               . of Orleance, promiſing (as men layd) more than he was able to perfourme, wherefore the King of England 
               
                  ••••
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                Embaſſadors to them both, amongſt whome were the Biſhops of Durham and Norwich as chi
                  •
               f
                  〈…〉
                were oft times ſent into France, and the French Kings Embaſſadors were ſente hither, with great coſt on both 
                  ••••
               s, but no hope of peace to be had. On Mary Magdalens day, in London, Iohn 
                        •••
                     nſer
                Eſquire, with mine of his men, ſet vpon and 
                  •
               lewThe Queenes Chancellour flayne. 
               Iohn T
                     ••
                  bey Clearke, Archdeacon of Hun
                     •••
                  g
                     ••
                  
                and Chancellour to Quéene Ioane, late wife to Henry the fourth, for the which fact, the ſayd Eſquire, and foure of his men fled to Saint Annes Church within Alderſgai
                     •
                  , where they were mured vp with boord, and watched day and night till the xxj. of Auguſt, on the which day, they forſware the lande,Men foreſvvare the land. and paſſed through the Citie towards Caleis in their ſhirtes and bréeches, eache of them hauing a Croſſe in hys hand.
            This yeare dyed the 
                  •
               oalours of Newgate and Ludgate
               Priſoners dyed. of London, and many priſoners in Newgate, to the number of thréeſcore and foure.
            The tenth of September, Iohn Claydon Skinner; andA Skinner & a Baker brent. 
               Richard Gurmonfrench Baker, in Lombardstree
                     •
                  e of London, were brent in Smithſield.
            
            
               
               Iohn Michel
                     •
                  . Thomas Allin, the 28. of September.
               
                  Sherifes. Maior. Mooregate firſt made in the vvall of Lōdon.
            
            
               Thomas Fawconar Mercer, the 28. of October.
            
            This▪ 
               Thomas Fawconar Maior, cauſed to breake the wall of London, néere to the ende of Colmanſtreete, and made there a Gate vpon the moore ſide, where was none before.
            He alſo cauſed the ditches of the Citie to be cleanſed, and a comm
                  ••
                priuie that was on the moore without the wall to be taken downe▪ and another to be made within the Citie vpon Walbrooke, into the which brooke he cauſed the water of citie to be turned by grates of iron in diuers places.
            Our Embaſſadors▪ the Biſhops of Durham & Norwich, returning now the ſecond time out of France, declared to the King, that the Frenchmen, did but vſe fraude and deceiptes, wherefore the King being ſtirred vp vnto anger, determined to a
                  •
               at
                  •
                their 
                  •••
               rnin
                  •••
               
               ▪ and to teach them to vnderſtād their fully▪ in 
                  ••
               aking of a 
                  ••
               éeping Dogge: and forth with, the King commanded all the Pre
                  ••
               tes, and Nobles of the Realme, to come to London, there to intreate of waight
                  •
                affaires cōcerning y• Realme, at y• which time, the Archbiſhop of Canterbury held a great counſayle, in y• which were choſen 
                  〈◊〉
                of the Cleargie of England, to go to the generall Counſell that ſhould be holden at Constance, a Citie of Germ
                     ••
                  
                and ſo there were ſent the Biſhops of Saliſburie, Bath, and Hereford, and with them the Abbot of Westminster, and the Prior of Worcester, and many other wiſe men, in co
                  ••
                
               
                  ••••
                of the Earle of Warwike, whoſe preſence did thē much honour▪
            
            This yeare, the order of Church ſeruice throughout
                  Anno reg. 3. 1415 Order of Church ſeruice in England altered. 
               England was changed, from the vſe of Saint Paule, to the vſe of Saliſburie, which was to the great diſliking of many men in thoſe dayes.
            When King Henry percey
                  •
               ed that the Frenchmen had with deceite entreated him with fayned promiſes, and faire words▪ he gathered his 
                  •
               a
                  •
               y togither, apointed his bowmē 
               
                  •
                men of armes, prepared his engins, & all things neceſſary 
                  •
               or y• warres, cōmanding all y• ſhould go we him, to be ready

againſt the feaſt of Saint Iohn Baptiſt, and to m
                  •
               e
                  •
               e him at Hampton.
            
            The eyghtenth day of 
                  •••
               e, King Henry with many Lords and others rode from London toward South-hampton▪
                the Maior, 
                  〈◊〉
               
               ▪ and Craftes of the C
                  •
               tle 
                  〈…〉
               
               ▪ing him on his 
                  •••
               y to 
                  •
               he 
                  •
               owne of Kingston vpon Thamis, while
                  ••
                the King 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  ••
                
               
                  
                     〈◊◊〉
                  
                  ▪
                where he abode for his reli
                  ••••
                and 
                  •••
               ffe 
                  ••
               nging to the warres.
            On the laſt 
                  ••
                July was diſcouered a great conſpiracieConſpiracy diſcloſed. Tho. Walſ. Regiſt. Maior.
                againſt him, by three 
                  〈…〉
                is 
                  〈◊〉
                of all the reſt he pat greateſt truſt and confid
                  ••••
                
               
                  〈…〉
                of them was Henry Scrope, Lord Treaſours▪ the ſecond, Richard 
               
                  •
               a
                  ••
               e of Cambridge, brother 
                  •
               o Edward Duke of Yorke, and Sir Thomas Grey, a Knight of the North▪ theſe had made Edmond Earle of Ma
                     ••
                  h 
               
                  〈◊◊〉
                vpon a Booke, not to d
                  ••••
               oſe their counſell, and then 
                  ••
               l
                  ••
                him that they thought to 
                  〈◊〉
                the King▪ and to 
                  〈◊〉
                the ſayd Ed
                  ••
               ō
               
                  ••
                King, the which 
                  ••
                he refuſed to take vpon him▪ they would 
                  ••
               ey him: where vppon, the Earle prayse them to giue him one hou
                  •
               es ſpa
                  •
               e to take 
                  ••
               uiſe
                  •
               ent what was beſt to doe, whiche being granted, the Earle went ſecretly and 
                  •
               ol
                  •
                the King
                  •
                ther
                  •••
               , who cauſed them forthwith 
                  •
               o be apprehended, and brought before him, where they confeſſed the 
                  •••
               aſon, for the which, on the ſixth of Auguſt they were ar
                  •••
               gned in y• Kings preſence, and the ſame day all three beheaded. The Earle was buried head and all, bu
                  •
                the other hea
                  ••
                were 
                  •
               e
                  •••
               , the one to Yorke, the other to Newcastell vpon Tine, and there ſe
                  •
                vp.
            On the eleuenth of Auguſt, the King tooke ſhipping, and entred the Sea with a thouſand Sayle, Enguerant ſaythKing Henry ſayled into Normandy. Tho. W
                        ••
                     ſ. Titus Liuius. Enguerant.
                1600. Sayles, and the third night after arriued at Kedeca
                     •
                  x in Normandy, whiche is betwixte Hereflete and 
                  
                     •
                  imflete, of whoſe comming, all the Cities, and States of th
                  •••
                partes being aduertiſed, were ſtriken with great feare. The King, the Dukes of Clarence and of Glocester his bréethren, the Duke of Yorke his Unkle, the Earles▪ Barons, Knightes, Gentlemen, and Souldiours, 
                  〈◊◊〉
                an
                  ••••
               
               ▪
               
                  •
                there, and

tooke land without any reſiſtance, and the King forthwith falling to the ground vpon his knées, deuoutely prayde to God that to his honor he would giue him iuſtice of his enimies. He had at his landing in his hoſt▪ ſixe thouſande Speares, and xxiiij. thouſand footemen, beſides Gunners, and other enginars, artificers, and labourers, of whome the King had great abundance.
            The King gaue to diuers Gentlemen the order ofTitus Liuius. Knighthoode, and aſſigned the bearing of his Standarts and Banners to ſuch mē as he knew to be of great ſtrength and proweſſe. All thing being ſet in good order and array, the King with all his hoſt aſcended to the toppe of an high hill there nigh, and there he reſted the next day.
            On the ſixtéenth day of Auguſt, the Duke of Clarence, leader of the foreward, in good ordinance, entred his iourney towarde a Towne called Herefleete, diſtant from Kedecamp ſcarcely thrée leagues, where he lodged his hoſt in a field before the towne. The King at his comming, lodged himſelfe nigh to the firſt warde, not farre from the Towne. The Earle of Suffolke, Michaell at Poole,
                Chiefetayne of the rereward, lodged on the other ſide before the Towne. Other noble men that had the conduct of the two wings, lodged them, one on the right hād, the other on the left. Forthwith were ſent to the Towne, men of armes in great number, to ſée the ſcituation thereof, who ſhortly returned with a great pray of Cattell, and enformed the King of all his demaundes.
            
               Hereflete is the key of the ſée of all Normandy, and is ſcituate
                  Enguerant. Deſcription of Herefleete. vpon the Sea ſide, by the Riuer of Seene, betwixte two hilles, and through the middle thereof runneth a Riuer, whiche not farre from the ſame Towne entreth into the Seane, and from thence, both thoſe Riuers in one deſcende into the Sea, where as a great and goodly Hauen is, belonging to the ſame Towne, which Hauen, is garniſhed with the defence of two faire and ſtrong Towers: and in the ſame Hauen a right great Nauie of Shippes may ride in

ſafetie: and if the inhabitants of this Towne encloſe and képe within the Towne the courſe of the foreſayd Riuer by their ſluces, as they may right well do, then the Riuer riſeth without the Towne ſo high, that it forecloſeth all entries to the walles, ſo that no man may approch the towne on that part. This Towne is alſo defended with high and thicke walles and towers, and is alſo enuironed with broade and déepe ditches. To this Towne alſo belongeth only two Gates for entries, the one called Calturances, the other Mostrouillier. In this Towne, beſides the inhabitants thereof, for the defence of the ſame, were foure hundred men of armes deputed in Garriſon, amongſt whome, were theſe Lords, Lord Diſcouteuile, chiefe Captayne of the Towne, Lord Blanuile, Lord Haqueuile, Lord Harmanuile, Lord Eancourt, Lord Gaillard Bos, and diuers other Lords and men expert in warre. The King commanding the Duke of Clarence to aſſéege the Towne, he endeuouredTitus Liuius. to conuey his people ouer the Riuer, in the paſſage whereof, he had a great ſkirmiſh with the inhabitants of the Towne, but at the laſt his aduerſaries being put to flight, recoyled within the walles. The Duke conuayde ouer the Riuer all his ward and company, and bycauſe the Riuer deuided the Kings Camp from the Dukes, they ordeyned a ready and ſure paſſage ouer the ſame Riuer betwixt both the Campes, to the kéeping whereof, certayne Gentlemen were appoynted, ſo that theyr enimies myghte not endomage them neyther by Water nor Lande.
            In this meane time befell a great miſaduenture to theEnguerant. 
               Frenchmen that were beſéeged, for the Gonnepouder and ſhotte that was ſent vnto them by the French King, was encountred vpon the Sea by the Engliſhmen, and taken, to their great diſpleaſure and domage.
            The King gaue the charge of the fielde to his brotherTitus Liuius. 
               Humfrey Duke of Glocester. On the ſame ſide the Riuer that the King lay, was ye Duke of Yorke, high Conneſtable

of England lodged with his band. When euery man was placed, ye Towne was ſo ſtreightly aſſéeged, that all entries and iſſues of the Towne were ſtopped, ſo y• they of ye towne were in diſpaire to haue any ſuccour from the Realme of France. Many engins were reyſed by the Engliſh, which in ſhort time ſhould haue bin the deſtruction of the walles, if they of the Towne had not the ſooner ſtopped the Riuer of the ſame towne within, wherby the water gathered & reiſed without the towne betwixt the King and the D. of Clarence, to the ſemblance of a little Sea, which cauſed the Engliſhmen to withdraw their Gonnes, and other engins, whereby at that time the walles were ſaued. Then the King cauſed toEnguerant. be made vnder the water thrée great Mines vnto the walles of the towne, which in like maner had bin the cauſe of their ruine, if the inhabitants had not countermined them, and letted their purpoſe. The inhabitants of the Town perceyuingTitus Liuius. themſelues thus ſtreightly aſſéeged, as well by Land as by Sea, conuayde all their Shippes within their Hauē, and bound them togither with cheynes, and in the two towers that were made for the defence of the Hauen, they put certaine Garriſons, and armed men, who oftentimes attempted to inuade the Kings Nauie, but at all times they were by his Shippes beaten, and conſtreyned to recule ſtill within their Hauen: at the laſt, the Captaynes and inhabitants conſidering that by ſuch ſkirmiſhes (as well vpon the Land as vpon the Sea) they gained nothing, tooke this appointment with the King, that if they were not reſcued by the Frenchmen within certayne dayes limited, they ſhoulde then delyuer into hys handes the Towne, with thirtie perſons of the greateſt and moſt noble within the Towne, ſuche as the King woulde deſire, to bée ordered at the Kings pleaſure, and all the reſidue, as well menne of Warre, as the inhabitantes of the ſame Towne, without armoure, and leauing behynde them theyr goodes, ſhoulde fréely goe where they woulde, for the ſuretie of whyche appoyntemente to bée kepte, they deliuered

vnto the King twelue of their greateſt perſonages for pledges. The Captaynes and inhabitants of the Towne ſéeing their day of appoyntment to approch, and themſelues vtterly deſperate of any ſuccours of their people, ordeyned to perfourme their couenant at their day prefixed, whiche was the xxij. of September, on which day came Sir Lionell Braquemont, gouernour of the Towne, vnto the King, and knéeling before him, ſayd: Moſt victorious Prince, beholde héere the keyes of this Towne, which after our promis I yéeld vnto you, with the Towne, my ſelfe, and my companie. Then were brought to the King the Lord Coteuile, the Lord Gangcourt, and other, to the number of thirtie, and all the reſidue, as well ſouldioures, as inhabitants, were ſuffered vnarmed to depart. The King conſtitute Captayne of the Towne Sir Thomas Beawford Earle of Dorſet hys Unkle, to whome he alſo committed two thouſand ſouldiers, choſen men of his hoſt. Then conſidering that winter drew on, as alſo the loſſe of their men, by reaſon of the Flix then reigning amongſt them, by which infirmitie, died Michaell at Poole, Earle of Suffolke, the Biſhop of Norwich, theEnguerat. Lord Beawmont, and others, and of the commons to the number of two thouſand and aboue. King Henry created the ſonne of Michaell at Poole, Earle of Suffolke, who liued not long after.
            After King Henry had remayned at Harefleete fiftéene dayes, after ye deliuerie of the Towne, and of the Towers, he departed from thence towards Caleis, whereof, when hisTitus Liuius. enimies were aduertiſed, and alſo by what way he intended to paſſe, all the people of the Countrey, Cities, and Townes, were maruellouſlie oppreſſed with feare, wherefore they haſted them to defenſible places, and other that were apt to warre, tooke them to their horſſes, and aſſembled them togither in great number, with no ſmall companie of footemen, and in all that they might they oppreſſed the Engliſhmen.
            
            The Kings hoſt kept an eaſie pace, without making any

haſt, and when they approched the Towne of Ewe, their enimies aſſayled them in the fieldes with great force and noyſe, where on both parties it was foughten ſore and vigorouſly:Enguerant. but the Frenchmen reculed to the Towne, where they were in good ſuretie. From thence the King departed, and came to a paſſage of the Riuer of Some, which the Frenchmen call Blankhestoke, or Blanch▪ tache. This paſſage, atTitus Liuius. the comming vnto it, was fixed with ſharp ſtakes by their enimies, ſo that they could not paſſe there, but were conſtreyned to go farther ſéeking their paſſage, vntill they came directly to haue the Citie of Amiens, and the Caſtell of Gorby on their left ſide, where they of the ſayde Citie began with them a new fight: but they were ſoone forced by the Engliſh to returne to their Citie agayne. The xix. of October the King paſſed the Riuer of Some, at the paſſage of Vienna, and Bethew-court, and wente then to lodge him at Mouche-legach, frō whence, he aduanced him towardes the Riuer of Miramont. In the meane time, the French King, and the Duke of Guyen his ſonne, then Dolphin, purpoſing to reſiſt the Engliſhmen, came to Roane, from whence, they ſent thrée Heraults to the King of England, to giue vnderſtanding that he ſhould not eſcape without battayle: vnto whome the ſayde King anſwered, All things be done at the pleaſure of God, I will kéepe the right way towardes Caleis: if our aduerſaries do attempt to diſturbe vs in oure iourney, we thinke they ſhall not do it without their owne great danger and perill. From thence, King Henry remouedEnguerant. to a Uillage called Forceuile, aduancing his hoſt towardes the Riuer of Miramont, and the next day they paſſed by the Cheue, and the King lodged that night at Bonyers lestaillon. The next day the King remoued vnto Bangy. TheTitus Liuius. next day late in the night the King came to a Uillage named Agencourt, Enguerant ſayeth Maſencelles, where they lodged not diſtant from the French hoſt the ſpace of two hundred and fiftie ſpaces. The Frenchmen fixed their BannersEnguerant. and Standerts with the Banner Royall, whereof the

Conneſtable had the conduct, in the field by them deuiſed and choſen, which was in the Countie of S. Paule, in y• groūd of Agencourt, by whiche the day following, the Engliſhmen
               The Battell of Agencourt. Titus Liuius.
                ſhould paſſe to go to Caleis.
            
            The xxv. day of October, the King of England in the morning very earely ſet forth his hoſt in array. He commanded that his Horſſes and other carriages ſhoulde be left in the Uillage where he had lodged. The order of his field was thus: The middle battell whereof the King was conductor, was ſet in the midſt of the field, directly againſt the middle battell of his aduerſaries. On the right ſide was the firſt battell, and therewith the right wing: and on the left ſide the laſt battell, and the left wing. And theſe battayles ioyning nigh togither, by the prouidence of God, proued vnto this King a defenſible place for his hoſt, for the Uillage wherein he was lodged before, defended his hoſt from all inuaſions on the backe, and the field wherein he was, was defended on both ſides with two ſmall Riuers.
            This noble King was armed with ſure and right beautifull armour. On his head a bright Helmet, wherevpon was ſet a Crowne of Golde, repleate with pearle and pretious ſtones, maruellous rich. In his Shield he bare the armes both of England and France. And thus armed, he was mounted vpon a goodly great Horſſe, and after hym were ledde certayne noble Horſſes, with their bridles and trappers of Goldſmithes worke, and vpon them alſo were beaten the Armes of England and of France. Thus this victorious King prepared to battell, encouraged his people to the field that approached at hand.
            The night before this cruell battell, by the aduiſe and counſell (as it is ſaid) of the Duke of Yorke, the King had giuen commandemēt through his hoſt, that euery mā ſhould puruey him a ſtake ſharp at both ends, which the Engliſhmen fixed in the ground before them in the field, to defend them from the oppreſſion of Horſſemen. The Frenchmen had ſuch confidence in the great multitude of their people, and

in their great Horſſes, that many of their great Princes and Lordes leauing behinde them their Souldiers, Standerts, and other Enſignes, came towards the Engliſhmen in right great haſt, as if they had bin aſſured of victory.
            The battayles of the Engliſhmen were as large as theEnguerant. field wherein they fought would ſuffer, which was greatly to their aduantage, for by that meanes their enimies were letted to come vpon them at the ſides and backes of their hoſt.
            The Frenchmen had ordeyned their battels with two ſharpe fronts, like vnto two hornes, which alwayes backward was broader and broader: and theſe ſharp battels ſet vpon the Engliſhmens middle ward, intending to haue runne thorough the whole fielde, but the Frenchmen were ſlayne and wounded by the Engliſh Archers, and by the helpe of the ſtakes which the Engliſhmen had fixed before them in the grounde, whereby the Horſſemen were conſtreyned to returne, or elſe to runne vpon the ſtakes, where many of them were ouerthrowne and wounded, and many both Horſſes and men ſlayne. The battell and fight encreaſed maruellouſly by the ſpace of thrée houres, in all whych time no man was taken priſoner, but innumerable were ſlaine, vpon whoſe dead bodyes they that followed were ouerthrowne and ſlayne. Thus after a long and cruell battell, there approched no man to battell, but to death, of whome, after that an innumerable company were ſlayne, and that the victorie remayned to the Engliſhmen, they ſpared to ſley and take priſoners of the Frenchmen.
            
            In this mortall battell, the noble King of England fought with his enimies as a famiſhed Lion for his pray, receyuing on his Helmet, and other armour, many and greate ſtrokes: at the laſt, the victorie obteyned, and the greate hoſt of the Frenchmen ſlayne, taken, wounded, and vanquiſhed, forthwith another hoſt of Frenchmen, no leſſe than the firſte, ſuppoſing the Engliſhmen now to be wéeried, prepared themſelues to begin agayne a newe battayle.

The King of England ſéeing this ſecond aſſemble of his aduerſaries,Titus Liuius. ſente his Heraults vnto them, commaunding them eyther forthwith to come to battayle, or elſe immediately to depart: and if they delayed to departe, or if they came to battell, both thoſe of theirs which were already taken priſoners, and alſo all thoſe that after ſhould be taken, without redemption ſhould be put to death, which meſſage when the Frenchmen had heard, fearing the ſtrength of the Engliſhmen, and alſo the death of themſelues, & of the priſoners taken, with heauineſſe they departed forthwith. Then the King of England being aſſured of the victory, gaue the greateſt laude and prayſe to God that might be.
            In this battayle were ſlayne on the French parte, the Dukes of Alaunſon, Barry, and Braban, and the Lord of Helly,
               Enguerant. the Lord Labret chiefe Conneſtable of France, the Archbiſhop of Saunce, eyght Earles, an hundred and mo Barons, fiftéene hundred Knightes, and aboue tenne thouſand of all eſtates, whereof ſcarcely fiftéene hundred were Souldiers or labourers, the reſt were of cote armour.
            At this battayle were taken priſoners of the Frenchmen,
               Titus Liuius. the Dukes of Orleaunce, and of Burbon, Arthure,
                brother to the Duke of Briteine, the Earles of Vandiſme, of Ewe, andEnguerant. 
               Richmount, and Sir Boumeycault, Marſhall of France, andTitus Liuius. many other, to the number of fiftéene hundred Knightes and Eſquiers. And of the Engliſh partie were ſlayne the Duke of Yorke, the Earle of Suffolke, and to the number of an C. perſons in the vantgard, and of all eſtates on ye EngliſhEnguerant. partie, were not found dead aboue vj. C. in the field.
            When night approched, the K. of England returned with his hoſt into that Uillage wherein they harbored the night before, where he found his Horſſes & other baggages & cariages ye he left there before the field, ſtolne, & caried away by the Frenchmen. On the day next enſuing, the King with his people entred his iourney towarde Caleis.
               Titus Liuius.
            
            
               William Cambridge: Allin Euerard, the 28. of Septemb.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Sir Nicholas Wotton Draper, the 28 of October.
            
            
               The morrow after Saint Simon and Iude, earely in theRegiſt. of Maiors. morning, came tidings to London of this victorie, for ioy whereof, Te deum was ſong in all the Churches, and at nine of the clocke, all the orders of Religious men of the Citie, went on Proceſſion from Saint Paules, vnto Westminster, with the new Maior, his Aldermen, and the Craftes, the Quéene and hir Lords and all hir trayne, who all offered at Saint Edwards Shrine, and then the Maior tooke his charge, and euery man returned with great ioy.
            The xxiij. of Nouember, King Henry arriued at Douer,
               King Henry returned. the Maior of London, with the Aldermen and Crafts riding in red, with hoods red and white, mette with the King on Blacke heath, comming from Eliam, and ſo brought him thorough Londō
                to Westminster, with all his priſoners of France. On the next morrow, the Maior, Aldermen, and 200. of the commoners, preſented the King with a thouſand pound in two Baſens of Gold worth 500. pound.
            In the feaſt of the Purification, ſeuen Dolphins of the ſea came vp the Riuer of Thamis, and playd there whiles four of them were kilde.
            In a Parliament begun the fiftéenth of March at Westminster, the halfepens of Ianua (cōmonly called Galey halfepens)Halfepens of Ianua forbiddē. were forbid to be vſed as lawfull payment among the Engliſh people.
            The firſt of May the Emperour landed at Douer, and theAnno reg. 4. 1416. ſeauenth of May, the Maior, Aldermen, and Craftes of London receiue him at Blacke heath, and the King with his Lords met him at Saint Thomas Waterings, and ſo brought him thorough London to Westminster. The Emperour returned out of England the ſixtéenth of Auguſt, after he had laboured, but could make no peace betwéene England and France.
            
            
               Iohn Benet Woolmā
                who had in Lōdō
                ſcattered ſcedules
                  Tho Walſ. VVoolman beheaded. ful of ſedition, was drawne, hanged, and beheaded on Michaelmas, day. The viij. day of October, was a Parchment maker of Trillmell ſtréete, drawne, hanged, and headed, for that he had harbored Sir Iohn Oldcaſtell.
            
            
               
               Robert Widington: Iohn Couentrie, the 28. of Septemb.Sherifes. Maior. Anno reg. 5. Henry Barton Skinner, the 28. of October.
            
            In the Parliament at London, the Earle of Dorſet was made Duke of Excester.
            
            The xxvij. of Nouember, was a Begger drawne and hanged for diſmembring of yong children, he was drawne in his owne carre from the Leaden Hall vnto Tiborne.
            
            A Spicers wife of Saint Albons, and the Bayliffes wife of Vineſburie, were hanged at Tiborne, and ſhortly after, the Bayly of Vineſburie himſelfe was alſo hanged at Tiborne.
            
            On Eaſter day in the after noone, at a Sermon in Saint Dunstons in the Eaſt of London, a great fray happened in the1417 A fray in Saint Dunſtons Church. Church, where-through many people were ſore wounded, and one Thomas Petwarden Fiſhmonger, dwelling at Sprots Key, was ſlayne out of hande, wherefore the Churche was ſuſpended, and the beginners of the fray (which was the Lord Strange, and Sir Iohn Tuſſell Knight, through the quarell of their two wiues) were brought to the Counter in the Pultry: the Archbiſhop of Canterbury cauſed them to be excommunicate,
                  Records of Caunt. The L. Strange & his vvife doth penance. as well at Paules Croſſe, as in al other Pariſh Churches of the Citie. The xxi. of Aprill, the ſayd Archbiſhop ſate at S. Magnus, to enquire of the authors of that diſorder, where he foūd the fault to be in the Lord Strange and his wife, who vpon the firſt of May following, in Paules Church before the Archbiſhop, the Maior of London, and other, ſubmitted themſelues to penance, and ſware to do the ſame, which was enioyned them, that immediately al their ſeruants ſhould in their ſhirtes goe before the Parſon of S. Dunstons, from Paules, to S. Dunstons▪
                Church, and the Lorde bare headed, with his Lady bare footed, Reignold Kenwood Archdeacon of London following them, and at the halowing of the Church, the Lady ſhould fill all the veſſels with water, and alſo offer an ornament to the Alter of tenne pound, and the Lord Straunge ſhould offer a Pixe of Siluer of fiue pound.
            The xxix. of June, the Earle of Huntington, with his retinue

fought with nine Carikes of Iene, and tooke foure of them to their patrons, and the Admirall of them all, that was called the Baſtard of Burbon, with all the treaſure that they all ſhould haue bin waged with for a quarter of a yeare.
            The thirtith of July, King Henry with his hoſt ſayled into Normandy, and tooke the Caſtell of Tonke, and ſhortly after gat Cane, Beyonx, and many other Townes and Caſtels.
            
               Henry Reade: Iohn Gedney, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Richard Marlow Ironmonger, the 28. of October.
            
            
               Sir Iohn Oldcaſtell was ſent vnto London by the LordeTho. Walſ. Powes out of Wales, which Sir Iohn was conuict by Parliament, drawne to Saint Giles field, where he was hanged byTho. Walſ. the necke in a chayne of iron, and after conſumed with fire.
            The 14. of December, King Henry continuing hysAnno reg. 6. warres in France, held his Chriſtmas in Normādy at Bayaux, about which time the Caſtell of Falaſe was yéelded vnto1418 him, and the Citie of Aueraunce was alſo yéelded.
            After Eaſter, Thomas Duke of Clarence was ſent by the King to beſéege the Monaſterie of Becke Helowin, and Humfrey Duke of Glocester was ſent to beſéege the Towne Cherburghe, Richard
                Earle of Warwike was ſent to beſéege the Caſtell of Daunfrount, and the Earle of Kime was ſent to beſéege the Caſtell of Milly Leuiſque.
            
            About the feaſt of the holy Trinitie, the King ſent Thomas Duke of Excester▪
                his Unkle into Normandy, with fiftéene thouſand men of armes.
            In the moneth of June, King Henry beſéeged the noble Towne of Louens, and compelled them within, to yéelde to him vpon conditions, on the euen of Saint Iohn Baptiſt.
            
            Then the King on the xxij. of June, remoued his armieTitus Liuius. towards Pount large, where he layde his ſéege on the one ſide of y• Towne, by the middle whereof, the Riuer of Seene hath his courſe, but could haue no paſſage ouer the riuer to lay ſéege on ye other ſide, for ye bridge which was without ye town

was defended with a ſtrong Tower, and a Garriſon, but King Henry commanded to make Boates of wickers, and thoſe to be cloſed in Beaſtes Skinnes, by which Boates, on the fifth of July, the Duke of Clarence with hys companie paſſed ouer ſecretly in great number, and then beſéeged the other ſide of the Towne: but bycauſe the Riuer of Seene diuided his hoſt, whereby if eyther part ſhould haue néede of other, they could not come togither for the Riuer, the King cauſed to be made ſo many ſmall ſquare Boates of the wicker aforeſayd, that being tyed togither, and caſt into the Riuer, he made of them a Bridge. When the inhabitants and Garriſons perceyued them thus enuironed in all partes, they agréed with the King, that if within fiftéene dayes they were not deliuered from thys ſéege, they ſhould deliuer to the King the Towne and Caſtell, and when the day was come, they perfourmed promiſe: and this was the firſt Bridge ouer the Riuer of Seene that the King ſubdued to his power.
            After the King had thus obteyned that Bridge ouer the Riuer of Seene, and that there was none other Riuer or floud mighte lette his iourney, with all the haſt he might, he entred hys iourney towardes Roane. The Citizens hearing the approche of their enimies, and fearing leaſt they ſhoulde bée lodged in the Suburbes whiche were muche larger than the Citie was within the walles, and was alſo muche repleniſhed with Monaſteries, Churches, and Towers, burned the ſame, and made all euen with the grounde. To this Citie on the thirtith day of Julye thys victorious King approched, agaynſte whome came the Citizens with theyr Garriſons and men of warre, where the more parte of all that day they continued in battell, and fought ſore on both partes, but the Frenche were forced to ſéeke their ſuccour within the walles of the Citie, whome in theyr recoyle the King purſued ſtill before the Citie, where hée ordered his ſéege in this maner. Firſt, the King with a noble company of yong & hardy men

lodged himſelfe before the gate of Saint Hillarie. The Duke of Clarence with his power was lodged before the gate of Caulx. The Duke of Excester, after he was c
                  •
               me to the king was lodged with his people before the gate of ye Caſtel, called Beanuice. Erle Marſhal was lodged before ye gate called Markeuile. The Earle of Warwicke, after he was come from the Caſtle of Donfrounte, was lodged vpon the Hil, where the ſtrong Monaſterie of Saint Katherie was: The Erles of Saliſburie and Huntingdon, were lodging ther vpon the other ſide of the Riuer of Seene: vpon whom their enimies made many aſſaults: and bycauſe the Riuer of Seene diuided the Engliſh hoaſte in two partes, the King cauſed to be made a ſtrong bridge of Tymber ouer the ſame Riuer, that when néede ſhoulde require, they might haue frée paſſage on foote and horſſe: and bycauſe their enimies ſhoulde not approch vnto it, wt their ſhips or Galleys, the K. cauſed to be made a great cheyne to be drawen ouer the Riuer, betwixt the citie and the Bridge. At that tyme the King of Portingale co
               
                  ••
                to the King of England, ſent a nauie of ſhippes wel manne
                  •
                into the Kings ayde, whom the King commaunded to lye betwixte the Citie and the ſea, to encloſe the Citie from all ſuccours by Water. The towne of Caudbeke fearing the daunger of the time, couenaunted with the King of England, that when the Citie of Roane were taken and deliuered into the Kings obeyſaunte; they in like manner woulde yéelde them to him, without any aſſaulte, and vnder the ſame appointed according with the King. xiiij. other defenſible Townes and Caſtels that were nigh borderers vnto Roane. After many cruell battayles and aſſaultes, the Citizens fearing at lēgth to be famiſhed, dayly put out of the Citie gret number of poore people and other, but the hunger encreaſing, they were forced to eate their horſſes, dogges, cattes, rattes and miſe: and theſe and other like things were conſumed & eaten. Then the plague of famine entred the Citie, ſo that the people for defaulte of reliefe dyed, that the liuing might ſcarcely burie the deade, whereby that noble

Citie was brought into ſo muche miſerie, that it is not leſſe maruayle than pitiful to heare.
            In this mean time during this ſiege of Roane. The duke of Excester beſieged the Citie of Eneroys, alſo about the xx. of Auguſt king Henrie had thrée maruellous victories in Normandie. The firſt was that one hundered Engliſhmen take iij. great Lords at a place called Kilbuife, and put to flight thrée hundred and foureſcoure perſons beſides. The ſecond was, foure hundered of his enimies entred within the ſuburbes of the Towne of Ebroicens, and eleauen Engliſhmen chaſed them away and toke foure of them, and ſlew twelue & tooke 40. of their horſſes. The thirde was, the enimies would indéede haue taken the town which was called Leuers, but the Captaine of the ſame with an hundered of our men wente out againſt a thouſand of them, and ouercame them, & toke 180. gentlemen of the enimies. Aboute thys tyme alſo Captaine de la Bouche toke the Towne of Pontoys by Paris.
            
            The Parſon of Wrotham in Norffolke, whiche haunted New market Heath and there robbed and ſpoyled many, was with his Concubine brought to Newgate of London, where he dyed in priſon.
            
               Iohn Brian: Ralphe Barton, the. 28. of Sep. Iohn Parneſſe,
               Sherifes. 
               the. 28. of October.
            
            This Iohn Brian Sherife, as he came one a time from Wapping in the Wooſe, thinking to haue eaſed himſelfe beyond Saint Katherines Mill, fell into the Thamis and was dragged vp againe by his men and the Miller, but dyed therof within a ſeauen-night, in whoſe place was choſen Iohn Parneſſe.
            
            
               William Seuenoke Grocer▪ the. 28. of October.
               Maior.
            
            This William Seuenoke, when he was a newe borne babe, was founde at a Town called Seuenoke in Kent, where by charitable people he was chriſtened by the name of William, and for that hys father or mother could not be known, they gaue him to ſurname Seuenoke being by thē broughte vp till he was able to ſerue, they then bounde him prentiſe

with a Citizen of London, where after his good ſeruice, God indued him with ſuch wiſedome and wealthe, that he came to be Maior of that Citie: who being not vnthankefull to God and the common wealth, among other his charitable workes, founded in the Towne of Seuenoke, where he hadde bin nouriſhed, a Frée ſchole and thirtéene almes houſes.
            When the Citizens of Roane, perceyued themſelues maruellouſly afflicted by famine, (as is before ſhewed, and alſo to be in diſpaire of ſuccour, from the Frenchmen, nowe after halfe a yeares ſiege and more, vpon certaine conditions, they deliuered to the king of England their Citie, caſtle, Tower, Abbayes, Churches, houſes, Citizens, Captaynes, Gariſons, and generallye all, things that were within the Citie, whatſoeuer they wer. The xix. day of Januarie, there had dyed within this Citie (as was ſayde) for defalt of victuals during this ſiege mo than xxx. thouſand people. ThisAnno reg. 7. 1419 noble King the rather to relieue this oppreſſed Citie, ordayned the ſame to be the chiefe Chamber of all Normandie, and ordayned hys exchequer, hys Treaſurie, and hys coynage to be kepte in the ſame, he alſo 
                  •
               dified a ſtrong tower behinde the Caſtle. Whileſt the King ordered his buſineſſe at Roane, he ſente diuerſe Lordes with ſtrong puiſſaunce of people, to receyue the Caſtelles of Townes borderyng vppon Roane, amongſt whom the Duke of Clarence, in ſhort tyme reduſed to the King, the mightie Caſtell of Galiarde, the Towne of Vernon, the Towne of Naunte, the Caſtall of Bandmounte, and manye other ſtrong places and holdes.
            The Earle of Saliſburie, wyth the Garriſon to hym aſſigned tooke the Town of Hounſlowe, the Towne of Moun
                  
                     •
                  iour de Villers, the towne of Ewe, the Towne of Gurney, the newe Caſtle, and generallye all the places in that part.
            This yere Quéene Iane the Kings ſtepmother being de
               
                  •
               amed by certaine perſons, of ſome wicked practice by

witch craft▪ or 
                  〈…〉
               , that ſhe had deuiſed againſt the 
                  〈…〉
                the counſell of 
                  〈…〉
               dolph a Doctour of Diuinitie hir Confeſſor▪ 
               
                  〈…〉
               ing all hir ſeruaunts put from hir, was committed to the cuſtody of Iohn Wellam, who appoynted nine ſeruaunts to attend hir, brought hir vnto the Caſtell of Pemſey to be gouerned vnder his prouidence. Frier Randolph 
               
                  •••
                ſent to the Tower, where at length, to wéete, in Anno. 
               
                  〈…〉
               . the fifte of June, he was ſlaine by the Parſon of the Tower, falling out at wordes with him. And after, Quéene Ioane was deliuered. Kyng Henry ſente his brother Humfrey Duke of Gloucester, accompanyed wyth the Earle Marſhall, and a greate power of armed men to laye ſiege afore the Towne and Caſtell of Yuory, which Town, after many aſſa
                  ••
               ts and battayles, the Duke tooke by force: But the Caſtel thereof was not yelded, til the thirtéenth of May. The King alſo ſent the Earle of Huntington wyth a power from Maunt, to the Towne of Pontois, by which, if it were taken, he might haue the more ſure and eaſie paſſage to Paris. Thoſe whyche were ſent, at the entry of the night were come nygh vnto Pontois, where, in a Wood they lefte their horſes, and that done, in the darkeneſſe of the night, they went on foote to the ditches of the Towne, whych then were drye, where parte of them lay on the banks of the ditches, with their Ladders in their handes ready to ſcale the walles when time ſhoulde ſerue, and the reſidue hyd them in the Uines, where they might be ready to enter the town at the opening of the gates. At the breake of the daye they of the towne changed their Watche, at the whych change, the 
                  ••••
               es were lefte without Watches for the time. But the Engliſhmen ſéeyng time to accompliſhe their intent, 
                  •
               ayſed their Ladders, and ſcaled the walles, and by that meanes, entred the Towne: where, ſome of them forthwyth brake the gate, and made entry for the reſte of their company, whiche, when the garriſons of the Town perceyued, as mē amazed, they turned themſelues to flight. But not long after, they armed them, and aſſayled their enimies, but to

the Engliſhmens great auayle, the Earle of Huntingdon wt his company ſet ſpurres to theyr horſſes, and haſted them to the ſuccour of their firſt company, whereby the Frenchmen as al diſcouraged and in diſpaire to ſaue the Towne, at the ſight of theſe newe reſcues that came to the Engliſhmen, leauing behinde them all their riches and ſubſtaunce endeanoured themſelues, to eſcape by flighte, and ſo the towne of Pointois, auoyded of all Frenchmenne, was lefte frée to the Engliſh, After theſe enterpriſes thus atchieued, the king with all his company came to this Towne of Pointois, where he aboade a certaine time, from whence he ſent the Duke of Clarence wt a choſen power of men to Paris, to view ye ſcituation and ſtrength thereof, before which Citie, when he had tarried certaine dayes and had ſéene all that him liked, and that none of the Frenche men woulde iſſue out of the Citie, to fight with him, he returned to the King, and aſſertayned him of al that he had ſéene.
            On the. xviij. of Auguſt, King Henrie with all his hoſte departed from Pointois. And bycauſe the Caſtell of Bokinvillers
               Bokinvillers yeelded. had done certaine inhumane cruelties to the Kings landes that bordered thereabout, to the intente to repreſſe theyr malice, the King lodged himſelf not far from thence, and ſent certaine to aſſault the ſame Caſtle, where both the inhabitants and garriſons feared ſo much the King, that as men deſperate of all ſuccours they yéelded both Caſtel and goods. And then all the townes, Caſtels and holdes within a great circuite, without abyding battaile, yéelded them to the King, but that ſtrong and mightie town of Gyſors, wherof the Caſtel is much more defenſible, than the Town, would not ſubmit to the King, wherefore on the laſt day of Auguſt the King with all his hoſt toke his iourney thyther, and encloſed the Towne with his pauilions and tentes. Betwyxt him and them of the Towne, were many ſharpe battayles and cruell aſſaultes, but at all times the Engliſhmen put the Frenchmen to flight, wherfore the inhabitantes and gariſons of the towne and Caſtel deliuered the ſame to the King in

the xxiiij. of September.
            
               Richard Whitingham: Iohn Butler, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Richard Whitington Mercer, the. 28. of October.
            
            King Henrie returned with his army to Maunt, where he deuided his hoſt into thrée battayles, whereof he deliuered the one to the Duke of Glocester, whome he ſente to ſubdue the Towne of Saint Germaines, which after manye battayles and aſſaultes, in ſhort time was yéelded to him: the ſeconde battayle he ſent to the Caſtell of Mount Oye, which in like manner was yéelded: with the thirde battayle, the King in hys owne perfom went to beſiege Mewlance, which aboue al other was moſt ſtrong. The ſituation of this town was in a plenteous Ile betwixte two armes of the ſea &c. notwithſtanding when the inhabitauntes and Gariſons ſawe the great prouiſion of the King they yéelded the town; on the laſt day of October: from thence the Kyng returned againe to Maunt, and ſente the Duke of Excester to beſiege the Caſtle of G
                     •••
                  arde, whiche to him was yéelded the xx▪ of December.
            King Henrie kept his Chriſtmaſſe in the Citie of Roane, he ſent the Earle of Saliſburie, to take the Towne of Freſvey▪
                which in ſhorte time he toke. The Earle Marſhal and the Earle of Huntington, were ſente by the Kyng to ſubdue the Prouince of Shenon▪
                where the Dolphin had deputed a Captaine with a ſtrong power, whiche Captaine mette the two Earles, and gaue them battayle, but the Engliſhmen remayned conquerors. And thus thoſe two Earles ſubdued the prouince of Shenon▪
                without any other great reſiſtaunce.
            Whileſt theſe and many other victories wer atchieued, the King continuing in the Citie of Roane, the ambaſſadors of Charles the French King, & of the Duke of Burgoigne, came to the King to treate of peace, where of the King they were right honourably recoyued, and ſent with him to the French King and the Duke of Burgoigne▪
                hys ambaſſadours, wyth full aucthority to conclude this long ſoughte peace: the principall ambaſſadour was the Earle of Warwicke, in company

of certaine Biſhops and other diſcrete men, accompanyed with a ſtrong power of armed men. Theſe ambaſſadors were firſt brought to the Duke of Burgoigne, bycauſe hée was next vnto them, and after they toke their iourney vntil they came to the Citie of Troys, where they founde King Charles
               Anno reg. 8. 1420 of Fraunce with the Quéene his wife, and that beautifull Lady Katheren theyr daughter. And entring into communication of peace with the Kings counſell of Fraunce, the waye of peace was founde betwixt thoſe two Kings by aliance, that is to ſay, by a mariage to be made betwixt y• moſt victorious K. of England▪
                & the Lady Katherin daughter to y• King & Quéene of Fraunce: but bicauſe they perceyued that many things mighte not be done wtout the preſence of the kings, as wel for y• appoſition of their ſeales for ye ratifying of y• articles of this peace, as for the ſolemnization of ye matrimony, & alſo y• King Charles was a man of many yeres, they condeſcended y• the K. of Englād at a certain day amōgſt them limited ſhoulde come to the foreſayde Citie of Troys▪
                wt as great an armed power as he woulde. At whiche day appointed, if he fayled to be there, al his cōmunicatiō of peace ſhold be as voyde. Theſe things thus concluded & ſet down in writing, y• erle of Warwicke wt his company returned to y• K. of Englande, to whō they declared by order what they had done, who was contente in all things to performe their appointments, & prepared for his iourney. He called togither knights, men of armes & archers to y• nūber of xvj. M. of thē the more part were Archers: & when the time came that he would depart toward Troys (as he was accuſtomed) he deuided his people in thrée parts & battayles, & two wings, and in that maner the. viij. day of May, he entred his iourny toward Troys in Campaine, where he was met by the Duke of Burgoigne accompanyed with manye noble mē, two leagues wtout the town, whō he receiued wt gret honor & due obſer
               
                  •
               ance. Then this moſt victorious king accompanyed bothe of Engliſh and Frenchmen of euery eſtate & degrée, entred the 
                  〈…〉
               reſaid Citie of Troys, y• ſtréetes wherof wtout any abyding

he paſſed vntil he came to the kings place, wher K. Charles and the Quéene▪ his wife abode his comming, of whom the was receyued goodly and after a Princely maner. When y• King of England was thus royally receiued, after the due reſolutions on his part made to King Charles & the Quéene, he departed from them, and by the Duke of Burgoine and other great eſtates as well of England as of Fraunce, he was conueyed to his lodges. The Cittie was deuided into two p
                  •
               rts, wherof the one half was aſſigned to the Frenchmen, & Burgonians, and the other halfe to the Engliſhmen: and bicauſe that parte aſſigned to the Engliſhmen, ſuffiſed not to receyue them all within the walles, but that a great part of thē muſt be lodged in the ſuburbes, the King of Englande, bicauſe hys people on that part ſhoulde haue frée concourſe togither, he cauſed the wall on that part of the Citie where he was lodged, to be caſt down to the ground. King Charles gaue aucthoritie and power to Iſabel his wife and Quéene, to Phillip Duke of Burgoigne, and to certaine other of his Counſell plenarily to conclude the peace with King Henrie, for hym and for his realme of France, vnder ſuch conditions as ſhold be decréed, & alſo to proue, ratify, & cōfirme the ſame, by oth ſolemnized in the parſō of K. Charles, without fraude, in al things to be obſerued vnto the ſayd K. Henrie, his heyres ▪ ſucceſſours, by the ſayde King Charles, his heyres and ſucceſſors, &c. On the xxj. of May, in the xl. yere of the reigne of King Charles, in the Cathedral Churche of Troys, the King of Englande with the Duke of Clarence his brother and other Dukes, Earles, Biſhops, Barons, Lordes of eſtat, and other Prelates of Englande, and Iſabel the Quéene of Fraunce with the Duke of Burgoigne and other of the Kings Counſel of Fraunce▪
                and in that part hys eſpeciall commiſſioners, for and in the name of the king of Fraunce, and alſo for themſelues, & in their proper names, in a great aſſembly of the iij. eſtates of Fraunce, vulgarly called theyr▪ Parliamente, concluded a peace betwixt the two Realmes of England & Frāce, and the ſame ratified and approued with the conditions and

Articles that in part ſhall follow, wherevpon writings wer made; ſealed with the brao
                  •
               e ſeale of the ſayde king Charles. Then immediately Iſabel the Quéene and the Duke of Burgoigne, in the name of King Charles, made a ſolemne oth vpon the holy Euangeliſtes, that y• ſame Charles his heyres and ſucceſſours ſhoulde obſerue and kéepe without fraude the peace made betwixt the two Realmes. And the ſame othe the Quéene and the Duke of Burgoigne in theyr owne names and for themſelues theyr heyres & ſucceſſours, made vnto the King for him his heyres and ſucceſſours, and after them as many as were there preſent both of the Kings counſel, and alſo of the Parliament, as Biſhoppes, Lords, Knightes, and commons, made the ſame othe to the Kyng. And the. xxiij. and. xxiiij. daye of May the Chauncellour of Fraunce, and many other Lordes, Biſhops, Prelates, and noble men gaue the like fayth and othe.
            The thirde of June, being preſent the Counſell of K. Charles, Iſabel Quéene of Fraunce, the Duke of Burgoigne, and the Parliament of Fraunce, and alſo the Duke of Clarence, with many Biſhops, Lords, and Knightes of England, with King Henrie, the matrimonie was ſolemnized betwixt the moſt victorious King Henrie of England,
                and the excellent & glorious Lady Katherin, daughter to Charles of Fraunce and Iſabel his Quéene. The peace that was confirmed betwixte the ſayd two kings and their realmes was red as foloweth.
            King Henrie from nowforth during the life of Kyng Charles ſhall not name or write himſelfe King of Fraunce, nor ſhall not ſuffer himſelfe of his people ſo to be named or written. After the death of king Charles, king Henry ſhal be king of Fraunce peaceably with hys heyres and ſucceſſours. And bicauſe King Charles by reaſon of his infirmitie is vnable to gouerne the common weale, king Henrie during ye life of Charles, ſhal rule and gouerne the realme of Fraunce, to the profit & honor of the ſame king Charles. King Charles in al his writings ſhal name the ſame King Henrie our ſon and heyre of France, during the life of the ſaid king Charles.
               
King Henrie ſhall be written, Henrie King of Englande, and heyre and Regent of Fraunce, and in the like maner hée ſhal write himſelfe in all things that ſhall be aucthorized vnder his owne ſeale. King Henrie ſhall call King Charles hys Father, and Quéene Iſabel hys mother and ſhall honoure them. Nor King Henrie ſhal not prohibite, with holde, nor defraude King Charles his Father of the Crowne of France, nor the iſſues or reuenues thereof. And the Quéene his mother at all times during hi
                  •
                life he ſhall kéepe in due eſtate as belongeth to hi
                  •
                maieſtie, &c. with diuerſe other Articles which for libertie I ſet not downe in this place.
            After the final end and accompliſhing of this marriage, couenants and conditions, ratifyed in all partes, King Henrie, accompanyed of King Charles and of his counſel, of the two Quéenes, Iſabel and Katherin, and of the Duke of Burgoigne, departed from Troys, and toke his iourney to Paris, and from Paris not many dayes after they all went to laye ſiege to the Citie of Sens, whiche was to them contrarie, but before the whole hoſte were ſetled in their places, the Captaine Citizens and Gariſons ſubmitted their bodyes and Citie with all that they had to the King. Then they haſted to Monstrean, which Towne they toke by force.
            On the xv. of July they went to the Citie of Melune, and inuironed the ſame with a ſtrong ſiege, for there were the Kings of Englande, of France, and Scotlande, the Duke of Burgoigne,
               Tho. Walſ. 
               Bauier, Clarence, Bedforde, and Excester, the Earles of March, Warwicke, Huntington, and Somerſet▪
                &c. This ſiege cō
               tinued. xiiij. wéekes and odde dayes, from the feaſt of Mary Magdalen▪
                to the feaſte of All Saintes, not without in a maner euery day a conflict and ſore ſkirmiſhe, but at length for wante of victualles the beſieged, yéelded themſelues to the Kyngs of Englande and Fraunce, from whence the forſayde Kyngs with a greate parte of theyr armye wente to Paris.
            
            
               Iohn Butler: Iohn Wels, the. 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               William Cambridge Grocer, the. 28. of October.
            
            
               King Henrie kept hys Chriſtmaſſe in the Citie of Paris, in the Caſtle of Saint Anthony. And after he had holden a Parliamente there, he went to Roane, and therewith hysTitus Liuius. 
               Normans, and Engliſhmen helde a Parliament. And thē when he had eſtabliſhed ſure guarde for this Realme of Fraunce & Dutchie of Normandie, he paſſed throughe Picardie to Caleis, and ſo to Douer, where with his Quéene he landed on Candlemaſſe day.
            The fourtéenth of Februarie Quéene Katherin was Crowned at Westminster, vnto whom the King aſſigned to hir dowrie. 10000. markes, alſo he conſented to the deliuerie of the King of Scots, who had bin long priſoner in Englande, with condition, that before his departure out of Englande, he ſhall take to wi
                  •
               e the Duke of Somerſets ſiſter, niece to the Cardinal of Winchester.
               Anno reg. 9. 1421
            
            The. xxij▪ of March the duke of Clarence▪
                with many other Lords were ſlaine beyond the Water of Leire in Fraunce, & many Lords were taken priſoners, of the which the Earle of Huntington and the Earle of Somerſet were principal.
            In a Parliamēt at Westminster it was ordayned that no man ſhould profer gold in payment, but if it helde waight, wherfore was ordayned Balances and weightes. The king ſuppreſſed the French houſes of religious Monkes and Friers, and ſuch like in Englande, bycauſe they thought ill of the Conqueſt ouer Fraunce, theyr▪ lands were giuen by him and Henrie the ſixth, to Monaſteries and Colledges of learned men.
            In this Parliament was demaunded ſubſidie. The Biſhop of Winchester lent the king 
                  •
               0000. pounde to ſtraine y• matter. The King hauing diſpoſed all thing in order cōcerning the realme of England and the wars in Scotland▪
                leauing in Englande his Quéene, with a greate power to the number (after Enguerant) of thirtye thouſande, returned into Fraunce, where, after he hadde viſited the King and Quéene of Fraunce at Paris, he tooke the Caſtell of D
                     •
                  wex▪
                by aſſault.

And when he heard, that his enimies prepared themſelues to battaile, he approched the floude of Loyre, aboute whycheTitus Liuius. floud it was ſaid his enimies were: but againſt him came no man. Wherfore the Kyng ledde his hoſte to laye ſiege to the City of Sens, commonlye called the Kings new Town, whiche Towne for lacke of victualles yéelded themſelues and the Town to the King.
            
               Iohn Mortimer brake foorthe of the Tower of London, and beyng afterwards taken, hée was drawen and hanged.
            
               Richarde Goſſelin: William Weſton, the 28. of Septemb.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Sir Robert Chicheley Grocer, the 28. of October.
            
            This Syr Robert Chicheley, when he deceaſed in Anno 1439. willed in his Teſtament, that vppon his mind▪day, a competent dinner ſhould be ordained for 2400. pore men, houſholders of the Citie, and twenty pounde in mony to be diſtributed amongeſt them, whyche was to euery man two pence. He alſo with his brother William Chicheley Alderman of London gaue liberally to the Almes houſes founded by his brother Henrie Chicheley Archebyſhop of Canterbury, at Higham Ferrers in Nothamptonſhire, in whych Towne they were borne.
            In the Moneth of October, when King Henry had deliueredTi
                     •
                  us Liuius. the Citie of Paris from all annoyaunces, he with his h
                  •
               ſte went to beſ
                  •
               ege the Citie of Meaulx in Brye, to whych City nigh adioyning, is a place called y• 
               Market of Meaulx, betwixt which two places floweth the riuer of Marne, whiche alſo enuironeth bothe the ſame places.
            Thys Citie was beſieged all the Winter, wherein were ſo manye, and ſo greate ſtormes and flouds of raine, that the kings hoſt was often annoyed with hūger & colde.
            The ſixth of December, Lady Katherine Quéen of Englande, broughte forth hir firſte begotten ſonne in the Caſtell of Windſore, and his name was gyuen him Henry: for there receyued hym at the Fonte, Iohn Duke of Bedford hys vncle Lord Warden of England, and Henrie the Kings vncle B. of Winchester, and Iaquelyn dutches of Holland that

remained then in England. Henry
                Archbiſhop of Canterburie, doing the office of Baptiſme.
            In the moneth of Februarie the Knights that were in Gariſon, and the principall of y• Citie of Mealx perceyuing that the Sommer comming ſhoulde cauſe the ſiege to be more light, and leſſe painefull to the Engliſhmen, and difficil vnto themſelues, departed the Citie and wente into thatAnno reg. 10 1422 place, that is called the Market of Mealx, as to the more defenſible holde▪ after whoſe departing the cōmon people hauing none ability to reſiſt the Kings power, yéelded themſelues and the Citie to the King. After this in the moneth of May, when the King had ſore beaten the forſayd Market of Meaulx, he conſtrayned the Frenchmen that were beſieged, to condeſcende vnto certaine couenauntes, and to deliuer the place vnto him: and ſhortly after were deliuered to the King the towne of Orepy in Valois, the Caſtle of Pier Pountmeralaw, Offemoūt and many others. After the rendering of theſe Townes and Caſtles the King returned to Paris.
            
            In the moneth of Aprill Katherin Quéene of Englande ſhipped at Hampton, and ſayled ouer into Fraunce with a ſtrong power, vnder the conducte of Iohn Duke of Bedforde y• kings brother, Humfrey Duke of Glocester, being appointed Warden of England, in the Duke of Bedfordes place: whē the comming of Quéene Katherin was knowne to Kyng Henry hir huſband, and to Charles king of France, both theſe Kings, and with them the Quéene of Fraunce, accompanyed with many great Lordes and eſtates, as well of Englande as of Fraunce, went to méete hir at Boys de Viſcenne, wher ſhe was ioyfully receyued of them, as if ſhe had bin an Angell ſente from God. The. xxx. day of May the two Kings of Englande and Fraunce, with theyr Quéenes departed from Bois de Viſcenne, and went to Paris: the king of England and his Quéen were lodged in the Caſtell of Lowre, and the King of France and his Quéene were lodged in the pallace of Saint Paule.
            
            King Henrie hearing that the Dolphen with a great power beſieged the Towne of Guiſney, he determined to goe

himſelfe to the rayſing of the ſiege, and ſo came to the town of Corbeil, and ſo to Senlis, where he waxed ſo ſicke, that hée was conſtrayned to tarry and ſend his brother the Duke of Bedforde, to reſcue thē of Coſney: but the Dolphin rayſed hys ſiege and departed thence. King Henrie his diſeaſe increaſing, he departed this life in the Caſtell called Boyes de Viſceme, not far from Paris, on the laſt of Auguſt, in the yeare 1422. when he had raigned nine yeares fiue monethes and odde dayes. There was preſent at his death King Charles of Fraunce, and the two Quéenes: but before his death this moſt prudent King diſpoſed the guarde of the yong Prince his ſonne, and the defence of the realme of Englande, to hys brother Humfrey Duke of Glocester, but the cuſtodie of the body of this yong Prince the King, committed to his vncle the Duke of Excester: and the reuenues of the Dutchie of Normandie, he bequethed to his brother Iohn Duke of Bedforde, for the gouernaunce of the ſame Dutchy and of the Realme of France. In his life time he reedified his royall manour that then was called Shine, nowe Richmount: hée founded two Monaſteries vpon the Thamis not farre from Richmount, the one of Carthuſians, whiche he named Bethlem, the other of religious men and women of Saint Bridget, and that he named Sion. He founded Gartar, principal Kyng at armes of all Engliſhmen, and alſo the brotherheade of Sainte Gyles without Creple Gate of London. Shortlye after hys departing, his bowels were enterred in the Church of Sainte More de Foſſes, and his corps well enbaulmed and ſeared, was cloſed in leade: and accompanyed with all the Lords,Enguerant. eſtates, and commons of England, that were there preſente, with alſo many Lords and great eſtates, as well of France, Normandie, Burgondie, and Picardie, was brought with greate honour to Paris, and ſet in the Churche of our Ladie, where were done for him right ſolemne exequies, with diſtributiō of mony and great almes to the poore. From thence he was broughte to Roane, where he aboade long. When all things

neceſſarie were prepared for the conueyaunce of the deade King into Englande, hys body was layde in a Chariot, whiche was drawen by foure great horſſes: and aboue the dead corpes they layde a figure made of boyled hydes or leather, repreſenting his perſon, as nyghe to the ſemblaunce of him as could be deuiſed, painted curiouſly to the ſimilitude of a liuing creature: vpon whoſe heade was ſet an Emperiall Diadem of golde and precious ſtones: and in his right hand he helde a Scepter royall, and in his lefte hand a ball of gold. And in this manner adorned was this figure layde in a bedde in the ſayde Chariot, with hys vnſage vncouered toward the heauens: and the couerture of hys bedde was of red ſilke beaten with golde: and beſides that, when the body ſhoulde paſſe through anye good Town, a Canapie of maruaylous great value, was borne ouer the Chariot, by men of great worſhippe. In this manner accompanyed of the King of Scottes, and of all Princes, Lordes, and Knightes of hys houſe, he was broughte from Roane to Abeuile, where the corpſe was ſet in the Churche of Sainte Offr
                     •
                  ne. From Abuile, he was broughte to Hedin, and from thence to Menstreull, ſo to Bulloigne, and to Caleis. In all thys iourney were many men about the Chariot clothed al in white, which bare in theyr handes torches burning, after whom followed al the houſholde ſeruauntes in blacke, and after them came the Princes, Lordes, and eſtates of the Kyngs bloud, adorned in veſtures of mourning: and after all thys, from the ſayde Corpſe the diſtaunce of two Engliſhe myles followed the Quéene of Englande righte honourably accompanyed. In thys manner they entred Caleis, from whence after a fewe dayes they departed, and continued theyr iourneys by water and lande vntyll they came to London, where they arriued about the tenth of Nouember, & ſo were conuaied by London bridge through Cheap to the Cathedrall Churche of Saint Paule: vppon the couering of the for moſte of the foure horſſes that conuayed the Chariot, wer imbrodered the auntient armes of Englād:
               
vpon the couerture of the ſeconde horſſe were the armes of England and Fraunce, in one ſhielde quarterly: vppon the couerture of the thirde horſſe was imbrodered the armes of Fraunce, without any maner of difference: and on the fourth horſſe were the armes of King Arthur. When his exequies were ſolemnized at Saint Paules Church in London, hée was brought from thēce to be enterred in the Abbay of Saint Peter at Westminster amongſt hys noble aunceſtoures. Thus thys moſt victorious and renoumed Kyng entred the way decréed for euery creature, in the floure & moſt luſtie time of hys age, to witte but ſixe and thirtie yeares olde. ⸪
         
         
            
            ¶ King Henry of Windſor.
            
            
            
               
                  HEnrie the ſixth, being an infant of eight moneths old, beganneAnno reg. 1. Titus Liuius. his raigne the laſt of Auguſt, in the yeare 1422. Continuing the time of his youth, the gouernance of the Realme was committed to ye Duke of Glocester, and the gard of his perſon to the Duke of Excester: and to the Duke of Bedford was giuen the regiment of France, who right wiſely and nobly ruled the ſame ſo long as he liued. This Henry was of witte and nature ſimple, gentle, and méeke: he loued better peace than warre, quietneſſe of mind than buſineſſe of the world: honeſtie than profite: reſt and 
                  •
               aſe than trouble and care: all iniuries that euer happened to him, which were many, he ſuffered patiently, and reputed them to be worthely ſent of God for his offences.
            
               William Gaſtfield: Robert Tatarſale, the 28. of Septem.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               William Walderne Mercer, the 28. of October.
            
            The xxj. of October, Charles King of France paſſed out of

this world, and was buried at S. Denis in France after he ha
                  •
               
               
                  Hiſtory of Loys Duke of Orleance. Charles le bievv King of France dyed. bin Crowned King 46. yeares. He was greatly beloued of his people all his life time, and therefore was called Le Roy Charle le biew ame: but yet he had a ſickneſſe the more part of his raigne, that being out of his witte, he woulde ſtrike all that came néere him: it tooke him firſt in the Citie of Mans ſhortly after he had bin in Flanders to reduce the Flemings to obedience. There was by reaſon héereof great trouble in France, bycauſe thoſe that were néere to him in lignage, ſought euery one to haue the chiefe gouernement in theyr hands. When he thus dyed, the Realme was left in miſerable ſtate, for people of each ſtrange nation were gouernoures in the Realme. Firſt, the Engliſhmen had conquered a great parte, and ſought to haue the reſt: and the Duke of Burgoigne, with many other great Lordes alied with hym, ſought to conquere all, for the yong King Henry of Englande who claymed then to be King of France, and likewiſe in allHenry King of England and of France. the money that was coyned, the Axmes of both Realmes were quartered. The Crownes that were ſtamped in the tyme of Charles, and all other money more, were forbidden to be currant, and called to the Minte. King Henry cauſed a péece to be ſtamped called a Salus, worth two and twentie Shillings, and Blans of eyghtpence a péece, and ſo in no place of France where King Henry was obeyed, any other money was receyued, but ſuche as had the Armes of France and England ſtamped on it.
            
               Charles Duke of Tourayne the Dolphin, ſonne to King Charles le biew ame, clayming to be right inheritor to theDolphin of France proclaymed King of France. Realme of France, by the auntient Edictes and cuſtomes of the ſayde Realme as was alledged, proclaymed himſelfe King after the deceaſſe of hys father, notwithſtanding, by the agréement made at the marriage of his Siſter to the King of England, it was otherwiſe concluded (as before is recited) and ſo there were two Kings in France, Henry
                and Charles, both which ſtriuing for the Crowne, the RealmeTvvo Kings of France, Henry and Charles. was in way of perdition.
            
               A Parliament at London began the ninth of Nouember,Parliament at London. wherin was granted to the King a ſubſedie for thrée yeares, fiue nobles of euery ſacke of wooll that ſhould paſſe out of the land.
            This yeare, the Weaſt Gate of London (ſometime calledNevvgate of London nevv builded. A
                        •
                     i. S. Paul. Lon. 1423 
               Chamberlaine Gate) was begon to be new builded, by the executors of Sir Richard Whitington, late Maior of London.
            
            King Charles of France began now to aduance himſelfe into the D. of Burgoignes lands, and the Conneſtable of Scotland, accompanied with many Lords, and men of war of K. Charles ſide, layd ſéege to the towne of Carnens, but the Marſhall of Burgoigne aſſembled men of warre to raiſe the ſéege, with whome went the Earle of Saliſburie, a valiant mā, andThe Earle of Salisburie vvan diuers holds in France, and raſed them. now being come togither, fought with their enimies, wan the field, tooke the Conneſtable, whoſe ſonne was ſlayne in the field. Many of K. Charles men were ſlayne and taken to the number of tenne or twelue hundred good men of warre. After whiche victorie, the Earle of Saliſburie layde ſéege to Montaguillon in Champeigne, and continued there an eyght monethes before he could haue it rendred, and then cauſed the ſame to be raſed and throwne downe. Then the Earle of Saliſburie beſéeged the Caſtell of Monnes, which at lengthAnno reg. 2. was yéelded to him: this Caſtell he alſo raſed & bet downe, which was the ſtrongeſt place in all Champaigne, it was after repaired by King Charles.
            
            
               Nicholas Iames: Thomas Wanford, the 28. of Septemb▪
               
               
                  Sherifes. Maior. Duke of Bedford married the Duke of Burgoignes daughter.
            
            
               William Crowmar Draper, the 28. of October.
            
            About the ſame time, the Duke of Burgoigne gaue his ſiſter the Lady Anne in marriage to the Duke of Bedford, and ſo the alliance was made more ſtrong betwixt the Engliſh & the Burgonians.
            
            
               Phillip de Comines writeth, that Iohn D. of Bedford, wasPhi. Comi▪
                Regent in France for the Engliſhmen, his monethly allowāce in that office amounting to 20000. Crownes at the leaſt.
            Alſo, y• Dukes of Burgoigne, Bedford, & Britein, met in ye town

of Amiens, there was alſo the Earle of Richmont, brother to the Duke of Briteine, and many other great Lordes, whiche Earle of Richmont had married the Duke of Briteines eldeſt ſiſter Margaret, ſometime wife to the Duke of Guyen, and Dolphin of France. Theſe thrée Dukes were fiue or ſixe dayes togither in Amiens, in great friendſhip and reuerence each to other, promiſing perpetuall amitie to continue. After this, the Duke of Briteine returned into his Countrey, the Duke of Bedford, (Regent of France,) to Paris, and the D. of Burgoigne, to Arras, but within a while after: the Earle of Richmont reuolted to King Charles, vpon ſome miſliking he had conceyued againſt the Duke of Bedford. King Charles receyued him ioyfully, & made him Conneſtable of France.
            
            About the ſame time, the Duke of Bedford cauſed Crotoy to be beſéeged both by water and by land, which after foure or fiue monethes ſéege, was both Towne and Caſtell deliuered to the Duke, where he ordeyned Ralph Butler to bée Captayne. At that time, the Duke of Bedford was obeyed as Regent in all places through Vimeu, Pontieu, and Picardy, from Paris to Reins, Chalons, & Troyes, vp to the water of Loyre.
            
            About the feaſt of Saint Andrew, the Captaynes of King Charles aſſembled their forces about Le Fere, and Nelle, and tooke by night the Towne of Campeigne, and ſpoyled the inhabitants of all their goodes. Shortly after came the Duke of Bedford to Mondidier with twelue hundreth fighting mē, and requeſted the Lord of Sanenſes to lay ſéege to Campeigne, and he woulde finde him men and money to wage them, wherevnto he graunted, and after fiftéene dayes ſéege, had the ſame deliuered.
            In the moneth of February, Iames Steward, the yong King of Scottes, who was taken by the Engliſhmen in theKing of Scottes releaſſed of impriſonment. eyght yeare of King Henry the fourth, and had remayned in England priſoner till this time, was now deliuered, and married in Saint Mary Oueryes Church in Southwarke to the Lady Iane, daughter to Iohn Earle of Somerſet, Couſin to King Henry.
            
            
               
               Sir Iohn Mortimer Knight was drawne to Tiborne, and there hanged and quartered, but his body was buryed in Saint Iohns Church at Clarkenwell.
            
            King Henryes people beſéeging the Caſtell of Dinry in1424 the marches of Normandy, they within compounded to yéeld at a day aſſigned, if the Engliſhmen were not fought withall before the ſame day by the Frenchmen: wherevpon as well King Charles, as the Duke of Bedford, made great leuies of men to kéepe the day appoynted, and héerewith they drew both towards Yury: but when King Charles heard how theThe Battell of Vernole in Perche. Duke of Bedford was comming towardes him with ſuch a puiſſance, he was counſelled to draw backe, and ſo he did towards Vernole in Perche, whome the Duke of Bedford followed, ſo that he found his armie néere to Vernole. And when eyther armie was in ſight of the other, they put themſelues in order of battell, and the Engliſhmen made an hedge of their Horſſe behind their battell, bycauſe the French ſhoulde not ſtrike in among them on the backes: and the Frenchmen ordered themſelues in battell array, making a great battell of footemen, in the which, they put the floure and chiefeſt men. They appoynted their Horſſemen to ſet on the Engliſhmen a trauerſe, the battayles on foote came vpon and ioyned, where was a ſore fight betwixt them, continuing two houres togither, that no man might iudge which way the victorie would encline: but at length, the men of King Charles began to breake, and then the Engliſhmen began to thruſt in among them, and did ſo much, that they diſcom
               
                  ••
               ted their enimies. There were ſlayne the Earle Dowglas, Duke of Turon, Iames Dowglas,
                Earle of Wighton, Iohn Earle
                of Boughan, with the Uicount Nerbon, and many other, to the number of tenne thouſand (ſayth Fabian) foureRobert Fabian▪
                thouſande ſayeth mine Author (a Frenchman) who ſayeth, that the Duke of Bedford bare himſelfe moſt valiantly, fighting with an axe ſo fiercely, as he had the prayſe of all other. The Earles of Saliſburie and Suffolke gouerned themſelues alſo right valiantly.
            
               The Lord of Torſy, and other Lords of Normandy, which before had taken part with the Engliſhmen, this day turned to the French, hoping that the Engliſhmen ſhoulde haue loſt the battell. True it is, that the Frenchmen would neuer ſuffer their King Charles to be preſent in perſon at any battayle, but when they thought to pitch a fielde, they ſent him into ſome ſtrong Towne. By the loſſe of this battayle fought on the ſeauentéenth of Auguſt, before Vernole inAnno reg. 3. 
               Perche, King Charles was put to great hinderance, ſo that he was not able in puiſſance to giue the Engliſhmen any battayle, hauing ynough to defende and kéepe his Townes and fortreſſes againſt them.
            The Duke of Bedford returned into Normandy, where he puniſhed many that fledde from him the day of the battayle. Then went he to Paris, where he found the Duke of Burgoigne, who receyued him, and the Dutches of Bedforde
               The Duke of Burgoigne enamored vvith the Counteſſe of Salisburie, vvhere of came great diſpleaſure and loſſe to England, by the breach of amity betvvixt the English, and the Burgonions. his wife, the ſayde Duke of Burgoignes Siſter, right ioyfully, and made to them great feaſt, at whiche feaſt alſo were the Earles of Saliſburie and Suffolke, the olde Quéene of France, mother to King Charles, and many other greate eſtates of diuers nations, amongſt the whiche, the Duches of Bedford was holden for the moſt gallanteſt Lady of all other, and with hir, the Counteſſe of Saliſburie, a very faire Lady. The Duke of Bedford that had neuer iuſted before, iuſted there.
            The Duke of Burgoigne was a very goodly & amiable mā of perſonage, doing excellently well whatſoeuer he tooke in hand, and eſpecially in danſing and iuſting he excéeded all other of his Countrey. At this feaſt, he became deſirous of the Counteſſe of Saliſburie, and ſome meſſages paſſed betwixt them, which came to the Earle of Saliſburies eare, whereof he was nothing contented with the Duke, and therfore ſought to do him diſpleaſure afterward. This feaſt being ended, the Duke of Burgoigne went into his Countrey of Burgoigne, and there tooke to wife the Duches of Neuers, which had bin wife to his Unkle the Duke of Neuers▪
               
               
and had by hir two Children. She was halfe ſiſter to the Duke of Burbon, but ſhe liued not long with him. The D. of Burgoigne alſo gaue his ſiſter the yongeſt, named Agnes,
               The ſecond cauſe of breach of amitle betvvixt England and Burgoigne. in marriage vnto Charles de Barbon, Earle of Cleremont, for the which, the Duke of Bedford, and other Engliſhm
                     •
                  
                were wroth, for that he made ſuche alliance with the enimies without their accord. This yeare, the Frenchmen repaired the Caſtell of Mouns in Champaigne, which had bin a little before deſtroyd by the Engliſhmen, and now it was well ſtuffed with victuals and men, which began to make ſore war to the Countrey, but ſhortly after the Earle of Saliſburie beſéeged thē, and with him Meſsire Iohn de Luxenburg, who did ſo much, that the Caſtell was yéelded to him. The D. of Bedford, with his wife the Duches, lay for the moſt parte in Paris, leading there a pleaſant life with the Lady whom he greatly loued, and was lodged in ye houſe of the Tournels, 
               
                  •
               éere to the Caſtel Saint Anthony, where he made faire buildings, and his men ſtill made ſore warres againſte the French, towards the Riuer of Loyre, and other places, vpon baſe Normandy, and toward the Duchie of Alanſon.
            
            This yeare in Englande, Edmond Mortimere
                Earle of March, with many other Lords, & a great retinue were ſentEarle of March ſent into Irelād. into Ireland, where the ſayd Earle of March ended his life.
            
               Simon Seman: Bythewater, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Iohn Michaell Stockfiſh monger, the 28. of October.
            
            This yeare 1424. the warres began in Henault, by reaſon of Iaqueline Duches of Henault, daughter to Duke William
               Iaqueline Duches of Henault. of Henault, Unkle to Phillip Duke of Burgoigne, and alſo daughter to Duke Iohn of Burgoignes ſiſter, wife to the 
                  ••
               renamed William, and ſo double Couſin german to Phil
                  
                     ••
                  p, Duke Phillip now liuing. This Iaqueline was married 
                  ••
                Iohn Duke of Brabant hir Couſin german, & Couſin ger
               
                  ••
               n alſo to Duke Philip of Burgoigne, and before that, ſhe 
                  ••
               s married to the Earle of Pontioue, ſon to King Charles le 
                     •••
                  n aime, eldeſt Brother to King Charles now liuing, 
                  ••
               t notwithſtanding that ſhe was thus married to the

Duke of Brabant, yet was ſhe conuayed by Sir Roberſart Knight, and brought into England to the Duke of Glocester, and there married to the ſayd Duke of Glocester: and ſo ſheIaqueline married to the D. of Gloceſter. had two huſbandes aliue at once, Brabant and Glocester, 
               
                  •
                thing thought vnreaſonable, both againſt God, the world, and the Church, for ſhe had bin four or fiue yeares in companie with the Duke of Brabant, but there had fallen ſome variance betwixt them, and ſo ſhe was come from him into Henault.
            
            About the laſt of Aprill began a Parliament at Weſtminſter, wherein was graunted a Subſedie of twelue in the
                  Robert Fabian. Parliament at London. Firſt Subſedie payde. pound of all manner Merchandize comming in, or paſſing out of this Realme: thrée Shillings of a Tunne of Wine for the tearme of thrée yeares to be holden. And furthermore it was enacted, that all Merchant ſtrangers ſhould be ſet to an Engliſh hoſt within fiftéene dayes of their comming to their port ſale, and to make no ſale of any Merchandize, ereAll Strangers to be lodged vvithin English hoſtes. they were ſo lodged: & then within fortie dayes following, to make ſale of all they brought: and if any remayned vnſold at the ſayd fortie dayes end, that then all ſuch Merchandize vnſold, to be forfeyted. Alſo, that all Strangers that caried any woolles out of this land, ſhould pay. xliij. ſhillings four pence for a ſacke cuſtome, where the Engliſh Merchants and Deniſons payde but fiue nobles &c.
            After the marriage had bin ſolemnized betwéene the Duke of Glocester, and Iaqueline Duches of Holland, as is aforeſayde,The Duke of Gloceſter goeth into Holland. within a moneth after the Duke of Glocester aſſembled an armie of twelue hundred fighting men at the leaſt, all Engliſhmen, and taking the Duches with him in cō
               panie, paſſed ouer to Caleis, and ſtreight from thence to L
                     •••
                  
                in Artois, and ſo into Henault, making no outrage as he paſſed through Duke Phillips Countreys. At their comming into Henault, many townes obeyed thē, and other refuſed 
                  ••
                to do: likewiſe were y• Nobles diuided. The D. of Burgoigne hearing of this, was ſore offended for the iniurie done to his Couſin of Brabant, the diſhonor of his Couſin the Duch
                  ••
               
               
               Iaqueline, and the euill dealing of the Duke of Glocester,
               A third cauſe of the amitie to be broken betvvixt England and Burgoigne, and the loſſe of many Tovvnes in France. and therefore, to ayde the Duke of Brabant, he appoynted many of his Captaynes, with xij. C. fighting mē Pickards, to go againſt the Duke of Glocester. The Duke of Brabant was a man but of weake complexion, and therefore by the Counſell of Brabant it was ordeyned, that his yonger brother Philip, Earle of Saint Pol, ſhould be chiefe Captayne of the warre, againſt the Duke of Glocester. He had a great Armye, as the more part of the Nobles of Brabant, of Henalt, and of Burgoigne, in all, 50000. Piere de Luxenburge, Earle of Conuarſon; his néere kinſman, had the leading of the Armie, for himſelfe was but yong. The Duke of Burgoigne had put of his men in garriſon within the towne of Braine, in the Countie of Henault, who made ſore warre to the Countrey about, but the Earle of Saint Pol, and Conuarſon, did come and beſéege Braine, continuing afore it twelue dayes before they within yéelded, compounding to departe with bodyes and goodes ſaued: theſe hauing wonne Braine, deſtroyde it vtterly, and that done, tooke the Field with all puiſſance, which was great: and the Duke of Glocester likewiſe came into the fielde, ſo that they approched néere togither, and the vauntcurrers ſkirmiſhed, but the battayle ioyned not. The Duke of Glocester had ſent his Heraulte, andHumfrey Duke of Gloceſter chalengeth the Combate vvith Phillip Duke of Burgoigne. written to the Duke of Burgoigne, calling him Traytor, and diſloyall to the King of England and France, for that he had ſente men in ayde againſt him, and offered him the Combate, wherevnto the Duke of Burgoine aunſwered, that hée would accept the Combate, denying that euer he had fayled of his promiſe, but that the Duke of Glocester had done great wrong to the Duke of Brabant, to haue bereft him of his wife, contrarye to the ordinance of God, and of holye Church, and for other wordes which the Duke had vttered againſt the Duke of Burgoignes honor, he gaue him the lye, and ſo farre the matter went in words betwixt them, that the day was appoynted for the Combate, and the Duke of Burgoigne choſe for Iudge of the Combate the Emperour of

               Almayne, and the Duke of Burgoigne ſent the Duke of Gloceſter a ſafeconduct, to departe ſafely into England, to prepare himſelfe of things neceſſarie for the Combate, wherevpon, both the Campes brake vp: the Duke of Glocester wente to Mons in Henalt, to the Duches his wife (ſo tearmed) & gaue hir to vnderſtand, that he was deſirous to trie the Combate with the Duke of Burgoigne: and many other things he told hir, which he performed not, for within four dayes after, he tooke all his power with him, and returned into Englād, and left the Duches in Mons, ſmally accōpanyed with ye people of that Countrey. Shortly after his departure, the Duke of Burgoigne ſent the Lord Lilladam to the Towne of Mens, to receyue Iaqueline the Duches, who being deliuered vnto him, he conueyed hir to Gaunt, where the Duke and ſhe made great ſemblance of ioy togither, ſhe promiſing to bée gouerned alwayes by his aduiſe, but to goe to hir olde huſband the Duke of Brabant ſhe would not: and when ſhe eſpied hir time, ſhe ſtale away into hir Countrey of Holland, where ſhe was well receyued of many Lordes, and began forthwith to mainteyne warre againſt Duke Philip of Burgoigne, and ſent to the Duke of Glocester for ayd, who ſente to hir a thouſand fighting men, vnder the conduct of the Lorde Fitzwaters. The Duke of Burgoigne fearing leaſt Iaqueline would deliuer the Countrey of Holland into the poſſeſſiō of the D. of Glocester, he aſſembled his power, and wente into Holland, to put the Coūtrey into obeyſance. At his comming thither, Iaqueline, accompanyed with many Nobles of the Countrey, and the Lord Fitzwaters, woulde haue defended his landing, but notwithſtanding al the defence they could make, he entred vpō thē, & there, néere to ye Towne of Bruſſeils, they ioyned in battaile, the D. of Burgoigne & his people againſt the Engliſhmen & Hollanders, taking ye Duches Iaquelines part: there was a fierce battayle on all ſides, but in the end, the Hollanders and Engliſhmen were all diſcomfited, and there dyed in that place aboue ſeauen or eight hundred, beſides thoſe that were taken priſoners: the Lord Fitzwater
               
hardly eſcaped. After this battell gote by the Duke of Burgoigne,
               1425 diuers Townes of the Countrey reuolted to him, againſt Iaqueline the Duches, as Dordrecht, Sericzee, and many other. Shortly after, the Duke of Burgoigne leauing garriſons in thoſe Townes that obeyed him, to make reſiſtāce againſt the Duches that lay in the Towne of Gaunt, hée returned into his Countrey of Flanders and Artoyes, there to prepare ſuch abiliments as were neceſſary for him to vſe at the Combate appoynted betwixt him and the Duke of Glocester. The Duke of Glocester likewiſe in England made his proniſion of his habilimentes and furniture, but the Duke of Bedforde, brother to the Duke of Glocester, tooke greate paynes to make them friends: and alſo the counſell of the yong King of England, were nothing content with this variance, doubting leaſt it might be occaſion that the Duke of Burgoigne mighte withdrawe himſelfe from their amitie, whereby their buſineſſe in France ſhould be hindered. The Duke of Bedford therefore tooke hys iourney from Paris, to Caleis, and ſo into Englande, to the ende to agrée the ſaydeAnno reg. 4. Dukes: he tooke with him the Duches his wife, and not paſt a four or fiue hundred men.
            About Michaelmaſſe, the Prince of Portugale came into England, and was honorably receyued and feaſted by the Kings Uncles.
            
               William Mildred: Iohn Brokell, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior. Rob. Fabian.
            
            
               Iohn Couentry Mercer, the 28. of October.
            
            The morrow after Simon and Iudes day, when the Maior of London had bin at Westminster to take hys charge, asDebate betvveene the Duke of Gloceſter, and the Bishop of VVincheſter. the cuſtome is, at ſuche tyme as hée was holding hys greate dinner, hée was by the Duke of Glocester Lord Protector, ſent for in ſpéedie manner, & when hée came to hys preſence, he gaue to hym commaundement, to ſée the Citie were ſurely watched in the night following, and ſo it was done.
            On ye next morrow, about ix. of the clock, certain ſeruāts of y• Biſhop of Winchester, brother to ye ſaid Protector, would

haue entred the Citie by the Bridge, but the warders or kéepers thereof, kept them out by force, as before they were commanded, wherwith they being gréeuouſly diſcontented, gathered to them a greater number of Archers, and men of armes, and aſſaulted the Gate with ſhot, and other meanes of warre, in ſo much, that the commons of the Citie ſhut in their ſhoppes, and ſpedde them thither in great number, ſo that greate bloudſhed woulde haue followed, had not the wiſedome of the Maior and Aldermen ſtayde the matter in time.
            The Archbiſhop of Canterbury, with the Prince of Portugale, and other, tooke great labour vpon them to pacifie this variance betwixt the two bréethren, the Protector and the Biſhop, in ſo muche, that they rode betwéene them eyght times, ere they might bring them to any reaſonable conformitie, and laſtly, they agréed to ſtande to the rule of the Duke of Bedford, Regent of France, or of ſuch as he would aſſigne, wherevpon the Citie was ſet in more quiet, and the Biſhop of Winchester wrote a Letter to the Duke of Bedford Lord Regent, as followeth.
            
               
                  
                     
                        RIght high and mighty Prince, and right noble, and after one leueſt earthly Lorde, I recommende me vnto your Grace with all my heart: and as ye deſire the welfare of the King our ſoueraigne Lorde, and of his Realies of England and of France, and your owne weale, with all yours, haſt you hither, for by my troth, and ye tarrie long, we ſhall put this Land in ieoperdy with a Field, ſuch a Brother yée haue héere, God make him a good man. For your wiſedome knoweth well, that the profite of France ſtandeth in the welfare of England.
                        
                        
                           Written at London,
                              the laſt of October.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            On the tenth day of January next enſuing, the ſayde Duke of Bedford, wyth hys wife, came vnto London, & with them alſo came the ſaid Biſhop of Wincheſter, and the Maior and Citizens receyued him at Merton, and 
                  •
               on
                  •
               ayde hym through the Citie vnto Westminster, where he was lodged in

the Kings Pallace, and the Biſhop of Winchester was lodged within the Abbots lodging. On the morrow following, the Maior preſented the Regente with a paire of Baſins of Siluer, and ouer-gilt, and in them a thouſande Marke of gold. The xxj. of February, began a great Counſayle at Saint Albons, which was after reiorned to Northampton, but for that no due concluſion mighte be made, on the1426 Parliament at Leyceſter. xxv. of March was called a Parliamente at Leycester, the which endured till the xv. day of June. This was called the Parliamente of Battes, bycauſe men being forbidden to bring Swords or other weapons, brought great battes and ſtaues on their neckes, and whē thoſe weapons were inhibited thē, they tooke ſtones and plomets of Leade. During this Parliament, the variance betwixt the two Lords was debated, in ſo much, that the Duke of Glocester put a Bill of complaynt againſt the Biſhop, conteyning ſixe Articles, all which Articles were by the Biſhop ſufficiently aunſwered, and finally, by the counſell of the Lord Regent, all the matters of variance betwéene the ſayd two Lordes, were put to the examination and iudgemente, with the aſſiſtance of the Lordes of the Parliamente, Henry Archbiſhop of Canterburie, Thomas
                Duke of Excester, Iohn
                Duke of Norffolke, Thomas
                Biſhop of Durham, Philip
                Biſhop of Worcester, Iohn Biſhop of Bath, Humfrey
                Earle of Stafford, Raulph
                Lord Cornewell, and Maiſter William Alnewike, then kéeper of the priuie Seale, which Lordes, made a decrée and awarde, ſo that eyther party tooke other by the hande with friendly and louing words, none hauing amends of other. Upon Whitſonday following, was a ſolemne feaſt holden at Leycester aforeſayde, where the Regente dubbed King Henry Knight, and then forthwith the King dubbed Richard Duke of Yorke, that after was father to King Edward the fourth, and other, to the number of fortie.
            After the Parliamente, the Kyng wente to Killingworth Caſtell.
            
               Henry Chicheley Archbiſhop of Canterbury, founded a

Colledge at Higham Ferrers, in Northamptonſhire, of eyghtColledge and Hoſpitall at Higham Ferrers fellowes, foure Clearkes, and ſixe Choriſters. He alſo founded there an Hoſpitall for poore folke, with many preferments to the ſayd Towne, which houſe for the poore, hisAnno reg. 5. bréethren Robert and William Chichely Aidermen of London, augmented with goodly legacies.
            On Saterday, the euen of Saint Michaell the Archangell,
                  Iohn Audley. An Earthquake during tvvo houres. in the morning before day, betwixte the houres of one and two of the clocke, began a terrible Earthquake, with lightning and thunder, whiche continued the ſpace of two houres, and was vniuerſall through the world, ſo that men had thought the world as then ſhould haue ended, and the generall dome to haue followed. The vnreaſonable Beaſts rored and drew to the Townes with hideous noyſe. Alſo, the Foules of the ayre likewiſe cryed out: ſuche was the worke of God at that time to call his people to repentance.
            
               Iohn Arnold: Iohn Higham, the 28. of September.
               
                  Sherifes. Maior. VVardes in London diſcharged of fifteenes.
            
            
               Iohn Reynwell Fiſhmonger, the 28. of October.
            
            This Iohn Reynwell, Maior of London, gaue certayne Lands or tenements to the Citie of London, for the whiche, the ſame Citie is bound to pay for euer all ſuch fiftéenes as ſhall be graunted to the King (ſo that it paſſe not thrée fiftéenes in one yeare) for thrée wardes in London, to wéete,Reignwels Teſtament. 
               Downegate warde, Billingſgate warde, and Aldgate warde.
            This yeare, the Tower at the Draw Bridge of London
               Tovver on Lō
                  don Bridge. was begun by the ſame Maior of London.
            
            On the Newyeares daye, Thomas Beawford, Duke of Excester deceaſſed at Greenewich, and was buryed at Sainte Edmonds Burie in Suffolke.
            
            About the Purification of our Lady, the Duke of Bedford Regent of France, with his wife and familie, paſſed the ſeas vnto Caleis, and ſo through Picardy into France: but ere he departed from Caleis, to wéete, vpon the feaſt day of the Annuntiation1427 of our Lady, the Biſhop of Winchester, within the Church of our Lady of Caleis, was created Cardinall, and after the ſolemnitie done, the Regente tooke him on

hys righte hande, and ſo conuayed hym vnto hys lodging.
            This yeare, was vnſeaſonable weathering, for it reyned moſt part continually from Eaſter to Michaelmaſſe.
            This yeare, the Duke of Alanſon, that before was taken priſoner at the battayle of Vernole in Perch, was deliuered for a raunſome of 200000. Scuttes of Golde, whiche wasRob. Gagwin. 50000. Markes ſterling.
            This yeare alſo, the Earle of Saliſburie accompanyed with the Earle of Suffolke, the Lord Talbot, and other, laydeRob. Fabian. a ſtrong ſéege vnto the Citie of Orleance, and hilde the Citiezens very ſtreight, and maugre the Duke of Orleance, and the Marſhall of France, the Engliſhmen wanne from them diuers ſtrong holdes, adioyning to the Citie, and forced them to bren a great part of their ſuburbes, but one day as ye ſaydAnno reg. 6. Earle of Saliſburie, Thomas Mountagew
                reſted him at a bay window, a Gunne was leuelled out of the Citie, which all toſquaſhed his face, whereof he dyed, after which miſhappe, the Engliſhmen loſt rather than wanne, ſo that by little and little, they loſt all their poſſeſſions in France.
            
            This yeare, Humfrey Duke of Glocester tooke to wifeDuke of Gloceſter married Elianor Cobham. 
               Elianor Cobham, whome before hée hadde wantonlye kept.
            
               Henry Frowike: Robert Otley, the 28. of September.
               
                  Sherifes. Maior. Parliament. Subſedy.
            
            
               Iohn Gidney Draper, the 28. of October.
            
            In a Parliament at Westminster, was graunted to the King a Subſedie of euery Tunne of Wine thrée ſhillings, and of other Merchandiſe, excepte wooll, fell, and cloth, xij.1418 pence of the pound. Alſo, of euery pariſh through ye Realme, (excepted Cities and Boroughes) the benefice being in value x. Marke, tenne of that pariſh ſhould pay vj. ſ. viij. d. euery man viij. d. and of euery benefice that were x. pound, x. pariſhners to pay xiij. ſ. iiij. d. and ſo rate and rate like of euery benefice, from the loweſt to the higheſt. And for the inhabitants of Cities and Boroughes, euery mā being in value of xx. ſ. aboue his houſhold ſtuffe, & the apparell of him &

his wife, ſhould pay foure pence, and ſo after that rate vnto the richeſt.
            On Corpus Christi day, a Briton, that a good widdow and honeſt woman had cheriſhed and brought vp of almes,Murther quitte vvith murther. dwelling in White Chappell pariſh without Aldgate, murthered the ſayd woman in a night ſléeping in hir bedde, and after conuayde ſuch iewels and ſtuffe as he might carrie, but he was ſo purſued vpon, that for feare he tooke a Churche, and there foreſware the Kings land, and the Conneſtables cauſed him to be brought to London, and ſo intended to haue conuayde him Weſtward, but ſo ſoone as he was come into the pariſh where before he had committed the murther, the wiues caſt vpon him ſo much filth and ordure of the ſtréete,Anno reg. 7. that notwithſtanding the reſiſtance made by the Conneſtables, they ſlew him there out of hand.
            On the firſt of September, the Cardinall of Winchester
               Cardinall of VVincheſter. being returned from beyonde the Seas, was mette by the Maior and his bréethren, and certaine Citizens of London on horſebacke without the Citie, and ſo brought to his pallace in Southwarke.
            
            This yeare, was a great fire at Baynards Castell in London.
               Fire at Baynards Caſtell. Sherifes. Maior.
               
            
            
               Thomas Duffehouſe: Iohn Abbot the 28. of September.
            
            
               Henry Barton Skinner, the 28. of October.
            
            The viij. of Nouember, the Duke of Norffolke was like to haue bin drowned, paſſing through London bridge: hysDuke of Norffolke eſcaped drovvning. Barge being ſet vpon the piles ouerwhelmed, ſo that to the number of thirtie perſons were drowned, and the Duke, with other that eſcaped, were drawne vp with ropes.
            The xxj. of February, Ri. Neuill was made Earle of Saliſb.
               1429
            
            The fifth day of June, Frier Randolph, a Mayſter of Diuinitie, that had bin long priſoner in the Tower of London,
               1. Treuiſe. was there ſlayne by the Parſon of the Tower.
            In the moneth of June, the Cardinall of Wincheſter with a warlike companye paſſed the Sea, intending to haue made warre vppon them that then inhabited the Countrey of Prage, but for néede of men that the Regente had

in Fraunce, the Cardinall chaunged his purpoſe, and taryed there a ſeaſon with the Regent.
            
               William Ruffe: Ralph Holland, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               William Caſtfielde Mercer, the. 28. of October.
            
            The ſixth of Nouember, King Henrie being about the age of nintéene yeares was ſolempnely crowned in Saincte Peters Churche of Westminster, at whoſe coronation were made xxxvj. Knightes of the Bath, and after ſolemnization in the Churche finiſhed, an honorable feaſte in the greate Hall of Westminster was kept, wherof yée may reade a large diſcourſe in Robert Fabian. After whiche feaſte great preparation was made for the Kings iourney into France.
            
            The. xxiiij. of Januarie a battayle was done in Smithfielde
               1430 within the liſtes before the King, betwéene two men of Feuerſham in Kent, Iohn Vpton
                appellaunte, and Iohn Downe defendaunt, when they had long fought, the Kyng toke vp the matter and forgaue both parties.
            The. xxvij. day of April the King toke ſhipping at Douer, & landed the ſame day at Caleis, hauing in his company the Dukes of Yorke and Norffolke, the Biſhops of Bath, Ely, and Rochester, the Earles of Huntington, Stafforde, Warwicke, Oxforde, Deuonſhire, Mortaine of Ewe, and of Ormonde, and Barrons, the Lorde Boucher, Beaumond, Typtoft, Fitz Water, Roos, Arundale, Audley, Faucōbridge, Gray, Codner, Scrop, and Welles.
            
            Whileſt the Kyng remayned at Caleis, manye ſkirmiſhes were fought betwéene the Engliſhmen and the Frenche, in diuerſe partes of France, and the Frenchmen preuayled greatly by helpe of a Woman which they named The Mayden of God. So that laſtlye ſhe with hir companye came to the Towne of Champaigne, to the end to remoue the ſiege layde therevnto by the Duke of Burgoigne and other of the Engliſhe Captaines, and the. xxiij. of Maye, ſhe gaue battaile to the Engliſhmen, and fought with them a long time, but in the ende by the manhoode of a Burgonian Knight named ſir Iohn Luxemborough, ſhe was taken aliue, and hir company diſtreſſed,

ſhe was conuayed to the Citie of Roane, and there kept a ſeaſon, where ſhe fained hir ſelfe to be with child, but when ye contrarie was known, ſhe was condēned & brent.
            After this King Henrie by ſmall iorneyes into Fraunce, came to Paris, wher he was honorably receiued of ye Citizēs and taken for theyr ſoueraigne Lord and King, whiles héeRobert Gagwine. there remayned, (ſayeth Gagwine) the Frenchmen, wan many holds of the Engliſhmen, and the Burgonians in the country of Bry. The third of Auguſt dyed the the Counteſſe of Vrmonde, and was buried at Saint Thomas of Acres in London.
               Anno reg. 9. Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Walter Cherteſey: Robert Large, the. 28. of September.
            
            
               Nicholas Wotton Draper, the. 28. of October.
            
            Soone after Eaſter the Lord protector was warned of an aſſembly of certaine lewde perſons to be aſſembled at Abington, wherefore he ſent thyther certaine perſons, and alſo rode thyther himſelfe, and there arreſted the Baylye of the Towne named William Mandeuil a Weauer, the whiche was appointed for a Captain, who had named himſelf Iack Sharpe of Wigmers lande in Wales, who being examined, confeſſed that he ment to haue done many miſchiefes, eſpecially againſt Prieſts, ſo that he would haue made their heads as cheape as Shéeps heads (that is to ſay) thrée for a peny, or as ſome write, ten for a penny: manye of his complyces were taken and ſent to dyuarſe priſons. Their Captaine was drawne, hanged, and headed at Abingdon, and his head was ſent to London, and ſet on the bridge: his other fautors were executed in diuerſe places and Countreys to the terror of other.
            The. xiij. of Julye Richarde Ruſſel a Wooll-man, was drawn, hanged, and quartered, for that he wold haue made Dukes and Earles at his pleaſure.
            
               Richard Robſert Lord Bourcher deceaſed, and was buried at Westminster.
            
            King Henrie remayning ſtill in Fraunce, the Earle of Arundale accompanyed with two thouſand Engliſhmen, ſente a certaine of his company vnto a Towne called Bealmount, to

prouoke ſhe Frenchmen to iſſue out of the towne, which ſmal cōpany when Boyſſycant & Sentrales thē Captains behelde, they with their ſouldiours ſped them forth to take the ſayd Engliſhmen, y• which by little & little gaue backe, till they had tolled the Frenchmen a good ſpace from the Towne, and then ſette vpon them with a ſtoute courage, and helde them on hand, tyll the Earle with his company reſcued them: then betwixt them was a cruell fighte, but in the end the Frenchmen were chaſed, and the ſayd Sentrayle with many footmen of the ſayde Town were ſlaine.
            
               Iohn Aderle▪ Stephen Browne, the. 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Iohn Wels Grocer, the. 28. of October.
            
            Thys IOHN WELLES Maior of London cauſed the Conduite commonlye called the Standarde in Cheape to bée builded.
            On the ſeauenth day of December Kyng Henrie was Crowned in Paris, by the Cardinall of Winchester, at the which Coronation was preſente, the Duke of Burgoigne, the Duke of Bedforde Regente, and diuerſe other Nobles of France. After the ſolemnitie of thys feaſte was ended, the King departed from Paris, and ſo came to Roane, where he helde hys Chriſtmaſſe, and that done, he returned to Caleis, where when he hadde ſoiourned a ſeaſon, he tooke ſhipping and returned into England, and landed at Douer, the eleauenth of Februarie, and then rydyng towarde London, he was mette on Barham Downe, betwixte Douer and Canterburie, by a greate companye of Gentles and Commons of Kent., all cladde in a liuerie wyth redde hoods, the whiche accompanyed hym tyll he came to Blacke Heath, which was on the one and twentith day of February where he was mette by the Maior of London, who rode in a gowne of Crimſon Ueluet, his Aldermen in Scarlet, & the Citizens al in white gownes and red hoodes, with diuerſe works or Cogniſances brodered vpō their ſléeues after ye facultie of their miſteries or crafts: & after due obeyſāce and ſaluting of the king, they rode on before him towards ye City.

And when the King was come to the Bridge, there was deuiſed a mightie Giaunt, ſtanding with a ſworde drawen in his hande, hauing written certaine ſpéeches in metre of great reioycing and welcōming of the King to the Citie, on the middeſt of the Bridge, and in diuerſe other places of the Citie, were diuerſe faire and ſumptuous pageants repleniſhed with goodly and beautifull perſonages, the order and ſpéeches whereof, are ſette downe by Robert Fabian in hys cronicle. Thus being cōueyed to his pallace at Westminster, the Maior with the Citizens returned to London, and on the xxiitj. day of Februarie the Maior and Aldermen yode to the King, and preſented him with a Hampire of Golde and1433 therin a thouſand pound of nobles.
            This yeare by reaſon of the ſouldiours of Caleis, a reſtraynte was made there of the Woolles, for they were not content of their wages, wherefore the Regente of Fraunce, came downe thyther in Eaſter wéeke, at which time many ſouldiours wer arreſted: and rode again to Tirwine. And hauing not long buried the Lady. Anne his late wife, ſiſter to the Duke of Burgoigne, he married there the Earles daughter of Saint Paule, and ſhortly after returned to Caleis where he cauſed foure of thoſe ſouldiours to be beheaded, on the. xj. of June, and. 110. ſouldiours to be baniſhed the towne, beſides. 120. that were baniſhed before that tyme. And vpon Midſommer euen the Lord Regent with his new wedded ſpouſe came to London, and remayned there till theAnno reg. 11 Sherifes. Maior. latter end of Auguſt.
            
               Iohn Olney: Iohn Peddeſley, the. 28. of September.
            
            
               Iohn Perneis Fiſhmonger, the. 28. of October.
            
            On the. xxv. day of Nouember was the Lord Fitz Water drowned on the ſea, and much other harmes were done by tempeſt.1433 Parliament.
            
            On the eight day of July, King Henrie began his Parliament at Westminster, continued it till Lammas, and then adiourned it vntil Saint Edwards tide.
            This yere in the South-Weaſt appeared a blaſyng ſtar.
            
               During the raigne of this King Henrie the ſixth were lieutenaunts ouer the realme of Irelande, Edmond
                Earle of March and Iames Earle of Ormond his deputie: Iohn Sutton Knight Lorde of Dudley, and ſir Thomas Straunge hys deputie: ſir Thomas Stanley, and ſir Chriſtopher Planket his deputie: Lyon Lorde Welles, and the Earle of Ormonde his deputie: Iames Earle of Ormonde the Kings Lieuetenaunt by himſelfe: Iohn Erle of Shreweſburie and the Archbiſhop of Diuelin, Lord Juſtice in his abſence: Richard Plantagenet
               Anno reg. 12 Duke of Yorke, Father to Edwarde the fourth and Earle of Vlstar, had the Office of Lieutenaunt by letters patents, during the ſpace of tenne yeares, who deputed vnder him at ſeuerall times, the Baron of Diuelin, Richarde Fitz Euſtace
                Knight, Iames Earle of Ormonde, and Thomas Fitz Moris Earle of Kildare: to this Richard then reſident in Diuelin, was borne within the Caſtel there, the ſeconde ſonne George Duke of Clarence, afterward drowned in a Butte of 
                  •
               almeſey.
            
               Thomas Chalton: Iohn King, the. 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Iohn Brokeley Draper, the. 28. of October.
            
            The ninth of Nouember, the tormente of the Earle of Saint Paule, Father to the Dutcheſſe of Bedford, was ſolemnly holden in Paules Church of London, where the more parte i
                  •
                eſtates of this realme were preſent.
            The ninth of Marche the Lorde Talbot with a goodlye companye paſſed throughe the Citie of London, towardes Fraunce, where he wrought much woe to the Frenchmen. The1434 Towne of Saint Denis, which is within two Engliſh myles of Paris, was gotten by the practiſe of one Iohn Notice a knight of Orleance, from Matthew Gouglye, and Thomas Kiriel Captaines, they ſlewe there many Engliſhmen, and toke many priſoners, but ſoone after, the ſayde Captaines with ſtrength taken from Paris, layde ſuch a ſtrong ſiege aboute Saint Denis, that finally they agréed to deliuer the Town to the Engliſhmen.
            
            In thys ſeaſon alſo the earle of Arundale, which in Normandie,
               
had manly born him, hearing that one Hirus, 
               
                  •
                
               Fr
                     •
                  ch Captaine, had fortifyed a ſtrong Caſtell, named Gerborym, before deſtroyed of the Engliſhmen, toke with him a certaine number of ſouldiours, and belaied the Caſtel with a ſtrong ſiege, and aſſaulted it ſundry times manfully: but Gagwine ſayeth, the ſaide Hirus with his companye iſſued out of the Caſtell, and gaue vnto the ſayde Earle a cruel ſkirmiſh, in the which the ſayde Earle receiued a deadly wound and dyed ſhortly after.Anno reg. 13 Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Thomas Barnewel: Simon Eyre, the. 28. of September.
            
            
               Roger Otley Grocer, the. 28. of October.
            
            Through a great Froſte, that laſted from the fiue andGreat Froſt. twentith of Nouēber, vnto the tenth of Februarie, the Thamis was ſo frozen, that the Merchandice which came to the Thamis mouth, was there landed, and carried through Kent to London.
            
            When the Pope Eugeny the fourth, and his Cardinalles14
                     •
                  5 after long laboure coulde make no peace betwixte King Henry of England and France, and Charles alſo named King of Fraunce, they at length made a peace betwixte the ſaid Charles and Philip Duke of Burgoigne, whereby the ſaid Duke of Burgoigne became vtter enimy to the King of England, and ſoone after the ſaid Duke beganne his order of the Lillie, and the Golden fléece, and ordayned certaine Knightes of that order, and made thervnto many Statuts, wherof ſome of them were like vnto the Statutes of the Garter.
            On the fourtéenth daye of September at Roan in Normandy dyed the noble Prince, Iohn Duke of Bedforde, and Regent of Fraunce, and was after with great ſolemnitie 
                  ••
               
               ryed within the Churche of No
                     •
                  ir Dame of the ſame 
                  •
               itie.Anno reg. 14 Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Thomas Catworth: Robert Clopton, the. 28. of Septemb.
            
            
               Henry Frowike▪ Mercer, the, 28. of October.
            
            King Charles of Fraunce recouered the Citie of Paris▪
               
               
and at Newyeares tide wanne the Towne of Harflewe, and1436 
               Sainct Denis, and manye other Townes and holdes, expellyng and murdering the Engliſhe people in greate number.
            The nintéenth daye of Julye the Duke of Burgoigne, wyth a great multitude of Burgonians and Flemmings appearedCaleis beſieged. before Caleis, and there pight his pauilions and tentes, at which ſeaſon was Lieutenaunt of Caleis Sir Iohn Ratclife Knight, and of the Caſtell was Lieutenant the Baron of Dudley: this ſiege endured about thrée wéekes, in whiche ſeaſon many knightlye actes were done & exerciſed on both partes.
            On the ſecond day of Auguſt the Duke of Glocester, protectourRobert Fub
                     •••
                  . of Englande, with 500. ſayles, (as ſome write,) landed at Caleis, and entended vppon the thirde day following to haue iſſued out of the Towne▪ and to haue gyuen battel to the Flemmings, (but as teſtifyeth our Engliſhe writers,) ſo ſoone as the Duke of Burgoigne was ware of the great power of the Lorde Protector, he toke with him of his ordinaunce that he might lightly carrye, and the other that were cumberous he left behind. When the Duke with his hoſt was thus fledde, the Lorde Protectour with his people followed hym into the Countrey by the ſpace of eleauen dayes, in whiche ſeaſon he brente the two Townes of Popering and Bell, and returned to Caleis and ſo into England.
            
            This yeare was the Caſtel or Towne of Rokeſborough in Scotlande beſieged by the Kyng of Scottes, but when héeAnno. reg. 
                     ••
                  . hearde that Syr Ralph Graye Knyghte was commyng thyther with a competente number to remoue the ſiege, anone he departed leauyng ſome parte of hys Ordinaunce behynde hym, to hys greate ſhame and diſhonour.
            
               Thomas Norſtede: William Gregory, the. 28. of Sep.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Iohn Michel Fiſhmonger, the. 28. of October.
            
            
               The ſecond of Januarie Quéene Katherin late wife to Henrie the fifth, and mother to King Henrie the ſixth, dyed at Bermondſey, and was buried at Westminster, but being takē
               Part of London bridge fel. vp againe, in the raigne of Henrie the ſeauenth, when he layde the foundation of his new Chappel there, ſhe was neuer buried ſince, but lyeth ſtill aboue ground▪ in a Coffin of bordes, behinde the Eaſt end of the Friers.
            The. xiiij. of Januarie at noone of the day, the gate on Lō
                  don bridge wyth the Tower vpon it, nexte to Southwarke, fell down, and two of the furdeſt Arches of the ſame bridge, and no man periſhed.
            
               Ralph Lord Cromwel, erected the Colledge of Ta
                     •
                  eſhall
               1437 Ta
                     •
                  eshall Colledge. in Lincolneſhire.
            
            King Henrie put downe the Maior of Norwich, ſente the Aldermen, ſome to Linne, ſome to Canterburie, toke their frā
               chiſes into his hande, and appointed Iohn Wels Alderman, ſometime Maior of London, to be Warden of Norwich, who ſo continued eight moneths, as I haue red on his Monument, in Saint Antholines Churche in London, whiche Monument is nowe amongeſt manye other by lewde perſons defaced.
            The ninth of July Quéene Iane wife to King Henrie the fourth dyed at Hauering a Boure, and was buried at Canterburie.
            
            All the Lyons in the Tower of London dyed.Anno reg. 18 Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               William Hales: William Chapman, the. 28. of Septemb.
            
            
               William Eaſtfielde Mercer, the. 28. of October.
            
            This William Eaſtfield Maior, of his own coſtes cauſed to be builded the Water Conduite in Fleetestreete of London.
            
            On Eaſter daye, Iohn Gardener was taken conuaying1438 Gardene
                     •
                  brent the Sacrament from his mouth with a ſoule cloth▪ after he had receyued the ſame at the Prieſts hande, in Saint Marie at the Axe Churche of London, for the whiche he was brent in Smithfielde the xiiij. of May.
            
               Owen Tewther 
               
                  •
               ouly hurting hys kéeper, brake out of

               Newgate but was againe taken afterwarde: thys Owen had priuilye (as it was ſayde) maryed Quéene Katherin late wife to Henrie the fifth, and had foure children by hir, whiche was not knowen, tyll ſhe was dead and buried.
            On the Uigil of Mary Magdalen, the town of Nantwich, in the Countie of Chester was pitifully conſumed with fire.
            A great dearth of corne, for wheate was in ſome placesDearth of corne Anno reg. 17 Sherifes. Maior.
                ſolde for two ſhillings ſixe pence the Buſhell.
            
               Hugh Diker: Nicholas Yoo, the. 28. of September.
            
            
               Stephen Browne Grocer, the. 28. of October.
            
            The fiue and twentith of Nouember a great winde dydGreat vv
                     •
                  n
                     •
                  es. muche harme in manye places. In London it bare muche leade of the Gray Friers Churche, and almoſt blewe downe the one ſide of the ſtréete called the Olde Change, ſo that the ſame was faine to be vnderſet with Timber.
            On New yeres day a ſtacke of woodde fell downe at Baynardes Caſtell, and killed thrée men: manye moe were ſore hurte. By fall of a Staire at Bedforde, where the ſhire daye was kepte, eightéene perſons were ſlayne, and manye moe hurte.
            
               Richard Beauchampe Earle of Warwicke dyed at Roane in Normādie, the laſt of May, and the fourth of October next folowing his corpſe was honourably conueyed as well by water as by land from Roane vnto Warwicke, and there worſhipfully buried in the Colledge of our Lady Church founded by his noble aunceſtours.
            Wheate was ſold at London for thrée ſhillings ye buſhel, Malt at thirtéen ſhillings y• quarter, & Otes at eight pence the buſhel, which cauſed men to eate beans, peaſe, and barley, more than in a hundred yeares before.
                  Anno reg. 18 Strūpets vvare Raye hoodes.
            
            Manye Stumpets were ſette on the Pyllerye, and banyſhed the Cytye, excepte they ware theyr Raye hoodes.
            
               Phillip Malpas: Robert Marſhal, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. 
                     ••
                  ior.
            
            
               Robert Large Mercer, the. 28. of October.
            
            
               In a Parliament at Reading, it was ordayned, that all Marchaunt ſtraungers ſhoulde goe to hoſt with Engliſhmen, and to make ſale of theyr Merchaundiſes, and buy again what they woulde, wythin the ſpace of ſixe monethes, geuing theyr hoſte for euerye twentye ſhillings worth two pence, except the Esterlings. And that euery houſholder thatOrder for ſtraungers. was alien, ſhould pay to the King xuj. pence the yeare, and euery ſeruant alien vj. pence.
            Syr Richard Wich, Uicar of Hermetſworth in Eſſex, who1440 had before abiured, was brēt on the Towre Hil, the xvij. of June. After whoſe deathe was greate murmur among the people, for ſome ſaide he was a good man and an holy, and put to death by malice: and ſome ſayde the contrarie: ſo that manye men and women wente by nighte to the place where he was brente, and offered theyr money, Images of waxe, and other things, making theyr prayers, knéeling, and kiſſing of the ground, bare away with them the Aſhes of hys body for holy reliques. &c. Thys endured eyght days, tyll the Maior and Aldermen ordayned men of armes, to reſtraine the people, who apprehended manye, and ſente them to priſon, among whome was taken the Uicar of Berking Churche beſide the Tower, in whoſe Pariſhe al thys was done, who had receyued the offering of the ſimple people. And to excite them to offer the more feruentlye to the fulfilling of hys falſe couetouſneſſe, he hadde medled Aſhes wyth the poulder of ſpices, and ſtrewed them in the place where the Prieſt was brente, and ſo the ſimple people were deceyued, wéenyng the ſwéete ſauour had come of the Aſhes of the deade Prieſt. All whiche the ſayd Uicar of Barking Churche confeſſed in priſon. Thys haue I noted the more at large, bycauſe ſome haue writen the Uicare of Berking to bée brente, whiche is falſe, for hée was not brente, thoughe he better deſerued than the other.
            The eightéenth day of July the Poſterne gate of London
               
by Eaſt Smithfielde, againſte the Tower of London ſancke by night, more than ſeauen foote into the Earth.
            The twelfth of Auguſte, the Starre in Breadstreet, an Inne of London, was fiered by lightning, and aboute fiftye loade of Hey burnte. The Eagle in Cheape was alſo burnt.Anno reg. 19
            
            The firſt of September, Iohn Knighte a ſouldiour, priſoner of Newgate in London, as he was led by one of the Sherifes Officers, from thence towarde Guilde Hall, fiue of hys fellow ſouldiours with their daggers drawn, came ſodainly out of the Pannier Alley, and berefte him from the Officer, thruſting him into Saint Martins Lane, and ſo into yt church, where they all claymed priuiledge of the Sanctuarie, thinking to haue remained there: but the ſame daye Phillip Malpas, and Richard Marſhal Sherifes, came with a nū
               ber of other, and by force toke them from thēce fettered faſt to the Counter, and from thence chayned by the neckes two togither, ſente them to Newgate, where they remayned till the thirde of Nouember following, at whiche tyme they were by the Kings Juſtice reſtored agayn to the ſame Sanctuarie of Saint Martin.
            
            
               Iohn Sutton: William Wetinhall, the. 28. of Septemb.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Iohn Paddeſley Goldſmith, the 28. of October.
            
            The Duke of Yorke was made Regente of Fraunce,
               1441 and the ſixtéenth daye of Maye the ſayde Duke wyth the Earle of Oxforde, the Earle of Ewe, ſir Richarde Wooduile, Syr Iames of Ormonde, the Lorde Clynton, and manye other, ſhipped at Porteſmouth, and Sayled thence into Normandie.
            
            The ſixe and twentith daye of Nouember was a challenge in armes done before Kyng Henrie within liſtes in Smithfielde, betwéene Sir Richarde Woduile a Knighte of Englande, and a Knighte of Spaine, but the Kyng tooke the matter into his hands after the thirde ſtroke.
            
               Alſo a Combat was foughte at Totehil betwéene two théeues, the apealer and defendāt, the apealer had the field of the defendant within thrée ſtrokes.
            
               Roger Bolingbroke, a greate Aſtronomer, with Thomas Southwell a Chanon of Sainte Stephens Chappell at Westminster, wer taken as conſpiratours of the kings deth, for it was ſaid, that the ſame Roger ſhoulde laboure to conſume the Kyngs perſon by waye of Negromancie, and the ſayde Thomas ſhoulde ſaye Maſſes, in the lodge of Harneſey Parke beſide London, vpon certaine inſtruments, with the whiche the ſayde Roger ſhoulde vſe hys crafte of Negromancye, againſte the Faythe, and was aſſen
               
                  •
               yng to the ſayde Roger in all hys workes. And the fiue and twentith daye of Julye beyng Sondaye, Roger Bolingbroke, wyth all hys inſtrumentes of Negromancye, that is to ſaye, a chayre paynted wherein hée was wonte to ſitte, vpon the foure corners of which Chayre ſtoode foure ſwordes, and vppon euerye ſworde an Image of Copper hangyng, wyth manye other inſtrumentes: hée ſtoode on a highe Scaffolde in Paules Churchyarde, béefore the Croſſe, holding a Sworde in hys righte hande, and a Scepter in hys lefte, arrayed in a maruellous attyre, and after the Sermon was ended by mayſter Low Byſhoppe of Rochester, he abiured all Articles longing to the crafte of Negromancye or miſſownyng to the Faythe.
            On the Tweſday next following, Dame Elianor Cobham
               Elianor Cobhā apprehended. Dutcheſſe of Glocester fledde by nighte into the Sanctuarie at Westminster, whiche cauſed hir to be ſuſpected of treaſon.
            In the meane tyme Roger Bolyngbroke was examined before the Kyngs Counſayle, where he confeſſed that hée wroughte the ſayde Negromancye at the ſtyrryng and procurement of the ſayd Dame Elianor, to know what ſhoulde be fall of hyr, and to what eſtate ſhée ſhoulde some, wherevppon ſhée was cyted to appeare béefore▪ 
               Henrye Chicheley Archebyſhoppe of Caunterburie,
               
               Henrie Beauforte Biſhoppe of Winchester Cardinall, Iohn Kempe Archbiſhop of Yorke Cardinal: William Aſcothe biſhoppe of Saliſburie, and other in Saint Stephens Chappell at Westminster, there to aunſweare to certaine Articles of Negromancie, Witchcrafte, Sorcery, Hereſie, and Treaſon, where when ſhe appeared, the foreſaid Roger was brought forth to witneſſe againſt hir, and ſayde, that ſhe was cauſe and firſt ſtyrred him to labour in the ſayde Arte. Then ſhée was committed to the warde of ſir Iohn Steward Knight, and Iohn Stanley Eſquire, and other, to be conueyed to the Caſtell of Ledes, there to remayne tyll thrée wéekes after Michaelmaſſe. Shortly after a commiſſion was directed to the Earles of Huntington, Stafforde, and Suffolke, and to certayne Iudges of bothe Benches, to enquire of all manner of Treaſons, Sorceries and other thyngs that myghte bée hurtefull to the Kyngs Perſon, before whome the ſayde Roger, and Thomas Southwel, as principalles, and dame Elianor as acceſſarie, were indicted of Treaſon in the Guild
               Anno reg. 20. 
               Hall of London.
            
            There was taken alſo Margerie Gurdemaine a witchThe VVitch of Eye brent. of Eye in Suffolke, whoſe Sorcerie and Witchcrafte the ſaid Elianor hadde long tyme vſed, and by hyr medicines and Drinkes enforced the Duke of Glocester to loue hyr, and after to wedde hyr, wherfore, and for cauſe of relapſe, the ſame Witch was brent in Smithfield, on ye ſeuen & twentith of October.
            The one and twentith of October, in the Chappel beforeſayde, before the Biſhoppes, of London Robert Gylbart,
                of Lincolne William Alnewike,
                of Norwich Thomas Brouns,
                the ſayde Elianor appeared, and Adam Molins Clearke of the Kyngs Counſell redde certayne Articles obiected againſte hyr of Sorcerye and Negromancie, whereof ſome ſhe denyed, and ſome ſhe graunted.
            The thrée and twentith of October Dame Elianor appeared againe, and witneſſes were broughte forth and examined, and ſhe was conuicte of the ſayde Articles: then

was it aſked if ſhe woulde ſaye anye thing agaynſte the witneſſes, wherevnto ſhe aunſweared nay, but ſubmitted hyr ſelfe. The ſeauen and twentith daye of October ſhe abiured the Articles, and was adioyned to appeare again the ninth of Nouember. In the meane time Thomas Southwel dyed in the Tower of London, as himſelfe had propheſied that hée ſhoulde neuer dye by Juſtice of the Law.
            
               William Combis: Richarde Riche, the. 28. of September.
               
                  Sherifes. Maior. Elianor Cobhā did penaunce.
            
            
               Robert Clopton Draper, the. 28. of October.
            
            The ninth of Nouember Dame Elianor appeared béefore the Archbiſhoppe and other, in the ſayde Chappel, and receyued hyr penaunce which ſhe perfourmed. On Monday the. xiij. of Nouember, ſhe came frō 
               Westminster, by water, and landed at the Temple Bridge, from whence with a taper of waxe of two pounde in hir hande, ſhe went throughe Fleetestreete, hoodleſſe (ſaue a kerchefe) to Paules, where ſhe offered hyr Taper at the high Aulter. On ye Wedneſday next ſhe landed at ye 
               Swan in Thamis ſtréete, & then went through Bridgestreet, Grace Church Streete, ſtreight to Leaden Hall, and ſo to Christ Church by Aldegate. On Fryday ſhe landed at Queene Hiue, and ſo went through Cheape to Saint Michels in Cornehil, in fourme aforeſayd: at all which times the Maior, Sherifes, and Craftes of London, receyued hir and accompanyed hir. This being done, ſhe was committed to the ward of ſir Thomas Stanley, wherein ſhe remayned duryng hyr life in the caſtel of Chester, hauing yerely an hundred marks aſſigned for hyr finding, whoſe pride, falſe, couetiſe, and lecherie, were cauſe of hir confuſion.
            The xviij. of Nouēber Roger Bolingbroke, with ſir Iohn Hum Prieſt, and William Woodham Eſquire, was arraigned in the Guild Hall of London, where the ſayde Iohn and William had their Charters, but Roger Bolingbroke was condemned, & had iudgemēt of ſir Iohn Hody, chief Juſtice of the Kings Bench, and the ſame day he was drawen frō the Tower to Tiborne & there hanged and quartered: & when ye ſaid Roger ſhold ſuffer, he ſaid yt he was neuer guilty of any

treaſon againſt the kings perſon, but he hadde preſumed too far in his cunning, whereof he cryed God mercie: and the Juſtice that gaue on him iudgemente liued not long after.
            
               Henrie Beauchampe ſuccéeded in hys fathers inheritāce, who being kept two yeares in the Kings hands, was reſtored to al his liuings with greate glory, for he was crowned King of Wight, by the kyngs owne handes, and nominated chiefe Earle of England.
            
            A challenge was done in Smithfield within liſtes, before1442 A Combat in Smithfielde. the King, by the Lorde Beawfe of Aragon, and Iohn Anſley Eſquire of the Kings houſe, whiche Anſley hadde the fielde, and at the Kings hande was made Knight: and theAnno. reg. 21 Lord Aragon offered his harneis at Windſor.
            
            In the moneth of Auguſt was a great fray in Fleetstreete, betwéene the yong Studentes of the Innes of Courte, and the inhabitauntes of the ſame ſtréete, whiche Fray began in the night, and ſo continued the aſſaultes and bickeryngs till the next day, in whiche ſeaſon muche people of the Cytie was thyther gathered, and diuerſe men on both partes ſlaine and many hurte, but laſtly, by the preſence of the Maior and Sherifes, this Fray was appeaſed, of whiche was chiefe occaſioner one of Cliffords Inne named Herbotel.
            
            
               Thomas Beaumount: Richard Norden, the 28. of Sept.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Iohn Athirle Ironmonger, the. 28. of October.
            
            
               Iohn Beaufort Earle of Somerſet was made Duke of Somerſet and Lord Talbot Earle of Shreweſburie.
            
            The ſtéeple of Waltham Holy Croſſe in Eſſex, was brente with lightning on Candlemaſſe day.
            The Citizens of Norwiche, roſe againſt the Priour of1443 
               Christes Churche, wythin the ſame Citie, and would haue fiered the priorie, they kept the towne by ſtrength againſte the Duke of Norffolke, and all his power, wherefore the Kyng ſente thyther the chiefe Judge Iohn Forteſcue, wyth the Earles of Stafforde and of Huntington, who indicted many

Citizens, and the Priour alſo. The Liberties of the Citie were ſeyſed into the Kings hand, and Sir Iohn Clifton made Captaine there, and manye of the Citizens fledde ouer the ſeas &c.Anno reg. 22. Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Nicholas Wilforde: Iohn Norman, the. 28. of September.
            
            
               Thomas Catworth Grocer, the. 28. of October.
            
            
               Iohn Earle of Huntington at Windſore was made Duke of Excester. Iohn Beauforde
                Duke of Somerſet deceaſed, and was buryed at Wimborne.
            
            The Earle of Stafforde was created Duke of Buckingham, Henrie Beauchampe
                Earle of Warwicke, Duke of Warwicke,
               1444 Cro. of 
                     •
                  ewx. vnto whom the King gaue the Caſtell of Bristowe with all the appurtenances, which King Iohn had kept in his hāds, he gaue vnto him alſo the Iſles of Garnſey and Iarnſey.
            
            The Earle of Dorſet was made Marques of Dorſet, and the Earle of Suffolke, Marques of Suffolke.
            
            King Henrie ſent into Fraunce Ambaſſadours, William de la Pole Marques of Suffolke, Adam Molens
                Biſhoppe of Chichester and kéeper of the priuie ſeale, ſir Roberte Roos and other, to treat of a marriage betwéene King Henrie, and Margaret the kings daughter of Scicil, which was concluded in the Citie of Towres in Touraine.
               Anno reg. 13 Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Stephen Poſter: Hugh Wich, the. 28. of September.
            
            
               Henrie Frowike Mercer, the 28. of October.
            
            In the moneth of Nouember William de la Pole Marques of Suffolke, with other went againe into Fraunce for to conduct the ſayd Lady Margaret into England.
            
            On Candlemaſſe euen in diuerſe places of England, was heard terrible thunders wyth lightning, wherby the church of Baldoke, in Hertfordſhire, the Churche of Walden in Eſſex, & diuerſe other, were ſore ſhaken. And the ſtéeple of Saint Pauls in London, about two of the clocke in the after noone, was ſet on fire in the middeſt of the ſhaft, but by the labour of many well deſpoſed people the ſame was quenched and no man periſhed. The ſtéeple of Kingstone was likewiſe fiered by the ſame lightnings.
            
               
               Ladie Margaret landing at Portchester, went from thence1445 by water to Hampton, & reſted there in a place called Gods houſe, from thence ſhe went to the Abbay of Tychfielde andQuene Margaret crovvned. was there wedded to King Henry, ye xxij. of April. She was receyued at the Blackeheath by the Citizens of London, ryding on horſebacke, in blewe gownes with brodered ſleues and red hoods the 28. of May, and on the 30. of May ſhe was crowned at Westminster: hir badge was the Dayſie.
            With the fall of Kingstone ſteple, one man was ſlaineKingſton ſteple fell. An▪ reg. 24. Sherifes. Maior. Leaden hall in Lon. builded. and many ſore hurt.
            
               Iohn Darby: Godfrey Filding, the 28. of September.
            
            
               Simon Eyre draper, the 28. of October.
            
            This Simon Eyre builded the Leaden hall in London (to be a ſtore houſe for graine and fewell for the poore of the Citie,) & alſo a beawtifull Chappel in the Eaſt end of ye ſame, ouer the gate whereof he cauſed to be written, Dextera Domini
               A notable example. 
               exaltauit me, that is to ſay, The Lordes right hand hath exalted me: Whereby he doing ſo notable a worke for the common weale, alſo left example to other Citizens comming1446 Cronicle of Thevvkesbury. Iohn Rovvſe, Duke of vvarvvik & King of vvight died. after him, whō God likewiſe exalteth with ſuch temporall bleſſings, that they be not vnthankfull to God, and their common weale, wherein they haue receiued them.
            
               Henrie Duke of Warwike, chiefe Erle of England, Lorde Spencer and Aburgaueny, King of the Iſle of Wight, Garnſey and Iarnſey, and Lord of the Caſtell of Bristow, died without iſſue, and was buried at Tewksburie.
            
            
               Iohn Dauid appeached his maſter William Catur an ArmorerCōbat betvven a maſter & the ſeruaunt. dwelling in S. Dunstones Pariſh in Fleteſtreete, of treaſon, and a day being aſſigned them to fight in Smithfield, the maiſter being wel beloued, was ſo cheriſhed by his friends, and plied with wine, that being therewith ouercome, was alſo vnluckily ſlaine by his ſeruaunt.An. reg. 25. Baylifes. Custos.
            
            
               Robert Horne: Godfrey Boleine the 28. of September.
            
            
               Iohn Olney Mercer, the 28. of October.
            
            Pope Eugenius ſent a golden Roſe to the King of England, expreſſing the propertie and aplicatiō of the ſame, with the

ceremonie that is yéerely vſed on Palme Sonday, touchingRecord. Eccleſi. Canta. the ſame Roſe, exhorting the Kyng agaynſte the Turkes. Which Roſe Lodouicus Cordona Doctor of Diuinitie did preſent to the King in S. Stephens Chappell at Westminster vpon S. Andrewes day, in preſence of the Dukes of Yorke & Excester, Cardinall Kempe Archbiſhop of Yorke & Iohn Stafford Archbiſhop of Caunterburie Chauncellor of England.
            
            The x. of Februarie beganne a Parliament at Saint Edmondeſburie
               Parliament at Burie. in Suffolke, at which time al the wayes about the ſame Towne were kept with armed men both daye and night, ſo that many dyed with colde and waking. Humfrey
               The Duke of Gloceſter areſted & ſone after dyed. Duke of Glocester being at the caſtell of the Vies in Wilſhire, came from thence to the Parliament, and was lodged in the Hoſpitall, where ſhortly after he was arreſted by Iohn Lord Beaumount high Conſtable, the Duke of Buckingham, the Duke of Somerſet and other, who appointed certaine of the Kings houſholde to waite vpon him: but on the. xxiiij.1447 day he died for ſorrow, as ſome ſaid, that he might not come to his aunſwere: he was buryed at Saint Albons. xxxij. of his principall ſeruauntes were arreſted and ſent to diuers priſons, and fiue of them were arraigned at London and condemned,v. 
                     ••
                  n hanged & after pardoned. whoſe names were, ſir Roger Chamberlain knight Middleton, Herbert, Arteyſe Eſquiers, and Richard Nedam gentleman, which were al fiue drawne from the Towre of London to Tiborne and there hanged, letten downe quicke, ſtript naked, marked with a knife for to be quartered, and then a charter ſhewed for their liues: but the yoman of the crowne had their liuelode, and the hangman had their clothes. Henry Beauford Cardinal of Winchester deceaſed, & after him W. Wainflete Prouoſt of Eaton, was made Biſhop of Winchester. The v. of Auguſt died Iohn Hollād duke of Excester
               An. reg. 16. & was buried at S. Catherins nygh the Towre of London.
            
            
               William Abraham: Thomas Scot, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Iohn Gidney Draper, the 28. of October.
            
            This yéere during y• peace betwéene England & Fraunce 
               
                  •
                knight of the Engliſh part, named ſir Frances Aragonoyſe,
               
toke a towne named Fogars vpō the borders of Normādie belonging1448 to y• duke of Britaine. For the which he complained him to y• French king, & he at ye ſaid dukes requeſt ſent vnto y• king of England▪
                to aſke reſtitutiō of the harme. The which meſſengers were anſwered of ye kings Coūſell, that y• déede was right diſpleaſant vnto ye king, & that ſir Francis Aragon had enterpriſed y• feate of his owne preſumption. Whervpō it folowed ſhortly after, that ye French by like policie toke y• towne & caſtle of Pountallarche, & after that many other, ſo y• the taking of y• foreſaid towne of Fogiars by ye Engliſh men,An. reg. 27. was y• occaſion by ye which the French after gat al Normādy.
            
            
               William Catlow: William Marow, the 28. of September.
               
                  Sherifes. Maior. 1449 Roane yeelde 
                     •
                   to the French.
            
            
               Steuen Browne Grocer, the 28. of October.
            
            This yéere the Frenchmē
                got many townes in Normādy, out of the poſſeſſion of ye 
               Engliſhmē. Alſo y• citie of Roane was yéelded to the French, with condition that the Captaines & garriſons might depart with armour & goods, & not long after was rendered (with the like cōditiō as of Roane) the towns of Harflewe, & Hounflewe. A knight of France called ſir Lewes de Breyll, challenged an Eſquier of England named Ralph Chalons of certaine feates of Warre, the which to proue, a day to them was giuen to méete at a towne in France named Maunce where y• 
               French king at that day was preſent: But Chalons, canne the French knight through the body with hisAn. reg. 28. ſpeare, whereof the ſaid Lewes dyed.
            
               William Hulin, Thomas Cannings, the 28. of September.
               
                  Sherifes. Maior. B. of Chicheſter murdered.
            
            
               Thomas Chalton Mercer, the 28. of October.
            
            The 9. of Januarie Adā Molins Biſhop of Chicheſter, kéeper of the kings priuie ſeale, through y• procurement of Richard duke of Yorke was by ſhipmen ſlaine at Porteſmouth.
            
            The 9. of Februarie Thomas Thany, otherwiſe Blewberd
               Blevvberd hanged. 1450 a Fuller, was taken beſide Caunterburie for raiſing a rebellion, who was hanged and quartered.
            
               Williā Delapole duke of Suffolke was baniſhed ye land for v.Duke of Suffolk murdered. yéeres, to appeaſe ye rumor of ye cōmons of England, who taking ſhip at Ipſwich the 3. of May, ſailed toward Fraunce, but

was mette on the ſea, by a ſhip of warre named▪ 
               Nicholas 
               
                  ••
                the Towre, and beheaded, and his corps was caſt vp at Douer and buried in the Charter houſe at Hull. This William de la pole Duke of Suffolke, and Alice his wife, daughter to Thomas Chawcer, ſonne to Geffrey Chawcer the famous Poet, tranſlated and increaſed the manner place of Eweline in Oxfordſhire: they builded a newe the pariſhe Churche ofGods houſe at nevv Evveline in Oxfordshire. 
               Eweline, a comely péece of worke ſtanding on a hyll: and alſo hard adioyning to the Weſt end of Eweline pariſhe Church they founded a pretie Hoſpitall or almes houſe for. ij. prieſts
                  
                     •
                  iber fundationis. and xiij. poore men to dwell and be ſuſtained in for euer, one of the prieſtes to be maiſter of the almes houſe, the other prieſt a ſcholemaſter, fréely to teache the children of the tenaunts of the ſayd Lordſhip of Eweline and other Lordſhips pertaining to the ſaid almes houſe their Grāmer, & eyther of thoſe. ij. prieſts to haue. x. pound the yeare. One of the 13. poore men to be called miniſter, to preſent the faultes of the other to the maiſter, and to ring their common bell to ſeruice, and to haue. xvj. pence the wéeke, the other xij. poore m
                  •
                to haue euery of them xiiij. pence y• wéeke. This houſe hath to name Gods houſe, or the houſe of almes, vnto the which he gaue iij. Manors, Ramruge in Hampſhire, Conocke in Wilſhire, and Merſhe in Buckinghamſhire, with their appurtenaunces,Hoſpital at Donington Caſtle. they alſo founded▪ the Hoſpitall of Donnington Caſtle.
            In the moneth of May the commons of Kent in greatIacke Cade Captaine of the rebels in Kent. numbers aſſembled, hauing to their Captaine Iacke Cade, who named himſelfe Mortimer, coſin to the Duke of Yorke, or as he was named of ſome Iohn amend all: this Captaine brought a great number of people to the Blackcheath, & there kept the fielde more than a moneth, pilling the countrey about, to whom the Citie of London at that time was full fauourable. And the ſaid Captaine (as I finde recorded) ſent for ſuch Citizens of London as it pleaſed him to command to repayre vnto him, vnder letters of ſafe conduct, as followeth:
            
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           The ſafegard and ſigne manuell of the Captaine of Kent, ſent to Thomas Cocke Draper of London, by the Captaine of the great aſſemble in Kent.
                           BY this our writing enſealed, we grant and wil permit truly, that Thomas Cocke of Londō
                                 
                               Draper, ſhal come in good ſuertie and in ſafegard to our preſence, without any hurt of his perſon, and ſo auoyde from vs againe at his pleaſure, with al other perſōs aſſigned at his denominatiō with him comming in likewiſe.
                        
                        
                           The commaundement by the Capitaine of Kent, ſent vnto Thomas Cocke aboue ſayd.
                           FOr your inſtruction, firſt ye ſhall charge all Lumbardes & ſtrangers, being marchaunts, Ienewe
                                    •
                                 s, Venetians, Florentines, and other, this day to draw them together, and to ordaine for vs the Captain. xij. Harniſes complete of the beſt faſhion, xxiiij. Brigandines, xij. battaile Axes, xij. Glaues, vj. Horſes with ſaddle and bridle completely harneſſed, and a thouſande markes of readie money: and if this oure demaund be not obſerued and done, we ſhall haue the heades of as many as we can get of them.
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            What anſwere to this demaund was returned I finde not, but like it is the ſame was graunted and performed, for I finde not theſaid Captaine and Kentiſhmen, at their being in the Cittie, to haue hurt any ſtraunger.
            In the meane time the King ſent notable men to the ſayd Captaine and his fellowſhip, to knowe their purpoſe and the cauſe of their inſurrection: vnto whom the Captaine anſwered, that he and his company were aſſembled there to redreſſe and reforme the wrongs that were done in the Realme, and to withſtand the malice of them that were deſtroyers of the common weale, and to amend the defaultes of them that were chiefe counſellers to the King, and ſhewed vnto them the articles of complaints touching the miſgouernment of the realm, wherein was nothing conteined but ſéemed reaſonable, wherof a copie was ſent to the Parliament holden that time at Westminster, with alſo one other byll of requeſtes by them made, of things to be reformed,

and to haue anſwere thereof agayne, but he had none. The bill of Articles they intituled
            
               The complaint of the Commons of Kent, and cauſes of the aſſembly on the Blackheath.
               1 Inprimis, it is openly noyſed that Kent ſhoulde be deſtroyed with a Royall power, and made a wylde foreſt, for the death of the Duke of Suffolke, of which the Commons of Kent thereof were neuer guiltie.
               2 Item the King is ſtyrred to lyue onely on his Commons, and other men to haue the reuenues of the Crown, the which hath cauſed pouertie in his excellencie, and great paymentes of the people, nowe late to the King graunted in his Parliament.
               3 Item that the Lordes of his Royall bloud béen put from his dayly preſence, and other meane perſons of lower nature exalted and made chiefe of his Priuie Counſell, the which ſtoppeth matters of wronges done in the Realme, from his excellent audience, and may not be redreſſed as lawe will, but if bribes and giftes be meſſengers to the handes of the ſayde Counſell.
               4 Item, the people of his Realme be not payde of debts owing for ſtuffe and purueyaunce taken to the vſe of the Kings houſholde, in vndoyng of the ſayde people, and the poore Commons of this Realme.
               5 Item, the Kings meniall ſeruauntes of houſholde, and other perſons, aſken dayly goods and lands, of empeached or indited of treaſon, the which the King graunteth anon, ere they ſo endaungered be conuict. The which canſeth the receyuers thereof to enforge labours and meanes applyed to the death of ſuch people, ſo appeached or indited, by ſubtyl meanes, for couetyſe of the ſayde grauntes: & the people ſo empeached or indited, though it be vntrue, may not be committed to the Lawe for their deliueraunce, but helde ſtil in priſon, to their vttermoſt vndoyng and deſtruction, for couetyſe of goods.
               6 Item, though diuers of the poore people and Commons

of the Realme, haue neuer ſo great right, trueth and perfite tytle to theyr lande, yet by vntrue clayme of enfeffement made vnto diuers States, Gentles, and the Kings meniall ſeruauntes in maintenaunces againſte the ryghte, the true owners dare not holde, clayme, nor purſue their right.
               7 Item, it is noyſed by common voyces, that the Kings landes in Fraunce bene aliened and put awaye from the Crowne, and his Lordes and people there deſtroyed with vntrue meanes of treaſon, of which it is deſyred, enquiries thorough all the Realme to bée made howe and by whom, and if ſuche Traytors may be found guiltie, them to haue execution of Lawe without any pardon, in example of other.
               8 Item, Collectors of the. xv. pennie in Kent be greatly vexed and hurte in paying great ſummes of money, in the Eſchequere to ſue out a Writ called Quorum nomina for the allowaunce of the Barons of the Ports, which nowe is deſyred, that hereafter in the lieu of the Collectors the Barons aforeſaide may ſue it out for their eaſe at their owne coſtes.
               9 Item, the Sherifes and Underſherifes, let to ferme their offices and Bayliwikes, taking great ſuertie therfore, the which cauſeth extortions done by them & by their Baylifes to the people.
               10 Item, ſimple & poore people that vſe not hunting, be greatly oppreſſed by inditements fained & done by the ſaide Sherifes, Underſherifes, Baylifs, and other of their aſſent, to cauſe their encreaſe for paying of their ſaid Ferme.
               11 Item, they returne in names of Enqueſts in writing into diuers Courtes of the Kinges not ſomoned nor warned, where through the people dayly léeſe great ſūmes of money, welny to the vttermoſt of their vndoyng: & make leuie of amercementes called the Gréene Waxe, more in ſummes of money than can be founde due of recorde in the Kings bookes.
               
                  12 Item, the miniſters of the courte of Douer in Kent vexe and areſt diuers people through all the Shire out of Caſtle warde paſſing their bands and libertie vſed of olde time, by diuers ſubtile and vntrue meanes and actions falſelye fained, taking great ſée at their luſt in great hurt of the people on all the Shire of Kent.
               
               13 Item, the people of the ſaide Shire of Kent, may not haue their frée election in the choſing Knights of the Shire, but letters bene ſent from diuers eſtates to the great Rulers of all the Country, the which enbraceth their tenaunts and other people by force to chooſe other perſons than the common will is.
               14 Item, where as Knightes of the Shire ſhould choſe the kings collectors indifferētly without any bribe taking, they haue ſēt now late to diuers perſons, notifying them to be collectors, wherevpon giftes and bribes be taken, and ſo the collectors office is bought and ſold extortionouſly at the Knightes luſt.
               15 Item the people be ſore vexed in coſtes and labour, called to the Seſſions of peace in the ſayd Shire, appearing frō the fartheſt & vttermoſt part of the Weſt vnto the Eaſt, the which cauſeth to ſome men. v. dayes iourney, where vpon they deſire the ſaide appearaunce to be deuided into two partes the which one part, to appeare in one place, an other part, in an other place in releuing of the gréeuaunce and intollerable labours and vexations of the ſaid people.
            
            
               
                  
                     
                        The requeſtes by the Captaine of the great aſſemble in Kent.
                        
                           INprimis, deſireth the Captaine of the commons, the welfare of our ſoueraigne Lord the King, & al his true Lords ſpirituall and temporall, deſiring of our ſaide ſoueraigne Lorde, and of al the true Lordes of his counſell, he to take in al his demaines, that he may raigne like a King royall, according as he is borne our true Chriſtian King annoynted, and who ſo will ſaye the contrarye, we all will liue and die in the quarrell as his true liege men.
                        
                           Item deſireth the ſaid Captaine, that he will auoide al the falſe progenie and affinitie of the Duke of Suffolke, the whiche béene openlye knowne, and they to be puniſhed after the cuſtome and Lawe of this Land, & to take about his noble perſon the true Lordes of his Royal bloud of this his Realme, that is to ſay, the high and mightie Prince ye duke af Yorke late exiled from our ſaide Soueraigne Lordes preſence (by the motion and ſtirring of the traiterous and falſe diſpoſed the Duke of Suffolke and his affinitie) & the mightie Princes & Dukes of Excester, Buckingham, and Norfolke, and all the Earles and Barons of this land: and then ſhal he be the richeſt King Chriſten.
                        Item, deſireth the ſaid Captaine & commons puniſhment vpon the falſe traitors, the which contriued and imagined the death of the high & mightful excellent Prince the Duke of Glocester, the whiche is too much to rehearſe, ye which duke was proclaimed as traitor. Upon the which quarrell, we purpoſe all to liue and die vpon that it is falſe.
                        Item the Duke of Excester, our holy father the Cardinal, the noble Prince Duke of Warwike, and alſo the Realme of Fraunce, the Dutchie of Normandie, Gaſcoyne, and Gwi
                                 ••
                              , Anioy and Mayne, were deliuered and loſt, by the meanes of the ſayd traytors, and our true Lords, Knights, and Eſquiers, and many a good yoman loſt and ſold ere they wēt, ye which is great pitie to heare, of the great and gréeuous loſſe to our Soueraigne Lorde and his Realme.
                        Item, deſireth the ſayd Captayne and Commons that all the extortions vſed dayly among the Common people, might be layde downe, that is to ſay, the Gréene Waxe the which is falſely vſed, to the perpetuall deſtruction of the kings true Commons of Kent. Alſo the kings Bench, the which is too gréefefull to the ſhire of Kent without prouiſion of our Soueraigne Lord and his true Counſell. And alſo in taking of Wheate and other graynes, Béefe, Mutton, and all other victual, the which is importable to the ſayde Commons, without the briefe prouiſion of our ſaide Soueraigne

Lorde and his true Counſell, they may no longer beare it. And alſo vnto the ſtatute of laborers and the great extortioners the which is to ſay the falſe traytors, Slegge Crowmer, Iſle, and Robert Eſte.
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            Theſe bylles when the Counſell had well peruſed, they did not onely diſalowe and condemne them & the authors, as proude and preſumptuons, but alſo perſwaded the King rather to ſuppreſſe thoſe rebels by force, than by fayre promiſes. Whervpon the King remoued from Westminster vnto Greenewiche, from whence he woulde haue ſent certayne Lordes with a powre to haue deſtreſſed the Kentiſhmen, but the men ſayde to their Lordes they would not fight againſt them that labour to amend the common Weale: wherevppon the Lordes were driuen to leaue their purpoſe. And becauſe the Kentiſhmen cryed out againſt the Lorde Say the Kings Chamberlayne, he was by the King committed to the Towre of London. Then went the King agayne to London,
               King Henrie vvent againſt the Kentishmen vvith a great povver. and within. ij. dayes after went againſt the Kentiſhmen with. xv. thouſand men well prepared for the warre, but the ſayd Kentiſhmen fled the night before his comming into the wood countrey néere vnto Senocke, wherevpon the King returned againe to London, and ſent ſir Humfrey Stafforde▪
                Knight with William Stafford his brother, and other Gentlemen, to follow the Kentiſhmē, who finding them at Senock, ſet vppon the rebels, and fought with them a long time, but in the ende both the Staffordes were ſlaine with many otherKing Henries povver ouercome. of their people. When Iacke Cade had thus ouercome the Staffordes, he forthwith apparelled himſelf with the knightes apparell, and after he had refreſhed his people, he returned to the Blackeheath, and there pight agayne his fielde, and lay there from the. xxix. daye of June, tyll the firſt day of July, in which ſeaſon came vnto him the Archbyſhop of Caunterburie, and the Duke of Buckingham, with whom they had a long communication, and founde him ryght diſcrete in his aunſweres. Howbeit they coulde not cauſe him to ſubmit himſelfe and lay downe his people.
            
               In the meane while, the King and Quéene hearing of the increaſing of his rebels, and alſo the Lordes fearingKing Henrie vvent to Killingvvorth. their owne ſeruaunts, leaſt they would take the Captaines part, remoued from London to Killingworth, leauing the Citie without ayde, except onely the Lorde Scales, which was left to kéepe the Towre, and with him a manly and warly man named Mathewe Gowghe. Then the Captaine of Kent thus houering at Blackeheath, to bring himſelfe the more in fame, that he kept good Juſtice, beheaded there a petie Captayne of his named Paris, for ſo muche as he had offended agaynſt ſuch ordinaunces as he had eſtabliſhed inCaptaine of Kent & his K
                     •
                  ttishmen entred the Citie of London. his hoſte: and hearing that the King and his Lordes were thus departed, drewe him néere vnto the Cittie, ſo that vppon the firſt of July, he entred the Borough of Southwarke, then beyng Wedneſday, and lodged him there at the Harte, for he myght not bée ſuffered to enter the Cittie.
            And vpon the ſame day, the Commons of Eſſex in greatRobert Fabian. number pight them a fielde vppon the playne of Myles ende.
            
            And vppon the ſeconde day of the ſayde moneth, theRebels of Eſſex pight their field on the Myles end. Maior called a common Counſell at the Guild hall, to pur
               
                  •
               ey for the withſtanding of theſe rebels, in which aſſembly were diuers men of ſundrye opinions, ſo that ſome thought good that the ſayde rebels ſhould be receyued into the Cittie, and ſome otherwiſe. Among the which Robert Horne Stockefiſhe monger then being an Alderman, ſpake ſore agaynſt them that woulde haue them enter. For the which, the Commons were ſo moued agaynſt him, that they ceaſſed not till they had him committed to ward. And the ſame afternoone about. v. of the clocke, ye Captaine with his people entred by the bridge, and cutte the Ropes of the draw bridge a ſunder with his ſworde, when he was paſſed into the Citie. He made in ſundrye places thereof Proclamations in the kings name, that no man in payne of death ſhoulde robbe or take any thing without paying therefore. By reaſon whereof he wanne the hartes of the Commons,

but all was done to beguile them, after as he came by London stone he ſtrake it with his ſword, and ſaid: now is Mortimer Lorde of this Citie, and then ſhewing his minde to the Maior for the ordering of his people, he returned into Southwarke & there abode as he before had done, his people comming and going at lawfull houres when they would. On the morrowe ye third of July, the ſayd Captaine agayne entred the Citie, and cauſed the Lorde Say to be fette from the Tower to the Guild hall, where he was araygned before the Maior and other the Kings Juſtices, and Robert Horne Alderman before named ſhould haue bene likewiſe araygned, but that his wife and other friendes for. v. hundred markes gat him reſtored to his libertie. The Lord Say deſiring he might be tried by his Péeres, was by the rebels forceably taken from the officers, & brought to ye Standard in Cheape, where they ſtrake off his head, pight it on a pole, and bare it before them, and his body they cauſed to be drawne naked at a horſe tayle vpon the pauement from Cheape into Southwarke to the ſayd Captaines Inne.
            Alſo a Squier called Crowmer that was then Sherife of Kent, that had wedded ye ſaid Lord Sayes daughter, by commaundement of the Captaine was brought out of the Flete, that was committed thither for certaine extortions that he had done in his office, and led to Mile end without London, & there without any iudgement his head was ſmit off, & the Lord Sayes head and his were borne vpon. tj. long poles vnto London bridge and there ſet vp, and the Lorde Sayes body was quartered. The ſame daye the Captaine went vnto y• houſe of Philip Malpas Draper & Aldermā, & robbed & ſpo
                  •
               
               led his houſe, taking from thence great ſubſtance, & returned into Southwarke: on the next morowe he againe entred y• Citie, and dyned that day in the Pariſhe of Saint Margaret Patyns at one Cherſtis houſe, and when he had dyned, like an vncourteous gueſt he robbed him, as the day before he had Malpas. For which two robberies, althoughe the poore people drewe to hym and were parteners in the ſpoyle, yet

the honeſt and wealthy commoners caſt in their mynds the ſequele of this matter, and feared leaſt they ſhould be delt with in lyke manner. Then the Maior and Aldermen with aſſiſtaunce of the Worſhipful Commoners, in ſafegarde of themſelues and of the Cittie, toke their Counſell how they might driue the Captaine and his adherents from the Citie, for the performaunce whereof the Maior ſent vnto the Lorde Scales, and Mathew Gowghe, then hauing the Tower in their gouernment, requiring their ayde and aſſiſtaunce, which they promyſed. On the. v. of July the Captayne being in Southwarke, cauſed a manne to be beheaded there, and that day entred not the Cittie. When night was come, the Maior and the Citizens, with Mathew Gowghe kept the paſſage of the Bridge, and defended the Kentiſhmen which made great force to reenter the Cittie. Then the Captayne ſéeyng this bickering, went to Harneys, & aſſembled his people, and ſet ſo fiercely vppon the Citizens, that he draue them backe from the ſtoupes in Southwarke, or Bridgefoote, vnto the drawbridge, in defending wherof many a man was drowned and ſlaine. Among the which was Iohn Sutton Alderman, Mathewe Gowghe a Squire of Wales, and Roger Hóyſand Citizen. This ſkirmiſh continued all night tyll nyne of the clocke on the morrowe, ſo that ſometyme the Citizens had the better, and ſometymes the other, but euer they kept them vpon the bridge, ſo that the Citizens paſſed neuer much the Bulwarke at the Bridge foote, nor the Kentiſhmen no farther than the drawe Bridge. Thus continuing the cruell fighte to the deſtruction of much people on both ſydes, laſtly after the Kentiſhmen were putte to the worſt, a truce was agréede for certayne houres, during which truce, the Archbyſhoppe of Caunterburie, then Chauncellor of England, ſonte a generallCaptaine, and rebels pardoned. pardon to the Captayne for him ſelfe, and an other for his people, by reaſon wherof, he and his company withdrewe them little and little, and their Captayne put all his pillage and goods that he had robbed, into a Barge, and

ſent it to Rochester by water, and himſelfe went by land and woulde haue entred into the Caſtle of Quinborow with a fewe men that were lefte about him: but he was there let of his purpoſe: wherefore he fled into the wood Countrey beſide Lewes in Suſſex. The Captayne and his people being thus departed, not long after Proclamations were made in diuers places of Kent, Suſſex, and Southerey, that who might take the foreſaid Captaine aliue or dead▪ ſhould haue a thouſand markes for his trauaile.
            
               
                  
                     
                        The Copie of the Writ and Proclamation by the King, for the taking of the ſayd Cade and his felowſhip.
                        
                           HENricus Dei gratia Rex Angliae & Franciae, & dominus Hibernia, vniuerſis & ſingulis custodibus▪ &c.
                        
                        For as much as one Iohn Cade borne in Ireland, which calleth himſelfe Iohn Mortimer, and in ſome writing calleth himſelfe Captayne of Kent, the which Iohn Cade the laſt yeare tofore his dwelling in Suſſex with a Knight called ſir Thomas Dagre, ſlewe there a woman with childe, and for that cauſe tooke the gréeth of the Churche, and after for that cauſe for ſware the Kings lande: The which Iohn Cade alſo after this, was ſworne to the Frenche parte, and dwelled with them, which hath nowe of late time, (to the intent to enrich him ſelfe by robbyng and diſpoyling of the Kings liege men, as it is▪ nowe openly knowne, to bring himſelfe to great and high eſtate) falſely and vntruely deceyued many of the Kings people, and vnder colour of holy and good intentes, made them to aſſemble with him againſt the Kings Regalitie and his Lawes, and nought ſetting by the Kings Grace and pardons graūted, not onely to him but to al the Kings ſubiectes, the which by his deceyt haue aſſembled with him, the which he with great reuerence receiued on Munday laſt paſſed, and ſo did all that were aſſembled with him: not withſtanding al this, he laboureth now of newe to aſſemble the Kings people againe, & to that intent beareth them on hand, that the Kings letters of pardon graunted to him and them, be not auaileable

nor of none effect without authoritie of Parliament: wheras the contrarie is true, as it is openly knowen by that, that the King grauntes from tyme to tyme his Charters of Pardon to ſuch as him lyſt, of all manner of crimes and offences both generall and ſpeciall.
                        The King therfore willeth and commaundeth, that none of his ſubiectes giue fayth nor credence to the ſaid falſ
                              •
                            Informations of the ſayde falſe 
                              •
                           raylor, nor accompany with him in any wiſe, nor comfort nor ſuſtaine him nor his with victuall, nor with any other things. But will whoſoeuer of the Kings ſubiectes may take him, ſhall take him, and that who ſo euer taketh him and bringeth him quicke or dead to the King or to his Coūſel, ſhal haue a thouſand markes for his labour truely payde him without faile or delaye by the prouiſion of the Kings Counſell. And who ſo euer taketh any of thoſe that from this day forth accompany with him, ſhal haue. v. marke for his reward, truely to be paide in maner and forme aboue ſaide.
                     
                  
               
            
            And ouer this, commaunding all Conſtables, Miniſters, & Officers of the ſaid Shire, that none of them on paine of death take vpō them to execute any cōmandement by word or writing ſent or▪ made vnto them by the ſaid Cade, calling himſelfe Mortimer & Captaine, be it to rere any people or to any other intent: but to areſt and make to be areſted ſuch as take vpō them to bring any ſuch cōmaundemēt by writing or by word. Et hoc nullatenus omittatis Teste me ipſo apud Weſtminster▪ x. die Iulij, anno regni. 28. After which ProclamationCaptaine of Kent taken and beheaded. thus publiſhed, a Gentleman of Kent named Alexander Eden awayted ſo his time, that he tooke the ſayde Cade in a Garden in Snſſex. And there he was ſlaine at Hothfield▪
                and brought to Londō
                in a cart, & there quartered, his head ſet on Londō
                bridge, and his quarters ſent to diuers places in Kent. This done, y• King ſent his Cōmiſſioners into Kent, & rode after himſelf, & cauſed inquiry to be made of this riot in Caū
                  terbury, where for y• ſame. vitj. mē were iudged & executed, & in other townes of Kent, & Suſſex was dane y• like execution.
            
               This yeare the Commons alſo in diuers partes of England, and in Suſſox, Saliſbury, Wilſhire, and other places, didde much harme to many perſons, among the which, on the xxix. of June, William Aſcoth Biſhop of Saliſburie, (after he had ſayde Maſſe at Edington) was by his owne tenauntes drawen from ye Altar, in his Albe with his Stole about his necke to the toppe of an hill, and there by them ſhamefully murthered, and after ſpoyled to the naked ſkynne: they rentingBishop of Saliſburie murdered. his bloudy ſhirt, tooke euery man a péece, & made boaſt of their wickedneſſe. The day before, his Chariot was robbed,An. reg. 29. to the value of. x. thouſand markes.
            
               Iohn Middleton: William Deere, the 28. of September.
               
                  Sherifes. Maior. Fray in Londō againſt the Maior.
            
            
               Nicholas Wilforde Grocer, the 28. of October.
            
            Souldiours made a fraye againſt the Maior of London the ſame day he tooke his charge at Westminster, at nyght comming from Saint Thomas of Acres, after he had bene at Paules.
            
            The. vj. of Nouember began a Parliament at Westminſter, and the firſt of December the Duke of Somerſet which was newly come out of Normandie, was put vnder areſt,1451 and his goods by the Commons was foulely deſpoyled and borne away from the Blacke Eryers. After which ryot, on the nexte morrowe, Proclamation was made through the Cittie, that no man ſhould ſpoyle or robbe, vpon paine of death: and the ſame day at the Standard in Cheape was a man beheaded for doyng contrarie to the Proclamation. And thus beganne malice to ſpring between the Lordes of the Lande, and ſpecially againſt the Duke of Somerſet and other of the Quéenes Counſell, for the léeſing of Normandie, whereof the chiefe Cittie of Roane was loſt or giuen vp by appoyntment the yeare procéeding (as witneſſeth Gagwyne,) vpon condition that the Duke of Somerſet
               Robert Gagwyne. with his wife & Engliſh ſouldiours, ſhoulde with ſuch goods as they might carrie, dep
                  •
               rte fréely from the Cittie: For which frée paſſage he ſhoulde paye vnto the French king lvj. M. Scu
                  •
               s, which amount to fourtèene thouſand marks

ſterling. And alſo he was bounde to deliuer into the French Kings poſſeſſion, all Townes and Caſtels that at that day were in the poſſeſſion of Engliſhmen, wythin the Dutchie of Normandie: for performaunce of whiche couenauntes, the Lord Talbot was ſent for one of the pledges, and ſo by one Floquet all the Townes and Caſtelles were to the Frenche Kyngs vſe receyued, Harfleete onely excepted, whereof the Captaine named Curſon. with the aſſiſtance of ſir Thomas Auringham, in deſpight of al the French Kings power laide both by Sea and lande, helde the ſame a full moneth or more, and then for lacke of reſcue gaue it vppe by appoyntment.An. reg. 30.
            
            
               Matthew Phillip: Chriſtopher Warton, the 28. of Sep.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               William Gregorie Skinner, the 28. of October.
            
            The ſixtéenth of Februarie, King Henrie accompanyed with the Duke of Somerſet and many other Lords, tooke towardes the Marches of Wales, for as muche as he was credibly informed, that the Duke of Yorke aſſiſted wyth diuerſe other Lordes and men of name, had in thoſe partes gathered a ſtrong power of people, and with them was entring the land, and ſo helde on his iourney towarde him: but whē the Duke had witting of the Kings greate power, he returned from the way which was taken by the Kings hoſte, and haſted towardes London▪, and when he had receyued knowledge from the Citie, that he might not there be receyued, he went ouer Kingstone Bridge, and ſo into Kent, and there vpon Brent Heath neare vnto Dertforde, he pight his fielde, wherof the king hauing knowledge, ſped him after, & laſtly came vnto Blacke Heath and there pighte hys fielde. When both the hoſtes were thus embattelled, mediation of peace was made betwéene them, for furtheraunce whereof, to the Duke were ſente the Biſhops of Winchester and of Ely, with the Earles of Saliſburie and Warwicke. To whom it was anſwered by the Duke, that he nor none of his company entended any hurt to the Kings perſon, nor to any of hys coū
               ſayle, beyng louers of the Common wealth▪ and of him and

hys land: but his intent and purpoſe was to remoue from the King a fewe euill diſpoſed perſons, by whoſe meanes the common people was gréeuouſly oppreſſed, and the communaltie greatlye impoueriſhed, of whome he named the Duke of Somerſet to be the principal &c. And further to vnderſtande of the Dukes meaning by this his forcible entring of the Realme, (as himſelfe pretended) may appeare by certaine letters by him written to the King, and alſo the Kings aunſweares, to the ſame, both whiche I thinke good here to ſet downe as I finde them recorded.
            
               
                  
                     
                        PLeaſe it your highneſſe to cōceiue, that ſith my departingRichard Duke of Yorke his letter to King He
                                 •
                              rie. out of this your Realm, by your commandement, and being in your ſeruice in your land of Ireland, I haue bin informed that diuerſe language hath bene ſayde of me to your moſte excellente eſtate, whiche ſhoulde ſounde to my diſhonour and reproch, and charge of my perſon: howe be it that, I aye haue bene, and euer will be, your true liegeman and ſeruaunt: and if there be any man that wyll or dare ſay the contrarie, or charge me otherwiſe, I beſéech your rightwiſeneſſe to call him before your high preſence, and I wyll declare me for my diſcharge as a true Knighte ought to do, and if I doe not, as I doubt not but I ſhall, I beſéech you to puniſhe me as the pooreſt man of your lande: And if hée bée founde vntrue in his ſuggeſtion and information, I béeſéech you of your highneſſe that he be puniſhed after his deſert, in example of all other. Pleaſe it youre excellence to knowe, that as well before my departyng out of thys your Realme, for to goe into your Lande of Irelande, in your full noble ſeruice, as ſith, certaine perſons haue lyne in awayte for to hearken vppon me, as Syr Iohn Talbot Knighte at the Caſtell of Holte: Syr Thomas Stanley Knighte in Cheſhire: Pulforde
                            at Chester: Elton
                            at Worcester: Brooke
                            at Gloucester: and Richarde grome of your Chamber at Beaumarres: whyche hadde in charge (as

I am enformed,) for to take me and putte me into youre Caſtell of Conway, and to ſtrike of the heade off Syr William Oldehall Knighte, and to haue put in priſon Sir William Deuereux Knight, and Sir Edmond Malſo Knyghte, withouten enlarging, vntyl the time that your highneſſe had appointed theyr deliueraunce. Item, at ſuch tyme as I was purpoſed for to haue arriued at youre hauen of Beaumarres, for to haue come to youre noble preſence to declare me your true man and ſubiecte, as my duetie is, my landing was ſtopped and forbarred by Henrie Norres, Thomas Norres, William Bulkeley, William Gruſt, and Bartholmew Boulde, your officers in Northwales, that I ſhould not lande there, nor haue victuall nor refreſhing for mée and my fellowſhippe, as I haue written to your excellence here before, ſo farre for the that Henrie Norres deputye to the Chamberlayne of Northwales, ſayde vnto me that hée hadde in commaundemente that I ſhoulde in no wiſe haue landing, refreſhing, nor lodging, for men nor for horſſe, nor other thyng that myghte turne to my worſhippe or eaſe, puttyng the blame vppon William Saye Uſher of your Chamber, ſaying and affyrmyng that I am againſt youre intente, and as a Traytoure, as I am informed: and moreouer, certaine letters were made and delyuered vnto Chester, Shreweſburie, and to other places for to lette myne entrye into the ſame. Item aboue all wrongs and iniuries aboue-ſayde done vnto me of malice, wythout any cauſe, I beyng in your lande of Irelande, in youre honourable ſeruice, certayne commiſſions were made and dyrecte vnto diuerſe perſons, whiche for the execution of the ſame, ſatte in certayne places, and the Juries empaneled and charged, to the whiche iniuries, certayne perſons laboured inſtauntlye to haue me endited of treaſon, to the intente for to haue vndone me and myne iſſue, and corrupted my bloude, as it is openlye publyſhed: beſéeching your Maieſtie Royall, of your ryghteouſneſſe, to doe examyne theſe matters, and therevppon to doe ſuche

Iuſtice in his behalfe as the cauſe requyreth, for mine intēt is fully to purſue to your highneſſe for the concluſiō of theſe matters.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                     
                        COoſin we haue ſéene the byll that yée tooke vs late, andAnſvvere of King Henric to the Duke of Yorke. alſo vnderſtand y• good hūble obedience that yée in your ſelfe ſhewe vnto vs, as well in worde as in déede, wherfore our intente is, the more haſtily to eaſe you of ſuche things as were in your ſayde Bil. How be it that at our more leyſure we might aunſwere you to your ſayde Byll, yet we let you wit, that for the cauſes aforeſayde, we will declare you now our intent in theſe matters: ſith it is that a long time among the people hath bene vpon you many ſtraunge language, and in eſpecial anone after your diſordinate and vnlawfull ſlaying of the Biſhoppe of Chester, diuerſe and manye of the vntrue ſhipmen and other▪ ſayde in their maner, words againſt our eſtate, making manace to our own perſon by yourſayings, that yée ſhoulde be fetched with many thouſandes, and yée ſhould take vpon you that, whiche yée neyther oughte, nor as we doubt not, yée will not attempt, ſo farre forth that it was ſayde to our perſon by diuerſe
                              •
                            & eſpeciallye we remember of one Waſnes whyche hadde like words to vs. And alſo ther was diuerſe of ſuch falſe people, that went on & had like language in diuerſe of our townes of our lande, whiche by our ſubiectes were taken and duely executed: wherefore we ſente to diuerſe of our Courtes and places, to hearken and to take héede if any ſuch manner cō
                           myng were, and if there had bin, for to reſiſt it: but comming into our lande our true ſubiecte as yée did, our intente was not that ye, nor leſſe of eſtate of our ſubiectes, nor none of youre ſeruauntes ſhoulde not haue bin letted nor▪ warned, but in goodly wiſe receyued: howe be it that peraduenture your ſodaine comming, without certayne warnyng, cauſed oure ſeruauntes to do as they dyd, conſidering the cauſes aboue ſayde. And as to the enditement that yée ſpoke of, we thinke verily, and holde for certaine warning, cauſed our ſeruaunts to doe as they did, conſidering the cauſes

aboue ſayde. And as to the enditemente that yée ſpoke of, we thinke verylye and holde for certaine, that there was none ſuche. And if ye maye truely proue that any perſon was thereaboutes, the matter ſhall be demeaned as the caſe ſhall require, ſo that he ſhall know it is to our greate diſpleaſure. Upon thys for the eaſing of your hearte in all ſuch matters, we declare, repute, and adn
                              •
                           tte you as our true aud faythful ſubiecte, and as your faythfull Cooſin.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                     
                        PLeaſe it your highneſſe tenderly to conſider, that greateRichard, Duke of Yorke to K. Henrie againe. murmur & grudging, is vniuerſally in this your realm, in that Iuſtice is not duely ininiſtred to ſuche as treſpaſſe & offende againſt your lawes, and in eſpecial of them that be endited of treaſon, and other being openly noiſed of y• ſame, whereby greate inconueniences haue fallen, and greate is like to fall hereafter in your ſayde Realme, which God defende, but if by your highneſſe prouiſion couenable be made for due reformation and puniſhment in this behalfe. Wherfore I your humble ſubiect & true leigeman, Richard Duke of Yorke, willing as effectuallye as I can, and deſiring the ſuretie and proſperitye of your moſte royall perſon, and the welfare of thys your noble Realme, counſell and aduertiſe your excellency for the conuerſation of good tranquility and peaceable rule among all other ſubiectes, for to ordain and prouide, that true iuſtice be had, againſt all ſuch that ſo bée endited, or openly named, wherin I offer my ſelfe, and wil put my endeuour for to execute youre commaundemente in the premiſſes, for the puniſhing of ſuche offendours, and redreſſe of the ſayde miſrules, to my might and power. And for the haſtie execution hereof, like it your highneſſe to addreſſe theſe letters of priuie ſeale and writs to your officers and miniſters, to doe, take, and arreſt, all ſuche perſons ſo noyſed and endited, of what eſtate, degrée, or condition, ſoeuer they be, and them to committe to the Tower of London and to other of your priſons, there to abyde without Bayle or mayne priſe, vntil the tyme they be vtterly tryed, and determined

termined after the courſe of your lawes.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                     
                        COoſin as touching your Bill laſt put vp to vs, we vnderſtandeAunſvvere of K. Henrie to the Duke of Yorke well that yée of good harte, counſayle and aduertice vs to y• ſetting vp of Juſtice, and to the ſpéedy puniſhing of ſome perſons endited or noyſed, offering your ſeruiſe to bée readie at commaundemente in the ſame, ſithe it is that for manye cauſes mouing vs to haue determyned in our ſoule to ſtabliſhe a ſadde, and a ſubſtancial counſell, giuing them more ample aucthoritie and power than euer we did afore this, in the whiche we haue appointed you to be one, but ſithe it is not accuſtomed ſure, nor expedient, to take a concluſion and conduct by aduiſe or counſell of one Perſon by hymſelfe for the conſeruation, it is obſerued that the greateſt and the beſte, the riche and the poore, in libertye, Uertue, and effect, of your voyces be equall, we haue therefore determyned wythin our ſelfe to ſende for our Chauncellour of England, and for other Lords of our Counſel, yea and al other, togither within ſhort time ripelye to common theſe and other our greate matters, in the whiche communication, ſuche concluſion by the grace of God ſhal be takē, as ſhal ſound to his pleaſure, the Weale of vs and our land, as well in theſe matters as in any other.
                     
                  
               
            
            At length it was agréed by the King, that the Duke of Somerſet ſhoulde be committed to warde, there to abyde and anſwere ſuche Articles as the Duke of Yorke would laye againſt him, vpon which promiſes ſo made by the Kyng to the Duke, who ſawe that the people of Kent, and of other places, came not to him as they had promiſed, and that they were not ſtrong ynough, for the Kings part was much more than his, he brake vp his fielde on the firſt of Marche, and yéelded himſelfe to the King at Dertforde, where contrarie to promiſe before made, he founde the Duke of Somerſet chiefe about the King. Then was the Duke of Yorke ſent before to London and holden, partly as priſoner, and ſtreighter ſhoulde haue bene kepte, but it was noyſed that ſir Edward
               
Earle of March ſonne to the ſayde Duke of Yorke was comming towarde London with a ſtrong power of Welchmen, whych feared ſo the Quéene and Counſell, that the Duke was ſet at full libertie. And on the tenth of March the ſaide Richarde Duke of Yorke made his ſubmiſſion, and toke hys othe to be true, faythfull, and obedient ſubiect to King Henrie the ſixth, King of England, in Saint Paules Church at London, there being preſent the King and moſt of his nobilitye, that is to ſaye, the Dukes of Buckingham, Northampton, and Somerſet: the Earles of Warwicke, Arundale, Saliſburie, Shropſhire, Deuonſhire, Wiltſhire, Northumberlande, Stafford and Dorſet: viconnts of Beaumount and Welles, Barons Fitz Warren, Sainmounde, Cobham, Douglas, and others: Biſhoppes, the Cardinall, Archbyſhoppe of Yorke, and Canterburie, Wincheſter, Ely, and London, in theſe wordes following.
            I Richard Duke of Yorke, confeſſe and beknowe that I am and oughte to bée humble ſubiecte and liegeman to you my ſoueraigne Lorde King Henrie the ſixth, and owe therefore to beare you Fayth and trueth, as to my ſoueraigne liege Lorde, and ſhall doe all dayes vnto my liues ende, & ſhall not at any time wyll or aſſente that any thing attempted or done againſte your moſte noble perſon, but where ſo euer I ſhall haue knowledge of anye ſuche thing imagined or purpoſed, I ſhall with all ſpéede and diligence poſſible to mée, make that youre hygheneſſe ſhall haue knowledge thereof. And ouer that, doe all that ſhall be poſſible to me, to the withſtanding and lette thereof, to the vttermoſte of my lyfe: I ſhall not anye thing take vppon me agaynſte youre royall eſtate or obeyſaunce that is due thereto, nor ſuffer anye other man to doe, as farre forthe as it ſhal be in my power to let it: And alſo ſhall come at youre commaundemente whenſoeuer I ſhall be called by the ſame, in humble and obeyſaunte wiſe, but if it be letted by any ſickneſſe of impotence of my perſon, or by ſuch other cauſe as ſhal bée thoughte by you my ſoueraigne LORD reaſonable.

I ſhall neuer hereafter take vpon me to gather any row
                  •
               e, nor to make any aſſembly of your people, without your cō
               maundement or licence, or in my lawfull defence, in interpretation or declaration of the which my lawfull defence, I ſhall reporte me at all times to your highneſſe, and if the caſe require, to my péeres, nor any thing attempt againſte any of your ſubiects, of what eſtate▪ degrée, or condition, ye they be. But when ſoeuer I finde my ſelfe wronged and agréeued, I ſhal ſue humblye for remedie to your highneſſe, and procéede after the courſe of your lawes, and in none otherwiſe, ſauing in mine owne lawfull defence in manner aboue ſaide, and otherwiſe haue to your highneſſe as an hū
               ble and true ſubiecte oughte to haue him to his ſoueraigne Lorde. All theſe things aboue ſayde I promiſe you truely to obſerue and kéepe, by the holy Euangeliſtes contayned in the booke that I laye my hande here vpon, and by the holye Croſſe I here touch, and by the bleſſed Sacrament of oure Lordes bodye, that I ſhall nowe with hys mercye receiue. And ouer I agrée me and wil▪ that if I any tyme hereafter▪ as by the grace of our Lord God I neuer ſhall, any thing attempt by waye of feate or otherwyſe againſte your royall Maieſtie and obeyſaunce that I owe thereto, or any thyng take vppon me otherwiſe than is aboue expreſſed, I from that tyme forth be vnabled, helde and taken, as an vntrue and openly foreſworne man, and vnable to all manner of worſhip, eſtate, and degrée, be it ſuch as I now occupye, or any other that might in any wiſe grow vnto me hereafter. And this I haue here promiſed and ſworne, procéedeth of myne owne deſire and frée volunte, and by no conſtraynyng or coaction. In witneſſe of all the which things aboue written, I Richarde Duke of Yorke aboue writ ſubſcribe, with mine owne hand and ſeale.
            This oth he alſo toke at Westminster, and at Couentrey, at ſundry times.Anno. reg. 31 Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Richard Lee: Richard Alley, the 28. of September.
            
            
               Godfrey Filding Mercer, the 28. of October.
            
            
               On the Twelfth day after Chriſtmas, the King holding aRobert Fabian. 1453 ſolempne feaſte at Westminster, made his two bretherne on the mothers ſide Knightes: he alſo made Edmunde the elder, Earle of Richemonde, and Iaſper the yonger, Earle of Penbrooke.
            
            In the moneth of Marche (as witneſſeth Gagwine,) was the Towne of Harflewe wonne by the Frenchmen. And ſoone after the Citie of Bayons was giuen vppe by appointment, that the ſouldioures ſhoulde leaue theyr armoure behinde them.
            The one and twentith of July Iohn Talbot Earle of Shrewſburie wyth his ſonne Lorde Liſle, and Syr Edwarde Hull Knight, was ſlaine beſides Burdeaux: and the Lorde Molins was taken priſoner, who was after deliuered for a greate raunſome.
            On Bartholmewe daye, at the Wreſtling neare vnto Clearken well, a Gentleman belonging to the Prior of Saint Iohns, made a rumour or tumulte, for the whiche, by the commaundement of the Maior, he was arreſted by Richard Alley, one of the Sherifes, and deliuered to Paris a Sergeant: but ſuche reſiſtance was made by partes taking, that the Sherife was faine to craue help of the Maior, who with his brethren the Aldermen aroſe from the game, & ſtrengthned the Sherifes, and for the reſcue of the ſaid Gentleman, one named Calleis, came out of Saint Iohns with a greate ſtrength of Archers, to reſiſte the Maior, in the which fray, a Yeoman of Saint Iohns was 
                  •
               laine, and many other ſore hurte: the Maior himſelfe eſcaped hardly, for his Cap was ſmitten from his head with an arrowe: but the Maior with his Citizens putte the other to flight, ſente the principall of them to Newgate, and then toke his place again til ye games were ended, by which time, the Citizens had gathèred them ſelues in greate nūber, and fetched him home, neuer Maior ſo ſtrongly, nor ſo honorably.
                  Anno reg. 32▪
               
            
            This yeare the King lay longſicke at Claringdon, & was in greate daunger to haue ended his life.
            
               The thirtéenth daye of October, the Quéene at Westminster was deliuered of hir firſte ſonne, who was named Edwarde.
            
            
               Iohn Waldren: Thomas Cocke, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior. 1454
            
            
               Iohn Norman Draper, the 28. of October.
            
            Before thys time the Maiors, Aldermen, and Commoners of the Cytie of London, were wonte all to ride to Westminster, when the Maior ſhoulde take hys charge, but this Maior was rowed thyther by water: for the whiche the watermen made of hym a ſong, Rowe the boate Norman, &c.
               
            
            The ninth of Marche in the nighte, was a greate fire nexte wythout Ludgate, in a Cordwayners houſe, whyche Cordwayner wyth hys wife, thrée yong men and a mayde were all burnte, the priſoners of Ludgate were remoued to Newgate, bycauſe they were almoſte ſmouldered.An reg. 35. Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Iohn Fielde: William Tayler, the 28. of September.
            
            
               Stephen Foſter Fiſhmonger, the. 28. of October.
            
            A greate Fray at London by the Sanctuarie men of Saint Martins le graunde, who iſſued forth and hurte dyuerſe Citizens, but it was appeaſed by the Maior and hys brethren.
            The one and twentith of May king Hēry taking his iorney1455 from Westminster toward Saint Albons, to mete with the Duke of Yorke, the Earles of Warwicke and Salisburie lodged that nighte at Wateforde or Wadeforde, on thys ſide Sainte Albons, and on the morning earely he came to Saint Albons, wyth hym aſſembled on hys partye the Dukes of Somerſet, and of Buckingham, the. Earles of Penbroke, Northumberlande, Deuonſhire, Stafforde, Dorſet, and Wiltſhire, the Lordes, Clifforde, Sudley, Barons, and Roos, wyth diuerſe Knights, Eſquiers, Gentlemen, and Yeomen, to the nūber of. 2000. and more. And at the ſame time were there aſſembled Richard Duke of Yorke, Richarde
                Earle of Warwicke, Richarde
                Earle of Salisburie, with diuerſe Knightes and Eſquiers in

the fielde called Keyfielde, beſide Saint Albons. The King hearing of the dukes comming with the Lords aforeſaid, pight his banner in a place called Goſelowe, which place was ſometimes called Sandforth in Saint Peters ſtréete, & commaunded in ſtrong manner to kéepe the wardes and Barriers of the ſame Towne. The Duke of Yorke knowing the ſtrength made againſte him abyding in the fielde afore ſayde, from ſeuen of the clocke in the morning vntill it was almoſt ten of the Clocke without any ſtroke ſmitten on eyther parte, by the aduiſe of hys Counſell, ſente vnto the King vnder theſe wordes following.
            
               
                  
                     
                        Wordes in writing by the Duke of Yorke to the King.
                        PLeaſe it vnto your excellente grace, Richarde Duke of Yorke, to take hym as your true liege manne and humble ſubiecte, and to conſider and tender at the reuerence of God, and in the way of Charitie, the true intent of my commyng, and to be good and gratious Soueraigne vnto me, and all other your true liege menne, whych, that with all their power and mighte will be readye to lyue and dye with you in your right, and to do al things as ſhal like your Maieſtie royal to commande vs, if it be to the worſhip of the Crowne of England, and the welfare of this your noble Realme. Moreouer, gratious Lorde, pleaſe it vnto youre Maieſtye Royall, of youre greate goodneſſe and rightewiſeneſſe, to encline youre will to heare and féele the rightwiſe parte of vs youre true Subiects and Liege men. Fyrſte, praying and beſéeching to oure Soueraigne, Chriſte Jeſus, of hys hyghe aod mightye power, to giue the vertue of Prudence, and that throughe the prayer of the glorious Martyre Sainct Albon gyue you verye knowledge of oure trothes, and to knowe the intent of our aſſembling at this time: For God that is in Heauen knoweth, oure intent is rightfull and true. And therefore we praye vnto that mighty LORDE in theſe woordes: Domine ſis clypeus defenſionis nostrae:
                           
wherefore gracious Lorde, pleaſe it your Maieſtie royal to deliuer ſuch as we will accuſe, and they to haue like as they haue deſerued. And this done, you to be honorably worſhipped as moſte rightfull King and our true gouernour. And if we ſhoulde nowe at this tyme be promiſed, as afore thys time is not vnknown haue bin promiſes broken whiche haue bin full faithfully promiſed, and therevpon greate othes ſworne, we will not nowe ceaſe for no ſuche promiſes, nor othe, tyl we haue them which haue deſerued death, or elſe we to dye therefore.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                     
                        The aunſwere by the King to the Duke of Yorke.
                        
                        I King Henrie charge and commaunde, that no manner perſon of what degrée, eſtate, or condition ſoeuer he be, abyde not, but that they auoyde the field, and not be ſo hardie to make reſiſtaunce againſt me in my owne realm. For I ſhall knowe what traytour dare be ſo bolde to ariſe anye people in mine owne lande, where through I am in great diſeaſe and heauyneſſe: by that Faith I owe vnto Saint Edwarde, and vnto the Crown of England, I ſhal deſtroy them euery mothers ſon, and eke they to be hanged, drawn, and quartered, that may be taken afterward of them, in example to make all ſuche traytours to beware, for to make anye riſing of people within mine owne land, and ſo trayterouſly to abyde theyr king and gouernour. And for a concluſion, rather than they ſhall haue any Lorde that here is with me at this time, I ſhall this day for their ſake in this quarrell my ſelfe liue and dye.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                     
                        The wordes of the Duke of Yorke to all Gentlemen and other aſſembled with hym.
                        SIrs, the king our ſoueraign Lord wil not be reformed at our beſéeching ne prayer, nor wil not in no wiſe vnderſtād the intente wherfore we be here aſſēbled & gathered at this time, but only is in ful purpoſe to deſtroy vs al and

there vpon a great othe hath made, that there is none other waye but that he with all his power will purſue vs, and if we be taken to giue vs a ſhamefull death, léeſing our liuelodeand goods, and alſo our heyres ſhamed for euer. Therfore ſirs, now ſith it will none otherwiſe be, but yt we ſhall vtterly die, better it is to vs to die in the field, than cowardly to be put to an vtter rebuke and ſhamefull death, for the right of England ſtandeth in vs. Conſidering alſo in what perill it ſtandeth at this time, and for to redreſſe the miſchiefe thereof, let euery man helpe to his power this daye, and in that quarrell to quite vs like men, to the crowne of England, praying and beſéeching vnto that Lord the which is eternal, that raigneth in the glorious kingdome celeſtial, to kéepe and ſaue vs thys day in our right, and throughe the giftes of his holy grace we may be made ſtrong to withſtād the greate abhominable and horrible malice of them, that purpoſe to deſtroy vs and the realme of England, and put vs to a ſhamefull death: praye we therefore vnto that Lord to be our comfort and our defendour, ſaying theſe wordes, Domine ſis clipeus defenſionis nostri.
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            And when theſe wordes were ſayde, the Duke of Yorke, and the Earles of Warwicke and Saliſburie, with their hoſte, betwéene eleauen and twelue at noone breake in in thrée ſeueral places of the ſayd ſtréete. The King thē being in the place of Edmond Weſtby Hundreder of the ſayde Towne of Saint Albons, hearing of the ſaide Dukes comming, commaunded his hoſte to ſlaye all manner Lordes, Knightes, Squiers, Gentlemen and yeomen, that might be taken on the party of the foreſayd Duke of Yorke. Thys done, the Lorde Clifforde kepte ſo ſtrongly the barriours of the ſame Towne, that the forſayde Duke of Yorke might in no wiſe with all the power that hée hadde enter, nor breake into the ſayde Towne. The Earle of Warwicke knowyng thereof, tooke and gathered hys menne togyther wyth hym, and brake in by the Garden ſide into the ſayde Towne, betwéene the ſigne of the keye, and the Exchequere in Holywel ſtréete: and anone

as they were within the fayde Towne they blew vppethe Trumpet and cryed with an high voyce a Warwicke, a Warwicke, that maruayle it was to heare. And tyll that tyme the Duke of Yorke might neuer haue entry into the Town, and then with ſtrong hande they brake vp the Barriers, and foughte a fierce▪ and cruell battayle, in the whiche were ſlayne, Lordes of name, Edmonde Duke of Somerſet, the Earle of Northumberlande, the Lorde Clifforde, ſir Barton Entewſell Knighte, William Souche, Iohn Botreaux, Ralphe Balithorpe and his ſonne, William Coruin, Williā Cotton receyuer of the Dutchie of Lancaster, Gilbert Faldinger, Reignalde Griffin, Iohn Dawes, Ellis Wood, Iohn Cyt
                        •
                     e, Robert Woodwarde, Gilbert Scarlocke,
                and Ralph Willowby Eſquires, a Gentleman of the Courte Roger Mercraft the Quéenes meſſanger, Hawbin the Kings Porter, Malener Padington and William Butler Yeomen, and fiue and twentie moe, whoſe names were not knowne, and of them that were ſlayne, bene buryed at Saint Albons eighte and fourtie perſons. And at that battayle were wounded Lordes of name, the King was ſhotte into the necke wyth an arrowe. The Duke of Buckingham, and the Lord Sudley, in the viſages wyth arrowes, the Earle of Stafforde in the right hande with an arrowe, the Earle of Dorſet was ſo ſore hurte that he might not goe, but was fayne to be carried home in a carte, and Syr Iohn Wenloke Knighte in likewiſe hurt and carried from thence in a Chayre, and diuerſe other Knightes and Eſquiers ſore hurt, and the ſubſtaunce of the Kyngs hoſte diſpoyled of theyr harneis, at their owne requeſte, made deliuerye to the Dukes hoſte for ſauation of theyr liues and fled. The Earle of Wiltſhire, and Thorpe, with many other fled, and caſt away their harneis in ditches and woods. This done, the Duke of Yorke, the Erles of Warwicke and Saliſburie, came vnto the King where hée was, and beſoughte hym on theyr knées, of grace and forgiueneſſe of that they had done in his preſence, & beſoughte him of his highneſſe to take thē to grace, & as his true liege

men. The king deſired them to ceaſe their people, that there ſhoulde be no more hurte done, and to obey hys commaundemēt, did cauſe to be proclaymed in the Kings name, that all maner of people ſhoulde ceaſe off theyr malice, and not to ſmite one ſtroke more, and ſo ceaſed the battayle. And vpon the day next after, the King and the Duke of Yorke, the Earles of Warwicke and Saliſburie, came to London and were lodged in the Biſhoppes Pallaice of London, where they kepte theyr Whitſontide with great ioye and ſolemnitye, concluding there to holde a Parliament, the ſame to begin on the ninth of July next following.
            This yeare in the moneth of June appeared a comet or ſtarre, called Stella Cometa, betwixt the North and the Eaſt, extending his beames towards the South.
            In the Parliament begun the ninth of July as is afore ſaide, Richarde Duke of Yorke was made protectour of the realme. The Earle of Salisburie was made Lord Chauncellour of Englande, and Richarde Earle of Warwicke was made Captaine of Caleis.
            
            
               Iohn Yong: Thomas Owlgraue, the. 28. of September.
               
                  Anno. reg. 34▪ 
                  Sherifes. Maior.
               
            
            
               William Marrow Grocer, the 28. of October.
            
            This yeare by meanes of the Quéene and the Lordes of hir Counſell, the Duke of Yorke was diſcharged of the Protectourſhip, and the Earle of Salisburie of the Chauncellourſhip, and being called by priuie ſeale to Couentrie, they were like to haue bene intrapped there, and hardlye eſcaped.
            In the moneth of Maye, an Italians ſeruaunte walkyng1456 Robert Fabian. throughe Cheape of London, wyth a dagger hangyng at hys gyrdle, a Merchauntes ſeruaunt that before tyme had bin in Italy and there blamed for wearing of the like weapon, chalenged the ſtraunger, howe hée durſt be ſo bolde to beare weapon, conſydering he was out of hys natiue Countrey, knowyng that in his Countrey no ſtraunger was ſuffered to wear y• like. To the which queſtiō ſuch anſwere was

made by the ſtraunger, that the Merter toke from him hys dagger and brake it vpon his heade, wherevpon the ſtranger complayned to the Maior, who on the morrow ſent for the yong man to ye 
               Guilde Hall: wherfore after his aunſwere made vnto the complaynt, by agréemente of a full Courte of Aldermē, he was ſent to ward, and after the Court was finiſhed, the Maior and Sherifes walking homewarde thoroughe Cheape, were there mette by ſuche a number of Mercers ſeruauntes and other, that they mighte not paſſe, for ought they coulde ſpeake or doe, till they hadde deliuered the yonug manne that before was by them ſente to priſon. And the ſame daye in the afternoone ſodainely was aſſembled a multitude of lewde and pore people of the City, which without heade or guide ranne vnto certaine Italians houſes, and eſpecially to the Florentines, Lukeſſes and Venetians, and there toke and ſpoyled what they founde, and dyd great hurt in ſundry places, but moſte in foure houſes ſtanding in Breadſtreete warde, whereof thrée ſtoode in Saint Bartholmewes Pariſhe the little, and one in the Pariſh of Saint Beni
                     •
                  s Finke. The Maior, Aldermen and worſhipful Commoners of the Citie, with all theyr diligence reſiſted them what they coulde, and ſente diuerſe of them to Newegate: and fynallye, not wythout ſhedding of bloude and mayming of diuerſe Citizens, the rumour was appeaſed. The yong manne beginner of all thys buſineſſe, tooke Sanctuarie at Westminster, and not long after the Duke of Buckingham with other noble menne were ſente from the Kyng into the Cytie, who there charged the Maior by Uertue of a Commiſſion, that inquirie ſhoulde hée made of thys ryot, and ſo called an Oyer determyner at the Guilde Hall, where ſatte for Judges the Maior, as the Kyngs Lieuetenaunte, the Duke of Buckingham on hys ryghte hande, the chiefe Juſtice on the lefte hande, and manye other men of name, where whyle they were enpanelyng theyr inqueſtes, the other Commons of the Citie manye of them ſecretly putte them in armour,

and ment to haue roong the common bell, ſo to haue rayſed the whole force of the Citie, and ſo to haue deliuered ſuch perſons as before for the robberie were committed toward. But this matter was diſcretely handled by the counſel and labour of ſome diſcrete Commoners, which appeaſed their neighbours in ſuch wiſe, that all this furie was quenched: but when worde was brought to the Duke of Buckingham, that the commonaltie were in harneſſe, he with the other Lordes tooke leaue of the Maior and departed, and ſo ceaſed the inquirie for that day. Upon the morrow the Maior commaunded the common counſell with the Wardens of fellowſhips to appeare at the Guild Hall, where by the Recorder in the Kings name and the Maiors, was commaunded euery 
                  〈…〉
               den, that in the afternoone eyther of them ſhould aſſēble his whole fellowſhip at their cōmon Halles, and there to giue ſtraight commaundement, that euery mā ſée the kings peace kept within the Citie. After which time the Citizens were brought to ſuch quietneſſe, that after that day, the enquirie was duly peruſed, and. iij. perſons for the ſaid ryot put in execution and hanged at Tyborne, whereof ij▪ were Sanctuarie men of Saint Martins le graunde, the otherAnno reg. 35 a ſhipman, for robbing of Anthony Mowricine and other Lumbardes.
            
            
               Iohn Steward: Raph Verney, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Thomas Canings Grocer, the 28. of October.
            
            In the moneth of Nouember, in the Ile of Portland not farre from the towne of Weymouthe was ſéene a Cocke comming out of the Sea, hauing a great creſt vpō his head, and a great red beard, and legges of halfe a yarde long: he ſtoode on the water and crewe. iij. times, and euery time turned1457 him about, and beckened with his head, toward the North, the South, and the Weſt, and was of colour like a Feſaunt,Robert Fabian. and when he had crowed. iij. times he vaniſhed away.
            And ſhortly after were taken at Erithe within. xij. myles of London, iiij. great and wonderfull Fiſhes, whereof one was called Mors Marina, the ſecond a Sworde Fiſhe, the other

two were Whales.
            The. xxvitj. day of Auguſt Peter Brice Steward of Normandie;
               Iohn Maior. with a flete of Frenchmen landed at Sandwiche, and with fyre and ſword waſted the Towne to aſhes, and ſlewe the inhabitauntes almoſt to the laſt man. Alſo Fowey in Deuonſhire was ſpoyled by Pirates in the moneth of Auguſt.
            In this yeare was a great fray in the Northe CountreyRobert Fabian. betwéene the Lorde Egremond and the Earle of Saliſburies ſonnes, whereby many were maymed and ſlaine, but in the ende the Lorde Egremonde was taken, who was by the Kings Counſell found in great default, and therefore condemned in great ſummes of mony, to be payde to the Earle of Saliſburie, and in the meane time committed to Newgate. Not long after this ſir Thomas Percie Lord Egremount, and ſir. Richard Percie his brother beyng priſoners in Newgate condemned in a great ſumme to the Earle of Saliſburie as is aforeſaid, brake out of priſon by night, and went to the King, the other priſoners tooke the leades of the gate andRegeſter of Maior. defended it a long while againſt the Shriues and all their officers, in ſo much that they were forced to call more aydeAnno reg. 36 Sherifes. Maior. of the Citizens, whereby they laſtly ſubdued them.
            
               William Edwards: Thomas Reyner, the 28. of September.
            
            
               Godfrey Boleyne Mercer, the 28. of October.
            
            Maiſter Reginald Pecocke Byſhop of Chichester, a ſecular Doctor of Diuinitie, that had labored many yéeres to tranſlate the holy Scripture into Engliſhe, was accuſed to haue paſſed the bonds of Diuinitie and of Chriſtian beléefe in certaine Articles, of the which he was conuict before the Archbyſhoppe of Counterburie, and other Byſhoppes and Clerkes, and after vtterly abiured, reuoked, and renounced thoſe Articles openly at Paules Croſſe in his mother tongue on the fourth day of December, as followeth. In the name of the Trinitie, Father, Sonne, and holy Ghoſt, I Reynold Pecocke Byſhoppe of Chichester vnworthie, of myne owne power and will without any manner coertion

or dread, cōfeſſe and knowledge that I here before this time preſuming of myne naturall witte, and preferring my iudgement and naturall reaſon before the newe and the olde Teſtament, and the authoritie and determination of our mother holy Churche, haue helde, written & taught otherwiſe than the holy Romane and Uniuerſall Churche teacheth, preacheth, or obſerueth. And one is againſt the true Catholike and Apoſtles faith, I haue written, taught, and publiſhed many and diuers perilous doctrines, bookes, workes and writings, conteining Hereſies and errors, contrarie to the fayth Catholike, and determination of holye Church: and eſpecially theſe Hereſies and errours following, that is to ſay.
            
               In primis quod non est de neceſſitate fidei credere quod dominus noster Ieſus Christus post mortem deſcendit ad inferos.
               
            
            
               Item, quod non est de neceſſitate ſalutis credere in ſanctorū communionem.
               
            
            
               Item, quod Eccleſia vniuerſalis poteſt errare in hijs quae ſunt fidei.
               
            
            Item, quod non est de neceſſitate ſalutis credere & tenere illud quod conſilium generale & vniuerſalis Eccleſia ſtatuit, approbat, ſeu determinat, in fauorem fidei, & ad ſalutē animarum, est ab vniuerſis Christi fidelibus approbandum & tenendum.
            
            Wherfore I miſerable ſinner which here before long time haue walked in darkneſſe, & now by the mercy and infinite goodneſſe of God reduced into y• right way, & light of truth, & conſidering my ſelfe gréeuouſly haue ſinned and wickedly haue enformed & enfected the people of God, returne & come againe to the vnitie of our mother holy Church, & all hereſies & errors written & conteined in my ſaid bookes, works & writings, here ſolemnly & openly reuoke & renounce, which hereſies & errors & all other ſpices of hereſies I haue before this time before ye moſt Reuerēd father in God, and my good Lord of Caunterbury in diuers and lawfull forme iudicially abiured, ſubmitting my ſelfe, beyng then and alſo nowe at this time verye contrite and penitent ſinner, to the correction of the Churche and of my ſayd Lorde of Caunterburie.
            
            
               And ouer this, exhorting and requiring in the name and vertue of almightie God, in the ſaluation of your Soules and minde, that no man hereafter giue fayth and credence to my ſayd pernitious doctrines, hereſies and errors, neyther my ſayd Bookes kéepe, holde, or reade in any wiſe, but that they all ſuch Bookes, workes, and writings ſuſpect of hereſies, delyuer in all goodly haſt vnto my ſayde Lorde of Caunterburie, or to his Commiſſioners and Deputies, in eſchewing of many inconueniences & great perils of ſoules, the which elſe might be cauſe of the contrary. And ouer this declaration of my conuerſation and repentaunce, I here openly aſſent, that my ſayde Bookes, workes and writings, for declaration and cauſe aboue rehearſed, be deputed vnto the fire, and openly brent in enſample and terrour of all other, &c. After this, he was depriued of his Biſhopricke, hauing a certaine pencion aſſigned vnto him for to lyue on in an Abbey, and ſoone after he dyed. His Bookes were intituled:
            
               1. Of Chriſtian Religion, and a Booke perteyning therevnto.
               
               2. Of Matrimonie.
               
               3. Iuſt oppreſsing of holy Scripture, deuided into three partes.
               
               4. The Donet of Chriſtian Religion.
               
               5. The follower of the Donet.
               
               6. The Booke of Faith.
               
               7. The Booke filling the. 4. Tables.
               
               8. The Booke of Worſhipping.
               
               9. The Prouoker of Chriſtian men.
               
               10. The Booke of Councell.
               
            
            In the moneth of Januarie dyed the Earle of Deuonſhire, in the Abbey of Abindon, poyſoned (as men ſayd) being there at that tyme with Quéene Margaret, to appeaſe the malice betwéene the yong Lords, whoſe fathers were ſlaine at Saint Albons, and they that helde with the Duke of Yorke. A méeting was appoynted by the King to be at London, in

obeying whoſe commaundement, the Duke of Yorke came vnto London on the. xxvj. day of Januarie, and was lodged at Baynards Castle, and afore him, to wit the. xv. of Januarie came the Earle of Saliſburie, and was lodged at his place called the Erber: ſhortly after came the Dukes of Somerſet & Excester, who were lodged without Temple Barre, lykewiſe the Earle of Northumberland, the Lord Egremond: & the yong Lord Clyfford, were lodged in ye Suburbes. And on the. xiiij. day of Februarie came the Earle of Warwike from Calleis with a great band of men all arrayed in red Jaquets with white ragged ſtaues vppon them, who was lodged at the Grey Friers. And the. xvij. day of Marche the King & Quéene with a great retinue came to London, and were lodged in the Biſhop of Londons Pallace. And ye ſhall vnderſtand, that with theſe Lordes came great companies of men, ſome had. 600. ſome. 500. and the leaſt had. 400. Wherefore the Maior had dayly in harneſſe. 5000. Citizens and rode dayly about the Citie and Suburbes of the ſame, to ſée the Kings peace were kept, & nightly. 2000. men in harneſſe, to gyue attendance vpon. iij. Aldermen, which kept the night watch tyll. vij. of the clocke in the morning, that the day watches were aſſembled, by reaſon whereof, good order and rule was kept, and no man ſo hardie once to attempt the breaking of the Kings peace. During this watch, a great Coūſell was holden by the Lordes, and a faygned agréement was made, betwéen the King, the Quéene, and the Duke of Yorke with1458 his retinue: for ioy whereof the. xxv. day of Marche a generall Proceſſion was made in Saint Paules Church at London, where the King in Royall habite with his Diademe on his head kept the ſtate, before whom went hand in hand y• duke of Somerſet, the Earle of Saliſburie, the Duke of Excester, the Earle of Warwike, and ſo one of the one faction, & an other of that other ſort. And behind the King, the Duke of Yorke led the Quéene with great familiaritie to all mens ſightes.
            The. xiij. of April there was a great fraye in Fletestreete,
               The Queenes atturney ſlaine. betwéene men of Courte and the inhabitantes of the ſame

ſtréete, in which fray the Quéenes Atturney was ſlaine. For this facte the King committed the principall gouernours of Furniuals, Clifforde and Barnardes Inne to priſon in the Caſtle of Hertforde, and William Taylour, Alderman of that warde, with many other, were ſent to Windſore Caſtle the vij. of May.
            On Thurſday in Whitſon wéeke, the Duke of Somerſet
               Iuſting in the Tovvre of London. with Anthonie Riuers and other. iiij. kept Juſtes before the Quéene in the Towre of London agaynſt thrée Eſquiers of the Quéenes. And in lyke manner at Greenewiche the Sonday following.
            On the Trinitie Sonday or Munday following, certaineThe Earle of VVarvvike tooke Spanish Ships. ſhippes appertayning to the Earle of Warwike, met with a fléete of Spanyardes, and after long and cruell fyght tooke vj. of their Shippes laden with Yron and other Marchandies, drowned and chaſed to the number of. xxvj. not without ſhedding of bloud on both partes, for of the Engliſhmen were ſlayne an hundred, and many more woundedAnno reg. 37 Sherifes. Maior. and ſore hurt.
            
               Ralph Ioſeline: Richard Medtham, the 28. of September.
            
            
               Thomas Scot Draper, the 28. of October.
            
            The King and Quéene beyng at Westminster the. ix. day of Nouember fell a great debate betwéene Richard Earle of Warwike and them of the Kings houſe, in ſo much that they woulde haue ſlayne the Earle: and vnneth he eſcaped to his Barge and went after to Calleis, for he was not long before made Captaine thereof by authoritie of the Parliament. Soone after, the young Duke of Somerſet by ſtirring of them that hated the Earle of Warwike, was made Captayne of Calleis, and a Priuie Seale direct to the Earle for to diſcharge him of the Captayneſhyp: but the Earle for as muche as he was made by Parliament, he woulde not obey the Priuie Seale, but continued forth in the ſayd office.
            The Noble Science of Printing was about this tyme1459 Printing firſt inuented. founde in Germanie at Magunce by one Iohn Cuthembergus
               
a Knight: One Conradus an Almaine brought it into Rome: William Caxton
                of London Mercer brought it into England aboute the yeare a. 1471. And fyrſt practiſed the ſame in the Abbay of Saint Peter at Westminster, after which tyme it was likewyſe practiſed in the Abbayes of Saint Auguſtine at Caunterburie, Saint Albons, and other Monaſteries of England.
            
            In a lyttle Towne in Bedfordſhire there fell a bloudieIt raigned bloud. rayne, whereof the red drops appeared in ſhéetes the which a woman had hanged out for to dry.
            In this tyme the Realme of Englande was out of good order, as it had bene of long tyme: for the King béeyng ſymple and pitifull, was ledde by couetous Counſell. The King grewe in debte dayly, but payment was not made. All the poſſeſſions and Lordſhippes that pertayned to the Crowne, the King had giuen ſome to Lordes and ſome to others, ſuch as would begge them, ſo that himſelfe had almoſt nothing lefte to lyue on, but ſuch impoſitions as were put to the common people, as Taxes, Tallages, Quinzimes, all which was ſpent in vayne, for he helde no houſhold, nor maintayned no warres, for which miſgouernaunce the heartes of the people were turned from them that had the Land in gouernaunce. The Quéene with ſuch as were of hir affinitie, ruled the Realme as hir lyked, gathering riches innumerable. The Officers of the Realme, eſpecially the Earle of Wilſhire Treaſurer of England, for to enriche himſelfe, pilled the poore people, & diſherited rightfull heyres, and did many wrongs. The Quéene was defamed and ſclaundered that the young Prince was not hir ſonne but a Baſtard gotten in adulterie: wherefore ſhe dreading that he ſhoulde not ſuccéede his father in the Crowne of Englande, allyed vnto hir all the Knightes and Eſquiers of Chesterſhire, for to haue theyr fauour: ſhe helde open houſholde among them, and made hir ſonne the Prince to giue a liuerie of Swannes to all the Gentilmen of the Countrey, and to many other through the land,

truſting through their ſtrength to make hir ſonne King, making priuie meanes to ſome of the Lordes of England for to ſtirre the King that he ſhould reſigne the Crowne to her ſonne, but ſhe could not bring their purpoſe about.
            The. xxj. day of September Richard Earle of Saliſburie hauingAn. reg. 38. gathered a well appoynted armie for dread of his enemies, eſpecially of the Quéene, tooke his way towarde Ludlowe, where at that time the Duke of Yorke lay, to the intent that they both together would haue rydden to the King to Colſhull in Staffordſhire, to haue excuſed them of certaine articles layd againſt them by malice of their enemies as they ſayd. Wherevpon thoſe that were about the King, and alſo the Quéene, who laye at Egliſhall, moued him to aſſemble a great powre, whereof Iames Twichet Lorde Awdley was made chiefe, and had the leading of them into the fielde called Bloreheath néere vnto Mucklestone, by the which the ſaydeBloreheath fielde. Duke and the Earle muſt néedes paſſe, & there both hoſtes mette and fought a mortall battaile, wherin the Lord Audley was ſlaine with Hugh Venables of Kinderton, Thomas Dutton
                of Dutton, Richard Mollynes, William Trowtbek, Iohn Legh del Bothes, Iohn Donne
                of Vtkinton, and Iohn Edgerton of Edgerton Knightes, Richard Donne of Croton, Iohn Duttes
                Eſquiers, and many other of Chesterſhire, that had receyued the Princes liuerie of Swannes: and there were takē priſoners the Earle of Saliſburies. ij. ſonnes Thomas and Iohn, and ſir Thomas Harington, which were ſent to Chester, but ſoone after deliuered. After this diſcomfiture, the Earle of Salisburie paſſed forth to Duke Richard to Ludlowe, and thether came to them for Calleis the Earle of Warwike, which all thrée writ a letter vnto King Henry, whereof the tenure is this.
            
               
                  
                     MOſt Chriſtian King, right high and mighty Prince, & our moſt dread Soueraigne Lord, 
                  
                  after as humble recommēdations to your high excellencie as will ſuffice. Our true intent to the proſperitie & augmentation of your high eſtate, and to the commō Weale of this Realme, hath be
                        •••
                     
                     
ſhewed vnto your highneſſe in ſuch writing as wée make thereof. And ouer that an Indenture ſigned by our hands in the Churche Cathedrall of Worcester, comprehending y• proofe of the truth & duetie that (God knoweth) we beare to your ſaide eſtate, and to the preheminence and prerogatiue thereof, we ſent vnto your good Grace by the Prior of the ſayde Churche, and diuers other Doctors, and among other, by M. William Lynwood Doctor of Diuinitie, which miniſtred vnto vs ſeuerally the bleſſed Sacrament of the body of Jeſus, wherevppon we and euery of vs depoſed for our ſayde trueth and duetie, accordyng to the tenor of the ſayde Indenture. And ſith that time we haue certified at large in writing and by mouth, by Garter King of Armes, not onely to your ſaid highneſſe, but alſo to the good & worthie Lordes beyng about your moſt Noble preſence, the largeneſſe of our ſayde trueth and duetie, and our intent and diſpoſition, to ſerche all the motions that might ſerue conueniently to the affirmation thereof, and to our perfect ſuerties from ſuche inconuenient and vnreuerent ieopardies as wée haue béene put in diuers tymes here before. Whereof we haue cauſe to make, and ought to make ſuche exclamation and complaint, not without reaſon, as is not vnknowen to all the ſayde worthie Lordes, and to all his land, and wil offer vs to your high preſence, to the ſame intent, if we myght ſo doe without ſayd ſuertie, which onely cauſeth vs to kéepe ſuche fellowſhippe as we doe in our léefull manner. And hereto we haue forborne and auoyded all thinges that might ſerue to the effuſion of Chriſtian bloud, of the dreade that we haue of God, and of your Royall Maieſtie: and haue alſo eſchued to approche your ſayde moſt Noble preſence, for the humble obeyſaunce and reuerence wherein we haue, and during our lyfe will haue the ſame. And yet neuertheleſſe we heare, that we be proclaimed and defamed in our name vnrightfully, vnlawfully, and ſauing your high reuerence, vntruely, and otherwiſe (as God knoweth) than we haue giuen cauſe, knowing

certainely, that the bleſſed and noble intent of your ſaid good grace, and the righteouſneſſe thereof is, to take, repute and accept your true and lawfull ſubiectes, and that it accordeth neyther with your ſayd intent, nor with your wyll or pleaſure, that we ſhoulde be otherwiſe taken or reputed. And ouer that, our Lordſhippes and tenantes bene of high violence robbed and ſpoyled, agaynſt your peace and lawes, and all ryghteouſneſſe. Wée therefore, as we ſuffice, beſéeche your ſayde good Grace to take, repute, and receyne therevnto our ſayde trueth and intent, which to God is knowne, as wée ſhewe it by the ſayde tenor of the ſame Indenture. And not apply your ſayde bleſſedneſſe ne the great righteouſneſſe and equitie wherewith God hath euer endued your high nobilitie, to ye importune impacience and violence of ſuch perſons as intende of extreme malice to procéede vnder the ſhadowe of your high might and preſence, to our deſtructiō, for ſuche inordinate couetiſe (wherof God is not pleaſed) as they haue to our Landes, Offices, and goods, not letting or ſparing therefore, to put ſuche things in all lamentable and too ſorrowfull ieoperdie, as might in all wyſe take effecte, by the myſterie of Gods will and power, nor not hauing regarde to the effuſion of Chriſtian bloud, ne any tenderneſſe to the noble bloud of this Land, ſuch as ſerue to the tuition and defence thereof, ne not waying the loſſe of your true liege men of your ſaydo Realme, that God defend, which knoweth our intent, and that wée haue auoyded there from as farre as we may with our ſuerties, not of any dreade that wée haue of the ſayde perſons, but onely of the dreade of God & of your ſaid highneſſe, and will not vſe our ſayde defence vntil the time that wée be prouoked of neceſſitie, whereof wée call heauen and earth vnto witneſſe and recorde, and therein beſéeche God to be our Judge, and to delyuer vs according to our ſayde intent, and our ſayde trueth and duetie to your ſaid highneſſe and to the ſayde Common Weale. Moſt Chriſtian King, right high and mightie Prince, and moſt dread Soueraigne

Lorde, wée beſéeche our bleſſed Lorde to preſerue your honour and eſtate in ioye and felicitie.
                  
                     Written at Ludlowe
                        the. x. day of October:
                     
                     
                        
                           R. Yorke,
                           R. Warwike,
                           R. Salisburie.
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            After their excuſation contayned in this letter ſent to the King, they withdrewe them, and went into diuers partes beyond the Seas, for the more ſuertie of their perſons. The Duke of Yorke went into Ireland, where he was honorably receyued: the Earle of Marche, Saliſburie, and Warwike, not without great ieoperdie and perill, as well on the lande as on the ſea, went to Calleis, and abode there.
            Then was a Parliament holden at Couentrie, whereinParliament at Couentrie. were attaint of treaſon, Richard duke of Yorke, Edward
                Erle of Marche his ſonne and heire, Richard Earle of Warwike, Edmond
                Earle of Rutlande, Richard
                Earle of Saliſburie, Iohn
               
               Duke of Yorke & other attaint. Lorde Clifford, Lorde Clinton, ſir Thomas Harington, ſir Iohn Wenlocke, Thomas Neuill, Iohn Neuill ſonnes of the Earle of Saliſburie, Iames Pickering, Iohn Conyers, Thomas Par, William Oldhall,
                and Henrie Ratforde Knightes, Iohn Bowſer, Thomas Cooke, Iohn Clay, Richard Gyton, Robert Browne, Edward Bowſer, Thomas Vaughan, Iohn Roger, Richard Grey, Walter, Deuorux, Walter Hopton, Roger Kynderton, William Bowes, Foulke Stafforde, the Lorde Powys, and Alice Counteſſe of Saliſburie, their goods and poſſeſſions eſcheted, and their heires diſherited vnto the 9. degrée, their tenauntes ſpoyled of their goods, bemaymedLudlovv ſpoyled. and ſlayne, the towne of Ludlowe longing to the Duke of Yorke, was robbed to the bare walles, and the Dutches of Yorke ſpoyled of hir goods.
            The Earle of Warwike hauing a great Nauie, kepte theEarle of VVarvvike fought vvith the Spa
                     •••
                   ardes. narrow ſeas, and ſought with the Spanyards, kylled many of them, tooke their great veſſels, with one Carrake of Iene, and got in them great riches.
            
               Iohn Plummer: Iohn Stocker, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               William Hulin Fiſhmonger, the 28. of October.
            
            In this moneth of October, Henrie the yong duke of Somerſet,
               
               Henry Lorde Roos, and Lorde Audley, with men of Armes ſailed toward Calleis, to the intent the Duke ſhoulde haue bene Captaine there: but when he came to lande, theyDuke of Somerſet fled to Gvvynes. The Lord Audley taken into Calleis. The lord Roos fled into Flaunders. of Calleis would haue taken him, ſo that he hardly eſcaped to the Caſtle of Gwines: his ſouldiors were ſtripped out of their harneſſe and let go. The Lord Audley was taken into Calleis, and the Lord Roos fled into Flaunders, and after returned into England.
            
            Not long after, Richard Lord Riuers was ſent to Sādwich to kéepe the towne and certaine great ſhips which lay there at Anker, but when the Earle of Warwike ſawe time conuenient,The Lord Riuers and the Lord VVoodvile by force caried from Sandvvicke. he ſent ſome of his men to Sandwich by night, ye which tooke the Lorde Riuers and Antonie Wooduile his ſonne in their beds, & led them ouer to Calleis, with al the great ſhips ſaue one called Grace de Dieu, the which might not be had away bicauſe ſhe was broke in the bottome. Sir Baudwyne Fulford, vndertooke on paine of looſing his head, yt he woulde1460 Sir Baudvvin Fulford his enterpriſe. deſtroy yt 
               Earle of Warwike, but when he had ſpent ye King a thouſand markes in money, he returned againe. Then was the Duke of Excester Admirall ſent to the ſea with a greatThe Duke of Exceſter ſent to the Seas. Nauie for to diſtreſſe the Earle of Warwike and his Nauie, he ſailing from Sandwiche to Dertmouth, for lacke of victuals and money his Souldiours forſoke him there. And betwéene Sandwiche and Dertmouth he met the Earle of Warwike comming out of Ireland that had bin there for to ſpeake with the Duke of Yorke, and brought with him his mother that was ſled thither for dread, and led hir to Calleis: but the Duke of Excester durſt not ſet vppon the Earle of Warwike, nor the Earle woulde not diſtreſſe him, becauſe he was Admirall and of the Kings bloud, but let him paſſe by.
            In ye moneth of June. 500. men were ſent to conduct the duke of Somerſet frō 
               Gwynes into England, but abiding ye wind in ye port of Sandwich, ye Earle of Warwikes men ſpoyled them of their harnes, killed their captain Moūford & many other. The Earles at Calleis, ſent to the Archbiſhop of Caunterburie,
               Captaine Moūt ſort ſlaine. and at large to the commons of England certaine Articles in

writing, beginning thus: Worſhipful ſirs, we the Duke ofArticles ſent frō the Duke of Yorke, and the Barles, to the Archbishop of Caunterburie and to the commons. 
               Yorke, the Earles of March, Warwike, and Saliſburie, ſewed & offered to haue come vnto the King our Soueraigne Lords moſt noble preſence, to haue declared there aſore him for our dutie to God & to his highneſſe & to the proſperitie and welfare of his noble eſtate, and to the Common Weale of all his Lande as true liege men, the matters following, that is to ſay.
            
               In primis the great oppreſſion, extortion, robberie, murther and other violences done to Gods Church and to his miniſters thereof, againſt Gods and mans law.
            2 Item, the pouertie & miſerie that to our great heauineſſe our Soueraigne Lord ſtādeth in, not hauing any liuelode of the Crowne of England whereof he may kéepe his honorable houſholde, which cauſeth the ſpoyling of his ſayde liege men by the takers of his ſayde houſholde, which lyuelode is in their hands that haue bene deſtroyers of his ſayd eſtate, and of the ſayde common Weale.
            3 Item, how his Lawes be partially and vnrightfully guided, and that by them that ſhould moſt loue and tender his ſaid Lawes, the ſaid oppreſſion and extortion is moſt fauored and ſupported, and generally, that al righteouſneſſe and Juſtice is exiled out of the ſayde land, and that no man dreadeth to offend againſt the ſaid Lawes.
            4 Item, that it will pleaſe his ſaide good Grace to liue vpon his owne liuelode, wherevpon his noble Progenitors haue in dayes heretofore lyued as honorably and as worthily as any Chriſtian Princes, and not to ſuffer the deſtroyers of the ſayde land, and of his true ſubiectes, to lyue thervpon, and therfore to lacke the ſuſtenances that ſhould be belonging to his ſayd eſtate, and finde his ſayd houſhold vpon his poore commons, without payment, which neyther accordeth with Gods nor mans lawe.
            5 Item, how oft the ſaid commons haue bene greatly & maruellouſly charged with taxes & tallages to their great empoueriſhing, whereof little good hath eyther growne to

the king or to the ſaid land, and of the moſt ſubſtance thereof the King hath left to his part not half ſo much, and other Lordes and perſons, enimies to the ſayd common Weale, haue to their owne vſe, ſuffering all the old poſſeſſions that the King had in Fraunce & Normandy, Aniow & Maine, Gaſcoyn & Gwiene, won & gotten by his father of moſt noble memory, & other his noble progenitors, to be ſhamefully loſt or ſold.
            6 Item, how they can not ceaſe therwith, but now begin a new charge of impoſition and tallages vpon the ſaid people, which neuer afore was ſéen, that is to ſay, euery towne, ſhip to finde men for ye Kings Gard, taking enſample therof, of our enimies & aduerſaries of Fraunce, which impoſition and tallage, if it be continued to heire, heires, and ſucceſſors, will be the heauieſt charge and worſt enſample that euer grewe in Englande, and the foreſayde ſubiectes, and the ſayde heires & ſucceſſors, in ſuch bondage as their auncetors were neuer charged with.
            7. Item, where the King hath now no more liuelode out of his Realme of Englande, but onely the Lande of Ireland, and the towne of Calleis, and that no King Chriſtened hath ſuch a Lande and a Towne without his Realme, diuers Lordes haue cauſed his highneſſe to write letters vnder his Priuie Seale, vnto his Iriſhe enemies, which neuer King of Englande did here to fore, whereby they may haue comfort to enter into the conqueſt of the ſayde Lande, which letters the ſame Iriſhe enemies ſent vnto me the ſayde Duke of Yorke, and maruelled greatly that any ſuch letters ſhoulde be to them ſent, ſpeaking therein great ſhame and villanie of the ſayd Realme.
            8 Item, in like wiſe the King by excitation and labour of the ſame Lordes, wrote other letters to his enemies and aduerſaries in other lands, that in no wiſe they ſhould ſhew any fauour or good will to the towne of Calleis, whereby they had comforte ynough to procéede to the wynning thereof. Conſidered alſo, that it is ordayned by the labour of the ſayd Lords, that no where victuall nor other thing of refreſhing

or defence ſhould come out of Englande, to the ſuccour or reliefe of the ſayde towne, to the intent that they woulde haue it loſt, as it may openly appeare.
            9 Item, it is déemed & ought greatly to be déemed, that after that the ſame Lordes would put the ſame rule of England, if they might haue their purpoſe and intent, into the handes and gouernaunce of the ſayd enemies.
            10 Item, howe continually ſithe the piteous, ſhamefull, and ſorrowfull murther to all Englande, of that Noble, worthie, and Chriſtian Prince Humfrey Duke of Glocester the Kings true vncle, at Burie, it hath bene laboured, ſtudyed, and conſpired, to haue deſtroyed and murthered the ſayde Duke of Yorke, and the yſſue that it pleaſed God to ſende me of the Royall bloud, and alſo of vs the ſaide Earles of Warwike & Saliſburie, for none other cauſe but for the true hart that God knoweth we euer haue born, and beare to the profite of the Kings eſtate, to the Common Weale of the ſame Realme, and defence thereof.
            11. Item, howe the Earles of Shrewſburie and Wilſhire, and the Lord Beaumount, our mortall and extréeme enemyes nowe and of long tyme paſt, hauing the guiding aboute the moſt Noble perſon of our ſayde Soueraigne Lorde, whoſe highneſſe they haue reſtrayned and kepte from the libertie and fréedome that belongeth to his ſayde eſtate, and the ſupporters and fauourers of all the premyſſes, woulde not ſuffer the Kings ſayde good grace to receyue and accepte vs, as he would haue done if he might haue had his owne will, into his ſayde preſence, dreading the charge that woulde haue bene layde vppon them, of the miſerie, deſtruction, and wretchedneſſe of the ſayde Realme, whereof they becauſes and not the King, which is himſelfe as noble, as vertuous, as rightuous and bleſſed of diſpoſition, as any Prince earthly.
            12. Item, the Earles of Wilſhire and Shrewſburie, and the Lorde Beaumount, not ſatyſfyed nor content with the Kings poſſeſſions and his goods, ſtirred and excited his ſayd

highneſſe to holde his Parliament at Couentrie, where an Acte is made by their prouocation and labour, agaynſt vs the ſayde Duke of Yorke, my ſonnes Marche and Rutlande, and the Earles of Warwike and Salisburie, and the Sonnes of the ſayde Earle of Saliſburie, and many other Knightes and Eſquiers, of diuers matters falſely and vntruely imagined, as they will anſwere afore almighty God in the day of Dome, the which the ſayde Earles of Salisburie and Wilſhire, and the Lorde Beaumount prouoked to be made, to the intent of our deſtruction and of our yſſue, and that they myght haue our lyuelode and goods, as they haue openly robbed and diſpoyled all our places and our tenementes, and manye other true men, and nowe procéede to hangyng and drawing of men by tyrannie, and will therein ſhewe the largeneſſe of their violence and malice as vengeably as they can, if no remedie be prouided at the Kings highneſſe, whoſe bleſſedneſſe is neither aſſenting nor knowing thereof.
            We therefore ſéeyng all the ſayde miſchiefes, hearing alſo that the Frenche King maketh in his lande great aſſembly of his people, which is greatly to bée dreade for many cauſes, purpoſe yet agayne with Gods grace to offer vs to come agayne to the ſayde preſence of our ſayde Soueraygne Lorde, to open and declare there vnto hym the miſchiefes aboue declared, and in the name of the land to ſue, in as reuerent and lowely wiſe as wée can, to his ſayde good Grace, to haue pittie and compaſſion vppon his ſayde true ſubiectes, and not to ſuffer the ſame miſchiefes to raygne vppon them. Requiring you in Gods behalfe, and praying you in our owne, therein to aſſiſt vs, doyng alway the duetie of liege men in our perſons to our ſayd Soueraigne Lord, to his eſtate, prerogatiue, and preheminence, and to the ſuertie of his moſt Noble perſon, wherevnto we haue euer bene and will be as true as any of his ſubiectes aliue, wherof we call God, our Lady S. Marie, and all the Saintes in heauen vnto witneſſe and record.
            
               In the meane time the Earle of Wilſhire treaſurer of England,
               The Earle of VVilshire and other ſpoyled Nevvbery. the Lorde Scales and the Lorde Hungerforde, went to Newberie, whiche longed to the Duke of Yorke, and there made inquiſition of all them that in any wiſe had fauoured the ſayde Duke, whereof ſome were founde guiltie, and were drawen, hanged, and quartered, and all the inhabitauntes of the Towne were ſpoyled of their goods. From thence the Earle of Wilſhire went to Southampton, where vnderThe Earle of VVilshire ſtale ouer the Seas. colour to take the Earle of Warwicke, he armed fiue gret Caraks of Iene with ſouldioures, taking victuals of the Kings price without payment, and put a great part of hys treaſure into the ſayde Caraks, and after ſayled about in the ſea, and at laſte ſtale into Dutchlande, ſending backe againe hys ſouldiours into Englande. Then were the KingsPriuie ſeales for money. priuie ſeales directed to all Biſhops, Abbots, Priours, and other ſtates, to lende the Kyng money, therewith to wage ſouldiours to kéepe the Sea coaſts: but the commons of Kēt dreading the like vengeance to be taken vpon them, as was done vpon them of Newberie, ſent priuily meſſangers to Caleis,
               The men of Kent ſent to Galeis for the Earles. to the foreſayde Earles, beſéeching them in all haſte poſſible to come to theyr ſuccour, whervpon the ſaid Erles ſent ouer into Kent the lord Fawconbridge to know if their déedes woulde accorde with theyr wordes, and anone the people of Kent and other ſhires adioyning, reſorted to the ſayde Lorde Fawconbridge in greate number. When the Earles knewe the wylling heartes of thoſe people, they prepared to come into thys lande, againſte whoſe comming, a long Ballet was fixed vpō the gates of Canterburie, made in fauour of the Duke of Yorke and the ſayde Earles, beginning thus: In the daye of faſt and ſpirituall affliction, The celeſtiall influence of bodies tranſitorie, &c The Erles of March, Warwick, and Salisburie, arriued at Sandwich, where met wyth them Thomas Bourcher, Archebyſhop of Canterburie,
               The Earle entred into London. who with hys croſſe borne before him, and a greate number of other people, accompanyed them to London, into the whiche Citie they entred on the ſeconde of Julye: wyth

them came the Popes legate, to treate of peace if néed wer. Th
                  •
               n was a conuocation of the Clergie holden in S. Paules Church▪ where the ſayde Earles being preſent, the Earle of Warwicke recited the cauſe of their comming into the lande, with the miſgouernements thereof, and then made open othe vpon the croſſe of Canterburie, that they had euer borne true faith and alegiaunce to King Henry. Then the Earles of March and Warwicke, with the Lords Fauconbridge, Clinton, Borſer Priour of Saint Iohns, Audley, Burgavennie, Say,
                and Scrope, the Archbyſhop, the Popes legate, the Biſhops of Excester, Ely, Saliſburie, and Rochester, addreſſed thē forth to the King at Northampton, leauing the Earle of Saliſbury to be gouernour of the Citie in their abſence. The Lorde Scales and Hungerforde, that before the comming of the Earles, were in the Citie of London, and would haue had the gouernance thereof, went to the Towre of London, and with them the Lordes Veſſy, Louel, Delaware, Kendale a Gaſcoigne: Knightes, ſir Edmond Hampden, Thomas Brune Sherife of Kent, Iohn Bruyn
                of Kent, Geruayes Clyfton
                treaſurer of the King houſe, Thomas Tyrel, the Dutcheſſe of Exceſtex, & many other. Then was the Tower of London beſieged both by water and lande, that no victualles might come to them. And they that were within the Towre caſt wilde fire into the Citie, and ſhotte manye ſmall Gunnes, whereby they brent and ſlew mē, women, and children, in the ſtréets: alſo they of the Citie layde greate Gunnes on the furtherſide of the Thamis againſt the Tower, and brake the Wals in diuerſe places. The King lying in the Friers at Northāpton, ordayned a ſtrong and myghtie fielde in the Meddowes beſide the Nunrie, hauing the riuer at his backe. The Earles with their power comming to Northampton, ſent certaine Byſhops to the King, beſéeching him to admit y• Erle of Warwicke to come to his preſence, to declare their innocencie, which requeſt being denyed by the Duke of Buckingham, the Earles ſent an Heralde of Armes, deſiring to haue hoſtages for his ſafe comming and going, but he might not

be heard. The thirde time the Erle of Warwicke ſent worde to the King, that at two houres after noone he would ſpeake with him, or dye in y• field. The Biſhop of Hereford, a white Frier the kings Confeſſour, incouraged the kings parte to fight, wherfore after the battayle he was committed to the Caſtelf of Warwicke, where he was long priſoner. The tēth of July at two of y• clocke after noo
                  •
               re, y• Earles of March & Warwicke let cry through the field y• no man ſhould lay hand vpon the King 
                  •
               e on y• cōmon people, but on the Lordes, Knights & Eſpuiers: then both hoſts incountred & foughte halfe an houre, the Lord Grey that was the Kings vaward breake the fielde and came to the Earles partie, and was a great helpe to them in obtayning the victorie: many on the kings ſide were flayn, & many y• fled were drowned in ye riuer, y• Duke of Buckingham, the Erle of Shrowesburie, ye Lorde Beaumont & the Lord Egremont were ſlain by y• Kings 
                  •
               ēt, wt many Knights & Eſquires: ye kings ordinaunce of Guns might not be ſhot, there was ſo gret rayne that day: When the field was done, & the Earles had the victorie, they came to the King, he being in his tent, & ſaid in this wiſe. Moſt noble prince, diſpleaſe you not though it haue pleaſed God of his grace to grant vs the victorie of our mortal enemies, y• which by their venemous malice haue vntxuely ſtirred & moued your highneſſe to exile vs out of your land, & woulde haue vs put to finall ſhame and confuſion: we come not to y• intent for to vnquiet ne grieue your ſayde highneſſe, but for to pleaſe your noble perſon, deſiring tenderly the high welfare & proſperitie therof, & of al your realme, and to be your true liegemen while our liues ſhall endure. The King of theſe words was greatlye recomforted, & anone was led to Northampton with proceſſion, where he reſted thrée dayes, & came to London the ſixtéenth of July, and was lodged in the Byſhops Pallaice.
            The nintéenth of Julye they that were in the Tower of London, for lacke of victualles yéelded and came forth, of the which afterward ſome were drawn and headed.
            
               The Lorde Scales late in an euening entred a Wherry with thrée perſons, and rowing towarde Westminster, there to haue taken Sanctuarie, was deſcried by a woman, and anone the Wherry men fel on him, killed him, & caſt hym a lande beſide Saint Marie Oueries.
            
            When Quéene Margaret heard that the king was takē, ſhe wyth hir ſonne, and eight perſons fled, to the Caſtel of Hardlagh in Wales, and was robbed by the way in Lancaſhire, of all hir goodes to the valewe of ten thouſande markes: from thence ſhe went into Scotland.
            
            The tenth of Auguſt Iames King of Scottes beſieging the Caſtle of Rockeſborough, was ſlaine with a Gun that brake in his Campe.
            The one and twentith of September the Duke of Somerſet came from Gwines into England.
               Anno. reg. 39 Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Richard Flemming: Iohn Lambert, the 28. of September.
            
            
               Richard Lee Grocer, the. 28 of October.
            
            The vitj. of October a Parliamēt was begun at Westminster, vnto the which came Ri. duke of Yorke, that a little beforeParliament. was come out of Irelande, and being lodged in the Pallaice, the Kyng being there, he brake vp the dores of the Kyngs Chamber, ſo that the King giuing hym place, tooke an other Chamber. Then the ſayde Duke, as right heyre by lyneall deſcent from Richard the ſeconde, chalenged the realme, purpoſing to haue bin crowned on Alhallown day next following, and herevppon ſente to the Parliament in wryting hys ſayde clayme, title, and pedigrée. The whych clayme after diligent deliberation had and approued, by the ſayde Parliamente, peace and concorde betwéene the king and Duke on the Uigil of Alhalow was eſtabliſhed and cō
               cluded, as in Articles followeth.
            
               
                  
                     
                        BLeſſed be Iohn in whoſe handes and bountie refiethThe Articles betvvixt King Henrie & the Duke of Yorke and is the peace and vnitie betwixte Princes and the Weale of euerye Realme: I knowe by whoſe direction agréed it is appointed and accorded as followeth, betwixte the moſte high and moſte mightis Prince King Henrie the

ſixth King of England and of Fraunce, and Lord of Irelande, on y• one party, and the right high and mightie Prince Richard Plātagenet Duke of Yorke on that other party, vpon certain matters of variaunce moued betwixt them, and eſpecially vpon the clayme and title vnto the Crownes of England and of Fraunce, and Royall power, eſtate and dignitie appertayning to the ſame, and Lordſhip of Irelande, opened, ſhewed, and declared, by the ſayde Duke, afore all the Lordes ſpirituall and Temporall, being in this preſent Parliament.
                        Firſt where the ſaide Richarde Duke of Yorke hath declared and opened, as aboue is ſayde, title and clayme in maner as followeth:
                        That the right noble and worthy Prince, Henrie Kyng of Englande the third, had iſſue and lawfullye got Edwarde his firſt begotten ſonne, borne at Westminster the xv. Kalendes of July, in the yeare of our Lord 12
                              •
                           9. and Edmond his ſecond ſonne, which was borne on Saint Marcels day, the yeare 1200. the whiche Edwarde after the death of Kyng Henrie hys Father, intituled and called Kyng Edwarde the firſte, had iſſue, Edward his firſt begotten ſonne, called after the deceaſe of his Father, Kyng Edward the ſeconde, the whiche had iſſue, Edward the thirde: which Edward the third had iſſue, Edward Prince of Wales▪ 
                              William
                            of Hatfield hys ſeconde ſonne: Leonel the thirde, Duke of Clarence: Iohn
                            of Gaun
                                 •
                              
                            fourth, Duke of Lancaster: Edmond
                            of Langley fifth, Duke of Yorke: Thomas
                            of Woodstocke the ſixth, Duke of Glocester: & W. of Windſor the ſeuenth. The ſaid Edward Prince of Wales, which dyed in the life time of hys Father, had iſſue Richard, which ſuccéeded Edwarde the thirde his grandſire: Richarde dyed without iſſue: William of Hatfield the ſecond ſonne of Edwarde the thirde, dyed without iſſue: Leonel the thirde ſonne of Edwarde the thirde, Duke of Clarence, hadde iſſue Phillip his daughter and heyre, whych was coupled in matrimony vnto Edmond Mortimer Earle of Marche, and had iſſue Roger Mortimer Earle of Marche hyr Sonne and heyre, which Roger had iſſue of Edmond erle of March,
                           
                           Roger Mortimer, Anne, and Elianor: which Edmonde, Roger and Alianor dyed without iſſue. And the ſayde Anne coupeled in matrimony to Richard Earle of Cambridge, the ſonne of Edmond of Langley, the fifth ſonne of Henrie the third, and had iſſue Richard Plantagenet, commonly called Duke of Yorke: Iohn
                            of Gaunt, the fourth ſon of Edward, & the yonger brother of the ſayde Leonel, had iſſue Henrie Earle of Darby, whiche incontinent, after that King Richard reſigned the Crownes of the Realmes and Lordſhip of Irelande, vnrighteouſly entred vppon the ſame, then being aliue Edmonde Mortimer Earle of Marche, ſonne to Roger Mortimer Earle of March, ſonne and heyre of the ſaide Phillippe, daughter and heyre of the ſayde Leonel, the thirde ſonne of the ſayde King Edward the thirde, to the whiche Edmonde the right and title of the ſayde Crownes and Lordſhip by lawe and cuſtome belonged. To the whiche Richard Duke of Yorke, as ſonne to Anne daughter to Roger Mortimer, Earle of March, ſonne and heyre of the ſayd Phillip, daughter and heyre of the ſayde Leonell, the third ſonne of Kyng Edwarde the thirde, the righte, title, dignitie Royall, and eſtate of the Crownes of the Realmes of England and Frāce, and the Lordſhippe of Irelande, pertayneth and belongeth a fore anye iſſue of the ſaide Iohn of Gaunt, the fourth ſonne of the ſame King Edwarde. The ſayde title notwithſtanding and without preiudice of the ſayde Richarde Duke of Yorke, tenderly deſiring the wealth, reſte, and proſperitie of this land, and to ſet apart all that might be trouble to the ſame, and conſyderyng the poſſeſſion of the ſayde Kyng Henne the ſixth, and that he hathe for hys tyme bene named, taken, and reputed for Kyng of Englande and of Fraunce, and LORDE of Irelande, is contented, agréede, and conſenteth, that hée bée hadde, reputed, and taken for Kyng of Englande and Fraunce, wyth the Royall eſtate, dignitye, and preheminence belonging therevnto, and Lorde of, Irelande during hys naturall lyfe.

And for that time, the ſaide Duke without hurte or preiudice of his ſaide righte and title, ſhall take, worſhippe, and honor him, for his ſoueraigne Lorde.
                        Item, the ſaide Richard Duke of Yorke, ſhall promiſ and binde him by his ſolempne othe, in maner and forme as foloweth
                        
                           In the name of God Amen: I Richarde, Duke of Yorke,
                              The othe of Richard Duke of Yorke. promiſe and ſweare by the faith and truth that I owe to Almightie God, that I ſhal neuer conſent, procure, or ſtirre, directly or indirectly, in priuie or aperte, neyther, (as much as in me is) ſhall ſuffer to be done, conſented, procured, or ſtirred, any thing that may ſound to the abridgement of the natural life of King Henry the ſixth, or to y• hurt or diminiſhing of his raigne or dignitie royall, by violence or anye otherwiſe, againſte his fréedome or libertie: but if anye perſon or perſons wold do or preſume any thing to y• contrary, I ſhal with all my might & power withſtande it, and make it to be withſtoode, as farre as my power wil ſtretche there
                              
                                 •
                              herevnto, ſo helpe mée GOD and his holie Euangeliſtes.
                           Item, Edward Earle of March, and Edmund Earle of Rutlande, ſonnes of the ſaide Duke of Yorke, ſhall make like othe.
                           Item, it is accorded, appointed, and agréed, that the ſaid Richard Duke of Yorke, ſhal be called & reputed from hence forth very and rightfull heire to the crownes, royall eſtate, dignitie and Lordſhippe aboue ſaide, and after the deceaſe of the ſaide King Henry, or when he will lay from him the ſaide crownes, eſtate, dignitie, and Lordſhippe, the ſayde Duke and his heyres ſhal immediately ſuccéed to the ſaide crownes, royal eſtate, dignitie and Lordſhip.
                           Item, the ſaide Richard Duke of Yorke, ſhall haue by authoritie of this preſent Parliament, caſtels, manors, lands and tenementes, wyth the wardes, marriages, reliefs, ſeruices, fines, amercementes, offices, anowſions, fées, and other appurtenaunces to them belonging, what ſoeuer

they be, to the yearely valewe of tenne thouſande markes ouer al charges and repriſes, where of fiue thouſand markes ſhall be to his owne ſtate, thrée thouſande fiue hundred markes to Edward his firſt begotten ſonne Earle of March for his eſtate, and one thouſande pounde to Edmond Earle of Rutland his ſeconde ſonne, for his yearely ſuſtentation, in ſuche conſiderations and ſuche intent as ſhall be declared by the Lords of the Kings Counſell.
                           Item if any perſon or perſons imagine or compaſſe the death of the ſayde Duke, and thereof probably be attaynte, of open déede done by folkes of other condition, that it be déemed and adiudged high treaſon.
                           Item, for the more eſtabliſhing of the ſayde accorde, it is appointed and conſented, that the Lordes ſpirituall and Temporall, being in thys preſent Parliament, ſhal make othes to accepte, take, worſhip, and repute the ſaid Richard Duke of Yorke, and hys heires, as aboue is rehearſed, and kéepe and obſerue, and ſtrength in as muche as apperteyneth vnto them, all the things aboueſayd, and reſiſt to their power, all them that woulde preſume the contrarie, according to their eſtates and degrées.
                           Item, the ſayde Richard Duke of Yorke, Erles of March and Rutland, ſhall permitte and make other to helpe, ayde, and defende the ſayde Lords, and euery of them, againſt althoſe that wyll quarrell, or any thing attempt againſt the ſayde Lordes or anye of them, by occaſion of agréemente or conſenting to the ſayde accorde, or aſſiſtaunce giuing to the Duke and Earles or any of them.
                           Item, it is agréed and appointed, that this accorde, and euery Article thereof, be opened and notifyed by the kings letters patents, or otherwiſe, at ſuch times and places, and in maner as it ſhall be thought expedient to the ſayde Rycharde Duke of Yorke, with the aduiſe of the Lordes of the Kings Counſel. The King vnderſtandeth certainely, the ſayde title of the ſayde Richarde Duke of Yorke, iuſt, lawfull, and ſufficient, by the aduiſe and aſſent of the Lordes,

ſpirituall and Temporall, and the Commons in this Parliament aſſembled, & by aucthoritie of y• ſame Parliament declareth, approueth, ratifyeth, confirmeth and accepteth the ſayde title, iuſt, good, lawfull, and true, and therevnto giueth his aſſent and agréemente of his frée will and libertie. And ouer that, by the ſayd aduice and aucthoritie declareth, entitleth, calleth, ſtabliſheth, affirmeth, and reputeth the ſayde Richarde Duke of Yorke, very true and rightfull heire to the Corones, Royal eſtate, and dignitie of y• realms of England and of Fraunce, and of the Lordſhip of Irelande aforeſaid, and that according to y• worſhip and reuerence that therto belongeth, he be taken, accepted and reputed, in worſhip and reuerence, by all the ſtates of the ſayde Realme of Englande, and of all hys ſubiectes thereof, fauyng and ordayning by the ſame aucthoritie, the King to haue y• ſaide Corones, Realme, royal eſtate, dignity, and preheminence ofthe ſame, and the ſayde Lordſhippe of Ireland during his life naturall. And furthermore by the ſame aduice and authoritie will, conſenteth and agréeth, that after his deceaſe, or when it ſhall pleaſe his highneſſe to laye from hym the ſayde Corones, eſtate, dignitie, and Lordſhippe, the ſayde Richarde Duke of Yorke and hys heyres, ſhal immediatelye ſuccéede him in the ſayde Corones, Royall eſtate, dignitye, and worſhippe, and them then haue and inioye, any acte of Parliament, ſtatute, or ordinance, or other thing to the contrarie made, or interruption, or diſcontinuaunce of poſſeſſion notwithſtanding. And moreouer, by the ſaide aduiſe and aucthoritie, ſtabliſheth, graunteth, confirmeth, approueth, ratifieth, and accepteth the ſaid accorde, and al things therein contayned, and therevnto fréely and abſolutely aſſenteth agréeth, and by the ſame aduice and authoritie ordayneth and eſtabliſheth, that if anye perſon or perſons ymagine or compaſſe the deathe of the ſayde Duke, and probably be attaynt of open déede done by folkes of that conditions, that it be déemed and adiudged highe Treaſon.

And furthermore ordayneth and eſtabliſheth by the ſayde aduice and aucthoritie, that all ſtatutes, ordinaunces and actes of Parliament, made in the time of the ſaid King Hē
                                 rie the fourth, by the whiche he and the heyres of his bodye comming of Henrie late King of England the fifth, the ſonne and heyre of the ſayd King Henrie the fourth, and the heires of King Henrie the fifth, were or be inheritable to the ſaide Crownes and Realmes, or to the heritage of the ſame, bée adnulled, repelled, dampned, cancelled, voyde, and of none effect.
                           And ouer this, the King by the ſaide aduice, aſſent & authoritie, ordayneth and eſtabliſheth, that all other actes and ſtatutes made afore thys time by acte of Parliamente, not repelled or adnulled by like authoritie, or otherwiſe voyde, be in ſuch force, effecte, and vertue, as they were afore the making of theſe ordinaunces, and that no letters pattents royalx of record, nor actes Judicial, made or done afore this tyme not repelled reuerſed, ne otherwiſe voyde by lawe, be preiudiced or hurte by this preſent acte. Alſo it was ordayned by the ſame Parliamente, that the ſayde Richarde Duke of Yorke, ſhoulde be called Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornewall, and Earle of Chester, and protectour of Englande.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            In the moneth of December, the Duke of Somerſet and the Earle of Deuonſhire, wente into the Northe Countrey with eighte hundered men, and anone after, the ſaide Duke of Yorke, the Earle of Rutlande his ſonne, and the Earles of Saliſburie a little before Chriſtmaſſe with a fewe perſons wente into the Northe alſo for to repreſſe the malice of the Northerne men, the whiche loued not the Duke of Yorke, ne the Earle of Saliſburie, and were lodged at the Caſtell of Sandale, and at Wakefielde. Then the Lorde Neuill, brother to the Earle of Westmerlande, vnder a colour of Friendſhippe, came to the Duke of Yorke, requyring of hym a commiſſion for hym to rayſe the people for

to chaſtice the Rebelles as he ſayde, but when he hadde rayſed to the number of eighte thouſande menne, hée broughte them to the Lordes of that Countrey, that is to ſaye, the Earle of Northumberlande, Lorde Clifforde, and the Duke of Somerſet, that were aduerſaries to the Duke of Yorke, and on the laſte of December they fell on the ſayde Duke Richarde, killed hym and his Sonne the Earle of Rutland, and many other knights and Eſquiers, to witte the Lorde Harington, Thomas Harington Knighte, Sir Thomas Neuil ſonne to the Earle of Saliſburie, and Syr Henrie Ratforde Knight, and other, to the number of 2200. The Earle of Saliſburie was taken aliue and ledde by the Duke of Somerſet to the Caſtell of Pomfraite, and had graunte of hys life for a greate ſumme of money, but the common people of the Countrey whyche loued hym not, toke hym out of the Caſtel by violence, and ſmote off hys heade. When the death of theſe Lordes was knowen 
                  ••
                the King, he commaunded writs and commiſſions to be ſent into the ſhires to the people, and to goe againſte the Rebelles into the Northe to ſuppreſſe them, but they of the Northe came ſodainelye downe to the Town of Dunstaple, robbing all the Countrey and people as they came, ſpoyling Abbayes, Priories, and Pariſh Churches, bearing awaye Chaliſſes, bookes, ornamentes and other, whatſoeuer was worth the carriage, as thoughe they had bin Sariſens and no Chriſtians, againſte whom, the twelfth of Februarie, the Duke of Norffolke and Suffolke, the Erles of Warwicke and Arundale, the Lord Bonuile and other, with the King, wente out of London towarde Saint Albons; and when they heard that they of the Northe were ſo nyghe, they tooke a fielde beſide a little Towne called Sandriage not farre from Sainte Albons, on Barnarde Heathe, in a place called No mans Lande, where the Kyng ſtoode and ſawe hys menne ſlayne on bothe ſydes, tyll at the laſte throughe the wythdrawyng manye of

the Kentiſhmen with their Captaine Louelace that was the vaward, King Henries parte loſt the fielde, the Lords fled, and the King wente to Quéene Margaret that was come wt the Northerne men and hyr ſonne Edwarde. The Earle of Warwicke wente towarde the Earle of Marche that was comming towarde London out of Wales. The Lord Bonuile woulde haue withdrawen him, but the King aſſured hym to haue no bodylye harme: neuertheleſſe at the inſtance of the Quéene, the Duke of Excester, and the Earle of Deuonſhire, he was beheaded at Saint Albons, and wyth hym Syr Thomas Kyriell of Kente. This battayle was fought on Shroue Tweſday the ſeauentéenth of February,Exlibre Norwicenſis. in the whiche was ſlain. 1916 perſons. The ſame day Thomas Thorpe Baron of the Exchequer was beheaded at High Gate by the commons of Kent. Then the Citizens of London dreading the malice of the Quéene and the Duke of Somerſet, ſente vnto them the Dutcheſſe of Buckingham with other, to treate for to be beneuolent to the Citie, for the which a ſumme of money was promiſed, and that they ſhoulde come to the Citie wyth a certayne number of perſons, where vpon certayne ſpeares and men of armes were ſente to haue entred the Citie before the Dukes commyng, whereof ſome were ſlayne, ſome ſore hurte, and the remnaunte putte to flighte by the Commons, who tooke the Keyes of the gates, and manfully defended the Citie vntill the comming of Edwarde Earle of Marche, where-throughe King Henrie wyth Quéene Margaret and the Northerne men were forced to return again Northwarde.
            The thirde of Februarie, Edwarde Earle of Marche foughte wyth the Welchmen beſide Wigmore in Wales, neare vnto Mortimers Croſſe, whoſe Captaynes were the Earle of Penbroke, and the Earle of Wilſhire, where he put them to flight, and ſlewe of the Welchemen aboute foure thouſande. Owen Tewther (whome Iohn Leylande ſayeth ſhoulde be called Me
                     ••
                  dicke,) Father to the ſayde Earle

               Penbroke, whiche Owen hadde married Katherin mother to King Henrie the ſixth, was there taken and beheaded, and afterward buried in the a Chapel of the Gray Friers Church in Hereforde: the day before this battayle, about tenne of the clocke before noone, were ſéene thrée Suns in the firmamēt, ſhyning a like cleare, which after cloſed togither all in one.
            The eight and twentith of Februarie, Edward Earle of March, accompanied with the Erle of Warwicke, & a mightie power of Marchmen, came vp to London, where he was ioyfully receyued, and on the ſeconde day of March being Sonday, all hys hoſte was muſtered in Saint Iohns fielde, where was redde among the people certaine Articles and pointes that King Henrie had offended in, and then it was demanded of them whether the ſaid Henrie were worthy to raigne ſtill, and the people cryed nay, naye. Then was it aſked if they would haue the Erle of March to be theyr King, and they ſayde yea, yea: then certaine Captaynes were ſente toErle of March elected King. the Earle of March, at Baynardes Caſtel, and tolde the Erle that the people had choſen him King, whereof he thanked God and them, and by the aduiſe of the Archbyſhoppe of Canterburie, the Byſhoppe of Excester, and the Earle of Warwicke wyth other, hée tooke it vpon hym. The Dutches of Yorke, mother to Edwarde Earle of Marche, fearing the fortune of the worlde, ſente hyr two yonger ſonnes George and Richarde ouer the ſeas, to the Citie of Vtricke in Almaine, where they remayned tyll their elder brother had got the Crown. Alſo Phillip Malpas Alderman of London, Thomas
               
               Citizens of Lō
                  don fled. 
               Vaghan Eſquire, Maiſter William Atclife, with many other, fearing the Quéenes comming to London, ſhypped them in a ſhippe of Antwerpe, purpoſing to haue ſayled thyther: but by the way they were taken by a French ſhippe named the Colmapne, and at length delyuered for greate raunſome.
            
               Edwarde Earle of March, being elected as is aboueſaid,Edvvard Erle of March toke on him the kingdome. on the next morrowe went in proceſſion at Paules, and offered there, and after Te Deum beyng ſung, he was with gret

royaltie conueyed to Westminster, and there in the Hall ſette in the kings ſeate with Saint Edwards Scepter in his hand, and then aſked of the people if they would haue him King, and they cryed yea, yea. Then after certaine homages by hym receyued, he was with Proceſſion conuayed into the Abbay there, and ſette in the Quire as King, whyle Te Deum was ſinging: that done, he offered at Saint Edwardes Shryne, and then returned by water vnto Saint Paules and was there lodged wythin the Biſhops Pallaice. Thus tooke he poſſeſſion of the Realme, vpon a Tuiſday being the fourth of Marche, and was proclaymed King of England, by the name of Edward the fourthe when King Henrie hadde raigned thirtie yeares, eight monthes and odde dayes. ⸪
         
         
            
            ¶ Edward Earle of March.
            
            
            
               
                  EDvvarde Earle of Marche borne at Roane, ſonne and heyre toAnno. reg. 1 10. Rouſe. 
               Richarde Duke of Yorke, about the age of eightéene yeares, began his raigne the fourth day of March, by the name of Edward the fourth, in the yeare. 1460. he was a man of noble courage and greate wit: but in his time was muche trouble & vnquietneſſe in the realme.
            The twelfth of Marche, Walter Walker a Grocer thatVValter VValker beheaded. dwelt in Cheape, for words ſpoken touching King Edwarde, was beheaded in Smithfield. This Grocer is he, whom Maiſter Hal miſtaketh to be Burdet, of whom ye ſhal finde in the xvij. yeare of this King.
            The ſame xij. day of Marche in the afternoone: King Edward with great triumph rode through the Citie of London
               1461 to Biſhops Gate, and ſo toke his iourney towarde the Northe, where betwéene Shirburne in Elmet, and Todcaster, all the Northe partye mette hym, and on Palme Sondaye

the. xxix. of Marche fought a greate battaile betwéene Towton and Saxton, in which were ſlaine, Henrie Percy Erle of Northumberlande, Iohn
                Lorde Clifforde, Iohn Lord Neuil, Leo Lorde Welles, Ranulph Lorde Dacre, and many other on both parties, to the number of fiue and thirtie thouſand ſeauen hundred and eleauen perſons, but King Edwarde gatte the fielde. Many of the Bones of theſe men were buriedIohn Leyland. in the Churchyard of Saxton: they were firſte buryed in fiue pittes halfe a mile off by North in Saxton fielde, yet appearing. Towton village is a mile from Saxton, where a gret Chappell was begonne by Richarde the third, but not finiſhed, in whiche Chappel were buried alſo many of the men flaine at Palmſonday fielde. This fielde was as muche in Saxton Pariſhe, as in Towton, yet it bare the name of Towton.
            
            The Duke of Excester, the Duke of Somerſet, the Lorde Roos, the Hungerford and many other, fled to Yorke to king Henrie, and then they with the King, Quéene, and Prince,King Henry fled into Scotlande. fled towarde Scotlande to Barwicke, and ſo to Edenborough.
            
            King Edwarde wente to Yorke, and then to Durham, and when he had quieted the Countrey, returned Southwarde. Thomas Courtney Earle of Deuonſhire, was taken and beheaded in Yorke Caſtell, Iames Butler Earle of Wilſhire was beheaded at Newcastell, the Lord Fitz Walter was drowned at Ferybridge.
            
            The town of Barwicke was deliuered to the Scots by king Henrie the ſixth on Saint Markes daye.
            The. xxvj. of June the Mayor of London with the Aldermen in Scarlet, and the Commons in gréene, broughte King Edwarde from Lambeth to the Tower of London, where he made eight and twentie Knightes, and on the morrowe he dubbed foure mo, and on the eight and twentith of June he was crowned at Westminster with greate ſolempnitie of Biſhops and other temporall Lordes.
            And on the morow after the King was crowned againe in Westminster Abbay in the worſhip of God & Saint Peter and on the next morow he went Crowned in Paules Church of

               London, in the honour of God and Saint Paule, & there an Angell came downe & cenſed him, at which time was ſo great a multitude of people in Paules, as euer was ſéene in any dayes. And ſoone after his Coronation, the King made hisStates created. brother George Plantagenet Duke of Clarence and his other brother Richard, duke of Glocester: Williā Stafford
                Eſquier, Lord Stafford of Southwike: ſir William Hebert, Lorde Herbert, and after Earle of Penbroke: and the ſayd Lord Stafford Earle of Deuonſhire. After this he made Edward Lord Grey of Ruthen Earle of Kent: Henrie
                Lorde Bourcher Earle of Eſſex: Iohn
                Lorde of Buckingham, Lorde of Mountioy: ſir Iohn Heyward, Lord Heyward▪ William Haſtings, Lord Haſtings, and after that great Chamberlaine: Richard Woodvile
                Lord Riuers: Denham Eſquier, Lord Denham, &c. Not long afterIohn Dauy had his hand ſtriken of in Cheape. the Coronation of King Edward, one Iohn Dauy had his hand ſtriken off, at the Standard in Cheape, becauſe he ſmote a man before the Judges in Westminster Hall, contrarie to the Lawe.
            
               George Ireland: Iohn Locke, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Hughe Wiche Mercer, the 28. of October.
            
            The. iiij. of Nouember began a Parliament at Westminſter, wherein King Henrie, his Quéene, and his ſonne, were diſherited of the Crowne: Henrie Duke of Excester, Henrie
                Duke of Somerſet, Thomas
                Earle of Deuonſhire, &c. to the nū
               ber of. 140. were attainted & diſherited. Shortly the EarleAnno. reg. 2. of Oxford, and Awbrey his ſonne, ſir Thomas Tudenham Knight, William Tirrell, and Iohn Mongomerie Eſquiers,1462 were detect and at ſeuerall times beheaded at the Towre hyll, and after that many other.
            The. xxvij. of Marche King Edward went Northwarde ſo farre as Stamforde, where he was informed that King Henrie had procured the Frenchmen and Scots to enter this land, in reſiſting whereof King Edwarde ſent his Priuie Seale through England, to moue men to giue him a certaine ſūme of money, which they graunted liberally. The Lord Fauconbridge Earle of Kent, was appointed to kéepe the Seas,

with the Lorde Audeley, Lorde Clinton, Sir Iohn Heyward, ſir Richard Walgraue, and other, to the number of ten thouſand, which landed in Britaine, and wanne the towne of Conqnet, with the Iſle of Reth, &c. In Michaelmas Terme king Edward ſat in the Kings bench thrée dayes together in open court, to vnderſtande how his lawes were executed.
            
               William Hampton: Barthelmew Iames, the 28. of Sep.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Thomas Coke Draper, the 28. of October.
            
            Quéene Margaret wyfe to Henrie the ſixt, landed in the North, where hauing but ſmall ſuccour and euill fortune, ſhe was faine to take the Sea againe, & by tempeſt of weather was driuen to Barwicke, where ſhe landed, but loſt hir ſhippes and goods. In December King Edwarde laide ſiege to the Caſtels of Bambrugh, Dunstonbrugh, & Alnewike. Henrie Bowfort
                Duke of Somerſet, ſir Ralph Percie, and other yéelded Bambrugh on Christmas euen, and were taken to the Kings fauour. King Edward graunted to the Duke of Somerſet a. 1000. marks by the yéere, where of he was neuer paid, the Earle of Penbroke, ſir Thomas Fyndern, and other, went into Scotland.
            
            On S. Iohns day Dunstonburgh was yéelded. On y• Twelfe euen Peirs
                     •
                  e Braſile the great warrior of Normandie came to helpe the Quéene Margaret with Frenchmen, &. xx. thouſande Scots, to remoue King Edwardes men from Alnewike ſiege, and the reſidue of other Caſtels there. By whoſe comming King Edwardes men were afearde of the Scottes, as reculing from the ſiege, and the Scottes afearde of Edwardes men, leaſt they had reculed to bring them into a trap. And Henries mē iſſuing out, of too much boldneſſe, gaue Edwards mē opportunitie to enter into the Caſtle: on the morow after the Twelfe day, the Earle of Warwike made xv. knights:Anno reg. 3. theſe. iij. Caſtels were committed▪ to ye kéeping of ſir Ralph Grey, and after againe King Henrie with his Quéene and1463 their felowſhip entred them and kept them.
            About Midſomer the Scots with many French & Engliſhmen,
               
laid ſiege to the Caſtle of Norham, but were forced to leaue it as they found it. The Earle of Warwike wan the towne of Barwike, where he made fiue Bannertes &▪ xxij. knights and went into Scotland, where he burnt Lawghmaban, Iedeworth, Galowey, and many other Townes, and returned to Barwike.
            
            The Minſter of Yorke, & the ſtéeple of Chriſtes Church in Norwiche were brent.
            
               Robert Baſſet: Thomas Muſchampe, the 28. of Sept.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Mathew Phillip Goldſmith, the 28▪ of October.
            
            In the moneth of Aprill, King Edwarde made greatAnno. reg. 4. 1464 preparation againſt King Henrie, and on Saint Markes day Ralph Percie Lorde Hungerforde, with a great power, purpoſing to haue diſtreſſed ſir Iohn Neuil, Lorde Mountacute, was himſelfe ſlaine, with many other.
            The. xv. of May King Henries power beyng at Hexham, the Lorde Mountacute with a power came thither, and encloſed them round about. There were taken & ſlaine many Lords that were with King Henry, but he himſelf was fled iiij. dayes before into Lancaſhire, where he and other liued in caues full hardly vnknowne more than a yéere. On Trinitie Sonday King Edward made the Lord Mountacute Earle of Northumberland and warden of the Marches. The Earles of Warwike and Northumberlande tooke Bambrugh Caſtle and beheaded ſir Ralph Grey, at Doncaster. The Earle of Warwike was ſent into Fraunce, to conclude a mariage with the French Kings ſiſters daughter for K. Edward, which he did,K. Edvvard maried. but in the meane while, on the firſt of May, King Edwarde tooke to wife Elizabeth Daughter to Iaquet Duches of Bedforde, ſiſter to the Earle of Saint Paule, late wife to ſir Iohn Grey, ſlayne at Courton fielde on King Henries parte, which mariage was kept ſecret almoſt halfe a yéere.
            King Edward tooke the Chauncellorſhip from the Byſhop of Excester, brother to the Earle of Warwike, and gaue it to the Byſhop of Bathe.
            
            In the moneth of May, the Duke of Somerſet, the Lord

               Roos, the Lord Molyns, Talbois Earle of Kyme, ſir Philippe Wentworth, ſir Thomas Finderne, gathered an hoſte in theDuke of Somerſet and other beheaded. North Countrey, & ſir Iohn Neuill Earle of Northumberland with. x. thouſand men came vpō them, whom the commons forſaking, their Captaines were taken & beheaded. King Edward ſearing the Lord Moūtacute the Earle of Warwike, whom he had of late made Earle of Northumberland, he cauſed the men of the / Countrey to deſire the rightfull heyre Percie ſonne to Henrie y• was ſlaine at Yorke fielde: & ſo Percie
               Earle of Northumberland made Marques Mountacute. was reſtored, and Mountacute was made a Marques, & his ſonne Duke of Bedforde, which ſhoulde wed the Kings eldeſt daughter; which by poſſibilitie ſhould be King of Englande.
            
            Aboute Michaelmas the King held a Counſell at Reading, where the Quéene was ſhewed openly and receiued asCoine enhaūſed Quéene. After this wedding knowne, the Earle of Warwike and King Edward were neuer friends. The King changed the Coyne both gold and ſiluer, and ordained that ye newePeſtilence. Grote waied ſcantly. iij. d. and that the Noble of. vj. s̄. viij. d. ſhould go for. viij. s̄. iiij. d. &c. A great Peſtilence, and the Thames ouer froſen. In Michaelmas Terme were made Sergeantes at Lawe, Thomas Young, N. Geney, RichardSerieants feaſt. Regeſter of maiors
                   Neale, Thomas Brian, Richard Pigot, I. Grenefield, I. Catesby and Gwy Fairfax, which helde their feaſt in the Biſhop of Eles place in Holborne to the which feaſt, the Maior of London, with the Aldermen, Sherifes, and Commons of diuers Craftes being bidden, repayred: but when the Maior looked to be ſet to kéepe the ſtate in the Hall, as it had béene vſed in all places of the Cittie & liberties out of the Kings preſence (vnknowne to the Sergeauntes and againſt their willes as they ſayd) y• Lord Grey of Ruthin then TreaſurerThe Maior of London departeth from the Serieants feaſt. of England was there placed, wherevpon the Maior, Aldermen and Commons departed home, and the Maior made all the Aldermen to dyne with him, howbeit he and all the Citizens was greatly diſpleaſed that he was ſo delt with, and the newe Sergeaunts and other were right ſorie therfore;

and had leauer th
                  •
               n much good it had not ſo happened. This was then (as my Recorde reporteth more at large) recorded to be a preſident in time to come.
            
               Iohn Tate: Iohn Stone, the 28. of September.
               
                  Sherifes. Maior. Nevv coyne, Anno. reg. 5.
            
            
               Ralph Ioſſeli
                     •
                   Draper, the 28▪ of October.
            
            A newe Coine was made, a Roſe Noble at. x. ſhillings, the halfe Noble fiue ſhillings, & the farthing two ſhillings ſir pence, an Angelet ſix ſhillings eight pence, ye halfe thereof thrée ſhillings foure pence.
            On the. xxvj. of May Quéene Elizabeth was Crowned at1465 
               Westminster beyng Trinitie Sonday, againſt the which time King Edward made. xxxix. Knightes.
            King Henrie was taken in Cletherwood, beſide Bungerley
               King Henrie taken. 
               Hyppingstons in Lancaſhire, by Thomas Talbot ſonne & heire to ſir Edward Talbot of Basſhall, and Iohn Talbot his coſyn of Colebry, which deceiued him being at his dynner at Wadington Hall, and brought him toward London, with his legs bounde to the ſtirops, where he was mette by the Earle of W
                     •
                  rwike, and areſted at Eſyldon▪
                Doctor Manning Deane of Windſore, Doctor Bedle and yong Ellerton being in his companie, with their féete bound vnder the horſe bellyes, were brought to the Towre of London.
            A licence was graūted to conuey certaine Coteſwold ſhéepeSheepe trāſported ouet the ſeas. Long piked Shone forbid. into Spaine, which haue ſince greatly multiplyed there.
            It was proclaynied throughout England, that the beakes or pikes of Shoone and Bootes ſhould not paſſe. ij. ynches, vpon paine of curſing by the Clergie, and forfeting. xx. s̄. to be payde one Noble to the King, one other to the Cordewayners of London, and the thirde to the chamber of London: and for other Cities and Townes the like order was takē. Before this time and ſince the yéere of our Lord. 1282. the pikes of ſhooes & bootes were of ſuch length, that they were fayne to be tyed vp to their knées with chaynes of ſiluer and guilt, or at the leaſt with ſilke laces.
            
               Henrie Wauer: William Conſtantine, the 28. of Sep.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Sir Ralph Verney Mercer, the 28. of October.
            
            
               The. xj. of Februarie Quéene Elizabeth was deliuered at Westminster of a Daughter alſo named Elizabeth; who was long after married to King Henrie the ſeuenth; whoſe Chriſtening was done in the Abbey with ye moſt ſolemynitie that might be, and the more, becauſe the King was aſſured by his Phiſitions, that the Quéene was conceyued with a Prince, which proued otherwiſe as ye haue heard.
            This yéere was the Lord Hungerford beheaded at Saliſburie.
               Anno. reg. 6 1466 Alſo ſir Thomas Hungerford Knight, ſonne to the Lord Hungerford, and Henry Courteney of right Earle of Deuōſhire, were beheaded at Saliſburie. The Lord Stafford of Southwike, procured the ſaid Courteneys death, to be made Earle of Deuonſhire, as in déede he was ſhortly after.
            
               Iohn Browne: Henrie Brice, the 28. of September.
            
            
               Sir Iohn Yong Grocer, the 28. of October.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Iohn Stocton, the 26. of Iune.
            
            The. iij. of June beganne a Parliament at Westminster,
               
                  Anno. reg. 7. 1467 All the Kings giftes reuoked. wherin was reſumed to ye Kings honor all maner of giftes that had bin giuen from the firſt day he tooke poſſeſſion of y• Realme to that time, except certaine things then named.
            On Thurſday next after Corpus Christi, Antonie Wooduile
               
               Iuſtes in Smithfielde. Lorde Scales, iuſted in Smithfield with the Earle of the Roche called the Baſtard of Burgoygne, and had the victorie of the fielde. The liſtes were of length. 120. Taylers yardes, and. 10. foote, and of bredth. 80. yardes. 10. foote, double barred, v. foote betwéene the barres. &c.
            Diuers perſons Iurours in Aſſiſes falſely forſworn for rewards, were iudged that they ſhould ride from Newgate
               Iurours on the Pillery. to the Pillerie in Cornehill, with Myters of paper on their heades, and there to ſtand on the Pillerie the ſpace of one houre, and then led againe to Newgate. And this iudgement was giuen by the Maior.
            
               Thomas Stalbroke▪ Humfrey Heyford, the 28. of Sept.
               
                  Maior. Sherifes. Anno reg. 8▪ 1498
            
            
               Thomas Olgraue Skinner, the 28. of October.
            
            The. viij. of May beganne a Parliament at Westminster, where was graunted two fiftenes and a demy.
            
               The xviij. of June Margaret ſyſter to King Edward theLady Margaret the Kings ſiſter married to the Duke of Burgoigne. fourth beganne hir iourney from the Wardrobe in London, toward hir mariage we 
               Charles Duke of Burgoigne: firſt ſhe offred in the Church of S. Paule, & then rode through the Citie, the Earle of Warwike riding before hir, with Earles & Barons a great number, the Dutches of Norfolke, with other Ladyes and Gentlewomen in great number. And at hir entrie into Cheape, the Maior of London and his brethren the Aldermen, preſented hir with a payre of riche Baſons, 
                  •
                in them an. 100. 
                  •
               . of golde, & that night ſhe lodged at the Abbey of Stratford, where the King then lay: from thence ſhe tooke hir iourney to Caūterbury. The King riding after to ſée hir ſhipping, on ye firſt of July, ſhe tooke ye ſea at Margate, & there toke leaue of ye King hir brother, & departed. There returned backe againe with ye King, the Duke of Clarence, the Duke of Glocester, ye Earles of Warwike, Shrewſburie, & Northūberland. And there abode with hir in the ſhip, the Lorde Scales, the Lorde Dacres hir Chamberlaine, ſir Iohn Wodvile, ſir Iohn Heyward, and many other famous Knightes & Eſquiers: ſhe was ſhipped in the new Ellen of Londō, and in hir Nauie the Iohn of Newcastle, the Marie of Saliſburie, and many other Royall ſhips, & the morrowe landed at Sluce in Flaūders, & as ſoone as hir ſhip & cōpany of ſhips were entred into ye Hauen, there receiued hir ſir Simō de Leleyn and the water Bailie, in diuers Boates & Barks apparelled redie for hir lāding. The firſt eſtate y• receiued hir was ye Biſhop of V
                     •
                  right well accompanyed, & the Counteſſe of Shorne baſtard daughter to Duke Phillip of Burgoygne, & with hir many Ladyes & Gentlewomē, & ſo procéeding in at the gate of the towne, the ſame towne was preſented to hir, ſhe to be Soueraigne Ladie thereof: alſo they gaue hir. xij. marks of gold Troy waight, the which was. 200. 
                  •
                of Engliſh Money, and ſo ſhe procéeded through the towne to hir lodging, euery houſholder ſtanding in the ſtréete with a torche in his hand burning. On the morrow the olde Dutches of Burgoygne came to hir, accompanyed with many great Eſtates.

On the. iij. of July came the▪ Duke of Borgoigne to Sluce with xx. perſons ſecretly, and was there openly affianced to the Ladie Margaret, by the Byſhop of Saliſburie and the Lorde Scales, in preſence of the Lord Dacre, the Duches of Norfolke, the Ladie Scales, and all the Knightes, and Eſquiers, Gentlewomen enuironing the Chamber.
            On the viij. of July being Saterday, by the Duke of Burgoignes appointment, the Ladie Margaret remoued by water to the Dame. And on the Sonday in the morning betwixt v. and. vj. of the clocke, the mariage was ſolempnized betwixt them, by the Biſhops of Saliſburie and of Turney, there being preſent the olde Duches of Burgoigne, the Lord Scales, the Lord Dacre, with the Knightes, Eſquiers, Ladyes and Gentlewomē that came out of England, the great triumphs, feaſtings, ſhewes of Pageants, with other ſtraunge deuiſes, and Juſtings, were ſuch as I haue not read the like, and would be ouer long in this place to ſet downe.
            Sir Thomas Cooke late Maior of Londō, was by one named
                  Robert Fabian. Sir Thomas Cooke. 
               Hawkins appeached of treaſon, for the which he was ſent to the Towre, and his place within London ſeaſed by the Lorde Ryuers, and his wife and ſeruauntes clearely put out therof. The cauſe was this: The forenamed Hawkins came vpon a ſeaſon vnto the ſayd ſir Thomas, requeſting him to lend a thouſand markes vpon good ſuertie, wherevnto he anſwered, that firſt he would know for whom it ſhould be, and for what intent, at length vnderſtanding it ſhoulde be for the vſe of Quéene Margaret, he anſwered he had no currant wares whereof any ſhiftes might be made without too much loſſe, and therfore required Hawkins to moue him no farther in that matter, for he intended not to deale withall: yet the ſayde Hawkins exhorted him to remember, what benefites he had receiued by hir when ſhe was in proſperitie, as by making him hir Wardrober, and cuſtomer of Hampton, &c. but by no meanes the ſayde Cooke woulde graunt goods nor money, although at the laſt the ſayd Hawkins required but an hundreth poūd, he was fayne to depart without

the value of a pennie, and neuer came againe to moue him which ſo reſted two or thrée yeares after tyll the ſayde Hawkins was caſt in the Towre, and at length brought to the brake, called the Duke of Excesters daughter, by meane of which payne he ſhewed many things, amongſt ye which the motion was one, that he had made to ſir Thomas Coke and accuſed himſelfe ſo farre that he was put to death: by meane of which confeſſion the ſayde ſir Thomas was troubled as before is ſhewed. After the ſaide ſir Thomas had lyen in the Towre from Whitſontide fyll about Michaelmas, in the which ſeaſō many enquiries were made to finde him guiltie, and euer quit, till one iurie by meanes of ſir Iohn Fogge, endited him of treaſon, after which an other determine was ſet at the Guildhall, in the which ſat with ye Maior, the Duke of Clarence, the Earle of Warwike, ye Lorde Riuers, ſir Iohn Fogge with other of ye Kings counſell, to the which place the ſaide Thomas was brought & there arraygned vpō life & death, where he was acquited of ye ſaid inditement, & had to the Counter in Bredſtreete, & from thence to the Kings bench. After a certaine time that he was thus acquited, his wife gat againe the poſſeſſiō of hir houſe, ye which ſhe found in an euill plight, for ſuch ſeruants of y• Lord Riuers and ſir Iohn Fogge, as were aſſigned to kéepe it, made hauoke of what they liſted. Alſo at his place in Eſſex named Guydy hall, were ſet an other ſort to kéepe that place, the which deſtroyed his Deare in his Parke, his Connies & his Fiſhe without reaſon, and ſpared not Braſſe, Pewter, bedding and all that they might carie, for the which might neuer one pennie be gottē in recompence, yet could not ſir Tho. Cooke be deliuered til he had paid 8000. 
                  •
               . to ye
               ▪ K. & 800. 
                  •
               . to ye Quéene.
            In the ende of Auguſt the Caſtle of Harlowe was wonneHarlovv Caſ
                     •
                  l
                     •
                   vvonne. by the aſſaulte of the Lorde Herberd, the which Caſtle was one of the ſtrongeſt holdes in Wales.
            
            This yéere many murmurous tales ran in the Citie, betwene ye Earle of Warwike, and the Quéenes blood, ye which Earle was euer had in great fauour of the Cōmons of this

land, by reaſon of y• excéeding houſhold which he dayly kept in all Countries where euer he ſoiourned or lay, and whenEarle of VVarvvike his houſe keeping. he came to London, he held ſuch an houſe, that. vj. Oxen were eaten at a breakefaſt, and euery Tauerne was full of his meate, for who that had any acquaintance in that houſe, he ſhould haue had as much ſoden and roſt as he might carrie vpon a long Dagger.
            
               Simon Smith: William Hanot, the 28. of Sept.
               
                  Sherifes. Maior. Cordvvainer ſtreete diſcharged of fiftens. Anno reg. 19.
            
            
               William Tailour Grocer, the 28. of October.
            
            This W. Tailour gaue to ye Citie of London certaine tenements, for the which ye Citie is boūd to pay for euer, at euery fiftéene graunted to ye King, for all ſuch as ſhall dwell in Cordwainers ſtréete warde, ſeiſed at. xij. d. a péece or vnder.
            The Duke of Clarence went to Calleis, & there wedded Iſable one of ye daughters to ye Earle of Warwike. Sir Iohn Coniers
               1469 knight, Robert Hiltard, who named himſelfe Robin of Ridſedale,
                & other, gathered an hoſt of. 20000. mē in ye North,Robert of Ridſedale. againſt whō K. Edward ſent W. Herbert late made Earle of Penbroke, with. 18000. Welch men, and Humfrey Stafforde of Southroike, late made Earle of Deuon wt 6000. good archers, which ij. Erles falling out for lodging in ye towne of Bābery,
               Edgecote field. 
               Hūfrey▪ Stafford departed wt his power, wherby W. Herbert & Richard Herbert his brother were ouercome & taken by thē of the North▪ &. 5000. (ſaith Hall) of the Welchmen ſlaine in a plaine called Danes more, néere to ye towne of Edgecote, iij. miles frō 
               Ba
                     •
                  bery, y• 26. of July. The men of name ſlaine of y• 
               Welch party, were ſir Roger Vaughā
                knight, Henry ap Morgan, Tho. ap Richard Vaughā
                Eſquier, W. Herbert of Brecknocke Eſquier, Watkin Thomas ſon to Roger Vaughan: Inā ap Iohn ap Meridik, Dauy ap Iankin ap Limorik, Harriſdon ap Pikton, Iohn Done of Kidwelly, Rice ap Morgā ap Viſtō, Iankin Perot ap Scots Burg, Iohn Euerard
                of Penbrokeſhire, Iohn Courtor
                of Hereford. The Northrē men of name ſlain were, ſir Henry Latimer ſonne & heire to ye Lord Latimer, ſir Roger Pigot Knight, Iames Coniers ſonne & heire to ſir Iohn Coniers Knight, Oliuer Awdley Eſquier, Tho▪ Wakes
               
ſonne & heire to W. Mallerie Eſquier: Richard Woodvile Lord Riuers, wt 
               Iohn his ſonne, were takē in y• foreſt of Dene & brought to Northamptō, where they with ſir W. Herbert & Richard his brother were all▪ iiij. beheaded, by y• cōmaundement of ye duke of Clarence, & the Erle of Warwike. T. Herbert
                was ſlaine at Bristow. Humfry Stafford
                was by the commōs taken at Bridgewater, and beheaded. King Edwarde was taken at V
                     •
                  nar, a village beſide Northampton, by ye archbiſhop of Yorke, & brought to Warwicke Caſtell, & thence to Yorke, from whence by faire promiſes he eſcaped, & came to London.
            
            
               Richard Gardiner, Robert Drope, the 28, of September,
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Richard Lee Grocer, the 28. of October.
            
            The 29. of Sept. Humfrey Neuile Knighte, and Charles his brother, were taken by the erle of Warwike, & beheaded at Yorke, King Edward being preſent. In the moneth of
                  Anno reg. 1
                     •
                  
                  ▪
                March the L. Willoughby, Rich. Lord Wels, ſir Roberte his ſon, ſir Tho. Delaband, ſir Tho. Dimoke the Kings Champion, draue out of Lincolnſhire ſir Tho. Burgh a Knighte of the kings houſe, pulled down his place, and toke al his goods & cattels, & with 30000 of the commons, cried, King Henrie. K. Edward gaue Lorde Wels his pardon, & ſente for him, & hauing him in cuſtody, cōmanded him vpon paine of death, to cauſe the Lincolneſhire men i
                  •
                lay down their hoſte, and ſo he wrote, but all in vaine: Wherevpon the Lorde Wels head was cutte off. King Edward ſprinkeled the Lincolnſhire men with his ordinance, and ſlewe many of them. Sir Robert Wels, ſir Thomas Delaband, & ſir Thomas Dimoke were taken and beheaded beſide Stamforde the 13. of March: and the 19. day the Lorde Willoughbey was beheaded at Doncacter. The Duke of Clarence, and the Earle of Warwike fledde into Fr
                     •
                  unce, where they made a marriage betwixte Prince Edwarde ſonne to King Henrie the ſixth, and one of the Earle of Warwikes daughters. At this marriage was concluded, that King Henry ſhoulde raigne againe, and Prince Edwarde after him, and for lacke of their heires, George Duke of Clarence, and his heires, 
                  ••
               .
            
               The. xiij. day of Sept. George Duke of Clarence, Iaſper
                Earle of Penbroke▪ 
                  Richard
                Earle of Warwike, the Earle of Oxford with the baſtard Fawconbridge and many other ariued at Plymmouth▪
                and an other ſort at Dartmouth, of whome the Earle of Penbroke went into Wales, the other toward Excester, proclaiming in the name of King Henry that all men betwixt the ages of. xvj. and. lx. ſhould be ready to aſſiſt the ſaide Lordes on the behalfe of King Henrie, againſt King Edward. Alſo on the Sonday next after the feaſt of Saint Michael the Archangell, Doctor Godard preaching atDoctor Godard preached at Paules Croſſe againſte King Edvvarde. 
               Paules▪
                Croſſe, declared by the reading of byls and diuers other arguments and proofes that Henrie was true & lawfull King of England, and not King Edward. Moreouer the Marques Mountacute who had gathered a. vj. thouſand men in King Edwardes name, and was come néere vnto the ſaid Edward, he told them how King Edward had ſerued him: firſt, making him▪ Earle of Northumberland, and after giuing the ſame Erledome to T. Percie, made him Marques Mountacute, allowing him a Pies neſte to maintayne it▪ with all, wherefore he would leaue to ſerue him and take part with the Earle of Warwike his brother. Whereof when King Edwarde vnderſtoode, he fled from his hoſt, beſides Notingham,
               King Edvvarde fled beyond the Seas. and the. iij. day of October, he with the Lorde, Riuers, Lorde Haſtings his Chamberlaine, the Lord Say and other to ye number of. vij. or. viij. Earles tooke ſhipping at Lynne,
               Phil. Kom
                     •
                  in
                     ••
                  . & ſayled toward the duke of Burgoigne his brother in lawe.
            The Quéene had before that, to wit, on y• firſt of October,The Queene tooke ſanctuary at▪ VVeſtm
                     •
                  ſter. ſtolne ſecretly in ye night out of the Towre of London, by water to Westminster & there taken Sanctuary. This time was great watch kept in ye Citie of London▪
                for the Kentiſhmen hadKentishmen robbed the Flemings, & chaſed 
                     •
                  hem oute of London. aſſembled themſelues in great companies, & ſo had come to the outer part of the Citie as to Ratcliffe, Saint Katherins, Southwarke, and other the ſuburbes▪ and many of them were entred the Citie, where they robbed the Flemings at Blanchapelto
                     •
                  , and other places, making▪ them to flye out of the Citie with ſorrow ynough.
            
               On Wedneſday folowing the tower of London was yéeldedThe tovvre of London yéelded to the Mayor of London. to the Mayor, and his brethren the Aldermē, who forthwith entred the ſame, and delyuered King Henrie of his impriſonment, and lodged him in the Kings loding. On the Fryday following came to London the Archbyſhoppe of Yorke, brother to the Earle of Warwike, the Lorde Prior of Saint Iohns, and other to the number of 2000. men of armes. On the morrow following, came the Duke of Clarence, the Earle of Warwike, the baſtard Fawconbridge, with other to the number of foure thouſand men. On the. vj. day of OctoberIohn Forteſcue. the Duke of Clarence, the Earle of Warwike, the Archbiſhop of Yorke, the Lorde of Saint Iohns, with other, entred the Towre of London, and King Henrie being there priſonerK. H. reſtored. nigh the ſpace of nine yéeres, they elected him to be their lawfull King, and forthwith rode with him through London to the Biſhops Pallace, where he reſted til the. xiij. of October, on which day he went a proceſſion Crowned in Paules Church: the Earle of Warwike bare his traine, and ye Earle of Oxforde his ſworde. &c.
            King Edward was proclaimed vſurper of the Crowne, and Iohn Tiptoft Earle of Worcester was founde in the top of an high trée, in the Foreſt▪ of Wabridge, in the Countie of Huntington, and brought to London and beheaded at ye Towre hill, and was buried at the Blacke Friers,
            
            
               Iohn Crosby: Iohn Ward, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Sir Iohn Stockton Mercer, the 28. of October.
            
            Sir Iohn Crosby Knight, one of the late named Sherifes of London for this yeare▪ deceaſed in Anno Domini. 1475Sir Iohn Croſby his giftes to the Citie. and was buryed in the Pariſhe Churche of Saint Helen in Byſhoppes gate ſtréete, vnto the repayring of which Pariſhe Churche he gaue fiue hundred markes, and. xxx. pounde to be diſtributed to poore houſholders in the warde of Byſhops gate: to the repayring of the Pariſh Church at Heneworth in Myddleſex fortie pounde: to the▪ repayring of London Wall one hundred pounde: toward the making of a new Towre of ſtone at the South ende of London bridge, if the ſame were

begun by the Maior and commonaltie within. x. yéeres next after his deceaſſe, one hundred pounde: to the reparations of Rochester bridge. x. pound: to euerie the priſoners in and about London liberally. Alſo he gaue to the Wardens and Commonaltie of the Grocers in London two large pottes of Siluer chaced halfe guilte, waying. xitj. pounde v. ounces of Troy weyght, to be occupyed in their common hall, and elſe where, at their diſcretions. Quéene Elizabeth wyfe to Edward the fourth, being in the Sanctuarie at Westminster,
               Prince Ed. born in the Sāctuarie. was deliuered of a Prince on the. iitj. of Nouember, who was after King Edward the fifth.
            King Edward with the Lord Haſtings, the Lorde Say, ix. hundred Engliſhmen, & iij. hundred Flemings, would haue landed in Eſſex, but there the Erle of Oxfordes brother put themAnno reg. 11 off, and after he landed ſore weather beaten at Raueneſporne, within Humber on Holderneſſe, and there roſe on him Holderneſſe
               1471 men, whoſe Captayne was ſir Iohn Weſterdale a Prieſt, after caſt into the Marſhalſea at London. As K. Edward paſſed the countrey he ſhewed ye Erle of Northumberlandes letters and Seale, that ſent for him, ſaying that he came to claime no tytle of the Crowne, but only his Dukedome of Yorke, nor would not haue done afore, but at ye exciting of the Erle of Warwike, and cryed in euery place K. Henrie, and Prince Edwarde, wearing an Eſtriche Feather Prince Edwardes lyuerie. King Edward came to Notingham where ſir William Stanley, ſyr William Norres, and diuers other broughte him men; ſo that he had then 4000. or more. Then Edward marched towarde Lecester where the Earle of Warwike and Marques Mountacute had 4000 men, and would haue fought with King Edwarde, but that he had receyued letters from the Duke of Clarence, that the ſhould not fight vntill he came. Whervpon he kéeping Lecester ſtill, ſuffered Edwarde to marche towarde London. A 
                  〈…〉
                of Clarence with ſeuen thouſand
                  〈…〉
                
               Edward, agréed to him, & brake all the promiſes made in Fraunce. King Edwarde comming

to London, by Maſter Vrſwike the Recorders meanes and others entred, into the Byſhoppe of Londons Palaice by aKing Henry againe ſent to the Tovver. Poſterne, and there tooke King Henrie, and the Archbyſhop of Yorke, and ſent them both to the Towre on Maū
               dye Thurſday.
            The Earle of Warwike, the Duke of Excester, the MarquesBarnet field. 
               Mountacute, & the Earle of Oxford, we many Knights came with their hoſt towarde Barnet: Wherefore King Edward tooke King Henrie with him, & preoccupied ye town of Barnet all the night: the Earle of Warwike & his retinue remained on the plaine without the towne, ſhooting gūnes one at the other. And in ye morning being Eaſter day and ye xiitj. of Aprill, they fought in a thick miſt from. iitj. of ye clock in the morning till. x. & diuers times the Earle of Warwikes men ſuppoſed that they had gotte the victorie of the fielde, but it happened that ye Earle of Oxfords men had a ſtarre we ſtreames both before & behinde on their liueries, and King Edwards men had the ſunne with ſtreames on their lyuery: whervpon the Earle of Warwikes men by reaſon of the myſt not well decerning the badges ſo lyke, ſhot at the Earle of Oxfordes men that were on their owne parte, and then the Earle of Oxforde and his men cryed treaſon, and fled with eight hundred men. The Marques Mountacute was priuily agréed wyth King Edwarde, and had gotten on hys lyuerie, but one of his brothers the Earle of Warwikes men eſpying this fell vppon him and killed him.
            The Earle of Warwike ſéeing all this, lepte on a horſe to flye, and comming to a woodde where was no paſſage, one of Kyng Edwardes men came to hym, kylled hym, and ſpoyled hym to the naked ſkynne. Sir William Tirrell Knyghte was kylled on the Earle of Warwikes 
               
                  ••
               rt. The Duke of Excester fought manfully and was diſſ
                  ••
               yled, wounded, and lefte for deade from ſeuen in the morning tyll. 4. of the clocke in the afternoone, and then beyng brought to a ſeruauntes houſe of his there by, called Ruthland, he had a Chirurgion, and after was conueyed into

               Westminster Sanctuarie. The Lorde Cromwell ſonne and heire to the Earle of Eſſex, the Lord Barnes ſonne and heire, to the Lord Say, were ſlaine on King Edwardes partie, and on both partes to the number of foure thouſande, which were buryed on the ſame playne, where after a Chappell was builded.
            The morow after Easter day, were ye bodyes of the EarleIob. Raſtall. of Warwike, and the Marques Mountacute layde naked in Paules Churche in London, that all men might ſée them, King Henrie with the Archbyſhop of Yorke, were ſent to the Towre of London.
            
            At this time Quéene Margaret, and Prince Edwarde hir ſonne had lyne on ye ſea. xvtj. dayes letted with foule weather, & on Easter day at euen they landed with their Frenche
               Battell at Tevvkesburie. Nauie at Weymouth, and ſo came to Excester, from thence to Tewkeſburie, and pitched his fielde by Seuerne. Edwarde
                the fourth being come from London, fought with Prince Edward
               Liber Tewx. at Tewkeſburie, on the fourth of May, tooke Quéene Margaret priſoner with Prince Edward hir ſonne, whom cruelly he ſmote on the face with his gawntlet, and after his ſeruants ſlew him. Edmond Duke of Somerſet, and ſir Hugh Courteney fledde from Prince Edward and loſte him the fielde. There was ſlaine Courteney Earle of Deuonſhire, Lorde Iohn of Somerſet, Lorde Wenlocke, ſir Edmond Flamdene, ſir Robert Whittingham, ſir William Vaus, ſir Nicholas Haruie, ſir Iohn Deluis, ſir William Filding, ſir Thomas Fizhony, ſir Iohn Laukenor. King Edward entring a Churche in Tewekſburie with his ſworde drawne, a Prieſt brought the Sacrament againſt him, and woulde not let him enter vntill he had graunted his pardon to theſe that followe: the Duke of Somerſet, the Lorde of Saint Iohns, ſir Humfrey Audeley, ſir Geruis of Clifton, ſir William Crimeby, ſir William Carie, ſir Thomas Treſham, ſir William Newbrough Knightes, Henrie Treſham, Walter Courteney, Iohn Florie, Lewes Myles, Robert Iackſon, Iames Gower, Iames Deluis, ſonne and heire to ſir Iohn Deluis, all theſe where they

might haue eſcaped, tarryed in the Church (truſting in the Kings pardon,) from Saterdaye tyll Mondaye, when they were taken out and beheaded.
            Aboute this time ſir Walter Wroitile, and ſir GeffreyThomas the Baſtarde. Gates Knightes, gouernours of Caleis, ſente ſir George Broke Knight from Caleis with. 300. ſouldiours to Thomas the Baſtarde Fauconbridge, Captaine of the Earle of Warwickes Nauie, willing him to raiſe the Countrey of Kente, and to goe to London, there to take King Henrie out of the Tower, and then to goe againſt King Edwarde.
            
            The fourtéenth day of May Thomas, the Baſtarde wyth a ryotous company of ſhipmen, and other of Eſſex and Kent, came to London, where being denyed paſſage throughe the Citie, he ſet vpon Biſhops Gate, Aldegate, London bridge, &c. along the Thamis ſide, ſhooting arrows and Gunnes into the Citie, fiered the Suburbs, and brent more than 60. houſes, wanne the Bulwarkes at Aldegate and entred the Citie, but ye Parcoliſe being let downe, ſuche as had entred were ſlaine, and then the Citizens purſued the reſt, as farre as Stratforde and Blacke Wall, ſlaying many, and tooke manye priſoners. Thomas the Baſtarde went from London Weaſtwarde, as farre as Kingstone vppon Thamis, to proſecute King Edwarde, but the Lorde Scales, with Nicholas Faunte Maior of Canterburie, by fayre wordes cauſed Fawconbridge to returne to Blacke Heath in Kent, from whence in the night he ſtale from the hoſte with ſixe hundred horſſemenne to Rochester, and ſo to Sandwiche, where he abode the Kyngs comming.
            The one and twentith of May King Edwarde came toKing Henrie murdered. 
               London with thirtie thouſand men, and the ſame nyght king Henrie was murdered in the Tower of London: on the morrowe he was brought to Saint Paules Church in London, in an open Cophen bare faced, where he bled: thēce he was carried to the Blacke Friers and there bled: and thence to Cherſey Abbay in a boate, where he was then buryed, but ſince remoued to Windſor, where he reſteth.
            
               Thus ended the King his tranſitorie life, hauing inioyed as great proſperity, as fauourable fortune coulde aforde, and as greate troubles on the other ſide, as ſhe frownyng coulde poure out, yet in both ſtates he was patiente, and vertuous, that he maye be a patterne of moſte perfect vertue, as he was a worthy example of Fortunes inconſtancie, he was plaine, vpright, far from fraude, wholye giuen to prayer, reading of Scriptures, and almes-déedes, of ſuch integritie of lyfe, that the Biſhoppe whyche hadde bene hys Confeſſour tenne yeares, auowched that hée had not all that tyme committed anye mortall cryme: So continente as ſuſpition of vnchaſte life neuer touched hym: and hauyng in Chriſtmaſſe a ſhewe of yong womenne wyth theyr bare breaſtes layde out, preſented before hym he immediately departed, wyth theſe wordes, fie, fie, for ſhame, forſooth you be to blame: before his marryage he liked not that women ſhoulde enter into hys Courte, and for thys reſpect, he committed hys two brethren by the mothers ſide, Iaſper and Edmonde, to moſte honeſt and vertuous Prelates, to bée broughte vppe, ſo farre he was from couetouſneſſe, that when the executors of hys vncle the Biſhoppe of Winchester, ſurnamed the rich Cardinall, would haue giuen to him 2000. pounde, he playnelye refuſed it, willing them to diſcharge the will of the departed, and woulde ſcarcely condeſcend at length to accept the ſame ſome of money towarde the endowing of his Colledges in Cambridge and Eaton: he was religiouſly affected (as the tyme then was) that at principall holydayes, he would were ſackeclothe next his ſkinne. Othe he vſed none, but in moſte earneſt matters theſe wordes: forſoothe and forſooth: he was ſo pityfull, that when hée ſawe the quarter of a Traytour agaynſte hys Crowne ouer Criple Gate, hée willed it to be taken awaye, wyth theſe wordes: I wyll not haue anye Chriſtian ſo cruellye handeled for my ſake: manye greate offences hée willinglye pardoned, and receyuing

at a tyme a greate blowe by a wicked manne whyche compaſſed hys deathe, he onelye ſayde, forſooth, forſooth, yée doe fowelye to ſmite a Kyng annoynted ſo: another alſo thruſte him in the ſide wyth a ſworde when hée was reſtoared to hys ſtate and Kyngdome: not long before hys death, beyng demaunded why hée hadde ſo long helde the Crowne of Englande vniuſtlye, he replyed, my Father was Kyng of Englande, quietlye enioying the Crowne all hys raigne, and further my grandſire was Kyng of Englande, and I euen a chylde in my Cradle, was proclaymed and crowned King without anye interruption, and ſo helde fortye yeares, well neare all the ſtates doing homage vnto me, as to my anteceſſors: Wherefore I may ſaye with King Dauid: The lotte is fallen vnto me in a faire grounde, yea, I haue a goodlye heritage, my helpe is from the Lorde whyche ſaueth the vprighte in hearte.
            This good King, of hymſelfe alwayes naturally enclinedThe Kings Colledge in Cambridge. to doe good, and fearing leſte he might ſéeme vnthankfull to almyghtye GOD for hys greate benefittes beſtowed vppon hym ſince the tyme he firſte tooke vppon hym the regimente of the Realme, determyned aboute the ſixe and twentith yeare of hys raygne, for hys primer notable worke (as by the wordes of hys wyll I finde expreſſed) to erecte and founde two famous Colledges in the honoure and worſhippe of hys holy name, and for the encreaſe of vertue, the dilation of cunning, and eſtabliſhmente of Chriſtian Fayth, whereof the one in Cambridge, to bée called hys Colledge royall of oure Ladye and Saint Nicholas: And the other at Eaton beſide Windſor, to bée called hys Colledge of oure bleſſed Ladye. And for the performaunce of thys hys deuoute purpoſe, hee enfeffed certayne Byſhoppes wyth other Noble and worſhipfull perſonages by hys letters patents wyth lands and poſſeſſions, parcel of his enheritance of the

Dutchie of Lācaster, to the cleare value of wel neare xxxiiij. hundred pound by yere, whych letters patents he after confirmed by his Acte of Parliament, declaring alſo by his wil vnto his ſayde feoffées, his intent and meaning, howe the ſame ſhould be imployed vpon the edifications of his ſaide two Colledges, wherof in my iudgemente the deuice is ſo excellent, and the buildings ſo princely and apt for that purpoſe, as I can not omitte to ſet forth vnto you the very plat of the whole Colledge in Cambridge, euen as I finde mentioned, almoſt Verbatim, in his ſaid wil, ſuppoſing that if the reſt of the houſe had procéeded according to the Chappel alreadie finiſhed (as his full intent & meaning was) the lyke Colledge coulde ſkant haue bin found againe in any Chriſtian land. The words of the Will are thus. As touchingThe Chappel. the dimenſions of the Church of my ſayde Colledge, of our Lady and Saint Nicholas of Cambridge, I haue deuiſed & appointed, that the ſame Church ſhal containe in length 288. foote of aſſiſe, without any Iles, & all of the wideneſſe of xl. foote. And the length of the ſame Church from ye Weſt end vnto the Alters at the Quire dore, ſhal contayne 120. foote. And from the Prouoſtes ſtall, vnto the gréece called Gradus Chori. 90 foote, for 36. ſtals on either ſide of the ſame Quyre, aunſcoering to lxx. fellowes and ten Prieſts conduits, whiche muſt be de prima forma. And from the ſayd ſtalles vnto ye Eaſt end of the ſayde Church, lxij. foote of aſſiſe. Alſo a Reredoſſe bearing the Roodelofte, departing the Quire and the bodye of the Churche, contayning in length xl. foote, and in breadth xiiij. foote. The walles of the ſame Church to be in height 90. foote imbattelled, vawted and Charerooffed, ſufficiently butteraced, and euery Butterace fined with finials. And in the Eaſt end of the ſame Church ſhal be a Window of nine dayes, and betwixt euerye Buttrace a Windowe of fiue dayes. And betwixt euery of the ſame Buttraces in the Bodye of the Churche, on both ſides of the ſame Church a Cloſet with an Alter therein, contayning in length twenty foote, and in bredth ten foote, vawted and finiſhed vnder the

ſoyle of the Ile windowes. And the pauement of ye Church to be enhanſed 4. foote aboue ye groūd without. And ye height of the pauement of the Quire one foote and a halfe aboue the pauement of the Churche. And the pauemente of the Alter thrée foote aboue that. And on the North ſide of the Quier aThe Veſtry. Ueſtry contayning in length fiftie foote, and in breadth. 22. foote, departed into two houſes beneath, and two houſes aboue, which ſhal containe in hight 22. foote in al, with an entrey from the Quire vauted. And at the Weſt ende of theThe Cloiſter. Church a Cloyſter ſquare, the Eaſt pane contayning in length. 175. foote and the Weſt pane as muche. The North pane two hundered foote, and the South pane as muche of the whiche the Deambulatoriē
                thirtéene foote wide, and in heyght twentie foote, to the Corbill Table, wyth cleare ſtories and Butteraces wyth finalles, vawted and embattelled. And the grounde thereof, foure foote lower then theThe Steeple. Churche grounde. And in the middle of the Weſt pane of the Cloyſter a ſtrong Tower ſquare, contayning foure and twentith foote wythin the Walles. And in height one hundred and twentie foote, to the Corbill table. And foure ſmall Turrets, ouer that fined wyth Pynacles. And a dore into the ſayde Cloyſter inwarde, but outwarde noone. And as touching the dimenſions of the houſing of the ſaideThe baſe Cour
                     •
                  
                Colledge, I haue deuiſed and appointed in the Southſide of the ſayde Churche a Quadraunte, cloſing to bothe endes of the ſame Churche, the Eaſt pane wherof ſhal contayne 230. foote in length, and in bréedth within the WalsThe Eaſt pane. two and twentith foote. In the ſame panes myddle a Tower for a Gatehouſe containing in length thirtie foote, and in bredth two and twentith foote, and in height lx. foote withThe great Gate in thrée Chābers ouer ye Gate euery one ouer ye other. And on either ſide of the ſame gate foure Chambers, euerye one contayning in length fiue and twentie foote, and in breadth two and twentie féete. And ouer euery of theſe Chambers, two Chambers aboue of the ſame meaſure or more, with two Towers outwarde, and two Towers inwarde.

The Southe pane ſhall containe in length 238. foote, andThe ſouth pane in breadth two and twentie foote wythin, in which ſhall bée ſeuen Chambers, euery one cōtayning in length nine and twentie foote, and in breadth 22. with a Chamber percell of the prouoſts lodging contayning in length. 35. foote, & wyth a Chamber in the Eaſt corner of the ſame pane contayning in length. 25. foote, and in breadth. xxij. foote. And ouer euery of all theſe Chambers two Chambers, and with fiue Towers outward, and thrée towers inward. The Weſt paneThe vveſt pane ſhal contain in length 230. foote, and in breadth within 24. foote, in whiche at the ende towarde the Church ſhall bée aThe Librarie. Librarie, contayning in length 110. foote, and in bread theThe diſputation houſe. 24. foote. And a large houſe for reading and diſputations cō
               tayning in length. xl. foote. And two Chambers vnder the ſame Librarie, eache contayning 29. foote in length and in breadth foure and twentie foote. And ouer the ſayde Lybrary a houſe of the ſame largeneſſe, for diuerſe ſtuffe of theThe vvardrobe ſayd Colledge. In the other ende of the ſame pane a Hall,The Hall. containing in length 100. foote vpō a vaute of 12. foote high, ordained for the Cellor and Buttrie: and the breadth of the Hall ſixe and thyrtie foote. On euerye ſide thereof a Baye Windowe. And in the neather ende of the ſame Hall towarde the middle of the ſame pane a Pantrey and ButtrieThe Pantrie and Buttrie. euerye of them in length twentie foote, and in breadth ſeauentéene foote, and ouer that two Chambers for Officers. And at the neather end of the Hal toward the Weſt, a goodlyeThe Colledge Kitchin. Kitchin. And euerye corner of the ſame pane ſhall haue inwarde two Towers, ordayned for the wayes into the Hall and Librarie. And in euerye corner of the ſayde Quadraunt, ſhall be two corner towers, one inwarde, and one outwarde, moe than the Towers aboue rehearſed.The prouoſts lodging. And at the vpper ende of the Hall, the Prouoſts lodgins, that is to witte, moe than the Chambers for him aboue ſpecifyed, a Parlour on the grounde contayning ſixe and thirtie foote in length, and two and twentie in breadth, and two chambers aboue of the ſame quantitie. And weſtwarde

cloſing thereto a Kitchin for him, a Larderhouſe, Stables and other many houſings and grounds. And weſtwardeThe Bake houſe and Brevvhouſe beyonde theſe houſes, and the ſaide Kitchin ordayned for a Hall, a Bakehouſe, a Brewhouſe, and other houſes of office, betwéene which there is lefte a grounde ſquare of foure ſcoure foote in euery pane, for wood and ſuche ſtuffe.The vvoodyarde. The vvater Conduite. And in the middle of the ſayde large Quadraunt ſhall bée a Conduite goodly deuiſed for eaſe of the ſame Colledge. And I will, that the edification procéede in large forme of my ſayde Colledge cleane and ſubſtancial, ſetting apart ſuperfluitie of too greate curious workes, of entaile and buſye moulding. And I haue deuiſed and appointed that the precinctThe Precinct of the Colledge. of my ſayde Colledge, as well on both ſides of the garden from the Colledge to the Water, as in all other places of the ſame precinct, be incloſed with a ſubſtanciall Wall, of the height of fourtéene foote, with a large Tower at the principall entrie againſte the middle of the Eaſt pane, out of the highe ſtréete. And in the ſame Tower a large Gate,The vvater Gate. and another Tower in the middle of the Weaſt ende at the newe bridge. And the ſame Wall to bée creaſted, embattelled, and fortifyed with Towers, as manye as ſhall bée thought conuenient therevnto. And I will that my ſayde Colledge be edified of the moſte ſubſtantiall and beſt abyding ſtuffe, of ſtone, leade, glaſſe, and Iron, that maye beſte be hadde and prouided thereto.
            Thus much I haue enlarged by occaſion of reading this good Kings Will: the cunning deuiſe wherof I leaue to be conſidered by ſuch as be experte in Architecture, hartily deſiring almightie God to putte into the hearte of ſome notable Prince one day to make perfecte thys princely worke ſo charitably begonne.
            And nowe to returne agayne to Kyng Edwarde. At this hys commyng to London, at Biſhoppes Gate hée made theſe Knyghtes of Aldermen, Syr Iohn Stocton, Syr Ralphe Verney, ſir Richard Blee, ſir Iohn Yong, ſir William
               
               Tayler, ſir George Irelād, ſir Iohn Stokar, ſir Matthew Phillip, ſir William Hampton, ſir Thomas Stalbroke, ſir Iohn Crosby, ſir Thomas Vrſwike Recorder of London.
            
            The foure and twentith of May King Edward with hys hoſte rode through Kent, to Canterburie, and ſo to Sandwiche, where Baſtarde Faulconbridge, ſubmitted himſelfe and all hys to King Edwarde, and yéelded to him lvj. ſhippes gret and ſmall whych had bene vnder his leading, wherevppon King Edward pardoned him, made him Knight and v
                  •
               zeadmiral of the ſea. The L. Denhā
                & ſir Iohn Fog, with others were lefte in Kent, to ſit in iudgement of the rebels, wherof were a greate number puniſhed by the purſe, Nicholas Faunt Mayor of Caunterburie, with other, were hanged, and headed there, the heads of Spicing and Quinton were ſet on Aldegate of London.
            
            The fourth of June George Neuill Archebiſhop of Yorke: and brother to the Earle of Warwike, was deliuered oute of the Tower of London.
            
            The firſte of July Edwarde the ſonne of King Edwarde, was made Prince of Wales, Duke of Lancaster, and Earle of Cornewall.
            
            In September Thomas the Baſtarde of Fauconbridge was taken at Southampton, and beheaded at the Caſtle of Midleham in Yorkeſhire, hys heade was ſette on London bridge.
            
               Iohn Allein: Iohn Shelley, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               William Edward Grocer, the. 28. of October.
            
            The xij. of Nouember the Ladye Anne the Kings ſiſter was deuorſed from the Duke of Excester, by hyr owne ſute.
            Kyng Ed. on Chriſtmaſſe day was Crowned at Westminster, and the Quéene alſo: likewiſe the twelfth day the Kyng was agayne Crowned & wente on Proceſſion crowned,Anno. reg. 12 1472 but the Quéene was not at that time crowned bycauſe ſhe was great with childe.
            
               Thys yeare were ſente Ambaſſadours from King Edwarde to the Duke of Burgoigne, who landed at Bridges on the ſeconde of Aprill, where they were honorablye receyued wythout the Towne, by the Lorde Grantehuſe. The names of the Ambaſſadors was, ſir Iohn Scot Knight Marſhall of Caleis, Mayſter William Hatclofe Secretarie to the Kyng, Mayſter Iohn Ruſſel Doctour and Archdeacon, maſter Richarde Marten Archdeacon of London, ſir Iohn Yong Knighte, and Merchaunte of London, on the fourth of April they were conueyed on horſſebacke to the Dukes lodging. &c.
            
               George Neuill Archebiſhoppe of Yorke, being at Windſor with Kyng Edwarde on hunting, the King promiſed the Archebiſhoppe to come to the More (a place in Hartfordeſhire, whiche the Archebiſhoppe hadde purchaſed and buylded commodiouſlye) there to hunte and make merry with hym, wherevppon the Archebiſhoppe made greate prouiſion for the Kyng, and ſente for muche plate that hée hadde hydde, 
                  •
               at the tyme of Barnet and Tewkeſburie fields, and beſides this, borrowed muche of hys friendes, thys beyng done, the King ſodaynely ſente for the Archbiſhoppe to come to Windſor; where he was arreſted of Treaſon, that he ſhoulde helpe the Earle of Oxforde, and ſo was ſente to Caleis and to Hames, where he continued long after priſoner.
            In thys meane whyle ſir William Parre Knight, and ſir Thomas Vahan Eſquire, and other were ſente to the More to ceaſe all hys goods for the Kyng, which came there to the ſamme of twentie thouſande pounde, Kyng Edward at thys time brake the Biſhops miter, that had many riche ſtones and made therof a Crowne for himſelfe.
            Alſo the Earle of Oxforde that had withdrawen hymſelfe from Barnet fielde, firſt into Scotland, after into France, then getting muche goods on the Sea, landed in the Weaſt Countrey, and entred Saint Michaels Mounte with 397. men, the laſt of September, wheron he was, by the kings

appointmēt, beſieged by Bodrigan and other, but wyth ſuch fauour, that the Earle reuictualled the Mount. Then was Forteſcue ſente thyther to continue the ſiege, and King Edwarde ſending pardons to the Erles men, ſo long practiſed with them, that at the laſt if the Earle had not ſubmitted himſelfe to King Edward, he had bin taken of his own mē, & ſo Forteſtue entring y• 
               Mount, the fiftéenth of Februarie, found victuall ynough there to haue ſerued them till Mydſommer after▪ 
               Iohn Vere Earle of Oxforde, the Lord Beaumonde, two brothers of the ſayde Earle, and Thomas Clifforde were brought priſoners to the King. The Earle of Oxforde was ſente priſoner to Gwines, where he remayned ſo long as thys Kyng raygned. In all whyche tyme the Ladye hys wife, myghte neuer come to hym, or had anye thyng to liue vppon, but what people of theyr Charityes woulde giue hyr, or what ſhée gotte by hyr néedle.
            In the moneth of September Lewes de Bruges Lorde Grantehuſe, came into Englande from Charles Duke of Burgoigne, and on the thirtéenth of October was created Earle of Winchester openly in the Parliament Chamber.
            
               Iohn Broune: Thomas Bledlow, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Sir William Hampton Fiſhmonger, the 28. of October.
            
            This Maior aboue al other hys predeceſſours, corrected Strumpets, and cauſed them to ride about the Citie wyth Rey hoodes vppon their heades, and after baniſhed them the Citie for euer. He alſo cauſed a paire of ſtockes to be ſet in euery ward of London.
            
            The ſixth of October beganne a Parliamente at Westminster by authoritie, wherby an ayde was graunted to the King, towards the charge of his Wars, whiche was leuied of mens lands, as well of Lordes as of other.
            The Duke of Burgo
                     •
                  gne hauing greate Warres wythAnno. reg. 13 1473 the French King, ſente Ambaſſadours into Englande to require

King Edwarde hys brother in Lawe to make Warre on the Frenche Kyng, vnto the whiche requeſte, Kyng Edwarde eaſily graunted, bycauſe hée wiſhed to be reuenged on the Frenche King, as of hys enymie, for ayding the Erle of Warwicke, Quéene Margaret and hyr ſonne Prince Edwarde and their complices: wherevpon he promiſed and alſo determyned in the beginning of the next yeare to bring a greate armye ouer to Caleis, and to inuade the Kingdome of Fraunce. And forthwith with all diligence prepared all things readie for hys iourney, makyng manye ſhiftes for the prouiſion of money to ſerus hys turne.
            
               William Stocker: Robert Balliſdon, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Iohn Tate Mercer, the 28. of October.
            
            Thys yeare the Duke of Excester was founde deade in the Sea betwéene Douer and Caleis, but howe he came there the certaintie coulde not be knowne.
            King Edwarde hauing prepared hys armye, ledde theAnno reg. 14 1474 ſame to Douer from thence to croſſe the ſeas to Caleis. The force that paſſed wyth hym at thys preſente was the greateſt that euer came into Fraunce, moſte of them beyng Horſſemenne, all in verye good order well armed. All the Nobles of the Realme were there, a fewe excepted, they were fiftéene hundered menne of armes very well mounted, and the moſte of them barded and richly trapped, after the manner of the Frenche Warres, and well accompanyed with horſſemenne of theyr retinue, they were at the leaſte fiftéene thouſande Archers on horſſebacke, and a greate number of f
                  ••
               temenne and others, as well to pitche theyr Tentes, whereof they were well furnyſhed, as alſo to attende vppon theyr Artyl
                  •
               erye, and incloſe theyr Campe, and in all theyr armye they hadde not one pledge. Beſides thys, were thr
                  •
               e thouſande Engliſhe menne appoynted to lande in Brytaine.
               
When King Edwarde came to Douer the Duke of Burgoigne to helpe his paſſage, ſent. 500. boates of Hollande, and Seland, called Cuttes, whiche are flatte and lowe, builte verye commodiouſly for tranſporting of horſſes, but notwithſtanding all thys helpe they hadde from the Duke, and all the Kyng of Englande coulde commaunde hymſelfe: hée was aboue thrée wéekes in paſſing betwéene Douer and Caleis, one ſhippe of Ewe tooke two or thrée of his ſmall paſſengers, before Kyng Edwarde embarqued, hée ſente from Douer to the Kyng of Fraunce, one Heralte alone called Gartera Norman
                borne, who broughte a letter of defiaunce from the King of Englande, in verye good language and ſo excellently well penned, that myne Aucthour was perſwaded it was neuer Engliſhe mans doyng. The contentes whereof were, that the Kyng ſhoulde yéelde vnto hym the Realme of Fraunce, beyng hys inheritaunce, to the ende he might reſtore the Cleargye and Nobilitie to theyr auntient libertye, eaſe them of the greate charges they ſuſtayned and deliuer them of the miſeries they were in, whyche if hée refuſed to doe, he proteſted what greate miſchiefe ſhoulde enſue thereof, in manner and forme as in ſuche caſes is accuſtomed. The Kyng read the letter ſoftlye to himſelfe, and afterwarde all alone withdrewe hymſelfe into a wardrobe, and commaunded the Heralte to be brought to hyepreſence, to whom hée made thys aunſwere.
            Fyrſt that he knewe well that the King of Englande had not paſſed the ſeas of hys owne frée motion, but by the perſwaſion of the Duke of Burgondie, and the comminaltie of England.
            
            Secondelye that the Sommer was nowe almoſte paſte, and that the Du
                  ••
                of Burgoigne, was returned from Nunz, as a man diſcomifited and vtterlye vnfurniſhed of all things.
            Thirdlye as touching the Coneſtable (of Fraunce) he knew wel (he ſayde) yt the intelligence wyth ye K. of England,
               
bycauſe he hadde married hys niece: but would deceyue the Kyng his Mayſter as he 
                  •
               ad him, notwithſtandyng all the great benefits that he had receiued of him, which he that rehearſed, adding therevnto that the ſaide Coneſtable ment to liue in continuall diſſimulation, and entertaine euerye man to make his profit of him. Laſt of all he alleaged to the Heralte diuerſe reaſons to perſwade the Kyng hys Maſtor to peace, and gaue hym with hys owne hand. 300. crownes, promiſing him. 1000. more if the peace were▪ cōcluded: further opēly he gaue him for a preſent a goodly péece of Crimſon Ueluet of thyrtie Elles. The Heralte aunſweared that he woulde trauayle the beſte he coulde for peace, and thoughte the Kyng hys Mayſter woulde eaſilye be wonne therevnto: but he willed the Kyng of Fraunce, to ſende an Haraulte to the Engliſhe Campe to demaunde a ſafeconduite for certaine Ambaſſadours, that he woulde ſende to the Kyng of Englande, and to directe hys letters to the Lorde Hawarde, or to the Lorde Stanley, and to hymſelfe alſo to conuene hys Haralte. At one tyme in a ma
               
                  •
               oure, bothe the King of Englande landed at Caleis, and the Duke of Burgoigne departed from before Nunz, who in greate haſte rydde ſtreyghte to Caleis, to the ſayde Kyng wyth a verye ſmall trayne, for he hadde ſente his armye to ſpoyle the Countrey of Barroys and Loraine. The Kyng of Englande departed from Caleis in companye of the Duke and paſſed through Bolloigne, and from thence marched to Peronne where the Duke gaue the Engliſhe men but colde entertaynemente, for he cauſed the Gates to bée ſtreightly kepte, and woulde ſuffer but fewe to enter, ſo that the greateſt parte of them lodged in the fieldes. After they were come to Peronne the Coneſtable of France ſēt to ye Duke of Burgoigndie one of his ſeruants, by whom hée 
                  •••
               uſed himſelfe for the wythholdyng of S. Quintins, alleaging that if hée had reſtored it he could haue ſtoode hym in 
                  ••
                ſtée
                  •
               e in the Realme of Fraunce, for he ſhoulde vtterly haue loſte hys credite and intelligence, but nowe ſéeyng

the Kyng of Englande was come ouer in perſon, he promyſed to doe hereafter all that the Duke ſhoulde commaunde hym, whereof the better to aſſure hym, hée ſente hym a letter of credite to the declaration of the Duke. Further hée gaue the Duke hys Faythe in wryting, to ſerue and ſuc
                  ••
               ure hym, hys friendes and confederates, as well the King of Englande as others, againſt all men none excepted.
            The Duke deliuered the Kyng of Englande hys letter, and all the matter of credite, adding ſomewhat thereto of hys owne heade: for he aſſured the King, that the Coneſtable woulde deliuer into his handes both Saint Quintines, and all his other places, whiche the Kyng eaſilye beléeued, partly bycauſe hée hadde marryed the Coneſtables Nie
                  •
               e, and partlye bycauſe hée ſawe hym in ſo greate feare of the Kyng of Fraunce, that hée thoughte hée durſte not fayle hys promiſe made to the Duke and hym: and the Duke beléeued i
                  •
                alſo. But the Coneſtable meante nothing leſſe, for the feare he was in of the Frenche Kyng was not ſo greate that it coulde force hym thus 
                  〈…〉
               , but he vſed ſ
                  •
               yl his 
                  •
               onted diſſimulation. The King of Englande reioycyng at thys meſſage ſente by the Coneſtable, departed from Peronn
                     •
                  , wyth the Duke of Burgoigne, towarde Saint Quintins, wherevnto when hée approched, a greate bande of Engliſhe menne ranne before, thynkyng that the belles ſhoulde haue bene rong at theyr commyng, and that the Citizens woulde haue receyued them wyth Croſſe and Holye Water, but when they drewe néere to the Towne, the Artill
                  •••
               e ſhotte, and the Souldi
               
                  •
               urs 
                  •••
               ed for the 
                  〈…〉
               he 
                  〈…〉
                ſhe bothe on horſ
                  •
               e backe and on foote, ſo that two or three Engliſhe menne were ſlayne, and ſome taken 
                  •
                and in thys ſtate returned they in great rage to theyr Campe, 
                  〈…〉
                againſte the Coneſtable.
            The nexte morning the Duke of 
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                woulde

haue taken hys leaue of the King of Englande to departe to hys armye in Barrays, promiſing to do maruayles in hys fauour.
            The Frenche Kyng ſente a ſeruaunte of the LORD Halles in the lykeneſſe of an Herraulte, wyth a coate made of a Trumpets Banner, to the Engliſhe Campe, where when hée came, hée was broughte to a Tente, and after dynner talked wyth the Kyng: hys meſſage was chielely grounded vppon the greate deſire the Kyng hadde of long time to bée in peace wyth the Kyng of Englande, ſaying further, that ſince hée was Crowned Kyng of Fraunce he neuer hadde attempted anye thyng againſte the King of England or his realme.
            Secondly he excuſed himſelfe, for the receiuing in times paſte the Earle of Warwicke into his Dominions, ſaying, that hée dyd it onely
                  •
                agaynſte the Duke of Burgoigne and not him.
            Further, he declared that the ſayd Duke of Burgoigne had for none other cauſe called hym into Fraunce, but that by the occaſion of hys comming, hée mighte conclude a bett
                  •
               r peace for hymſelfe wyth the Kyng: And if happily anye other furthered the matter, it was onely to amende the broken eſtate of theyr owne affaires, and for their owne priuate commoditie: but as touching the Kyng of Englandes good ſucceſſe, they were altogither careleſſe thereof. Hée putte hym alſo in mynde of the tyme of the yeare, alleaging that Winter approched, & likewiſe the great charges he ſuſtained.
            Laſtlye he ſayde, that notwithſtanding a great number in Englande deſyred Warre with Fraunce, yet if the Kyng o
                  •
                
               Englande inclyne to peace, the Kyng for hys parte would condeſcende to ſuche conditions as he doubted not but hée and hys Realme woulde allowe of: finally he demaunded a ſa
                  •
               e conduite for certaine Ambaſſadours, to come well enformed of his maiſters pleaſure.
            
               The King of England and part of his Nobles liking theſe ouertures very well, graunted to the Harrault of Fraunce as large a ſafe conducte as he demaunded, and gaue him foure Nobles of golde in rewarde. He alſo ſente an Engliſhe Harrault, with him to bring the like ſafe conducte. And in the nexte morning in a Uillage neare to Amience, the Commiſſioners of both Princes met being theſe. For, the King of France, the baſtard of Bourdon Adm
                  •
               ral of France, the Lord of Saint Pierre, and the Biſhop of Eureux, called Heberge: And for the King of Englande, the Lord Howard, one Chalenger, and Doctor Morton Many articles of peace were treated of, but the laſte reſolutions were theſe, That the French King ſhoulde paye to the King of Englande, preſently before his departure out of Fraunce, 72. thouſande crownes, that the Dolphine ſhoulde marrye King Edwardes eldeſt daughter, and that ſhe ſhoulde haue the Duchie of Guien, for hir maintainaunce, or 5000. crownes yearly to be paid in the Tower of London the ſpace of nine yeres, which terme expired, the Dolphine ſhoulde peaceably enioy the reuenues of the whole Dutchie of Gnien, and then the Kyng of France to be clearly diſcharged of all payments to the King of Englande. Further it was decréed, that the two Primes ſhoulde méete togither, and be ſworne to the treatie, which méeting was obſerued in a town called Picquigny on the 29. of Auguſt.
            The King of England vppon receit of hys money, departed towarde Cal
                     •
                  is in great haſte, fearing the Duke of Burgoignes malice, and his ſubiectes.
            At his departure he lefte for hoſtages with the King of Fraunce, till his returne into England, the Lorde Howarde, and the Maiſter of his horſe called ſir Iohn Cheyney. King Edward tooke ſhipping at Calais, and landed at Douer, and was receyued on the Blacke-heath by the Mayor of London and his brethren in Scarlet, and 500. commoners, all clad in Murrey, and ſo conueyed to London through the Citie to Westminster, on the 28. of September.
            
               This yéere was one Iohn ſurnamed Goſe, brent on ſhe Towre hill in the moneth of Auguſt.
            
               Edmond Shawe. Thomas Hill, the 28. of September.
               Maior. Sherifes.
            
            
               Robert Drope Draper, the 28. of October.
            
            This Robert Drope Maior of London, inlarged the Condite vpon Cornehill, making an Eaſt ende therevnto.
            The. xvi
                  •
               j. of Aprill, were inhaunced to the honour of
                  Anno reg. 15 1475 Knights made by the King. Knighth and after the cuſtome of England, in the time of peace his eldeſt ſonne Edward Prince of Wales, Duke of Connewall and Earle of Chester, his ſeconde ſonne the Duke of Yorke, and with them the Earle of Lincolnes ſonne and heire, the Duke of Suffolke, the Lord Thomas Grey▪
                ye Quéenes ſonne, & Richard his brother: the Earle of Shrewſburie▪
                the Earle of Wilſhire, Maſter Edward Woduile: the Lorde Neuib
                     •
                  : the Lorde Barkleys ſonne and heire: the Lord Awdeleys ſonne and heire: the Lord Saint Ainand: the Lord Stanleys ſonne and heire: the Lorde Sturtons ſonne and heire: the Lorde Haſtings ſonne & heire: the Lorde Ferrors of Chartleys ſonne and heire: Maſter Harbert brother to the Earle of Penbroke, Maſter, Vaughon Brian chiefe Judge: Litilton one of theLittle 
                     〈…〉
                  . Judges of the Common place, Maſter Bodringham, Maſter Brian Stapleton, Kneuit, Pilkinton, Ludlow, Charleton, &c. The ſame day the King created the Lord Thomas Marques Dorſet before dinner, and ſo in the habit of a Marques aboue the habit of his Knighthood, he beganne the table of Knights in Saint Edwards Chamber. At that time he ordained that the Kings Chamberlaine ſhoulde goe with the auncient and well nurtred Knight to aduertiſe and teache the order of Knighthood to the Eſquiers being in the bayne. The King himſelfe came in perſon and did honour to all ye companie with his noble Counſell and his handes.
            
               Hugh Brite: Robert Colwitch, the 28. of Sept.
            
            
               Robert Baſſet Salter, the 28. of October.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            This Maior did ſharpe correction vpon Bakers, for makingAnno. reg. 16. 1476 of light bread, he cauſed diuers of them to be ſet on the Pillorie in Cornehill. And alſo one Agnes Daintie a Butter-wife

for felling of butter new and olde myngled together,Agnes Daintie ſet on the pillerie. being firſt trapped with butterdiſhes, was then ſet on the pilery.
            The Counteſſe of Oxforde, deceaſſed and was buryed at Windſor.
            
            
               Richard Rawſon: William Horne the 28. of Sept.
               Sherifes.
            
            This Richard Rawſon one of the Sherifes of Londō, cauſed to be builded one houſe in the Church yarde of S. Marie Hospitle without Byſhopſgate of London, where the Maior of that Cittie and his brethren the Aldermen vſe to ſit and heare the Sermons in the Eaſter holydayes, as in tymes paſt appeared by an inſcription on the front of the ſame houſe, now by wethering defaced, which I haue red in theſe wordes: Pray for the ſoules of Richard Rawſon late Mercer and Alderman of London, and Iſabel his wife, of whoſe goods this worke was made and founded. Anno Domi. 1488.
            
               Ralph Io
                     •
                  celine Draper, the 28. of October.
               Maior.
            
            By the diligence of this Maior the Wall about London was newe made betwixte Aldgate and Creplegate the cauſedPart of London vv
                     •••
                   nevv builded. the Moore field to be fearched for Clay, & the Bricke 
                  •
               o be made & burnt there: he alſo cauſed Chalke to be brought out of Kent, and in the ſame Moore fielde to be brent intoIohn Rouſe. Lyme, for the furtheraunce of that worke. The Maior with his company of the Drapers, made all that parte betwixte Byſhops gate and Athalowes Church in the ſame Wall. And Byſhops gate itſelfe newe builded by the Marchauntes Almaynes
               Byshops gate nevv builded. of the Stillyard, and from Alhallowes Churche toward Mooregate a great part of the ſame was builded of the goods, and by the executors of ſir Iohn Croſſeby late Alderman of London, as may appeare by his armes in two places fixed.Anno reg. 17. 1477 The companie of Skynners made that parte of the wait betwéene Aldgate and Buryes Markes, towardes Byſhops gate, as may appeare by their armes in thrée places fixed: the other companyes of the Cittie made the other deale of the ſayde Wall, which was a great worke to be done in one yeare.
            
               
               Thomas Burdet an Eſquier of Arrowe in Warwikeſhire,
               Burdet for a vvord ſpoken beheaded. ſonne to ſir Nicholas Burdet who was great butlar of Normandie in Henry y• ſixt dayes) was beheaded for a worde ſpoken in this ſort: K. Edward in his progreſſe hunted in Tho.Engwarant. Burdets parke at Arrow, & flew many of his Deare, amongſt the which one was a white bucke, wherof Tho▪ Burdet made great account, & therfore when he vnderſtoode therof, he wiſhedRegiſter of the Grey Friers. the buckes head in his belly y• moued the King to kyll it. Which tale being told to the King, Burdet was apprehē
               ded & accuſed of treaſon, for wiſhing the buckes head hornes & all in the Kings belly: he was condemned, drawne from the Towre of London to Tyburne, and there beheaded, & then buried in the grey friers Church at London.
            
            
               Henrie Collet: Iohn Stocker, the 28. of Sept.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Humfrey Heyford Goldſmith, the 28. of October.
            
            The. xv. day of Januarie K. Edward the fourth ſolemnized the Matrimoniall feaſt of his ſonne the Duke of Yorke, and Lady A
                     ••
                  e daughter & ſole heire to Iohn Duke of Norfolke.
            
            The. xvj. day of Januarie began a Parliament at Westminster
               Duke of Clarence murdred Anno reg. 18 where George Duke of Clarence K. Edwards brother was attainted of treaſon: and y•. xj. of March after he had offred his owne Maſſe penny in y• Tower of Londō, made his end in a veſſell of Malueſey, & after buried at Tewkeſburie, by his wife ſomtime daughter to y• erle of Warwike, which being with childe died of poyſon but a little before him.
            
               Margaret Dutches of Burgoygne, ſent to hir brother King1478 
               Edward of England for aide againſt the Frenche King, which he would in no caſe graunt to do but ſent Ambaſſadors to y• 
               French King with le
                  •
               ing letters, requiring him to growe to 
                  •••
               e reaſonable agréement wt the ſayd Lady of Burgoygne.
            
            
               Robert H
                     ••
                  ding: Robert Byfield, the 18. of Sept.
               Sherifes. Maior. Anno. reg. 19 1479
            
            
               Richard Gardiner Mercer, the 28. of October.
            
            This yere was a great mortalitie & death of y• peſt not on
               
                  ••••
                
               Londō, but in diuers partes of y• Realme, which begā in the 
                  ••
               tter end 
                  ••
                
               
                  ••
               pt. in the yéere la
                  ••
                befor a paſſed, & continued all this yéere till the beginning of Noue 
                  ••
               her, which

was aboute. xiiij. monethes, in the which ſpace dyed innumerable of people in the ſa
                  •
               d Citie and elſe where.
            This yéere the Maior of London being in Paules, knéeling in his deuotions at Saint Erkenwaldes ſhrine, Robert Byfield one of the Sherifes vnaduiſedly, knéeled downe nigh vnto the Maior, whereof afterward the Maior charged him to haue done more then becommed him, but the Sherife anſwering rudely and ſtubbornly, would not acknowledge to haue committed any offence, for the which he was afterwarde by a court of Aldermen fyned at fiftie pounde to bée payde towarde the reparations of the Condites in London, which was truely payde.
            
               Thomas Ilam, Iohn Ward, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Sir Bartholmew Iames Draper, the 28. of October.
            
            This Thomas Ilam one of the Sherifs laſt before named, newly builded the great Condite in Cheape, of his owne charges.
            This yéere King Edward began his Chriſtmas at Waking, and at fiue dayes end remoued to Greenewich, where he kept out the other part of his Chriſtmas with great Royaltie.
            The. xxij. day of Februarie, were fiue notable théeues put to death, for robbing the Church called S. Martins le graund
               Anno reg. 20 1480 in London, and other places, thrée of them were drawne to the Towre hill hanged and brent, the other two were preſſed to death.
            
               Thomas Daniell: William Bacon, the 28. of Sept.
            
            
               Iohn Browne Mercer, the 28. of October.
            
            King Edwarde required great ſummes of money to bée tent him, the Citizens of London graunted him 5000. marksAnno. reg. 21 1481 which was ſeſſed of the. xxv. wardes, which 5000. markes was truely repayde againe in the next yéere following.
            This yéere on Whitſonday King Edward the fourth created the Lord Barkeley, Uicount Barkeley, at Grenewiche.
            
            An houſe on London bridge called the common ſiege, or priuie, fell down into the Thames, where through it fiue perſons
                  
                     •
                  ala tempo. were then drowned.
            
               
               Robert Tate: William Wiking, the 28. of Sept.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Richard Chawrie, the firſt of Februarie.
            
            
               William Harriot Draper, the 28. of October.
            
            This yéere King Edward with his Quéene kept a Royal Chriſtmas at Windſor.
            
            About the ende of Januarie deceaſſed William Wiking, one of the Sherifes of London. In whoſe place was choſen Richard Chawrie, on the firſt of Februarie.
            King Edwarde ſo greatly fauoured this Maior that heAnno reg. 22 1482 tooke him, with certaine of his brethren the Aldermen, and commons of the Citie of London into the Foreſt of Waltham, where was ordeyned for them a pleaſaunt lodge of gréene vowghes, in the which lodge they dyned, with great chéere, and the King would not go to dynner tyll he ſawe them ſerued. After dynner they went a hunting, with the Kyng, and ſlew many deare as well red, as fallowe, whereof the King gaue vnto the Maior and his company good plentie, & ſentK. E. banqueted the Maior & aldermen of Lon. vnto the Ladie Maires & hir ſiſters the Aldermens wiues, ij. Hartes. vj. Buckes, and a tunne of wyne to make them merrie with, which was eaten in the Drapers hall. The Scots began to ſtirre, againſt whom the King ſent the Duke of Glocester and many other, which returned againe without any notable battaile.
            
               William White, Iohn Mathewe, the 28. of Sept.
               
                  Sherifes. Maior. Creplegate builded.
            
            
               Edmond Shaw Goldſmith, the 28. of October.
            
            This Edmond Shaw, new builded Creplegate of London, from the foundation, which gate in old time had bene a priſon, whereunto ſuch citizens and other as were arreſted for debt, or like treſpaſſes were committed, as they be nowe to the Counters, as may appeare by a writ of King Edwarde the ſecond: in theſe wordes.
            
               Rex vic' London ſalutem ex graui querela capri ex detenti in
               Recordes. 
               priſona noſtra de Creplegate pro. x, li▪ quas coram Radulfo Sandwico, tune custode Ciuitatis nostre London, & I. de Blackewell cuius recognum debitorum, &c.
            
            King Edward held his Chriſtmas at Eltham and kept his

eſtate all the whole feaſt in his great Chamber, and the Quéene in hir Chāber, where were dayly more than 2000, perſons.
            The ſame yéere on Candlemas day, he with his Quéene went on proceſſion from Saint Stephens Chappell into Westminster hall, accompanied with the Earle of Angwyſe, ye Lord Grey, and ſir Iames Liddall Ambaſſadors from Scotland, and at his procéeding out of his Chamber he made ſir IohnAnno reg. 23 1483 Wood vnder Treaſurer of England, and ſir William Cateſby one of the Juſtices of the common place Knights.
            After King Edwarde had bene long time in quiet in his Realme, and had receiued yéerely 50000. Crownes payde him in the Towre of London, and was growne ſo ritche that richer he could not be (ſayth myne Author) hauing a maruellous great deſire to accompliſh ye mariage of his daughter with Charles Dolphin of Fraunce, according to the Articles of truce taken as is afore ſhewed, was now by the Lord Heyward (returned out of France▪
               ) certified that the Dolphin had alreadye ioyned himſelfe in mariage with the Ladye Margaret of Austriche, daughter to Maximiliā, ſonne to Frederike the Emperour. Which newes ſo highly offended King Edward, now ſéeing how he had bene abuſed with the vniuſt and dubble dealing of the Frenche King, that he forth with tooke counſell how to be reuenged, and preparing his power to make warres in Fraunce, through melancholy (as was thought) fel ſicke, and ended his life at Westminster the ix. day of Aprill, Anno Domini 1483. when he had raigned 22. yeares, one moneth and odde dayes. He was honorably buried at Windſor: he lefte iſſue, Edwarde the Prince, and Richard Duke of Yorke, and fine Daughters, Elizabeth that after was Quéene, Cicely, Anne Katherine and Briget.
            
            ⸪
         
         
            
            ¶ King Edwarde the fifth.
            
            Whoſe Hiſtorie vvas vvritten by ſir Thomas Moore.
            
            
            
               
                  KIng Edvvarde of that name the fourth, after that he had lyued fiftie and thrée1483 yéeres, ſeuen monethes and ſixe dayes, and thereof raygned twoo & twentie yéeres, one Moneth, & eyght dayes, dyed at Westminster ye ninth day of Aprill, the yeare of our redemption a thouſand foure hundreth foure ſcore & thrée, leauing much fayre iſſue, that is to witte, Edward the Prince, of thirten yeares of age: Richard Duke of Yorke, two yéere yonger: Elizabeth, whoſe fortune and grace was after to be Quéene, wyfe vnto King Henrie the ſeuenth, and mother vnto the eight: Cicelie not ſo for tunate as fayre: Briget which repreſenting the vertue of hyr, whoſe name ſhe bare, profeſſed and obſerued a Religious life in Dertforde, an houſe of cloſe Nunnes: Anne, that was after honourably

married vnto Thomas, then Lord Heyward and after Earle of Surrey: And Katherine, which long time toſſed in eyther fortune, ſometime in wealth, ofte in aduerſitie, at the laſt, if this be the laſt, for yet ſhée liueth, is by the benignitie of hir Nephewe King Henrie the eyght, in very proſperous eſtate, and worthie hir birth and vertue.
            This noble Prince deceaſſed at his Palaice of Westminſter,
               The loue of the people. and with great funerall honour and heauineſſe of his people from thence conueyed, was entered at Windſor. A King of ſuch gouernaunce and behauiour, in time of peace (for in warre eche part muſt néedes be others enimie) that there was neuer any Prince of this lande, attayning the Crowne by battaile ſo hartely beloued with the ſubſtaunce of the people: nor he himſelfe ſo ſpecially in any part of his life, as at the time of his death. Which fauour and affection, yet after his deceſſe by the crueltie, miſchiefe, and trouble of the tempeſtuous world that followed, highly toward him more increaſed. At ſuch time as he dyed, the diſpleaſure of thoſe that bare him grudge, for King Henries ſake the ſixt, whom he depoſed, was well aſſwaged, and in effect quenched, in that, that many of them were deade in more than twentie yeares of his raigne, a great parte of a long life: And many of them in the meane ſeaſon growne into his fauour, of which he was neuer ſtraunge. He was a goodlyDeſcription of Edvvard the fourth. perſonage, Princely to beholde, of harte couragious, pollitique in counſell in aduerſitie nothing abaſhed, in proſperitie rather ioyfull than proude, in peace iuſt and mercifull, in warre ſharpe and fierce, in the fielde bolde and hardie, and natheleſſe no further than wiſedome would aduenturous, whoſe warres who ſo well conſider, he ſhall no leſſe commende his wiſedome where he voyded, than his manhoode where he vanquiſhed. He was of viſage louely, of body mightie, ſtrong, and cleane made: Howbeit in his latter dayes with ouer liberall dyet, ſomewhat corpulent and boorely, and natheleſſe not comely; he was of youth greatly giuen to f
                  •
               eſhely wantonneſſe: from which health

of body in great proſperitie and fortune, without a ſpeciall grace hardly refraineth.
            This faulte not greatly gréeued the people: for neyther could any one mans pleaſure, ſtretch and extend to the diſpleaſure of very many, and was without violence, and ouer that in his latter dayes leſſed and well left. In which time of his latter dayes, this Realme was in quiet and proſperous eſtate, no feare of outward enimies, no warre in hand, nor none toward, but ſuch as no man looked for: the people toward the Prince, not in a conſtrained feare, but in a willing and louing obedience: among themſelues, the cōmons in good peace. The Lordes whom he knewe at variaunce, himſelfe in his death bed appeaſed: he had lefte all gathering of money (which is the onely thing that withdraweth the hartes of Engliſhmen from the Prince) nor any thing intended he to take in hande, by which he ſhoulde be driuen thereto for: his tribute out of Fraunce he had before obtayned:Tribute. and the yéere foregoing his death, he had obtained Barwike. And albeit that all the time of his raigne he was with his people, ſo benigne, courteous, and ſo familiar, that no part of his vertues was more eſtéemed: yet the condition, in the ende of his dayes (in which many Princes by a long continued ſoueraintie, decline into a proude porte frō debonair behauiour of their beginning) maruellouſlye in him grew & increaſed: ſo farre forth, that in Sommer the laſt y• euer he ſawe, his highneſſe being at Windſor in hunting, ſent for the Maior and Aldermen of London, to him for none other errand, but to haue them hunt & be merie with him, where he made them not ſo ſtately, but ſo friendly and ſo familiar theare, and ſent veniſon frō thence ſo fréely into the Citie, that no one thing in many dayes before, gat him either 
                  •
               o heartes or more heartie fauour amongeſt the common people, whiche oftentimes more eſtéeme and take for greater kindneſſe, a little courteſie, than a great benefite. So deceaſſed (as I haue ſayd) this noble King, in that time, in which his lyfe was moſt deſired. Whoſe loue of his people, and

their entire affection towarde him, had béene to his noble children, (hauing in themſelues alſo as many giftes of nature, as many Princely vertues, as much goodly towardneſſe as their age could receiue) a maruellous fortreſſe and ſure armour, if diuiſion & diſſention of their friends had not vnarmed them, & left them deſtitute, & the execrable deſire of ſoueraintie prouoked him to their deſtruction, which if either kind or kindneſſe had holden place, muſt néedes haue bene their chiefe defence. For Richard the duke of Glocester, by nature their vncle, by office their Protector, to their father beholdē, to themſelues by othe & allegiaunce bounden, all bandes broken that binden man & man togither, without any reſpect of God or the world, vnnaturally contriued to bereue them, not only their dignitie, but alſo their lyues.
            But for as much as this Dukes demeanor miniſtreth in effect all the whole matter whereof this booke ſhal intreate, it is therfore conuenient, ſomewhat to ſhew you ere we farther goe, what manner of man this was, that could finde in his heart ſo much miſchiefe to conceiue.
            
               Richard Duke of Yorke▪
                a noble man & a mightie, began not by warre, but by law ſo chalenge the Crowne, puttingRichard Duke of Yorke. hys claime into the Parliament, where his cauſe was eyther for right or fauour ſo farre forth auaunced, that Kyng Henry his bloud (albeit he had a goodly Prince) vtterly reiected, the Crowne was by aucthoritie of Parliamente entailed vnto the Duke of Yorke and his iſſue male in remainder, immediatly after the death of King Henrie. But ye duke not enduring ſo long to tarrie, but intending vnder pretext of diſſention and debate ariſing in the Realme, to preuent his time, and to take vpon him the rule in King Henrie his life, was with many nobles of the Realme at Wakefielde ſlaine, leauing thrée ſonnes, Edward, George and Richard. All thrée as they were great ſtates of birthe, ſo were they great and ſtately of ſtomack, gréedie & ambitious of aucthoritie, and impatient of partners. Edwarde reuenging hisEdvvarde. fathers death, depriued▪ King Henrie, & attained ye Crowne▪
               
               George Duke of Clarence, was a goodly noble Prince and atGeorge Duke Clarence. al points fortunate, if either his owne ambition had not ſet him againſt his brother, or the enuie of his enimies his brother againſt hym. For were it by the Quéene and Lords of hir bloud which highly maligned the Kings kinred (as women commonly not of malice, but of nature hate them whō their huſbandes loue,) or were it a proude appetite of the Duke hymſelfe, intending to be King: at the leaſt wiſe heinous treaſō was there laid to his charge, and finally, were he faultie, were he faultleſſe, attaynted was he by Parliament, and iudged to the death, and therevpon haſtily drowned in a butte of Malmeſey, whoſe death King Edward (albeit he commaunded it) when he wyſt it was done, piteouſly bewayled and ſorowfully repented.
            
               Richarde the thirde ſonne, of whom wée nowe intreate,The diſcription▪ of Richard the third. was in wit and courage egall with either of them, in body & prowes farre vnder them both, little of ſtature, yll featured of limmes, crooke backed, his left ſhoulder much hygher than his right, hard fauoured of viſage, & ſuch as is in ſtates called warlye, in other men otherwiſe: he was malicious, wrathfull, enuious, & from afore his byrth euer froward. It is for truth reported, that the Dutches his mother had ſo much a doe in hir trauaile, yt ſhe coulde not be deliuered of him vncut, & that he came into the world with the féete forward, as mē be borne outward, & (as ye fame runneth) alſo not vntoothed, whether mē of hatred report aboue ye truth, or elſe y• nature chaūged hir courſe in his beginning, which in the courſe of his life many things vnnaturally committed. None euil captaine was he in ye warre, as to which his diſpotiō was more méetely thā for peace. Sundry victories had he, & ſomtimes ouerthrows, but neuer in default as for his own perſon, either of hardines or politike order: frée was he called of diſpence, & ſomewhat aboue his power liberall: wt large giftes he gat him vnſtedfaſt friendſhip, for which he was faine to pill & ſpoile in other places, & get him ſtedfaſt hatred. He was cloſe & ſecrete, a déepe diſſimuler, lowly of

countenaunce, arrogant of heart, outwardlye coumpinable where he inwardlye hated, not letting to kiſſe whom hée thought to kill: diſpiteous & cruell, not for euill wil alway, but ofter for ambition, & either for the fuertie or increaſe of his eſtate. Friend & foe was much what indifferent, where his aduauntage grewe, he ſpared no mans death, whoſe life wythſtoode his purpoſe. He ſlewe with his owne handes King Henry the ſixt, being priſoner in the Tower, as menThe death of King Henrie the ſixte. conſtantly ſaid, & that without commaundement or knowledge of the King, which would vndoubtedly, if he had intended that thing, haue appointed that butcherly office to ſome other, than his owne borne brother.
            Some wiſe men alſo wéen, that his drift couertly conueyed, lacked not in helping forth his brother of Clarence to his death: which he reſiſted openly, howbeit ſomewhat (as men déemed) more faintly, than he that were hartily mynded to his wealth. And they y• thus déeme, thinke that he long time in K. Edwardes lyfe, forethought to be King, in caſe that the King his brother (whoſe life he looked that euill diet ſhould ſhorten) ſhould happen to deceaſſe (as in déede he did) while his children were yong. And they déeme, that for this intent he was glad of his brothers death ye Duke of Clarence, whoſe life muſt néedes haue hindered him ſo intending, whether the ſame duke of Clarence had kept him true to his Nephew the yong King, or enterpriſed to be King himſelfe. But of al this poynt, is there no certaintie, and who ſo deuineth vpon coniectures, may aſwell ſhoote to farre as to ſhort. Howbeit this haue I by credible information learned, that the ſelfe night, in which King Edward dyed, one Miſtlebrooke long ere morning, came in great haſt to the houſe of one Pottier dwelling in Redcroſſe ſtreete without Creplegate in Loxdon: and when he was with haſtie rapping quicklye letten in, he ſhewed vnto Pottier that King Edwarde was departed. By my truth man quoth Pottier, then will my Maiſter the Duke of Glocester be King. What cauſe he had ſo to thinke harde it is to ſay, whether he being toward him, any thing

knewe that he had ſuch thing purpoſed, or otherwiſe had any inkeling thereof: for he was not likely to ſpeake it of nought.
            But now to returne to the courſe of this hiſtorie. Were it that the Duke of Gloucester hadde of olde foreminded this concluſion, and was nowe at erſte therevnto moued, and putte in hope by the occaſion of the tender age of the yong Princes, his Nephewes, (as oportunitie and likelihoode of ſpéede, putteth a man in courage of that he neuer intended) certaine is it, that he contriued their deſtruction, with the vſurpation of the regall dignitie vpon himſelfe. And, foraſmuche as, he well wiſte, and holpe to maintaine, a long continued grudge and heart-burning betwene the Quéenes kinred, and the Kings bloude, either partie enuying others aucthoritie, he nowe thought their diuiſion ſhoulde be (as it was indéede) a furtherly beginning to the purſuit of hys intent, and a ſure ground for the foundation of al his building, if he might firſte, vnder the pretexte of reuenging old diſpleaſure, abuſe the anger and ignorance of the one partie, to the deſtruction of the other, and then winne to hys purpoſe as many as he coulde, and thoſe that could not bée wonne, myght be loſt ere they looked therefore: For of one thing was he certayne, that if hys intent were perceyued, he ſhould ſoone haue made peace betwéene the both parties with his owne bloud.
            King Edwarde in his life, albeit that this diſſention betwéene his friendes ſomewhat irked him: yet in his good health he ſomewhat the leſſe regarded it, bicauſe he thought whatſoeuer buſineſſe ſhoulde fall betwéene them, himſelfe ſhould alway be able to rule both the parties. But in his laſt ſickneſſe, whē he perceiued his naturall ſtrength ſo ſore enféebled, that he diſpaired al recouerie, then he conſidering the youth of his children, albeit he nothing leſſe miſtruſted than that that happened, yet well foreſéeing that many harmes might growe by their debate, while the youthe of his children ſhould lacke diſcretion of themſelues, & good counſell

of their friendes, of which either partie ſhould counſell for their owne commoditie & rather by pleaſaunt aduiſe to wyn themſelues fauour, than by profitable aduertiſement to doo their children good, he called ſome of them before him that were at variaunce, and in eſpeciall the Lord Marques Dorſet the Quéenes ſonne by hir firſt huſbande, & William the Lord Haſtings a noble man then Lord Chamberlaine, againe whō the Quéene ſpecially grudged, for the great fauour the King bare him: & alſo for that the thought him ſecretly familiar with the King in wantō company. Hir kinred alſo bare him ſore, aſwell for that y• King had made▪ him Captaine of Calleis, which office the Lord Riuers brother to y• Quéene claimed of y• kings former promiſe, as for diuers other great gifts which he receiued, y• they looked for. When theſe Lords with diuers of both the parties were come in preſence, the King lifting vp himſelfe & vnderſet with pyllows, as it is reported, on this wiſe ſaide vnto them. My Lordes, my deare kin
                  •
               men & alies, in what plight I lie youThe Oration of the King in his death bed. ſée, & I fée
                  •
               e. By which the leſſe while I looke to lo liue with you, the more déepely am I moued to care in what caſe I leaue you, for ſuch as I leaue you, ſuch be my childrē like to finde you. Which if they ſhould (that God forbid) finde you at variaunce, might hap to fall thēſelues at warre, ere their diſcretion would ſerue to ſet you at peace: ye ſée their youth, of which I recken y• onely ſuertie to reſt in your concorde. For it ſuffiſeth not y• all you loue them, if eche of you hate other. If they were mē, your faithfulnes happily would ſuffiſe: but childhood muſt be maintained by mens aucthority, & ſlipper youth vnderpropped wt elder coūſel, which neither they cā haue, but ye giue it▪ nor ye giue it, if ye grée not. For where eche laboureth to breake that the other maketh, and for hatred of eche of others perſon, impugneth eche others coūſell, there muſt it néedes be long ere any good concluſion go forward. And alſo while either party laboreth to be chief, flatterie ſhal haue more place thā plaine & faithfull aduiſe, of which muſt néedes inſue ye euil bringing vp of y• Prince,

whoſe minde in tēder youth infect, ſhal redily fal to miſchief & riot, & draw downe with his noble Realme to ruine, but if grace turne him to wiſdome: which if God ſend, then they y• by euil meanes before pleaſed him beſt, ſhal after fal furtheſt out of fauour, ſo y• euer at length euil drifts draw to nought and good plaine wayes proſper. Great variaunce hath there long bene betwéene you, not alway for great cauſes. Sometime a thing right wel intended, our miſconſtructiō turneth vnto worſe, or a ſmall diſpleaſure done vs, either our owne affectiō or euil tongues agréeueth. But this wot I well, ye neuer had ſo great cauſe of hatred, as ye haue of loue. That we be al men, that we be Chriſten mē, this ſhal I leaue for preachers to tell you (& yet I wot neare whether any preachers words ought more to moue you, thā his that is by and by going to the place that they al preache of.) But this ſhal I deſire you to remēber, y• the one part of you is of my bloud the other of mine alies, & ech of you with other either of kinred or affinitie, which ſpiritual kinred of affinitie, if the Sacramentes of Chriſtes Church beare that weight with vs, y• would God they did, ſhould no leſſe moue vs to charitie, than ye reſpect of fleſhly conſanguinitie. Our Lord forbid, y• you loue togither ye worſe for the ſelfe cauſe ye you ought to loue ye better. And yet y• happeneth, & no where finde we ſo deadly debate, as among thē, which by nature & lawe moſt ought to agrée togither. Such a peſtilent Serpent is ambitiō,Ambition. & deſire of vaine glory & ſoueraintie, which amōg ſtates where he once entreth, créepeth forth ſo farre, til wt deuiſion & variaunce he turneth all to miſchiefe, firſt longing to be next the beſt, afterward egall with the beſt, & at laſt chiefe & aboue y• beſt. Of which immoderate appetite of worſhip, & thereby of debate & diſſentiō, what loſſe, what ſorowe, what trouble hath wt in theſe few yéeres grown in this Realme, I pray God aſwel forget, as we wel remēber. Which things if I could aſwel haue foreſéen, as I haue wt my more paine thē pleaſure proued, by godes bleſſed Lady (y• was euer his othe) I would neuer haue won y• courteſie of mens knées, wt y• loſſe of ſo many heads.

But ſithen things paſſed cannot be gainecalled, much ought we the more beware, by what occaſion we haue taken ſo great hurt afore, that we eft ſoones fall not in that occaſion againe. Now be thoſe griefs paſſed, and all is (God be thanked quiet) & likely right well to proſper in wealthfull peare vnder your couſins my children, if God ſend them life and you loue. Of which two things, the leſſe loſſe were they, by whom though God did his pleaſure, yet ſhould the Realme alway finde Kings, and peraduenture as good Kings. But if you among your ſelues in a childes raigne fall at debate, many a good man ſhall periſh, and haply he to and ye to, ere this land finde peace againe. Wherfore in theſe laſt wordes that euer I looke to ſpeake with you, I exhorte you and require you all, for the loue that you haue euer borne to mée: for the loue that I haue euer borne vnto you: for the loue that our Lord beareth to vs all, from this time forward all griefes forgotten, eche of you loue other. Which I verely truſt you will, if ye any thing earthly regarde, eyther God or your King, affinitie or kinred, this Realme your owne countrey, or your owne ſuertie. And therewithall the King no longer induring to ſit vp, laid him downe on his ryghte ſide, his face toward them: and none was there preſent that could refraine from wéeping. But the Lordes recomforting him with as good wordes as they could, and anſwering for the time as they thought to ſtand with his pleaſure, there in his preſence, as by theyr wordes appeared, eche forgaue other, and ioyned their handes together, when (as it after appeared by their déedes) their hartes were farre a ſunder. As ſoone as the King was departed, the noble Prince his ſonne drew toward London, which at the time of his deceaſſe kept his houſholde at Ludlowe in Wales, which countrey béeing farre off from the lawe and recourſe to Juſtice, was begon to be farre out of good will, and waxen wylde robbers and reuers; walking at libertie vncorrected.
            And for this encheaſon the Prince was in the life of his father ſent thither, to y• eude y• the au
                  •
               thoritie of his preſence,

ſhoulde refraine euill diſpoſed perſons fro the boldeneſſe of their former outrages. To the gouernaunce and orderyng of this yōg prince at his ſending thither, was there appointed ſir Anthonie Wood
                     •
                  ile Lorde Riuers, and brother vntoLord Riuers. the Quéene, a right honorable man, as valiant of hande as politike in Counſell. Adioyned were there vnto him other of the ſame partie, and in effect euery one as he was neareſt of kinne vnto the Quéene, ſo was planted nexte aboute the Prince.
            That drifte by the Quéene not vnwiſely deuiſed, wherby hir bloude might of youth be rooted in the Princes fauor, the Duke of Glocester tourned vnto theyr deſtruction, and vpon that grounde ſette the foundation of all his vnhappye building. For, whom ſoeuer he perceyued eyther at variaunce with them, or bearing himſelfe their fauour, he brake vnto them, ſome by mouth, ſome by writing and ſecret meſſengers, that it was neyther reaſon nor in any wiſe to bée ſuffered, that the yong King theyr Maiſter and kinſman, ſhoulde be in the handes and cuſtodie of his mothers kinred, ſequeſtered in maner from theyr companye▪ and attendaunce, of whiche euerye one ought him as faithful ſeruice as they, and many of them farre more honorable parte of kinne than hys mothers ſide. Whoſe bloud (quoth he) ſauing the Kings pleaſure, was full vnméetelye to be matched with hys: whiche nowe to be as who ſaye remoued frō the King, and the leſſe noble to be left about him, is (quoth he) neyther honorable to his maieſtie nor vnto vs, and alſo to hys grace no ſuretie, to haue the mightieſt of his friends from him, and vnto vs no little ieopardie, to ſuffer oure well proued euill willers to growe in ouer great auctority wyth the Prince in youth, namely which is light of beliefe and ſoone perſwaded. Yée remember I trowe King Edward himſelfe, albeit he was a manne of age and diſcretion, yet was hée in manye things ruled by the bende, more than ſtoode eyther wyth hys honour, or our profitte, or with the commoditie of any man elſe, excepte onely the immoderate

aduancemente of themſelues. Which whether they ſort thir
                  •
               ted after their owne weale, or our wo, it were harde I wene to geſſe. And if ſome folkes friendſhip had not holden better place with the King, than any reſpect of kinred, they might peraduenture eaſilye haue betrapped and brought to confuſion ſome of vs ere this. Why not as eaſilye as they haue done ſome other alreadye, as néere of his royall bloude as wée? But our Lorde hath wrought his will, and thankes be to his grace that peril is paſt. Howbeit as great is growing, if we ſuffer this yōg king in our enemies hād, which without his witting might abuſe the name of hys commaundement, to any of our vndoing, which thing God and good prouiſion forbidde.
            Of whiche good prouiſion none of vs hath any thing the leſſe néede, for the late made attonement, in which y• Kings pleaſure hadde more place than the parties willes. Nor none of vs, I beléeue, is ſo vnwiſe, ouerſoone to truſte a newe friend made of an old foe, or to thinke that an hourely kindenes, ſodainly contracte in one houre, continued yet ſkant a fortnight, ſhould be déeper ſettled in their ſtomacke, than a long accuſtomed malice manye yeares rooted. With theſe wordes and writings and ſuche other, the Duke of Glocester ſoone ſet a fire them that were of themſelues eathe to kindle, and in eſpecial twayne, Edwarde Duke of Bu
                     •
                  
                  kingham, and Wiliam Lord Haſtings and Chamberlain, both men of honour and of great power.
            The tone by long ſucceſſion from his aunceſtrie: the tother by his office, and the Kings fauour. Theſe two not beryng eache to other ſo muche lone as hatred, both vnto the Quéenes parte, in this point accorded togither wyth the Duke of Glocester, that they would vtterly amoue from the Kings company all hys mothers friendes, vnder the name of theyr enimies.
            Uppon this concluded, the Duke of Gloucester vnderſtanding, that the Lordes whyche at that time were about

the King, intended to bring him vp to his coronation, accompanied with ſuche power of their friends, that it ſhould be harde for him to bring his purpoſe to paſſe, without the gathering a greate aſſemble of people, and in manner of open warre, whereof the ende he wiſte was doubtfull, and in whiche the King being on their ſide, his part ſhould haue the face and name of a rebellion: he ſecretly therfore, by diners meanes cauſed the Quéene to be perſwaded and broughte in the minde, that it neyther were néede, and alſo ſhoulde be ieopardous, the King to come vppe ſtrong. For, whereas nowe euerye Lorde loued other, and none other thing ſtudyed vppon, but aboute the Coronation and honor of the King: if the Lordes of hir kyndred ſhoulde aſſemble in the Kings name muche people, they ſhoulde giue the Lordes at wixte whom and them hadde bin ſometime debate, to feare and ſuſpect, leaſte they ſhoulde gather this people, not for the Kings ſafegarde, whome no man impugned, but for their deſtruction, hauing more regarde to theyr olde variaunce, than their newe attonement: for which cauſe they ſhould aſſemble on the other partie much people againe for theyr defence, whoſe power ſhe wiſte wel farre ſtretched. And thus ſhoulde all the Realme fall on a 
                  •
               ore. And of all the hurte that thereof ſhoulde enſue, which was likely not to be little, and the moſte harme there lyke to fall where ſhe leaſte woulde, all the worlde woulde put hyr and hyr kyndred in the wight, and ſaye that they hadde vnwiſely and vntruely alſo broken the amitie & peace, that the Kyng hyr 
                  •
               uſbande ſo prudentlye made, betwéene his kinne and hyrs in his death bed, and which the other partie faithfully obſerued.
            The Quéene being in this wiſe perſwaded, ſuche worde ſente vnto hir ſonne, and vnto hir brother béeing aboute the Kyng, and ouer that the Duke of Glocester hymſelfe and other Lordes the chiefe of his bende, wrote vnto the King ſo reuerentlye, and to the Quéenes friendes there ſo louingly, that they nothing earthly miſtruſting, brought the King

vp in greate haſte, not in good ſpéede, with a ſober companye. Now was the King in hys waye to London gone from Northampton, when the Dukes of Glocester and Buckingham came thither, where remained behinde the Lord Riuers the Kings vncle, intending on the morrowe to followe the King, and be with him at Stonie Stratforde, xij. myles thence, earelye or he departed. So was there made that nighte muche friendlye cheare betwéene theſe two Dukes and the Lord Riuers a great whyle. But incontinent after that they were openlye with greate curteſie departed, and the Lorde Riuers lodged, the Dukes ſecretely with a fewe of theyr moſte priuie friendes, ſet them down in counſaile, wherein they ſpent a great parte of the nighte. And at theyr riſing in the dawning of the day, they ſente out priuilye to theyr ſeruantes in theyr Innes and lodgings about, giuing thē commaundement, to make thēſelues ſhortly readie, for their Lordes were to horſſebackewarde. Uppon whyche meſſages, manye of theyr folke were attendaunt, when manye of the Lord Riuers ſeruauntes were vnreadye. Nowe had theſe Dukes taken alſo into theyr cuſtody the Keyes of the Inne, that none ſhoulde paſſe forth without their licēce. And ouer thys, in the highe waye, towarde Stonie Stratforde, where the King laye, they hadde beſtowed certaine of theyr folke, that ſhoulde ſende backe againe, and compell to returne, anye man that were gotten out of Northampton, towarde Stonie Stratforde, tyll they ſhoulde giue other licence. For as much as the Dukes thēſelues intēded for the ſhew of theyr diligence, to be the firſte that ſhoulde that daye attende vpon the Kings highneſſe out of that Towne: thus bare they folke in hande. But when the Lord Riuers vnderſtoode the Gates cloſed, and the wayes on euery ſide beſet, neyther his ſeruauntes nor himſelfe ſuffered to goe out, perceiuing wel ſo great a thing without his knowledge not begun for naughte, comparing thys manner preſent, wyth hys laſt nights chéere, in ſo fewe houres ſo great a change, maruellouſly miſliked. Howbeit, ſith he coulde not gette awaye,

and kéepe himſelfe cloſe he would not, leaſt he ſhould ſéeme to hyde himſelf for ſome ſecrete fear of his own fault, wherof he ſaw no ſuch cauſe in hymſelf. He determined vpon the ſuretie of his own conſcience, to go boldelie to them, and inquire what this matter mighte meane, whome as ſ
                  •
               one as they ſawe, they beganne to quarrel with him and ſaye, that he intended to ſet diſtaunce betwéene the Kyng and them, and to bring them to confuſion, but it ſhould not lye in hys power. And when he beganne (as he was a very wel ſpoken man) in goodly wiſe to excuſe himſelfe, they tarryed not the ende of his aunſweare, but ſhortly tooke hym,The L. Riuers put in vvarde. and put him in warde, and that done, forthwyth wente to horſſebacke, and tooke the waye to Stonie Stratforde, where they founde the King wyth hys companye, readie to leape on Horſſebacke, and depart forwarde to leaue that lodging for them, bycauſe it was to ſtraighte for both companyes. And as ſoone as they came in hys preſēce, they light adown with all their companye about them. To whom the Duke of Buckingham ſayd, go afore Gentlemen, and yeomen kéepe your roomes.
            And thus in goodly aray, they came to the King, and on theyr knées in verye humble wyſe ſalued his grace, whiche receyued them in very ioyous and amiable maner, nothing earthlye knowing nor miſtruſting as yet. But euen by and by in his preſence, they piked a quarrell to the Lorde Rycharde
               The Lord▪ Grey. 
               Gray▪
                the Kings other brother by his mother, ſaying, that he with the Lorde Marques his brother, and the Lorde Riuers his Uncle, had compaſſed to rule the King and the Realme, and to ſet variance among the ſtates, and to ſubdue and deſtroye the noble bloude of the Realme. Toward the accompliſhing whereof they ſayd, that the Lorde Marques had entred into the Tower of London, and thence taken out the Kyngs Treaſure, and ſente menne to the Sea.
            All which things theſe Dukes wiſt well, were done for good purpoſes and neceſſarie, by the whole counſaile at London,
               
ſauing that ſomewhat they muſt ſay. Unto which words the King aunſwered. What my brother Marques hath done I cannot ſaye: But in good faith I dare well aunſweare for mine vncle Riuers and my brother here, that they be innocent of any ſuche matter. Yea my liege quoth the Duke of Buckingham, they haue kept theyr dealing in theſe matters farre fro the knowledge of your good grace. And forthwyth they areſted the Lord Richard and ſir Th. Vaughā
                Knight, in the Kings preſence, and brought the king and al back vnto Northampton, where they tooke againe further Counſell. And there they ſent away frō the King, whō it pleaſed thē, and ſet new ſeruaunts about him, ſuch as liked better thē than him. At which dealing he wept, and was nothing content, but it booted not. And at dinner, the Duke of Glocester ſente a diſhe from his owne table to the Lord Riuers, praying him to be of good cheare, all ſhould be well ynough. And he thanked the Duke, and prayed the meſſenger to beare it to his nephew the Lord Richard, with the ſame meſſage for hys comforte, as one to whome ſuch aduerſitie was ſtrāge, but himſelfe had bin all his dayes in vre therewith, & therfore could beare it the better. But for all this cōfortable curteſie of the Duke of Glocester, he ſent the Lord Riuers, & theThe death of the L. Riuers and others. Lord Richarde, with ſir Thomas Vaughan into the Northe Countrey, into diuerſe places to priſon, and afterwarde all to Pomfraite, where they were in concluſion beheaded.
            In this wiſe, the Duke of Glocester toke vppon hymſelfe the order and gouernaunce of the yong King, whom with muche honoure and humble reuerence, hée conueyed vpward toward the Citie. But anone, the tydings of this matter came haſtily to the Quéene a little before the midnighte following, and that in the ſoreſt wiſe, that the King hir ſon was taken, hir brother, hir ſonne, and other friends arreſted, and ſente no man wiſt whether, to bée done with God wot what. With which tydings, the Quéene in great flight and heauineſſe, bewayling hir childes raigne, hir friendes miſchaunce, and hir owne infortune, damning the time

that euer ſhe diſſwaded the gathering of power aboute the Kyng, gatte hyr ſelfe in all the haſte poſſible wyth hir yō
               ger Sonne and hyr daughters, out of the Pallaice of Westminster, in whiche ſhe then laye, into the Sanctuarie,The Qu. taketh Sanctuarie. lodging hyr ſelfe and hyr companye there in the Abbots place.
            Now came there one likewiſe not long after midnighte from the Lorde Chamberlayne, vnto the Archbiſhoppe of Yorke, then Chancellour of Englande, to his place not far frō 
               Westminster. And for that he ſhewed his ſeruauntes that hée had tydings of ſo great importaunce, that hys maiſter gaue him in charge, not to forbeare his reſte, they letted not to wake him, nor he to admitte this meſſenger into his bedde ſide. Of whome he hearde that theſe Dukes were gone backe wyth the Kings grace from Stonie Stratforde vnto Northampton. Notwythſtanding Syr (quoth he) my Lorde ſendeth your Lordſhippe worde, that there is no feare: for he aſſureth you that all ſhall be well. I aſſure him quoth the Archebiſhoppe, be it as well as it will, it wyll neuer be ſo well as we haue ſéene it: And therevpon, by and by after the meſſenger departed, he cauſed in all the haſte all his ſernauntes to be called vp, and ſo with his owne houſholde about him, and euerye man weaponed, he tooke the greate ſeale with him, and came yet before daye vnto the Quéene. About whom he founde much heauineſſe, rumble, haſt and buſineſſe, cariage and conueyaunce of hyr ſtuffe into Sanctuarie, cheſtes, coffers, packes, fardels, truſſed all on mens backes, no man vnoccupied, ſome lading, ſome going, ſome diſcharging, ſome comming for more, ſome breaking down the walles to bring in the next way, and ſome yet drewe to them to helpe to carry a wrong way.
            The Quéene hir ſelfe ſate alone alowe on the ruſhes al deſolate and diſmayde, whome the Archebiſhoppe comforted in the beſte manner he coulde, ſhewing hir that he truſted, the matter was nothing ſo ſore as ſhe toke it for, and that he was putte in good hope and out of feare by ye meſſage

ſent him from the Lord Chamberlaine: Ah wo worth hym (quoth ſhe) for he is one of them that laboureth to deſtroye me and my bloud.
            Madam (quoth he) be yée of good chéere, for I aſſure you, if they Crowne any other King than your ſon, whom they nowe haue with them, we ſhall on the morrowe Crowne hys brother, whom you haue here with you. And here is the greate ſeale, whyche in likewiſe as that noble Prince your huſbande deliuered it vnto me, ſo héere I deliuer it vnto you, to the vſe and behoofe of your ſonne, and therewith he betooke hir the greate ſeale, and departed home againe, yet in the dawning of the daye. By whiche time, he mighte in his chamber windowe, ſée all the Thamis full of boates of the Duke of Glocesters ſeruauntes, watching that no man ſhoulde go to Sanctuarie, nor none could paſſe vnſearched. Then was there great commotion and murmur, as well in other places about, as ſpecially in the Citie, the people diuerſly diuining vpō this deling. And ſome Lords, Knightes, and Gentlemen, eyther for fauour of the Quéen, or for feare of themſelues, aſſembled in ſundry companies, and wente flockmeale in harneys: and manye alſo, for that they reckoned thys demeanour attempted, not ſo ſpeciallye againſt the other Lords, as againſt the King himſelfe in the diſturbaunce of his Coronation. But then by and by the Lordes aſſembled togither, towarde whiche méeting, the Archbiſhoppe of Yorke fearing that it woulde be aſcribed (as it was indéede) to his ouermuch lightneſſe, that he ſo ſuddainely hadde yéelded vppe the greate ſeale to the Quéene to whom the cuſtodie thereof nothing perteyned, wythout ſpeciall commaundement of the King ſecretely ſent for the ſeale againe, and brought it with him after the cuſtomable manner. And at this méeting, the Lorde Haſting, whoſe trouth toward ye king, no man doubted nor néeded to doubt, perſwaded the Lordes to beléeue, that the Duke of Glocester was ſure and faſtly faithfull to his Prince, & that the Lord Riuers and Lorde Richarde, with the other Knightes,

were for matters attempted by them againſt the Dukes of Glocester and Buckingham, put vnder areſt for their ſuretie, not for the Kings ieopardie: and that they were alſo in ſafegarde, and there no longer ſhoulde remayne than till the matter were, not by the Dukes onely, but alſo by all the other Lords of ye Kings counſayle indifferently examyned, & by other diſcretions ordered, and eyther iudged or appeaſed.
            But one thing he aduiſed them beware, that they iudged not the matter too farre forth, ere they knew the trueth, nor turning theyr priuate grudges into the common hurte, yrking and prouoking men vnto anger, and diſturbing the Kings coronation, toward which the Dukes were cōming vp, that they might peraduenture bring the matter ſo farre out of ioynte, that it ſhoulde neuer be broughte in frame againe. Whiche ſtrife if it ſhould happe, as it were lykely, to come to a fielde, though both parties were in all things equal, yet ſhoulde the aucthoritie be on that ſide where the King is himſelfe. With theſe perſwaſions of the Lord Haſtings, whereof part himſelfe beleeued, of parte he wiſt the contrarie, theſe commotions were ſomwhat appeaſed, but ſpecially by that, that the Dukes of Glocester and Buckinghā
                wer ſo néere, and came ſo ſhortly on with the king, in none other manner, with none other voyce or ſemblance than to his coronation, cauſing the fame to be blowen about, that theſe Lords and Knights which were taken, had contriued the deſtruction of the dukes of Glocester and Buckingham, and of other the noble bloud of the Realme, to the end that thē
               ſelues would alone demeane and gouern the King at their pleaſure.
            And for the coulourable proofe therof, ſuch of the Dukes ſeruauntes as rode with the cartes of their ſtuffe that were taken (among which ſtuffe no maruel thoughe ſome were harneys, which at the breaking vppe of the houſholde, muſt néedes eyther be brought awaye, or caſt away) they ſhewed vnto the people all the wayes as they went, loe héere be the 
                  ••
               rels of harneys that theſe Traytours hadde priuilye conueyed

in theyr carriage to deſtroy the noble LORDES withal.
            This deuiſe albeit that it made the matter to wiſe men more vnlikely, well perceyuing that the intendours of ſuch a purpoſe would rather haue hadde theyr harneys on their backes than to haue bound them vppe in barrels, yet much part of the commō people were therwith very wel ſatiſfied, and ſayd it were almoyſe to hang them.
            When the King approched néere to the Citie, Edmonde Shaa Goldſmith, then Maior, with William White, & Iohn Matthew Sherifes, and al the other Aldermen in Scarlet, with fiue hundered Horſſe of the Citizens in violet, receyued him reuerently at Harneſey, and ryding from thence, accompanyedThe Kings cō
                  ming to Londō. him into the Citie, whiche he entred the fourth daye of Maye, the firſt and laſte yeare of his raigne.
            But the Duke of Gloucester bare hym in open ſight ſo reuerently to the Prince, with all ſemblaunce of lowlineſſe, that from the great obloquie in which he was ſo late before, he was ſodainly fallen in ſo gret truſt, ye at the counſel next aſſēbled, he was made the only mā, choſe and thought moſt méete, to be Protector of ye King and hys Realme, ſo (thatThe protectour made. were it deſtenie, or were it follie) the Lambe was betaken to the Woolfe to kéepe. At whych Counſayle alſo, the Archbyſhop of Yorke, Chauncelor of Englande, whyche hadde delyuered vppe the greate Seale to the Quéene, was thereof greately reprooued, and the Seale taken from hym, and delyuered to Doctor Ruſſell Byſhoppe of Lincolne, a wiſeThe Bishop of Lincolne made Lord Chauncellour. man and a good, and of muche experience, and one of the beſte learned menne vndoubtedly that Englande had in hys time. Dyuers Lordes and Knightes were appointed vnto dyuers roumes. The Lorde Chamberlaine and ſome other kepte ſtill theyr offices that they had before.
            Nowe all were it, ſo that that the Protector ſo ſore thirſted for the finiſhing of that he had begunne, that thought euery daye a yeare, till it were atchéeued, yet durſte hée

no further attempte, as long as he had but halfe hys pray in his hande: well witting, that if he depoſed the one brother, all the Realme woulde fall to the other, if hée either remaynèd in Sanctuarie, or ſhoulde happily be ſhortelye conueyed to hys fathers libertie. Wherfore, incontinent at the nexte méeting of the Lordes at the Counſaile, he propoſed vnto them, that it was a hainous déede of the Quéen,The protectours oration. and procéeding of greate malice towarde the Kyngs Counſailours, that ſhe ſhoulde kéepe in Sanctuarie the Kings brother from hym, whoſe ſpeciall pleaſure and comforte were to haue his brother with hym. And that by hir done to none other intente, but to bring all the Lordes in obloquie, and murmure of the people. As thoughe they were not to be truſted with the Kings brother, that by the aſſente of the Nobles of the lande, were appointed as the Kings neareſt friendes, to the tuition of hys owne royall perſon. The proſperitie whereof ſtandeth (quoth he) not all in kéeping from enimies, or ill vyande, but partly alſo in recreation, and moderate pleaſure, whiche he cannot in hys tenuer youth, take in the companye of auncient perſons, but in the familiar conuerſation of thoſe that be neither far vnder, nor farre aboue his age, and naytheleſſe of eſtate conuenient to accompanye hys noble Maieſtie, wherefore, with whome rather, than wyth hys owne brother? And if anye man thinke this conſideration (whyche I thinke no manne thinketh that loueth the King) let him conſider, that ſometyme wythout ſmall things, greater cannot ſtande. And verilye, it redoundeth greatlye to the diſhonour both of the Kings hyghneſſe, and of all vs that bene aboute his grace, to haue it runne in euerye mans mouth, not in this realme only, but alſo in other lands (as euil words walke far) ye the kings brother ſhold be fain to kepe Sāctuary. For euery mā wil wéene, ye no mā wil ſo do for nought. And ſuch euil opiniō once faſtned in mens hearts, hard it is to wraſte out, & may grow to more grief thā any mā can here deuine. Wherfore me thinketh it were not worſt to ſend vnto y• Q.

for the redreſſe of this matter, ſome honorable truſtie man, ſuche as both tendereth the Kyngs weale, and the honoure of hys counſayle, and is alſo in fauour and credence wyth hyr. For all which conſiderations, none ſéemeth me more méetely, than our reuerende Father héere preſent, my Lord Cardinall, who maye in this matter doe moſt good of any man, if it pleaſe him to take the payne, which I doubt not of hys goodneſſe he will not refuſe for the Kings ſake and ours, and wealth of the yong Duke himſelf, the kings moſt honorable brother, and after my ſoueraigne Lord himſelfe, my moſt déere nephew, conſidered that thereby ſhal be ceaſſed the ſlaunderous rumor and obloquie nowe going, and the hurtes au
                  •
               yded that thereof mighte enſue, and muche reſte and quiet growe to all the Realme. And if ſhe be percaſe ſo obſtinate, and ſo preciſely ſet vpon hir own wil, that neyther his wiſe and faithful aduertiſement, can not moue hir, nor anye mannes reaſon contente hir: then ſhall we by mine aduiſe, by the Kings authoritie, fetche him out of that priſon, and bring hym to hys noble preſence, in whoſe continuall companye he ſhall be ſo well chéeriſhed, and ſo honorablye intreated, that al the world ſhal to our honor and hir reproche perceyue, that it was onely malice, frowardeneſſe, or follie, that cauſed hir to kéepe him there: this is my minde in this matter for this time, except any of your Lordſhippes any thing perceiue to the contrarie, for neuer ſhall I by Gods grace ſo wedde my ſelfe to mine owne wil, but that I ſhal be readie to change it vpon your better aduiſes.
            When the Protectoure hadde ſayde, all the Counſayle affirmed, that the motion was good and reaſonable, and to the King and the Duke his brother, honorable, and a thing that ſhould ceaſe greate murmure in the Realme, if the mother mighte be by good meanes enduced to deliuer him. Which thing the Archbiſhop of Yorke, whom they all agréed alſo to be thereto moſt conuenient, tooke vpon him to moue hir, and therin to doe his vttermoſt deuoire. Howbeit, if ſhe coulde be in no wiſe intreated with hyr good will

to▪ deliuer him, then thought he, and ſuch other as were of the Spiritualtie preſent, that it were not in any wiſe to be attempted to take him out againſt hir wil. For it would beSanctuarie. a thing that ſhoulde turne to the greate grudge of all men, and high diſpleaſure of God, if the priuiledge of that holye place ſhoulde nowe be broken, whiche had ſo many yeares bene kepte, which both Kings and Popes ſo good had grā
               ted, ſo many hadde confirmed, and which holy ground was more than fiue hundred yeares agoe by Saint Peter in hys owne perſon in ſpirite accompanyed wyth great multitude of Angels by night ſo ſpeciallye hallowed, and dedicate to God (for the proofe whereof, they haue yet in the Abbay S. Peters Cope to ſhewe) that from that time hitherward, was ther neuer ſo vndeuoute a king, that durſt that ſacred place violate, or ſo holy a Byſhop, that durſt it preſume to conſecrate. And therefore (quoth the Archbiſhop of Yorke) God forbid that any man ſhould for any thing earthly enterpriſe to breake the immunitie and libertie of the ſacred Sanctuarie, that hath bene the ſafegard of ſo many a good mannes life▪ And I truſt (quoth he) with Gods grace, we ſhall not néede it. But for any manner néede, I woulde not we ſhold doe it. I truſt that ſhe ſhall be wyth reaſon contented, and all things in good manner obtayned. And if it happen that I bring it not ſo to paſſe, yet ſhal I toward it ſo far forth do my beſt, that ye ſhal al wel perceiue, that no lacke of my denoire, but the mothers dreade and womaniſhe feare, ſhall be the lette. Womaniſhe feare, nay womaniſhe frowardeneſſe (quoth the Duke of Buckingham,) for I dare take it vpon my ſoule, ſhe wel knoweth ſhe néedeth no ſuch thing to feare, eyther for hir ſonne or for hir ſelfe. For as for hyr, héere is no man that wil be at warre with women. Would God ſome of the men of hir kinne, were women too, and then ſhoulde all be ſoone in reſte. Howebeit, there is none of hyr kynne the leſſe loued, for that they be hyr kinne, but for their owne euil deſeruing. And natheleſſe, if we loued neither hyr nor hir kinne, yet were there no cauſe to think that

we ſhoulde hate the kings noble brother, to whoſe Grace, we ourſelues be of kinne: whoſe honour, if ſhe as muche deſired, as our diſhonour, and as muche regarde tooke to his wealth, as to hir owne will, ſhée woulde be as loath to ſuffer him from the king as any of vs be. For, if ſhe haue witte, (as woulde God ſhée had as good will as ſhe hathe 
                  〈…〉
               de witte) ſhe reckneth hir ſelfe no wiſer, than ſhée thinketh ſome that be here, of whoſe faithfull minde ſhée nothing doubteth, but verily beléeueth and knoweth, that they woulde be as ſorie of hys harme, as hir ſelfe, and yet woulde haue hym from hir, if ſhe byde there: And we all (I thinke) content, that both be with hir, if ſhe come thence, and byde in ſuche place, where they maye with their honor be.
            Now thē, if ſhe refuſe in the deliuerāce of him, to follow y• coūſaile of thē, whoſe wiſdome ſhe knoweth, whoſe truth ſhe wel truſteth: it is ethe to perceiue, y• frowardnes letteth hir, & not feare. But go to, ſuppoſe y• ſhe feare (as who may let hir to fear hir own ſhadow) the more ſhe feareth to dely▪ner hym, the more ought we feare to leaue him in hir hāds. For, if ſhe caſte ſuche fonde doubts, that ſhe feare hys hurte: then wil ſhe feare, that he ſhal be fetcht thence. For▪ ſhe wyll ſoone thinke, that if men were ſet (which God forbid) vpon ſo great a miſchief, the Sanctuarie woulde little lette them: whiche good men myghte (as me thinketh) without ſinne, ſomewhat leſſe regarde than they doe.
            Nowe then, if ſhée doubte, leaſte hée mighte be fetched from hir, is it not likely ynough that ſhe ſhall ſende hym ſome where out of the Realme? Uerily, I looke for none other. And I doubte not, but ſhe now as ſore mindeth it, as we the lette thereof. And if ſhe might happen to bring that to paſſe, (as it were no great maiſtrie, we letting hir alone) all the world would ſay, that we were a wiſe ſorte of Counfailours aboute a King, that let his brother be caſte awaye vnder our noſes. And therfore, I enſure you faithfully for my minde, I wil rather maugre hir mind, fetch him away,

than leaue him there, till hir frowardneſſe and fonde feare conuey him away. And yet wil I breake no Sāctuarie therfore. For verily, ſith y• priuiledges of that place & other like, haue bin of long continued, I am not hée y• would be about to breake them. And in good fayth, if they wer now to begin, I would not be he that ſhoulde be about to make them.
            Yet will I not ſaye naye, but that it is a déede of pitie, that ſuch men as the ſea, or their euil dettours haue brought in pouertie, ſhold haue ſome place of libertie, to kéepe theyr bodies out of the daunger of their cruel creditours.
            And alſo, if the Crown happen (as it hath done) to come in queſtion, whyle eyther parte taketh other as Traytors, I wil wel there be ſome places of refuge for both.
            But as for théeues, of whiche, theſe places be full, and which neuer fall from the crafte, after they once fall therto, it is pitie the Sanctuarie ſhoulde ſerue them. And muche more, manquellers, whom God bad to take from the Aulter and kil them, if their murther were wilful. And wher it is otherwiſe, there néede we not the Sanctuaries y• God appointed in the olde lawe. For if eyther neceſſitie, his own defence, or miſfortune draweth him to that déede, a pardon ſerueth, whych eyther the lawe graunteth of courſe, or the King of pitie may.
            Then looke me now how few Sanctuarie men there be, whome anye fauourable neceſſitie compelled to goe thyther: And then ſée on the tother ſide, what a ſort, there be cō
               monly therin of thē, whō wilful vnthriftineſſe hath brought to naught.
            What a rabble of théeues, murtherers, and malitious heynous Traytours, and that in two places ſpecially. The tone at the elbowe of the Citie, the tother in the very bowels.VVeſtminſt
                     ••
                  
                  ▪ and Saint Martin
                     •
                  . I dare well auowe it, weye the good that they doe, wyth the hurte that commeth of them, and yée ſhall finde it much better to lacke both, than haue both. And thys I ſaye, althoughe they were not abuſed as they nowe bée, and ſo long haue bene, that I feare me euer they wyll bée,

whyle menne be afrayde to ſette their handes to the mendmente, as though God and Saint Peter, were the patrons of vngracious liuing.
            Now vnthriftes riot, and runne in debt, vpon the boldneſſeThe abuſe of Sanctuaries. of theſe places, yea, and rich men runne thyther with poore mens goods, there they buylde, there they ſpende, and bidde their creditours go whiſtle them.
            Mens wiues runne thyther with their huſbandes plate, and ſay, they dare not abide with their huſbāds for beating.
            Théeues bring thither their ſtollen goods, and there liue thereon.
            There deuiſe they newe robberies, nightlye they ſteale out, they robbe, and reaue, and kill, and come in agayne, as though thoſe places gaue them not only a ſafegarde for the harme they haue done, but a licence alſo to do more. Howbeit, much of this miſchief, if wiſe men would ſet their hands to it, might be amended, with great thanks of God, and no breach of the priuiledge.
            The reſidue, ſith ſo long ago I wote neare what Pope, and what Prince more piteous than politike, hath granted it, and other men ſince, of a certaine religious feare, haue not broken it, lette vs take a payne therewyth, and let it a Gods name ſtand in force, as farre forth as reaſon wil, whiche is not fully ſo farre forthe, as may ſerue to let vs of the fetching forthe of thys noble man, to hys honor and wealth, out of that place, in whych he neyther is, nor can be a Sanctuarie man.
            A Sanctuarie ſerueth alway to defende the body of that man that ſtandeth in daunger abroade, not of greate hurte only, but alſo of lawful hurt▪ for againſt vnlawful harmes, neuer Pope nor King intēded to priuiledge any one place, for that priuiledge hath euery place: knoweth any man, any place, wherein it is lawfull one man to do an other wrong?
            That no man vnlawfully take hurt, that libertie, the K. the law, & very nature, forbiddeth in euery place, & maketh to that regarde, for euerye man euerye place a Sanctuarie.
            
               But where a man is by lawfull meanes in peryll, there néedeth he the tuition of ſome ſpeciall priuiledge, which is the onely ground and cauſe of all Sanctuaries: from which neceſſitie, this noble Prince is farre, whoſe loue to his King, nature and kindred proueth, whoſe innocencie to all the world, his tender youth proueth, and ſo Sanctuarie, as for him, neither none he néedeth, nor alſo none can haue.
            Men come not to Sāctuarie, as they come to Baptiſme, to require it by theyr Godfathers, he muſt aſke it himſelf, that muſt haue it, and reaſon, ſith no man hath cauſe to haue it, but whoſe conſcience of his owne fault maketh him fayne, néede to require it: what will then hath yonder babe? which and if he had diſcretion to require it, if néede were, I dare ſay would now be ryght angrie wyth them that kéepe hym there: and I would thynke without any ſcruple of conſcience, without any breach of priuiledge, to be ſomwhat more homely wyth them that be there Sanctuarie men in déede.
            For if one goe to Sanctuarie with an others mans goods, why ſhould not the King▪ leauing his body at libertie, ſatiſfie the partie of his goods, euen wythin the Sanctuarie? for neyther Kyng nor Pope can gyue any place ſuche a priuiledge, that it ſhall diſcharge a man of hys debtes, being able to pay: and with that, dyuers of the Clergie that were preſent, whither they ſaid it for his pleaſure, or as they thought agréed playnely, that by the law of God and of the Church, the goods of a Sanctuarie man ſhoulde be deliuered in payment of hys debtes, and ſtollen goods to the owner, & onely lybertie reſerued hym to get hys liuing with the labour of hys handes, verily (quoth the Duke) I thynke you ſay very trueth, and what if a mans wyfe will take Sanctuarie, bycauſe ſhe liſt to runne from hir huſband? I woulde wéene if ſhe could alledge none other cauſe, he may lawfully wythout any diſpleaſure to Saint Peter, take hir out of Saint Peters Church by the arme. And if no body may be taken out of Sanctuarie, that ſayth he will byde there, then if a childe wyll take Sanctuarie, becauſe he feareth to goe to Schole,

hys maiſter muſt let him alone. And as ſimple as that ſample is, yet is there leſſe reaſon in our caſe than in that, for therein, thoughe it be a chyldiſhe feare, yet is there, at the leaſtwyſe ſome feare, and herein is there none at all. And verily, I haue often heard of Sanctuarie men, but I neuer heard earſt of Sanctuarie children. And therefore, as for the concluſion of my mynde, who ſo may haue deſerued to néede it, if they thinke it for their ſuertie, let them kéepe it. But he can bée no Sanctuarie man, that neyther hath wiſedome to deſire it, nor malice to deſerue it, whoſe life or libertie, can by no lawfull proceſſe ſtand in ieoperdie. And he that taketh one out of Sanctuarie to doe him good, I ſaye playnely, that he breaketh no Sanctuarie.
            When the Duke had done, the Temporall men whole, and a good part of the ſpiritual alſo, thinkyng no hurt earthly, ment toward the yong babe, condiſcended in effect, that if he were not delyuered, he ſhould be fetched. Howbeit, they thought it all beſt, in the auoyding of all manner of rumor, that the Lorde Cardinall ſhould firſt aſſay to get him with hir good will. And therevppon, all the Counſell came vnto the Starre Chamber at Westminster, and the Lorde Cardinall, leauyng the Protector with the Counſell in the Starre Chamber, departed into the Sanctuarie to the Quéene, with dyuers other Lordes with him, were it for the reſpect of hys honour, or that ſhée ſhould by preſence of ſo many perceyue that thys errande was not one mans mynde: or were it, for that the Protector intended not in this matter, to truſt any one man alone, or elſe, that if ſhée finally were determyned to kéepe hym, ſome of that companie, had happily ſecrete inſtruction incontinent, maugre hir mynde, to take him, and to leaue hir no reſpite to conuey him, which ſhée was lykely to mynde after this matter broken to hir, if hir time would in any wiſe ſerue hir.
            When the Quéene, and theſe Lordes were come togyther in preſence, the Lorde Cardinall ſhewed vnto hir, that it was thoughte vnto the Protector, and vnto the whole

Counſell, that hir kéepyng of the Kings brother in that place, was the thing, whych highly ſounded, not onely to the great rumour of the people and their obloquie, but alſo to the importable griefe and diſpleaſure of the Kings royal Maieſtie, to whoſe grace it were as ſingular comforte to haue hys naturall brother in companye, as it was their both diſhonour, and all theyrs and hirs alſo, to ſuffer hym in Sanctuarie, as though the one brother ſtoode in danger and perill of the other. And he ſhewed hir, that the Counſell therefore had ſent hym vnto hir, to require hir the deliuerie of hym, that he myght bée broughte vnto the Kyngs preſence at hys libertie, out of that place, which they reckoned as a pryſon, and there ſhoulde he bée demeaned, accordyng to hys eſtate, and ſhée in thys doyng, ſhoulde both doe great good to the Realme, pleaſure to the Counſell, and profite to hir ſelfe, ſuccour to hyr friendes that were in diſtreſſe, and 
                  •
               uer that (which he wiſte wel ſhée ſpecially tendred,) not onely great comforte and honour to the Kyng, but alſo to the young Duke hymſelfe, whoſe both greate wealth it were to bée together, as well for many greater cauſes, as alſo for theyr both diſporte, and recreation: which thyng, the Lord eſtéemed no 
                  •
               leyght, though it ſéeme lyghte,Protector▪
                well pondering, that theyr youth without recreation and play, cannot endure, nor any ſtraunger, for the coniecture of their both ages and eſtates, ſo méetely in that poynt for any of them, as eyther of them for other.
            My Lord (quoth the Quéene) I ſay not nay, but y• it wereThe Queen
                     ••
                   aunſvver
                     •
                  . 
               
                  •
               ery conuenient, y• this Gentleman whom ye require were in company of the King his brother: and in good fayth, mée thynketh it were as great commoditie to them both, as for yet a while, to bein the cuſtodie of their mother, the tender age conſidred of y• elder of them both, but ſpecially y• yonger, which beſides hys infancie, that alſo néedeth good looking to, hath a while béene ſo ſore diſeaſed, vexed with ſikeneſſe, and is ſo newlye rather a little amended, than well recouered, that I dare put no perſon earthly in truſt with his kéeping,

but my ſelfe onely, conſidering that there is (as Phi
                  ••
               tions ſay) and as we alſo finde, double the perill in the recidiuation, that was in the firſt ſickneſſe, with which diſeaſe, Nature beyng ſore laboured, forewéeried and weakened, wa
                  •
               
               eth the leſſe able to beare out and ſuſtaine a newe ſurfette. And albeit there myght be founde other that would happily doe their beſte vnto hym, yet is there none that eyther knoweth better how to order hym, than I that ſo long haue kept hym: or is more tenderly lyke to cheryſhe hym, than hys owne mother that bare hym. No man denyeth, good Madame, (quoth the Cardinall) but that your grace were of all folke moſt neceſſarie about your chyldren: & ſo would all the Counſel not onely be content, but glad that ye were, if it myght ſtande wyth your pleaſure to be in ſuch place as myght ſtand wyth their honour. But if you doe appoynt your ſelfe to tarrie héere, then thynke they it more conuenient that the Duke of Yorke were wyth the King honorably at his lybertie to the comfort of them both: than héere as a Sanctuarie man, to their both diſhonour and obloquie, ſith there is not alway ſo great neceſſytie to haue the Chylde to bée with the Mother: but that occaſion may ſometime bée ſuch, y• it ſhould be more expedient to kéepe him elſewhere, which in this well appeareth, that at ſuch time as your déereſt ſonne then Prince, and nowe King, ſhoulde for his honour, and good order of the Countrey, kéepe houſholde in Wales, farre out of your company: your grace was well content there with your ſelfe. Not very well content quoth the Quéen: And yet the caſe is not like, for the one was then in health, and the other is now ſicke: In which caſe, I maruell greatly, that my Lord Protector is ſo deſirous to haue hym in his kéeping, where if the chyld in hys ſickeneſſe miſcarrie by nature, yet myght he runne into ſclaunder and ſuſpition of fraude. And where they call it a thing ſo ſore agaynſt my childes honour, and theyrs alſo, that he bydeth in this place: it is all their honors thereto ſuffer him bide, where no man doubteth he ſhall be beſt kepte, and that is

héere, whyle I am héere, which as yet intende not to come forth, and ieoperd my ſelfe after other of my friendes, which would God were rather here in ſuertie with me, thā I were there in ieoperdie with them. Why Madame (quoth an other Lord) know you any thing why they ſhould be in ieoperdie? Nay verily ſir quoth ſhée, nor why they ſhoulde be in priſon neyther, as they now bée. But it is I trowe, no great maruell though I feare, leaſt thoſe that haue not letted to put them in dureſſe without colour, will let as little to procure theyr deſtruction without cauſe. The Cardinal made a countenaunce to the other Lorde, that he ſhoulde harp no more vpon that ſtring, & then ſaid he to the Quéene, that he nothing doubted, but that thoſe Lordes of hir honorable kynne, which as yet remayned vnder arreſt, ſhoulde vppon the matter examined, doe well ynough: and as towarde hir noble perſon, neyther was, nor coulde be anye manner ieoperdie. Whereby ſhoulde I truſt that (quoth the Quéene) in that I am gyltleſſe? as though they were giltie, in that I am with their enimyes better loued than they? when they hate them for my ſake, in that I am ſo 
                  •
               éere of kynne to the Kyng? and howe farre they be of, if that would helpe, as God ſend grace it hu
                  ••
                not, and therefore as for me, I purpoſe not as yet, to depart hence. And as for this Gentleman my ſonne, I mynde that he ſhall bée where I am, tyll I ſée further: for I aſſure you, for that I ſée ſome men ſo gréedie, without any ſubſtantiall cauſe to haue hym, this maketh me much the more fearder to delyuer him. Truely Madame, quoth he, and the fearder that you be to deliuer him, the feader bin other men to ſuffer you to kéepe him, leaſt your cauſeleſſe feare might cauſe you farther to conuey him: and many be there that thinke he can haue no priuiledge in this place, which neyther can haue wyll to aſke it, nor malice to deſerue it, and therefore, they recken no priuiledge broken, though they fetche him out, which if ye finally refuſe to deliuer him, I verily thinke they will. So much dread hath my Lorde his Uncle, for the

               
                  •
               ender loue he beareth him, leaſt your grace ſhoulde hap to ſend him away.
            A Syr (quoth the Quéene) hath the Protector ſo tenderThe Queene. zeale, yt he feareth nothing but leaſt he ſhoulde eſcape him? Thinketh he that I woulde ſend him hence, whych neyther is in the plyght to ſend out, and in what place coulde I recken hym ſure, if he be not ſure in the Sanctuarie? whereof was there neuer Tyraunt yet ſo diuellyſhe that durſt preſume to breake. And I truſt God is as ſtrong now to withſtand his aduerſaries, as euer he was. But my ſonne can deſerue no Sanctuarie, and therfore he can not haue it. Forſooth he hath founde a goodly gloſe, by which that place that may defend a Théefe, may not ſaue an Innocent. But he is in no ieoperdie, nor hath no néede thereof: would God he had not. Troth the Protector (I pray God he may proue a Protector) troweth he that I perceyue not where vnto hys paynted proceſſe draweth? It is not honorable that the Duke byde here: It were comfortable for them both, that he were with his brother, bycauſe the King lacketh a playfellowe be ye ſure. I pray God ſend them both better playfellowes than hym that maketh ſo high a matter vpon ſuch a tryfelyng pretext: As though there coulde none be founde to play wyth the King, but if hys brother that hath no luſte to play for ſickeneſſe, come out of Sanctuarie out of his ſafegarde to play with him. As though Princes as yong as they he, could not play but 
                  ••
               rth their Peeres, or children coulde not playe but with their kinred, with whom for the more part they agrée much worſe than with ſtraungers. But the childe can not require the priuiledge: who tolde him ſo? He ſhall heare him aſke it, and he will. Howbeit this is a ga
                  •
                matter, ſuppoſe he coulde not aſke it, ſuppoſe he woulde not aſke it▪ ſuppoſe he woulde aſke to goe out, if I ſay he ſhall not, if I aſke the priuiledge but for my ſelfe, I ſay he that againſt my will taketh him out, breaketh ye Sanctuarie. Serueth this libertie for my perſon only, or for my goods to? Ye may not hence take my horſe from me: & may you take my

child fro me? He is alſo my ward: for as my learned counſell ſheweth mée, ſithe he hath nothing by diſcent holden by knightes ſeruice, the law maketh his mother his gardaine. Then may no man I ſuppoſe take my warde from me out of Sanctuarie, without the breache of Sanctuarie. And if my priuiledge coulde not ſerue him, nor he aſke it for himſelfe, yet ſith the law committeth to me the cuſtodie of him, I may require it for him, except the law giue a childe a gardaine onely for his goods and landes, diſcharging him of the 
                  ••
               e & ſafekéeping of hys bodie, for which onely both landes and goods ſerue.
            ¶ And if examples be ſufficient to obtaine priuiledge forThis that is here betvveene this marke ¶ and this marke *vvas not vvritten by him in englith but is tranſlated out of this Hiſtorie vvhich he vvrot in Latten. my child, I néede not far to ſéeke. For in this place in which now be (& which is now in queſtiō whether my childe may take benefit of it) mine other ſonne (now king) was borne, & kept in his cradle, & preſerued to a more proſperous fortune, which I pray God long to continue. And as all you know, this is not the firſt time that I haue taken Sanctuarie. For when my Lorde my huſbande was baniſhed, and thruſt out of hys Kingdome, I fled hither, being great with childe, and here I bare the Prince. And when my Lorde my huſband returned ſafe agayne, and had the victorie, then went I hence to welcome him home, and from hence I brought my babe the Prince vnto his father, when he firſt tooke him in his armes. And I pray God that my ſonnes palace may be as great ſauegarde vnto him nowe raigning, as this place was ſomtime to ye kings enimie. In which place I intēd to kéepe his brother ſith. &c. *Wherfore here intend I to kéepe him, ſince mans law ſerueth ye gardaine to kéepe the infant. The law of nature will ye mother kéepe hir child, Gods law priuiledgeth y• Sanctuarie, & the Sanctuarie my ſon, ſith I I feare to put him in ye Protectors hands yt hath his brother alreadie, & were (if both fayled) inheritor to ye Crowne. The cauſe of my feare hath no man to doe to examine. And yet feare I no farther than ye lawe feareth, which as learned mē tell me, forbyddeth euery mā the cuſtodie of them, by whoſe

death he may inherite leſſe land than a kingdome. I can no more, but whoſoeuer he be ye breaketh this holy Sactuarie, I pray God ſhortly ſend him néede of Sanctuarie, when he may not come to it. For taken out of Sanctuarie woulde I not my mortall enimie were.
            The Lord Cardinall perceyuing that the Quéene wared euer the longer the further off, and alſo that ſhe began to kindle and chafe, and ſpeake more byting words againſt the Protector, and ſuch as he neither beléeued, & was alſo loath to heare, he ſaid to hir for a finall concluſion, that he woulde no longer diſpute the matter, but if ſhe were content to deliuer the Duke to him, and to the other Lordes preſent, he durſt lay his owne body and ſoule both in pledge, not onely for his ſuertie, but alſo for his eſtate. And if ſhe woulde giue them a reſolute anſwere to the contrarie, he woulde forthwith depart there with all, and ſhift who ſo would with this buſineſſe afterwardes, for he neuer intended more to moue hir in that matter, in which ſhe thought that he and al other alſo ſaue hirſelf lacked either wit or truth. Wit, if they were ſo dull that they could nothing perceiue what the Protector intended: truth, if they ſhould procure hir ſonne to be delyuered into his handes, in whom they ſhoulde perceyue toward the childe any euill intended.
            The Quéene with theſe wordes ſtoode a good while in a greate ſtudie. And foraſmuch as hir ſéemed the Cardinall ready to departe than ſome of the remnant, and the Protector himſelfe readie at hand, ſo that ſhe verily thought ſhée coulde not kéepe him there, but that he ſhoulde incontinent be taken thence, and to conuey him elſe-where, neither had ſhe time to ſerue hir, nor place determined, nor perſons appointed, all things vnreadie, this meſſage came on hir ſ
                  •
                ſodainely, nothing leſſe looking for, than to haue him fetcht out of Sanctuarie, which ſhe thoughte to be nowe beſet i
                  •
                ſuch places about, y• he could not be conueyed out vntaken, and partly (as ſhe thoughte) it might fortune, hir feare to be falſe, ſo wel ſhe wiſte it was eyther néedeleſſe or bootleſſe
                  •
               
               
wherfore, if ſhe ſhould néedes goe frō him, ſhe déemed it beſt to deliuer him. And ouer that, of the Cardinals faith ſhe nothing doubted, nor of ſome other Lordes neither, whom ſhe there ſawe. Which as ſhe feared leaſt they might be deceiued: ſo was ſhe wel aſſured they would not be corrupted: thē thought ſhe it ſhould yet make them ye more warely to looke to him, & the more circumſpectly to ſée to his ſuertie, if ſhe we hir owne hands betooke him to thē of truſt. And at ye laſt ſhe tooke ye yong Duke by the hand, & ſaid vnto the Lords: My Lords (quoth ſhe) & al my Lords, I neither am ſo vnwiſe to miſtruſt your wittes, nor ſo ſuſpicious to miſtruſt your truthes: Of which thing I purpoſe to make you ſuch a proofe, as if either of both lacked in you, mighte turne both me to great ſorow, the Realme to much harme, & you to great reproch. For loe, here is (quoth ſhe) this Gentlemā, whom I dout not but I could here kéepe ſafe, if I would, whatſoeuer any mā ſay: & I doubt not alſo, but there be ſome abrode ſo deadly enimies vnto my bloud, y• if they wiſt where any of it lay in their own body, they would let it out. We haue alſo experience ye the deſire of a kingdom knoweth no kinred. The brother hath bene ye brothers bane: & may y• nephewes be ſure of their vncle? Eche of theſe childrē is the others defence while they be a ſunder, & eche of their liues lieth in the others body. Kéepe one ſafe & both be ſure, & nothing for thē both more perillous, thā to be both in one place. For what wiſe Marchant aduētureth all his goods in one ſhip? Al this notwithſtāding, here I deliuer him, & his brother in him, to kéepe, into your hands, of whō I ſhal aſk thē both afore god & the world. Faithful ye be ye wote I well, & I knowe well you be wiſe. Power & ſtrength to kéepe him if you liſt, neyther lack ye of your ſelf, nor can lack helpe in this caſe. And if ye can not elſe where, then may you leaue him here. But only one thing I beſéeche you, for the truſt which his father put in you euer, & for the truſt ye I put in you nowe, y• as far as ye thinke y• I feare too much, be you well ware that you feare not as far too little. And therwithall the ſaide vnto the

child, farewel mine own ſwéete ſon▪ God ſend you good kéeping: let me kiſſe you yet once ere you go, for God knoweth whē we ſhall kiſſe together againe. And therwith ſhe kiſſed him, & bleſſed him, turned hir back & wept, & went hir way, leauing ye child wéeping as faſt. When y• Lord Cardinal, & thoſe other Lords wt him, had receiued this yong duke, they brought him into y• ſtar Chamber, where y• Protector tooke him in his armes, & kiſſed him, with theſe words: now welcome my Lord euen wt al my very hart. And he ſaid in y• ofO diſsimulation. likelihood as he thought. Thervpon forthwith they brought him vnto the King his brother, into the Biſhops Palace at Paules, and from thence through the citie honorably into the Tower, out of ye which after y• day they neuer came abrode.
            ¶ When the Protector had both y• children in his hands,This that is here betvveene this marke ¶ and this marke *vvas not vvritten by him in english but is tranſlated out of this Hiſtorie vvhich he vvrote in Lattin. he opened himſelf more boldly, both to certaine other men, & alſo chiefly to y• Duke of Buckinghā. Although I know y• many thought y• this Duke was priuie to al y• Protectors coū
               ſel, euen frō the beginning, & ſome of the Protectors friends ſaid, y• the duke was the firſt mouer of the Protector to this matter, ſending a priuie meſſenger vnto him, ſtraight after K. Edwards death. But other againe which knew better the ſubtil wit of y• Protector, denie y• he euer opened his enterpriſe to y• duke, vntil he had brought to paſſe y• things before rehearſed. But whē he had impriſoned y• Quéens kinſfolks, & gotten both hir ſonnes into his owne hands, then he opened the reſt of his purpoſe with leſſe feare to them whom he thought méet for y• matter, & ſpecially to the Duke, who being woon to his purpoſe, he thought his ſtrength more than half increaſed. The matter was broken vnto ye duke by ſubtill folkes, & ſuch as were their crafts maſters in the handling of ſuch wicked deuiſes: who declared vnto him that the yong king was offended with him for his kinſfolks ſake, & if he were euer able he would reuenge them. Who woulde prick him forward thervnto if they eſcaped (for they would remember their impriſonment) or elſe if they were put to deathe, without doubte the yong King woulde be carefull

for their deathes, whoſe impriſonment was grieuous vnto him. And that with repenting the Duke ſhould nothing auaile, for there was no way left to redéeme his offence by benefites, but he ſhoulde ſooner deſtroy himſelfe than ſaue the king, who with his brother and his kinſfolkes he ſawe in ſuch places impriſoned, as the Protector might wyth a beck deſtroy them all: and that it were no doubt but he woulde doe it in déede, if there were any new enterpriſe attempted. And that it was lykely, that as the Protector had prouided priuie garde for hymſelfe, ſo had he ſpyalles for the Duke, and traynes to catche him, if he ſhoulde be agaynſt hym, and that peraduenture from them, whom he leaſt ſuſpected. For the ſtate of things and the diſpoſitions of mē were then ſuch, that a man coulde not well tell whom he mighte truſt, or whom he might feare.*
            Theſe things and ſuch lyke, beyng beaten into the Dukes mynde, brought him to that point, that where he had repented the way that he had entred, yet woulde he goe forthe in the ſame, and ſince he had once begunne, he woulde ſtoutely goe throughe. And therefore to this wicked enterpriſe which he beléeued coulde not be voyded, he bent hymſelfe, and went through and determined, that ſince the common miſchiefe could not be amended, he would turne it as much as he might to his owne commoditie.
            Then it was agréed, that the Protector ſhoulde haue the Dukes aide to make him King, and that the Protectors only lawfull ſonne ſhould marrie the Dukes daughter, & that the Protector ſhould graunt him the quiet poſſeſſion of the 
                  •
               ledome of Hertford, which he claimed as his inheritance, and could neuer obtayne it in King Edwardes tyme. Beſides theſe requeſts of y• duke, y• Protector of his own minde promiſed hym a great quantitie of the kings treaſure, and of his houſholde ſtuffe. And when they were thus at a poynt betwéene themſelues, they went about to prepare for y• Coronation of the yong king as they would haue it ſéeme. And that they myght turne both the eyes and mindes of men frō
               
perceiuing of their drifts other where, the Lords being ſent for from all partes of y• Realme, came thick to y• ſolemnitie. But the Protector, & the duke after that, that they had ſent y• Lord Cardinal, the Archbiſhop of Yorke then Lord Chauncellour, y• Biſhop of Elie, y• Lord Stanley, & the lord Haſtings then Lorde Chamberlaine, wt many other noble men* to common & deuiſe about the coronation in one place, as faſt were they in another place, contriuing the contrarie, and to make the Protector King. To which Coūcell, albeit there were adhibited very few, & they were ſecret: yet began there here & there about, ſome maner of muttering among y• people, as though all ſhould not long be wel, though they neyther wyſt what they feared, nor wherefore, were it that before ſuch great things mens hartes of a ſecret inſtinct of nature miſgiue them. As the ſea without winde ſwelleth of himſelf ſomtime before a tempeſt: or were it that ſome one man happily ſomewhat perceiuing, filled many men with ſuſpition, though he ſhewed few men what he knew. Howbeit ſomewhat the dealing it ſelf made men to muſe on the matter, though the Councell were cloſe. For by little and little, all folke withdrew from the Tower, & drew to Croſbies in Biſhops gate ſtreete. where the Protector kept his houſhold. The Protector had the reſort, the King in manner deſolate.
            While ſome for their buſineſſe made ſute to them that had the doing, ſome were by their friends ſecretly warned, that it might happily turne them to no good, to be too muche attendant about the King without the Protectors appointment, which remoued alſo diuers of the Princes olde ſeruaunts from him, and ſet new about him.
            Thus many things cōming togither, partly by chaunce, partly of purpoſe, cauſed at length not cōmon people onely, y• wound wt the wind, but wiſe men alſo, & ſome Lords eke to marke the matter, & muſe thereon, ſo farre forth, that the Lorde Stanley that was after Earle of Darbie, wiſely miſtruſted it, and ſayde vnto the Lorde Haſtings, that he muche

miſlyked theſe two ſeueral Councels. For while we (quoth he) talke of one matter in ye one place, little wote we wherof they talke in the other place. My Lorde (quoth the Lorde Haſtings) of my life neuer doubt you: for while one man is there, which is neuer thence, neuer can there be thing once moued, that ſhould ſound amiſſe toward me, but it ſhoulde be in mine eares ere it were well out of their mouthes.
            This ment he by Catesby, whiche was of hys néere ſecreteCatesbie. counſell, and whom he verie familiarly vſed, and in his moſt weightie matters put no man in ſo ſpeciall truſt, reckening himſelfe to no man ſo liefe, ſithe he well wyſte there was no man ſo muche to him beholden as was this Catesby, which was a man well learned in the lawes of this land, and by the ſpeciall fauour of the Lorde Chamberlaine, in good authoritie, and much rule bare in all ye Countie of Leycester, where the Lorde Chamberleynes power chiefely laye. But ſurely great pitie was it, that he had not had eyther more truth or leſſe wit. For his diſſimulation onely, kept all that miſchiefe vp. In whom if the Lorde Haſtings, had not put ſo ſpeciall truſt, the Lorde Stanley and he had departed with diuers other Lordes, and broken all the daunce, for many yll ſignes that he ſawe, which he now conſtrues all to the beſt. So ſurely thought he, that there coulde be no harme toward him in that Councell intended, where Catesby was.
            And of truth the Protector, and the Duke of Buckingham. made verie good ſemblaunce vnto the Lorde Haſtings, and kept him much in companie. And vndoubtedly, the Protector loued him well, and loth was to haue loſt him, ſauing for feare leaſt his lyfe ſhoulde haue quaiied their purpoſe. For which cauſe he moued Catesby to proue wyth ſome wordes caſt out a farre off, whether he coulde thinke it poſſible to winne the Lorde Haſtings vnto their part. But Catesby whether he aſſayed him, or aſſayed him not, reported vnto them, that he founde him ſo faſt, and heard him ſpeake ſo terrible words, that he durſt no further breake.
            
               And of trueth the Lorde Chamberlayne of verye truſt ſhewed vnto Catesby the diſtruſt that other began to haue in the matter. And therefore hée fearing leaſt theyr motion might with the Lorde Haſtings miniſhe his credence, wherevnto onely all the matter leaned, procured the Protector haſtily to rid him. And much the rather, for that he truſted by his death to obtayne muche of the rule that the Lorde Haſtings bare in his Coūtrey: the onely deſire wherof, was the allectiue that induced him to be partner and one ſpeciall contriuer of all this horrible treaſon.
            Wherevpon ſoone after, that is to wit, on the Fryday the thirtéenth day of June, many Lordes aſſembled in the Tower, and there ſat in Councell, deuiſing the honourable ſolemnitie of the Kings Coronation, of which the tyme appoynted then ſo neare approched, that the Pageantes and ſubtiltyes were in making daye and night at Westminster, and much vitayle kylled therefore, that afterward was caſt away.
            Theſe Lordes ſo ſitting together communing of thys matter, the Protector came in amongſt them firſt about. ix. of the clocke, ſaluting them courteouſly, and excuſing hymſelf that he had bene from them ſo long, ſaying merily that he had bene a ſléeper that day.
            And after a little talkyng with them, he ſayde vnto the Byſhop of Elie: My Lorde you haue verye good Strawberies at your Garden in Holborne; I require you let vs haue a meſſe of them. Gladly my Lorde (quoth he) woulde God I had ſome better thing as readie to your pleaſure as that. And therwith in all the haſt he ſent hys ſeruant for a meſſe of Strawberies.
            The Protector ſet the Lordes faſt in communing, & therevpon praying them to ſpare him for a little while, departed thence. And ſoone after one houre, betwéene x. and xj. he returned into the Chamber among them all, changed with a wonderfull ſoure angrie countenance, knitting ye browes, frowning & fretting, & gnawing on his lippes, & ſo ſat hym

downe in his place, all the Lordes much diſmayde and ſore maruelling of this manner of ſodaine change, & what thing ſhould him aile. Then, whē he had ſitten ſtill a while, thus he began: What were they worthy to haue that compaſſe and imagine the deſtruction of mée, beyng ſo néere of bloud vnto the King, and Protector of his Royall perſon and his Realme? At this queſtion, all the Lordes ſat ſore aſtonyed, muſing much by whom this queſtion ſhoulde be ment, of which euery man wyſt himſelfe cleare.
            Then the Lord Chamberlaine, as he that for the loue betwéene them thoughte he might be boldeſt with him, aunſwered and ſayde, that they were worthy to be puniſhed as heynous traytors, whatſoeuer they were. And all the other affyrmed the ſame. That is (quoth he) yonder ſorcereſſe my brothers wyfe, and other with hir, meaning ye Quéene. At theſe words many of ye other Lords were greatly abaſhed, y• fauoured hir. But ye Lord Haſtings was in his minde better content, y• it was moued by hir, thā by any other whō he loued better: Albeit his hart ſomwhat grudged, yt he was not afore made of counſel in this matter, as he was of the taking of hir kinred, & of their putting to death, which were by his aſſent before, deuiſed to be beheaded at Pomfret thys ſelf ſame day, in which he was not ware yt it was by other deuiſed, yt himſelf ſhould be beheaded ye ſame day at London. Then ſaide the Protector, ye ſhall all ſée in what wiſe that ſorcereſſe, and that other Witch of hir counſell Shores wife with their affinitie, haue by their ſorcerie and witchcrafte waſted my body. And therewith he plucked vp his dublet ſléeue to his elbow vpō his left arme, where he ſhewed a weriſh withered arme, and ſmal, as it was neuer other. And thervpō euery mans minde ſore miſgaue them, wel perceiuing y• this matter was but a quarrel. For they well wiſt y• the Quéene was too wiſe to goe about any ſuch folly. And alſo if ſhe would, yet would ſhe of all folke leaſt make Shores wife of counſell, whom of all women ſhe moſt hated, as that Concubine whome the King hir huſbande had moſt loued.

And alſo, no manne was there preſent but well knew that his arme was euer ſuche ſince hys byrth. Naytheleſſe the Lorde Chamberlayne (which from the death of Kyng Edward kept Shores wyfe, on whom he ſomewhat doted in the Kings lyfe, ſauing (as it is ſayde) he, that while forbare hir of reuerence toward the K. or elſe of a certayn kind of fidelitic to his friend) aunſweared and ſayd: certaynly my Lord, if they haue ſo heynouſly done, they be worthie heynous puniſhment.
            What (quoth the Protector) thou ſerueſt me I wéene with iffes and with andes, I tell thée they haue ſo done, and that I will make good on thy bodye traytour: and therewith as in a great anger, he clapped his fyſt vpon the bourd a great rappe. At which token giuen, one cried treaſon without the Chamber. Therewith a doore clapped, and in come there ruſhing men in harneſſe, as many as the Chamber myght holde. And anone the Protector ſayd to the Lord Haſtings, I arreſt thée Traytour: What mée my Lord? (quoth he) yea thée traitour quoth the Protector. And another let flie at the Lorde Stanley, which ſhrunke at the ſtroke, and fellThe Lorde Stā
                  ley vvounded. vnder ye table, or elſe his head had béen cleft to the téeth: for as ſhortly as he ſhrāke, yet came the bloud about his eares. Then were they al quickly beſtowed in diuers Chambers, except the Lorde Chamberlaine, whom the Protector bad ſpéede and ſhriue him apace, for by Saint Paule (quoth he) I will not to dinner till I ſée thy head off.
            It booted him not to aſke why, but heauily tooke a Prieſt at auenture, and made a ſhort ſhrift, for a longer would not be ſuffred, the Protector made ſo much haſt to dinner, which he might not goe to, till this were done, for ſauing of hys othe. So was he brought forth into the gréene beſyde the Chappell within the Towre, and his head layde downe vppon a long logge of Tymber, and there ſtriken off, and afterward his body with the head enterred at Windſor beſide ye body of King Edward.
            
            A maruellous caſe is it to heare eyther the warnings of

that he ſhoulde haue boyded, or the tokens of that he coulde not voyde, for the ſelfe night next before his death, the Lord Stanley ſente a truſtie ſecrete meſſenger vnto him at mydnight in all the haſte, requiring him to riſe and ride awaye with hym, for he was diſpoſed vtterly no longer to byde, heThe Lorde Stanleys dreame. hadde ſo fearefull a dreame, in whiche him thoughte that a Boare with his tuſkes ſo raſed them both by ye heads, that the bloud ran about both their ſhoulders. And for as much as the Protector gaue the Boare for his cogniſance, this dreame made ſo fearefull an impreſſion in his heart, that he was throughly determined no longer to tarrie, but had hys horſſe readie, if the Lord Haſtings would goe wyth hym to ride yet ſo farre the ſame nighte, that they ſhoulde be out of daunger ere daye. Ha good Lord (quoth the Lorde Haſtings to this meſſenger) leaneth my Lorde thy maiſter ſo muche to ſuche trifles, and hath ſuch fayth in dreames, whiche eyther his owne feare fantaſieth, or doe riſe in the nightes reſt by reaſon of his day thoughts? Tell him it is plaine witchcraft to beléeue in ſuch dreames, whiche if they were tokens of things to come, why thinketh he not y• we mighte be as likely to make thē true by our going, if we were caught and brought back (as friends fayle fléers) for thē had ye Boare a cauſe likelye to race vs with his Tuſkes, as folke y• fled for ſome falſehoode, wherfore eyther is there no peril, nor none there is in déede: or if any be, it is rather in going than byding. And if we ſhoulde néeds coſt fal in peril one way or other, yet had I lieffer y• men ſhould ſée that it were by other mennes falſehoode, than thinke it were eyther by our owne faulte, or fainte hearte. And therefore go to thy maiſter manne and commende me to him, and pray him to be merry and haue no feare: for I enſure him I am as ſure of the manne that hée woteth of, as I am of mine owne hande. GOD ſende grace ſir, quoth the meſſenger, and went his waye.
            Certaine is it alſo, that in riding towards the Tower the ſame morning in whiche he was beheaded, his Horſſe

twice or thrice ſtumbled with him, almoſte to the falling, which thing albeit eache man wote wel dayly happeneth to them to whom no ſuch miſchance is toward, yet hath it bin of an olde rite and cuſtome, obſerued as a token oftentimes notably foregoing ſome great miſfortune.
            Now this that followeth, was no warning but an enuyous ſkorne.
            The ſame morning ere he was vp, came a Knight vnto him, as it were of curteſie, to accompany him to the Counſell, but of trueth ſent by the Protector to haſt him thitherwardes, with whom he was of ſecrete confederacie in that purpoſe, a meane man at that time, and nowe of great authoritie.
            This Knight when it happened the Lorde Chamberlayne by the waye to ſtay his horſſe, and commune a while with a Prieſt whom he mette in the Tower streete, brake his tale, and ſayde merily to him, what my Lorde I praye you come on, whereto talke you ſo long with that Prieſte, you haue no néede of a Prieſt yet: and therewith he laughed vpon hym, as though he would ſaye, yée ſhall haue ſoone. But ſo little wiſt the tother what he mente, and ſo little miſtruſted, that he was neuer merier, nor neuer ſo ful of good hope in his life, which ſelfe thing is often ſéene a ſigne of change. But I ſhal rather let any thing paſſe me, than y• vaine ſuretie of mans minde ſo neare his death.
            Upon the very Tower Wharfe, ſo neare the place wher his head was off ſoone after, there met he with one Haſtings a Purſiuaunt of his owne name. And of theyr méeting in that place, he was put in remembraunce of another time, in whiche it hadde happened them before to méete in lyke manner togither in the ſame place. At whiche other tyme the Lord Chamberlain had bin accuſed vnto King Edward by the Lorde Riuers the Quéenes brother, in ſuche wiſe as he was for the while (but it laſted not long) far fallen into ye Kings indignation, and ſtoode in great feare of himſelf. And for as muche as he now mette this Purſiuaunt in the ſame

place that ieopardie ſo well paſſed, it gaue hym great pleaſure to talke with him thereof, with whom he hadde before talked thereof in the ſame place, whyle he was therin. And therefore he ſayde: Ah Haſtings arte thou remembred when I met thée here once with an heauie hearte? Yea my Lorde (quoth he) that remember I well, and thanked be God, they got no good, nor you no harme thereby. Thou wouldeſt ſaye ſo (quoth he) if thou kn
                  •
               weſt as much as I knowe, whyche fewe knowe elſe as yet, and mo ſhal ſhortly. That ment he by the Lordes of the Quéenes kyndred that were taken before and ſhould that daye be beheaded at Ponfraite
                     •
                  
                which he well wiſt, but nothing ware that the Are hung ouer his own heade. In fayth man (quoth he) I was neuer ſo ſorie, nor neuer ſtoode in ſo great dreade in my life, as I dyd when thou and I mette here. And lo howe the worlde is turned, nowe ſtand mine enimies in the daunger (as thou mayeſt happe to heare more hereafter) and I neuer in my life ſo mery, nor neuer in ſo great ſuretie.
            O good God the blindneſſe of our mortall nature, when he moſt feared, he was in good ſuretie, when he reckened himſelf ſureſt, he loſt his life, & that within two hours after.
            Thus ended thys honourable man, a good Knight and aThe deſcription of the Lord Haſtings. gentle, of greate aucthoritie with hys Prince, of lyuing ſomewhat diſſolute, playne and open to hys enimie, and ſecrete to his friend, eaſie to beguile, as he that of good hearte and courage foreſtudied no perilles: a louing man and paſſing wel beloued: very faithful and truſtie ynough, truſting too much. Now flew the fame of this Lords death ſwiftlye through the Citie, and ſo forth further about like a winde in euery mans eare.
            But the Protector immediately after dinner, intending to ſette ſome colour vpon the matter, ſent in all haſt for many ſubſtantial men out of the Citie into the Tower. And at theyr comming, himſelfe with the Duke of Buckingham, ſtoode harneſſed in olde yll faring Briganders, ſuch as no man ſhoulde wéene that they would vouchſafe to haue put vpon

their backes, except that ſome ſodain neceſſitie had conſtrained them.
            And then the Protectour ſhewed them, that the Lorde Chamberlaine and other of his conſpiracie had contriued to haue ſodainely deſtroyed hym, and the Duke, there the ſame daye in the Counſel. And what they intended further was as yet not well knowne. Of whiche their Treaſon hée neuer had knowledge before tenne of the clocke the ſame forenoone, which ſodain feare droue them to put on for their defence ſuche harneys as came next to hande. And ſo hadde God holpen them, that the miſchief turned vpon them that woulde haue done it. And thys he requyred them to report.
            Euery man aunſwered him fayre, as though no manne miſtruſted the matter, which of trothe no manne beléeued. Yet for the further appeaſing of the peoples minde, he ſent immediately after dinner in al haſt, an Herault of armes, wyth a Proclamation to be made throughe the Citie in theThe Protectors proclamation. Kyngs name, conteyning, that the Lord Haſtings with diuerſe other of his trayterous purpoſe, had before conſpired the ſame daye, to haue ſlaine the Lorde Protectour, and the Duke of Buckingham, ſitting in the Counſell, and after to haue taken vpon them to rule the King, and the realme, at theyr pleaſure, and thereby to pill and ſpoyle whome they liſt vncontrolled. And much matter there was in that proclamation, deuiſed to the ſlaunder of the Lorde Chamberlayne, as that he was an euil. Counſayler to the Kings father, inticing him to manye things highly redounding to the miniſhing of his honour, and to the vniuerſall hurte of his Realme by his euill companye, ſiniſter procuring, and vngracious enſample, as wel in manye other things, as in the dicious liuing and inordinate abuſion of hys bodie, both wyth manye other, and alſo ſpeciallye wyth Shores wiſe, whiche was one alſo of hys moſte ſecret counſaile of thys heynons treaſon, with whom he laye nightlye, and namely the night laſt paſt nexte before his death, ſo that it

was the leſſe maruayle, if vngratious liuing broughte him to an vnhappy ending, whiche he was nowe putte vnto, by the moſte dread commaundemente of the Kings highneſſe, and of his honorable and faythfull counſayle, bothe for hys demerites, being ſo openly taken in hys falſlye conceyued treaſon, and alſo leaſte the delaying of his execution, might haue encouraged other miſchieuous perſons partners of his conſpiracie, to gather and aſſemble themſelues togither, in making ſome greate commotion for hys delyueraunce: whoſe hope being nowe by his well deſerued death politikely repreſſed, al ye realm ſhould by gods grace, reſt in good quiet and peace.
            Now was this proclamation made wythin two houres after that he was beheaded, and it was ſo curiouſly indited, and ſo faire written in parchment, in ſo well a ſette hand, and therewith of it ſelfe ſo long a proceſſe, that euery childe might well perceyue that it was prepared before. For all ye time betwéene his death and the proclayming, coulde ſkant haue ſufficed vnto the bare writing alone, all had it béene but in Paper, and ſcribled forth in haſte at aduenture. So that vpon the proclayming thereof, one that was ſcholemaſter of Paules, of chaunce ſtanding by, and comparing the ſhortneſſe of the time with the length of the matter, ſayd vnto them that ſtoode about him, here is a gay goodly caſt, foule caſt away for haſte: and a Merchaunt aunſweared him, that it was written by prophecie. Nowe then by & by, as it were for anger, not for couetiſe, the Protectour ſent into the houſe of Shores wife (for hir huſbande dwelled not with hyr) and ſpoyled hir of all that euer ſhe had, aboue the value of two or thrée thouſande marke, and ſent hyr body to priſon. And when he had a while layde vnto hyr (for the manner ſake) that ſhe wente aboute to bewitch him, and that ſhe was of counſaile with the Lord Chāberlaine to deſtroy him: in cō
               cluſion when that no colour coulde faſten vppon theſe matters, then he layde heynouſly to hir charge, y• thing that hir ſelfe could not denye, that all the world wiſt was true, and

that naytheleſſe euery manne laughed at, to heare it then ſo ſodainely, ſo highly taken, that ſhe was nought of hir body.
            And for this cauſe (as a good continent Prince, cleane and faultleſſe of himſelfe, ſente out of heauen into this vicious world for the amendment of mens manners) he cauſed the Biſhop of London to put hyr to open penaunce, going before the Croſſe in Proceſſion, vpon a Sonday, with a Taper in hir hande. In whiche ſhe went in countenance and pace demure ſo womanly, and albeit ſhe were out of al array ſaue hir kyrtle onlye, yet wente ſhe ſo faire and louely, namely while the wondering of the people caſte a comely rudde in hir chéekes (of which ſhe before had moſt miſſe,) yt hir great ſhame wanne hir much prayſe, among thoſe that wer more amorous of hir bodie, than curious of hir ſoule. And manye good folke alſo that hated hir liuing, and glad were to ſée ſin corrected: yet pitied they more hir penaunce, ethan reioyced therein, when they conſidered that the Protector procured it, more of a corrupt intent, than any vertuous affection.
            This woman was borne in London, worſhipfullye friended,The deſcription of Shores vvife. honeſtly brought vp, and very wel maried, ſauing ſomwhat too ſoone, hir huſband an honeſt Citizen▪ yong & godly, and of good ſubſtāce. But for as much as they were coupled ere ſhe were wel ripe, ſhe not very feruently loued, for whō ſhe neuer longed, which was happily the thing that ye more eaſily made hir incline vnto the Kings appetite, when hée required hir. Howbeit the reſpect of his royaltie, the hope of gay apparell, eaſe, pleaſure, and other wanton wealth, was able ſoone to pierce a ſoft tender hearte.
            But when the king had abuſed hir, anone hir huſband (as he was an honeſt mā, & one y• could his good, not preſuming to touch a Kings Concubine) left hir vp to him altogither.
            When the King died, the Lord Chamberlain tooke hyr, whiche in the Kings dayes, albeit he was ſore enamoured vpon hir, yet he forebare hir, eyther for reuerence, or for a certaine friendly faythfulneſſe. Proper ſhe was and fayre: nothing in hir bodie that you would haue chaunged, but if

you woulde haue wiſhed hir ſomewhat higher.
            Thus ſay they that knewe hir in hir youth. Albeit ſome that nowe ſée hir (for yet ſhe liueth) déeme hir neuer to haue bene wel viſaged, whoſe iudgement ſéemeth me ſomewhat like, as though men ſhould geſſe the beautie of one long before departed, by hir ſcalpe taken out of the charnel houſe: for now is ſhe olde, leane, withered, and dryed vp, nothing left but riueld ſkin and hard bone. And yet being euen ſuch: who ſo wel aduiſe hir viſage, might geſſe and deuiſe, which parts how filled woulde make it a faire face. Yet delited not men ſo much in hir beautie as in hir pleaſaunt behauiour. For a proper wit had ſhe, and coulde both reade well and write, merrie in companye, readie and quicke of aunſwere, neyther mute nor full of bable, ſometime taunting without diſpleaſure, and not without diſporte.
            The King would ſay that he had thrée Concubines, whichKing Edvvards three concubines. in thrée diuerſe properties diuerſly excelled. One the merieſt, another the wylieſt, the thirde the holyeſt harlot in his Realme, as one whom no man could get out of the Church lightly to any place, but it were to his bed. The other two were ſomewhat greater perſonages, and natheleſſe of their humility content to be nameleſſe, & to forbeare the praiſe of thoſe properties. But ye merieſt was this Shors wife, in whō the King therfore tooke ſpeciall pleaſure. For many he had, but hir he loued, whoſe fauour to ſaye the troth (for ſinne it were to belie the Diuel) ſhe neuer abuſed to any mās hurt, but to manye a mannes comforte and reliefe: where the Kyng tooke diſpleaſure ſhe would mitigate and appeaſe his mynde: where men were out of fauour ſhée woulde bryng them in his grace. For manye that hadde highlye offended ſhée obtayned pardon. Of great forfeytures ſhe gat men remiſſion. And finally, in many weightie ſutes ſhe ſtoode many men in great ſteade, eyther for none or very ſmall rewardes, and thoſe rather gaye than riche: eyther for that ſhe was content with the déede ſelfe well done, or for that ſhée delyted to bée ſued vnto, and to ſhewe what ſhée was able

to doe with the King, or for that wanton women and wealthy be not al wayes couetous.
            I doubt not ſome ſhall thinke this woman to ſleyghte a thing to be written of, and ſet among the remembrances of great matters: whych they ſhall ſpeciallye thinke, that happilye ſhall eſtéeme hir onely by that they nowe ſée hir. But me ſéemeth the chaunce ſo muche the more worthy to be remembred, in how much ſhe is nowe in the more beggerlye condition, vnfriended and worne out of acquaintaunce, after good ſubſtaunce, after as great fauour with the Prince, after as greate ſute and ſéekyng to with all thoſe that thoſe dayes had buſineſſe to ſpéede, as manye other men were in theyr tymes, which be now famous only by the infamye of theyr yl déeds. Hir doings wer not much leſſe albeit they be much leſſe remēbred bycauſe they were not ſo euil. For mē vſe if they haue an euill turne, to write it in Marble: & who ſo doeth vs a good turne, we write it in duſte, whiche is not worſt proued by hir: for at this day ſhe beggeth of manye at thys day lyuing, y• at this day had begged if ſhe had not bin.
            Now was it ſo deuiſed by the Protectour and his counſayle, that the ſelfe daye in whych the Lord Chamberlayne was beheaded in the Tower of London, and aboute the ſelfe ſame houre, was there (not without his aſſent) beheaded at Ponfraite, the foreremembred Lords and Knightes that were taken from the King at Northampton and Stonie Stratforde. Which thing was done in the preſence, and by the order of ſir Richarde Ratcliffe Knight, whoſe ſeruice the ProtectourSir Richarde Ratclife. ſpecially vſed in that counſell, and in the execution of ſuch lawleſſe enterpriſes, as a man that had bene long ſecrete wyth him, hauing experience of the worlde, and a ſhrewde witte, ſhort and rude in ſpéech, rough and boyſterous of behauyour, bolde in miſchiefe, as farre from pitie as from al feare of God.
            This Knight bringing thē out of ye priſon to the ſcaffold, and ſhewing to the people about that they were traytours, not ſuffering them to declare & ſpeake their innocency, leaſt

their words might haue inclyned men to pitie them and toThe Lord Riuers and other beheaded. hate the Protector and his part: cauſed them haſtily wythout iudgement, proces, or manner of order, to be beheaded, & without other earthly gilt, but onely that they were good mē, too true to the Kyng, and too nigh to the Quéene.
            Nowe when the Lorde Chamberlaine and theſe other Lordes and Knightes were thus beheaded and ridde out of the way: then thoughte the Protector, that whyle men muſed what the matter ment, while the Lords of the Realme were about him out of theyr owne ſtrengthes, while no mā wiſte what to thinke, nor whome to truſte, ere euer they ſhoulde haue ſpace to diſpute and diſgeſt the matter and make parties, it were beſt haſtily to purſue his purpoſe, and put himſelfe in poſſeſſion of the Crown, ere men could haue time to deuiſe any way to reſiſt.
            But nowe was all the ſtudie by what meane thys matter being of it ſelfe ſo heynous, might be firſt broken to the people, in ſuch wiſe that it might be well taken.
            To thys Councell they tooke diuerſe, ſuche as they thought méetlye to be truſted, likelye to be induced to that parte, and able to ſtande them in ſteade eyther by power or policie.
            Among whome they made of Co
                  •
               nlaile Edmonde Shaa
               Edmond Shaa Maior of Lōdō
                Knight then Maior of London, which vpon truſt of his owne aduauncement, whereof he was of a proude hearte highlye deſirous, ſhould frame the Citie to theyr appetite. Of Spirituall men they toke ſuch as had wit, and were in authoritie among the people for opinion of their learning, and had 
                  ••
                ſcrupulous conſcience.
            Among theſe hadde they Iohn Shaa Clearke, brother toDoctour Shaa, Frier Penker. the Maior, and Fryer Penker; pro
                  •
               inciall of the Augustine Fryers, both Doctours of diuinitie, both great Preachers, both of more learning than vertue, of more fame thā learning. For they were before gretly eſtéemed among the people: but after that neuer. Of theſe two the tone had a Sermon in prayſe of the Protecte
                  ••
                before the coronation,

the tother after, both ſo ful of tedious flatterie, that no m
                  ••
                eares coulde abide them.
            
               Penker in his ſermon ſo loſt his voyce, that he was fain to leaue off and come downe in the midſt: Doctour Shaa by his ſermon loſt his honeſtie, and ſoone after his life, for 
                  •
               erys ſhame of the worlde, into whiche he durſte neuer after come abroade. But the Frier forced for no ſhame, and ſo it harmed him the leſſe. How be it ſome doubt & many thinke, that Penker was not of counſayle of the matter before the coronation, but after the common maner, fel to flatterie after: namely ſith his Sermon was not incontinent vppon it, but at Saint Marie Hoſpitall at the Eaſter after. But certaine it is, that Doctor Shaa was of counſayle in the beginning, ſo farre forth, that they determined that he ſhould firſt breake the matter in a. Sermō at Paules Croſſe, in whiche he ſhould by the authoritie of his preaching, incline the people to the Protectors ghoſtly purpoſe.
            But now was all the labour and ſtudie, in the deuiſe of ſome conuenient pretext, for whyche the people ſhoulde be content to depoſe the Prince, and accepte the Protector for King▪ In which diuerſe things they deuiſed. But the thie
                  •
                thing and the weighte of all that inuention, reſted in thys, that they ſhould alledge Baſtardie▪ eyther in king▪ 
               Edward himſelfe, or in his children, or both. So that he ſhould ſéeme diſabled to inherite the Crowne, by the Dyke of Yorke, and the prince by him.
            To laye Burſtardie in King Edwarde founded openlie to the rebuke of the Protectours owne mother, which was mother to them both: for in that point coulde be none other colour but to protende that his owne mother was an aduoutreſſe, which notwithſtanding, to further thys purpoſe he letted not: but na
                  •
                the leſſe, he woulde that poynt ſhoulde be loſſe and more fauourably handled, not euen fully plaine and directly, but that the matter ſhoulde be touched aſlope 
                  •
               ra
                  •
               tily, as thou 
                  〈…〉
                ſpared in that 
                  〈…〉
               t to ſpeake al the troth, for feare of his diſpleaſure.
            
               But the other poynt concerning the Baſtardie that they deuiſed to ſurmiſe in King Edwardes children, that woulde he ſhould be openly declared, and inforced to the vttermoſt. The colour and pretext whereof, cannot be wel perceyued, but if we firſte repeate you ſome things long before done about King Edwards mariage.
            After that King Edwarde the fourth hadde depoſed King Henrie the ſixth, and was in peaceable poſſeſſiō of y• realm, determining himſelfe to marie, as it was requiſite both for himſelfe and for the Realme, he ſent ouer in Ambaſſade the Earle of Warwicke, with other noble men in his companye vnto Spaine, to intreate and conclude a mariage betwéene King Edwarde and the Kings daughter of Spaine. In which thyng the Earle of Warwicke founde the parties ſo towarde and willing, that he ſpéedilyé according to his inſtructions without any difficultie, brought the matter to very good cō
               cluſion.
            Now happened it, that in the meane ſeaſon there came to make ſute by petition to the king Dame Elizabeth Gray, which was after his. Quéene, at that time a Widowe, borneDame Elizabeth Gray. of noble bloude, ſpecially by hyr mother, whiche was Dutches of Bedforde, ere ſhe married the Lorde Woodfielde hyr Father. Howbeit this Dame Elizabeth hir ſelfe, being in ſeruice wyth Quéene Margaret, wife vnto King Henrie the ſixth, was maryed vnto one Iohn Gray an Eſquire, whom King Henrie made Knight, vppon the fielde that he had on Bernet Heath by Saint Albons againſt King Edwarde. And little while enioyed he that Knighthoode, for he was at the ſame fielde ſlaine.
            After which done, and the Earle of Warwicke being in his Ambaſſade aboute the afore remembred mariage, thys péere Ladie made humble ſute vnto ye King, that ſhe might be reſtored vnto ſuch ſmall landes as hir late huſbande had giuen hyr in ioynture. Whome when the Kyng behelde, and hearde hyr ſpeake, as ſhe was both fayre and of a goodly fauour, moderate of ſtature, wel made, and very wiſe: he

not only pitied hir, but alſo waxed enamoured of hir. And takyng hir after ſecretly aſide, beganne to enter in talking more familiarly. Whoſe appetite when ſhe perceyued, ſhe vertuouſly denyed hym. But that did ſhe ſo wiſely, & with ſo good maner, and words ſo wel ſet, that ſhe rather kindled his deſire than quenched it.
            And finallye, after manye a méeting, muche wooyng, and manye greate promiſes, ſhe well eſpyed the Kings affection towarde hyr ſo greatelye encreaſed, that ſhée durſte ſomewhat the more boldely ſay hir minde, as to him whoſe heart ſhe perceyned more feruently ſet, than to fall off for a worde.
            And in concluſion, ſhe ſhewed him playne, that as ſhée wyſte hyr ſelfe to ſimple to be his wife, ſo thoughte ſhe hir ſelfe too good to be hys Concubine. The King muche maruelling at hir conſtancie, as hée that hadde not bene wonte elſe where to be ſo ſtiffelye ſayde naye, ſo muche eſtéemed hir continencie and chaſtitye, that hée ſette hyr vertue in the ſteade of poſſeſſion and riches, and thus takyng Counſayle of his deſire, determined in all poſſible haſte i
                  •
                mary hir.
            And after he was thus appointed, and hadde betwéene them twaine enſured hir: then aſked he Counſaile of hys other friendes, and that in ſuche manner, as they might then perceiue, it booted not greatly to ſay nay. Notwithſtanding the Dutches of Yorke his mother was ſo ſore moued ther wt, ye ſhe diſwaded the mariage as much as ſhe poſſible might,The Kings Mother. alleaging ye it was his honor, profite and ſurety alſo, to marie in a noble progenie out of his Realme, whervpon depended great ſtrength to his eſtate, by ye affinitie, and great poſſibilitie of encreaſe of his poſſeſſion. And that he coulde not well otherwiſe doe, ſtanding that the Earle of Warwick had ſo far moued alreadye, which were not likely to take it wel, i
                  •
                al his voiage wer in ſuch wiſe fruſtrate, & his apointments deluded. And ſhe ſayd alſo, yt it was not Princely to mary

owne ſubiecte, no greate occaſion leading therevnto, no poſſeſſions, or other commoditie depending therevpon, but onely as it were a rich man that woulde marie his mayde, only for a little wanton votage vpon hyr perſon. In which mariage many mo cōmende the maydens fortune than the maiſters wiſedome. And yet therin ſhe ſayd ther was more honeſtie than honor in this mariage. For as much as there is betwéene no Merchaunte and his owne mayde ſo greate difference, as betwéene the King and this widow. In whoſe perſon, albeit there was nothyng to be miſlyked, yet was there (ſhe ſayde) nothing ſo excellent but that it mighte bée founde in diuerſe other that were more méetly (quoth ſhée) for your eſtate, and maydens alſo, wheras the only widowhead of Elizabeth Gray, though ſhe were in all other things conuenient for you, ſhoulde yet ſuffice as me ſéemeth to refrayne you from hir mariage, ſithe it is an vnſitting thing, and a very blemiſhe and high diſparagemente to the ſacred maieſtie of a Prince, that ought as nigh to approche prieſthoode in cleaneſſe as he doth in dignitie, to be defouled with Bigamie in his firſt mariage.
            The King when his mother had ſayde, made hir aunſwere,The Kings a
                     •
                  
                  ſvvere to his mother. part in earneſt, part in play merily, as he that wyſte himſelfe out of hyr rule. And albeit he woulde gladlye that ſhe ſhould take it wel, yet was at a point in his own minde, toke ſhe it well or otherwiſe. Howbeit ſomewhat to ſatiſfie hir, he ſayde, that albeit mariage beyng a Spiritual thing, oughte rather to be made for the reſpect of God, where hys grace enclyneth the parties to loue togtiher, as he truſted it was in hys, than for the regarde of any Temporall aduā
               tage: yet naytheleſſe, him ſéemed that this mariage euen worldly conſidered, was not vnprofitable. For he reckened the amitie of no earthly Nation ſo neceſſarie for him, as the friēdſhip of his own, which he thought likly to beare him ſo muche the more heartie fauour, in that he diſdayned not to marie with one of his owne lande. And yet if outward aliaunce were thought ſo requiſite, he would finde the meanes

to enter therevnto, much better by other of his kinne, where all the parties coulde be contented, than to marye himſelfe whom he ſhould happily neuer loue, and for the poſſibilitie of more poſſeſſions, leaſe the fruite and pleaſure of this that he had alredy. For ſmal pleaſure taketh a man in all that euer he hath beſide, if he be wiued againſt his appetite. And I doubt not (quoth he) but there be as yée ſaye other, yt be in euery point comparable with hir. And therfore I let not thē that like them to wedde them. No more is it reaſon, that it miſlike any man, y• I marry where it liketh me. And I am ſure yt my couſin of Warwicke neither loueth me ſo little, to grudge at y• I loue, nor is ſo vnreaſonable to looke yt I ſhold in choyſe of a wife, rather be ruled by his eie, than by mine own: as though I were a ward y• wer boūd to mary by ye appointment of a Gardaine. I would not bea K. with y• cōditiō, to forbear mine own libertie in choiſe of mine own mariage. As for poſſibilitie of more inheritāce by new affinitie in ſtrange lands, is oft the occaſion of more trouble thā profite. And we haue alreadie title by that meanes, to ſo much as ſufficeth to get and kéepe well in one mans dayes. That ſhe is a Widow, and hath already children, by Gods bleſſed Ladie, I am a Bacheler & haue ſome to, and ſo eache of vs hath a proofe that nether of vs is like to be barraine. And therefore (Madame) I pray you be contente, I truſt in God ſhe ſhal bring forth a yong Prince that ſhall pleaſe you. And as for the Bigamie, let the Biſhop hardly lay it in my way when I come to take orders. For I vnderſtād it is forbiddē a Prieſt, but I neuer wiſt it yet, yt it was forbiddē a prince.
            The Dutches with theſe words nothing appeaſed, and ſéeing the King ſo ſette thereon, that ſhe coulde not pul him back, ſo highly ſhe diſdayned it, that vnder pretext of hir dutie to Godwarde, ſhe deuiſed to diſturbe this mariage, and rather to helpe y• he ſhould marie one Dame Elizabeth Lucy, whom the King hadde alſo not long before gotten with childe. Wherfore the Kings mother openly obiected againſt his mariage, as it were in diſcharge of hir conſcience, that

the King was ſure to Dame Elizabeth Lucy, and hir huſbandeElizabeth Lucy before God. By reaſon of which wordes, ſuch obſtacle was made in the matter, that eyther the Biſhops durſt not, or the K. would not procéed to the ſolemnizatiō of this wedding, til theſe ſame wer clearly purged, & the troth wel and openly teſtifyed. Whervpon dame Eliz. Lucy was ſente for.
            And albeit that ſhe was by the Kings mother and many other put in good comforte, to affirme that ſhe was enſured vnto the King: yet when ſhe was ſolemnly ſworn to ſay the troth, ſhe confeſſed that they were neuer enſured. Howbeit ſhe ſayde his grace ſpake ſo louing words vnto hir, that ſhe verily hoped he woulde haue maried hir. And yt if it had not bene for ſuch kinde wordes, ſhe would neuer haue ſhewed ſuch kindnes to him, to let him ſo kindly get hir with child.
            This examination ſolemnly taken, when it was clearlyThe kings mariage. perceyued that there was none impedimente: the King with gret feaſt and honorable ſolemnitie, maried dame Elizabeth Gray and hir crowned Quéene that was his enimies wife, & many time had prayed ful heartilye for his loſſe, in which God loued hir better than to graunte hir hir bone.
            But when the Earle of Warwicke vnderſtoode of this mariage, he toke it ſo highly that his Ambaſſade was deluded, that for very anger and diſdaine, he at his returning aſſembled a great puiſſaunce againſt the King, & came ſo faſt vpō him or he coulde be able to reſiſt, that he was fayne to voyd the realme, and flée into Hollande for ſuccour, where he remaynedThe king fled. for the ſpace of two yeres, leauing his new wife inThe prince borne. 
               Westminster in Sanctuarie, where ſhe was deliuered of Ed. the Prince, of whom we before haue ſpokē. In which mean time the Erle of Warwicke tooke out of priſon, and ſet vppeK. Henrie the ſixth ſet vp. again King Henrie the ſixth, which was before by King Edward depoſed, & that much what by ye power of the Erle of Warwick which was a wiſe man, and a couragious warrior,Of the Erle of VVarvvicke. & of ſuch ſtrength, what for his lands, his alliance, & fauoure with all people, that he made Kings, and put down kings almoſt at his pleaſure, & not impoſſible to haue atteyned it

himſelfe, if he had not reckened it a greater thing to make a King than to be a King. But nothing laſteth alway: for in concluſion King Edwarde returned, and with muche leſſe number than he had at Barnet on the Eaſterday fielde, ſ
                  •
               ueThe Erle of VVarvvicke 
                     •
                  laine. the Earle of Warwicke, with many other great eſtats of that partie, and ſo ſtablie attayned the Crowne againe, that he peaceably enioyed it vntil his dying day: and in ſuch plight left it, that it coulde not be loſte, but by the diſcorde of hys very friendes, or falſehoode of his fayned friends. I haue rehearſed this buſineſſe aboute this mariage ſomewhat the more at length, bycauſe it might thereby the better appeare vpon howe ſlipper a grounde the Protector builded his colour, by whiche he pretended King Edwardes children to be Baſtardes. But that inuention ſimple as it was, it liked them to whom it ſufficed to haue ſomewhat to ſaye, whyle they were ſure to be compelled to no larger proofe than thē
               ſelues liſte to make.
            Now then (as I began to ſhew you) it was by the ProtectorDoctor Shaa
                     •
                   Sermon. and his counſaile concluded, that this Doctour Shaa ſhould in a ſermon at Paules croſſe ſignifye to the people, y• neither king Edwarde himſelfe, nor the Duke of Clarence, were lawfully begotten, nor were not the very children of ye duke of Yorke, but begottē vnlawfully by other perſōs, by aduoutrie of the Dutches their mother. And that alſo dame Elizabeth Lucy was verily the wife of King Edward, and ſo the Prince and al his children Baſtards, that were begottē vpon the Quéene. According to this deuiſe Doctor Shaa y• Sonday after, at Paules Croſſe in a greate audience (as alway aſſembled great number to his preaching) he tooke for his Theame Spuria vitulamina non agent radices alt as. That is to ſay: Baſtarde ſlippes ſhal neuer take deepe roote.
            
            Therevppon when he had ſhewed the great grace that God giueth & ſecretly infundeth in right generation after y• lawes of matrimonie, thē declared he y• cōmonly thoſe children lacked y• grace, & for ye puniſhment of their parēts were for ye more part vnhappy, which wer gottē in baſe, & ſpecially

in aduoutrie. Of which though ſome by the ignorance of the world and the truth hid from knowledge inherited for the ſeaſon other mens landes, yet God alway ſo prouideth, that it continueth not in their bloud long, but ye truth comming to light, the rightfull inheritors be reſtored, and the baſtard ſlip pulled vp ere it can be rooted déepe. And when he had laid for the proofe and confirmation of this ſentence certaine enſamples taken out of the old Teſtament, and other auncient hiſtories, then beganne he to deſcend into the praiſe of the Lorde Richarde late Duke of Yorke, calling him father to the Lorde Protector, and declared the title of his heires vnto the Crowne, to whom it was after the death of King Henrie the ſixt entayled by authoritie of Parliament. Then ſhewed he that his verie right heyre of his body lawfully begotten was onely the Lord Protector. For he declared then, that King Edward was neuer lawfully marryed vnto the Quéene, but was before God, huſband vnto Dame Elizabeth Lucie, and ſo his children baſtardes. And beſides that, neither King Edwarde himſelfe, nor the Duke of Clarence, among thoſe that were ſecrete in the houſholde, were reckened verie ſurely for the children of the noble Duke, as thoſe that by their fauours more reſembled other knowne men than him. From whoſe vertuous conditions he ſayde alſo that King Edward was farre off. But the Lorde Protector he ſayd, the verie noble Prince, the ſpeciall paterne of Knightly prowes, as well in all Princely behauiour as in the lineamentes and fauour of his viſage, repreſented the very face of the noble Duke his father. This is, quoth he, the fathers owne figure, this is his owne countenaunce, the verie print of his viſage, the ſure vndoubted Image, the plaine expreſſe likeneſſe of that noble Duke.
            Nowe was it before deuiſed, that in the ſpeaking of theſe words, the Protector ſhoulde haue come in among the people to the Sermon warde, to the end that thoſe words méeting with his preſence, might haue bene taken among the hearers, as though the holy ghoſt had put them in the preachers

mouthe, and ſhoulde haue moued the people euen there to crie, King Richarde, King Richarde, that it myght haue béene after ſayde, that he was ſpecially choſen by God and in manner by myracle. But this deuiſe quayled, eyther by the Protectors negligence or the Preachers ouermuch diligence. For whyle the Protector founde by the way tarying, leaſt he ſhoulde preuent thoſe wordes, and the Doctor fearing that he ſhoulde come ere hys Sermon could come to theſe wordes, haſted his matter thereto, who was come to them, and paſte them, and entred into other matters ere the Protector came. Whom when he beheld comming, he ſodainely lefte the matter with which he was in hande, and without any deduction thervnto, out of al order and out of all frame beganne to repeate thoſe wordes agayne: this is the very noble Prince, the ſpeciall patrone of Knightly prowes, which as well in all Princely behauiour, as in the li
                  •
               iamentes and fauour of his vſage, repreſenteth the verie face of the noble Duke of Yorke his father: this is the fathers owne figure, this is his owne countenaunce, the very print of his viſage, the ſure vndoubted Image, the playne expreſſe lykeneſſe of the Noble Duke, whoſe remembrance can neuer dye whyle he liueth. While theſe wordes were in ſpeaking, the Protector accompanied with the Duke of Buckingham, went through the people into the place where the Doctors commonly ſtaud in the vpper ſtorie, where he ſtoode to hearken the Sermon. But the people were ſo farre from crying King Richarde, that they ſtoode as they had béene turned into ſtones, for wonder of this ſhamefull Sermon.
            After which once ended, the Preacher gat him home, andPreacher. neuer after durſt looke out for ſhame, but kepte hym out of ſight lyke an Owle. And when he once aſked one that had béene his olde friend what the people talked of him, al were it that hys owne conſcience well ſhewed him that they talked no good, yet when the other aunſwered him, that there was in euery mannes mouth ſpoken of hym much ſhame, it

ſo ſtrake him to the heart, that within fewe dayes after hée withered and conſumed away.
            Then on the Tueſday folowing this ſermon, there came into the Guild hall in London the Duke of Buckingham, accompanyed with diuerſe Lordes and Knightes, more than happily knewe the meſſage that they brought. And there in the Eaſt end of the hall, where ye Maior kéepeth the Huſtings, the Maior and all the Aldermen beyng aſſembled aboute him, all the Commons of the Citie gathered before them: after ſilence commaunded vppon great payne in the Protectors name: the Duke ſtoode vp, and (as he was neyther vnlearned, and of nature maruellouſly well ſpoken) he ſaid vnto the people with a cleare and a loude voyce in this manner of wiſe.
            
               
                  
                     
                        FRiendes, for the zeale and heartie fauour that we beareThe Duke of Buckinghams Oration. you, wée be come to breake vnto you, of a matter ryght great and weightie, and no leſſe weightie than pleaſing to God, and profitable to all the Reame: nor to no part of the Realme more profitable, than to you the Citizens of this noble Citie. For why, that thing that we wote wel ye haue long tyme lacked, and ſore longed for, that ye woulde haue giuen great good for, that ye would haue gone farre to fetch, that thing we be come hither to bring you without your labour, paine, coſt, aduenture or ieoperdie. What thing is that: Certes the ſuertie of your owne bodyes, the quiet of your wynes and your daughters, the ſauegarde of your goods: of all whych things in tymes paſte ye ſtoode euer more in doubte. For who was there of you all, that woulde recken him ſelfe Lorde of his owne good among ſo many grens and traps as was ſet therfore, among ſo much pilling & polling, among ſo many taxes & tallages, of which there was neuer end, & oftentimes no néede: or if any were, it rather grew of royot, & vnreaſonable waſt, thā any neceſſary or honorable charge. So yt there was dayly pilled frō good mē and honeſt, great ſubſtance of gods to be laſhed out among vnthrifts, ſo farre forth that fiftenes ſufficed not, nor

any vſuall manner of knowne taxes: but vnder an eaſye name of beneuolence and good will, the Commiſſioners ſo much of euery man tooke, as no man coulde with his good will haue giuen. As though that name of beneuolence, had ſignified that euery man ſhoulde pay not what himſelfe of his owne good will lyſt to graunt, but what the King of his good will lyſt to take. Which neuer aſked little, but euery thing was haūſed aboue the meaſure, amerciaments turned into fines, fines into raunſoms, ſmall treſpaſſes in miſpriſion, miſpriſion into treaſon. Whereof I thinke no man looketh that we ſhoulde remember you of examples by name, as though Burdet were forgotten, that was for a word ſpoken in haſt cruelly beheaded, by the miſconſtruing of the lawes of this Realme, for the Princes pleaſure: wyth no leſſe honour to Markam then chiefe Juſtice, that left his office rather than he woulde aſſent to that iudgement, than to the diſhoneſtie of thoſe, that eyther for feare or flatterie gaue that iudgemēt. What Cooke your owne worſhipful neighbour, Alderman and Maior of this noble Citie, who is of you eyther ſo negligent that he knoweth not, or ſo forgetful that he remembreth not, or ſo hard hearted that he pitieth not that worſhipfull mans loſſe? what ſpeake we of loſſe? his vtter ſpoyle and vnderſerued deſtruction, onely for that it happened thoſe to fauour him whom the Prince fauored not. We néede not I ſuppoſe to rehearſe of theſe any mo by name, ſith there be (I doubt not) many here preſent, that eyther in themſelues, or in their nigh friendes haue knowne as well their goods as their perſons greatly endaungered, eyther by feyned quarels, or ſmall matters agréeued wyth heynous names. And alſo there was no crime ſo great, of which there could lacke a pretext. For ſith the King preuenting the time of his inheritaunce attayned the Crowne by battayle: it ſufficed in a riche man for a pretext of treaſon, to haue bene of kindred or aliaunce, neare familiaritie or longer acquaintaunce with any of thoſe that were at anye tyme the Kings enimies, which was at one time and other,

more than halfe the Realme. Thus were neither your goods in ſuertie, and yet they brought your bodyes in ieoperdie, beſide the common aduenture of open warre, which albeitOpen vvarre. that it is euer the will and occaſion of much miſchiefe, yet is it neuer ſo miſchieuous as where any people fall at diſtaunce among themſelues, nor in none earthly nation ſo deadly and ſo peſtilent, as when it hapneth among vs: and among vs neuer ſo long continued diſſention, nor ſo many battayles in that ſeaſon, nor ſo cruell and ſo deadly foughtē, as was in that Kings dayes that deade is, God forgiue it his ſoule. In whoſe time, and by whoſe occaſion, what about the getting of the garland, kéeping it, leaſing, and winning againe, it hath coſt more Engliſh bloud, than hath twice the winning of Fraunce. In which inwarde warre amongCiuill vvarre. our ſelues, hath bene ſo great effuſion of the auncient noble bloud of this Realme, that ſcarcely the halfe remayneth, to the great enféebling of this noble land, beſide many a good towne ranſacked and ſpoyled by them, that hath bene going to the fielde or comming from thence. And peace long after not much ſurer than warre. So that no time was there, in which riche men for their money, and great men for their landes, or ſome other for ſome feare, or ſome diſpleaſure were not out of perill. For whom truſted he that miſtruſted his owne brother? whō ſpared he that kylled hys owne brother? or who coulde perfitly loue him, if his owne brother could not? What manner of folke he moſt fauored we ſhall for his honour ſpare to ſpeake of, howbeit, this wote you well all, that who ſo was beſt, bare alway leaſt rule, & more ſute was in his dayes vnto Shores wife, a vile and an abhominable ſtrumpet, than to all the Lordes in Englande, except vnto thoſe that made hir their protector: which ſimple woman was well named and honeſt, tyll the King for hys wanton luſt and ſinful affection bereft hir from hir huſband, a right honeſt ſubſtantiall yong man among you. And in that point, which in good fayth I am ſorie to ſpeake of, ſauing that it is in vaine to kéepe in counſell that thing that

all men knowe, the Kings gréedie appetite was inſatiable, and euery where ouer all the Realme intollerable. For no woman was there any where, yong or olde, 
                              •
                           iche or poore, whom he ſet his eye vpon, in whom he any thing liked, eyther perſon or fauour, ſpéeche, pace, or countenaunce, but without any feare of God, or reſpect of his honor, murmure or grudge of the worlde, he would importunely purſue his appetite, & haue hir, to the great deſtruction of many a good woman▪ and great dolor to their huſbande and their other friendes, which being honeſt people of themſelues, ſo much regarde the cleanneſſe of their houſe, the chaſtitie of theyr wiues, and their children, that them were leauer to leaſe al that they haue beſide, than to haue ſuch a villanie done thē. And all were it that wyth this and other importable dealyngs, the Realme was in euery part annoyed: yet ſpecially ye here the Citizens of this noble Citie, as well for that amongeſt, you is moſt plentie of all ſuch things as miniſter matter to ſuche iniuryes, as for that you were neareſt at hand, ſith that neare here about was commonly his moſt abyding. And yet be ye the people whom he had as ſingular cauſe wel and kindly to entreat, as any part of his Realme, not onely for that the Prince by this noble Citie, as hys eſpeciall Chamber, and the ſpeciall well renowmed Citie ofLondon the Kings eſpeciall Chamber. hys Realme, much honourable fame receiueth among all other nations: but alſo for that ye not without your great coſte, and ſundrie perils and ieoperdies in all his warres, hare euen your ſpeciall 
                              •
                           auour to his parte, whyche you
                              •
                            kinde myndes borne to the houſe of Yorke, ſithe hée hathe nothyng worthyly acquited, there is of that houſe that now by Gods grace better ſhall, which thing to ſhewe you, is the whole ſumme and effecte of this our preſent errande. It ſhall not I wote well, néede that I rehearſe you againe, that ye haue alreadie hearde, of hym that can better tell it, and of whom I am ſure ye wyll better beléeue it. And reaſon is that it ſo bée. I am not ſo proude to looke therfore that yée ſhoulde recken my wordes of as greate aucthoritie

as the Preachers of the worde of God, namely a man ſo cunning and ſo wyſe, that no man better woteth what he ſhoulde ſaye, and thereto ſo good and vertuous, that hée woulde not ſaye the thing which he wyſt he ſhould not ſaye▪ in the Pulpet, namely, into the which no houeſt man commeth to lye, which honorable Preacher yée well remember ſubſtantially declared vnto you at Paules▪ Croſſe
                                 •
                              
                            on Sunday laſt paſſed, the right & title, that the moſt excellent Prince Richarde Duke of Glocester, now Protector of this Realme hath vnto the Crowne and Kingdome of the ſame. For as the worſhipfull man groundlye made open vnto you, the children of King Edward the fourthe, were neuer lawfully begotten, for as much as the King (leauing his very wyfe Dame Elizabeth Lucie) was neuer lawfully married vnto the Quéene their mother, whoſe bloud ſauing that he ſet his voluptuous pleaſure before his honor, was ful vmnéetly to be matched with his, and the minglyng of whoſe bloude togither, hath beene the effuſion of great parte of the
                              •
                            noble bloud of this Realme. Whereby it may well ſéeme the mariage not well made, of which there is ſo muche miſchiefe growne. For lacke of which lawfull accoupling, and alſo of other things which the ſayde worſhipfull Doctor rather ſignified▪ than fully explaned, and which things ſhall not be ſpoken 
                              ••
                           r mée; as the thing wherein euery man forbeareth to ſay that he knoweth 
                              ••
                            auoyding diſpleaſure of my noble Lord Protector, bearing as nature requireth a filiall 
                              ••••
                           re
                              •••
                            to the Duches his mother, for theſe cauſes I ſ
                              •
                           y before remembred▪ that is to wit, for lacke of other iſ
                           
                              •••
                            lawfullye comming of the late noble Prince Richarde Duke of Yorke, to whoſe morall bloud the Crowne of Englande and of Fraunce 
                           
                              ••
                            is by the hyghe aucthoritie of Parliament entayled, the ryght and title of the ſame, is by the inſt courſe of inheritaunce according to the common lawes of thys Lande, deu
                              •
                           lute and commen vnto the moſt excellent Prince the Lord Protector, as to the very lawfully▪ 
                           
                              ••••
                           tten ſonne of the forere membred noble D
                              •••
                            of Yorke.
                           
Which thing well conſidered▪ and the great knightly prowes pondered, with manifolde vertues which in his noble perſon ſingularly abound, the Nobles and Commons alſo of this Realme, and ſpecially of the North part, not willing any baſtard bloud to haue the rule of the land, nor the abuſtons before in the ſame vſed any longer to continue, haue condiſcended and fully determined to make humble petition to the moſt puiſſaunt Prince the Lord Protector, that it may lyke his grace at our humble requeſt, to take vpon him the guiding and gouernance of this Realme, to the wealth and encreaſe of the 
                              •
                           ame▪ according to hys verie right and iuſt tytle. Which thing I wote it well, he will be lothe to take vpon hym, as he whoſe wiſedome well perceyueth the labour and ſtudie both of minde and body, that ſhall come therewith, to whomſoeuer ſo will occupie the roome, as I dare ſay he will if he take it. Which roome I warne you well is no childes 
                              ••••
                           e. And that the great wiſe man well perceiued, when he 
                              •
                           ayd
                              •
                            
                           V
                                 •••
                              g
                                 •
                              o cuiu
                                 •
                               rex puer est: Wo is that Realme that hath a childe to their King.
                            Wherefore ſo much the more cauſe haue we to thanke God, that this Noble perſonage which is ſo righteouſly intituled thervnto, is of ſo ſad age, and therevnto ſo great wiſedome ioyned with ſo great experience, which albeithe will be loth (as I haue ſayd) to take it vpon him, yet ſhall he to our petition in that behalfe the more graciouſly in
                              •
                           l
                              •••
                           , if ye the worſhipful Citizens of this the chiefe Citie of this Realme, ioyne wyth vs the nobles in our ſaide requeſt. Which for your owne weale we doubt not but ye will: and natheleſſe I har
                              ••
                           ly pray you ſo to doe, whereby you ſhall doe great profit to all this Realme beſide, in choſing them ſo good a King, and vnto your ſelfe ſpecial commoditie, to whom his Maieſtie ſhal euer after beare ſo much the more tender fauour, in howe much he ſhal perceyue you the 
                              ••
                           ore proue and beneu
                              •
                           lently minded toward his election. Wherin deare friends what minde you haue, 
                              •••
                            requi
                              •
                           e you plainely to ſhew vs.
                        When the Duke had ſayde, and looked that the people

whom he hoped that the Maior hadde framed before, ſhould after this propoſition made, haue cryed King Richarde, King Richard, all was huſht and mute, and not one word aunſwered therevnto: wherewith the Duke was maruellouſly abaſhed, and taking the Maior nearer to hym, with other that were aboute him priuie to that matter, ſayde vnto them ſoftlye, what meaneth thys, that thys people be ſo ſtyll? Syr (quoth the Maior percaſe they perceyue you not well. That ſhall wée mende (quoth he) if that will) helpe.
                     
                  
               
            
            And by and by ſomewhat louder hée rehearſed them the ſame matter agayne in other order and other wordes ſo well and ornately, and naytheleſſe ſo euidentlye and playne, wyth voyce, geſture, and countenaunce ſo comely, and ſo conuenient, that euery man muche maruelled that hearde him, and thought that they neuer had in theyr liues heard ſo euil a tale ſo well tolde.
            But were it for wonder or feare, or that eche lookt that other ſhoulde ſpeake firſt: not one worde was there aunſwered of all the people that ſtoode before, but all was as ſtyll as the mydnight, not ſo muche as rowning amongeſt them, by which they myght ſéeme to commune what was beſt to doe. When the Maior ſawe this, hée with other partners of that Councell drewe aboute the Duke, and ſayde that the people had not béene accuſtomed there to be ſpoken vnto, but by the Recorder, which is the mouth of the Citie, and happily to him they wyl aunſwere. With that the Recorder called Fitz William, a ſad manne, and an honeſt,Fitz VVilliam Recorder. which was ſo newe come into that office, that he neuer had ſpoken to the people before, and lothe was wyth that matter to begynne, notwithſtandyng, therevnto commaunded by the Maior, made rehearſall to the Commons of y• the Duke had twice rehearſed them to himſelfe. But the Recorder ſo tempered hys tale, that he ſhewed euery thing as the Dukes wordes, and no parte of hys owne. But all this noting, no chaunge made in the people, which alway

after one, ſtoode as they had béene men amaſed, wherevppon the Duke rowned vnto the Maior and ſayde: this is a maruellous obſtinate ſilence, and there with he turned vnto the people agayne with theſe wordes: Deare friendes wée come to mooue you to that thing whiche peraduenture wée not ſo greatlye needed, but that the Lordes of thys Realme, and the commons of other parties might haue ſufficed: ſauing that wée ſache loue beare you, and ſo much ſet by you, that we woulde not gladlye doe without you, that thing in whiche to be partners is your weale and honour, which as it ſéemeth, either you ſée not, or wey not. Wherefore we require you giue vs anſweare one or other whether yée be ininded as al y• Nobles of the Realm be, to haue this Noble Prince now Protector to be your King or not.
            At theſe wordes the people beganne to whiſper among themſelues ſecretely, that the voice was neither lowde nor diſtinct, but as it were the ſounde of a ſwarme of Bees, tyll at the laſt in the neather end of the Hall, a buſhment of the Dukes ſeruauntes and Naſhfieldes, and other longing to the Protector, with ſome prentiſes and laddes that thruſt into the Hall among the preaſe, beganne ſodainly at mens backes to crye out as loude as theyr throtes woulde gyue
                  •
                King Richarde, King Richarde, and threwe vp their cappes in token of ioy. And they that ſtoode before caſt backe their heads maruelling thereof, but nothing they ſayde.
            And when the Duke and the Maior ſawe this manner, they wiſelye turned it to theyr purpoſe, and ſayde it was a goodly crye, and a ioyfull to heare, euerye man with one voyce, no man ſaying nay. Wherefore friendes (quoth the Duke) ſince that we perceiue it is all your whole myndes to haue this Noble man for your K. wherof we ſhall make his grace ſo effectuall report, that we doubt not but it ſhall redounde vnto your great wēale and commodytie: wee require ye that ye to morow go with vs, and we with you vnto his Noble graced, to make our humble requeſt▪ vnto him in maner before remembred. And there with the Lords

came dow
                  •
               e, and the company diſſolued and departed, the more part all ſad; ſome with glad femblance that were not very merrie, and▪ ſome of thoſe that came thither wyth the Duke not able to diſſemble their ſorrow, were faine at his barke to turne their face to the wall, while the dolour of their heart burſt out of their eyes.
            Then on the morrowe after, the Maior with all the AldermenThe Maiors comming to Baynards Caſtell. and chiefe commoners of the citie in their beſt maner apparelled, aſſembling themſelues together, reſorted vnto Baynardes Castell where the Protector lay. To which place repayred alſo accordyng to theyr appoyntment, the Duke of Buckingham, with diuerſe Noble men wyth him, beſyde many Knightes and other Gentlemen. And therevppon the Duke ſent worde vnto the Lorde Protector of the being there of a great and honorable companie; to moue a great matter vnto his grace.
            Wherevpon the Protector made difficultie to come out vnto them, but if he firſt knewe ſome part of their errand, as thoughe he doubted, and partly diſtruſted the comming of a number vnto him ſo ſodenly, without any warning or knowledge whether they came for good or harme. Then the duke when he had ſhewed this vnto the Maior & other, that they might therby ſée how little the Protector looked for this matter, they ſent vnto him by the Meſſenger ſuche louing meſſage againe, and there with ſo humbly beſought him to vouchſafe, that they might reſort to his preſence, to purpoſe their intent, of which they woulde vnto none other perſon part diſcloſe, that at the laſt he came forth of his Chamber, and yet not downe vnto them, but ſtoode aboue in a Gallerie ouer them, where they might ſée him, and ſpeake to him, as though be woulde not yet come too néere them tyll he will what they ment.
            And there vpon the Duke of Buckinghā, firſt made humble poſition vnto him on the behalfe of them all, that his grace 
                  •
               ould pardon them, and licence them to purpoſe vnto his 
                  •••••
                the intent of 
                  •
               o
                  ••
               , comming, without his diſpleaſure,

without which pardon obteined, they durſt not be bolde to moue him of that matter. In whiche albeit they ment as muche honour to his grace, as wealthe to all the Realme beſide, yet were they not ſure howe his grace woulde take it, whom they woulde in no wyſe offende. Then the Protector (as he was verie gentle of himſelfe, and alſo longed ſore to witte what they ment) gaue him leaue to purpoſe what him lyked, verily truſting for the good minde that hée bare them all, none of them any thing woulde intende vnto him warde, wherewith he ought to be grieued.
            When the Duke had thys leaue and pardon to ſpeake, then waxed hée bolde to ſhew him their intent and purpoſe, with all the cauſes moouing them therevnto as ye before haue heard, and finally to beſéeche his grace, that it woulde like him of his accuſtomed goodnes & zeale vnto the realme nowe with his eye of pitie, to beholde the long continued diſtreſſe and decaye of the ſame, and to ſet his gracious handes to redreſſe and amendment thereof, by taking vpon him the Crowne and gouernaunce of thys Realme, accordyng to his ryght and tytle lawfully deſcended vnto him, and to the laude of God, profite of the Lande, and vnto hys grace ſo muche the more honour, and leſſe payne, in that that neuer Prince raygned vppon any people, that were ſo glad to lyue vnder hys obeyſaunce, as the people of thys Realme vnder his.
            When the Protector had hearde the propoſition, he looked verie ſtraungely therat, & anſwered: that albeit it were ye he partly knewe the things by them alledged to be true, yet ſuch entire loue he bare vnto King Ed. and his children, y• ſo much more he regarded his honor in other realmes, about than the Crowne of any one of whiche hée was neuer deſyrous, y• he coulde not finde in his heart in this poynt to enclyne to theyr deſire. For in all other Nations where the truth were not well knowne, it ſhoulde peraduenture be thoughte, that it were his owne ambitious minde and deuiſe, to depoſe the Prince, and take himſelfe the Crowne,

with which infamie he woulde not haue his honour ſtayned for any Crowne, in which he had euer perceyued much more labour and payne, than pleaſure to hym that would ſo vſe it, as he that woulde not, were not worthie to haue it. Notwithſtanding he not onely pardoned them the motion that they made him, but alſo thanked them for the loue and heartie fauour they bare hym, praying them for hys ſake to gyue and beare the ſame to the Prince, vnder whom hée was, and woulde bée content to lyue, and with hys labour and counſell, as farre as ſhould lyke the King to vſe him, he would doe his vttermoſt deuoyre to ſet the Realme in good ſtate, whyche was alreadie in this lyttle whyle of hys Protectorſhippe (the prayſe gyuen to God) well begunne, in that the malice of ſuche as were before occaſion of the contrarie, and of new intended to bée, were nowe partly by good policie, partly more by Gods ſpeciall prouidence, than mans prouiſion repreſſed.
            Uppon this aunſwere giuen, the Duke by the Protectours licence, a lyttle rowned, aſwell wyth other Noble men aboute hym, as with the Maior and Recorder of London. And after that vppon lyke pardon deſired and obteyned, he ſhewed aloude vnto the Protector, that for a finall concluſion, that the Realme was appoynted King Edwardes lyne ſhould not any longer raygne vpon them, both for that they hadde ſo farre gone, that it was nowe no ſuertie to retreate, as for that they thoughte it for the weale vniuerſall to take that waye, althoughe they had not yet begonne it.
            Wherfore if it would lyke his grace to take the Crowne vppon hym, they woulde humbly beſéeche him therevnto. If he woulde giue them a reſolute aunſwere to the contrarie, which they woulde be lothe to heare, then muſt they néedes ſéeke and ſhoulde not fayle to fynde ſome other noble man that would.
            Theſe wordes muche moued the Protectour, which elſe as euerie man may wit, woulde neuer of likelyhood haue

enclyned therevnto. But when hée ſawe there was none other waye, but that eyther he muſt take it, or elſe hée and hys both goe from it, he ſayde vnto the Lordes and Commons: Sith wée perceyue well that all the Realme is ſo ſet, whereof wée bée very ſorie that they will not ſuffer in any wiſe King Edwardes lyne to gouerne them, whome no man earthly can gouerne agaynſt their wylles, and we wel alſo perceyue, that no man is there, to whome the Crowne can by iuſt tytle appertayne, as to our ſelfe, as verie ryghte heyre lawfully begotten of the bodie of our moſt deare father Richarde late Duke of Yorke, to whiche tytle is nowe ioyned your election, the Nobles and Commons of thys Realme, which wée of all tytles poſſible take for moſt effectuall: Wée bée content and agrée fauourably to enclyne to your petition and requeſt, and accordyng to the ſame, hereThe Protector taketh vpon him to be king. wée take vppon vs the royall eſtate, preeminence and kingdome of the two noble Realmes, Englande and Fraunce, the one from this daye forwarde, by vs and our heyres to rule, gouerne, and defende: the other by Gods grace, and your good helpe, to get agayne and ſubdue, and eſtabliſhe for euer in due obedience vnto thys Realme of Englande, the aduauncement wherof wée neuer aſke of God longer to liue; than we intend to procure.
            With this there was a great ſhoute, crying King Richarde, King Richarde. And then the Lordes went vp to the King (for ſo was he from that tyme called) and the people departed, talking diuerſely of the matter, euery man as hys fantafie gaue him. But much they talked and maruelled of the manner of this dealing, that the matter was on both partes made ſo ſtraunge, as thoughe neyther had euer communed with other thereof before, when that them ſelues wyſte there was no manne ſo dull that hearde them, but hée perceyued well ynoughe, that all the matter was made betwéene them. Howbeit ſome excuſed that agayne, and ſayd all muſte be doone in good order? And menne muſt ſomtyme for the manners ſake, not be aknowen what

they knowe. For at the conſecration of a Byſhop, euerye man woteth well by the paying for his Bulles, that hée purpoſeth to be one, and thoughe he paye for nothing elſe. And yet muſt he be twyce aſked whether he will be Byſhop or no, and he muſte twice ſaye nay, and at the thyrde tyme take it, as compelled therevnto by his owne will. And in a ſtage play, the people know right well, that hée that playeth the Sowdaine, is percaſe a ſowter, yet if one ſhoulde know ſo little good, to ſhew out of ſeaſō what acquaintance hée hath with hym, and call hym by his owne name while he ſtandeth in his Maieſtie, one of his tormentors myghte hap to breake his head, and worthy for marring of the play. And ſo they ſayde, that theſe matters be Kings games, as it were ſtage playes, and for the more part, played vpon ſcaffoldes. In which poore men be but the lookers on. And they y• wiſe be will meddle no further. For they that ſomtime ſtep vp, and play with them, when they cannot playe theyr partes, they diſorder the playe, and doe themſelues no good.
            (⸪)
         
         
            
            ¶ King Richard the thirde
            
            
            
               THe next day, the Protector with a great trayne, went to1483 Anno reg. 1. This that is here betvvene this marke and this marke *▪ vvas not vvritten by maiſter Moore in this Hiſtorie vvritten by him in english, but is tranſlated out of this hiſtorie vvhich he vvrote in Lat
                  
                     •
                  in. 
               Westminster Hall, and there when he had placed himſelf in ye Court of the Kings Bench, declared to the audience, that he would take vppon him the Crowne in that place there, where the King himſelfe ſitteth and miniſtreth ye law, becauſe he conſidered that it was the chiefeſt duetie of a King to miniſter the lawes. Then with as pleaſant an Oration as he could, he went about to wyn vnto him the nobles, the merchants, the artificers, and in concluſion all kind of men but eſpecially the Lawyers of thys Realme. And finally to the intent that no man ſhould hate him for feare, and that his deceitfull clemencie myght get him the good will of the people, when he had declared ye diſcommoditie of diſcorde, and the commodities of concorde

and vnitie, he made an open proclamation, that he did put out of his minde all enmities, and that he there did openly pardon all offences committed againſt him. And to the intent that he might ſhewe a proofe thereof, he commaunded that one Fogge, whome he had long deadlye hated, ſhoulde be broughte then before him, who being broughte out of the Sanctaurie (for thyther hadde h
                  •
                fledde for feare of him) in the ſighte of the people, he toke him by the hande. Which thing the Commō people reioyced at, and prayſed, but wiſe men tooke it for a vanitie. In his returne homewarde, whom ſoeuer he met, he ſaluted. For a mynde that knoweth it ſelfe guiltie, is in a manner deiected to a ſeruile flatterie.
            When he had begon his raigne in June, after this mockiſhe election, then was he Crowned the ſixth daye of the ſame moneth. And that ſolemnitie was furniſhed for the moſt part, with the ſelfe ſame prouiſion that was appointed for the coronation of his nephew.*
            Now fell there miſchieues thick. And as the thing euillSir Thomas More againe. gotten is neuer well kepte, thoroughe all the time of hys raigne neuer ceaſſed their cruell death and ſlaughter, tyl his owne deſtruction ended it. But as he finiſhed his time with the beſt death and the moſt righteous, that is to witte, hys owne, ſo beganne he with the moſt piteous and wicked, I meane the lamentable murther of his innocent nephewes, the yong King and his tender brother: whoſe death and finall infortune hath natheleſſe commen ſo farre in queſtion, that ſome remayne yet in doubt, whether they were in hys dayes deſtroyed or no. Not for that only that Perkyn Werbecke
               Perkyn VVerbecke. by many folkes malice, and moe folkes folly, ſo long ſpace abuſing the worlde, was as well with Princes as the poorer people, reputed and taken for the yonger of theſe two, but for that alſo that all things were in late dayes ſo couertly demeaned, one thing pretended, and another mēt, that there was nothing ſo plaine & openly proued, but that yet for the commō cuſtom of cloſe & couert dealing, men had

it euer inwardly ſuſpect: as manye well counterfayted Jewels make the true miſtruſted. Howbeit concerning the opinion, with the occaſions mouing eyther partie, we ſhall haue place more at large to intreate, if we hereafter happen to write the time of the late noble Prince of famous memorie King Henrie the ſeauenth, or percaſe that Hiſtorie of Perkin in any compendious proceſſe by it ſelfe. But in the meane time for this preſent matter, I ſhal rehearſe you the dolorous ende of thoſe babes, not after euerye waye that I haue hearde but by ſuche men and by ſuche meanes as me thinketh it were harde, but it ſhoulde be true.
            King Richard after his Coronation, taking his waye to Glocester to viſite in his newe honour, the Towne of which he bare the name of his olde, deuiſed as he rode, to fulfil the thing which he before had intended. And for as much as hys minde gaue him, that his nephewes liuing, mē would not recken that he coulde haue right to the Realme, he thought therfore without delay to ridde them, as though the killing of his kinſmen coulde amende his cauſe, and make him a kindely King. Whervpon, he ſent one Iohn Greene, whom he ſpeciallye truſted vnto Syr Robert Brakenburie, ConeſtableIohn Greene. Robert Brakē
                  burie Coneſtable of the Tovver. of the tower, with a letter and credence alſo, that the ſame ſir Robert ſhoulde in any wiſe put the two children to death. This Iohn Greene did his errand vnto Brakenburie, knéeling before our Lady in the Tower, who playnely anſwered, that he would neuer put them to death to die therefore: with whiche aunſweare, Iohn Greene returning, recoumpted the ſame to King Richard at Warwicke yet in hys waye. Wherewith he tooke ſuche diſpleaſure and thought, that the ſame night he ſayde vnto a ſecréet page of his: Ah whom ſhall a man truſt? thoſe that I haue brought vpmy ſelf, thoſe that I had wened would moſt ſurely ſerue me, euen thoſe fayle me, and at my commaundement, will do nothing for me. Sir (quoth his page) there lyeth one on your pallet without, that I dare well ſay, to do your grace pleaſure, the thing were right harde that he would refuſe, meaning

this by ſir Iames Tirell, which was a man of right goodlySir Iames Tirel▪
                perſonage, and for natures giftes worthy to haue ſerued a much better Prince, if he had wel ſerued God, & by grace obtained as much troth and good wil as he had ſtrength and witte. The man had an high hart, and ſore longed vpward,Authoritie loueth no partners. not riſing yet ſo faſt as he had hoped, being hindered & kept vnder by the meanes of Sir Richarde Ratclife, and ſir Wil. Cates by, which longing for no mo partiners of the Princes fauour, and namely not for him, whoſe pride they wiſt wold beare no péere, kéepte him by ſecrete driftes out of all ſecret truſt, which thing, this Page wel had marked and known: wherfore this occaſion offered, of very ſpeciall friendſhip he tooke his time to put him forward, & by ſuch wiſe to doe him good, that al the enimies he had, except the Diuel, could neuer haue done him ſo much hurt. For vpō this pages words King Richard aroſe (For this cōmunication had he ſitting at the draught, a conuenient Carpet for ſuch a counſel) and came out into a Pallet Chamber, on which he found in bed ſir Iames & ſir Thomas Tirels, of perſon like and brethen of bloud, but nothing of kin in conditions. Then ſayde the K. merily to them, what ſirs be yée in bed ſo ſoone? and calling vp ſir Iames, brake to him ſecretly his minde in this miſche
               
                  •
               ous▪ matter. In whiche he founde him nothing ſtraunge. Wherfore on the morow he ſente him to Brakenburie wyth a letter, by which was commaunded to deliuer ſir Iames all the Keyes of the Tower for one night, to the ende he might there accompliſh the Kings pleaſure, in ſuch things as hée had giuen him commaundement. After which letter deliuered, and the keyes receiued, ſir Iames appointed the nighte next enſuing to deſtroy them, deuiſing before and preparing the meanes. The prince as ſoone as ye protector left ye name, and toke himſelfe as king, had it ſhewed vnto him▪ that hée ſhold not raign, but his vncle ſhold haue ye crown. At which word, ye Prince ſore abaſhed, beganne to ſigh & ſaid: Alas, I would my vncle woulde let me haue my life yet, though I léeſe my Kingdome. Then he that told him the tale, vſed hym wyth good wordes, and putte hym in the beſte comfort

he coulde. But forthwith was the Prince and his brother both ſhut vp, and all other remoued from them, onely one called Blacke Will, or William Slaughter except, ſet to ſerue them and ſée them ſure. After whiche time the prince neuer tyed hys pointes, nor aught roughte of himſelfe, but with that yong babe his brother, lingred with thought and heauineſſe, til this trayterous death deliuered them of that wretchedneſſe. For Sir Iames Tyrell deuiſed y• they ſhould be murthered in their beds. To the execution whereof, hée appointed Myles Forreſt, one of the foure that kept them, a fellow fleſhed in murther before time. To him he ioyned one Iohn Dighton his owne horſſekéeper, a bigge, brode▪ ſquare, ſtrong knaue.
            Then al the other being remoued from them, this MilesThe yong king and his brother murthered. Forreſt, and Iohn Dighton, about midnight (the ſelie childrē lying in their beddes) came into the Chamber, and ſodainly lapped them vp among the clothes, ſo to bewrapped thē and intangled them, kéeping downe by force the featherbed and pillowes hard vnto their mouths, that within a while, ſmothered and ſtifled, theyr breath fayling, they gaue vp to God their innocente ſoules into the ioyes of Heauen, leaning to the tormentors their bodyes deade in the bed. Whiche after that the wretches perceyued, firſt by the ſtrugling with the paynes of deathe, and after long lying ſtill, to bée throughly deade, they layde their bodies naked out vppon the bed, and fetched Sir Iames to ſée them, which vppon the ſight of them, cauſed thoſe murtherers to burie them at the ſtaire foote, méetly déepe in the ground, vnder a great heape of ſtones.
            Then rode Syr Iames in greate haſte to King Richarde, and ſhewed him all the manner of the murther, who gaue him great thankes, & (as ſome ſay) there made him knight▪ But he allowed not as I haue heard, the burying in ſo vile a corner, ſaying, that he woulde haue them buryed in a better place, bycauſe they were a Kings ſonnes. Loe the honorable courage of a King. Whervpon they ſay, that a Prieſt

of S. Roberte Brakenburie tooke vppe the bodyes again, and ſecretly enteried them in ſuch place, as by the occaſion of his death, which only knew it, coulde neuer ſince come to light. Uerye troth is it, and well knowen, that at ſuch time as Sir Iames Tyrel was in the Tower, for Treaſon committed againſt the moſt famous Prince King Henrie the ſeauenth, both Dighton and he were examined, and confeſſed the murther in maner aboue writtē, but whether the bodyes were remoued, they coulde nothing tell. And thus as I haue learned of them that muche knewe, and litle cauſe had to lye were theſe two noble princes, theſe innocente tender children, borne of moſt royal bloud, brought vp in great wealth, likely long to liue, raigne, and rule in the Realme, by trayterous tirannie taken, depriued of their eſtate, ſhortly ſhut vp in priſon, and priuely ſlain and murthered, their bodies caſt God wot where, by the cruel ambition of theyr vnnatural vncle and his diſpiteous tormentors. Whiche things on euery part wel pondered, God neuer gaue this world a more notable exāple, neither in what vnſuretie ſtandeth this worldlye weāle, or what miſchiefe worketh the proude enterpryſe of an high heart, or finallye, what wretched ende enſueth ſuch diſpiteous crueltie. For firſt to beginne with the Miniſters, Miles Forreſt, at Saint Martins peacemeal
                  •
                rotted away. Dighton indéede yef walketh on aliue in good poſſibilitie to be hanged er
                  •
                he dye. But Sir Iames Tyrell dyed at the Tower Hil beheaded for treaſon. King Richarde himſelf, as yée ſhal hereafter heare, 
                  •
               laine in the fielde, hacked and hewed of his enimies hands; caried on Horſſeback dead, his heare in deſpight torne and tagged like a cur dog. And the miſchiefe that hee tooke, was within leſſe than thrée yeres of the miſchief that he did. And yet al the mean time, ſpent in much paine and trouble outward, much feare, anguiſhe and ſorrow within. For I haue hearde by credible report of ſuche as were ſecrete with hys Chamberlaine, that after this abhominable déede done, he neuer had quiet in his minde. He neuer thought hymſelfe

ſure. Where he went abroade, hys eyen whirled about, hys bodie painely fen
                  •
               ed, hys hande euer vpon his dag
                  •
               er▪ hys countenaunce and maner like one, alwayes readie to ſtrik
                  •
                againe, he toke ill reſt a nyghtes, lay long waking and muſing, ſo
                  •
               e wearied with care and watche, rather ſlumbred than ſlept, troubled with fearefull dreames, ſodainely ſometime ſtert vppe lept out of his bedde, and ranne about the Chamber, ſo was his reſtleſſe hearte continually toſſed and tumbled with the tedious impreſſion and ſtormie remembraunce of hys abhominable déede.
            
               Thomas Norland: William Martin, the 28. of Septem.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Robert Byliſdon H
                     •
                  berdaſher; the 28 of October.
            
            Nowe had he outwarde no long time in reſt. For herevpon, ſoone after, began the conſpiracie, or rather good confederation, betwéene the Duke of Buckingham, and manye other Gentlemen againſt him.
            The occaſion where vppon the King and the Duke fell out, is o
                  •
                diuerſe folke diuerſe wiſe pretended.
            Thys Duke (as I haue for certaine ben enformed) as ſoone as the Duke of Glocester, vppon the death of King Edwarde, came to Yorke, and there had ſolemne funeral ſeruice, for King▪ 
               Edward, ſent thyther in the moſt ſecret wiſe he coulde, one Perſall▪
                his truſtie ſeruant, who came to Iohn Warde▪
                a Chamberer of like ſecrete truſte with the Duke of Glocester, deſiring, that in the moſt cloſe and couert manner, he might be admitted to the preſence and ſpéech of hys maiſter. And the Duke of Glocester, aduertiſed of hys deſire, cauſed him in the dead of the night▪ after al other folk auoyded, to be brought vnto him in his ſecrete Chamber, whe
                  ••
                
               Perſall▪
                after his maiſters recōmendation, ſhewed hym, that he had ſecretly ſent to ſhew him in his new world, he would take ſuch partas he woulde; and way
                  •
               e vpon hym wyth 
                  •
                thouſande good fellowes, i
                  •
                néede were. The meſſenger

ſente backe with thankes, and ſome ſe
                  •
               r
                  •
               ate inſtruction of the Protectors minde: yet mette hym agayne with farther frō the D. his Maſter, within few dayes after at Notinghā: whither the Protector from Yorke, with many Gentlemē of the Northe Countrey, to the number of ſixe hundred horſes, was come on his waye to London warde, and after ſecreat méeting and communication had, 
                  •
               eftſoone departed. Whēce vpon at Northampton, the Duke met with the Protector, himſelf wt thrée hundred Horſes, and from thence ſtil cōtinued with him partner of all his deuiſes, till y• after hys Coronation, they departed as it ſéemed very greate friends at Gloucester. From whēce, aſſoone as the Duke came home, he ſo lightlye turned from hym, and ſo highlye conſpired againſte him, that a man would maruell whereof the change grewe. And ſurely, the occaſion of their variance is of dyuers men diuerſly reported. Some ha
                  •
               e ſaid I (heard ſay) yt the Duke a little before the Coronation, among other thinges, required of the Protector the Duke of Hertford
                     •
                  
                lands, to the which he pretended himſelfe iuſte inheritor. And foraſmuch as the title whiche he claymed by inheritance, was ſomewhat interlaced with the title to the Crowne, by the line of King Henry before depriued, the Protector conceyued ſuche indignation, that he reiected the Dukes requeſte with many ſpitefull and minatorie wordes, which ſo wounded his hart with hatred and miſtruſte, that he neuer after toulde endure to looke a right on King Richard, but euer feared his owne life, ſo far forth▪ that when the Protector rode throughe London towarde his Coronation, hée fayned himſelfe ſicke, bycauſe he woulde not ride with him. And the other takyng it in euill parte, ſente him worde to riſe, and come ride, or he woulde make him be carryed. Wherevpon, he rode on with euill will, and that notwithſtanding on the morrow, roſe from the feaſt; fayning hymſelfe ſicke, & Kyng Richard ſaid, it was done in hatred and deſpite of him. And they ſaide, that euer after continually, 
                  •
               ch of them liued in ſuch hatred & diſtruſt of other, that ye Duke v
                  •
               tily loked to

haue bin murthered at Glocester. From which natheleſſe, he in faire manner departed. But ſurely ſome right ſecrete at that daye deny this: and many right wiſe men thinke it vnlikely, (the déepe diſſembling nature of thoſe both men cō
               ſidered, and what néede in that gréene worlde the Protector had of the Duke▪ and in what perill the Duke ſtoode, if he fel once in ſuſpition of the Tyrant) that eyther the Protectour woulde giue the Duke occaſion of diſpleaſure or the Duke the Protectour occaſion of miſtruſte. And verylye, men thinke, that if King Richard had anye ſuch opinion conceyued, he would neuer haue ſuffered him to eſcape his hands. Uery troth it is, the Duke was an high minded man, and euill could beare the glorie of an other, ſo that I haue heard of ſome that ſay they ſawe it, that the Duke at ſuch time as the Crowne was firſt ſet vpon the Protectors head, hys eye coulde not abyde the ſight thereof, but wryed his heade another waye. But men ſaye, that he was of troth not wel at eaſe, and that both to King Richarde well knowen, and not ill taken, nor any demaunde of the Dukes vncurteouſly reiected, but he both with greate giftes and high beheſtes, in moſt louing and truſtie manner, departed at Glocester. But ſoone after his comming home to Brecknocke, hauing ther in cuſtodie by the commaundement of King Richarde Doctor Morton, Byſhoppe of Ely, who (as yée before hearde) was taken in the Counſel at the tower, waxed with him familiar: whoſe wiſedome abuſed his pride to his owne deliueraunce and the Dukes deſtruction. The Biſhop was a man of gret natural witte, very wel learned, and honorable in behauiour, lacking no wiſe wayes to winne fauour. He had bin faſt vpon the part of King Henrie, while that parte was in wealth, and naytheleſſe, lefte it not nor forſooke it in woe, but fledde the Realme with the Quéene and the Prince, whyle King▪ 
               Edwarde hadde the King in priſon, neuer came home, but to the fielde. After whiche loſte, and that parte vtterly ſubdued, the 
                  •
               other for his faſt fayth and wiſedome, not onelye was contente to receiue him, but alſo

woed him to come, and hadde him from thenceforth both in ſecreate truſt, and very ſpeciall fauour, whiche he nothing deceiued. For he being (as ye haue hearde) after King Edwards death firſte taken by the tyrante, for hys truth to the King, founde the meane to ſet this Duke in his toppe, ioyned Gentlemen togither in aide of king Henry, deuiſing firſt the marriage betwéene him and King Edwardes daughter, by which his faith, he declared the good ſeruice to both his maſters at once, with infinit benefite to the realm by ye coniunction of thoſe two blouds in one, whoſe ſeueral titles had long enquieted the land, he fled the realme, went to Rome, neuer minding more to meddle wite the worlde, till the noble Prince King Henry the ſeauenth gate hym home agayne, made hym Archebyſhoppe of Canterbury, and Chauncelor of Englande, wherevnto the Pope ioined the honor of Cardinal. Thus, lyuing many dayes in as muche honor as one man mighte well wiſhe, ended them ſo godly, that his death with Gods mercie well changed his life.
            This man therefore, as I was aboute to tell you, by the long and often alternate proofe, as well of proſperitie, as aduers fortune, hadde gotten by greate experience the verye mother and miſtreſſe of Wiſedome, a déepe inſighte in pollitique worldly driftes. Whereby, perceyuing nowe thys Duke glad to commune with him, fed him with faire wordes, and many pleaſaunt prayſes. And perceyuing by the proceſſe of their communication, the Dukes pride, now and then balke oute a little bredde of enuie, towarde the glorye of the King, and thereby féeling him eaſie to fall oute if the matter were well handled: he craftely ſought the wayes to pricke him forwarde, taking alwayes the occaſion of hys commyng, & ſo kéeping himſelfe ſo cloſe within his bounds, that he rather ſéemed to follow him, then to leade him. For, when the Duke firſte beganne to praiſe and boaſt the king, and ſhewe howe muche profite the Realme ſhoulde take by his raigne: my Lorde Morton anſwered: Surely my Lord, 
                  •
               ollie it were for me to lye, for if I would ſweare the contrarie,

your Lordſhip would not I wéene beléeue, but that if y• world would haue gone as I wold haue wiſhed, K. Henries ſon had had the Crown, & not King Ed. But after that God hadde ordered him to looſe it, and King Edwarde to raigne, I was neuer ſo madde that I woulde with a deade manne ſtriue againſt the quicke. So was I to King Edward a faithfull Chaplaine, and glad woulde haue bin that his chylde hadde ſuccéeded him. Howbeit, if the ſecrete iudgemente of God haue otherwiſe prouided, I purpoſe not to ſpurre againſt a pricke, nor laboure to ſette vppe that God pulleth downe. And as for the late Protector and now King. And euen there he left, ſaying y• he had already meddled to muche wyth the world, and would from that day meddle with hys Booke and his beades, and no further. Then longed the D. ſore to heare what he woulde haue ſayde, bycauſe he ended with the King, and there ſo ſodainely ſtopped, and exhorted him ſo familiarly betwéene them twayne, to be bolde to ſay whatſoeuer he thoughte, whereof he faythfullye promiſed, there ſhoulde neuer come hurte, and peraduenture more good than he woulde wéene, and that himſelfe intended to vſe his faithfull ſecrete aduiſe and counſell, whiche hée ſayde was the only cauſe for which he procured of the King to haue hym in his cuſtodie, where he might recken himſelf at home, and elſe had he bin putte in the handes of them with whome hée ſhoulde not haue founde the like fauour. The Biſhoppe righte humblye thanked hym, and ſayde in good faith my Lord, I loue not to talke much of Princes, as a thing not all out of perill, thoughe the worde be wythout faulte, for as muche as it ſhall not be taken as the partie meane it, but as it pleaſeth the Prince to conſ
                  •
               rue it. And euer I thinke on Eſops tale, that when the Lion hadde proclaymed, that on payne of death, there ſhould none horned beaſt abide in that wood: one that had in his forhead a bunch of fleſh, 
                  •
               led away a great pace. The Foxe that ſaw him run ſo faſt, aſked him whether he made all that haſte? And hée aunſwered, In fayth I neuer wote, nor recke, ſo I wer once

hence, bicauſe of thys proclamation made of horned beaſts. What foole quoth the Foxe, thou mayſt abyde wel ynough, the Lion meant not by thée, for it is none horne that is in thine heade. No marry (quoth hée) that wote I wel ynough. But what and he call it an horne, where am I then? The Duke laughed merily at the tale, and ſaid, My L. I warrāt you, neyther the Liō nor the Bore ſhall pike any matter at any thing here ſpoken, for it ſhal neuer come to their eares. In good faith Sir ſayde the Biſhop if it did, the thing that I was about to ſay, taken as well (as afore God, I meant) it coulde deſerue but thankes. And yet taken as I wéene it woulde, might happen to turne me to little good, and you to leſſer. Then longed the Duke yet muche more to witte what it was, wherevpon the Biſhoppe ſaide, in good faith my Lord, as for the late Protector, ſith he is now King in poſſeſſion, I purpoſe not to diſpute his title, but for the weale of this Realme, whereof his grace hath now the gouernaunce, and wherof I am my ſelfe one poore member, I was about to wiſhe, that to thoſe good abilities whereof he hath alredy righte many, little néeding my prayſe: it might yet haue pleaſed God, for the better ſtore, to haue giuen him ſome of ſuch other excellente vertues, méete for the rule of a realme, as our Lord hath planted in the perſon of your grace: and there left againe.
            The Duke ſomewhat maruayling at hys ſodayneThis that follovveth is abridged out of Edvvard Hall. pauſes, ſaide my Lorde I note your often breathing and ſodayne ſtoppyng in your communication, ſo that to my intelligence, your wordes neyther come to anye perfecte ſentence, whereby eyther I mighte haue knowledge what your entente is nowe towarde the King, or what affection you beare towarde me. For the compariſon of good qualities aſcribed to vs both, maketh me not a little to muſe thinking y• you haue ſome other priuie imagination, imprinted in your hearte, which you be abaſhed to diſcloſe, and eſpecially to me, which on my honor do aſſure you to be as ſecrete in this caſe as the deafe and dome. The Byſhop

being ſomewhat bolder, conſidering the Dukes promiſe, but moſte of all animated, bycauſe he knewe the Duke deſirous to be magnified, and alſo he perceyued the inwarde hatred whiche he bare towarde King Richard, hée opened hys ſtomake to the botome, and ſaide, my ſingular good Lorde, ſith the tyme of my capti
                  •
               itie, whyche béeyng in your Graces cuſtody, I maye rather call it a libertie, then a ſtraight impriſonment, in au
                  •
               yding of ydleneſſe mother of all vyces, in reading Bookes and auncient Pamphlets, I haue founde this ſentence written▪ that no manne is borne frée and at libertie of himſelfe onely, for one part of duty he oweth to his parents, an other parte to his friends and kinſfolkes: but the natiue countrey, in the which he firſte taſted this pleaſaunte and flattering worlde, demaundeth a debte not to be forgotten, whyche ſaying cauſeth me to conſider in what caſe this realme my natiue countrey nowe ſtandeth, and in what eſtate and aſſuraunce before this time it hathe cōtinued: what gouernor we now haue, and what ruler we might haue, for I plainely perceiue (the Realme being in this caſe) muſt néeds decay, & be brought to confuſiō: but one hope I haue, that is, whē I conſider youre noble perſonage, your iuſtice and indifferencie, your feruent zeale and ardent loue toward your naturall country, & in like maner the loue of your countrey toward you, the great learning, pregnant witte, & eloquence, which ſo much doth abounde in your perſon, I muſte néedes thinke this realme fortunate, whyche hathe ſuch a Prince in ſtore, méete and apt to be gouernor. But on the other ſide, when I call to memorie the good qualities of the late Protector, and nowe called King, ſo violated by tyranny, ſo altred by vſurped authoritie, ſo clouded by blinde ambition, I muſte néedes ſay, that he is neither méete to be King of ſo noble a realme, nor ſo famous a realme méete to be gouerned by ſuch a tyrant: Was not his firſt enterprice to obtaine the Crowne begunne, by the murther of dyuers noble perſonages? Did he not ſecondarily procéed againſte his owne naturall mother, declaring hir openlye

to be a woman giuen to carnall affection, and diſſoulute lyuing, declaring furthermore hys two brethren, and two nephewes, to be Baſtardes, and to be borne in aduo
                  •
               trey, yet not contented, after he had obtayned the Garlande hée cauſed the two pore innocents his nephewes committed to him, to be ſhamefully murthered, the bloude of whiche little babes dayly cry to God, from the earth for vengeaunce, what ſure tie ſhall be in this realme to any perſon, eyther for life or goodes vnder ſuche a cruell Prince, whych regardeth not the deſtruction of his owne bloud, & then the leſſe, the loſſe of other: but nowe to conclude what▪ I meane toward your noble perſon, I ſay, & affirme, if you loue God, your linage, or your natiue coūtry, you muſt your ſelf take vpon you y• Crown of this Realme, both for ye maintenāce of the honour of the ſame, as alſo for the deliueraunce of your natural Countreymē from the bondage of ſuch a Tyrante. And if your ſelf wil refuſe to take vpon you ye Crown of this Realme. Thē I adiure you by the faith y• you owe to God, to deuiſe ſome way how this realme may be brought to ſome conuenient regiment, vnder ſome good gouernour, whē the B▪ had ended his ſaying, the D. ſighed, & ſpake not of a gret while, ſo y• night they cōmoned 
                  〈…〉
               ore. The next daye the Duke ſent for the B. vnto whom he ſayd, my L. of Ely▪
                I muſt néedes in hart thinke, and with mouth confeſſe, that you be a ſure friende, a truſtie counſaylour and a verye louer of your Countrey. And ſith at our laſt communicatiō, you haue diſcloſed the ſecrets of your hart, touching ye new vſurper of the Crowne, and alſo haue a little touched the 
                  ••
               auncement of the two noble families of Yorke and Lancaster, I ſhal likewiſe declare vnto you my priuie entents and ſecrete cogitations, and to beginne, when King Edwarde▪
                was deceaſed; I then beganne to ſtudye and with deliberation to ponder in what maner this realme ſhoulde be gouerned. I perſwaded wyth my ſelfe to take part wyth the Duke of Glocester, whom I thought to be as cleane without diſſimulation, as tractable without iniurie, and ſo by my

means he was made Protector both of the king and realm, whiche auathoritie being once gotten, he neuer ceaſed printly to require me & other Lords, as wel ſpirituall as temporall, that he might take vppon hym the Crowne, till the Prince came to the age of xxiiij. yeares, and were able to gouerne the realme as a ſufficient king, which thing, when he ſaw me ſomewhat ſticke at; he then brought in inſtrumēts, autentike Doctors, Proctors, and notaries of the law, with depoſitions of diuers witneſſes, teſtifying King Edwardes children to be baſtards, whiche depoſitions then I thought to be as true, as nowe I knowe them to be fayned. When the ſayde depoſitions were before vs read and diligentlye hearde, hée ſtoode vppe bare headed, ſaying: Well my Lordes, euen as I and you would, that my nephewes ſhould haue no wrong: ſo I praye you do me nothing but right, for theſe witneſſes and ſayings of famous Doctours be true: for I am onelye the vndubitate heyre to RICHARDE PLANTAGENET Duke of Yorke, adiudged to be the verye heire to the Crowne of this realme, by aucthoritie of Parliament. Whyche thynges, ſo by learned men for veritie to vs declared, cauſed me and other to take him for our lawful & vndoubted Prince and Soueraigne Lorde: ſo agayne by my aide, he of a Protector was made a King, but when he was once crowned King, and in full poſſeſſion of the realme, he caſte awaye his olde conditions. For, when I my ſelfe ſued to him for my parte of the Earle of Herefords landes, which his brother Kyng Edward wrongfully detained from me, and alſo requyred to haue the office of the highe Coneſtableſhip of Englande, as diuers of my noble aunceſtours before this time haue hadde, and in long deſcent continued, in this my firſte ſute, hée did not only firſt delay me, and afterward deny me, but gaue me ſuche vnkind wordes, as though I had neuer furthered him: al which I ſuffred paciētly, but whē I was informed of the death of the two yong innocentes, O Lord my heart inwardly

grudged, in ſo much that I abhorred ye ſight of him. I toke my leaue of the Court, and returned to Brecknocke to you, but in the iourney as I returned, I had diuerſe imaginatiōs how to depriue this vnnatural vncle. Frſt I ſanti
                  •
               ed y• if I liſt to take vpon me the Crowne, now was the way made playne, and occaſion giuen. For I ſawe he was dyſdayned of the Lords temporall, and accurſed, of the Lordes ſpiritual. After diuerſe cogitations of this matter, As I rode betwéene Worcester and Bridgenorth▪
                I encountred with the Lady Margaret Counteſſe of Richmonde, now wife to ye Lord Stanley, which is the very daughter and ſole heire, to Iohn Duke of Somerſet my grandfathers elder brother: ſo that ſhe and hir ſonne the Garle of Richmond, be both betwéene me & the gate, to enter into the Maieſtie royall, and getting of the Crowne: and when we had a little comoned, concernyng her ſonne; and were departed: I then beganne to diſpute wt my ſelfe, whether I were beſt to take vpon me, by the election of the nobilitie and communaltie or to take it by power. thus ſtanding in ye wauering ambiguitie, I conſidered firſt, y• offi
                  •
               e, dutie, and pain of a King, which ſurely I think that no mortall men can iuſtlye, and truely obſerue, excepte hée 
                  •
               ée elected by GOD as King Dauid was: but further I remembred that if I once toke on me the gouernaunce of the Realme: the daughters of King Edwarde and theyr Allies, being bothe for hys ſake muche helpned, and alſo for the greate iniurye done to them muche pytied, woulde neuer ceaſe to barke at the one ſyde of mée. Sen
                  •
               b
                  •
               abye my cooſin the Earle of Richemonde hys aydes, and kinſfolke, wyll ſurelye attempte eyther to 
                  •
               yte or to pierſe mée on the other ſyde, ſo that my life and rule ſhoulde euer hang vnquiet in 
                  •
               pubte of deathe or depoſition. And if the ſayde two ly
               
                  •
               ages of Yorke and Lancaster, ſhoulde ioyne in one againſte mée, then were I ſurelye matched. Wherefore I haue cléerelye determyned vtterlye to relinquiſhe all

imaginations concerning the obtayning of the Crowne: For as I told you, the Counteſſe of Richmond, in my returne from the newe named King, méeting me in the high waye, prayed me firſt for kinred ſake, ſecondly for the loue I bare to my grandfather Duke Humfrey; whiche was ſworne brother to hir father, to moue the King to be good to hir ſon, Hencie Earle of Richmonde, and to licenſe him with his fauour to returne againe into England, and if it were his pleaſure ſo to doe, ſhe promiſed that the Earle hir ſonne ſhoulde marrie one of king Edwards daughters at the appointment of the King, without anye thing demaunded for the ſayde eſpouſalles, but only the Kings fauoure, whiche requeſt I ſ
                  ••
               ne ouer paſſed and departed, but after ſeruice I called to memorie more of that matter, I am bente, that the Earle of Richmonde heire of the houſe of Lancaster, ſhal take to wife Lady Elizabeth eldeſt daughter to K. Edwarde, by the which marriage both the houſes of Yorke and Lancaster, maye be vnite in one: when the Duke had ſayde, the Biſhop Morton, whiche fauoured euer the houſe of Lancaster, 
               
                  ••
               s wonde
               
                  •
               ous ioyfull, for all his imagination tended to this effecte, and leaſt the Dukes courage ſhoulde ſwage o
                  •
                his minde alter, he ſayde to the Duke my Lord of Buckingham, ſithe by God
                  •
                prouiſion, and your incōparable wiſedome, thys noble coniunction is firſt moued, it is neceſſarie to conſider what perſons we ſhall firſte make pri
                  ••
               e of this polliticke concluſion, by my troth quoth the Duke, we will beginne wyth my Ladye of Richmonde the Earles mother, whyche knoweth where he is in Brytaine, ſith you will begin that waye (ſayde the Byſhoppe) I haue an olde friende wyth the Counteſſe called Reignalde Bray, for whom I ſhall ſend if it be iyoc
                  ••
                pleaſure▪ ſo the Byſhoppe wrode for him to come to Brecke
                     •••
                  ke, who ſtreight came backe with the meſſenger▪ where the Dirke and Biſhoppe declared what they hadde deuiſed for the prefermente of the Earle of Richmonde ſonne to hys▪ Ladye land Maiſtreſſe: willyng hyr firſte to compaſſe howe to obtayne the good wyll of Quéene

               Elizabeth, and alſo of hir eldeſt daughter: and after ſecretly to ſend to hir ſonne into Britaine to declare what highe honour, was prepared for him, if he would ſweare to marrye the Lady Elizabeth as ſoone as he was King of the Realme. Reynold Bray with a glad heart returned to the Counteſſe his Ladie. When Bray was gone, the Byſhoppe tolde the Duke that if he were in his Iſle of Elie he could make many friendes to further their enterpriſe. The Duke knewe this to be true, but yet lothe to loſe the companie of ſuch a counſeller, gaue the Byſhoppe fayre wordes, ſaying he ſhoulde ſhortly departe well accompanied for feare of enemies, but the Biſhop or the Dukes company were aſſembled, ſecretly diſguiſed, in a night departed, and came to Elie, where he founde money and friendes, and ſo ſayled into Flaunders, where he did the Earle of Richmond good ſeruice, when Reynold Bray, had declared his meſſage to the Counteſſe no maruaile if ſhe were glad, wherefore ſhe deuiſed a meanes hold to breake this matter to Quéene Elazabeth then being in Sanctuarie at Westminster, And hauing in hir family a certayne Wel
                     •
                  hman called Lewes learned in Phiſicke, nowe hauing opportunitie to breake hir minde vnto him, declared that the time was come that hir ſonne ſhould bée ioyned in marriage with Ladye Elizabeth daughter and heyre to King Edward: and that King Richard, ſhoulde out of all honour and eſtate be detected: and required him to goe to Quéene Elizabeth, not as a meſſenger, but as one▪ that came friendly to viſite hir, and as tyme and place ſhould ſerue, to make hir priuie of this deuiſe. This Phiſition with good diligence repayred to the Quéene, and when he ſaw tyme conuenient, he ſaid vnto hir: Madame although my imagination be verye ſimple, yet for the entire affection I beare to you and to your children, I am ſo bolde to vtter vnto you a ſecrete conceit that I haue compaſſed in my brayne. When I remember the great loſſe that you haue ſuſtayned by the death of your louing huſband, and the great ſorow that you haue ſuffered by the cruell murther of your innocent chyldren

I can no leſſe doe than daylye ſtudie howe to bring your heart to comforte, and alſo to reuenge the quarrell of you and your children on that cruell tyraunt King Richard. And firſt conſider what battayle and what miſchiefe hath riſen by the diſ
                  •
               ention betwéene the two houſes of Yorke and Lancaster, which two families if they may be ioyned in one, I doubt not but y• your line ſhall be againe reſtored, to your great ioye and comforte. You knowe Madame that of the houſe of Lancaster, the Earle of Richmond is nexte of bloud, and to the houſe of Yorke your daughters nowe are heyres. If ye coulde inuent the meane howe to couple your eldeſt daughter with the Earle of Richemond in Matrimonie, no doubt but the vſurper ſhould bée ſhortly depoſed, and your heire agayne to hir ryght reſtored. When the Quéene had heard thys friendly motion, ſhée inſtantly beſought hym that as he had béene the firſt inuenter of ſo good an enterpriſe, that now he would not deſiſt to folow the ſame, requrring him further, that he would reſorte to the Counteſie of Richemond mother to the Earle Henrie, and to declare to hir on the Quéenee behalfe, that all the friendes of King Edwarde▪
                hir huſband, ſhould aſſiſt and take part with the Erle of Richemond hir ſonne, ſo that he woulde take an othe that after the Kingdome obteyned, to eſpouſe the Lady Elizabeth hir daughter, &c. After Lewes ſo ſpedde his buſineſſe that he made a final
                  •
               en
                  •
                of this buſyneſſe betwéene the two mothers: ſo the Ladye Margaret Counteſſe of Richemond brought to a good hope of the preferment of hir ſonne, made Reynold Bray chiefe ſolicitor of this conſpiraoie, geuyng hym in charge ſecretely to inuegle ſuche perſons of Nobilitie to ioyne wyth hir and take hir parte as he knewe to be faythfull.
            This Reynold Bray within fewe dayes broughte to his lure, ſir Gyles Daubeney, ſir Iohn Ch
                     •
                  nie, Richard Guilford and Thomas Rame Eſquiers & others. In the meane ſeaſon the Counteſſe of Richemond ſeat Chriſtopher Vrfwike into Britaine to the Erle of Richmond, to declare to him all agréementes

betwéene hir & the Quéene agréed: but ſhe rementbring that the Duke of Buckingham, was one of the firſt inuentors of this enterpriſe ſent Hugh Conway Eſquier into Britaine with a great ſum of money to hir ſonne, giuyng him in charge to declare to the Earle the great loue that ye moſt part of the nobilitie of the Realme bare toward him, wylling him not to neglect ſo good an occaſion offered, but with all ſpéede to fettle his minde how to returne into Englande, giuing him Counſell to take land in Wales. When ye Earle had receyued this ioyfull meſſage, he brake to the Duke of Britayne all his ſecretes, aduertiſing hym that he was entered into a ſure and ſtedfaſt hope to obtayne the Crowne of England, deſiring hym of helpe towarde the atchieuing of his enterpriſe, which the Duke promiſed and after performed. Whervpon the Earle ſent into England Hugh Conway,
                and Thomas Ram, to declare his comming ſhortly into England. In the meane ſeaſon the chiefe of the conſpiracie in England beganne many enterpriſes, which beyng neuer ſo priuely handled, yet knowledge thereof came to Kyng Richard, and becauſe he knewe the Duke of Buckingham to bée the chiefe heade and ayde of this commination, he thought it moſt neceſſarie to plucke hym from that parte, where vppon he adreſſed his louing letters to the Duke to exhorte the Duke to come to the Courte: but the Duke required the Kyng to pardon hym, excuſing himſelfe that he was not well. King Richard not content wyth this excuſe, directed to the Duke other letters wyth checkyng wordes commaunding hym wythout delaye to repayre to hys preſence. The Duke made to the meſſenger a determinate aunſwere, that he woulde not come to his mortall enemye: and immediatelye prepared warre agaynſte hym, and by this meanes, Thomas Marques Dorſet came out of Sancturie, gathered a great bande of men in Yorke ſhire, ſyr Edwarde Courtney and Peter his brother Byſhoppe of Excester, rayſed an other armie in Deuonſhire and Cornewall.
            
            
               In Kent 
                  •
               ir Richard Calfortle and other gentlemen rayſes a comparrie. But King Richarde in the meane tyme had gotten together a great ſtrength, with whom he remoued from London towarde Saliſburie, to the entent he myght ſet on the Dukes army, the King was ſtarce two dayes tourney from Saliſburie▪
                when the Duke of Buckingham accompanyed with a great powre of wilde Welchmen which in the ende forſooke him. The Duke with his powre marched through the foreſt of Dene intending to haue paſſed the ryuer of Seuerne at Glocester, and there to haue ioyned in armie with the Courtneys & other Weſterne men, which if he had done no doubte but King Richard had béene in great ieoperdie: But before he could attayne to Seuerne ſyde, by force of continuall raine the riuer roſe ſo high that it ouerflowed all the countrey adioyning, which rage of water laſted. x. dayes, by which inundacie, the paſſages were ſo cloſed that neyther ye Duke could come ouer Seuerne to his complices, nor they to hym, d
                  •
               wing which time the Welchmen lyngering ydle and wythout money or victuall, ſodainly ſcaled and departed. The Duke thus left almoſt alone, was of neceſſitie compelled to flie, and conueyed himſelfe into the houſe of Humfrey Baniſter his ſeruaht beſide Shreweſburie, whom he had tenderly brought vp, which whē it was knowne to his adherents, euery man ſhifted for himſelfe and fled. And ſome of them ſayled into Britaine, among the which, were Peter Courtney Byſhop of Excester, and ſir Edward Courtney his brother, Thomas Marques Dorſet, Iohn Lord Welles, ſir Iohn Bourchier, ſir Edmond Woodvile brother to Quéene Elizabeth, ſir Robert Willoughbie, ſir Gyles Daubney, ſir Thomas Arundale, ſir Iohn Cheynie and his two: brothren, ſir William Barkerley, ſir William Brandō
                and Thomas his brother, ſir Richard Edgecombe, and Iohn Halwell, Edwarde Pownyngs; &c Proclamation was made and a thouſande pound promiſed to who ſo coulde bring out the Duke of Buckingham, where vpon Humfrey Baniſter bewrayed his gueſt andHumfrey Baniſter betrayeth his maiſter. maiſter to Iohn Mitton then Sherife of Shropſhire, whiche

with a ſtronge powre apprehended the Duke in a little groue adioyning to the manors of Humfrey Baniſter, and in great haſte conueyed him to the Citie of Saliſburie, where King Richard than kept his houſholde. This Baniſter afterBaniſter that be trayed his maiſter miſerably plagued, let the like traitors looke for the like or vvorſe to them and theirs, vvithout ſpeedie repentance. he had betrayed his maiſter, his ſonne and heire waxed mad and dyed in a Bores ſtye, his eldeſt daughter was ſodainely ſtriken with a foule leperie, his ſeconde ſonne maruellouſly deformed of his lymmes and made lame, his yonger ſonne in a ſmall puddle was drowned, and he himſelfe being of extreme age arraygned and found guiltie of a murther and by his clergie ſaued. And as for his thouſande pounde▪ King Richarde gaue him not one farthing, ſaying that he which woulde be vntrue to ſo good a maiſter, would be falſe to all other.
            The Duke after he had confeſſed all the whole conſpiracieDuke of Buckingham beheaded. vpon the ſecond of Nouember without araignement or iudgement was at Saliſburie beheaded.
            Whileſt theſe things were thus handled in England, Henrie
                Earle of Richmond prepared an armie of fiue thouſand Britons, and fortie wel furniſhed ſhippes. When al thyngs were prepared, and the day of ſetting forward was appoynted, which was the. xij. of October, the whole armie hoyſed vp ſayles and tooke the ſea, but toward night the wind turned and ſo huge a tempeſt aroſe that the ſhips were diſperſed a ſunder: ſome driuen into Normandie, ſome againe into Britaine. In the morning after when the tempeſt was aſſwaged, the Earle approched to the South parte of England, at the mouth of the Hauen of Pole in Dorcet, where he might ſée all the bankes full of men of warre, appoynted to defend his arriuall, wherfore he gaue charge that no man ſhoulde lande, vntil ſuch tyme as the whole Nauie were aſſembled, but after that he perceyued none of his ſhips to appeare, he hoyſed vp Ankers and away, where he arriued ſafe in Normandie, and returned by lande into Britaine, where he was ſoone aduertiſed that the Duke of Buckingham had loſte hys head, and that the Marques Dorcet and a great number of

Noble men of England had a little before enquired for hym there.
            In the meane ſeaſon King Richarde apprehended in diuers partes of this Realme certaine Gentlemen of ye Earle of Richmondes faction, amongſt whom ſir George Browne ſir Roger Clifford, and, iiij. other were put to death at London y• iij. of December. Sir Thomas Sentlegar which had marryed the Duches of Excester the Kings owne ſiſter and T. Rame with diuers other were executed at Excester.
            
            The. xxx. of December was a great fire at Leaden hall inFire at Leaden hall in London. 
               London, where through was brent much houſing and all the ſtocks for gunnes & other like prouiſion belonging to ye citie.
            After this King Richard called a Parliament, in y• which1484 he attainted the Earle of Richemond, and all other perſons, which were 
                  •
               led out of the Realme for feare, or any other cauſe as enemyes to him and to their natural countrie, and all their landes and goods was confiſcate to the Kings vſe, and yet notwithſtanding he laid on the people a great taxe. In this troubleſome ſeaſon, nothing was more maruelledAnno. reg. 2. at than that the Lorde Stanley had not bene taken, conſidering the working of the Lady Margaret his wyfe mother▪ to the Earle of Richemond, but for as muche as the enterpryſe of a woman was of hym reputed of no regarde, or eſtimation, and that the Lorde Stanley, hir huſband had purged hym ſelfe to be innocent of all attemptes by hir committed, it was giuen him in charge to kéepe hir in ſome ſecrete place at home, without hauing any ſeruaunt or company, ſo that from thence forth ſhée ſhoulde neuer ſend letter to hir ſonne or to any of his friendes, by the which the Kyng myghte bée moleſted, which commaundement was a whyle put in execution.
            This yéere King Richard began the high towre at Westminster, which remaineth yet vnfiniſhed. Alſo he cauſed theK. Henry the ſixt remoued to VVindſo
                     •
                  . body of King Henry the ſixte to be remoued from Cherteſey Abbey in Surrey and to be buried at Windſor, where he nowe reſteth, on the. xij. of Auguſt.
            
               
               Richard Cheſter: Thomas Britaine the 28. of September.
               Sherifes.
            
            
               Ralph Auſtry the 6. of Februarie.
            
            
               Tho. Hill Grocer the 28. of October. W. Stocker draper the
               Maiors. 
               24. of Sep. in anno. 1485. Iohn ward grocer the 29. of Sep.
            
            
               William Collingborne made a Ryme of. iij. of KingColingborne executed. 
               Richards Coūſellers, the Lord Louell, ſir Richard Ratclife, and ſir William Catesby which was:
            
               The Ratte the Catte and Louell our dogge,
               Rule all England vnder the hogge.
            
            For the which he was drawne frō 
               Westmin. to the Towre of London and there on y• hyll hanged, headed & quartered.
            King Richard conſidering y• a
                  •
               ities concluded betwéene Princes are the cauſe that their Realmes are fortified with a double power, that is to ſay, with their owne ſtrength, & the ayde of their friendes, practiſed a league with the King of Scots, which not long before had made diuers incurſions & roades into the Realme of Englande, and therefore ſued to haue a truce or peace concluded. Wherfore Commiſſioners were appointed which met at Notingham, & there in the end concluded for. iij. yéeres on certaine articles. xv. in number.Truce vvith Scotland for three yeeres. This peace thus concluded, King Richard nowe doubtyng his owne people, was continually vexed with feare of the returne of the Earle of Richmond and his complices. Wherfore, nothing was for his purpoſe more then once agayne with price & prayer, to attempt the duke of Britaine in whoſe territorie y• Erle then abode, to deliuer him into his hands, wherfore incontinent he ſent certaine Ambaſſadors to the Duke of Britaine, which tooke vpon them that King Richard ſhoulde yéerely pay and aunſwere the Duke of Britaine of al the reuenewes, rentes and profites of the landes & poſſeſſions as well belonging to the Earle of Richmond, as to any other noble or gentlemā which then were in the Erles companie, if he after that time would kéepe them in continuall priſon and reſtrayne them from libertie. The orators furniſhed with theſe & other inſtructions ariued in Britaine but could not ſpeake wt the duke, by reaſon y• he being weakned

by a long and dayly infirmitie, began to waxe ydle of his remembraunce, for whiche cauſe Peter Landoyſe his chiefe Treaſurer, ruled all things at his pleaſure, vnto whom the Engliſh Ambaſſadors moued to him their meſſage, offering to him the ſame rewardes and lands that they ſhould haue offered the Duke. This Peter faythfully promiſed to accompliſhe King Richardes requeſt, ſo that he kept promiſe wyth him, but fortune was ſo fauourable to the publike Weale of England, that this deadly compact tooke none effect, for Iohn Morton Byſhop of Elie ſoiourning then in Flaunders, was of al this craftie deuiſe certified: wherfore he ſent Chriſtopher Vrſwike, to declare to the Earle of Richemond all the deceyt, giuing him charge in all haſt poſſible with his company to retire out of Britaine into Fraunce. When theſe newes came to the Earle, he incontinent ſent to Charles the French king requiring that he and his myght ſafely paſſe into Fraunce, which deſire was graunted, and the Earle with the reſt diſpatched as priuily as mought be into Fraunce, no man ſuſſpecting their departure. After this, the Erle tooke his iourney to Charles the Frenche King, to whō after great thanks giuen, he diſcloſed the occaſion of his acceſſe to his perſon. After that he required of him helpe and ſuccour, to the intent he myghte returne to the Nobilitie of his Realme, of whō he was generally called to take vpō him the Crowne. King Charles promyſed him ayde, and bad hym be of good comforte, for he aſſured him that he woulde gladly ſhewe to1485 him his bountifull liberalitie. Whiles the Earle of Richemond thus attended on the Frenche Court, Iohn Vere Earle of Oxforde ſo perſwaded Iames Blonte Captaine of Hames Caſtle, and ſir Iohn Forteskewe Porter of the Towne of Calleis that he him ſelfe was not only ſet at libertie, but they alſo leauing their fruitfull offices condeſcended to goe with him into Fraunce to the Earle of Richemond.
            
            In the meane ſeaſon King Richard was credibly aduertiſed what promiſes and othes the Earle and his confederates had made and ſworne, and how by the Erles meanes,

all the Engliſh men were paſſed out of Britaine into Fraunce. Wherefore being in manner deſperate, imagining howe to infringe the Earles purpoſe by an other meane, ſo that by the mariage of Lady Elizabeth his niece, he ſhould pretend no clayme to the Crowne, there came to his minde a thing not onely deteſtable, but much more cruell to be put in execution, for he cléerelye determined to reconcile to his fauour his brother wife Quéene Elizabeth, and ſo by that meanes the Earle of Richemond, of the affinitie of his Nice ſhoulde bée vtterly defrauded, and if no ingenious remedie coulde bée otherwyſe inuented, if it ſhoulde happen Quéene Anne hys wyfe to departe out of this worlde, then he himſelfe woulde rather take to wyfe hys coſin and Nice the Ladye Elizabeth, than for lacke of that affinitie the whole Realme ſhoulde runne to ruyne. Wherefore hée ſent to the Quéene being in Sanctuarie, diuers and often meſſengers whiche ſhoulde excuſe hym of all things before agaynſt hir attempted, and after ſhoulde ſo largelye promyſe promotions, not onely to hir but to hir ſonne Thomas Marques Dorſet, that they ſhoulde bryng hir (if it were poſſible) into ſome wan hope. The Meſſengers ſo perſwaded the Quéene, that ſhée beganne ſomewhat to re
                  •
               ent, in ſo muche that ſhée faythfully promyſed to yéelde hir ſelfe to the Kyngs wyll and pleaſure. And ſo ſhée firſt delyuered vnto Kyng Richardes handes hir fyue daughters. Afterwarde ſhée ſent letters to the Marques hir ſonne beyng then at Paris wyth the Earle of Richemond, wylling hym in any wyſe to repayre into Englande, where for him were prouided great honours, aſſertayning hym that all offences on both parties were forgiuen and forgotten: After that King Richarde hadde thus pleaſed the mutable mynde of Quéene Elizabeth, he cauſed all hir daughters to bée conueyed into his Palace with ſolempne receyuing. Nowe nothing was contrarie to his purpoſe, 
                  •
               ut that his manſion was not voyde of a wyfe: and firſt 
                  〈…〉
                abſtayned both from the bedde and companye of hys

wyfe: after, he complayned to many of the infortunate barrenneſſe of his wife. After this, he procured a common rumor to be publiſhed among the common people, that the Quéene was dead. When the Quéen heard tell that ſo horrible a rumor of hir death was ſprong amongſt the communaltie, ſhe ſore ſuſpected the world to be almoſt at an ende with hir, and not long after, howſoeuer it fortuned, the Quéene departed out of this life, and was with due ſolemnitie buryed at Westminster.
            
            The King thus loſed out of the bonds of Matrimony, began to caſt a fancie to Lady Elizabeth hys Néece, making much ſuite to haue hir ioyned with him in lawfull Matrimonie: but bycauſe all men, and the Mayden hir ſelfe moſt of all deteſted thys vnlawfull copulation, hée determined to deferre the matter till he were in a more quiet caſe, for all thys ſeaſon he was oppreſſed with weighty affayres on euery ſyde, conſidering that dayly parte of the Nobilitie ſayled into France, other priuily fauoured the Earle of Richmond, amongſt the noble men whome hée moſt ſuſpected, theſe were the principall, Thomas▪
                Lorde Stanley, Sir Wyllyam Stanley hys brother, Gilbert Talbot, and ſixe hundred other, of whoſe purpoſe, though King Richard were ignorant, yet he gaue no credence to any one of them, and leaſt of all to the Lord Stanley, bycauſe he was ioyned in Matrimonie wyth the Lady Margaret, mother to the Earle of Richmond, for when the ſayde▪ Lorde Stanley would haue departed into hys Countrey, the King in no wyſe woulde ſuffer hym to departe, before he had lefte as in hoſtageAnno reg. 3. in the Courte George Stanley, Lord Strange, his firſt begotten ſonne and heire.
            Whyle Kyng Richarde was thus troubled, ſodeynely hée hearde newes that the Caſtell of Hames was delyuered into the handes of the Earle of Richmonde, by the meanes of the Earle of Oxford, and that not onely he, but alſo Iames Blunt, Captayne of the Caſtell, were fledde into France, to ayde the Earle of Richmond.
            
            
               
               Henry Earle of Richmond obteyning of King Charles a ſmall crue of men, and borowing certayne ſummes of money of hym, and of dyuers other hys priuate friendes, hée departed from the French Court, and came to the Citie of Roane. Whyle he taryed there, making prouiſion at Harefleete, in the mouth of the Riuer of Seyne, for all things neceſſarye for hys Nauye, tydings were broughte to hym, that Kyng Richarde béeyng wythout Children, and a Widdower, intended ſhortly to marrye wyth Lady Elizabeth, hys brothers daughter, whyche newes, hée tooke of no ſmall momente, for thys thyng onely tooke away from all hys companyous, theyr hope to obteyne an happye enterpriſe, by reaſon whereof, hée iudged that all hys friendes in Englande woulde ſhrinke from him, yet notwithſtanding, Earle Henry of Richmonde, bycauſe he woulde no longer linger and wéerie hys friendes, lyuing betwéene hope and feare, determined in all haſt conuenient to ſette forwarde, and caryed to hys Shippes armour, weapons, vitiayle, and all other ordinances expedient for warre, which béeyng done, onely accompanyed wyth two thouſande men, and a ſmall number of Shyppes, weyed vp hys Anckers, and in the kalendes of Auguſt, hée ſayled from Harefleete wyth ſo proſperous a wynde, that the ſeauenth day afterHenry Earle of Richmond, landed at Milford Hauen. hée arriued in Wales in the euening, at a Port called Milford Hauen, and incontinente tooke lande, and came to a place called Dale, and at the Sunne riſing, remoued to Hereford Weſt, where he was receyued of the people wyth great ioy.
            From thence, he remoued to Cardigan, fiue mile from Hereford Weſt, whether came to the Earle Richard Griffith with all his men and power. After him the ſame day came Iohn Morgan, wyth hys men. Then the Earle aduanced forwarde, making no abode in anye place, and ſodeynly hée was aſcertayned that Sir Walter Harbert, and Rice appe Thomas, were in harneſſe before hym, readye to encounter wyth hys Armye, and to ſtoppe theyr paſſage,

Wherefore he firſt determined to ſet vpon them, and eyther to deſtroye or to take them into his fauour, and after with all hys power to gyue battayle to King Richarde. But to the intent his friendes ſhoulde knowe with what de
                  •
               teritie he attempted his enterpriſe forwarde, he ſent meſſengers with letters and inſtructions to the Ladye Margaret his mother, to the Lorde Stanley and his brother, to Talbot and to other, declaring to them, that he holpe with the ayde of his friendes, intended to paſſe ouer the riuer of Seuerne at Shrewſburie, and ſo to paſſe directly to the Citie of London, requiring them as his ſpeciall truſt was in the hope of their fidelitie, that they woulde méete him by the waye with all diligent preparation. When theſe meſſengers were departed, he marched forward towardes Shrewſburie, & in his paſſage there mette and ſaluted him Rice ap Thomas with a goodly band of Welchmen, which ſubmitted himſelfe whole to his order and commaundement. In the meane tyme the meſſengers laden with rewardes returned to him the ſame daye that he entred into Shrewſburie, and made relation to him that his friendes were readie in all poyntes to doe all things for him which they myghte doe. The Earle Henrie continued his iourney and came to a little towne called Newporte, and pitched his campe on a little hyll adioyning, repoſing himſelfe there that nyghte. In the Euenyng of the ſame day came to him ſir George Talbot with the whole power of the young Earle of Shrewſburie, then beyng in warde, which were accounted. ij. thouſand men. And thus his power increaſing he arriued at the Towne of Stafforde, and there pauſed. To whome came ſir William Stanley accompanyed with a fewe perſons. After that the Earle departed from thence to Lytchfield and lay without the walles in campe all that night. The next morning he entred the towne and was lyke a Prince receiued. A day or two before the Lorde Stanley hauing in his band almoſt fiue thouſand men, lodged in the ſame towne, but hearing ye the Earle of Richemond was marching thetherward, gaue to hym place,

diſlodging him and his, and repaired to a towne called Adrestone, there abiding the comming of ye Earle, and this he did to auoyde all ſuſpition, being afraide leaſt if he ſhould be ſéene openly to be a fawtor or ayder to the Earle his ſonne in law before the day of batiayle, that King Richard which yet did not vtterly put in him miſtruſt, woulde put to ſome cruel death his ſonne & heire apparāt George Lord Strange, whom King Richard had in hoſtage. King Richard at this ſeaſon kéeping his houſe in the Caſtle of Notingham was informed that the Earle of Richmond with ſuch baniſhed men as were fled out of England to him, were arryued in Wales, and that all things neceſſarie to his enterpriſe were vnpurueyed and very weake, nothing méete to withſtande the power of ſuche as the King hadde appointed to reſiſt him, yet notwithſtandyng he ſent to Iohn Duke of Norfolke, Henrie
                Earle of Northumberlande, Thomas
                Earle of Surrey, and to other of hys truſtie friendes, willyng them to muſter and viewe all theyr ſeruauntes and tenaunts, and to electe the moſte couragious and actiue perſons of the whole number, and with them to repaire to his preſence with al ſpéede. Alſo he wrote to Robert Brakenburie Lieutenaunt of ye Tower, commaundyng him with his power to come to his armie & to bring with him his fellows in armes T. Bouchier, and ſir Walter Hungerford and diuers other Knights & Eſquiers in whom he had caſt no ſmall ſuſpition. While he was thus ordring his affayres, tidings came that the Earle of Richmond was paſſed Seuerne, and come to Shrewſburie with out any detriment or encombraunce. At which meſſage he was ſore mooued, and cryed out on them that contrarie to their othe had deceyued him, and in all haſte ſent out to viewe what way his enemyes kepte and paſſed: it was declared to the king, that the Earle was encamped at ye towne of Litchfield. Wherof, whē he had perfect knowledge, he hauing cōtinuall repayre of his ſubiects to him, he incōtinently made his battayles to ſet forwarde toward ye way where his enimies (as was to him reported,) intended to paſſe,

and kéeping his array, he with great pomp entred y• towne of Leycester after the Sunne ſet. The Earle of Richmond reyſed his Campe from Lichfield to Tomworth, and in the midde way paſſing, there ſaluted him Sir Walter Hungerford, and Sir Thomas Bourchier Knightes, and diuers others, which ſubmitted themſelues to his pleaſure. Diuers other noble perſonages likewiſe reſorted to him withall their power. There hapned in this progreſſion to the Earle of Richmond a ſtrange chance, for he was not a little afrayd, bycauſe he could not be aſſured of his father in law Thomas Lord Stanley, whiche as yet enclyned to neyther partie, wherfore the Earle, accompanyed with twenty light horſemen, lingring in his iourney behind his hoſt, in the meane while, the whole armie came before the Towne of Tomworth▪
                and when he for darkeneſſe coulde not perceyue the ſteppes of them that paſſed on before, and had wandred hyther and thither ſéeking after his companye, he abode in a little Uillage, about thrée miles from his armie, where he tarried all night. The next morning in the dawning, he returned, and by good fortune came to his Armie, excuſing himſelfe, not to haue gone out of his way by ignorance, but of purpoſe: this excuſe made, he priuily departed agayne to the downe of Aderstone, where the Lorde Stanley, and Sir William his brother, with their bands, were abiding: then the Earle came to his father in law, in a little Cloſe, where he ſaluted him and Sir William his brother, and after conſulted how to giue battayle to King Richard, if he would abide, whome they knew, not to be farre off with an huge armie. In the euening of the ſame day▪ 
               Sir Iohn Sauage, Sir Brian San
                     •
                  ord, Sir▪ Simon Digby, and many other, leauing King Richarde, turned, and came to the Earle of Richmond with an elect companye of men. In the meane ſeaſon, King Richard marched to a place méete for two battayles to encounter,Battayle at Boſvvorth. by a Uillage called Boſworth, not farre from Leyceſter, and there he pitched his field, refreſhed his Armie, and tooke his reſt. The next day after, King Richard being furniſhed

with men, and all abiliments of warre, bringing all his men out of their Camp into ye playne, ordered his forewarde in a maruellous length, in which he appoynted both horſemen and footemen, and in the forefront he placed the Archers.
            Ouer this battayle was Captayne Iohn Duke of Norffolke, with whome was Thomas Earle of Surrey hys ſonne. After this long vauntgard followed King Richarde with a ſtrong company of approued men of warre, hauyng horſemen for wings on both ſides of his battayle.
            After that the Earle of Richmond was returned from the communication wyth hys friendes, hée wyth all diligence pitched hys Fielde iuſt by the Campe of hys Enimies, and there he lodged that nighte. In the morning betime▪ he cauſed hys men to put on theyr armour, and apparrell themſelues to fight and gyue battayle, and ſente to the Lorde Stanley, requiring hym wyth hys men to approche néere to hys armye, and to helpe to ſet the Souldyers in array: he anſwered, the Earle ſhoulde ſette hys owne men in good order, whyle hée woulde come to hym in tyme conueniente. The Earle made hys fore-warde ſomewhat ſingle and ſlender, according to the ſmall number of hys people. In the front hée placed the Archers, of whome hée made Captayne Iohn Earle of Oxforde. To the right wing of the Battayle he appoynted Sir Gilbert Talbot to be the leader. To the lefte wing he aſſigned Sir Iohn Sauedge, and hée wyth the ayde of the Lord Stanley, accompanyed wyth the Earle of Pembrooke, hauyng a good companye of horſſemen, and a ſmall number of footemenne, for all hys whole number excéeded not fyue thouſande menne, beſyde the power of the Stanleys, whereof thrée thouſand were in the fielde vnder Sir William Stanley. The Kyngs number was double ſo much, or more. When both theſe Armyes were thus ordred, and all men ready to ſet forwarde, King Richard called hys Chiefetaynes togyther, perſwadyng them

to be valiaunt, &c. But his people were to him vnfaythfull in his ende, as he was to hys Nephewes, vntrue and vnnaturall in his begynnyng. When the Earle of Richmond knewe that the King was ſo néere embattayled, he rode aboute hys armie giuyng comfortable wordes to all men, after the whiche he made to them a pithie Oration, perſwadyng them to haue the victorie, for that they were to fyght in a iuſt quarrell, he had ſcantlye finiſhed hys ſaying, but the one armye eſpyed the other: betwéene bothe armyes there was a great marriſhe which the Earle lefte on hys ryght hande, and ſo doyng, he hadde the Sunne at hys backe, and in the face of hys enemyes. When the King ſawe the Earles companye was paſſed the marriſhe, he commaunded wyth all haſte to ſet vpon them: the terrible ſhotte on both ſides paſſed, the armyes ioyned and came to hande ſtrokes, at whiche incounter the Lorde Stanley ioyned with the Earle.
            The Earle of Oxforde in the meane ſeaſon fearing leaſt while his company was fighting, they ſhould be compaſſed of the enemies, gaue commaundement that no man ſhould go aboue. x. foote frō the Standard, which commaundement once knowne, they kni
                  •
                themſelues together & ceaſed a litle frō fighting: the enemies ſodainely abaſhed at the matter & miſtruſting ſome fraude, began alſo to pauſe. The Earle of Oxford bringing all his band together on the one part, ſet on his enemies freſhly: againe the aduerſaryes perceyuing that, placed their men ſlender and thinne before, and thicke and broade behynde, begynnyng agayne the battayle. Whyle the two fore wardes thus mortally foughte, Kyng Richarde was admoniſhed that the Earle of Richmond accompanyed wyth a ſmall number of men of armes was not farre of, and as he approched to hym, he perfectly knewe hys perſonage, and béeyng inflamed with yre, he put hys ſpurres to hys horſe and rode out of the ſide of the range of his battayle, leauyng the vauntgardes fighting, and wyth 
                  •
               earein wreſt ranne towarde him. The Earle perceyued

well the King furiou
                  •
               lye comming towarde him, and bycauſe the whole hope of his wealth and purpoſe was to bée determined by battayle, 
                  •
               e gladlye pr
                  •
               fere
                  •
                
               
                  ••
                encounter with him body to body and man to man, King Richarde ſet on ſo ſharply at the firſt brunt, that he ouerthrew the Earles ſtandard, and ſlew ſir William Brandon his ſtā
               derdbearer▪ and matched hand to hande with ſir Iohn Cheny, a man of great force and ſtrength▪ which would haue re
               
                  ••
               ſ
                  •
               ed him, and the ſaide Iohn was by him man fully ouerthrowne, and ſo he making open paſſage by dint of ſworde as he went forwarde, the Earle of Richmonde withſtoode hys violence and kept him at the ſwords point longer than his companions thought, which being almoſt in diſpaire of victorie were ſodainelye recomforted by ſir William Stanley, whiche came to ſuccour with 3000. tall men, at which very inſtaunt, King Richards men were driuen backe and fled, and he himſelfe manfully fighting in the middle of his enimies was flaine. In the meane ſeaſon the Earle of Oxforde, with the ayde of the Lorde Stanley after no long fight diſcō
               
               
                  •
               ited the fore ward of King Richarde, wherof a greate number were ſlaine in the chaſe, but the greateſt number yt came to the fielde neuer gaue ſtroke. In this battaile died fewe aboue the number of a M. perſons, and of the Nobilitie were flaine Iohn Duke of Norffolke, Walter
                Lord▪ 
               Ferrers of Chartley, ſir Richarde Ratclife, and Robert Brakenburie, liuetenāt of the Tower, and not many Gentlemen moe, ſir William Catesby, learned in the lawes of the Realme, and one of the thiefe Counſellours to the late King, with diuerſe other were two dayes after beheaded at Leicester. Amongſt them that ranne awaye were▪ Syr Frauncis Vicount Louel and Humfry Stafforde with Thomas Stafford his brother, which toke Sanctuarie in Saint Iohns at Glocester. On the Erle of Richmonds part wer ſlayn ſcarce 100. perſons, amongſt whō the principal was ſir William Brandon his ſtandardbearer. This battel was fought at Boſworth in Lecesterſhire, the 22. of Auguſt, in the yeare of our Lord. 1485. the whole conflict

               
                  ••
               udured little aboue two hours. When the Earle had thus obtained the victorie, he rendered thankes to God, and after in his ſouldiours for their 
                  •••
               litie: then the people cryed King Henry, King Henry. When the Lord Stanley ſa
                  ••
                the good will of the people, he tooke the Crowne of Kyng Richarde, whiche was founde amongeſt the ſpoile in the fielde, and ſette it on the Earles head, as thoughe hée had béene elected Kyng by the voyce of the people.
            After this, the whole campe remoued to the Towne of Leicester, where he reſted two dayes. In the meane ſeaſon, the dead corps of King Richarde was as ſhamefully carryed to the towne of Leicester, as he gorgeouſlye the daye before with pompe departed out of the ſame towne: for his body
                  •
                was naked to the ſkinne, not ſo muche as one clowte aboute hym; and was truſſed behinde a Purſiuant of armes, like a hogge or calfe, the head and armes hanging on the one ſide of the horſſe, and the legs on the other ſide, and all ſprinckled with myre and bloud, was brought to the Gray Friers Church within the town, and there homely buried, when he had raigned two yeres, two moneths, and one daye.
         
         
            
            ¶ Henrie, Erle of Richmonde
            
            
            
               
                  HEnry the ſeauenth, borne in
               Anno reg. 1. 
               Penbrooke Caſtell, began his raigne the xxij. of Auguſte, in the yeare of oure Lorde God. 1485. He was a Prince of maruellous wiſedom, policie, iuſtice, temperaunce, and grauitie, and notwithſtandyng manye and greate occaſions of trouble and warre, he kept his realme in right good order, for the which he was greately reuerenced of forraine Princes.
            On the forenamed xxij. of Auguſt, was a greate fyreParſon of Saint Mildreds bren
                     •
                  . in Bred-ſtreete of London, in the whiche fire, was brente the Parſon of Saint Mildreds, and one other man in the Parſonage there.
            King Henry, before his departure from Leicester, ſente ſir Robert Willoughbey knight, to the Manour of Sherenton in Yorke, for Edwarde Plantagenet Earle of Warwike, ſonne and heire to George Duke of Clarence, then being of the age of fifteene yeares, and ſente him vppe to the Tower of London, where he was put vnder ſure cuſtody.
            
               In the meane ſeaſon the Kyng remoued towards London, and when he had approched the Citie, on the 27. of Auguſt, the Maior, magiſtrates, and companies, all clothed in violet, met him at Shoredich▪
                and with great pompe conueyed him through the Citie to Saint Paules Church, where hée offered his thrée ſtandards, one of Saint George, the ſeconde a red Dragon, the thirde a dun Cowe
                  •
               after his prayers ſaide and Te Deum ſung, he departed to the Biſhoppes Pallaice, where he ſoiourned a ſeaſon.
            The Sweating beganne the one and twentith of September, and continued till the ende of October: of ye which ſickneſſe, a wonderfull number dyed, and in London beſids other, dyed Thomas Maior, in whoſe place was choſen William Stocker, who likewiſe deceaſed about ſeauen dayes after, in which ſpace departed other foure Aldermen, Thomas Ilam, Richard Ramſon, Thomas Norland, and Iohn Stocker, and then was choſen Maior, Iohn Warde, who continued til the feaſt of Simon and Iude.
            
            
               Iohn Tate: Iohn Swan, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Sir Hugh Brice Goldſmith, the 28. of October.
            
            On the euen of Sainte Simon and Iude king Henrie came from Kenington his houſe, vnto Lambeth, and there dyned wt 
               Thomas Bourcher Archbiſhoppe of Canterburie, Cardinal of Saint Ciria in Thermis. And after dinner with a goodlye company of the eſtates of this Realme both ſpirituall and temporal, from thence wēt to the Tower of London by land, & ouer London bridge, his nobles riding after the guiſe of Frāce, vpon ſmall Hackneys, two and two vppon a Horſſe, and at London Bridge ende the Maior of London with his brethren and the Craftes, met and receyued the King, and the King procéeded to Grace Church corner, and ſo to the Tower. On the morrowe being the feaſt daye of Simon and Iude, King Henrie created Thomas Lord Stanley Earle of Darby, Edwarde Courtney
                Earle of Deuonſhire, and Iaſper Earle of Penbroke, was created Duke of Bedforde, all at one time in the Tower of London.
            
            
               On the thirtith of October King Henrie was Crowned at Westminster, and ordayned a number of choſen Archers, being ſtrong and hardie perſons, to giue dayly attendaunce on his Parſon, whome he named Yeomen of the Guarde.
            The ſeauenth of Nouember beganne a Parliamente at Westmi
                     •
                  ster, for the eſtabliſhing of all things, in the whiche he cauſed to be proclaimed, that al men were pardoned of al offences, and ſhoulde be reſtored to their landes and goods, which would ſubmit themſelues to his clemency. After this he began to remember his eſpecial friendes, of whom ſome he aduannced to honor and dignitie, and ſome he enriched with poſſeſſions and goods: and to beginne, the Lord Chandew of Brytaine, he made Earle of Bath: ſir Gyles Dawbeney was made Lord Dawbeny: ſir Robert Willoughby Lorde Broke: and Edward Stafford eldeſt ſonne to Henrie late D. of Buckingham, he reſtored to his dignitie and poſſeſſions. The Parliament being diſſolued, the King redéemed the Marques Dorſet, and ſir Iohn Bourcher, whom he had left as pledges at Paris, for mony there before borrowed. And ſent alſo into Flaunders for Iohn Morton Byſhop of Ely.
            
            The eightéenth daye of Ianuarie King Henrie married the Lady Elizabeth, eldeſt daughter to Edward the fourth, by whiche meanes the two families of Yorke and Lancaster, which had long bene at great diuiſion, were vnited & made one.
            King Henrie ſente the Lorde Treaſurer with Maiſter Bray and other vnto the Lorde Maior of London, requiring1486 Loane to the King. hym and the Citizens of a Preſte of 6000. markes, wherefore the Maior with hys brethren and Commons graunted a preſt of two thouſand pound, which was leuied of the cō
               panies and not of the wards, which preſt was repayred againe in the yeare next following.Anno. reg. 2.
            
            Wheate was ſold for iij. ſhillings the Buſhell and Bay ſalt at the like price.
            In the moneth of September Quéene Elizabeth was deliuered of hir firſt ſon, named Arthur, at Winchester.
            
            
               
               Iohn Perciuall: Hugh Clopton, the 28. of Septemb.
            
            
               Sir Henry Collet Mercer, the 28. of Octob.
            
            The beautifull Croſſe in Cheape was newe builded, towarde the building whereof Thomas Fiſher Mercer, gaue 600. markes.
            Sir Richarde Simon, a wily Prieſt, came to Geralde erle of Kildare, and Deputie of Irelande, and preſented to hym a lad his Scholler named Lambert, whom he fained to be ye ſonne of George, duke of Clarence, lately eſcaped the Tower of London. And the childe hadde learned of the Prieſte, ſuch Princely behauiour, that he lightly moued the Earle, and manye Nobles of Irelande, tendering the bloude royall of Rycharde Plantagenet, and George his ſonne, as alſo maligning the aduancement of the houſe of Lancaster in Henry the ſeauenth, eyther to thinke or make the world wéene, they thought verily this childe to be Edward Earle of Warwicke, the Duke of Clarence lawfull ſonne. And althoughe King Henrie more thā halfe marred their ſport, in ſhewing the right Earle thorowe all the ſtreates of London, yet the Lady Margaret Dutches of Burgoigne, ſiſter to Edwarde the fourth, Iohn de la Poole hir nephewe, the Lorde Louell, ſir Thomas Broughton Knight, and other Capitaines of thys conſpiracy, deuiſed to abuſe the colour of this yong Earles name for preferring their purpoſe, which, if it came to good, they agréed to depoſe Lambert, and to erecte the verye Erle in déede, nowe priſoner in the Tower: for whoſe quarrell, had they pretended to fight, they déemed it likely, he ſhould haue béene made awaye: wherfore it was blazed in Ireland, that the Kyng, to mocke his ſubiects, had ſchooled a boye to take vpon him the Earle of Warwickes name, and had ſhewed hym aboute in London, to blind the eies of ſimple folke and to defeate the lawfull inheritor of the Duke of Clarence theyr Countreyman and Protectour during hys lyfe, to whoſe lynage they alſo diuided a tytle of the Crowne.
            
               In al ye haſt they aſſemble at Diueline, and there in Chriſtes Church, they crowned this Idoll, honouring him with tytles emperiall, feaſting and triumphing, rearing mighty ſhowtes and cries, carying him thence to the Kings Caſtel vppon tall mens ſhoulders, that he might be ſéene and noted, as he was ſurely an honourable boy to looke vppon.
            In thys meane tyme, the Earle of Lincolne, and the lordEdward Hall. 
               Louell, hadde gotten by the ayde of the ſayde Margaret, aboute 2000. Almaines with Martin Swart a Germaine, and in martiall actes verye experte, to be their Capitaine, and ſo ſayling into Ireland, and at the Citie of Diuelin, cauſed yong Lambert to bée proclaymed King of Englande, and ſo with a greate multitude of Iriſhemen, of whome Thomas Gerardine was Capitaine, they ſailed into Englande wyth the newe king, and landed at Fowdrey within a little of Lancaster, truſting there to be ayded with money by ſir Thomas Broughton, one of the chiefeſt of thys conſpiracy.
            Kyng Henrie not ſléepyng in his matters, when he had gathered hys hoſt togither, ouer the whych, the Duke of Bedforde, and the Earle of Oxforde were chiefe Capitaines, he went to Couentrie, where he being certified, that the Erle of Lincolne was landed at Lancaster with his newe King, he remoued to Notingham, to whom ſhortly after came George Talbot Earle of Shrewſburie, the Lorde Straunge, ſir Iohn Cheyney, with manye other.
            In this ſpace the Earle of Lincolne beyng entred into Yorkeſhire, directed his way to Newarke vppon Trent, and at a little village called Stoke, thrée or four miles from Newark, nighe to the King and his armye planted his Campe.
            The nexte daye following, the king diuided hys number into thrée battailes, and after approched nighe the town of Stoke, where bothe the armies ioyned and foughte egrelye on bothe partes: but at the length the Kyngs forewarde ſette vppon the aduerſaries, wyth ſuche a violence, that they ſlewe manye, and putte the reſte to flighte. For there their chiefe Capitaines, the

Earle of Lincolne, and the Lord Louel, ſ
                  •
               r Thomas Broughton, Martin Swart, and the lord Grardin, (or (after Champion) Moriſe Fitz Thomas) Captaine of the Iriſhemen, were flaine, and other aboue foure thouſande. This battaile was fought on the ſixtéenth of June: Lambert, and the prieſt wer both taken, to the no ſmall griefe of Margaret Dutcheſſe of Burgoine.
               Anno. reg. 3 Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Iohn Fenkell: William Remington, the 28. of Septem.
            
            
               Sir William Horne Salter, the 28. of October.
            
            The xxv. of Nouember, Quéen Elizabeth was Crowned at Westminster.
            
            In the moneth of July was a preſte for the Kyng made1488 in the Citie of London, of foure thouſande pounde, and ſhortly after was an other preſt of two thouſande pounde, which were both repayde againe in the nexte yeare following. Theſe ſummes of money, and manye more were leuied to ayde the Archeduke of Burgoigne, agaynſte the Duke of Brytaine.
               Anno reg. 4. Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               William Iſaac: Ralph Tinley, the 28. of September.
            
            
               Robert Tate Mercer, the 28. of October.
            
            A taſke of the tenth penny of all mens goods and landes was graunted to King Henrie, to ayde the Duke of Brytaine againſt the French Kyng, through which taxe ſir Iohn Egremount, and Iohn a Chamber, wyth the commōs of ye North,Iohn Skelton. 1489 made an inſurrection, and ſlewe the Earle of Northumberlande and certaine of hys houſholde ſeruauntes, in a place called Coke-lodge, by Thurske, eightéene myles from Yorke, on the eighte and twentith of Apryll. Wherefore Iohn Achamber was hanged at Yorke vppon a Gibbet ſette vppon a foure ſquare Gallowes, and the other his accomplices were hanged on the Gallowes round aboute him, but ſir Iohn Egremount fledde into Flaunders to the Lady Margaret Dutches of Burgondie.
            
            It was ordayned by Parliament, the Maior of London toAnno reg. 5. haue conſeruation of the riuer of Thamis, from the bridge of Stanes, vnto the Waters of Yendale, and Medway.
            
            
               
               William Capell: Iohn Brooke, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               William White Draper, the 28. of October.
            
            
               Roger Shaueloke a Taylour, within Ludgate of London,
               1420 being a man of greate wealth, ſlewe hymſelfe, for whoſe goodes was greate buſineſſe and ſtrife betwéene the Kings Almoner and the Sherifes of London: but in the ende, theAnno. reg. 6 Almoner preuailed, and gaue to the widowe hir goodes againe, vpon condition, that ſhe ſhoulde marry with one of his ſeruauntes named William Flower.
            
            
               Henry Coote: Robert Reuell, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes.
            
            
               Hugh Pemberton, the 1. of February.
            
            
               Iohn Mathew Mercer, the 28. of October.
               Maior. 1491
            
            The twelfth of March, Sir Robert Chamberlaine knight, was arraigned and adiudged at Stratforde of the Langthorne, and after beheaded on the Tower hill.
            King Henry required a beneuolence, whych was granted towarde hys iourney into France. The Citizens of London gaue toward this iourney. 9682. l. 17. s̄. 4. d. to the whiche ſumme many Aldermen gaue 200. l. the péece, and ſome of the meaner ſorte 100. l. the reſte the common people ſupplied.
            
               Henry the Kings ſecond ſonne, was borne at Greenwich,
               Henry the kings ſon borne. Anno. reg. 7. Conduite in Grace-ſtreete: Dearth of corn. the twoo and twentith of June.
            The Conduite in Grace-streete, was begunne to bée builded by the executours of ſir Thomas Hill Grocer, late Maior of London, of his goodes.
            Wheate was ſolde at London for twenty pence the buſhel, whiche was accompted a great dearth.
            
               Thomas Wood: William Browne, the▪ 28. of Septemb.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Hugh Clopton Mercer and Bacheler, the 28. of Octob.
            
            This Hugh Clopton Mayor of London, and of the Staple, a Gentleman, borne at Clopton village, halfe a mile from Stratforde vpon Auen by north, continued during hys lyfe 
                  〈…〉
                Bacheler: he builded the greate and ſumptuous Bridge1492 
               
                  〈…〉
                
               Stratforde vpon Auen, at the Eaſté ende of the Towne: 
                  〈…〉
               ys Bridge hathe fourtéene greate arches, and a long cawſey,

with ſmaller Arches, all made of ſtone, newe walled on eche ſide at the weſt ende of the bridge, he buylded a fayre large Chappell towarde the ſouth ende of that towne, and neare vnto the ſame a preatye houſe of Bricke and Tymber, where he laye, and ended his life. He glazed the Chancell of the pariſhe Churche in that towne, and made away of foure myles long, thrée miles from Aleſburie towardes London, and one myle beyonde Aleſburie,
            
            The ſixt day of Aprill the Mayor of London, his brethren the Aldermen, and the Craftes in their Liueries, aſſembled in Paules Churche, where Doctour Morton Chauncelour made to them an Oration, declaring, howe the Kyng of Spaine hadde wonne the great and riche Citie and countrey of Granade from the Turkes: for ioy whereof, Te Deum was ſung wyth greate ſolempnitie.
            In the moneth of May following, was holden a greate and valiaunt iuſting wythin the Kings Palaice of Shine
               Anno. reg. 8. nowe named Richmonde, the whyche endured by the ſpace of a moneth, ſometime wythin the ſaide Palaice, and ſometime wythout, vpon the Gréene before the Gate of the ſaid Pallaice. In whiche Juſtes, ſir Iames Parker Knight, running againſt a Gentleman named Hugh Vaughan, by caſualtie was ſo ſore hurte and bruſed, that he dyed thereof.
            The ninth of September, King Henry tooke his voyage into Fraunce with a greate army to aide the Britons againſt the Frenche King, where he beſieged Bolloine til a truce was taken.
            
               William Purchas: William Welbecke, the▪ 28▪ of Sept:
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Sir William Martin Skinner, the 28. of October.
            
            King Henry returned into Englande the ſeauentéenth of December.
            Twoo Pardoners were ſette on the Pillorie in Cornehill thrée market dayes, for forging of falſe pardons, wherewyth they hadde deceyued the people and gote much money: and for that one of them hadde ſayned hymſelfe to bée a Prieſte, he was ſente to Newgate, where he dyed: the other

was dryuen oute of London wyth ſhame ynoughe.
            The ninth of October was a ryo
                  •
                made ▪vpon the Eaſterling
                  •
               
               149
                     •
                   Fray againſt the Stiliard men. Anno reg. 9. or Stiliarde men, by Mercers ſeruauntes, and other of the Citie of London, for the which many of them were ſore puniſhed.
            
               Robert Fabian: Iohn Winger, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes.
            
            This Robert Fabian Sherife aforenamed and Aldermā, made a Chronicle of Englande and of Fraunce, beginning at the creation of the worlde, and ending in the thirde yeare of the raigne of King Henrie the eight, which booke is imprinted to the ende of Richarde the thirde.
            
               Sir Ralph Auſtry Fiſhemonger, the 28. of October.
               Maior.
            
            This ſir Ralph Auſtry rooffed with tymber, and couered with Lead the Pariſhe Churche of Saint Martin in the Vintrie of London, and alſo glazed the ſame Churche very beautifully, as partely appeareth.
            The two and twentith of February, were arraigned in the Guild hall of London foure perſons, Thomas Bagnall, Iohn Scot, Iohn Heth, & Iohn Kenington, the whyche were Sanctuary men of Saint Martins le Grand in London, and latelye before were taken out of the ſaide Sanctuarie, for forging o
                  •
                ſeditio
                  •
               s billes, to the ſclaunder of the King, and ſome his Counſell, for the whiche, thrée of them were iudged to dye, and the fourth named Bagnall, pleaded to be reſtored to Sanctuarie: by reaſon wherof he was repriued to the Tower till the nexte Terme: and on the ſixe and twentith of February, the other thrée with a Fleming and a Yeoman of the Crowne, were all fiue executed at Tyborne.
            
            The eyghte and twentith of Aprill Ione Boughton widowe,1494 was brent in Smithfielde, for holding certaine opinions of Iohn Wicklife.
            
            Wheate was ſolde at London at ſixe pence the buſhell,Anno reg. 10 Bay Salte for thrée pence halfe peny the Buſhell, Na
                     ••
                  
                  wiche Salte was ſolde for ſyxe pence the Buſhell, white hearring nine ſhillings the barrel, red hearring at

thrée ſhillings the cade, red ſprots ſixe pence the cade, and Gaſcoine wine▪ for ſixe poundes the tunne.
            
               Nicholas Alwine: Iohn Warner, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Richarde Chawry, Salter, the 28. of October.
            
            Sir Robert Clifford bearing fauor to the houſe of Yorke, had long ſince ſayled ouer to the Lady Margaret Dutcheſſe of Burgoigne, by whome he was there perſuaded and broughte in beliefe, that one Perken Werbecke, a Fleming born, was the verye ſonne of King Edwarde the fourth: but afterwarde, béeyng ſente for by King Henry, and pardon promiſed him, he returned into Englande, and comming to the Kings preſence in the Tower of London, hée, on hys knées moſte humblye cr
                  ••
               ed pardon, which ſhortely he obtained, and after accuſed manye, amongeſt whome he accuſed ſir William Stanley, whome the Kyng hadde made his chiefe Chamberlaine, and one of hys priuie Counſaile. The reporte is, that this was hys offence. When communication was had betwéene him and Sir Robert Clifforde, as concerning Perken Werbecke, ſir William Stanley affirmed there, y• he would neuer fight nor beare armor agaynſt the yong man, if he knowe of a trueth, that he was the vndoubted ſonne of King Edward the fourth. For this offence ſir William Stanly was apprehended, araigned, and on the xvj. day of February beheaded on the Tower hill. This ſir William Stanley was the chiefeſt helper of King Henrye to the Crowne at Boſworth fielde againſte King Richard the thirde. He was a man of greate power in his Country, and alſo of great wealth, inſomuch, as the cōmon fame ran that there was in hys Caſtell of Hol
                     •
                  e, founde in readye coyne, plate, and Jewels, to the value of fortie thouſand markes or more, and his lande and fées extended to thrée thouſand poundes by yeare.
            In Lent white hearring being good, were ſold for. iij. 
                  •
               
               1495 iiij. 
                  •
                the barrell at London. Sir W Capel Aldermā of London.
               
was condemned to the king in xxvij. C. and xliij. pound ſterling,Cronicl
                     •
                   of Lond. for the breaking of certain ſtatuts, made before times, for the which he made his end with the King for. xvj. C. and fiftéene pounde ſixe ſhillings eight pence.
            
               Pierce or Perken Werbecke, which by the counſaile of Margaret Dutches of Burgoigne named himſelfe Richarde of Yorke, King Edwards ſeconde ſonne, arriued at Deale in Kēt, the thirde daye of July, where when he and his companye ſawe they coulde haue no comforte of the Countrey, they withdrewe to their ſhippes againe, at which ſo withdrawyng, the Mayor of Sandwich with certaine commons of the countrey bickered with the reſidue that were vpon land, & toke aliue of them an hundred thrée ſcore and nine perſons, among the which were fiue captaines, Mountford, Corbert,Anno reg. 11 Whitbelt, Quintine and Gem
                     ••
                  e. And the xij. of July Iohn Peche Eſquier, Shriue of Kent, brought vnto London bridge thoſ
                  •
                169. priſoners, where the Shriues of London receiued them and conueyed them in cartes and long ropes vnto the Tower of London, and to Newgate, who were ſhortly after to the number of 150. hanged in Kent, Eſſex, Suſſex, and Norfolk, the reſidue were executed at Tiburne & Wapping, in the Woſe beſides London.
            
            
               Thomas Kneiſworth, Henry Sommer, the. 28. of Septemb.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Sir Henry Colet Mercer, the. 28. of October.
            
            The. xvj. of Nouember was holden the Serieants feaſt at the Biſhops place of Ely in Holborne, where dined the King, Quéene▪ and all the chiefe lordes of England. The new Serieants names were maiſter Mordant, Higham, Kingſmill, Conisby, Butler, Yakeſley, Frowicke, Oxenbridge, and Conſtable.
            
            In digging for to lay a new foundation in the Church of S. Mary hill in London, the body of Alice Hackeney, which had bene buried in the Church the ſpace of. 175. yeares, was 
                  •••
               ud whole of ſkinne, and the iointes of her armes pliable:

whiche corps was kepte aboue grounde foure dayes without anoyance, and then buryed againe.
            In Aprill was concluded an amitie and entrecourſe betwéene this lande, and the Countrey of Flaunders, &c.
            
            In September, the Scots entred England, by the ſetting on of Perkin Werbecke, and did much harme to the borders: but when they hearde of the Lorde Neuels commyng againſt them, they ſped them away.
            
               Iohn Shawe: Richard Haddon, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Iohn Tate Mercer, the 28. of October.
            
            This Iohn Tate newly builded and enlarged Sainte Anthonies Churche in London, a goodly foundation, with a Fréeſ
                  •
               hoole, and certaine almes houſes for poore men.
            
               Iaſper Duke of Bedforde, vncle to King Henry the ſeauenth, dyed the eightéenth daye of December, and was buried at Kenſham.
            
            By meanes of a payment that was granted to the king,1497 a new commotion was made by the commons of Cornewal, whiche vnder the leading of Iames Tuchet of Audley, Lorde Audley, with Michaell Ioſeph, a horſe farrer or Blackſmith of Bodman and other, came to Blackeheath, where the Kyng met with them, and diſcomfited the rebels, and tooke their Captains the two and twentith of June, where were ſlain of the rebels about 300. and taken aboute. 1500. the Kyng gaue to them that tooke them, their goodes. The Lord Audley was beheaded on the Tower hill the xxviij. of June. The blacke Smith and Flamoke a lawyer, were hanged, headed, and quartered at Tiburne.
            
            In July the King ſente an army into Scotland, vnder the guyding of the Earle of Surrey, and the Lorde Neuell, which made ſharpe warre vppon the Scots.
            
            At Bartholmewtide, in Bedfordſhire, at the Towne ofHaile ſtones hightene ynches aboute. 
               Saint Needes, fell haile ſtones that were meaſured eightéene

ynches aboute.
            
               Perkin, or Pierce Werbecke, landed at Whitſondbay, inAnno reg. 13 
               Cornewall, the ſeauenth of September, hauing in his company not paſte a hundred and twentie perſons, hée wente to Bodman, where beyng accompanyed wyth a thrée or foure thouſand raſcalles, and almoſte naked men, he proclaymed himſelfe King Richarde the fourth, ſecond ſonne to Edward the fourth: from thence he wente to Excester, and beſieged it, which Citie was valiantly defended by the inhabitants, the Earle of Deuonſhire being their Generall, who hymſelf was hurt in the arme with an arrow of the rebels, but many of the rebelles béeyng ſlaine, they wythdrewe them to Taunton: but ſir Giles Dawbeney Lorde Chamberlaine approching with an armye, the people fledde, and Perkin got him to Beudley, where he tooke Sanctuary, but vppon couenauntes offered, he came to the King, and was pardoned his life.
            
               Bartholomewe Rede: Thomas Windought. 28. of Sep.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               William Purchas Mercer, the 28. of October.
            
            The eight and twentith of Nouember, Perkin Werbeck
               Perkin VVerbecke broughte vp to London. was conueyed vppon horſe backe through Cheape and Cornhill vnto the Tower of London, and from thence back againe through Candleweeke ſtreate to Westminster, with many a curſſe, and muche wondering.
            The one and twentith of December, at nyne of theSheene burnt. clocke at night ſodaynely beganne a greate fier within the Kings lodgings, then being at his Manour of Sheene, which continued tyll Mydnight, by violence whereof much and a great part of the olde building of that place was brent, with hangings, beddes, apparell, plate, and manye other Iewelles.
            
               Perkin Werbecke endeuouring to ſteale ſecreatlye out1498 Perkin VVerbecke taken. of the lande, was taken againe by hys kéepers, and by the

Kings commandement caſt in the Tower of London, and after he was ſhewed in Westminster, and in Cheape, ſtocked onAnno reg. 14 ſcaffoldes to the great wonderment of many people.
            This yeare all the Gardens which had bene continued time out of mind without More gate of London, wer deſtroyed, and of them was made a plaine fielde for Archers to ſhoote in. The Engliſhe Merchants were receyued into Antwarpe, with general proceſſion, after they had bene long abſent from thence.
            This yeare was a great drought, by reaſon whereof a loade of Hay which was before time ſolde at London for fiue ſhillings, was this yeare ſolde for ten ſhillings or twelue ſhillings more.
            This yeare one Sebaſtian Gabato a Genoas ſonne, borne in Bristow, profeſſing himſelfe to be experte in knowledge of the circute of the worlde and Ilandes of the ſame, as by his Charts and other reaſonable demonſtrations he ſhewed, cauſed the King to man and victual a ſhippe at Bristow to ſearch for an Ilande whiche he knewe to be repleniſhed with rich commodities: in the ſhip diuerſe Merchauntes of London aduentured ſmal ſtockes, and in the company of this ſhippe, ſayled alſo out of Bristow thrée or foure ſmal ſhippes fraught with ſlight and groſſe wares, as courſe cloth, Caps, Laces, pointes, and ſuch other, ſir Humfrey Gilbert knight, in his booke intituled a diſcouerie for a newe paſſage to Cataia, writeth thus, Sebaſtian Gabato, by hys perſonall experience and trauaile, hath ſet forth and diſcribed this paſſage in his Chartes, whiche are yet to be ſéene in ye quéenes Maieſties priuie Gallerie, at White Hall, who was ſent to make this diſcouerie by King Henrie the ſeuenth, and entred the ſame fret, affirming, y• he ſayled very far Weſtward, wyth a quarter of the North, on the Northſide of Terrade Labrador, the eleuenth of June, vntil he came to the ſeptentrial latitude of 67½ degrées, and finding the ſeas ſtil open, ſayde, y• he might, & would haue gone to Cataia, if the iminitie of the Maiſter and Mariners, had not bene.
            
               
               Thomas Bradburie, Stephen Iennins, the 28. of Sept.
               
                  Sherifes. Maior. A Shoemakers ſonne fained to be the Earleof VVarvvike.
            
            
               Sir Iohn Perciuall Tayler, the 28. of October.
            
            
               A Shoemakers ſonne borne in Byſhopſgate ſtreete of London, was hanged at Saint Thomas Watrings on Shroue Tueſday, for naming himſelfe to be Edward Earle of Warwike, ſonne to George Duke of Clarence, which Edward Earle of Warwike was then (and had bin all the raigne of this King) kept ſe
               
                  •
               ret priſoner in the Tower of London.
            
            The foure and twentith of February, the Kings thirde1499 Anno reg. 15 ſonne was Chriſtned within the Friers Church at Greenewich, by the name of Edward.
            
            The Gaſgoyne Wine was ſolde at London for forty ſhillingsVVine, ſalt and vvheate cheap. the Tunne, and much left to the Shipmen for freight, the plentie was ſo great.
            A quarter of Wheate foure ſhillings, and bay ſalte foure pence the buſhell.
            This yeare was the Brewers houſe called the Swanne, adioyning to Saint Antonyes, taken downe, for the enlarging of the ſayd Church, which was after new builded at the coſts of Sir Iohn Tate late Maior.
            
               Iames Wilford Tayler: Richard Brond, the 28. of Septem.
               
                  Sherifes. Maior. Perkin vverbeck hanged.
            
            
               Nicholas Alwin Mercer, the 28. of October.
            
            The xvj. of Nouember, was arraigned Perkin Warbecke, and thrée other, the which Perkin, and Iohn a Water, Maior of Corfe, were executed at Tiborne, the xxiij. of Nouember.
            The xxvitj. of Nouember Edward Plantagenet Earle ofThe Earle of VVarvvike beheaded. 
               Warwike, ſonne to George Duke of Clarence, being about the age of xxiitj. yeares, was beheaded at Tower hill, and buryed at Birſam by his aunceſters Shortly after, Walter Blewet and Thomas Aſtwoode, were hanged at Tiborne.
            
            In the beginning of May, the King and Quéene ſayled to1500 The King and Queene ſayled to Calleis. 
               Caleis, where they met with the Duke of Burgoigne, they returned agayne in June.
            In July, the Towne of Babram in Norffolke was brente. Edward the Kings thirde ſonne dyed, at a place of the

Biſhop of Eely, called Hatfield in Hartfordſhire, and was buryed at Westminster.
            
            This yeare was a great death in London, and other partesAnno. reg. 16 of this Realme.
            
               Iohn Hawes: William Stede, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               William Remington Fiſhmonger, the 28. of October.
            
            The xxx. day of January, was brought vnto the Grey Friers the corpſe of the Lorde Denham, Treaſurer of England, and was there buryed in the South ſide of the Quéere.
            In the moneth of May, was a royall Tourney of Lords and Knightes within the Tower of London before the King.
            The King buylded new his Mannour at Sheene, and named
                  Arnold. Smart. 1501 Richmond and Baynards Caſtell. Anno reg. 17. it Richmond, for that ſo many notable and rich Jewels were there brente, and the ſame coſt no ſmall ſummes the building new. He alſo new builded Baynards Castell in London, and repaired Greenewich.
            
            
               Edmond de la Poole Duke of Suffolke, and Richarde hys brother, ſhipped at Harwich, & departed ſecretly into France.
            
            The fourth of October, Katherine, daughter to the King of Spayne, landed at Plimmouth.
            
            
               Lawrence Ailmer: Henry Hede, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Iohn Shaw Goldſmith, the 28. of October.
            
            This Iohn Shaw cauſed his bréethren the Aldermen to ride from the Guildhall vnto the water ſide when he went to Westminster to be preſented in y• Exchequer. He alſo cauſed the kitchens and other houſes of office to be builded at y• Guildhall, where ſince that time the Maiors feaſtes hathThe Maiors feaſt firſt kept at the Guild hall. bin kept, which before had bin in y• Grocers or Tailors hal.
            The xiiij of Nouember, Prince Arthur was married inPrince Arthur married. 
               S. Paules Church at London, vnto Katherine, daughter to Ferdinando King of Spayne, which Arthur the ſecond of AprillPrince Arthur deceaſſed. 1502 deceaſſed at Ludlow, and was buryed at Worcester.
            
            About Eaſter, all the Grey Friers in Englande changed their habite, for where of long time before they had vſed toVVollen cloth tvvo shillings the brodyarde. weare browne Ruſſet of foure ſhillings, ſixe ſhillings, and eight ſhillings the yard, now they were compelled to weare

Ruſſet of two ſhillings the yard, and not aboue, which was brought to paſſe by the Friers of Greenewich.
            
            This yeare, the dike called Turnemill brooke, with all theDikes of London clenſed. courſe of Fléete dike, were ſo ſcoured downe to the Thames, that boates with fiſh and fewell were rowed vp to Holborne Bridge, as they of old time had bin accuſtomed, which was a great commoditie to all the inhabitantes in that parte of London. Alſo the Tower néere to the blacke Friers was taken downe by the commandement of the Maior.
            The ſixth of May, Sir Iames Tirell Knight, Lieutenant of Guiſnes Caſtell, and Sir Iohn Windham Knighte, were beheaded on the Tower hill, and a Shipman was hanged and quartered at Tiborne, all for ayding Edmond de la Poole Earle of Suffolke.
            
            Thys yeare, were brought vnto the Kyng thrée men takenMen brought from the nevv found Ilands. in the new found Ilands, by Sebaſtian Gabato, before named in Anno 1468. theſe men were clothed in Beaſtes Skinnes, and eate raw Fleſh, but ſpake ſuch a language,Anno reg. 18. as no man could vnderſtand them, of the which thrée men, two of them were ſéene in the Kings Court at Westminster two yeares after, clothed like Engliſhmen, and could not bée diſcerned from Engliſhmen.
            
            
               Henry Keble: Nicholas Nines, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Bartholmew Rede Goldſmith, the 28. of October.
            
            The Chappell of our Lady, aboue the Eaſt ende of the high Aultare of Westminster Churche, with a Tauerne calledKing Henry the ſeauenths Chappell at VVeſtminſter. the white Roſe néere adioyning, was taken downe▪ in whiche place, a moſt beautifull Chappell was then forthwyth begonne to be buylded by Kyng Henrye the ſeauenth, the charges whereof (as I haue bene credibly informed) amounted to the ſumme of fourtéene thouſande pounds.
            
               Elizabeth Quéene of England, wife to Kyng Henry theQueene Elizabeth deceaſſed. ſeauenth, dyed of Childbed in the Tower of London on the twelfth of February, and was ſolemnely buryed at Westminster.
            
            
               King Henry the ſeuenth being himſelfe a brother of theSixe Kings of England breethren vvith the Taylors Company in London, before they vvere entituled Merchant Taylors. 1503 Taylors company in London, as diuers other his predeceſſors Kings before him had bin (to wéete, Richard the third, Edward the fourth, Henry the ſixth, Henry the fifth, Henry the fourth, and Richard the ſecond. Alſo of Dukes, eleuen, Earles xxviij. and Lords xiviij.) he now gaue to them the name and title of Merchant Taylors, as a name of worſhip to endure for euer.
            This yeare, about the later end of March, the prior of thePrior of Shene murthered. Charterhouſe of Shene was murthered in a cell of his owne houſe, by meanes of one Goodwine, a Monke of the ſame Cloyſter, and his adherents artificers of London.
            
            On the xxv. of June at the Biſhop of Saliſburies place in Fléeteſtréete, was the noble Prince Henry the ſecond, ſonne of King Henry the ſeauenth, aſſured in matrimonie to the Lady Katherine, late the wife of that excellent Prince Arthure.
            
            The fifth of Auguſt deceaſſed Sir Reginald Bray Knight, Treaſurer of the Kings warres, and was buryed at Windeſore.
            
            The eyght of Auguſt, the King of Scottes marryed Margaret,
               Margaret the Kings daughter maryed. the eldeſt daughter of King Henry the ſeuenth.
            A drye Sommer, hauing no notable rayne from Whitſontide,Anno reg. 9. to the later Lady day in harueſt.
            
               Chriſtopher Hawes: Robert Wittes, the 28. of Septemb.
               Sherifes.
            
            
               Thomas Granger, the 11. of Nouember.
            
            
               Sir William Capell Draper, the 28. of October.
               Maior.
            
            The xiij. of Nouember, was holden within the pallaceSergeants feaſt. of the Archbiſhop of Canterbury, at Lambeth, the Sergeants feaſt, where dined the King and all his nobles, and vpon the ſame day, Thomas Granger, newly choſen Sheriffe of London, was preſented before the Barons of the Kings Exchequer, there to take his oth, and after went with the Maior vnto the ſame feaſt, whiche ſaued him money in hys purſſe, for if that day that feaſt had not bin kepte, he muſt haue feaſted the Maior, Aldermen, and others Worſhipfull

of the Citie. This Feaſt was kept at the charge of tenne learned men, newly admitted to be Sergeants to the Kings law, whoſe names were, Robert Bridnell, William Greuill, Thomas Marow, George Edgore, Iohn Moore, Iohn Cutler, Thomas Elyot, Lewes Pollard, Guy Palmis, William Fayrefax.
            
            On the xxj. day of Nouember, at night, beganne a perillousFire on London Bridge. fire at the ſigne of the Panyer vpon London Bridge, néere to Saint Magnus Church, where ſixe tenements were brent ere the ſame could be quenched.
            The ſeauenth of January, were certayne houſes conſumedFire. with fire againſte Saint Butolphes Churche in Thamis ſtréete.
            The xxv of January, beganne a Parliament at Westminſter,
               Parliament. of the which was choſen ſpeaker for the commons Maiſter Edmond Dudley.
            
            The xxvij. of March, was an houſe brent againſte Sainte
               1504 
               Martins le grand in London.
            
            A newe Coyne was by Parliament appoynted, that isNevv Coyne. to ſay, Grote, and halfe Grote, which bare but halfe faces: the ſame time alſo was coyned a Grote, whiche was in value twelue pence, but of thoſe were but few coyned.
            This yeare, Alume, which many yeares had bin ſold forAlume deere. ſixe ſhillings an hundred, and lower, aroſe to fiue Nobles an hundred, and after to foure Markes &c.
            The forenamed Sir William Capell, Maior of London, cauſed in euery ward of London a Cage with a paire of Stocks,
                  Anno reg. 20 Cages and Stockes ordeyned. Hunſditch paued. Sherifes. Maior.
                therein to puniſh vagabonds. Alſo, he cauſed all Hunſditch to be ouerpaued, the which many yeares before lay full noyouſly and perilouſly for all trauellers that way.
            
               Roger Acheley: William Browne, the 28. of Septemb.
            
            
               Iohn Winger Grocer, the 28. of October.
            
            About Chriſtmas, the more parte of the priſoners of the Marſhalſey in Southwarke brake out, and many of them béeingPriſoners of the Marshalſey brake out. ſhortlye after taken, were put to execution, ſpeciallye thoſe which had layne for Felouie or Treaſon.
            
               The xv. of Aprill, a money maker, one of the Coyners of1505 the Tower, was drawne to Tiborne, and there hanged.
            There was great ſtrife in the Guild hall about chooſingAnno reg. 21. of the Sheriffe, for the Taylors woulde haue had Mayſter Fitz Williams Tailor, and the other commons choſe Roger Groue Grocer.
            
               Richard Shore: Roger Groue, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Thomas Knieſworth Fiſhmonger, the 28. of October.
            
            This Thomas Kneiſworth, of his owne goodes, builded the Conduit at Biſhopſgate. He gaue to the FiſhmongersConduit at Bishopſgate builded. certayne tenements, for the whiche they be bound to finde four Schollers that ſtudie Arte, two at Oxford, and two at Cambridge, euery of them foure pound the yeare. They bée bound alſo to giue to twelue aged poore people of their company, to euery one of them at Barthelmewtide a winter garment for euer. Alſo to giue to the priſoners of Ludgate and Newgate, euery yeare forty ſhillings &c.
            The fifth of January in the night, the Kings ChamberRichmond on fire. was fiered at Richmond, the which might not be quenched, till many curteyns, carpets, rich beds, and much other ſtuffe was conſumed.
            Through great tempeſt of wind being at y• Southweſt,The King of Caſtile landed in England. which began the xv. of January, and continued till the ſire and twenty of y• ſame, Phillip King of Castile, and his wife, were weather driuen, and landed at Falmouth in England, asFrancis Guicciar. they were paſſing on the. xvj. of January out of Flanders toward Spayne, who were honourably receiued by the Earle of Arundell at y• Kings appointmēt, with thrée C. horſes, all by torch light. This tēpeſt was ſtrange to many mē, bycauſe y•
               VVeather cock of Paules blovvn dovvne. violence thereof had blowne downe the Egle of braſſe from the ſpire of Paules Church in London, and in the falling, the ſame Egle brake and battered the blacke Eagle, whiche hong for a ſigne in Paules Churchyard, that time being but low houſes, where now is the Schole of Paules.
            About the end of March, Edmond de la Poole was taken in Flanders, and conneyed through the Citie to the Tower

of London, and there left priſoner.
            In the beginning of July, a Galory newe buylded atGalery at Richmont fell. Anno reg. 22. 
               Richmond wherein the King and the Prince his ſonne had walked not one houre before, it fell ſodeinly downe aboute midnight, but no chriſtian man periſhed thereby.
            
               William Copingar: Thomas Iohnſon, the 28. of Septem.
               Sherifes.
            
            Theſe Sheriffes being on the morrow after Michaelmas day by the Maior and Aldermen preſented before the Barons of the Exchequer, only William Copingar was admitted and ſworne, but Thomas Iohnſon they woulde not admitte, till they knew farther of the Kings pleaſure. The x. of October, a commandement was brought from the King to the Lord Maior, that he ſhoulde cauſe an election to bée made for a new Sheriffe, at which day, came into the Guild Hall Mayſter Edmond Dudley, the Kings Preſident, and there ſhewed the Kings letters, that the commons ſhoulde name for the Kings pleaſure, William Fitz William to bée Sheriffe for the yeare enſuing, which with much difficulty, at length was granted, which William Fitz Williams kept his feaſt the ſixtéenth day of October.
            
               Richard Haddon Mercer by the Kings commandemente,
               Maior. 
               the 28. of October. On S. Thomas day at night, afore Chriſtmas, was a Bakers houſe in Warwike Lane brent, with the Miſtres of y• houſe, ij. women ſeruants, & iij. other.
            In Lent, the King deliuered all Priſoners in London
               1057 Anno reg. 23. Sherifes▪
                which lay for the debt of fortie ſhillings, or vnder.
            
               William Butler: Thomas Kirkeby Merchant Taylor, the 28. of September.
            
            
               William Browne Mercer, the 28. of Octo. Who deceaſſed,Maior. and forthwith Sir Lawrence Aylmer Draper was choſen & ſworne, and went home in a grey cloke, with y• ſword borne afore him, on the xxvij. day of March. Item, he tooke his oth at y• Tower, & kept no feaſt. William Capell was put in ſuite1508 VVilliam Capel ſued by the K. Thomas kneſvvorth impriſoned. by the King for things by him done in his Maioraltie. Alſo Tho. Kneiſworth that had bin Maior of London, and his Sheriffes, were ſent to the Kings Bench till they were put to

their fine of fouretéene hundred pound. In the moneth of June, the Citie of Norwich was ſore periſhed, and néere conſumedNorvvich on 
                     ••
                  re. Anno reg. 24. with fire, that began in a Frenchmans houſe named Peter Iohnſon, a Surgeon, in the Pariſh of Saint George.
            
            
               Thomas Exmew: Richard Smith, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Stephen Genings Merchant Taylour, the 28. of October.
            
            This Stephen Genings Maior of London, founded a frée Grammer Schole at Wlfrunehampton in Staffordſhire, wythFreeſchoole at VVlfrunehampton. conuenient lodgings for the Mayſter and Uſher in the ſame place where he was borne. He gaue Lands ſufficient for the mayntenance, leauing the ouerſight therof to the Merchant Taylors in London, who haue hitherto iuſtly dealt in that matter, and alſo augmented the building there. Mayſter Nichols, who marryed the only daughter and heire of the aforeſayd Stephen Genings, gaue Landes to maynteyne the pauements of that Towne. Alſo, Iohn Leneſon Eſquier, about Anno 1556. gaue Lands, where of four pound ſhould be dealt euery yeare, on good Friday, to the poore people of Wilfrunehampton, and ſixe and twenty Shillings eyght pence yéerely, towards the reparation of the Church there.
            Moreouer, aboute Anno 1566. Sir Iohn Lighe a Prieſt,Iohn Ligh of VVlfrunehampton, his rare example of Charitie. whiche had ſerued in that. Churche there, the ſpace of thréeſcore yeares, for fiue pounds, ſixe Shillings eyght pence the yeare, without any other augmentation of his liuing, who would neuer take any Benefice, or other preferment, gaue twentye pounds, to purchaſe twenty Shillings the yeare Lands, the ſame to be giuen yearely for euer to the poore of Wlfrunehampton vpon good Friday, and twelue pounds thirtéene Shillings fourpence, to purchaſe a Marke a yeare Lande, the ſame to be giuen to the poore of Chifnall, in the Countie of Salope, where the ſayde Lighe was borne.
            This man liued nigh one hundred yeares. He beſtowed beſides his owne laboure whiche was greate (in bearing of ſtone &c.) aboue twentye pounde on the high wayes about that Towne of Wlfrunehampton.
            
            This Towne of Wlfrunehampton, is now corruptly called

               
                  〈◊〉
               , for in Anno 996. in King Etheldreds tyme,VVlfrunehāpton, corruptly called VVolnerhampton. who wrote himſelfe Rex Angl
                     •
                  rum & princops Northumbrerum Olimpiade tertia regni ſui, for ſo he wrote the count of his reigne then, which was the fiftéenth yeare) it was thenEx Carta Regia. 
               
                  •
               alled Hampton, as appeareth by an old Charter written by the Notarie of the ſayd King Etheldred, whiche Charter I haue ſéene and read: and for that a noble woman named Wlfrune a Widow, ſometyme wife to Althelme Duke of Northampton, did obteyne of the ſayd King to giue Landes vnto the Churche there whiche ſhe had founded, the ſayde Towne tooke the addition of the ſame Wlfrune, for that Charter ſo nameth hir Wlfrune, and the Towne Hampton.
            
            
               Sir Lawrence Aylmer and his two Sheriffes were putSir Lavvrence Aylmer, and his Sheriffes. to their fine to the King of a thouſand pound.
            This yeare, was finiſhed the goodly Hoſpitall of the Sauoy
               1509 Smart. Hoſpitall of the Sauoy. néere vnto Charing Croſſe, which was a notable foundation for the poore, done by King Henry the ſeauenth, vnto the which he purchaſed and gaue Lands for the releeuing of one hundred poore people.
            This was firſt named Sauoy place, by Peter Earle of Sauoy,
               Rec. of Canterbury Church. Father to Boniface Archbiſhop of Canterbury, about the nine and twentith yeare of King Henry the thirde, who made the ſayde Peter Earle of Richmond. This houſe belonged ſince to the Duke of Lancaster, and at this tyme was conuerted to an Hoſpitall, ſtill reteyning the firſt name of Sauoy.
            
            King Henry alſo buylded thrée houſes of Franciſcane Friers, whiche are called Obſeruants, at Richmond, Greenewich, and Newarke, and thrée other of that familie of Franciſcane Friers which are called conuentuals, at Canterbury, Newcastell, and Southhampton.
            
            This noble Prince King Henry dyed at Richmond the
                  Smart. Henry the vij. deceaſſed. 
               
                  ••
               ij. of Aprill, when he had reigned thrée and twenty yeares and eyght monethes, and was buryed at Westminster in the 
                  〈◊〉
                Chappell which he had cauſed to be builded, on the eleuenth of May.
            
               He left iſſue Henry Prince of Wales, which ſuccéeded in the Kingdome, Lady Margaret Quéene of Scottes, and Lady Mary promiſed to Charles King of Castile.
            
            The Altare and Sepulture of the ſame King Henry theSepulture of Henry the ſeauenth. ſeuenth, wherein he now reſteth, in his new Chappell at Westminster was made and finiſhed in the yeare of ours Lorde 1519. by one Peter T. a Paynter of the Citie of Florence, for the which he receyued one thouſande pounde ſterling for the whole ſtu
                  ••
               e and workemāſhip, at the hands of the Kings exequetors, Richard Biſhop of Winchester, Richard
               
               Exequetors to Henry the ſeauenth. 
               Fitz Iames, Biſhop of London, Thomas
                Biſhop of Dureſme, Iohn
                Biſhop of Rochester, Thomas
                Duke of Norffolke, Treaſurer of Englande, Edwarde
                Earle of Worcester the Kings Chamberlayne, Iohn F. Knighte, chiefe Juſtice of the Kings Benche, Robert R. Knight, chiefe Juſtice of the Common Place &c.
         
         
            
            King Henry the eyght.
            
            
               
                  HEnry the eyght, at the age
               Anno. reg. 1. of eyghtéene yeares, begā his raigne the xxij. of Aprill, Anno. 15
                  •
               9. Of perſonage he was▪ tall and mighty, in witte and memorie excellent, of ſuche maieſtie with humanitie, as was comely in ſuch a Prince. TheThe King married. The King and Queene crovvned. third of June, he marryed Lady Katherine his firſt wife, who had bin late the wife of Prince Arthur deceaſſed.
            The ſixth of June▪ 
               Iohn Darby 
               
                  •
               owyer▪ 
               Iohn Smith Carpenter, Iohn S
                     •
                  mpſon 
               
                  •
               ulle
                  •
                
               
                  •
                
               
                  •
               ingleaders of falſe 
                  •
               neſ
                  •
               es in London r
                  •
               de about the Citie with their faces to the Horſſe taytes, and papers on their heads, and were ſet 
                  ••
                the Pillorie in Cor
                  •
               ehill▪ and after brought agayne to 
                  •
               awgate, where they dyed all within ſeauen dayes after for very ſhame.
            On Midſomer day, the King and Quéene were crowned 
                  ••
                
               Westminster.
            
            The nine and twentith of June, the moſt noble and verrtuous Princeſſe Margaret▪
                Counteſſe of Richmond 
               
                  •
                
               Darbye▪
               
               
mother to King Henry the ſeauenth, and Grandmother to King Henry the eyght, dyed at Westminster, whoſe noble Actes and moſt charitable déedes all hir life executed, can not be expreſſed in a ſmall volume.
            The ſeuentéenth of July, Edmond Dudley was arraigned at the Guild Hall of London, and after Michaelmas, Sir Richard Empſon was arraigned and condemned at Northhampton, and ſent agayne to the Tower of London.
            
            
               George Monex, Iohn Doget Mer Taylor▪ the 28. of Sept.
               Sherifes.
            
            
               Thomas Bradbury Mercer, the 28. of October.
            
            
               Sir William Capell Draper, the 12▪ of Ianuary.
               Maiors.
            
            The one and twentith of January, began a Parliament at Westminster.
            
            In February was a great fire in Thames ſtreete, néere vnto Wooll Key, which began in a Flaxe wiues houſe, and did much harine.
            The xx. of Aprill, a peace was proclaymed betwixte England and France, during the 
                  ••
               ues of Henry the eyght King of England, and Lewes the French King, but it laſted not lo
                  ••
               
               ▪
            
            
               Doctor Colet Deane of Paules, erected a frée Schoole in1510 Paules Church yard in London, and committed the ouerſight thereof to the Mayſter and Wardens of the Mercers,Paules Schoole. Anno. reg. 2. bycauſe himſelfe was 
                  •
               o
                  ••
               e in ▪
               London▪
                and was ſonne to Henry Colet Mercer, ſometime Maior of London.
            
            On Midſomer 
                  •
               igh
                  •
                the King came pe
                  •••
               ly into Cheape in one of the 
                  •
               oates of his 
                  〈◊〉
               , and on Saint Peters night, the King and Quéene came riding royally to the Kings head in Cheape, there to behold the watch of the Citie▪ o
                  •
                Sir Richard Empſon Knight, and Edmond Dudley 
               
                  ••
               
               
               
                  •
               uier,Empſon and Dudley beheaded. Edward Hall.
                who had bin gr
                  ••••
                C
                  ••••
               ay 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  ••
                the late Kyng Henry the ſeauenth, were beheaded at the Tower hill the ſeauenth of Auguſt, Richarde Empſon was buryed at the White Friers, and Edmonde Dudley at the Blacke, whoſe attacheme
                  •••
                
               
                  •
                was thoughte 
                  ••
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                procured by the malice of the 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  •
               h
                  •
                
               
                  •
               wyt
                  •
                they 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  •••
               e

were offended, or elſe to ſhift the noyſe of the ſtreight execution of penall Statutes in the late Kings dayes.
            This Edmond Dudley, in the tyme of his empriſonmēt in the Tower of London, compiled one notable Booke, whiche he entituled, The Tree of common wealth, a coppye whereofThe tree of common vvelth a Booke. I haue giuen to the right honourable Earle of Leycester now liuing.
            The xx
                  •
               . of September, William Fitz Williams, MerchātElection of a Sheriffe. Taylor, was agayne the ſeconde time choſen Sheriffe for the yeare following, whereof the ſayde William hauyng knowledge, abſented himſelfe, and woulde not be founde, wherevpon, the time drawing néere that preſentation muſt be made of the newe Sheriffes, they in a full Court of the Maior and Aldermen, with aſſent of the common Counſayle being preſent, in ſolemne and due forme, cauſed him to be thrice called, and commanded to appeare vpon payne that ſhould fall thereof, but he would in no wiſe appeare, nor any other for him, wherefore in auoyding the ieoperdie of forfeyture of their liberties if they ſhould not prepare an hable man of themſelues to be Sheriffe with that other which the Maior yéerely chooſeth, they called a new aſſemble of the commons, and then choſe Iohn Reſt Alderman,Nevv election of a Sheriffe. and Grocer, for the other Sheriffe, the whiche, with Iohn Milborne his fellow before choſen by the Maior, was preſented before the Barons of the Kings Exchequer, and there admitted, and ſhortly after, for ſo much as the ſayde William Fitz William would not ſubmit himſelfe to the authoritie of the Citie, he was diſfranchiſed, and diſmiſſed ofVVilliam Fitz VVilliams diſfranchiſed. his Aldermanſhip, and 
                  •
               ined at a thouſand Markes to bée le
                  •
               yed of hys goodes and Cattayles within the Citie.
            
               Iohn Milborne: Iohn Reſt, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Henry Kebell Grocer, the 28. of October.
            
            The eyghtenth of Nouember, was holden the Seriants feaſt at the Biſhop of Elyes in Oldborne, the new SeriantsSeri
                     •
                  ants Feaſt. were Mayſter Newport, Newdigate, Fitzherbert, Iohn Brooke, Pigote, Cariell, Brooke of Bristow, Palme Senior,
               
               
and Mayſter Roo.
            
            
               Henry the Kings firſt ſonne was borne on New yearesPrince borne. day, but dyed on Saint Mathies day next following.
            In the monethes of June and July, the Scottes made ſundrye1511 Anno reg. 3. entryes vpon the borderes of England, with Shippes well manned and victualled, who kept the narrow Seas (againſt the Portingales as they ſayd) wherevpon, Sir Edward Haward Lord Admirall of England, and Lord Thomas Haward, ſonne and heyre to the Earle of Surrey, wente toAndrevv Barton, a Scottish Pirate. the Seas by the King of Englands commaundement, wyth certayne Shippes, who about the end of July, mette with the ſayde Scottes, and gaue vnto them a ſharpe battayle, wounded theyr Captayne Andrew Barton, whereof he dyed, ſlew many of his men, and tooke many priſoners, with two Shippes, the one called the Lion, the other a Barke, called Ienny Perwine, which Shippes were brought toShippes taken from the Scots. 
               Blacke Wall the ſeconde of Auguſt, and the Scottes to London, where they were kept as priſoners in the Biſhop of Yorkes Place, and after ſent into Scotland.
            
            
               Nicholas Shelton: Thomas Mirfine, the 28. of Septemb.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Roger Acheley Draper, the 28. of October.
            
            The fiftéenth of January, began the Parliamente at Westminster, Sir Robert Sheffeld Knight, ſometime RecorderParliament. of London, was ſpeaker for the Commons.
            During this Parliamente, in the moneth of March, a Yeoman of the Crowne, one of the Kings Gard, namedNevvbolt hanged. 
               Newbolt, ſlew within the Pallace of Westminster a ſernant of Mayſter Willoughbyes, for the whiche offence, the Kyng1512 cōmanded to be ſet vp a new payre of Gallowes in ye ſame place where the ſayde ſeruante left his life, and vppon the ſame, the ſayd Newbold was hanged, and there remayned on the Gallowes by the ſpace of two dayes.
            King Henry ſente the Lorde Darcy with a goodly companyAnno. reg. 4. of men into Spayne, to ayde the King hys Father in law againſt the Moores, but ere he arriued, a peace was concluded betwéene them.
            
               In Auguſt, Sir Edward Poynings, accompanyed with the Lorde C
                     •
                  nton, and diuers other, was ſente into Gelderland with fiftéene hundred Archers, to ayde the Prince of Castell, at the requeſt of Margaret, Ducheſſe of Sauoy, and Regent of Flanders.
            
            
               Edward Haward Lord Admirall of England, through hys too much hardineſſe, was ſlayne before Breſt, in Britayne, after whome, hys brother Thomas Haward was made Admiral.
            About the moneth of Auguſt, the Nauyes of England and France méeting at Briteine Bay, fought a cruell battayle, in the which, the Regent, or Soueraigne of England, and a Carike of Brest in France, being crappeled togither, were burned, and their Captaynes with their men all drowned, the Engliſh Captaine was Sir Thomas Kneuet, who had with him Sir Iohn Carew, and ſeauen hundred men. In the Frenche Carrike was Sir Piers Morgan, with nine hundred men, which were all brent or drowned.
            
               Robert Holdernes, Robert Fenrother, the 28 of Septemb.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               William Copinger Fiſhmonger, the 28. of October.
            
            
               Richard Hadden, Mercer.
            
            The Stéeple and Lantarne of Bow Church in Cheape,Bovv Steeple builded. was this yeare finiſhed.
            By Friers this yeare, a great parte of the Kings PallaceKings Pallace at VVeſtminſier brent. Sca. Tempo.
                of Westminster, and the Chappell in the Tower of London, and many other places in England were brent.
            In a Parliament at Westminster, was granted to the king two fiftéenes, and four demies, and head money of euery1513 Duke tenne Markes, an Earle fiue pound, a Lorde four pound, a Knight four Marke, and euery man valued atGreat ſubſedie. eyght hundred pound in goods, to pay four Markes, and ſo after that rate, till him that was valued at fortie ſhillings, payd twelue pence, and euery mā that tooke fortie ſhillings wages xij. d. & euery mā & womā at xv. yeres or vpward 4. d.
            
            In Aprill, the King ſent a great Nauie of twelue thouſand men to the Sea.
            On May euen, Edmond de la Poole was beheaded on

the Tower hill, his brother Richard was after ſlayne in France.
            
            King Henry hauing ſent ouer a great and puiſſant ArmieKing Henry beſeegeth Turvvyne. into France to beſéege the Citie of Turwine, himſelfe accompanyed with many noble men, and vj. C. Archers of his Gard, all in white gabberdines, tooke his Ship at Douer on the laſt of June in the morning. When the King was ſhipped and made Sayle, all his armie followed, to the number of foure hundred Shippes, and the winde was ſo, that they were brought the ſame night into Caleis Hauen.
            On the nexte morrowe, being the firſt of July, Thomas Lord Howard, Admirall of England, landed at Whitſandbay, and entred, ſpoyled, and brent the Towne, and returned to his Shippes. The xxj. of July, the King paſſed out of the Towne of Caleis in goodly array of battell, and tooke ye field, and notwithſtanding that the fore-ward of the Kings great Armie were before Turwine, yet the King of his owne battayle made thrée battayles: the Lord Liſle Marſhall of the hoſt, was Captayne of the fore-warde, and vnder him thrée thouſand men: Sir Richard Carew with thrée hundred men, was the right hand wing to the fore-ward, and the Lorde Darcy with thrée C. men, wing on the left hand. The ſcourers and fore-riders of this battayle, were the Northumberland men on light geldings. The Earle of Eſſex was Lieutenant Generall of the Speares, and Sir Iohn Pechy was vicegouernour of the Horſemen. Before the King, wente viij. C. Almaynes all in a plump: after them, came the Standert with the redde Dragon, next the Banner of our Lady, and nexte of the Trinitie, vnder the whiche were all the Kings houſhold. Then went the Banner of the Armes of England, borne by Sir Henry Guildford, vnder which Banner was the King himſelfe, with diuers noble men, and other, to the number of thrée thouſand mē. The Duke of Buckingham, with vj. C. men; was on ye Kings left hand. On the right hād was Sir Edw. Poynings, with other vj. C. mē egall wt the Almains. The L. of Burgainie wt viij. C. mē, was wing

on the right hande: ſir William Compton with the retinue of the Byſhoppe of Winchester Fox,
                and Maiſter Thomas Wolſey, afterward Cardinall, of eighte hundred, was in manner of a rerewarde: ſir Anthony Oughtred and ſir Iohn Neuell with the Kings ſpeares that followed, were foure hundred, and ſo the whole armye was eleauen thouſande and thrée hundred men. The Maiſter of the ordināce ſet forth the Kings artillerie, as Faulcons, Slyngs, Bombards, powder, ſtones, bowes, arrowes, and ſuche other things neceſſarye for the fielde, the whole number of the carriages were thirtéene hundred, the leaders and driuers of the ſame were ninetéene hundred men. The King laye the firſte nighte betwixte Calkewell and Freydon: the nexte night before the Caſtel of Gwiſnes at Bocarde: the next night he laye beſide Arde a good waye wythout the Engliſhe pale, & when he was a little beyonde Dernome, there came a greate hoſte of French men, that purpoſed to haue ſette vpon him: but the Kyng with his hoſte kepte their ground, and ſhotte their greate ordinaunce, wherewyth the aray of the French men▪ was broken.
            The fourth of Auguſt, the King in good order of battell came before the Citie of Turwine, and planted his ſiege in warlike wiſe.
            The eleuenth day of Auguſt, Maximilian the Emperor came to King Henrye, who was receiued with greate triumph, betwéene Aire and the campe.
            The Emperor and all his ſeruants were reteyned with the King of Englande in wages by the daye, euery perſon according to his degrée, and the Emperor as the kings ſouldioure ware a Croſſe of Saint George with a Roſe, and ſo hée and all his traine came to the Kings Campe the thirtéenth of Auguſt, and there was receyued wyth greate magnificence.
            The thrée and twentith of Auguſt the towne of Turwine
               Turvvine yeelded to K. Henry was giuen ouer vnto the Kyng of England, wyth condition, that all men in the Towne mighte ſafely paſſe wyth horſſe

and harneſſe, and ſo on the foure and twentith of Auguſte there came oute of the towne foure thou
                  •
               and men of warre and moewell appointed, whereof ſixe hundred were well horſed, theyr ſtandardes borne before them.
            The ſixe and twentith of Auguſt, the King remoued to Singate, and there it was agréed, that the walles, gates, bulwarkes, and towers of Turwine ſhoulde be defaced, razed and caſte downe: of whyche concluſion, the EmperoureTurvviue raced and brent. ſent word to Saint Omers and to Aire. whych being ioyous of that tydings, ſente thither Pioners, and ſo they and the Engliſhe Pioners brake down the wals, gates, and towers, and filled the ditch, and fiered the towne, except the Cathedrall Churche and the Palaice, and all the ordinaunce was by the King ſente to Aire to be kept to his vſe.
            After this, it was concluded, that the King in perſon ſhoulde laye hys ſiege to the Citie of Turney, wherefore hée ſente forwarde thrée goodly battayles: the firſte was conducted by the Earle of Shrewſburie: the ſeconde battell led the King hymſelfe, wyth whome was the Emperour: The rerewarde was conducted by the Lorde Harbert, and ſo the firſte nyghte they laye in campe beſide Aire.
            
            The fourtéenth of September the King and hys armye came to Beatwin, and on the morrowe paſſed forwarde, and came to a ſtraite, where was a Forde, whiche with greate difficultie they paſſed: and the next day they paſſed a bridge called Fount Anandiew, &c.
            
            The one and twentith daye of September the Kyng remoued hys Campe towarde Tourney, and lodged wythin thrée myles of the Citie, the whyche nighte came to hym the Emperour and the Palſgraue, the people aboutKing Henry be
                  
                     •
                  ieged Turney. 
               Tourney were with theyr gòodes fledde to the Citie and yet the Citie hadde no menne of warre to defende it, but wyth multitude of Inhabitantes the Citie was well repleniſhed.
            The Kyng came in aray of battell before Tourney, planted

his ordinaunce rounde abonte the Citie, dyuers frenches were caſte and rampiers made, ſo that no Citizens coulde iſſue oute, nor no ayde come to them. Wherevpon at length, to wéete, on the nyne and twentith of September the Citie was yéelded.
            Then the King appointed the Lorde 
                  
                     •
                  iſle, the Lorde Burgeyny and the Lorde Willoughby to take poſſeſſion, whyche wyth ſixe thouſande menne entered the Citie and tooke the market place and the walles, and then Mayſter Thomas Wolſey the Kings Almoner called before him all the Citizens, and ſware them to the Kyng of Englande, the number of whiche Citizens were four ſcore thouſande.
            On the ſeconde daye of October the King entred the citie of Turney, and there ordayned ſir Edwarde Poynings, Knight of the order of the Garter, to be hys Lieuetenaunt, wyth Captaines, horſemen, archers, and artillerie conuenient: hée made hys Almoner Thomas Wolſey Byſhoppe of Tourney, and then returned to Callaice, and ſayledThomas VVoolſey Bishop of Turney. from thence to Douer on the foure and twentyth of October.
            In this meane tyme Iames King of Scottes, notwithſtanding he was ſworne to kéepe the peace, inuaded this lande with a mightye armye, but by the good dilligence of the Quéene, with the pollicie and manhoode of the Earle of Surrey, the Kings Lieuetenannt, he himſelfe was ſlaine at Bramstone vpon Piperd hill, with thrée Byſhoppes, two Abbots, twelue Earles, ſeuentéene Lords, beſides Knights, and Gentlemen, and ſeauentéene thouſande Scottes, and all the ordinaunces and ſtuffe taken, the ninth of September: there were ſlaine of the Engliſhe men aboute fiue thouſande.
            The dead body of the King of Scottes, was broughte vp to London, and ſo conueyed to Sheene, where I haue ſéene the ſame lapped in Lead, lye in an olde houſe vnburyed.
            
               
               Iohn Dawes. Iohn Bridges, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes.
            
            
               Roger Bafford.
            
            
               William Browne Mercer, the 28. of October. Iohn Tate
               Maior. 
               Mercer.
            
            On Candlemaſſe daye the Kyng made Thomas Howard Earle of Surrey, Duke of Norffolke: Thomas
                Lorde Howard Earle of Surrey: Charles Brandon
                Duke of Suffolke: Charles Somerſet
                Earle of Worcester, at Lambeth in the Archbiſhop of Canterburies palace, and not long after, he maoe ſir Edward Stanley Lorde Mountegle.
            
            In March folowing, Thomas Wolſey the Kings Almoner,1514 T. VVolſey B. of Lincolne. Anno reg. 6 Hedges plucked vp, & ditches filled. and Biſhoppe of Tourney was conſecrate Byſhoppe of Lincolne, as ſucceſſour to William Smith late deceaſſed.
            All the hedges wythin one myle and more, euery waye aboute London were pulled downe, and the ditches fylled vp in a morning, by a number of yong men, Citizens of London, bycauſe thoſe encloſures hadde bin hinderaunce to their ſhooting.
            The ninetinth of May was receyued into London a Cap of Maintenance, and a ſworde ſente from Pope Iulie the ſeconde, which was preſented to the King on the Sonday nexte with greate ſolempnitie in Saint Paules Churche.
            The ſeauenth daye of Auguſt, a peace was proclaimed betwixte the Kings of England and of Fraunce, duryng theyr lyues.
            In October, a marriage was made betwéene Lewis the twelfth King of Fraunce, and Ladye Mary the Kyngs ſiſter of England.
            
            
               Iames Yarford▪ Iohn Mundy, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               George Monox Draper, the 28. of October.
            
            This George Monox Mayor of London, of his godly diſpoſition reedified the decayed ſtéeple of the pariſhe Churche of Waltham Stowe, in the Countie of Eſſex, adding thereunto a ſide Ile with a Chappel, where he lyeth buryed. And on the North ſide of the Churchyarde there, he founded a fayre large Almoſe houſe for an Almoſe Prieſte or Schoolemaywomenster,

and thirtéene poore almes folke, eight men, and fiue women, appointing to the ſayde almes Prieſt or Schoolemayſter for his yearely wages, 6. l. 13. s̄. 4. d. and to euerye one of ye almes folke 7. d. a wéeke, & 5 l. to be beſtowed yéerely1515 among them in coles. And ordeyned, that the ſayd almes Prieſt ſhould on Sondayes and feſtiuall dayes be helping & aſſiſtant to the Uicar or Curate there in the celebration ofAnno reg. 7. diuine ſeruice, and on the wéeke dayes fréelie to apply and teache yong children of the ſaide pariſhe, to the number ofFree Schoole at VValtham Stovv. thirtie in a Schoolehouſe, by him there builded for that purpoſe. Moreouer, he gaue to the pariſh Clearke there for the time being, a yearly ſtipend of 26. s̄. 8. d. for euer, & a Chamber by the ſayde Almes houſe, to the intent he ſhould helpe the ſayd Schoolemayſter to teach the ſaid children. And hath giuen faire lands and tenements in the Citie of London, for the perpetual maintenance of the premiſſes to Gods glory foreuer. He alſo for the great commoditie of trauellers on 
                  •••
               e, made a continuall cawſey of Timber ouer the mar
               
                  •••
               s from Waltam-ſtow, to Locke bridge towards London.
            
            The vij. of Auguſt, a peace was proclaymed betwixt theMary ſiſter to King Henry married to the French King. Kingdomes of England and of France. And on the ninth day 
                  ••
                October, King Lewes of France marryed the Lady Mary, ſiſter to King Henry the eyght, in ye great Church of Abvile.
               Richard Hunne hauged in Lovv lards Tovver.
            
            
               Richard Hunne, a Merchant Taylor of London, dwelling 
                  ••
                the Pariſh of Saint Margaret in Bridgestreate, who (for de
               
                  ••
               ing to giue a mortuarie, ſuch as was demaunded by the Parſon for his childe being buryed) had bin put in the Low
                  
                     ••
                  ds Tower about the ende of October laſt before paſſed, was 
                  ••
               we the fift of December found hanged with his owne 
                  •
               ir
                  •
               le of ſilke, in the ſayd Tower, and after he was burned 
                  ••
                
               Smithfield.
            
            This yeare dyed at Rome the Archbiſhop of Yorke & Cardinall, called Doctor Banbredge, which was the Kings Embaſſador there. And King Henry gaue the ſaid Archbiſhop
               
                  ••
               ke to Thomas Wolſey then Biſhoppe of Lincolne, who 
                  ••
               rtly after gate to be Cardinall and Lord Chancellour.
            
               On Newyeares euen dyed the French King Lewes the1515 twelfth: and the ninth of Aprill a new peace was concluded betwéene the King of England, and Francis the new King ofAnno reg. 7. 
               France.
            
            In the moneth of May, Charles Duke of Suffolke weddedDuke of Suffolke married he Kings ſiſter. the Lady Mary the Kings ſiſter, late Quéene of Fraunce.
            
            And héere I thinke good to ſet downe ſome part of the procéedings of this ſo oft named Thomas Wolſey Archbiſhop, his aſcending vnto honorious eſtate, and ſodeiue falling againe from the ſame, as I haue bin enformed by perſons of good credite.
            This Thomas Wolſey was a poore mans ſonne of Ipſwich,
               The aſcending of Thomas VVolſey. 1516 in the Countie of Suffolke, and there borne, and being but a child, very apt to be learned, by the meanes of his parents he was conuayde to the Uniuerſitie of Oxford, where he ſhortly proſpered ſo in learning, as he was made Batcheler
                  Anno reg. 8. Batcheler of Art xv. yeares old. of Art, when he paſſed not fiftéene yeares of age, and was called moſt commonly through the Uniuerſitie the boy Batcheler. Thus proſpering in learning, he was made fellow of Maudelin Colledge, and afterward appoynted to be Schoolemayſter of Maudelin Schoole, at which time, the Lorde Marques Dorcet hadde thrée of his ſonnes there a
                  •
                Schoole, committing vnto him as well their education, a
                  •
               
               Schoolemayſter to the Marques Dorcets Children. their inſtruction. It pleaſed the ſayde Lorde Marqueſſe a▪gainſt a Chriſtmas ſeaſon to ſend as well for the Schoolemayſter, as for his children home to his houſe for their re
                  •
                creation, in that pleaſant and honourable feaſt. Then béeing there, the Lorde their father perceyuing them to 
                  〈…〉
                right well employed in learning for their time, he hauing a Benefice in his gift, being at that time voyde, gaue th
                  •
                ſame to the Schoolemaiſter in reward of his diligence at hisThomas VVolſey gate a Benefice. departure after Chriſtmas to the Uniuerſitie, and hauing the preſentation thereof, repaired to the Ordinarie for hy
                  •
                induction, and being furniſhed of his inſtruments, mad
                  •
                ſpéede to the Benefice to take poſſeſſion, and being there fo
                  •
               
               
that intent, one Sir Iames Paulet Knight dwelling there about, tooke occaſion againſt him, and ſet the SchoolemayſterThomas VVolſey ſet in the ſtockes by Sir Iames Paulet. by the héeles during his pleaſure, which after was neyther forgotten nor forgiuen: for when the Schoolemayſter mounted the dignitie to be Chancellour of England, he ſente for Mayſter Paulet, and after many ſharp words, enioyned him to attend vntill he were diſmiſſed, and not to depart out of London without licence obteyned, ſo that he continued therewithVVolſeys impriſonment reuenged. in the middle Temple the ſpace of fiue or ſixe yeares, who lay then in the Gate houſe next the ſtréete, which hée reedifyed very ſumptuouſly, garniſhing the ſame all ouerGatehouſe of the middle Temple nevv builded. the outſide with the Cardinals Armes, with his hatte, cogniſances, and other deuiſes in ſo glorious a ſorte, that he thought thereby to haue appeaſed his olde diſpleaſure.
            Now after the deceaſſe of the Lorde Marqueſſe, thys Schoolemayſter conſidering with himſelfe to be but a ſimple beneficed man, and to haue loſt his fellowſhip in the Colledge, which was much to his reliefe, thought not long to be vnprogided of ſome other help, and in his trauell thereabout, he fell in acquayntance with one Sir Iohn Naphant,
               Sir Iohn Naphant Treaſurer of Caleis, Thomas VVolſey his Chaplayne. a very graue and auntient Knight, who had a great 
                  ••
               me in Caleis vnder King Henry the ſeauenth, this Knight hée ſerued, and behaued hymſelfe ſo diſcretely, that he obteyned the eſpeciall fauour of his Mayſter, in ſo muche, that he committed all the charge of hys office vnto hys Chaplayne, and as I vnderſtand, the office was the Treaſureſhip of Caleis, who was in conſideration of hys greate age diſcharged of hys roome, and returned agayne into Englande, and through hys inſtant labour, hys ChaplayneThomas VVolſey vvas Chapleyne to Henry the vij▪
                was promoted to bée the Kyngs Chaplayne, and when hée had once caſt Ancker in the porte of promotion, how he wrought, I ſhall ſomewhat declare. He hauing there a 
                  •
               uſt occaſion to be in the ſight of the King dayly, by reaſon hée ſayde Maſſe before hym in hys Cloſet, and that bée
               
                  •
               ng done, he ſpēt not the day in ydleneſſe, but would attend

vpon thoſe whome he thought to beare moſt rule in the Counſell, the which at that tyme was Doctor Fox, Biſhop of Winchester, Secretarie, and Lord of the priuie ſeale: & alſo Sir Thomas Louell Knight, a ſage Counſellor, Mayſter of the Wardes, and Conneſtable of the Tower: theſe graue Counſellors in proces of time perceyued this Chapleyne to haue a very fine witte, and thought him a méete perſon to be preferred to wittie affaires. It chanced at a certayne ſeaſon that the King had an vrgent occaſion to ſend an Embaſſador vnto the Emperour Maximilian, who lay at that preſent in the low Countrey of Flanders, not farre from Caleis. The Biſhop of Winchester, and Sir Thomas Louell, whome the King counſelled and debated with vppon this Embaſſage, ſaw they had a conuenient occaſion to preferre the Kings Chapleyne, whoſe witte, eloquence, and learning, they highly commended to the King, the King commanded them to bring his Chapleyne before his preſence, with whome, he fell in communication of great matters, and perceyuing his witte to be very fyne, thoughte hym ſufficiente, commaunding hym therevpon to prepare hymſelfe to hys iourney, and hauing hys depeach, tooke hys leaue of the King at Richmond about noone, and ſo came to London about four of the Clocke, where the Barge of Graues ende was ready to launch forth, both with a proſperousThomas VVolſey Embaſſadour to the Emperour. tyde and winde, without any abode he entred the Barge, and ſo paſſed foorth with ſuche ſpéede, that hée arriued at Graues ende within little more than thrée houres, where hée tarryed no longer than his poſt Horſſes were prouiding, and then trauayled ſo ſpéedily, that hée came to Douer the nexte morning, whereas the paſſengers were readye vnder Sayle to Caleis, into the which paſſenger, without tarrying, he entred, and ſayled foorth wyth them, that long before noone hée arriued at Calleis, and hauing poſt Horſſes, departed from thence with ſuch ſpéede, that he was that night with the Emperour, & diſcloſed the whole ſumme of his Embaſſage to y• Emperor, of whom he

required ſpéedie expedition, the which was granted him by the Emperour, ſo that the next day he was cléerely diſpatched with all the Kings requeſtes fully accompliſhed, at which time he made no longer delay, but tooke poſt Horſſes that night, and rode towarde Caleis, conducted thyther with ſuch perſons as the Emperour had appoynted, and at the opening of the Gates of Caleis, he came thither, where the paſſengers were as readie to returne into England, as they were before at his iourney forward, in ſo muche, that he arriued at Douer by tenne of the clocke before noone, and hauing poſt Horſſes, came to the Court at Richmond the ſame night, where he taking ſome reſt vntill the morning, repayred to the King at his firſt comming from his bedchamber to this cloſet, whome, when the King ſawe, hée checked him, for that he was not on his iourney: Sir (quoth he) if it may pleaſe youre Highneſſe, I haue already bin with the Emperour, and diſpatched your affayres, I truſt to your Graces contentation, and with that preſented the King his Letters of credence from the Emperoure. The King being in a great confuſe and wonder of his ſpéedy returne and procéedings, diſſembled all his wonder, and demanded of him whether he encountred not his Purſiuant the which he ſent vnto him, ſuppoſing him not to be out of London, with Letters concerning a very neceſſary matter neglected in their conſultatiō, yes forſooth quoth the Chaplayne, I met with him yeſterday by the way, and hauing no vnderſtanding by your Graces letters of your pleaſure, haue not withſtanding bin ſo bold vpon mine owne diſcretion (perceyuing that matter to be very neceſſary in that behalfe) to diſpatch the ſame, and foraſmuch as I haue excéeded your Graces commiſſion, I moſt humbly require your Graces pardon: the King reioycing not a little, ſayd, we▪ do not only pardon you thereof, but alſo giue you our Princely thankes, both for the procéeding therein, and alſo for your good and ſpéedie exployte, commanding him for that time to take his reſt, and repaire agayne after Dinner,

for the further relation of his Ambaſſade. The Embaſſador when he ſaw tyme, repaired before the King and Counſayle, where he declared the effect of all his affaires ſo exactly, with ſuch grauitie and eloquence, that all the Counſell that heard him, commended him, eſtéeming his expedition to be almoſt beyond the capacitie of man. The King gaue him at that time the Deanerie of Lincolne. From thēceThomas VVolſey Deane of Lincolne. forward he grew more and more into eſtimation and authoritie, and after, was promoted by the King to be hys Almoner. After the death of King Henry the ſeauenth, andThomas VVolſey the Kings Almoner. in the flouriſhing youth of King Henry the eyght, thys Almoner handled himſelfe ſo politiquely, that he ſoone found the meanes to be made one of the Kings Counſaile,Thomas VVolſey of the priuie Counſayle vvith King Henry the eyght. and to grow in fauour with the King, to whome, the King gaue an houſe at Bridewell in Fleete ſtreete, ſometyme Sir Richard Empſons, where he kept houſe for his familie, and ſo dayly attended vpon the King, and in his eſpeciall fauour, who had great ſute made vnto him. His ſentences, and wittie perſwaſions in the Counſell Chamber, were alwayes ſo pithie, that the Counſayle as occaſion moued them, continually aſſigned him to be the expoſitor to the King in all their procéedings, in whome, the King receyued ſuch a leaning fantaſie, for that he was moſt earneſt and readyeſt of all the Counſayle to aduance the Kings will and pleaſure: the King therefore eſtéemed him ſo highly, that all the other Counſaylors were put from the great fauour that they before were in, in ſo much, that the King committed all his will vnto his diſpoſition, which the Almoner perceyuing, tooke vpon him therefore to diſcharge the King of the weightie and troubleſome buſineſſe, per
               
                  •
               wading the King that he ſhould not néede to ſpare any time of his pleaſure for any buſineſſe that ſhould happen in the Counſell: and whereas the other Counſaylours would diuers times perſwade the King to haue ſometime recourſe into the Counſell Chamber, there to heare what was done, the Almoner would perſwade him to the contrarie,

which delighted him much: and thus the Almoner ruled all them that were before him, ſuch did hys policie and witte bring to paſſe. Who was now in hygh fauoure but Maiſter Almoner? and who ruled all vnder the King, but Maiſter Almouer? thus he perſeuered in fauour, vntill at laſt in came preſents, giftes, and rewards ſo plentifully, that he lacked nothing that might eyther pleaſe his fantaſie, or enrich his coffers. And thus procéeding in fortunes bliſfulneſſe, it chanced the warres betwéene the Realmes of Englande and France to be open, in ſo much, as the King béeing fully perſwaded in hys moſt royall perſon to inuade hys foraigne enimies with a puiſſant Armye, wherefore it was neceſſarye that thys royall enterpriſe ſhoulde bée ſpéedily prouided and furniſhed in euery degrée of things apt and conueniente for the ſame, the expedition whereof, the King thought no mans witte ſo méete for policie and paynefull trauayle, as was hys Almoner, to whome therefore he committed hys whole truſt therein, and hée tooke vpon hym the whole charge of all the buſineſſe, and brought all things to good paſſe in a decent order, as all manner of victualles, prouiſions, and other neceſſaryes conueniente for ſo noble a voyage and Armie.
            All things béeyng by hym perfected, the King aduanced to hys royall enterpriſe, paſſed the Seas, and marched forwarde in good order of battayle, vntill hée came to the ſtrong Towne of Turwyne, to the whyche hée layde hys ſéege, and aſſayled it very ſtrongly continually with ſuch vehemente aſſaultes, that within ſhort ſpace it was yéelded vnto hys Maieſtie, vnto the which place, the Emperour Maximilian repaired vnto the King with a greate Armie like a mightie Prince, taking of the King his Graces wages, which is a rare thing, and but ſeldome ſéene, an Emperour to fighte vnder a Kings Banner.
            Thus after the King, had obteyned this puiſſant Fort, and taken the poſſeſſion thereof, and ſette all thynges there in due order, for the defence and preſeruation

thereof to hys vſe, he departed thence, and marched towarde the Citie of Turney, and there layde hys ſéege in like manner, to the which, he gaue ſo fierce and ſharpe aſſault, that they were conſtreyned of fine force to render the Towne vnto his victorious Maieſtie, at which time, the King gaue the Almoner the Biſhoprike of the ſame Sea,Thomas VVolſey Bishop of Turney. towards hys paynes and diligence ſuſteyned in that iourney, and when the King had eſtabliſhed all things agréeable to his will and pleaſure, and furniſhed the ſame with noble Captaynes and men of warre for the ſafegard of the Towne, hée returned agayne into Englande, taking with him diuers noble perſonages of France being priſoners, as the Duke of Longuile, and Uicount Clarimont, with other, whiche were taken there in a Skirmiſhe: after whoſe returne, immediately the Sea of Lincolne fell voyde by the death of Doctor Smith late Biſhop there, the which Benefice his Grace gaue to his Almoner, late Biſhop of Turney elect, who was not negligent to take poſſeſſion thereof, andThomas VVolſey Bishop of Lincolne. made all the ſpéede he could for hys conſecration: the ſolemnization whereof ended, he found the meanes that he gate the poſſeſſion of all his predeceſſors goodes into his hands. It was not long after that Doctor Bambridge Archbiſhop of Yorke dyed at Rome, being there the Kings Embaſſador, vnto the which Sea, the King immediately preſented hys late and newe Biſhop of Lincolne, ſo that he had thrée Biſhoprickes in his hands in one yeare giuen hym: then prepared he for his tranſlation from the Sea of Lincolne, vntoThomas VVolſey Archbishop of York. the Sea of Yorke, after whiche ſolemnization done, he béeing then an Archbyſhop Primas Angliae, thought himſelfe ſufficiente to compare with Canterbury, and therevppon erected hys Croſſe in the Court, and euery other place, as well within the precinct and iuriſdiction of Canterbury, as in anye other place. And for as muche as Canterbury claymeth a ſuperioritie ouer Yorke, as ouer all other Biſhoprikes within Englande, and for that cauſe claymeth as a knowledge of an aunciente obedience of Yorke, to abate

the aduauncing of hys Croſſe, in preſence of the Croſſe of Canterburie: notwythſtanding, Yorke nothing minding to deſiſte from bearing thereof in manner as I ſayde béefore, cauſed hys Croſſe to be aduaunced, as well in the preſence of Canterburie as elſewhere: wherefore Canterburie being moued therewith, gaue vnto Yorke a certayne checke for hys preſumption, by reaſon whereof, there engendred ſome grudge betwéene Yorke and Caunterburie. Yorke intending to prouide ſome ſuche meanes, that hée woulde bée rather ſuperior in dignitie to Canterburie, than to be eyther obedient or equall to hym, wherefore hée obtayned to be made Prieſte Cardinall, and Legatus de Latere: vnto whome the Pope ſente a Cardinals Hat wythThomas VVolſey Cardinall. certayne Bulles for hys aucthoritie in that behalfe. Yet you ſhall vnderſtande, that the Pope ſente hym thys worthye Hatte of dignitie, as a Iewell of hys honoure and aucthoritie, the whych was conueyed in a varlets budget, who ſéemed to all menne to bée but a perſon of ſmall eſtimation. Wherfore Yorke beyng aduertiſed of the baſeneſſe of this meſſenger, and of the peoples opinion, thought it méete for hys honour, that this Iewell ſhould not be conueyed by ſo ſimple a perſon, & therefore cauſed him to be ſtopped by the way immediatly after his arriualin England, where he was newly furniſhed in all manner of apparell, wyth all kynde of coſtlye ſilkes, whyche ſéemed decent for ſuche an hyghe Embaſſador, and that done, he was encountred vppon Blacke heath, and there receyued wyth a greate aſſemblye of Prelates, and luſtie gallant Gentlemen, and from thence conducted throughe London with greate triumph. Then was greate and ſpéedie preparation made in Westminster Abbey, for the confirmation and acceptance of thys hygh order and dignitie, the whyche was executed by all the Byſhoppes and Abbots aboute or nyghe London, wyth theyr rych Myters and Copes, and other ornaments, which was done in ſo ſolempne a wiſe, as had not bene ſéene the like, vnleſſe it had bin at the Coronation of a myghty Prince or

King obtayning thys dignitie. He thoughte himſelfe mée
                  •
               e to beare aucthoritie among the temporall power, as among the ſpirituall iuriſdiction: wherefore, remembring as well the tawntes ſuſtained of Canterburie, as hauing a reſpecte to the aduauncement of worldlye honor and promotion, found the means with the King, that he was made Lord ChancelourThomas VVolſey lord Chācelour. of Englande, and Canterburie whiche was Chanceloure diſmiſſed, who had continued in that roume ſince long before the deceaſſe of Henrie the ſeauenth. Nowe being in poſſeſſion of the Chancelorſhippe, and endued wyth the promotions of the Archebyſhoppe, and Cardinall de Latere, hauyng power to correcte Canterburie, and al other Byſhops and ſpirituall perſons, to aſſemble hys Conuocation when he would aſſigne, hée tooke vpon hym the correction of matters in all their iuriſdictions, and viſited all the ſpirituall houſes, hauing in euerye Dioceſſe all maner of Spirituall Miniſters, as Commiſſaries, Scribes, Apparators, and al other officers to furniſh hys Courts, and preſented by preuention whom he pleaſed vnto al benefices throughout all thys Realme. And to the aduauncing further of his legantine, iuriſdiction and honor, he hadde Maiſters of his Faculties, Maiſters Ceremontarum, and ſuche other, to the glorifying of his dignitie. Then had he his two great Croſſes of Syluer, the one of hys Archebyſhopricke, the other of hys Legacie, borne before him whyther ſo euer he wente or rode, by two of the talleſt Prieſtes that hée coulde gette wythin the realme: And to encreaſe his gaines, he had alſo the Byſhopricke of Durham, and the Abbey of Saint Albons in commendation: And after, when Doctor Foxe ByſhopThomas VVolſey Byshoppe of VVincheſter. of Winchester dyed, he ſurrendred Durham into the Ryngs handes, and tooke to him Winchester. Then had he in hys hande (as it were in Firme) the Biſhoprickes of Bathe, Worcester, and Hereforde, ſoraſmuch as the Incumbents of them were ſtrangers, and made their abode continually beyond the Seas in their owne Countries, or elſe at Rome, from whence they were ſente in Legation to thys Realme vnto

the King, and for their rewarde at their departure, Kyng Henrie the ſeauenth gaue thoſe Biſhoprickes: and they béeing ſtrangers, thoughte it more méete for the aſſuraunce to ſuffer the Cardinal to haue their benefices for a conuenient ſumme of mony payd them yearely, where they remayned, than either to be troubled with the charges of the ſame, or to be yearely burdened with the conueyance of theyr reuenues vnto them, ſo that al the ſpiritual and preſentations of theſe Byſhoprickes were fully in hys diſpoſition, to prefer whom he liſted. He had alſo a greate number daylye attending vpon hym, both of Noble men and worthye Gentlemen, with no ſmall number of the talleſt Yeomen that he coulde gette in all the Realme, inſomuche, that well was that Nobleman and Gentleman, that coulde prefer a tall Yeoman to his ſeruice. Ye ſhal vnderſtande, that he had in his HallThe order of the Cardinalies houſe. continually thrée boordes, kepte with thrée ſeueral principall officers, that is to ſay, a Stewarde whych was alwayes a Prieſt: a Treaſourer a Knight: and a Comptroller an Eſquier: alſo a Cofferer béeyng a Doctor: thrée Marſhalles: thrée yeomen Uſhers in the Hall, beſides two groomes, and Almoners. Then in the Hal Kitchen, two Clearks of the kitchen: a Clearke comptroller: a Surueyor of the Dreſſor: a Clearke of the Spicerie, the whyche togither kepte alſo a continuall meſſe in the Hal. Alſo in hys Hall kitchin hée had of Maiſter Cookes twoo, and of other Cookes, Laborers, and children of the kitchin, twelue perſons: foure yeomen of the Scullerie: and foure yeomen of the ſiluer Scullerie: two yeomen of the Paſtry, with two other Paſtelers vnder the yeomen. Then in his priuie Kitchin a Maſter Cooke, who went daylye in Ueluet or in Sattin, wyth a Chayne of Golde, wyth two other yeomen and a groome: In the Scalding houſe a yeoman and twoo groomes: In the Pantery twoo perſons: In the Buttrey two yeomen, two Groomes, and twoo Pages: And in the Yewrye lykewiſe: In the Seller thrée yeomen and thrée pages:

In hys Chaundrey two: In the Wafarie two: In the Wardrobe of Beddes, the Maiſter of the Wardrobe and 
                  •
                other perſons: In the Laundry, a yeoman, a groome, thirtie pages, two yeomen purueyors, and one groome: In the Bake houſe a yeoman and two groomes: In the Wood yarde a yeoman and a groome: In the Barne one: In the Garden a yeoman and two groomes: Porters at the Gate twoo yeomen and two groomes: a yeoman of hys Barge: & a maiſter of hys horſe: a Clearke of the Stable, a yeoman of the ſame: the Sadler: the Farrier: a yeoman of hys Chariot: a Sumpter man: a yeoman of his Styrrop: a Muleter: ſixetéene groomes of hys Stable, euery of them kepte foure Geldings: In the Almorie a yeoman, and a groome: InThomas VVolſeys Chappell. hys Chappel he hadde a Deane, a greate Diuine, and a man of excellent learning: a Subdeane: a Repeater of the Quire: a Goſpeller: a Piſtler: of ſinging Prieſtes ten: a maſter of the Children: Seculars of the Chappell ſinging men twelue: ſinging children tenne, with one ſeruant to awaite vppon the children: In the Reueſtry a yeoman, and two groomes, ouer & beſides dyuers reteiners, that came thither at principal feaſtes. For the furniture of hys Chappell, paſſeth my capacitie to declare, the number of coſtly ornamentes and riche iewels that were to be occupyed in the ſame continuallye: there hathe béene ſéene in Proceſſion, aboute the Hall, 44. very rich Coapes of one ſute worne, beſides the riche Croſſes and Candleſtickes, and other ornamentes to the furniture of the ſame: Hée had two croſſebearers, and two Piller bearers, in hys great Chamber: and in hys priuy Chamber theſe perſons: fyrſte the chiefe Chamberlaine, and Uizchamberlaine: of Gentlemen Uſhers, beſides one in his priuie Chamber, he hadde twelue daylye wayters, and of Gentlemen wayters in hys priuye Chamber he hadde ſixe, and of Lordes nyne or tenne, who hadde eche of them two men allowed them to attend vpon them, except the Erle of Darby, who had allowed fiue men: then had he of Gentlemen, of Cup bearers, Caruers, and

Sewers beth of the priuie Chamber, and of the great chamber wyth Gentlemen dayly wayters there fortie perſons: Ofyeomen Uſhers ſixe, of groomes in his Chamber eight, of yeomen in his Chamber fiue and fortie daylye: he had alſo Almoſe men ſometime more in number than other ſometime. There was attending on his borde of Doctors and Chapleines, beſides them of his Chappell ſixetéene daylye: a Clearke of his Cloſet: Secretaries two: and two Clearkes of his Signet: and foure Counſellours learned in the Lawe: And for aſmuche, as it was neceſſarie to haue dyuers officers of the Chauncerie to attende vppon hym, that is to ſaye, the Clearke of the Crowne: a ryding Clearke: a Clearke of the Hamper: and a chafer of the Waxe: then a Clearke of the Checke, as well vppon the Chapleins, as of the Yeomen of his Chamber: hée had alſo foure footemen whyche were garniſhed in riche running coates, when ſo euer he rode in anye iourney: then had hée an Harraulte of Armes: and a Sergeant of Armes: a Phiſition: a Poticarie: foure Minſtrels: a kéeper of his Tents: an Armorer: an inſtructer of hys wards: two yeomen of hys Wardrobe of hys Robes: and a kéeper of hys Chamber continuallye in the Court: he had alſo in his houſe the Surueyor of Yorke, and a Clearke of the gréene Cloth. All theſe were dayly attending, downe lying and vpriſing, and at meales: he kepte in his greate Chamber a continuall borde for the Chamberers and Gentlemen officers, hauing wyth them a meſſe of the yong Lords, and an other of Gentlemen: and beſides all theſe, there was neuer an officer, Gentleman, or worthy perſon, but he was allowed in the houſe, ſome thrée, ſome two, and al other one at the leaſte, whiche grewe to a greate number of perſons. Thus far
               
                  •
               ute of the Checker roll, beſides other officers, ſeruantes, 
                  ••
               teyners, and futers, that moſte commoulye dyned in the Hall.Thomas VVolſey tvvice Embaſſador to the Emperour Charles.
            
            After that he was thus furniſhed, he was ſente twice in embaſſade to the Emperor Charles the fifth, for diuers vrgent

cauſes touchyng the Kings Maieſtie, it was thought, that ſo noble a Prince (the Cardinall) was moſte méete to be ſente: wherefore, being readye to take vppon hym the charge thereof, was furniſhed in all degrées and purpoſes, moſte lyke a greate Prince: for firſte he procéeded forth furniſhed lyke a Cardinall: hys Gentlemen béeyng verye many in number, were clothed in Lyuerie coates of Crimoſin Ueluet of the beſt, wyth chaines of Golde aboute theyr neckes, and hys yeomen and meane officers, in coates of fine Scarlet, garded with blacke Ueluet a hande broade.
            Thus furniſhed, he was twice ſente into Flaunders to the Emperour then lying in Bruges, whom he did moſt highly, entertain diſcharging al his charges & his mēs. There was no houſe within the town of Bruges, wherein any Gentlemā of the Cardinals were lodged, or had recourſe, but that the owners were commaunded by the Emperoures officers, that they, vpon paine of their liues, ſhoulde take no mony for anye thing that the Cardinalles ſeruantes diode take of anye kinde of victuall, no althoughe they were diſpoſed to make anye coſtlye banquets: commaunding forthermore their ſaide hoſtes, to ſée y• they lacked no ſuch things as they honeſtly required for their honeſty & pleaſure. Alſo the Emperors officers euery night wēt through the town frō houſe to houſe, whereas any Engliſh Gentlemē did repaſt or lodged, & ſerued their liueries for all night, which was done in this maner. Firſt, the Officers brought into the houſe a caſt of fine Manchet, & of ſiluer two great pots with white wine, and Sugar to the waighte of a pounde: white lights and yellowe lightes of Ware: a boule of ſiluer wyth a Goblet to drinke in, and euerye night a ſtaffe▪ torche: This was the order of the liueries euerye nighte: and in the morning, when the ſame officers came to fetch away their ſtuffe, then woulde they accompte with the hoſtes for the Gentlemens coſtes ſpent in the daye before.
            Thus the Emperoure entertayned the Cardinall and all his traine for the time of his Embaſſage there.

And that done, he returned into Englande with great triumphe.
            Nowe of hys order in going to Westminster hall dayly in the Terme. Firſte, ere he came out of hys priuie Chamber, he hearde ſeruice in his Cloſet, and there ſaid hys ſeruice wyth hys Chaplaine: Then goyng againe to hys priuy Chamber, he woulde demaunde, if his ſeruants were in a readyneſſe, and furniſhed hys Chamber of Preſence, and wayghting Chamber, being thereof then aduertized, came oute of hys priuy Chamber aboute eighte of the clocke, apparelled all in red, that is to ſaye, hys vpper garment eyther of fine Scarlet, or elſe fine Crimoſin Taffata, but moſt commonlye of fine Crimoſin Satten engrayned, hys pillion of fine Scarlet, with a necke ſette in the inner ſide wyth blacke Ueluet, and a Tippet of Sables aboute hys necke, holding in hys hand an Orenge, wherof the ſubſtance within was taken oute, and filled vppe againe wyth the part of a Sponge, wherein was Uineger and other Confections againſte the peſtilent ayres, the whyche hée moſte commonlye helde to hys noſe when he came among anye preace, or elſe that he was peſtered wyth manye ſuters: and béefore him was borne firſte the broade Seale of Englande, and hys Cardinales Hat, by a Lorde, or ſome Gentlemanne of Worſhippe, right ſolempnely: and as ſoone as he was once entred into his Chāber of Preſence, his two great Croſſes were there attending to be borne before hym: then cried the Gentlemen Uſhers, going before him bare headed, and ſaide: On before, my Lordes and Maiſters, on before, make waye for my Lordes Grace. Thus went he downe through the Hall wyth a Sergeant of Armes before hym, bearing a greate Mace of Siluer, and two Gentlemen carying twoo greate Pillers of Siluer, and when he came at the Hall dore, there was hys Mule, being trapped all in Crimo
                  •
               n Ueluet wyth a Saddle of the ſame, and guilte ſtyrrops.
            
               When was there attending vpponhym, when he was mounted, hys two Croſſe-bearers: and his Piller bearers in like caſe vppon greate horſes, trapped all in fine Scarlet. Then marched he forward with a traine of noble men and Gentlemen, hauing his footmen four in number about hym, bearing eache of them a guilte Polare in their hands: and thus paſſed he forth vntill he came to Westminster hall dore, and there lighted, and wente vppe after thys manner into the Chauncerie, or into the Starre Chamber: howbeit, moſte commonlye he woulde goe into the Chancerie, and ſtay a while at a barre made for hym beneath the Chancerie on the righte hande, and there commune ſometyme wyth the Judges, and ſome▪ time with other perſons: and that done, he woulde repayre into the Chancerie, and ſitting there vntill eleauen of the clocke, hearing of ſutes, and determining of other matters, from thence he woulde dyuers times go into the Starre Chamber as occaſion ſerued. There he neyther ſpared highe ne lowe, but iudged euery ſtate accordyng to his merites and deſert. He vſed alſo euerye Sondaye to reſorte to the Courte, then béeyng for the moſte parte of all the yeare at Greenewiche, with hys former triumphes, takyng hys Barge at hys own ſtayres, furniſhed wyth Yeomen ſtandyng vppon the Bailes, and hys Gentlemen béeyng wythin aboute hym, and landed againe at the three Cranes in the Vintr
                     •
                  e: and from thence hée rode vpon his Mule with his Croſſe, his Pillars, his Hat and broade Seale carryed afore hym on horſebacke through Thamis ſtreete▪
                vntill he came to Billingſgate, and there tooke his Barge againe, and ſo was rowed to Greenewiche, where he was receyued of the Lordes and chiefe officers of the Kings houſe, as the Treaſurer, Comptroller, and other, and ſo conuyed vnto the Kings Chamber: then the Court was wonderfully furniſhed wyth Noble men and Gentlemen: and after dinner among the Lords, hauing ſome conſultation with the King, or with the Councell, he woulde departe homewarde with the like triumph.
            
               Thus in greate honour, triumph, and glory, he raigned a long ſeaſon ruling all thynges within the Realme appertayning vnto the King. His houſe was alwayes reſorted to with noblemen and Gentlemen, feaſting and banqueting Embaſſadors dyuers times, and al other right nobly: and when it pleaſed the King for his recreation, to repayre to the Cardinalles houſe, as he didde dyuers tymes in the yeare: there wanted no preparations, or furniture: Banquets were ſette forth with Maſkes and Mummeries, in ſo gorgeous a ſorte, and coſtly maner, that it was an heauen to beholde. There wanted no Dames or Damoiſels, méete or apte to daunce with the Maſkers, or to garniſh the place for the tyme: then was there all kinde of muſicke, and harmony, wyth fine voices bothe of menne and chyldren.
            One tyme the Kyng came ſodainely thither in a MaſkeA Maske and a Banquet. wyth a dozen Maſkers all in garmentes like Shepheards, made of fine cloth of Golde, and Crimoſin Satten paned, and Cappes of the ſame, wyth Uiſars of good viſnomy, their haires and beardes, eyther of fine Goldewyre ſilke, or black ſilke, hauing ſixetéene Torch-bearers, beſides their Drums and other perſons wyth Uiſars, all clothed in Satten of the ſame colour: and before hys entring into the Hall, hée came by water to the water gate, wythout any noiſe, where were layd diuers Chābers and Guns charged with Shot, & at hys landing they were ſhotte off, whyche made ſuche a tumble in ye Ayre, that it was like thunder: It made all the Noblemen, Gentlemen, Ladyes, and Gentlewomen, to 
                  •
               uſe what it ſhoulde meane, comming ſo ſodainelye, they 
                  •
               itting quiet at a ſolempne banquet, vnder this ſorte: Firſt yée ſhall vnderſtande, that the Tables were ſette in the Chamber of Preſence iuſt couered, and the Lorde Cardinall ſitting vnder the cloth of Eſtate, there hauing all hys ſeruice alone: and then was there ſette a Lady wyth a Nobleman, or a Gentleman and a Gentlewoman throughout all the Tables in the Chamber on the one ſide, whych

were made and ioyned as it were but one Table, all whiche order and deuice was done by the Lorde Sandes then Lorde Chamberlaine to the King, and by Syr Henrie Gilforde Comptroller of the Kinges Maieſties houſe. Then immediately after the greate Chamberlaine, and the ſayde Comptroller, ſente to looke what it ſhoulde meane, (as thoughe they knewe nothing of the matter,) they looking oute of the Windowes into the Thamis, retourned againe and ſhewed hym, that it ſéemed they were Noblemen and Straungers, arryued at hys bridge, comming as Embaſſadoures from ſome forreine Prince: with that quoth the Cardinal, I deſire you, bycauſe you can ſpeake Frenche▪
                to take the paines to goe into the Hall, there to receyue them according to their eſtates, and to conducte them into this Chamber, where they ſhall ſée vs, and all theſe Noble Perſonages, beyng mery at oure banquet, deſiring them to ſitte downe with vs, and to take parte of our fare. Then wente hée incontinent downe into the Hall, whereas they receyued them wyth twentie newe Torches, and conueyed them vppe into the Chamber, wyth ſuche a noyſe of Drummes and flewtes, as ſeldome hadde béene hearde the like. At theyr entring into the Chamber twoo and twoo togyther, they went directlye before the Cardinall where hée ſate, and ſaluted hym reuerentlye, to whome the Lorde Chamberlaine for them ſaide: Sir, for as muche as they bée Straungers, and can not ſpeake Engliſhe, they haue deſired me to declare vnto you, that they hauyng vnderſtanding of this your triumphaunt banquet, where was aſſembled ſuche a number of excellent Dames, they coulde doe no leſſe vnder ſupporte of youre Grace, but to repayre hyther, to viewe as well their incomparable beautie, as for to accompanye them at Mumme chaunce, and then to daunce with them: and ſir, they require of youre Grace licence to accompliſhe the ſaide cauſe of their comming. To whome

the Cardinall ſaide he was very well content they ſhould ſo doe.
            Then went the Maſkers, and firſt ſaluted al the Dames, and returned to the moſte worthieſt, and there opened their greate cuppe of Golde filled wyth Crownes, and other péeces of Golde, to whome they ſette certaine péeces of Golde to caſt at.
            Thus peruſing all the Ladyes and Gentlewomen, to ſome they loſte, and of ſome they wonne: and peruſing after this maner al the Ladies, they returned to the Cardinal with greate reuerence, powring downe all their Golde ſo lefte in their Cup, whych was aboue twoo hundred crowns: At all (quoth the Cardinall) and ſo caſte the Dice and wan them, whereat was made a great noiſe and ioy. Thenquoth the Cardinall to the Lord Chamberlain, I pray you (quoth he) that you would ſhew them, that me ſéemeth there ſhould be a Nobleman amongeſt them, who is more méete to occupye this ſeate and place than I am, to whome I woulde moſte gladly ſurrender the ſame according to my duety, if I knewe him. Then ſpake the Lorde Chamberlaine to them in Frenche, and they rownding him in the eare, the Lorde Chamberlaine ſaide to my Lorde Cardinall: Sir, (quoth he) they confeſſe, that among them there is ſuche a Noble perſonage, whome, if your Grace can appointe hym oute from the reſt, he is content to diſcloſe hymſelfe, and to accept your place: with that the Cardinal taking good aduiſement among them, at the laſte quoth he, me ſéemes the Gentleman wyth the blacke Bearde ſhoulde be euen he: and with that he aroſe oute of hys Chayre, and offered the ſame to the Gentleman in the blacke Bearde, with his cap in his hande. The perſon to whome he offered the Chayre was Sir Edwarde Neuil, a comely Knight, that much more reſembled the Kings perſon in that Maſke than anye other.
            The King perceyuing the Cardinall ſo deceyued, could

not forbeare laughing, but pulled down hys viſar and Maſter Neuels alſo, and daſhed out ſuche a pleaſaunt countenaunce and chéere, that al the noble eſtates there aſſembled perceiuing the King to be there among them, reioyced very much. The Cardinal eft ſoones deſired his Highneſſe to take the place of Eſtate: to whome the King aunſwered, that he woulde goe firſte and ſhifte hys apparell, and ſo departed into my Lorde Cardinalles Chamber, and there newe apparelled him: in whych tyme, the diſhes of the banquet were cleane taken vppe, and the Tables ſpred againe with new cleane perfumed clothes, euery man and woman ſitting ſtil, vntill the King with all his Maſkers came among them againe all newe apparelled: then the King tooke his ſeate vnder the cloth of Eſtate, commaunding euery perſon to ſit ſtill as they did before: In came a newe banquet before the Kyng, and to all the reſt throughout all the Tables, wherein were ſerued two hundred diuers diſhes, of coſtly deuiſes and ſuttilties. Thus paſſed they forth the night with banqueting, dauncing, and other triumphes, to the great comforte of the King, and pleaſant regard of the Nobilitie there aſſembled. Thus paſſed this Cardinall his time from day to daye, and yeare to yeare, in ſuche greate wealth, ioy, triumph, and glorie, hauyng alwayes on hys ſide the Kings eſpecial fauor, vntil Fortune enuied his proſperous eſtate, as is to the worlde well knowne, and ſhall be partely touched hereafter.
            This yeare in the moneth of May, were ſent out of Englande xij. C. Maſons and Carpenters, and thrée hundred laborersCaſtell of Turney builded to the Citie of Tourney, to builde a Caſtell there, to chaſtice the Citie if it chaunced to rebel, and to diminiſh the garriſon that then laye there to the Kings greate charge.
            
               Henry Worley: Rich. Gray, the 28. of Sep. William Bayly.
               
                  Sherifes. Maior. Lady Mary the Kings daughter borne. 1516
            
            
               Sir William Butler Grocer, the 28. of October.
            
            Lady Mary King Henries daughter was borne at Greenewiche on the eleauenth of February.
            
               Margaret Quéene of Scottes, King Henries eldeſt ſiſter, who

had after the death of hir firſt huſbande (Iames King of Scots
               The Queene of Scots fledde into Englande. flaine at Boſworth) married Archibald Duglas, Earle of Auguiſe, fledde into Englande, and lay at Harbottle, where ſhée was deliuered of a childe called Margaret. But ſhortlye after Archibalde Douglas hir huſbande wente home agayne into Scotlande wythoute leaue taking: wherefore the Kyng ſente for hir to London, where ſhée was roally receyued and lodged at Baynardes Castell, and there ſhe tarried a whole yeare ere ſhe returned.
            
               Thomas Seimer: Rich. Thurſtone, Broderer, the 28. of Sept.
               
                  Sherifes. Maior. Greate fr
                     •
                  ſte. 1517 Anno reg. 9. Euil May day.
            
            
               Iohn Reſt Grocer, the 28. of October.
            
            The Thamis was frozen, that men with horſe and Carts might paſſe betwixte Westminster and Lambeth.
            
            On May euen was an inſurrection of yong perſons and Apprentiſes of London againſt Aliens: for the whyche fact, tenne payre of Gallowes were made with whéeles to be remoued from ſtréete to ſtréete, and from dore to dore, wherevpon diuers yong men were hanged, wyth theyr Captaine Iohn Lincolne a Broker: the reſidue, to the number of four hundred men, and eleauen women, tyed in ropes al along one after an other in theyr ſhyrtes came to Westminster hall, wyth halters aboute their neckes, and were pardoned.
            
               Margaret Quéene of Scottes returned into Scotland to theQuene of Scots returned. Earle of Anguiſe hir huſbande.
            
               Thomas Baldry: Richard Simonds, the 28. of September.
               
                  Sherifes. Maior. 1518 Svveating ſickneſſe. Anno reg. 10
            
            
               Sir Thomas Exmew Goldſmith, the 28. of October.
            
            Manye dyed in Englande of the ſweating ſickneſſe, in eſpeciallye aboute London, wherefore Trinitie Terme was one daye at Oxforde, and then adiourned to Westminster.
            
            In the moneth of July Cardinall Campeius came into Englande from the Pope, to exhorte king Henry to make war on the Turkes.
            
            After long ſute made of the Frenche King, and hys councell,Cardinall Campeius. it was agréed, that the Citie of Tourney ſhoulde be delyuered to the Frenche King, he paying ſixe hundred thouſande

Crownes for the Citie, and foure hundred thouſand Crownes for the Caſtell the whyche the King had buylded, (whiche was not fully performed) and alſo he ſhoulde pay thrée and twentie thouſande pounde Tournois, the whych ſometime the Citizens of Tourney ought to the King of Englande, for their liberties and franchiſes. It was further agréede, that the yong Dolphin ſonne and heyre to the French King, ſhoulde marry wyth the Ladye Mary King Henries daughter of Englande, if they bothe ſo lyked eche other when they came to age. And then the Earle of Worcester, with the Biſhoppe of Ely and other, were ſente into Fraunce, to make delyuery of the ſaide Citie of Tourney, whyche was done on the tenth of February.
            
               Iohn Allen: Iames Spencer, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Thomas Mirfin Skinner, the 28. of October.
            
            The ſixetéenth of Marche landed at Calleis ſir Nicholas Vaux, ſir Edwarde Belknape, ſir William Sandes, Knightes of the Garter, Commiſſioners to ouer ſée the making of a Pallaice before the Caſtell of Guiſnes, wherefore there was ſente the Kings Mayſter Maſon, Maiſter Carpenter, and thrée hundred Maſons, and fiue hundred Carpenters, one hundred Joyners, many Paynters, Glaziers, Tylours, Smiths, and other Artificers, both out of England and Flaunders, to the number in all of two thouſande and more. The ſaide Pallaice was begunne the ninetéenth of Marche, for the whyche, tymber was boughte in Holand, whyche tymber was ſo long, that the ſame was bounden togyther and brought to Calleis wythout any ſhippe, for no ſhippe myghte receiue it, the other tymber and boorde was conueyed out of1519 
               Englande. And thus was there builded the goodlyeſt Pallaice of tymber that euer was wroughte, and ſo curiouſly garniſhed wythin and wythout. Then was prouiſion made in Englande and in Flaunders for victuall, wine, and all other thynges neceſſarie for the furniture of feaſting and banqueting.
            Then came into Englande, Orleaunce
                Kyng of Armes in

               France, made Proclamation at the Courte, that the Kyng of England and the Frenche Kyng, in campe betwéene Arde and Guiſnes with eightéene aydes, in June nexte enſuing, ſhould abide al commers being Gentlemen, at the tylt, & tourney, and at barriers. And the like Proclamation was made in the Courte 
                  •
               f Fraunce, by Clarencius Kyng of Armes of Englande: alſo in the Courte of Burgoigne, in Almaine, and Italie. For the furniſhing of thoſe Juſtes, there was deuiſed a tylt and all thyngs neceſſarie for that enterprice, in a goodlye plaine betwéene Guiſnes and Arde.
            
            Kyng Henrie being informed, that his realme of Ireland was oute of order, diſcharged the Earle of Kyldare of his office of Deputye, and therevnto was appoynted the Earle of Surrey Thomas Howard
                Lorde Admirall: wherefore the ſaide Earle in the beginning of April, tooke leaue of the Kyng, and the Duke of Norffolke his father, and paſſed intoAnno reg. 11. 
               Irelande with diuers Gentlemen or that hadde béene of the garriſon of Tourney, and hadde with hym one hundred Yeomen of the Kings Guarde, and other to the number of one thouſand men, and there he continued two yeres and more, in whiche ſpace he had manye battels and ſkirmiſhes, with the wilde Iriſhe.
            
            
               Iohn Wilkinſon: Nicholas Partridge, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior. 1520 Anno reg. 12.
            
            
               Sir Iames Yarforde Mercer, the 28. of October.
            
            As King Henrie was at Canterburie with the Quéene, in readineſſe to haue paſſed the Sea, he heard of the Emperor Charles his comming, who arriued at Hith in Kent, but landed at Douer on the ſixe and twentith of May, where he was mette by the Lorde Cardinall Wolſey, who conducted him from the ſhoare of Douer, to the Caſtel there, where he was lodged: On the nexte morning King Henrie came riding from Canterburie, to the Caſtel of Douer, where he ſaluted the Emperour. And on Whitſonday earely in the morning theſe two noble Princes tooke their horſes and rode to the Citie of Caunterburie, not onelye to ſolempniſe the feaſt of Pentecoſte, but alſo to ſée the Quéene his aunte.
            
               The noble perſonages of the realme of Englande, and the Quéene with hir traine of Ladyes receyued and welcomed the Emperour to Caunterburie, where he remayned tyll the Thurſday nexte following, whyche was the laſte of Maye: then he tooke hys leaue of the King, and of all the Ladyes, and ſo rode to Sandwich, where he tooke hys Ships, and ſayled into Flaunders.
            
            And the ſame daye the Kyng made ſayle from the Porte of Douer, and landed at Caleis aboute eleauen of the clocke, and wyth him the Quéene and Ladyes, and manye Nobles of the Realme. The number of perſons on the King and Quéenes ſide were 4334. and of horſes, 1637. beſides the perſons on the Frenche Quéenes and Duke of Suffolke hir huſbandes, and of the Cardinalles.
            On the fourth of June, the King wyth all hys Nobles, as well the Quéene with hir traine of Ladies as other, with the whole number of Nobles remoued frō 
               Calleis, to Guiſnes, into the moſte noble and royall lodging before ſéene, for it was a Pallaice made quadrant, and euerye quadrant was 328. foote long, whyche was in compaſſe 1312. foote aboute.
            The ſeauenth of June, the Kings of England and Fraunce met at the campe betwéene Guiſnes and Arde, wyth bothe their Swordes drawne and borne before them.
            The tenth of June, the King of Englande dyned with the Frenche Quéene in the towne of Arde: and the Frenche Kyng dyned the ſame day wyth the Quéene of England, in the new Pallaice made before the Caſtel of Guiſnes, which houſe was the moſte ſumptuous and coſtlye of Riches, that hath béen
                  •
                ſéene.
            And after thys, theſe two Kings mette euery daye after at Campe, wyth diuers Lords, and there iuſted and turneyed fourtéene dayes: and the two Quéenes met at Guiſnes and at Arde dyuers tymes.
            The foure and twentith of June theſe two Kings and Quéens with their retinues, met at Camp where the Juſts were kept, & there they banqueted & daūced with maſkings

and diſguiſings, that the like had not bin lightly ſéene, almoſt all the night following, and then tooke their leaue and departed: and on the xxv. of June, the King of England and the Quéene, and all the Court, remoued from Guiſnes to the Towne of Caleis, where they reſted.
            On the tenth of July, the King with a goodly company rode to the Towne of Grauelin in Flanders, and there mette with Charles the Emperour, and on the next morrow, the Emperour, and the Lady Margaret, the Emperours Aunt Ducheſſe of Sauoy, with many other great Eſtates, came with the King of England to the Towne of Caleis, whereby all the Lords and ſtates of England were diſplaced of their lodgings: and for ſolace againſt their comming, was buildedBanqueting houſe in the Tovvne of Caleis. Richard Turpin.
                a Banqueting houſe eyght hundred foote compaſſe, like a Theatre, after a goodly deuiſe, builded in ſuch manner, as I thinke was neuer ſéene, with ſixtéene principals made of great Maſtes, betwixt euery Maſt four and twentie foote, and all the outſides cloſed with boorde and canuas. Ouer it, and within round about by the ſides, were made thrée Scaffolds or loftes one aboue another for men and women to ſtand vpon, and in the midſt of the ſame Banqueting houſe was ſet vp a great piller of Timber made of eyght great Maſtes, bound togither with iron bands, for to holde them togither, for it was an hundred and four and thirtie 
                  •
               ote of length, and coſt ſixe pound thirtéene ſhillings foure pence to ſet it vpright. The Banqueting houſe was couered 
                  •
               uer with Canuas, faſtned with ropes and iron as faſt as might be deuiſed. And within the ſayd houſe was paynted the Heauens, with Starres, Sunne, Moone, and Clowdes, with diuers other things made aboue ouer mens heads: and ther were great Images of wickers couered, and made like great men of diuers ſtrange Nations, and diuers reaſons were written by them of the Countreys that they were likened to be off, and the Armes of thoſe Countreys hanging by them. Alſo, there was made as it were many ſhips vnder ſayle, and Windmilles going, and about the high

piller of timber that ſtoode vpright in the midſt, was made Stages of Timber for Organs, and other inſtruments to ſtande on, & men to play on them, and for other Muſitions and Pageants to be playde, when the King of England and the Emperour ſhould be at their Banquet, but in the morning of the ſame day, the winde beganne to riſe, and at night blew off all the Canuas, and all the elements, withBanqueting houſe defaced by tempeſt. the Starres, Sunne, Moone, and Clowdes, and the wind blew out aboue a thouſand Torches, and other lightes of waxe that were prepared to giue light to the Banquet, and all the Kings ſeates that were made with great riches, beſides all other things, were all daſhed and loſt. The ſame night, the King with fiftéene perſons more, were richly apparelled, and in a Maſke went to the Emperours lodging, and in the Chamber of preſence daunced and reuelled, and then departed. On the twelfth of July the Emperour and the Lady Margaret ſupped with the King and the Quéene at the Checker, where the ſame night were eyght companyes of Maſkers, and euery company twelue perſons, all in Gold, Siluer, and Ueluet richly apparelled.
            The fourtéenth of July, the Emperour departed from Caleis toward Grauelin.
            
            The eyghtéenth of July, the King of Englande with the Quéene departed from Caleis towards Calbais.
            
            
               Iohn Skeuington Mer. Taylor: Iohn Kyeme, the 28. of Sep.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Sir Iohn Bruges Draper, the 28. of October.
            
            King Henry kepte his Chriſtmas at his Manour of Greenewich, with much nobleneſſe, and open Court, and the tenth day of February in his owne perſon iuſted with all commers.
            In this time Edward▪
                Duke of Buckingham was accuſedDuke of Buckingham accuſed. 1521 of high Treaſon, wherefore the King directed his letters to the ſayd Duke, béeing at hys Manour of Thornebury in Glocesterſhire, that incontinent he ſhould come to his preſence, which commandement the Duke obeyed, and came vptoAnno reg. 13 
               London, where he was ſtreightwayes arreſted by Sir

               Henry Merney, Captayne of the Gard, and conuayde to the Tower of London on the ſixtéenth of Aprill, before whiche time, the Dukes Chancellour was taken, which had confeſſed matter of high Treaſon concerning the Kings perſon. There was alſo attached a Monke of the order of the Carthuſians being of Henton Priory, and Iohn Delaker the Dukes Confeſſor: all theſe were priſoners in the Tower. Shortly after, the Duke was arraigned at Westminster, the Duke of Norffolke ſitting as chiefe Judge. There were brought foorth againſt him witneſſes, Sir Gilbert Perke his Chancellour, Iohn de la Court his confeſſor, Charles Kneuet Eſquire, and a Monke Prior of Henton, which had diuers times ſayde to the Duke that he ſhould be King of England. Diuers preſumptions were layd to him by Charles Kneuet, which he would fayne haue couered, but in the ende he was found giltie, and had iudgement to be drawne, hanged, and quartered, and on the ſeauentéenth day of May, about eleuen of the clocke, the ſayd Edward Duke ofDuke of Buckingham beheaded. 
               Buckingham; Earle of Hereford, Stafford, and Northampton, was beheaded on the Tower hill, and his body buryed in the Friers Auguſtines Church: ſuch is the ende of ambition, the credite of falſe prophecies, and of euill life.
            This Duke had begonne a great and ſumptuous building at his Manour of Thornebury, but left the ſame vnfiniſhed. He made a faire Parke hard by the ſame building, for the which, he tooke in much faire and fruitefull ground. Alſo, another Parke at Eaſt wood, one mile off; he enlarged at two times, to the compas of ſixe miles, for the whiche déede, and ſuche like, he had many a curſſe of the poore tenants.Iohn Leyland.
            
            The ſeconde daye of Auguſt, Cardinall Wolſey paſſedThomas VVolſey Cardinall vvent Embaſſador. ouer from Douer to Caleis, to treate a peace betwixte the French King, and the Emperour, and returned agayne to Caleis in the latter end of Nouember, and from thence tooke his iourney to Blechingly, where the King welcomed him, and gaue him thankes for his great paynes.
            
               King Henry wrote a Booke againſt Luther in Germany,
               King Henry vvrote againſte Luther. and therefore the Biſhop of Rome, Leo
                the tenth, named him defender of the faith, to which Booke, Luther anſwered very ſharply, nothing ſparing his authoritie or maieſtie.
            This yeare was a peſtilence in this land, eſpecially atPeſtilence. 
               London, and a dearth of Corne, for wheate was at London ſold for twenty Shillings the quarter.
            
               Iohn Britaine merchāt Taylor: Th. Pargiter, the 28. of Sep.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Sir Iohn Milborne Draper, the 28. of October.
            
            This Sir Iohn Milborne builded certayne almes houſes adioyning to the Croſſed Friers in London, wherein he placed thirtéene aged poore people, who haue their dwelling 
                  •
               entfrée, and two ſhillings ſixe pence the péece the firſte day of euery moneth for euer.
            The ſixth of March, the French King attached all Engliſhmens
               Frenchmen attached. goodes at Burdeaux, and deteyned the Kings tribute, and the French Quéenes dower. Alſo, all Frenchmens bodies and goodes were attached at London.
            
            This yeare betwéene Eaſter and Michaelmas, was made a generall proſcription of all the Realme of England
                     •
                  .
            
            The twentith of May, Cardinall Wolſey rode through London to Douer, there to méete with the Emperour, being1522 accompanyed with two Earles, ſixe and thirtie Knightes, an hundred Gentlemen, eyght Biſhops, tenne Abbots,
                  Anno reg. 14. Cardinall VVolſey. thirtie Chapleins, all in Ueluet & Satten, and 700. yomen.
            
               Charles the fifth, Emperour, came into England, and was honourably receyued into London by the Maior, Aldermen,The Emperour came to London. and Commons of the Citie the ſixth of June, the King accompanying him: xj. Pageants were made in the Citie, and the Croſſe in Cheape new gilt. From thence, he wente to Windſore, and ſate in the Stall of the Garter. After great feaſtes, iuſtes, and honourable entertainement, he departed to Hampton, and ſayled from thence into Spayne.
            
            During this time, the Earle of Surrey Lord Admirall, brent Morles in Briteine, and then returned: not long after, he paſſed ouer to Caleis, entred Picardy, and brente diuers

Townes and Caſtels. He beſéeged Heſding, but bycauſe Winter was néere, he rayſed his ſéege, and returned.
            The Duke of Albany in Scotland began to enter this landIohn Skelton▪
                with a great Armie, but hearing that the Earle of Shrewſburie was comming, he tooke a truce for ſixe monethes.
            
               Iohn Rudſtone: Iohn Champneis, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Sir Iohn Mundy Goldſmith, the 28. of October.
            
            
               Iohn Champneis was Secretarie of the Counter.
            The Lord Roſſe, and Lord Dacres of the North, burned the Towne of Kelſey in Scotland, with fourſcore Uillages, and ouerthrew eyghtéene Towers of ſtone.
            The Emperour Charles, King Henry, and Ferdinando Duke of Austrige, the Pope, the Citie of Venice, and diuers other in Italy, were confederate againſt the Frenchmen.
            The Turkes beſéeged the Iſle of Rhodes, and on ChriſtmasThe Turkes tooke the Rhodes. day tooke it, to the great ſhame and rebuke of all Chriſtendome.
            The twentith of Februarie, the Lady Alice Hungerford
               
                  Regiſter of the grey friers. Lady Hungerford hanged. a Knightes wife, for murthering hir huſband, was ledde from the Tower of London to Holburne, and there put in a Cart with one of hir ſeruants, and ſo caried to Tiburne, and both hanged: ſhe was buryed in ye grey Friers Church at London.
            
            The Earle of Surrey burned xxxvtj. Uillages in Scotland, diſpoyled the Countrey from ye Eaſt marches to the Weſt, and ouerthrew diuers holdes.
            Sir Henry Marney was created Baron Marney at Richmond.
            
            The fiftenth of Aprill began a Parliament at the Blacke1523 Friers in London, and on the nine and twentith of Aprill, the Cardinall, with diuers Lords ſpirituall and temporal,Parliament at the black
                     •
                  friers. anno reg. 15. A great ſubſidy▪
                declared in the common houſe, that for diuers cauſes the King required a Subſidie of 800000. pound, to be reyſed on goodes and Lands, foure ſhillings of euery pound, againſt the which demand, many obiections wer made by the commons, one was, that the King had already by way of loane

two ſhillings of the pound, which was 400000. pound, and now to demaund four ſhillings the pouud, it ſhould amount in the whole to 1200000. pound, and the third partThere vvas not then 10000. parishes in England as I haue prooued by ſearch of Records. of euery mans goodes, whiche in coyne coulde not be had within the Realme &c. Among other arguments for the King, it was ſayde, that there were in England more than 40000. pariſhes, and if euery pariſh ſhould pay ſuche a ſumme as was there named, it could be no great matter. But it was by the Commons anſwered and proued, that there was not in England thirtéene thouſand pariſhes. After long debating, the Commons granted two ſhillings of the pound of euery mans goodes and lands that were worth twentie pound, or might diſpend twentie pound by yeare, and ſo vpward, and from fortie ſhillings to twentie pound, twelue pence of the pound, and vnder fortie ſhillings of euery head ſixtéene yeares and vpward four pence to be paid in two yeares. This Parliament the xxj. of May was adiourned to Westminster among the blacke Monkes, and ended in the Kings Palace at Westminster the fourtéenth of Auguſt, at nine of the clocke in the night.
            
               Chriſterne King of Denmarke, and his Quéene, arriuingThe K. and Qu. of Denmarke arriued in England. at the Downes beſides Douer the xv. of June, came to London on the xxij. of June, and were lodged in the Biſhop of Bathes place. The fifth of July, they returned agayne to Caleis.
            
            The Duke of Suffolke with many other Lords & Knights were ſent into France with an army of 10000. men, who paſſing ye water of Some without battayle, tooke diuers townes and Caſtels, deſtroying the Countrey before them.
            
               Michaell Engliſh: Nicholas Iennings, the 28. of Septemb.
               Sherifes.
            
            
               George Monex was choſen Maior, but would not takeMaior elected. it vpon him, wherefore he was condemned in a thouſande Marke for a fine, in diſcharge whereof, he gaue vnto the Citie a water Mill by the Horſe Downe in Southwarke, to grind the corne for the Bridgehouſe.
            
               Sir Thomas Baldrie Mercer, the 28. of October.
               Maior.
            
            
               This yeare, the Kippiers of Rye and other places, ſolde their freſh fiſh in Leaden hall Market at London.
            
            In December, at the Citie of Couentry, Francis Philip,
               
               Conſpiracy a
                     •
                   Couentrie. Schoole mayſter to the Kings Henxmen, Chriſtopher Pickering Clearke of the Kings Larder, and Anthony Manuile Gentleman, intended to haue taken the Kings treaſure of his Subſedie, as the Collectors of the ſame came toward London, therewith to haue reyſed men, and to haue taken the Caſtell of Killingworth, and then to haue made battayle agaynſte the King, for the whiche, they were drawn, hanged, and quartred at Tiburne the eleuenth of Februarie: the other of their conſpiracie were executed at Couentry.
            
            The Earle of Surrey brent Iedworth in Scotlande, and1524 tooke diuers holdes. The Duke of Albany beſéeged the Caſtell of Warke, and had in a readineſſe a great Armie to inuadeAnno reg. 1
                     •
                  
                
               England, but when he heard the Earle of Surrey was comming, he fledde into Scotland.
            
            The fiue and twentith of May, deceaſſed Sir Thomas Louell, Knight of the Garter, at Endfield, and the ſame moneth deceaſſed Thomas Lord Howard, Duke of Norffolke.
            
            The ſouldiers of Guiſnes tooke a great bootie at a faire in the Towne of Morguiſon, and Sir Robert Iernegan wyth certayne dimilances of Caleis, tooke diuers French priſoners.
            The firſt of September, Doctour Hanyball, Mayſter ofA golden Roſe ſent frō Rome. E. Hall.
                the Rolles, was receyued into London as Embaſſadour from Clement the ſeauenth Pope, whiche brought with him a Roſe of Gold for a token to the King, which was preſented to him at Windſore. This Trée was forged of fine Golde, and wrought with branches, leaues, and flowers, reſembling Roſes, ſet in a potte of Golde, which potte had thrée féete of A
                  •
               tike faſhion, of meaſure halfe a pinte. In the vppermoſt Roſe was a faire Saphire leape pearced the bigneſſe of an Acorne. The Trée was of height halfe an Engliſh yard, and in breadth a foote.
            
               
               Ralph Dodmer: William Roche, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Sir William Bayly Draper, the 28. of October.
            
            It chanced in the yeare paſſed, a grudge to breake out betwéene the French King, and the Duke of Burbon, in ſo much, that the Duke for the ſafegard of his life, fledde out of the French Kings Dominions, whereof the Cardinall Wolſey hauing intelligence, compriſed in his head, that if the King our ſoueraigne Lord could obteyne him to be his Generall in the warre againſt the French King, and conſidering further that the Duke of Burbon was fledde vnto the Emperour to inuite him to a like purpoſe, wherefore he hauing this imagination in his head, thought it good to moueA policie of Cardinall VVolſey, that in the end turned againſt himſelfe. the King in the matter, and after the King was once aduertiſed héereof, and conceyuing the Cardinals inuention, at laſt it came to a conſultation among the Counſell; ſo that it was concluded that an Embaſſade ſhould be ſente to the Emperour about the matter, with whome he was, that the King and the Emperour ſhould ioyne in thoſe warres againſt the French King, and that the Duke of Burbon ſhouldThe Duke of Burbon Champion for the K. of England againſt the King of France. be our Kings Champion and Generall in the fielde, who had a great number of good Souldiours, ouer and beſides the Emperours armie, which was not ſmall: and that the King ſhould pay vnto the Duke monethly wages, both for himſelfe, and his retinue, in ſo much, as Sir Iohn Ruſſell
               Sir Iohn Ruſſel. lay continually beyond the Seas in a ſecret place, both to receyue money of the King, and to pay the ſame monethly to the Duke, ſo that the Duke began the warres with the French King in his owne territorie and Dukedome, which the King had confiſked in his owne hands, being not perfectly knowne vnto the Dukes enimies that he had any ayde out of England, and thus he wrought the French King much diſpleaſure, in ſo much, as the French King was conſtreyned1525 to prepare a puiſſant Armie, and in his owne perſon to reſiſt the Dukes power, and with force the King droue him to take Pauy, a ſtrong Towne in Italy, with hys hoſt, for their ſecuritie, whereas the King encamped hym

wonderouſly ſtrong, intending to encloſe the Duke, that he ſhould not iſſue forth, yet notwithſtanding, the Duke did many times iſſue forth, and ſkirmiſhed with the King.
            Now let vs returne agayne to the Cardinall Wolſey, who ſéemed to be ſodeinly altered, and to be more FrenchAnno reg. 17 than Emperiall, howſoeuer it came ſo to paſſe: but the French King lying in his Camp, ſent ſecretly into Englande a priuie perſon, a very wittie man, to treate a peace betwixt the French King, and our King: this perſon was named Iohn Iokin, who was kept as ſecretly as might be, for he was no Frenchman borne, but an Italian a man of no great eſtimation in France, and for his ſubtile witte, elected to entreate of ſuch Embaſſade as the French King had giuen him in commiſſion. This Iokin was ſecretly conuayde vnto Richmond, and there remayned, vntill the Cardinall reſortedIohn Iokin meſſenger from the French King. thither vnto him, where after Eaſter tearme ended, he kept the feaſt of Whitſontide very ſolemnely, in which ſeaſon, the Cardinall cauſed diuers times this Iokin to dine with him. Thus continued this Iokin in England long after, vntill at the laſt, as it ſhould, he brought to paſſe the matter that he had in commiſſion. After this, there was ſente out immediatly a reſtreynt to Sir Iohn Ruſſell, into thoſe partes where he made his abiding beyond the Seas, that he ſhoulde reteyne that monethes wages ſtill in hys 
                  •
               ands, vntill the Kings pleaſure were to him knowne, which ſhould haue bin payde to the Duke of Burbon, bée
               
                  •
               ng then wyth hys retinue encamped within the Towne 
                  ••
                
               
                  ••••
               , for want whereof, at his day, the Duke and hys 
                  ••
               n were ſore diſmayde, when they ſaw there was not 
                  •••
               ey brought as it was wont to be, and béeing in ſo dan
               
                  ••
               rous a caſe, and where victualles beganne to be ſ
                  •
               ant 
                  •
               nd very déere, they imagined many wayes what ſhoulde 
                  ••
                the lette, ſome ſayde thys, and ſome ſayde that, ſo that they miſtruſted nothing leſſe than the very cauſe thereof, in ſo much as at the laſt, what for wante of victualles,

and other neceſſaries, the Souldyoures and Captaynes beganne to grudge and mutter, and at laſt, for lacke of victuals, were like all to periſh. The Souldyours being in this extremitie, came before their Captaine y• Duke of Burbon, and ſayd, Sir, we muſt bée of very force and neceſſitie conſtreyned to yéelde vs vp to our enimies, and better it were for vs ſo to do, than to ſterue lyke Dogges. When the Duke ſaw their extremitie, he ſayde vnto them with wéeping eyes, Sirs (quoth he) yée are both valiant men, and of noble heartes, who haue ſerued me héere right worthelie, and for your neceſſitie (whereof I am perticipant) I doe not a little lament▪ but I ſhall deſire you, as you are noble in heart and courage, ſo to take patience for a day or twayne, and if ſuccour come not then from the King of England, as I doubt nothing that he will deceyue vs, I will well agrée that we ſhall all put oure ſelues and our liues vnto the mercy of our Lorde, wherewith they were all agréeable: and tarrying the comming of the Kings money vntill the tearme of two dayes were paſt, the Duke ſéeing no remedie, called his noble Captaynes and Souldyoures before hym, and wéeping ſayde: Yée noble men and Captaynes, I ſée no remedie in thys neceſſitie, but eyther wée muſt yéeld vs vnto our enimies, or elſe 
                  ••
               
               miſhe, and to yéelde the Towne and our ſelues, I know not the mercie of our enimies, as for my parte, I paſſ
                  •
                not for their cruelties, for I knowe very well that 
                  •
                ſhall ſuffer death moſt cruelly if I come in their hand
                  ••
                it is not for my ſelfe therefore that I doe lamente, 
                  〈…〉
                it is for youre ſakes, it is for youre liues, and ſafegar
                  •
                of youre perſons, for ſo that yée might eſcape the dang
                  ••
                of oure enimies handes, I woulde moſt gladly 
                  〈…〉
                death, therefore good companyons, and moſt noble Souldyoures, I ſhall require you all to conſider the daungerous miſerie and calamitie that wée ſtande in, to ſell o
                  〈…〉
                liues moſt dearely, rather than to be murthered lyk
                  •
               
               
Beaſtes: if yée wyll bée agréeable, wée wyll take vpon vs thys nighte to gyue oure Enimes an aſſaulte, and by that meanes wée maye eyther eſcape, or elſe gyue them an ouerthrowe, and thus it were better to die in the Fielde lyke men, than lyue priſoners in captiuitle and miſerie, to the whiche they all agréed, then quoth the Duke, yée perceyue that our enimies Campe is ſtrong, and that there is no waye to enter vppon them but one, and that is ſo planted wyth Ordinance and ſtrength of men, that it is not poſſible to atteyne to oure Enimies that wayes to fighte wyth them in Campe. And alſo, nowe of late you perceyue they haue hadde but ſmall doubt of vs, in ſo muche that they haue kepte but verye ſlender watche, therefore, my deuice ſhall bée thus: There ſhall iſſue out of the Towne aboute the dead of the nighte from vs a number of you that bée of the moſt delyuereſt to aſſaulte theyr Campe, and they ſhall gyue the aſſaulte righte ſecretly, euen directly agaynſte the place of the entrie whyche is very ſtrong and inuincible, youre fierce and valiant aſſaulte ſhall be to them of the Campe ſo doubtfull, that they will turne their ſtrength of the entrie that lyeth ouer agaynſt your aſſaulte, to beate you from youre purpoſe, then will I iſſue out of the poſterne, and come to the place of theyr ſtrength newly turned, and there or they be ware will I enter, and fight with them in theyr Camp, and winne their Ordinance whiche they haue newly burned, and beate them wyth theyr owne 
                  ••
               ces, and then pleaſed them wonderous well. Then 
                  •••
               pared they all that daye for the purpoſed deuiſe, 
                  ••
                kepte them ſecret and cloſe without anye noyſe, or 
                  ••
               tte off péeces within the Towne, whyche gaue theyr Enimies the leſſe 
                  •
               eare of the aſſaulte, but 
                  ••
                
               
                  •
               yghte wente to theyr Tentes, and cowched 
                  〈…〉
               , nothyng miſtruſting that afterwarde immediately

happened vnto them. When the tyme came that all men were at reſt, the aſſaylants iſſued out of the Towne, and there according to their appoyntment, they gaue ſo cruell and fierce aſſault, that they in the Camp had as much to do as was poſſible to reſiſt them▪ and euen as the Duke declared before to his Souldiours, they within were compelled to turne their ſhotte that lay at the entrie, againſt the aſſaylants. With that iſſued the Duke, and with him about fiftéene or ſixtéene thouſand men, or more, ſecretly in the night, his enimies being not priuie of his comming, vntill he was entred the fielde, and at his entrie, he tooke all the Ordinance that lay there, and ſlew the Gunners, then hée charged the péeces againſt his enimies, and ſlewe them wonderfully, he cutte downe the Tentes and Pauilions, and murthered many within them, ere they were ware of his comming, ſo that he wanne the field or euer the KingFrench King taken. could ariſe to the reſcue, in ſo much as the King was taken in hys lodging or euer he were harneſſed, his Tentes were robbed and ſpoyled which were wonderous rith: and in the ſpoyle and ſearch of the Kings coffers, the Duke of Burbon found the league vnder the great Seale of England, newly made betwéene the King of England, and the French King, which once perceyued by him, began to ſmell the impediment of his money which ſhould haue come vnto him from the King, hauing vpon due ſearch intelligence that all the matter was deuiſed by the Cardinall of Englande. The Duke conceyued ſuche an indignation héerevpon agaynſt the Cardinall, that incontinente hée wente vnto Rome, and there intended to ſacke the Towne, and to haue taken the Pope, where at the firſt aſſaulte of the walles, the Duke was the firſt man that was ſtayne, yet notwithſtanding; hys Captaynes continued their aſſaulte, and at the ſaſt wanne the Towne, and the Pope fleddeRome ſacked, the people fled. vnto Castell Saint Angell, where hée continued long in calamitie. All this notwithſtanding, which yée haue hear
                  •
               
               ▪
               
when newes was brought into England of the taking of the French King, great triumph was made for ioy thereof on the ninth of March.
            About ſuch time as Cardinall Wolſey was determinedCardinall VVolſey ſuppreſſeth Priories to build his Colledges in Oxford and in Ipſvvich. to erect his new Colledges in Oxford and Ipſwich, he obteyned licence and authoritie of Pope Clement the ſeauenth, to ſuppreſſe about the number of fortie Monaſteries of good ſame, and bountifull hoſpitalitie, wherein the King bearing with all his doings, neyther Biſhop, nor temporall Lorde in this Realme durſt ſaye any worde to the contrarie.
            In the executing of this buſineſſe, fiue perſons were his chiefe inſtruments, who on a time made a demaunde to the Prior and Couent of the Monaſterie of Daintrie, for occupying of certayne of theyr groundes, but the Monkes refuſing to ſatiſfie their requeſts, ſtreightway they picked a quarrell agaynſte the houſe, and gaue information to the Cardinall agaynſte them, who taking a ſmall occaſion, commaunded the houſe to bée diſſolued, and to bée cōuerted to hys new Colledge, but of thys irreligeous robberie, done of no conſcience, but to patch vp pride, whiche priuate wealth coulde not furniſhe, what puniſhmente hath ſince enſued at Gods hande (ſayeth myne Authour) partly our ſelues haue ſéene, for of thoſe fyue perſons, two fell at diſcorde betwéene themſelues, and the one ſlewe the other, for the which, the ſuruiuor was hanged: the thirde drowned hymſelfe in a well: the fourth béeing well knowne, and valued worth two hundreth pounde, became in thrée yeares ſo poore, that hée begged to hys dying day: and the fifth called Doctor Allane, béeyng thiefe executor of theſe doyngs, was cruelly maymed in Irelande, euen at ſuche tyme as hée was a Biſhop: the Cardinall falling after into the Kings gréeuous diſpleaſure, was depoſed, and dyed miſerably: the Colledges whiche hée meante to haue made ſo glorious a building, came neuer to good effect: and Pope Clement himſelfe,

by whoſe authoritie, theſe houſes were throwne downe to the ground, was after encloſed in a dangerous ſéege within the Caſtell of Saint Angell in Rome by the Emperialles, the Citie of Rome was pitifully ſacked, and himſelfe narrowly eſcaped with his life.
            The Tower at Greenewich was this yeare builded.Greenevvich tovver builded.
            
            Creations at Bridewell. On the eyghtéenth of June, Henry Fitz Roy, which King▪ 
               Henry the eyght had by Elizabeth,
               Creations at Bridevvell. daughter to Sir Iohn Blunt Knight, was created Earle of Notingham, Duke of Richmond and Somerſet, Lieutenant Generall from Trent Northwards, Warden of the Eaſt, middle, and Weſt marches, fore aneinſt Scotlande. Henry
                Earle of Deuonſhire, was created Marqueſſe of Exceter. Henry
                Earle of Lincolne, Thomas
                Earle of Rutlande, Henry Earle of Cumberland, were likewiſe created. Robert Ratcliffe Lord Fitzwater, created Uicount Egremunt. Thomas Bolleyne Knight, Treaſourer of the Kings houſe, was created Uicount Rochford.
            
            Great murmuring was in all partes of the Realme for payment of money, and Suffolke men to the number of four thouſand, roſe in a tumult, agaynſte whome, was ſente the Duke of Norffolke, and other commiſſioners, by whoſe wiſedome they were appeaſed, and diuers executed.
            
               Iohn Caunton: Chriſtopher Askew, the 28. of Septemb.
            
            
               Sir Iohn Allen Mercer, the 28. of October.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            The eleuenth of February, four Merchants of ye 
               Stilyard did penance at Pawles Croſſe, and an Auguſtine Frier, called Doctor Barnes, bare a Fagot: there was preſent the Lord Cardinall, with eleuen Biſhops, Iohn Fiſher, Biſhop of Rochester made the Sermon, which was againſt Martine Luther of Germany,
                and his doctrine.
            A truce was taken betwéene Englande and France for a certayne ſpace, and Embaſſadors were ſent into Denmarke,
               1526 for reſtoring of their King, but the Danes woulde graunte nothing therevnto; they did ſo deadly hate hym for hys crueltie.
            
               The xxviij. of Aprill, came to the Court to Greenewiche
               
                  Anno reg. 18 Peace vvith France. 
               Mounſire Briond, Preſident of Roane, and Iohn Iokin, which Preſident, before the King and his Nobles, made in the Latin tongue a ſolemne Oration, the effect whereof was, how dreadfull the warres had bin betwéene the Realmes of England and France. He declared further of what power the King of Englande was, and what conqueſt he might haue made in France, the French King being priſoner, whereof he humbly thanked him of his pitie and compaſſion that he had on them in their neceſſitie, that he would conſente to peace: to the which Oration, Sir Thomas Moore, Chancellour of the Duchy of Lancaster, made anſwere, ſaying: that it much reioyced the King, that they firſt conſidered, how by hys power he might haue oppreſſed, and how by hys pitie he had reléeued them, wherefore he would héere after, that for kindneſſe they ſhoulde ſhewe hym none vnkindneſſe, but inuiolably kéepe that league which was cōcluded.
            In the moneth of May, was proclamation made againſtProclamation againſt vnlavvfull g
                     ••
                  es. all vnlawfull games, and commiſſions awarded into euerie Shire, for the execution of the ſame, ſo that in all places, Tables, Dice, Cardes, and Bowles, were taken and brent, but when yong men were reſtreyned of theſe games and paſtimes, ſome fell to drincking, ſome to ferretting of other mens Conyes, and ſtealing of Deare in Parkes, and other vnthriſtineſſe.
            The ſixth of September, was proclamation for Golde,Gold ennaunced the French Crowne foure ſhillings ſixe pence, the Angelet ſeauen ſhillings and ſixe pence, the Riall xj. s̄. iij. d. &c.
            
               Stephen Peacocke: Nicholas Lambart, the 28. of Sept.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Sir Thomas Semer Mercer, the 28. of October.
            
            In the monethes of Nouember, December, and Januarie,Great raynes and land vvaters. fell ſuch rayne, that thereof enſued great fluddes, which deſtroyde Corne fields, Paſtures, and Beaſtes, then was it drie till the twelfth of, April▪ and from that time it rayned euery day and night till the third of June, whereby Corne fayled ſore in the yeare following.
            
               After the deliuerie of the French King out of the Emperours1527 bondage, and his ſonnes receyued in hoſtage for the Emperours and the King of Englands ſecuritie, of allAnno reg. 19. ſuch demaundes and requeſtes as ſhould be demaunded of the French King. The Cardinall Wolſey lamenting the French Kings calamitie, and the Popes great aduerſitie, who yet remayned in the Caſtell Angell, trauelled all that he could with the King and his Counſell, to take ſome order for the quietneſſe of them both. At laſt, it was thought good that the ſayde Cardinall ſhoulde take vppon him the Kings commiſſion, to trauell beyond the Seas in this matter,Cardinall ſent Embaſſador into France. and by his witte, to compaſſe a perfect peace among thoſe potentates: wherevpon, he was commanded to prepare himſelfe to this iourney, which he tooke vpon him. He had with hym the Earle of Darby: the Biſhop of London Lord priuie ſeale: Sir Henry Gilfort, Knight of the Garter, comptroller of the Kings houſe: the Lord Sands, Knight of the Garter, Lord Chamberlayne of the Kings houſe: Doctor Taylor, Mayſter of the Rolles: Sir Thomas Moore, Knight, Chancellour of the Duchy of Lancaster▪
                the Biſhop of Deuelin: the Lord Mountegle: the Lord Harrenden: Sir Iohn Dudley Knight: Mayſter Ratclife: Maiſter Willowby: Mayſter Parker: Mayſter Sturton: Uicounts and Baro
                  ••
                ſonnes and heires, Sir Francis Brian, Sir Edward Semer▪
                Sir Robert Gernigam, Doctor Stephen Gardener Secretarie, Doctor Peter Vannes Secretarie: Of the priuie Chamber, Maiſter Hennege, Maiſter Arundell, Maiſter Kneuet▪
                Maiſter Alford: Phiſitions, Doctor Frances, Doctor Smith: Gentlemen Uſhers of the priuie Chamber, Maiſter Walgraue, Maiſter Elles, Sir Thomas Denis high Chamberlen, Maiſter Sent
                     •
                  lere Uizchamberlaine: Gentlemen Uſhers, M. Wentworth, M. Hanſard, M. Pemercy, M. Conſtable, M. Werren: Of houſhold, M▪ 
               Cade Steward, ſir Wil. Gaſcoigne Treaſurer, M. Goſtike Comptroller, M. Broughton Mayſter of the Horſſe Doctor Allen, Doctor Benet, Doctor Duke, Deane of the Chapell, Doctor Capō
                Almoner, y• Archdea
                  ••
               
               
of Canterbury: the Archedeacon of Carleile: ſir Iohn Sent-Iohn, ſir Richard Sands Knights, &c. in al to ye number of 900. horſes. Then marched he forwarde from hys owne houſe atThe pompous ryding of the Card
                     ••
                  a
                     •
                  . 
               Westminster, throughe London ouer London bridge, hauing before hym all the Gentlemen, thrée in a rancke in Ueluet Coates, and the moſte of them greate chaines of Golde aboute their neckes, and all hys Yeomen followed hym with Noblemens and Gentlemens ſeruants, al in Orenge tawney coates, with the Cardinalles Hat, and a T. 
                     •
                  . for Thomas Cardinall embrodered vpon all the Coates, aſwell of hys owne ſeruants, as of al the reſte of Gentlemens ſeruantes: and hys Sumpter Mules whyche were twentie or more, with all his cariage of Cartes, and other of hys traine, were paſſed before. He rode like a Cardinall verye ſumptuouſlye on hys Mule, wyth his ſpare Mule and ſpare horſe trapped in Crimoſin Ueluet vpon veluet, and ſtirrops guilt folowing him: And before hym he had his twoo great Croſſes of ſiluer, his two great Pillers of ſiluer, the Kings broade Seale of Englande, and hys Cardinals Hat, and a Gentlemanne carying hys Ualence, otherwiſe called his Cloake▪ bagge, whyche was made of fine Scarlet altogyther embrodered very richly with Golde, hauing in it a cloake. Thus paſſed he forth throughe London, and all the waye euerye daye in his iourney he was thus furniſhed, hauing hys Harbengers in euerye place before, whych prepared lodging for hys traine.
            The firſt iourney that he made, was twoo myles beyond Dertford in Kent, vnto ſir Thomas Wiltſhires houſe, and the reſte of hys traine were lodged in Dertford, and in the countrey there-aboutes. The nexte daye he marched to Rocheſ
                     •••
                  , where he was lodged in the Byſhoppes Pallaice, and the reſt of his traine in the Citie & in Strowde. The third day he rode to Feuerſham, and there was lodged in the Abbey, & his traine in the towne there, and ſome in the Countrey there-aboutes. The fourth daye he rode to Caunterburie, where he encountred wyth the worſhipfull of the town and

Country, and lodged in the Priorie of Christchurch, and all hys traine in the Citie, where he continued thrée dayes, in whiche ſeaſon there was a greate fayre in the Towne, by reaſon it was the feaſt of Thomas of Canterburie. At whych daye there was a ſolempne Proceſſion, wherein the Cardinal then went apparelled in hys Legantine Ornamentes, with hys Hat on his heade, who commaunded the Monks and the Quéere to ſing the Letany after this ſorte, Sancta Maria, or a pro Papa nostra Clemente, the Cardinall knéeling at a Stoole before the Quéere dore all the while the Monks and their Quéere ſtoode in the body of the church ſinging the Letany.
            The eleauenth of July the Cardinall arriued at Calleis, who was receiued with all the Officers and Counſell of the Towne, the Maior of the Towne, and the Maior of the Staple in Proceſſion, and in the Lauterne Gate, he knéeled and made his prayers: that done, they paſſed on before vntill he came to Saint Maries Churche, from whence he repayred with a greate number of Noblemen and Gentlemen, béeing Péeres of the Towne vnto a place called the Checker, where he was lodged, and kepte his houſe as long as he abode in the Towne. When all his traine and carriage was landed, and euery thing prepared for his iourney, he called all hys Noblemen & Gentlemen, beyng ſeruants vnto him into hys priuie Chamber, where they being al aſſembled before hym he ſayde: I haue called you hither to the intent to declare vnto you, that I conſider the duetie you beare me, and the good will that I ſemblably beare to you, ſéeing your intendment to further the aucthoritie that I haue by Commiſſion, whiche your diligent ſ
                  •
               ruice I wil remember hereafter, and therefore I meane to declare the ſame directly to the King. Secondly, to ſhewe you the nature of the Frenche men: And thirdely, to inſtructe you howe and with what reuerence yée ſhall vſe me for the honor of the Kings Maieſtie, and then to enforme you

howe ye ſhall entertaine and accompanye the Frenche men when ye ſhall méete at anye time.
            The firſt poynt ye ſhall vnderſtand, that the Kings Maieſtie for certaine waightie affaires, of his Graces hathe for more aduauncement of his royall dignitie aſſigned me to be in this iorney his lieuetenant, and what reuerence belongeth to the ſame I will tell you, for my parte I muſte by vertue of my Commiſſion and Lieuetenantſhip aſ
                  •
               ume and take vppon me to be eſtéemed in all honor and degrées of ſeruice, as to his Highneſſe preſence is méete and due, and that by me nothyng to be neglected, that to hys royall eſtate is due and appertinent. And for my parte yée ſhall ſée me, that I wyll not omit one iote thereof. Therefore bycauſe that ye ſhal not be ignorant of your dutie in this caſe, as one of the chiefe cauſes of this youre aſſembly, willing you as you will haue my fauour, and alſo charge you in the kings name, that ye doe not forget the ſame in time and place, but that euerye one of you do obſerue your duety vnto me accordingly as ye w
                  ••
                at your return auoide the kings 
                  ••••
               gnation▪ or obtaine and deſerue hys highneſſe thankes, the whiche I will ſette forth, as eache of you ſhall deſerue. Nowe to the ſeconde point, the nature of the Frenche men is ſuche, that at the firſte méeting they will be as familiar with you as they had bin acquainted wyth you long before, and commune with you in their Frenche tongue, as though ye vnderſtoode euerye worde, therefore vſe them in like maner, and be as familiar with them as they be wyth you. If they ſpeake in their natural tongue, ſpeake you agayne vnto▪ them in the Engliſhe tongue: For, if you vnderſtande not them, no more ſhall they vnderſtande you: and ſpeakyng merilye to one of the Gentlemenne there, being a Welche manne, ſayde, Rice (quoth hée) ſpeake you Welche to them: I doubt not but that thy ſpeache ſhall be more defuſe to hym, than hys Frenche ſhal be to 
                  •
               hée.
            And thus quoth he againe to them all, lette all youre

entertainement and behauior be according to the order of all gentleneſſe and humilitie, that it may be reported after your departure from thence, that ye be Gentlemen of right good behauiour, and of muche gentleneſſe, and that ye are men, who knowe your dueties to your Soueraigne Lord, and to your Maiſter, eſtéeming muche youre greate reuerence. Thus ſhall ye not onelye obtaine to youre ſelues greate commendation and praiſe for the ſame, but alſo aduaunce the honor of your Prince and Countrey: Nowe go your wayes, being admoniſhed of al theſe pointes, and prepare your ſelues againſte to morrowe, for then we intende (God willing) to ſet forwarde. The nexte morrowe, béeing Mary Magdalens day, all thyngs béeing furniſhed, the Cardinal aduanced out of Calleis, wyth ſuche a number of blacke Ueluet Coates, as hath béene ſeldome ſéene with an Embaſſador, al the Péeres of Calleis and Guiſnes, with al other Gentlemen beſides his traine, béeyng garniſhed in blacke Ueluet Coates and Chaines of Golde. Thus paſſed hée forwarde wyth his traine of Gentlemen before him thrée in a rancke, which by ſuppoſall endured thrée quarters of a myle or more in length, hauyng his Croſſes and all other his accuſtomed and glorious furniture carryed before him, as I haue before rehearſed, excepte the broade Seale, the whyche he lefte in Calleis wyth Doctour Taylour, then Maiſter of the Rolles, vntil his returne. Paſſing thus on hys way, and being ſcantly rydden a myle, it beganne to raine ſo vehemently, as lightly had not béene ſéene the like, whyche endured vntill they came to Boloinge, and ere they came to Sandingfielde, the Cardinal of Loraine, a goodly yong Gentleman, encountred the Cardinall of Englande, and receyued him with great ioy and reuerence▪ and ſo paſſed forth wyth the Cardinal in communication vntil they came nigh vnto the ſaide Sandingfielde, whych was a place of Religion, ſtanding betwéene the Engliſhe-Frenche, and the Emperours dominions, beyng a Newter, holding of neyther of them. There awayted for him Le Countie Brian, Capitaine of Pycardie,
               
with a greate number of S
                     •
                  radiates or Albenois, ſtandyng in arraye in a greate péece of gréene Oates, all in harneſſe vpon high horſes, paſſing on with the Cardinall in a wing vnto Bolongne, and ſo after throughe Picardie▪
                
               
                  •••
                the Cardinal doubted ſomewhat the Emperour, that he ſhould lay ſome ambuſh to betray hym, for whyche cauſe the French Kyng commaunded them to attende vppon hym for the aſſuraunce of his perſon. Thus rode he vntil he came within one Engliſhe myle of Bolongne, where encountred hym the Worſhipfull Citizens of the Towne of Bolongne, hauing a learned man that made vnto hym an Oration in Latine, vnto the whyche the Cardinall ſemblably made anſweare: And that done, Monſieur de Bees Capitaine of Bolongne with the retinue there of Gentlemen, mette wyth him on horſebacke, and then with al this aſſembly he rode into the town lighting at the Abbey gate, and from thence conueyed wyth Proceſſion into the Abbey Churche there offered, then went he into the Abbey to hys lodging, and all his traine were lodged in the high and baſe townes. The next morning after hée rode to Mutterell Ser Lemere, where he was in like caſe encountred with the Worſhipful of the Towne al in one Lyuerie, hauing a learned man to make an Oration vnto thē in Latine, whome he aunſwered alſo again in Latine. And as he entred in at the Gates, there was a Canapie made readie of ſilke, embrodered with letters & Hat euen as his men had on their Coates, and when that he was lighted, his footemen had the ſame as a Fée due to the office. Nowe was there made dyuers Pageants for the ioy of his comming, who was called in the Frenche tong there, and in al other places throughe the Realme where he rode or came, Le Cardinall Pacifique. The nexte daye hée tooke hys iourney towardes Abvile, where hée was encountred wyth diuers Gentlemen of the Towne and Countrey, and ſo recey
                  •
               ed into the towne with Pageants, as he rode thorough the towne, hauing a lyke Canapie borne ouer him, but more richer, and ſo broughte to hys lodgy
                  •
               g in thys

Towne, he remayned more than eyght dayes, where reſorted to him dayly diuers of the Frenche Kings Counſell ſitting with him in counſell euerye daye, and continually feaſting him and other. When the time came of hys departing out of the Towne, he rode to the Caſtell beyonde the water of Some, called Le Chanel de Picqiny adioyning to the ſaide watch vpon a Rocke, wythin the whyche there was a Colledge of Prieſts, the ſcituation whereof was much like vnto the Caſtel of Windſore, and there he was receiued with ſolemnne Proceſſion, and lodged that nighte. The nexte morning the Cardinall rode towarde Amiens, and paſſing on his way, he was encountred with noble perſonages, who made to him diuers Orations, whiche he anſwered extempore. Afterwarde the Frenche King with a goodly company mette with the Cardinal, embraced eche other: The preace was ſo thicke, that diuers had their legs hurt with horſes. Then the King and the Cardinall on his right hande rode forth towardes Amiens, euery Engliſhe Gentleman accompanyed with an other of Fraunce. The traine of theſe two
                  •
                Princes endured two long Engliſhe myles, they were nobly receyued into the Towne of Amiens with ſhot of Guns and coſtly Pageants, vntil the King had brought the Cardinall to his lodging, and then departed for that nighte, the King being lodged in the Biſhoppes Pallaice. The next daye after dinner the Cardinal rode to the Courte to the King, at whiche time the king kepte his bedde: yet neuertheleſſe, the Cardinall came into his bed▪chamber, where, on the one ſide of the bed ſate the Kings mother, and on the other ſide the Cardinal of Loraine, accompanied with diuers other Noblemen of Fraunce, and after a ſhorte communication, and drinking of a cuppe of Wine, he departed to hys owne lodging. Thus continued the Cardinall and the king in Amiens, the ſpace of a fortnight and more, conſulting and feaſting eche other dyuers tymes. Then the King and the Cardinall remoued to a Citie called Champaine, whych was more than. xx. Engliſh myles from Amiens, they were both

lodged in the great caſtel of y• town, wherof y• Cardinal had the one halfe aſſigned him for his lodging▪ & the king the other halfe. And like wiſe they denided a long Gallerie béetwéen thē, where was made in the midſt a ſtrong wal, with a window & a dore. The King & the Cardinal would many times méete at the ſame window & talke: and diuers times they woulde goe into the other at the ſaid dore. Then came there to my lord Cardinal y• Lord Chancelor of France, with al the kings counſellers, where they toke great paines dayly in conſultation, inſomuch that y• Cardinall of England fel out with the Chancelor of France, laying to hys charge, that he went about to hinder the league whyche before his comming was cōcluded, inſomuch, that Madam Regent hir ſelf & many Nobles of France, with much labor & trauel coulde ſcarcely bring the Cardinal to his former ſtate of communitation, he was in ſuche a wroth againſt the Chancelor: by theſe meanes, he brought other things to paſſe, that before he could not attaine, whiche was more for feare than for any affection to the matter, he had the heades of the Counſell ſo vnder his gyrdle. The next morning after this conflict he roſe early about foure of the clocke, and ſate him downe to write letters, into Englande vnto the King, commaundyng me of hys Chapleines to prepare hym ready to ſay Maſſe, inſomuch, that the Chaplaine ſtoode in his veſtures vntill four of the clocke in the afternoone: al which ſeaſon the Cardinal neuer roſe to eate or drinke, nor to make water, but continually wrote, and aboute the houre of foure in the afternoone he made an end, commaunding Chriſtopher Gunner the Kings ſeruant, without delay to ride Poſt into Englande with thoſe letters, whome he diſpatched away or euer he dranke, and then went to Maſſe, and ſaid his ſeruice with his Chapleine, and after went bothe to dinner and ſupper all at once.
            The nexte night after the Cardinall made a great Suppe
                  •
                for Madam Regent, for the Quéene of Nauar and other 
                  •••
               ate eſtates of Ladies and noble women, and at the

middeſt of the ſaid banquet▪ the Kings of Fraunce and of Ni
                  
                     ••••
                  
                  ▪
                came ſo day 
                  •
               elye in vnlooked for, and tooke their place in the loweſt parte of the banqu
                  •
               t▪ The ſupper and banquet being finiſhed, the Ladyes and Gentlemen fell to daūcing, and ſo paſſed awaye the moſte of the nighte ere they departed.
            Shortely after the King cauſed a wilde Bore to be lodged for him in the For reſt of Champaigne, and thither the Cardinal rode wyth hym to ſée hym hunt▪ where the Lady Regent with a number of Ladyes and Damoiſels were ſtandyng in Chariots, looking on the toyle on the oute ſide, whyche was pitched there for that purpoſe: among whom ſtoode the Cardinal to regarde the hunting in Madam Regents Chariot, and wythin the Toyle was the King with diuers minion Gentlemen of Fraunce readye furnyſhed to thys highe and daungerous enteprice of the hunting, the King beyng in his doublet and hozen all of ſhéepes colour cloth, hauing in his 
                  ••
               ippe a brace of greate white Greyhoundes, who were armed as the maner there is: and the reſte of the Kings Gentlemen being appoynted to hunte this Bore, were likewiſe in their doublets and hoſs▪ holdyng eache of them in theyr handes verye ſharpe Bore ſpeares. Then the King commaunded the Kéepers to vncouche the Bore, and that euerye perſon béeing within the Toile ſhould go to a ſtanding, among whome were dyuers Gentlemen and Yeomen of Englande▪
                and incontinent the Bore iſſued out of his den, and followed with an hounde, came into plaine, where béeing ſcaled a whyle, and gazing vpon the people, and incontinent pierced by the hounde, he ſpyed a lyttle buſhe ſtanding behinde a banke ouer a ditche (vnder the whiche laye two Frenche Gentlemen) and thither fledde, truſting there to haue defended himſelfe, who thruſt his head ſnuffing into the ſame buſhe, whyche cauſed the two Gentlemen to flye from thence, as from the danger of death. Then was the Bore by purſuite of Hunters and the hounde, driuen from thence, who ranne ſtraighte to one of the Cardinalles foote▪men,

a very ta
                  ••
                yong Yeoman, who hadde in his handes a 
                  ••••
               line, with the whiche he was faine to defende hymſelf from the Bore a greate while, the Bore continually 
                  •
               oyning at hym with his tuſkes, ſo that he was faine at laſte to pitche his Iaueline in the grounde betwéene him and the Bore: the whiche the Bore brake with the force of hys foyning, and with that the yeoman drew hys ſword, and ſtoode at defence, and therewith the Hunters came to the reſcue, and putte him once againe to flight, with that he fledde to an other yong Gentleman of England called Maiſter Henry Ratcliffe, who was ſonne and heyre to the Lorde Fitz Walter, who had borrowed by chance of a Frenche▪
                Gentleman a very fine and ſharp Bore ſpeare, where with he thruſte the Bore in the mouth, and ſo into the throate. wherevpon the paſtime was ended.
            The Cardinall paſſing diuers dayes in conſultation, & in other matters, expecting the returne of Chriſtopher Gunner, at the laſte he returned with letters againe, vppon receite whereof the Cardinall intended to remoue: being then at Maſſe in hys Cloſet, he conſecrated the Chauncelour of Fraunce Cardinall, and putte vppon hym his Habite, hys Hatte, and Cap of Scarlet, and then tooke hys iourney, returning againe into Englande, makyng ſuche neceſſary expedition, that he came to Guiſ
                     •
                  es, where he was nobly receyued by the Lorde Sandes then Capitaine there, wyth all the retinue of the ſame. And from thence he rode to Calleis, where he tarryed the ſhipping of his ſtuffe, horſes, and 
                  ••
               aine. And in the meane time, he ſtabliſhed there a Marte 
                  •
               or all nations. Theſe things and other for the weale of the Towne and Garriſon by him perfecte, he tooke ſhipping & 
                  ••••
               ued at Douer the xxiiij. of September, from whence he 
                  ••
               de to the Courte, the King being in hys Progreſſe at ſ
                  ••
                Henrie Wiats houſe in Kent, he wente immediately to hym with whome he hadde long talke, and continued twoo or three dayes there in the Courte, and then retourned to hys houſe at Westminster.
            
            
               Such ſcarcitie of bread was in London, and al England, thatScarcitie of breads. many dyed for default thereof: the King of his goodneſſe ſent to the Citie of his own prouiſion 600. quarters, or elſe for one wéeke there had bin little breade. The bread cartes cō
               ming frō 
               Stratford toward London were met at y• 
               Myle 
                     •
                  nd by the Citizens, ſo that the Maior and Sheriffes were forced to goe and reſcue the ſame Eartes, and to fée them broughte to the Markets appointed.
            Wheate was then at fiftéene ſhillings the quarter: but ſhortly after the Merchants of the Stiliarde broughte from Danske ſ
                  ••
               he ſtore of Wheate and Rie, that the ſame was better cheape to be ſolde in London than in any other part of the Realme beſides.
            
               Iohn Hardie: William Hollis the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Sir Iames Spencer, Vintner, the 28. of October
            
            After the beginning of the Terme, the Cardinall cauſed to be aſſembled in the Starre Chamber, all the Noblemen, Iudges and Iuſtices of Peace that were in Westminster hall at that tyme preſent, and there made to them a long Oration,Cardinal VVolſey in the Starre Chamber declareth vvhat an honorable peace he hadde concluded. declaring the cauſe of his Embaſſade into Fraunce, and of his procéedings there: among the whyche he ſaide he had concluded ſuch an amitie, as neuer was heard in the realm before, as well betwéen the Emperour and vs, as betwéene the King our Soueraigne and the Frenche King, with a perpetuall peace, the whyche ſhould be confirmed in writyng, ſealed in fine Golde: affyrming further, that the Kyng of Englande ſhould receiue yearly his tribute by that name out of the Dutchie of Normandie, wyth all the coſtes whyche hée had ſuſtained in the warres: And alſo, where there was a reſtraint made in Fraunce of the Frenche Quéenes Dowrie, (whome the Duke of Suffolke had married) for diuers yeres during the wars, it was concluded, that ſhe ſhould not onelye receiue it againe, but alſo the arrerages that were 
                  ••
               
               payed.

This peace thus concluded, there ſhoulde be ſuche an amitie betwéene the Gentlemen of eache realme and enterco
                  •
               rſe of Merchants, that it ſhoulde ſéeme to al men both territories to be but one Monarchie, &c.
            The twentith of October were receyued into London certaine Embaſſador
                  •
                oute of Fraunce, aboute eyghte in number, of the moſte noble and worthye Gentlemenne in all Fraunce they were lodged in the Biſhops Pallaice in Paules Churchyard▪ to whome di
                  •
               ers Noblemen reſorted, and gaue them dyuers preſents, eſpecially the Maior of the Citie of London.
            
            Then they reſorted vnto the Courte, béeyng at Greenewiche, where they were receiued by the King. They hadde Commiſſion to eſtabliſhe the King in the order of Fraunce, for whome they broughte, for that intente, a collar of fine Golde, with the Michaell hanging thereat, and Robes to the ſame order appertenant, the whiche was of blewe Uel
               
                  •
               et richly embrodered. And the King to gratifie the French 
               
                  •
               yng with the ſemblable, he ſent a noble man of the order here in Englande, with Garter the Harrault into France, to eſtabliſhe the Frenche King in the order of the Garter, with 
                  ••
               emblable collar, wyth a Garter and Robes accordyng to the ſame.
            The Embaſſadors remayning here vntil theyr returne, 
                  ••
                things béeyng concluded concerning the perpetuall peace vppon ſolempne ceremonies and othes contained in certain Inſtruments touching the ſame, whych was confirmed by receyuing of the Sacrament in Paules Churche of London by the King, and the Graund Maiſter of France, who repreſented the King his Maiſter, and there the inſtrumentes were ſe
                  •
               led with Golde, and the King put his hande therevnto, and the Graund Maiſter did the lyke: betwéene whome the Cardinall diuided the Sacrament: And that done, they de
               
                  ••
               rted, the King rode wyth the Cardinall to Westminſter,
               
and there dyned wyth all the Frenche men, paſſyng a
                  •
                the day after with conſultation of waightie matters touchyng the concluſion of the ſaide article of the perpetuall peace.
            The King then depa
                  •
               ted againe by water to Greenewich, at whoſe departing it was concluded by the Kings deuice, that al the Frenche men ſhoulde reſorte to Richemonde, and hunt in euerye one of the Parkes there: and from thence to Hampton Courte, and there to hunt, and the Cardinall to make there a ſupper or banquet, or both to them. And from thence they ſhould ryde to Windſore, and there to hunt: And after to returne to London, & ſo to Greenewich, & there to banquet with the King. Then was there made preparation of all thyngs for this greate aſſemblye at Hampton Court: the Cardinall called before him his principal Officers, as Stewarde, Treaſorer, Comptroller, and Clearke of hys Kitchin to whome he declared his minde, touchyng the entertainement of the Frenche men at Hampton Courte: his pleaſure to them knowne, they ſent out Caters, Purueyors and other, the Cookes wrought both night & daye in ſuttleties, the Yeomen and Grooms of the Wardrobes were buſied in hanging of the Chambers, and furniſhing the ſame wyth beds of ſilke and other furniture▪ there were prouided 280. beds furniſhed with all manner of furniture to them belonging.
            The daye was come to the French men aſſigned, and1526 they ready aſſembled before the houre of their appointmēt, wherefore the officers cauſed them to ryde to Ha
                     •
                  
                  ▪ orth, a place and a Parke of the Kings wythin thrée myles, there to hunt & ſpen
                  •
                the day vntill night, at whyth time they returned againe to Hampton Courte, & euery of them conueyed to theyr ſeuerall Chambers, hauing in them greate 
                  ••
               
               ers and wi
                  •
               e for their comforte, remayning there vntil the Supper was ready. The Chambers where they ſupped and banqueted, were ordered in this ſort: Firſt, the great wayting Chamber was hanged with rich Arras, as none wereA
                     ••
                  oreg. 20 better than other, and furniſhed with tall yeomen to ſerue.
            
               There were ſette Tables rounde aboute the Chamber banquet wiſe couered, a Cupborde was there garniſhed with whyte ſiluer Plate, hauing alſo in the ſame Chamber to giue the more light, foure plates of ſiluer ſette with greate lightes, and a greate fire of wood and coales. The nexte Chamber, being the Chamber of Preſence, was hanged with verye riche arras, and a ſumptuous cloth of eſtate furniſhed with many goodly Gentlemen to ſerue the Tables ordered in maner as the other Chamber was, ſauing that the highe Table was remoued beneath the cloth of Eſtate towarde the middeſt of the Chamber couered. Then was there a Cupborde, being in length as broade as the Chamber, with ſixe Deſks of haight, garniſhed wyth guilt Plate, 
                  •
               auing wyth lightes one payre of Candleſtickes of Syluer and guylte, béeyng curiouſly wrought, whyche coſt thrée hundred Markes, and ſtandyng vpon the ſame twoo lightes of Waxe burning as byg as Torches to ſet it forth. This Cupborde was barred rounde aboute, that no manne coulde come nighe it, for there was none of all this Plate touched in this bāquet, for there was ſufficient beſides. The Plates that hong on the walles to giue light were of ſiluer and guilte, hauyng in them great pearchers of Waxe burning, a greate fire in the Chimney, 
                  •
               nd all other things neceſſary for the furniture of ſo noble a feaſte. Nowe was all things in a readineſſe. The Trumpettes were blowne to warne to ſupper. The Officers diſcréetely conducted theſe Noblemen from theyr Chambers into the Chamber where they ſhoulde ſup, and cauſed them there to ſette downe, and that done, their ſeruice came vppe in ſuche abundance both coſtlye and full of ſuttleties, and with ſuche a pleaſaunte noyſe of inſtruments of Muſike, that the Frenche men (as it ſéemed) were rapte into a heauenly Paradice. The Cardinall was not yet come, but they were mery and pleaſant. Before the ſeconde courſe, the Cardinall came in booted and ſpurred, all ſodainely amongeſt them, and bade them Proface, at whoſe comming there was greate ioy, wyth ryſing

euerye man from his place. The Cardinall cauſed thē to ſit ſtill and kéepe their roumes, and beyng in hys apparell as he rode, called for a chayre and ſate in the midſt of the highe Table. Anone came vppe the ſeconde courſe, with ſo many diſhes, ſuttleties, and deuiſes, aboue a hundred in number, whiche were of ſo goodly proportion and coſtly, that I think the French men neuer ſawe the like, the wonder was no leſſe than it was worthy indéede. There were Caſtels wyth Images, in the ſame Paules Church, for the quantitie, as we
                  •
                counterfaited, as the Paynter ſhoulde haue painted it on a cloth or wall. There were beaſtes byrdes, and perſonages, moſte likely made and counterfaited, ſome fightyng wyth Swordes, ſome wyth Gunnes, and Croſſebowes, ſome vaughting and leaping, ſome dauncing with Ladyes, ſome on horſes in complete harneſſe, iuſtyng wyth long & ſharpe Speares, with many moe deuiſes. Among al other was a cheſſe boorde made of ſpiced Plate, with menne there of the fame: and for the good proportion, and bycauſe the French meune be verye experte in that playe, my Lorde Cardinall gaue the ſame to a Gentleman of France, commaunding there ſhoulde be made a goodly cace for the preſeruation thereof in all haſte, that he might conuey the ſame into hys Countrey. Then tooke my Lord a bole of Gold filled with Ipocraſe, and putting off hys Cappe, ſayde: I drinke to the Kyng my Soueraigne Lord, and next vnto the King your Maſter, & therwith dranke a good draught: and when he had done, he deſired the Graund Maiſter to pledge hym Cuppe and all, the whyche was well worth fiue hundred Markes, and ſo cauſed all the bourdes to pledge theſe twoo royall Princes: then wente the Cuppes ſo merily aboute, that manye of the Frenche menne were faine to be ledde to their beddes.
            Then roſe vppe the Cardinall, and went into hys priui
                  •
                Chamber, to pul off his Bootes, and to ſhifte hym, and then wente he to ſupper in his priuie Chamber▪ and making a verye ſhorte ſupper, returned into the Chamber of

Preſence among the Frenche menne, vſing them ſo louingly and familiarly, that they coulde not commende hym too muche: and whileſt they were in communication and other paſtimes, al their Lyueries were ſerued to their Chābers, euerye Chamber hadde a Baſon and an Ewer of ſiluer, a great liuery pot of ſiluer, & ſome guilt, yea and ſome chamber hadde two Lyuerie pots wyth Wine and Béere: a ſiluer Candleſticke, both white and plaine, hauing in it twoo cizes, and a ſtaffe torche of Ware, a fine Manchet and a chete loafe. Thus was euerye Chamber furniſhed through al the houſe: And yet the Cupbords in the two banquetting Chambers not once touched.
            Thus, when it was more than time conuenient, they were conueyed to their lodgings, where they reſted that night.
            In the morning they dyned with the Cardinall, and ſo departed to Windſore. After the returne of the ſtrangers from Windſore, which place with the order therof they much commended. The day approched that they were by the king inuited to the Courte, where firſte they dyned, and after daū
               
               
                  •
               ing and other paſtimes by them done, the time of ſupper came on. Then was the Banquetting Chamber in the tylte yarde at Greenewiche, to the whyche place theſe ſtrangers were conducted by the nobleſt perſonages in the court, where they didde bothe ſup and banquet, the ſtraunge and wonderful deuiſes of diſhes and ſuttleties whereof, as farre paſſed the banquet at Hampton Court, as Golde doth Siluer in valewe of waighte for waight.
            In the middeſt of this banquet, there was 
                  •
               ourneying at the barryers with luſtie Gentlemen in compleate harneſſe very gorgeous on foote. Then was there the like on horſebacke. And after all this was the moſte goodlyeſt diſguyſing or Enter lude made in Latine, the Players beyng ſo riche, and of ſo ſtrange deuiſes, that it paſſeth all compariſon.
            
               Thys done, there came ſuche a number of the fayreſt Ladyes and Gentlewomen that bare any brute of beautie in all the Realme in moſte richeſt apparell that mighte be deuiſed, with whome the Gentlemen of Fraunce daunced, vntil a gorgeous Maſke came in of Gentlemen, who daunced and maſked with theſe Ladies. This done, came in a Maſke of Ladyes: theſe Ladyes tooke eache of them one of the French men to daunce and to maſke: theſe women Maſkers ſpake good French to the French men, which delighted them very much.
            Thus was this nighte conſumed, from fiue of the clocke vntill thrée of the clocke after midnight, and then euerye man departed to their lodgings. After all thys ſolempue chéere, at a daye appoynted, they reſorted to the Court to take their leaue of the King and other noblemen: then came they to Westminster vnto the Cardinall, of whom they receyued the Kings rewards, the whyche were theſe: euerye man of honor and eſtimation had Plate, ſome to the valewe of thrée or foure hundred pound, and ſome more and ſome leſſe, beſides other greate gifts receyued before of the King, as gownes of Ueluet with riche Furres, greate chaynes of Golde, and goodlye horſes, wyth dyuers other giftes, and the leaſte of them had a ſumme of crowns of Golde: the worſte Page amongeſt them hadde twentie Crownes for hys parte: and beyng thus nobly rewarded, they departed.
            A Frenche Craer, of thirtie Tunne, being manned wyth eighte and thirtie Feenche menne, and a Flemiſh Craer of ſeauen and twentie Tunne, and foure and twentie Flemings, méeting at Margate, the one chaced the other along the riuer of Thamis to the Tower Wharffe of London, where ſir Edmond Walſingham Lieuetenaunte of the Tower, ſtayed them both, and tooke bothe their Captaines and men.
            The xvij. of June, the Terme was adiorned to Mihelmaſſe, bycauſe of the ſweating ſickneſſe that then raigned

in the Citie of London, and there was no ſuch watch at Midſomer, as before time had bin accuſtomed.
            
               Ralph Waren: Iohn Long, the 28. of September.
               
                  Sherifes. Maior. Legate from Rome.
            
            
               Sir Iohn Rudſton Draper, the 28. of October.
            
            The ſeauenth of October, came to London a Legate from Rome, called Lawrence Campaius Cardinall, and by the Kings gift, Biſhop of Saliſburie, who was lodged at Bath Place without Temple barre.
            
            A priſoner brake from the Seſſions hall at Newgate whē
               A priſoner brake from the Seſsions houſe. the Seſſions was done, which priſoner was brought downe out of Newgate in a Baſket, he ſéemed ſo weake, but now in the end of the Seſſions he brake through the people to the Grey Friers Church, and there was kept ſixe or ſeauen dayesRegiſter of the Grey Friers. ere the Sheriffes could ſpeake with him, and then bycauſe he would not abiure and aſke a Crowner, with violence they tooke him thence, and caſt hym agayne in priſon, but the law ſerued not to hang him.
            Commiſſioners were ſent ſome to Oxford, ſome to Cambridge, ſome to Louayne, Paris, Orleance, Bonony, Padua, &c. to knowe the opinions of the learned in thoſe Uniuerſities, concerning the marriage betwixt King Henry and Quéene Katherine ſometime his brothers wife, which marriage ſéemed to them to bée vnlawfull, as was affirmed vnder the perticular ſeale of euery Uniuerſititie.
            In the moneths of Aprill, May, June, and July, Cardinall1527 
               Campeius the Legate, with Cardinall Wolſey, ſate at the Blacke Friers in London, where before them was broughtAnno reg. 21 in queſtion the Kings mariage with Quéene Katherine, as to be vnlawfull, where theſe two Legates ſate as Judges,The Kings mariage vvith Queene Katherine called in queſtion at the Blacke Friers. before whome, the King and Quéene were aſſited and ſommoned to appeare. The Court was platted in tables and benches in manner of a Conſiſtorie, one ſeate reyſed higher for the Judges to ſitte in, then as it were in the midſt of the ſaid Judges al oft aboue them thrée degrées high, was a cloth of Eſtate hanged, with a Chaire royall vnder the ſame, wherein ſate the King, and beſides him, ſome diſtance

from him ſate the Quéene, and vnder the Judges féete ſate the Scribes, and other officers: the chiefe Scribe was Doctor Stephens, and the caller of the Court was one Cooke of Winchester. Then before the King and the Judges within the Court ſate the Archbiſhop of Canterbury Warham,
                and all the other Biſhops. Then ſtoode at both endes within, the Counſellours learned in the Spirituall Lawes, as well the Kings as the Quéenes. The Doctors of Law for the King, were Doctor Simpſon, Doctor Bell, and diuers other, and Proctors on the ſame ſide were Doctor Peter, Doctor Tregon
                     •
                  ll, with others. On the other ſide for the Quéene, were Doctor Fiſher, Doctor Standiſh, and Doctor Ridley. Thus was the Court furniſhed. The Judges commanded ſilence whileſt their commiſſon was red, both to the Court, and to the people aſſembled. That done, the Scribes commaunded the Crier to call the King by the name of King Henry of England, come into the Court, &c. with that the King anſwered, and ſayde héere: then called hée the Quéene by the name of Katherine Quéene of Englande, come into the Court, &c. who made no anſwere, but roſe out of hir Chaire, and bycauſe ſhe could not come to the King directly, for the diſtance ſeuered betwéene them, ſhe wente aboute by the Court, and came to the King, knéeling downe at hys féete, to whome ſhe ſayde in effect as followeth: Sir (quoth ſhe) I deſire you to do me iuſtice and right, and take ſome pitie vpon me, for I am a poore woman▪ and a Stranger, borne out of your Dominion, hauing héere no indifferent Counſell, and leſſe aſſurance of Frendſhip: Alas Sir, what haue I offended you, or what occaſion of diſpleaſure haue I ſhewed you, intending thus to put me from you after this ſorte? I take God to my Judge, I haue bin to you a true and humble wife, euer confirmable to your will and pleaſure, that neuer contraryed or gayneſayde any thing thereof, and béeing alwayes contented with all things wherein you had anye

delight, whether little or much, without grudge or diſpleaſure: I loued for your ſake all them whome you loued, whether they were my friendes or enimies. I haue bin your wife theſe twentye yeares and moe, and you haue had by me dyuers Children, if there be any iuſt cauſe that you can alledge agaynſte me, eyther of diſhoneſtie, or matter lawfull to put me from you, I am contente to departe to my ſhame and rebuke, and if there be none, then I pray you to let me haue Juſtice at youre hande. The King your father was in hys tyme of excellente witte, and the King of Spayne my Father Ferdinando was reckned one of the wiſeſt Princes that raigned in Spayne many yeares before: it is not to be doubted, but that they had gathered as wiſe Counſellours vnto them of euery Realme, as to their wiſedomes they thought méete, who thought the marriage betwéene you and me good and lawfull, &c. wherefore, I humblye deſire you to ſpare me, untill I may knowe what councell my friendes in Spayne wyll aduertiſe me to take, and if you will not, then youre pleaſure bée fulfilled: and wyth that, ſhe aroſe vp, making a low curteſie to the King, and departed from thence. The King béeyng aduertiſed that ſhe was ready to goe out of the houſe, commanded the Crier to call hir agayne, who called hir by theſe wordes, Katherine Quéene of Englande, come into the Courte, wyth that quoth Mayſter Griffith, Madame, you bée called agayne, on on (quoth ſhe) it maketh no matter, I wyll not tarrie, goe on youre wayes: and thus ſhe departed, wythoute anye further aunſwere at that tyme, or anye other, and neuer woulde appeare after in any Court. The King perceyuing ſhe was departed, ſayde theſe wordes in effect:
            For as much (quoth he) as the Quéene is gone, I will in hir abſence declare onto you all. She hathe bene to me as true, as obediente, and as confirmable

a wife, as I would wiſh or deſire, ſhe hath all the vertuous qualities that ought to be in a woman of hir dignitie, or in any other of a baſer eſtate, ſhe is alſo ſurely a noble woman borne, hir conditions will well declare the ſame: with that quoth the Cardinall Wolſey, Sir, I moſt humbly require your highneſſe, to declare before all this audience, whether I haue bin the chiefe and firſt mouer of this matter vnto your Maieſtie or no, for I am greatly ſuſpected héerein. My Lord Cardinall (quoth the King) I can well excuſe you in this matter, mary (quoth he) ye haue bin rather againſt me, in the tempting héereof, than a ſetter forward or mouer of the ſame: the ſpeciall cauſe that moued me vnto this matter, was a certayne ſcrupuloſitie that pricked my cōſcience, vpon certaine words ſpoken at a time when it was, by the Biſhop of Bayon the French Embaſſador, who had bin hyther ſente vpon the debating of a marriage to be concluded betwéene our daughter the Lady Mary, and the Duke of Orleance; ſecond ſonne to the King of France, and vpon the reſolution and determination of the ſame, he deſired reſpect to aduertiſe the King his mayſter thereof, whether our daughter Mary ſhould be legitimate in reſpect of this my marriage with this woman, being ſometime my brothers wife, which worde
                  •
                once conceyued within the ſecret bottome of my conſcience, engendred ſuche a ſcrupulous doubt, that my conſcience was incontiently accombred, vexed and diſquieted, whereby I thought my ſelfe to bée greatly in danger of Gods indignation, which appeared to be (as me ſéemed) the rather, for that he ſente vs no iſſue male, and all ſuch iſſues male as my ſaid wife had by me, died incontient after they came into the worlde, ſo that I doubted the great diſpleaſure of God in that behalfe, thus my conſcience being toſſed in the waues of a ſcrupulous conſcience, and partly in deſpaire to haue any other iſſue than I had already by this Lady now my wife, it behoued me further to conſider the ſtate of this Realme, and the danger that it ſtoode in for lacke of a Prince to ſuccéede me, I

thought it good in releaſſe of the weighty burthou of my 
                  ••
               ake conſcience, and alſo the quiet eſtate of this worthy Realme, to attempt the law therein, whether I may, lawfully take another wi
                  •
               e more lawfully by whome God may ſende me more iſſue, in caſe this my firſt copulation was not good, without any carnall concupiſcen
                  •
               e, and not for and diſpleaſure or miſliking of the Quéenes perſon and age, with whome I would be as well contented to continue, if our marriage may ſtand with the Lawes of God, as with any woman aliue, in which poynt▪ conſiſteth all this doubt that we go about now to trie, by the learning, wiſedome, and iudgement of you our Prelates and paſtoures of all this our Realme and domini
                  ••
                now héere aſſembled for that purpoſe, to whoſe conſcience 
                  〈…〉
                learning I haue committed the charge and iudgement, according to the whiche, I will (God willing) be right well content to ſubmit my 
                  〈…〉
               , and for my part obey the ſame, wherein, after that I perceyued my 
                  •••
               ſc
                  •
               ence ſo d
                  •••
               tfull, I moued it in confeſſion to you 
                  •••
                
               
                  〈…〉
                
               
                  ••
                
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                then Ghoſtly Father, and 
                  •••
                as much as 
                  •
               he
                  •
                
               
                  〈…〉
                
               
                  〈…〉
                ſelf were in ſome doubt, you 
                  ••
               ued me to 
                  〈…〉
                the counſell of all you my Lords, wherevpon, I moued you my Lord of Canterbury, firſt to haue your 
                  ••
               ence, in as much as you were Metropolitane, to put this matter in queſtion, and ſo I of all you my Lordes, to which you granted vnder your Seales, héere to be ſhewed: that is truth quoth the Archbiſhop of Canterbury. After that, the King roſe vp, and the Court was adiourned vntill another day. The next Court day, the Cardinals ſate againe, at which time, the Counſell on both ſides were there 
                  〈…〉
                to anſwere: the Kings Counſell alledged the Matrimonie not to be lawfull at the beginning, bycauſe of the 
                  •••
               nall copulation had betwéene Prince Arthure and the Quéene. This matter being very vehemently touched on that ſide, and to proue it, they alledged many reaſons and 
                  •••
               ilitudes of truth, and being anſwered negatiuely againe in the other ſide, it ſéemed that all their former allegations

were doubtfull to be tryed, and that no man knewe the truth. And thus this Court paſſed from Seſſions to Seſſions, and day to day, that at certayne of their Seſſions the King ſent the two Cardinalles to the Quéene (who was then in Bridewell) to perſwade with hir by their wiſedomes, and to aduiſe hir to ſurrender the whole matter into the Kings hands by hir owne conſent and will, which ſhould be much better to hir honour, than to ſtand to the triall of Law, and thereby to be condemned, whiche ſhoulde ſéeme much to hir diſhonour. The Cardinalles béeing in the Queenes Chamber of preſence, the Gentleman Uſher aduertiſed the Quéene, that the Cardinalles were come to ſpeake with hir 
                  •
                with that the roſe vp, and with a Skeyne of white th
                  •
               ead about hir 
                  •••
               ke, came into hir▪ Chamber of preſence, where the Cardinalles were attending, at whoſe comming, quoth ſh
                  •
               , what is your pleaſure with me: if it pleaſe your Grace (quoth Cardinall Wolſey) to goe int
                  •
                your pri
                  •
               ie Chamber, we will ſhew you the cauſe of oure comming: my Lord (quoth ſhe) if yée haue any thing to ſay, ſpeake it openly before all theſe f
                  ••
               ke, for I feare nothing that yée can ſay againſt me, but that I would all the worlde ſhould heare and ſée it, and therefore ſpeake your minde. Then began the Cardinall to ſpeake to hir in Latine, nay good my Lord (quoth ſhe) ſpeake to me in Engliſh
                  •
                forſ
                  •
               th (quoth the Cardinall) good Madame, if it pleaſe you, we come both to knowe your mind how you are diſpoſed to do in this matter betwéene the King and you, and alſo to declare ſecretly our opinions and councell vnto you, whiche we do only for very zeale and obedience we beare vnto your Grace. My Lord (quoth ſhe) I thanke you for youre god will, but to make you anſwere in your requeſt, I can not ſo ſodeinly, for I was ſet among my Maydes at worke, thinking full little of any ſuch matter, wherein there néedeth a longer deliberation, and a better head than mine to make anſwere, fo
                  •
                I néede of councell in this caſe which toucheth me ſo néere: and for my councel or friendſhip that I can find in England, they are not for my profite: what thinke you my

Lords, will any Engliſhman councell me, or be friendly to me againſt the Kings pleaſure, that is his ſubiect? nay forſ
                  •
               th, & as for my Counſell in whome I will put my truſt, they be not here, they be in Spayne in mine owne Countrey: and my Lordes, I am a poore woman lacking witte to anſwere to any ſuch noble perſons of wiſedome as you be, in ſo waightie a matter, therefore I pray you be good vnto me poore woman, deſtitute of friends héere in a forrayne region, and your counſell alſo I will be glad to heare: and therewith ſhe tooke the Cardinall by the hand, and lēdde him into hir priuie Chamber with the other Cardinall, where they tarried a ſeaſon talking with the Quéene, which communication ended, they departed to the King, making to him relation of hir talke. Thus this caſe went forward frō Court to Court, till it came to Judgemente, ſo that euery men expected the iūdgement would be giuen the next day, at which day the King came thither, and ſet him downe in a Chaire within a dore, in the end of y• Galery (which opened directly againſt the iudgemēt ſeate) to heare the iudgement giuen, at which time, all their procéedings were openly red in Lattin. That done, the Kings Counſell at y• barre called for iudgemēt, with y• (quoth Cardinall Campeius) I wil not giue iudgemēt till I haue made relation to y• Pope of all our procéedings, whoſe councel & cōmandemēt in this 
                  ••
               ſe I wil obſerue: the caſe is very doubtful, & alſo the party defendāt wil make no anſwer héere, but doth rather apeale frō vs, ſuppoſing y• we be not indifferent, wherefore I will 
                  •••
               ourne this Court for this time, according to the order of y• Court of Rome, and with y• the Court was diſſolued, & no more done. This protracting of the concluſion of the matter, 
                  •
                Henry tooke very diſpleaſātly. Cardinall Campeius toke his leaue of the K. and Nobilitie, & returned towards Rome. Ralph Rowlet
                Goldſmith was choſen Sheriffe of Lōdon by 
                  •
                commons, but y• King wrote for him, & he was for y• yeare 
                  〈…〉
               ged, & then was choſen Walter Champion Draper.
            
               Michael Dorman: Walter Champion, the 28. of Septem.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Sir Raulph Dodmere Mercer, the 28. of October.
            
            
               The 
                  ••
               i
                  •
                day of October, the Dukes of Suffolke and of Nonffolke come to the Cardinall then being at Westminster, to whome then declared that the Kings pleaſure was that he ſhould ſurrender vp the great Seale into their handes, and to depart ſimply vnto Aſher, which was an houſe ſcituate nigh vnto Hampton Court, belonging to the Biſhopricke of Winchester. The Cardinall demanded of them their commiſſion that gaue them ſuch, authoritie, who anſwered againe that they were ſufficient commiſſioners, and had authoritie to doe no leſſe by the Kings mouth, notwithſtanding, he woulde in no wiſe agrée in that behalfe, withoute further▪ knowledge of their authoritie, ſaying, that the great Seale was deliuered him by the Kings perſon, to enioy the miniſtration 
                  •
               hereof, with the roome of the Chancellor, for the tearme of his life, whereof for his ſuretie, he had the Kings letters pattents: which matter was greatly debated betwéene them, with many great wordes, in ſo much, that the Dukes were ſayne to depart againe without their purpoſe, and r
                  •
               de to Windeſore to the King, and made report accordingly, but the next day they returned againe, bringing with them the Kings letters. Then the Cardinal deliueredCardinall diſcharged of the great Seale. vnto them the great Seale, and was content to departe ſimply, taking with him nothing but only certayne prouiſion for his houſe 
                  •
                and after long talke betwéene him and the Dukes they departed with the great Seale of England, and brought the ſame to the King. Then the Cardinal called al his Officers before him, and tooke accompt of them for all ſuch ſtuffe whereof they had charge, and in his Galrey were f
                  ••
                diuers Tables, wherevpon lay a great number of goodly rich ſtuffe as whole péeces of Silke of all coloures, 
                  •
               el
               
                  •
               et, Sattin, Damaſke, Taffata, Grograine, & other things. Alſo, there lay a thouſand péeces of fine Hollād cloth. There was layd on euery Table, Bookes, reporting the contents of the ſame, and ſo was there Inuentories of all things it order againſt the Kings comming. He cauſed to be hanged the walles of the Gallory on the one ſide, with cloth of

Gold, cloth of Tiſſue, cloth of Siluer, and rich cloth of Bodken of diuers colours. On the other ſide were hanged the richeſt ſuite of Coapes of his owne prouiſion made for hys Colledges of Oxford and Ipſwich, that euer was ſéene in England. Then had he two Chambers adioyning to the Galerie, the one moſt commonly called the gilt Chamber, and the other the Counſell Chamber, wherein were ſet vp two broade and long Tables vpon treſtles, wherevpon was ſet ſuche a number of plate of all ſortes, as was almoſt incredible. In the gilt Chamber were ſet out vpon the Table nothing but gilt plate, and vpon a Cupbord and in a window was ſet no plate but Gold, very rich: and in the Counſell chamber was all white and parcell gilt plate, and vnder the Table in baſkets was all olde broken Siluer plate, and Bookes ſet by them, purporting euery kinde of plate, and euery parcell, with the contents of the ounces thereof. Thus was all things prepared, giuing charge of all the ſaid ſtuffe, with all other remaining in euery Office, to be deliuered to the King, to make anſwere to their charge: for the order was ſuch, that euery Officer was charged with ye receipt of the ſtuffe belonging to his Office by Indenture. To Sir William Gaſcoine being his Treaſurer, he gaue the charge of the deliuerie of the ſaid goodes, and therewithal, with his traine of Gentlemen and yeomen, he tooke his Barge at the priuie ſtaires, and ſo wente by water vnto Putney, where, when he was arriued, he tooke his Moyle, and euery man tooke their Horſſes, and rode ſtreight to Aſhere, where he and his family continued the ſpace of thrée or four wéekes, without either beddes, ſhéetes, table clothes, or diſhes to eate their meate in, or wherwith to buy any: the Cardinall was forced to borow of the Biſhop of Carelile, plate and diſhes &c.
            The xxvj. of October, Sir Thomas Moore was madeSir Thomas Moore made Chancellour. Chancellour of England.
            
            
               William Tindall, after he had tranſlated the new Teſtament into Engliſh, he cauſed the ſame to be printed beyondNevv Teſtament printed in English. the Seas.
            
               A peace was agréed betwéene the Emperour, and the Kings of England, France, Boheme, and Hungary.
            
            In the moneth of October, the King came to his Place of Bridewell, where he and his Nobles put on their Robes, and went to the Blacke Friers, and began there a Parliamēt,Parliament at the Black friers. in ye which, the Cardinall was condēned in the Premunire.
            The eyght of December, was created Thomas Uiſcount Rochford Earle of Wilſhire: Robert
                Uiſcount Fitz Water Earle of Suſſex: and George Lord Haſtings, Earle of Huntington, at Yorke Place by Westminster.
            
            The thirtéenth of January, a great fire was in the Uintrie at London.
            
            Cardinall Wolſey after great ſuite made to the King, was licenced to remoue from Aſhere to Richmond, whyche place, he had a little before repaired with great coſtes, for the King had made an exchange therof with him for Hampton Court. The Cardinall hauing licence of the King to repaire to Richmond, made haſt thither, and lodged there in the Lodge of the great Parke, which was a very pretie houſe, there he lay vntill the beginning of Lent, then he remoued into the Charterhouſe of Richmond, where he lay in a lodging which Doctor Collet made for himſelfe, vntill he remoued Northward, which was in the Paſſion wéeke after, and euery day he reſorted to the Charterhouſe there, and would ſitte with one of the moſt auntient fathers, who perſwaded him to deſpiſe the vayne glorie of the world. Then prepared the Cardinall for his iourney into the North, and ſente to London for liuerie clothes for his ſeruants, and ſo rode from Richmond to Hendon, from thence, to a place called the Rye, the next day to Rayſtone, where he lodged in the Priorie, the next day to Huntingdon, and there lodged in the Abbey, the next day to Peterborow, and there lodged in the Abbey, where he abode all the next wéeke, where he kept hys Eaſter, his traine was in number 160. perſons: vpon Maū
               die Thurſeday he made his Maundy, there hauing 59. pore mē, whoſe féete he waſhed, & gaue euery one xij. d. in money,

iij. elles of good Canuas, a paire of ſhoes, a caſt of redde hearings, and iij. white hearings, and one of them had ij. s̄. On Thurſeday next after Eaſter, he remoued to Maiſter Fitz Williams, ſometime a Merchant Taylor of London, and then of the Kings Councell: the next wéeke he remoued to Stamford, the next day to Grantham, the nexte day to Newarke, and lodged in the Caſtell that night, and the next day alſo: from thence, he rode to Southwell, where he continued moſt part of all that Sommer, vntill the latter end of graſſe time, and then he rode to Scroby, where he continued vntill Michaelmaſſe, and then to Cawood Caſtell, within ſeauen miles of Yorke, whereof we will ſpeake more héereafter.
            The xvj. of May, a mā was hanged in chaines in Finſburie
               1530 field, for murthering Doctor Miles, Uicar of S. Brides. The xxv. of May, K. Henry commanded the Biſhops to call inAnno reg. 22 
               Tindals tranſlatiō of the new Teſtament, and to ſée another truly tranſlated to be ſet forth. K. Henry vpon occaſion ofSuite to the Court of Rome forbidden. delay made by the Pope in his controuerſie of diuorcement, and through diſpleaſure of ſuch reports as he heard had bin made of him to ye Court of Rome, thirdly, pricked forward by ſome counſellers to follow ye example of ye 
               Germanes, cauſed proclamatiō to be made the xix. of September, forbidding al his ſubiects to purchaſe any maner of thing from the Court of Rome. This yeare, Ralph Rowlet was againe choſenElection of the Sheriffe. Sheriffe for ye cōmons, and he would not take it vpon him, but went to Saint Albons: then on Michaelmaſſe euen, was choſen Robert Amadas Goldſmith, and the King wrote for him, ſo that he was excuſed. On the morrow, which was Michaelmaſſe day, was choſen Richard Choppin TallowSheriffe elected on Michael▪ mas day. Chandler, who was forthwith ſworne in the Guild hall, and changed into a Gowne and Cloake of Scarlet, wyth a theine of Gold about his necke, and a Horſe being prepared for him ready at ye 
               Guild Hall Gate, he rode to Westminster.
            
            
               William Dauntſey: Richard Choppin, the 28. of Septemb.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Thomas Pergeter Salter, the 28. of October.
            
            The iiij. and v. of Nouember, was a great wind y• blew

downe many houſes and trées, after the which winde followed ſo high a tide, that it drowned the marſhes on Eſſex ſide and Kent, with the Ile of Thanet, and other places, deſtroying much Cattell.
            Cardinall Wolſey lying at Cawood, helde there an honourable and plentifull houſe for all commers, and alſo built and repaired the Caſtell, which was greatly in decay, hauing artificers and labourers aboue 300. perſons dayly in wages: and at length being therevnto perſwaded by ye Doctors of ye Church of Yorke, he determined to be ſtauled there at Yorke Minſter, the next Monday after Alhallowen day, againſt which time due preparation was made for the ſame, but not in ſuch ſumptuous wiſe, as his predeceſſors before him had vſed. The day being once knowne vnto the worſhipfull Gentlemē of the Countrey, and other, as Abbots, & Priors, hauing notice of his ſtaulatiō, they ſent in ſuch prouiſion of victuall, that it is almoſt incredible, all whiche was vnknowne to the Cardinall, for as much as he was preuented and diſappoynted of his purpoſe, by the reaſon that he was arreſted of high Treaſon, as yée ſhall héereafter heare, ſo that moſt parte of this former prouiſion that I ſpake of, was ſent vnto Yorke the ſame day of his arreſt, and the next day following: for his arreſt was kept as cloſe as could be, the order of his arreſt was thus. It was appoynted by the King and Counſell, that Sir Walter Walſh Knight, one of the Kings priuie Chamber, ſhoulde be ſente downe with a Commiſſion into the North vnto the Earle of Northumberland (who was ſometime brought vp in houſe with the Cardinall) and they twaine being ioyntly in commiſſiō to arreſt the Cardinall of high Treaſon, Mayſter Walſh tooke his Horſſe at the Court gate, about noone, vpon Alhallowen day, towarde the Earle of Northumberland. And now haue I occaſion to declare what happened aboute the ſame time, which peraduenture ſignified the troubles following to the Cardinall. The Cardinall ſitting at Dinner vpon Alhallowen day, hauing at his boordes ende dyuers

Chaplaynes ſitting at dinner, ye ſhall vnderſtand that the Cardinalles great croſſe ſtoode in a corner at the tables end, leaning againſt the hanging, and when the bordes end was taken vp, and a conuenient time for the Chaplaines to ariſe, one Doctor Auguſtine a Venetian, and Phiſition to the Cardinall, riſing from the table with the other, hauing vppon him a great gowne of boyſteous Ueluet, ouerthrew the Croſſe, whiche 
                  •
               rayling downe along the tappet, with the point of one of the Croſſes, brake Doctor Bonars head, thatDoctor Bonars head broke. the bloud ran downe, the company there ſtanding, greatly aſtonied with the chance. The Cardinall perceyuing the ſame, demanded what the matter meant of their ſodeine amaze, and they ſhewed him of the fall of his Croſſe vppon Doctor Bonars head: hath it (quoth he) drawne any bloud, yea forſooth my Lord (quoth they) with that he caſt his head aſide, and ſaid ſhaking his head, Malum omen, and therewith ſaid Grace, and roſe from the Table, & went to his Chamber. Now marke the ſignificatiō how the Cardinal expounded this matter at Pomfret after his fall. Firſt, ye ſhall vnderſtand that the Croſſe which he bare as Archbiſhop of Yorke, ſignified himſelfe, and Auguſtine the Phiſition who ouerthrewe the Croſſe, was only he that accuſed the Cardinall, whereby his enimies caught an occaſion to ouerthrow him: it fell vpon Doctor Bonars head, who was Mayſter of the Cardinals faculties and ſpirituall iuriſdictions, & was then damnified by the ouerthrow of the Croſſe: yea, & moreouer, drawing bloud of him, betokened death, which ſhortly after did enſue. About which time of this miſchance, the ſame very day and ſeaſon Maiſter Walſh tooke his Horſſe at the Court as nigh as could be iudged. Now the appointed time drew néere of his ſtaulation, and ſitting at Dinner vpon the Friday next before the Monday, on the which day he intended to be ſtauled at Yorke, the Earle of Northumberland and Mayſter W
                  ••
               ſ
                  •
               , with a great company of Gentlemen of the Earles houſe, and of the Countrey, whome he had gathered togither in the Kings name, came into ye Hall

a
                  •
                
               Cawod, the Officers being at Dinner, and the Cardinall not fully dined, being then in his fruites. The firſt thing yt ye Earle did after he had ſet order in the hall, he commādedCardinall a
                     •
                  reſted. the Porter at the Gates to deliuer him ye keyes therof, who would in no wiſe obey his cōmandement, although he were roughly threatned, & ſtreightly cōmanded in ye Kings name to make deliuery of thē to one of the Earles ſeruants: Sir (quoth he) ſeeing that ye do but intend to ſet one of your ſeruants in my place to kéepe the Gates, I knowe no ſeruant that ye haue, but I am as able as he to do it, and kéepe the Gates to your purpoſe (whatſoeuer it be) and alſo the keyes were deliuered me by my Lord and Mayſter, wherefore I pray you to pardon me, for whatſoeuer ye ſhall commaund me to do in the miniſtratiō of mine office, I ſhall do it with good will: with that (quoth the Earle) hold him a Booke, & cōmaunded him to lay his hand theron: thou ſhalt 
                  •
               weare (quoth he) that thou ſhalt well and truly kéepe the Gates to the Kings vſe, and to doe all ſuch things as we ſhall commaund, and that ye ſhal let paſſe neither in nor out at theſe Gates, but ſuch as ye be commaunded by vs, and with this oth he receiued the keyes at the Earles hands. Of all theſe doings knewe the Cardinall nothing, for they ſtopped the ſteire, ſo that none went vp to the Cardinals Chamber, and they that came downe, could no more go vp againe: at the laſt, one eſcaped, who ſhewed the Cardinall that the Earle was in the Hall, wherat the Cardinall maruelled, & would not beléeue him, but cōmaunded a Gentleman to bring him the truth, who going downe the ſtaires, ſaw the Earle of Northumberland, and returned, and ſaid it was very he: then (quoth the Cardinall) I am for
                  •
                that we haue dined, for I feare our Officers be not prouided of any ſtore of good fiſhe to make him ſome honourable chéere, let the Table ſtande (quoth he) with that he roſe vp, and going downe y• ſtaires, he encountred the Earle cōming vp with all his tayle, and as ſoone as the Cardinal eſpied y• Earle, he put off his 
                  •
               ay, & ſaid, my Lord; ye be moſt hartily welcome, & ſo embraced each other: then the Cardinall tooke the Earle by the hand,

               
                  •••
                had him vp into the Chamber, whome followed all the number of the Earles ſe
                  ••
               ants. From thence, he led him into his bedchamber, and they being there al alone, the Earle ſaid vnto the Cardinall with a ſoft voice, laying his hande vpō his arme, my Lord, I arreſt you of high▪ Treaſon: with which words ye Cardinal being maruellouſly aſtonied, ſtā
               ding both ſtil a good ſpace, at the laſt (quoth the Cardinall) what authority haue you to arreſt me: forſooth my L. (quoth 
                  •
                Earle) I haue a cōmiſſiō ſo to do: where is your cōmiſſion (quoth he) that I may ſée it, nay ſir that you may not ſayde the Earle: well then (quoth the Cardinall) I will not obey your reſt. But as they were debating this matter betwéene them in the Chamber, ſo buſie was M. Walſh in arreſting Doctor Auguſtine at the dore in ye pallace, ſaying vnto him, go in Traytor or I ſhal make thée. At the laſt, M. Walſh being entred the Cardinals Chamber, began to plucke off his hoode, and after knéeled down to the Cardinall, vnto whom the Cardinal ſaid, come hither gentlemā and let me ſpeake with you, Sir, héere my Lord of Northumberland hath arreſted me, but by whoſe authoritie he ſheweth not, if ye be ioyned with him, I pray you ſhew me Indéede my Lord (quoth M. Walſh) he ſheweth you the truth: well then (quoth the Cardinall) I pray you let me ſée it. Sir, I beſéech you (quoth M. Walſh) hold vs excuſed: there is annexed to our cōmiſſiō certaine inſtructions, which you may not ſée: well (quoth ye Cardinall) I trow ye are one of the Kings priuie Chamber, your name is Walſh, I am content to yéeld to you, but not to my Lord of Northumberland without I ſée his commiſſion: the worſt in the Kings priuie Chamber is ſufficiēt to arreſt the greateſt péere of the Realme by the Kings commandement, without any commiſſion, therefore put your commiſſion and authoritie in execution, ſpare not, I will obey the Kings will. I take God to Judge, I neuer offended the Kyng in worde nor déede. Then the Earle called into the Chamber diuers Gentlemen of his owne ſeruauntes, and after they had taken the Cardinalles keyes from him, they put him in cuſtodie

of the Earles Gentlemen, & then they went about the houſe to ſet all things in an order: thē ſent they Doctor Auguſtine▪
                away to London with as much ſpéede as they could, who was boune vnto the Horſſe like a Traytor, but it was Sunday toward night ere the Cardinal was conuayd from Cawod, & lodged that night in the Abbey of Pomfret. The next day he remoued towarde Daneaster, and was there lodged at the blacke) Friers. The nexte day he was remoued to Shefilde Parke, where the Earle of Shrewſburie with his Lady, and a traine of Gentlemē and Gentlewomen receyued him with much honor, then departed all the great number of Gentlemen that conducted him thether: and the Cardinall being thus with y• Earle of Shrewſburie, cōtinued there xviij. dayes after, vpō whome, the Earle appointed diuers Gentlemen to attend cōtinually, to ſée that he ſhould lacke nothing, béeing ſerued in his owne Chamber, as honourably as he had in his own houſe, and once euery day the Earle would repaire vnto him, & commune with him. After the Cardinall had thus remained with the Earle of Shrewſburie aboute a fortnight, it came to paſſe at a certaine time as he ſate at his dinner in his own chāber, hauing at his boords end a meſſe of Gentlemen and Chaplaines to kéepe him company, toward y• end of his dinner, when he was come to eating hys fruites, his colour was perceyued often to change, whereby he was iudged▪ not to be in good health, where vpon, one ofThe Cardinall 
                     •
                  ickne
                     •••
                  . his Gentlemen ſaid, Sir, me ſéemes you are not well at eaſe, to whome he anſwered with a loude voice, forfooth no more I am, for I am (quoth he) taken ſod
                  •
               inly with a thing about my ſtomacke, that lyeth there along, as colde as a whetſtone, which is no more but wind, I pray you go to the Po
                  •
               icarie, and enquire of him 
                  ••
                he haue any thing that wil breake winde vpward. Then went he to the Earle, and ſh
                  •
               
               wed him what eſtate the Cardinall was in, and what he deſired: with that, the Earle cauſed the Poticarie to be called before him, and demanded of him if he had any thing that would breake wind vpward in a mans body, & he anſwered he had ſuch geare. Then quoth the Earle fetch me ſome, thē
               
y• Apoticary fetched a white cōfectiō in a fair paper, & ſhewed & to y• erle; who cōmanded one to giue ye aſſay therof before him, & then y• ſame to be brought to the Cardinall, who receiued it vp al at once into his mouth: but immediatly after ſurely, he auoided much wind vpward: 
                  •
               o (quoth he) ye may ſée that it was but wind, & nowe I am well eaſed, I thanke God, & ſo roſe frō the Table, & went to hys prayers: & that done, there came on him ſuche a looſeneſſe, that it cauſed him 
                  ••
                go to his ſtoole: & not long after ye erle of Shrewſburie came into y• Gallery to him, with whom ye Cardinall met: & then ſitting down vpon a bench, ye erle aſked him how he did, & he moſt lamētably anſwered him, & thanked him for his gentle entertainment: Sir (quoth the erle) if ye remember, ye haue often wiſhed to come before the king, to make your anſwer▪ & I haue writtē to ye King in y• behalf, making him priuie of your lamentation that ye inwardly haue receiued for hys diſpleaſure, who accepteth al your doings therin, as friends be accuſtoin'd to do in ſuch caſes, wherfore I wold aduiſe you to plucke vp your hart, and be not agaſt of your enimies, I doubt not but this your iorney to his highneſſe ſhal be much to your aduancement. The king hath ſent for you that worſhipful knight Maiſter Kingſton, & with him 24. of your old ſeruāts, now of ye Guard, to the intēt ye may ſafely come to his Maieſtie: ſir (quoth the Cardinal) I trow Maſter Kingſton is Cōſtable of the Tower, 
               
                  •
               ea, what of that quoth y• erle, I aſſure you he is elected by ye king for one of your friends: Wel quoth the Cardinal, as God wil, ſo be it, I am ſubiect to fortune, being a true man, ready to accept ſuch chances as ſhal folow, & there an end. I pray you where is Maſter Kingſton, quoth the earle I wil ſend for hym, I pray you ſo do, 
                  •••
               th the Cardinal, at whoſe meſſage he came, & as ſoone as the Cardinal eſpyed him, he made haſt to encounter him, & at his cōming he knéeled to him, & ſaluted him in the kings behalf, whō ye Cardinal barehaded offered to take vp, & ſaid: I pray you ſtande vp, knéele not to me, I am but a wretch repleat with miſerie, not eſtéeming my ſelfe but as a vile ab
                  •
               ecte, vtterly caſt away without deſert as God knoweth.

               
                  〈◊〉
                ſaid Maſter Kingſton with humble reuerence, Sir, y• King hath him commonded vnto you: I thanke his highnes quot
                  •
                the Cardinall, I truſt he be in health, yea quoth Maiſter Kingſton, & he commanded me to ſaye to you, that you ſhoulde aſſure your ſelfe that he beareth you as muche good wil as euer he did, & willeth you to be of good chéere. And where report hath bin made▪ y• ye ſhould cōmit againſt hym certain heinous crimes, which he thinketh to be vntrue, yet he can doe no leſſe than to ſende for you to your triall, & to take your iorney to him at your owne pleaſure, cōmanding me to be attendant vpon you▪ Therfore ſir I pray you when it ſhall be your own pleaſure to take your iorney, I ſhall be ready to gi
                  •
               e attēdāce: Maiſter Kingſton quoth he, I thāke you for your newes, & ſir, if I were as luſtie as I haue béen but of late▪ I would ride with you in poſt, but I am diſeaſed with a flixe that maketh me very weake, but I ſhal wyth al ſpéede make me ready to ryde with you to morrow. When night came, the Cardinall waxed very ſicke with the laſke, the whyche cauſed him continually to go to the ſtoole al that night▪ inſomuch, that he had that night 50▪ ſtooles: therefore in conſideration of his infirmitie, they cauſed him to tarry al that day: and the next day he tooke his iorney with Maiſter Kingſton and them of the Guard, til he came to an houſe of the Earle of Shrewſburies called Hardwike hall, where he lay al night very euill at eaſe▪ The nexte day he rode to Notingham, 
               
                  ••
               d there lodged that night more ſicke: and the nexte daye he rode to Leicester Abbey, and by the waye waxed ſo ſicke, that he was almoſte fallen from his Mule, ſo that it was night before he came to the Abbey of Leicester, where at his comming in at the Gates, the Abbot with al his cou
                  •
               nt met him with diuers Torches light, whome they honourablye receyued and welcommed: To whome the Cardinall ſayde: Father Abbot, I am come hyther to laye my bones among you, riding ſo ſtill vntil he came to the ſ
                  •
               ayres of the Chamber, where he alighted from hys Mule, and Maiſter Kingſton led him vppe the ſtayres, and as ſoone as he was in his Chamber he went to bedde▪ This was on the

Satterday at nighte, and then encreaſed ſicker and ſicker, vntil Monday, that all men thought he woulde haue dyed: So on Tuiſday Saint Andrewes euen, Maiſter Kingſton came to hym and bade him good morrowe, for it was about 
                  •
               i
                  •
               e of the clocke, and aſked him howe he didde: Sir, quoth he, I tarry but the pleaſure of God, to render vppe my poore ſoule into his handes: not ſo 
                  ••
               r, quoth Maiſter Kingſtone, wyth the grace of God, yée ſhall liue and doe verye well, if yée will be of good chéere: nay in good ſooth Maiſter Kingſtone, my diſeaſe is ſuche, that I can not liue: for I haue hadde ſome experience in Phiſicke. Thus it is, I haue a fluxe with a continuall Feuer, the nature whereof is, that if there be no alteration of the ſame wythin eyghte dayes, either muſte enſue excorrition of the entra
                  •
               les, or 
                  •
               ra
                  •
               ſie, or elſe preſent death▪ and the beſte of them is death, and as I ſuppoſe thys is the eyghte daye, and if yée ſée no alteration in me, there is no remedy, ſaue, though I may liue a daye or twaine after, but death muſte enſue: Syr, quoth Maiſter Kingſtone, you bée in ſuche penſiueneſſe, doubting that thing, that in good faith ye néede not. Well, wel, Maiſter Kingſtone quoth the Cardinall, I ſée the matter howe it is framed: but if I hadde ſerued God as diligently as I haue done the King, he woulde not haue gyuen me ouer in my grey haires: but this is the iuſte rewarde that I muſte receiue for the diligent paines and ſtudy that I haue hadde to doe him ſeruice, not regarding my ſeruice to God, but onelye to ſatiſfie his pleaſure: I pray you haue me moſte humbly commended vnto his Royall Maieſtye, and beſéeche him in my behalfe to call to hys Prince 
                  ••
               e remembraunce, all matters procéeding betwéene hym▪ and me from the beginning of the worlde, and the progreſſe of the ſame, &c, Maiſter Kingſtone farewell, I can no more ſaye, but I wiſhe all things to haue good ſucceſſe, my tyme draweth on faſt, and euen with that he beganne to drawe his ſpeach at length, and his tongue to faile, his eyes béeyng ſette▪ whoſe ſighte fayled hym, then dydde they putte hym in remembraunce of Chryſte hys Paſſion,

               
                  •••
               ſed 
                  •
               he Yeomen of y• 
               
                  •••
               ard 
                  •
               o ſtand by to ſée him dye, and to 
                  〈◊〉
                of his wor
                  ••
                at his departure: and incontinent the clocke ſtroke eyght, and then he gaue vp the Ghoſt, and departed this preſent life, whych cauſed ſome to call to remembrance howe he ſaide the daye before, that at 
                  ••
               ght of the clocke they ſhoulde loſe their Maiſter.
            Here is the ende and fall of Pride & arrogancie of menExample of pride and arrogancie. exalted by fortune to dignities: for in hys tyme he was the haughtieſt man in all hys procéedings alyue, hauing more reſpecte to the honor of his perſon, than he had to his ſpirituall profeſſion, wherein ſhould be ſhewed all méekeneſſe, 
                  〈◊〉
               
               ▪ a
                  ••
                charitie.
            The Cleargie of Englande▪
                beyng iudged by the KingsThe Cleargie condemned in the Premunire. learned Councel to be in the premunire, for maintaining y• power Legan
                  •
               ine of the Cardinall, were called by pro
                  •
               e
                  ••
                into the Kings Bench to aunſweare, wherefore in their conuocation they concluded a ſubmiſſion, where in they called the King Supreme head of the Church of England, and were contented to giue the King▪ 100000. poundes, to pardonKing Henrie ſupreame head. their offences, touching y• premunire, by acte of Parliamēt.
            The fift of Aprill one Richard Roſe a Cooke was boyled1531 A Cooke boyled. in Smithfielde, for poyſoning of diuers perſons at the Biſhop of Rochesters place.
            King Henrie purchaſed the Hoſpitall of Saint 
                     •
                  ames, 
               
                  •
               éere to Charing Croſſe, and al the medows to the ſame adioyning,
                  Anno reg. 23 The Kings houſe at Saint Iames. gyuing the ſiſters of the houſe pencions during their liues, and then builded thereof a goodly Manſion, with a Parke, whiche he cauſed to be walle
                  •
                about with Bricke.
            The 
                  〈◊〉
                of Auguſt▪ 
               Thomas Bilney, a BachelerT. Bylney burned. of Law 
                  〈…〉
                
               Norwich.
            
            
               Richard Greſham: 
                     〈◊〉
                   Alth
                     ••••
                  h
                     •
                   28. of September.
               
                  Sherifes. Maior. Rice Griffyn executed.
            
            
               Sir Nicholas Lambard G
                     ••
                  cer, the 28. of October.
            
            The fourth of December, ſir Rice Gryffyn was beheaded at the Tower hill, and buryed at the Croſſed Friers, & Iohn Hewes▪
                hys man 
                  〈◊〉
                to Tybor
                     ••
                  
                hanged and quartered.
            The 17. of May deceaſſed Robert Thorne Bacheler and Merchant Taylour of London, who gaue by his Teſtament,

(his debts firſte being paide) is to be deſtributed in the citieRobert Thom his charitie in the Citie of London. of London 500. l. to pore houſholders: in the xxv. Wardes, 20. l. in euery warde: To reléeue priſoners in the Counters 50. l. To pore Maides mariages 50. l. To the foure priſons about London, Newgate, Ludgate, Kings bench, Marſhalſea, 100. l. To Aldermarie Church in London, 10. l.
               
Summe. 710. poundes.
            In the Citie of Bristow, to the making vppe of the FréeRobert Thorn
                     •
                   his charitie in the tovvne of Briſtovve. ſchoole of Saint Bartholomew 300. l. to be diuided in the pariſhes among the poore houſholders 300. l. to the redemption of the frée farme of priſage there 200. l. to the Almes houſes there 100. l. to Thomas Moffit Maiſter of the Grammer Schoole 25. l. and to Robert his ſonne 10. l. to the poore priſoners in Bristowe 50. l. to poore maides Mariages there 50. l. towarde making of a place for Merchants for the ſtréete in Bristow 100. l. to the repayring of hyghe wayes from Camer Marche to Bristow, at the diſcretion of his executors as néede requyred, and to the other high ways about Bristow 100. l. to Saint Nicholas Churche in Bristowe 20. l. to the four orders of Friers there, euerye order 20. l. more to the priſoners of Bristowe 100. l. to the Chamber of Bristow 300. l. for the prouiſion of corne and wood: more to the Chamber 500. l. to the reléefe of yong men that practiſe Clothing: to the pore people of Bristow 500. l. And ouer and beſides all this, to be diſtributed in déedes of Charitie, at the diſcretion of his executors 1000. l.
               
Summe. 3735. poundes.
            Legacies to his ſiſters children & other kindred amounted to 5142. l. 6. s̄. 8. d. His debts forgiuē wer 83. l. 5. s̄. 10. d. The reſidue of hys goods he gaue to his brother Nicholas Thorne.
            
            The 28. of May Fryer Forreſt was put in priſon for contraryingFrier Forreſt. the Preacher before the King.
            The othe which the Clergie had vſed to make to the BiſhopClergy ſvvor
                     •
                  e to the King. of Rome was made voyde by ſtatute, & a new othe confirmed, wherein they cōfeſſed the king to be Supreme head.
            
               The fiftéenth of May ſir Thomas Moore after great ſuteSi
                     •
                   Thomas Moore. made by him, was diſcharged of the Chancelorſhip.
            The fourth of June the King dubbed Thomas Audeley
               Lorde Audley made Lorde Chauncelour. Knight, made him kéeper of the greate Seale, and not long after Lord Chancelor.
            The fiftéenth of June, fiue men were hanged and quartredCoyners and Clyppers executed. Chriſtes Church ſuppreſſed. at Tower hill, for coyning and clypping.
            In the Moneth of July, the King ſuppreſſed the Priorie of Christ church in London, he ſent the Chanons of that houſe to other Priories, and gaue their Church, plate, and lands, to ſir Thomas Audley.
            
            The thrée and twentith of Auguſte, William Warham Archebyſhoppe of Canterburie deceaſſed.
            The King repayred the Tower of London.
            
            The firſte of September the Lady Anne Bolleine wasMarchioneſſe of Penbrooke. made Marchioneſſe of Pembrooke at Windſore, and then was gyuen hir by the King, one thouſande pounde by yeare.
            The eleuenth of October King Henrie landed at Calleis, with the Duke of Richemonde hys baſtarde ſonne, the Duke of Norffolke Lord Treaſurer of England, the Duke of Suffolke, the Marqueſſe of Excester, the Erles of Darby, Arundale, Oxforde, Surrey and Rutlande, the Vicount Liſle King Edwarde the fourth his baſtarde ſonne, the Lord Matrauers, the Lord Sands Lorde Chamberlaine of the Kings houſe, the Lorde William Hawarde, the Lorde Bray, the Lorde Montague, the Lorde Cobham, the Lorde Mordant, the Lorde Dawbney, the Lorde Grey, the Lord Clinton, the Lorde Vaux, the Lorde Mountegle, the Lorde Rocheford, wyth diuers other Lordes: the Biſhoppes of Winchester, London, Lincolne, and Bathe: ſir William Fitz William treaſourer of the kings houſe, ſir William Pawlet Comptroller, ſir William Kingſtone Capitaine of the Guarde, ſir Iohn Page, ſir Iames Boleine, ſir Anthony Browne, ſir Edwarde Neuell, ſir Thomas Cheyney▪
                ſir Iohn Ruſſell, ſir Richard Page, ſir Ralph Eldercare, ſir Edward Baynton, ſir Edwarde Santener, ſir Griffyth Deene, ſir Iohn Dudley, ſir Iohn Femer, ſir Henry Long▪
                ſir

               Anthony Hungerforde, ſir Iohn Brudges, ſir Arthur Hoptō, ſir Anthony Wingfielde, ſir William Paſton, ſir Edmonde Bedingfielde, ſir Thomas Strange, ſir William Hawte, ſir Edwarde Wotton, ſir William Askewe, ſir Iohn Marleant, ſir William Barington, ſir William Eſſex, ſir Giles Strangweis, ſir Edwarde Chamberlaine, ſir Giles Caple, ſir Iohn Sent-Iohn, ſir Walter Hungerforde, ſir William Gaſcoine, ſir Lionel Norrice, ſir Edwarde Boloine, ſir Thomas Liſle, ſir Iohn Aſhton, ſir Thomas Palmer, ſir William Boloine, ſir William Finche, ſir William Pellam, ſir Thomas Rotherham, ſir Iohn Norton, ſir Richarde Sandes, ſir Iohn Neuell, and thyrtie Eſquiers, with manye Gentlemenne, and all theyr traines.
            The towne of Calleis had at thys ſeaſon xxiiij. C. beddes, and ſtabling for two thouſande horſes, beſides the Uillages about.
            The xxj. of October, King Henrie rode towarde Boloigne, and was by the waye at Sandingfielde mette by the Frenche King, and many Nobles of France, who rode al to Boloigne, and were there lodged.
            On the xxv. of October King Henrie returned againe to Calleis, accompanied with the Frenche King, the King of Nauarre, the Cardinall of Loraine, and many other Dukes, Byſhoppes and great eſtates of Fraunce, Gaſ
                     •
                  oine, Brytaine, and Normandie: And the xxviij. of October, Kyng Henrie made the King of Nauarre Knight of the Garter: and the nexte daye the Frenche King with the King of Nauarre, and all the greate Lordes of Fraunce, rode againe to Boloigne, and King Henrie of Englande rode wyth them to Sandingfielde, where he made to the Frenche King a coſtlye banquet, and there the thrée Kings departed like louing brethren in great amitie: & the xiiij. of Nouēber King Henrie landed at Douer.
            
            
               Richard Reynold: Nicholas Pinchon, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes.
            
            
               Iohn Martin Butcher.
            
            
               Sir Stephen Pecocke Haberdaſher, the 28. of October.
               Maior.
            
            Kyng Henrie kepte hys Chriſtmaſſe at Greenewiche, and

after Chriſtmaſſe ſir Thomas Audeley Lord Kéeper of the great Seale, was made Lord Chauncelor of England, and then beganne a Parliament, in the whiche it was enacted, that no perſon ſhoulde appeale for anye cauſe oute of thys Realme, to the Court of Rome: and alſo, that Quéene Katherine ſhoulde from thenceforth be no more called Quéene, but Princeſſe Dowager of Prince Arthur.
            
            The twelfth of Aprill being Eaſter euen, the Ladye1533 Anno reg. 25 
               Anne Bolleine, who hadde béene priuily marryed to Kyng Henrie, wente to hir Cloſet openly as Quéene, and was proclaymed Quéene of Englande.
            
            The ſixe and twentith of Aprill, Arthure Plantagenet ſonne illegitime of Kyng Edwarde the fourth, was created Viſcount Liſle at Bridewell.
            
            The twelfth of May Pauier, towne Clearke of London, hung himſelfe.
            The Kings highneſſe addreſſed his letters to the Maior and Communaltie of London, ſignifying vnto them, that his pleaſure was to ſolempnize the Coronation of his moſt deare and welbeloued wife Quéene Anne at Westminster on Whitſonday next enſuing, willing them to make preparation as well to fetche hir Grace from Greenewiche to the Tower by water, as to ſée the Citie garniſhed wyth Pageants in places accuſtomed, for the honor of hir Grace, when ſhée ſhoulde be conueyed from the Tower to Westminster. Wherevppon a common Counſell was called, and commaundement gyuen to the Haberdaſhers, of whiche Craft the Maior was, that they ſhoulde prepare a Barge for the Bachelers, wyth a Wafter, and a Foyſte, garniſhed wyth Banners, lyke as they vſe when the Maior is preſented at Westminster, on the morrowe after the feaſt of Saint Simon & Iude. Alſo all other Craftes were commaunded to prepare Barges, and to garniſhe them, not onely with their Banners accuſtomed, but alſo to decke them with Targets by the ſides of the Barges, and to ſette vppe all ſuche ſéemely Banners and Bannerets, as they hadde in their

hal
                  •
               es, or coulde get to furniſhe theyr ſayde Barges, and euery Barge to haue Minſtrels, according to whych commaundement greate preparation was made for all thyngs neceſſary for ſuche a noble triumph.
            The nine and twentith daye of May béeing Thurſeday▪ the Maior and his brethren all in Scarlet, and ſuch as were knightes hadde collars of Eſſes, and the reſidue hauyng greate Chaines, and the Counſell of the Citie aſſembled with them at Saint Marie hill. And at one of the clocke deſcended to the newe ſteire to their Barge, whyche was garniſhed with manye goodly banners and ſtreamers and richly couered, in whiche Barge was Shalmes, Shagebuſhes▪ and dyuers other Inſtruments of Muſicke, whiche played continually.
            After that the Maior and hys brethren were in their barge, ſéeing, that the companies to the number of fiftie barges were readye to waite vppon them▪ they gaue commaundement to the companies, that no barge ſhould rowe nearer to another, than twice the length of the barge, and to ſée the order kepte, there were thrée Whirries prepared, and in euerye one of them two officers to call on them to kéepe their order.
            After whyche commaundement giuen, they ſet forth in order, as hereafter is deſcribed. Firſte, before the Maiors Barge was a Foiſte, for a wafter full of Ordinaunce, in whyche Foyſte was a greate redd
                  •
                Dragon continuallye 
                  ••••
               ng and caſting wilde fire, and rounde aboute the ſayde foiſte ſtoode terrible monſtrous and wild men casting fire,▪ and making hideous noiſe: nexte after the foiſte a good diſtaunce came the Maiors Barge: on whoſe righte hande 
                  •••
                the Bachelers Barge, in the whyche were Trum
               
                  〈…〉
               , and dyuers other melodious Inſtrumentes: the 
                  〈…〉
                of the ſayde Barge and ſaile yardes and the toppe 
                  ••••
               elles were hanged wyth ryche cloth of Golde and 
                  〈…〉
               : at the Fore-ſhippe and the Sterne were two

greate banners ryche beaten wyth the armes of the King and the Quéene: aud on the ſoppe caſtell alſo was a long ſtreamer newly beaten with the ſaide armes: the ſides of the Barge was ſette full of Flagges and Banners of the deuices of the companyes of Haberdaſhers and Merchaunt Aduenturers, and the laſſerers or cordes were hanged wyth innumerable Penſelles, hauing lyttle Belles at the endes, whyche made a goodlye noyſe, and was a goodlye ſighte, wauering with the winde: on the out ſide of the barge were thrée dozen Scutcheons in mettall, of the Armos of the Kyng and Quéene whiche were beaten vppon ſquare Buckeram deuided, ſo that the righte ſide hadde the King▪ colours, and the lefte ſide the Quéenes, whyche Scutcheons were faſtened on the clothes of Golde and ſiluer, hauging on the deckes: on the lefte hand of the Maior was an other Foyſte, in the whyche was a mounte, and on the mounte ſtoode a white Faulcon crowned vppon a roote of Golde, enuironed wyth white Roſes and redde, whyche was the Quéenes deuice: aboute whyche mounte ſate Uirgins ſinging and playing melodiouſlye: Next after the Mayor followed hys Felowſhippe the Haberdaſhers: nexte after them the Mercers: then the Grocers, and ſo euerye company in hys order, and laſte of all the Maiors & Sheriffes officers, euery company hauing melodie in their Barge by them ſelues, and goodly garniſhed wyth Banne
                  •
               s, and ſome couered wyth Sylke, and ſome wyth Arras or ſuche like, which was a goodly ſight to beholde: and in thy 
                  •
                or 
                  •
               er they rowed by Greenewiche to the pointe beyende Greenwiche, and there they turned backward in an other order▪ that is to
                  •
                wéete, the Maiors and Sherifs officers firſte, and the meaneſt Crafte nexte, and ſo aſcencendyng to the vpper moſte Crafte in order, and the Maior laſte, as thy goe to Paules at Chriſtmaſſe, and in that order they to wed downe warde to Greenewiche towne▪ and

there caſte ancker, makyng greate melodie. At thrée of the clocke, the Quéene apparelled in riche cloth of Golde, entred into hir Barge, accompanyed wyth dyuers Ladyes and Gentlewomen, and incontinent the Citizens ſet forward in their order, theyr Minſtrels continually playing: and y• Bachelers barge going on the Quéenes right hand, whyche ſhée tooke greate pleaſure to beholde. Aboute the Quéenes barge were manye noble menne, as the Duke of Suffolke, the Marques Dorcet, the Earle of Wiltſhire hir father, the Earles of Arundale, Darby, Rutland, Worcester, Huntington, Suſſex, Oxforde, and many Byſhops and Noble men, euerye one in hys Barge, whyche was a goodly ſight to beholde: ſhée thus being accompanyed rowed towardes the Tower: and in the meane waye the Shippes whyche were commanded to lye on the ſhoare for letting of the Barges, ſhotte dyuers peales of Gunnes, and ere ſhe landed, there was a maruellous ſhotte out of the Tower, I neuer hearde the like: and at hir landing, there mette wyth hir the Lord Chamberlaine with the officers of Armes, and brought hir to the King, whych receyued hir with louing countenance at the Poſterne by the water ſide, and kiſſed hir, and then ſhée turned backe agayne, and thanked the Mayor and the Citizens wyth manye goodly wordes, and ſo entred into the Tower.
            
            After whyche entrye the Citizens all this while houered before the Tower, makyng greate melodie, & went not alande, for none were aſſigned to lande but the Maior, the Recorder, and two Aldermen: but to ſpeake of the people that ſtoode on euerye ſhoare to beholde this ſighte, hée that ſa
                  •
               e it not will not beléeue it.
            On Friday at dinner ſerued the King all ſuche as were appoynted by hys Higheneſſe to be Knights of the Bathe, whiche after dinner were brought to their Chambers, and that nighte were bathed, and ſhriuen according to the olde

vſage of Englands, and the nexte daye in the morning the King dubbed them according to the ceremonies thereto belonging, whoſe names here after enſue ninetéene in number.
            The Marques Dorcet.
            The Earle of Darby.
            
            The Lord Clifford, ſonne and heire to the Earle of Comberland.
            
            The Lord Fitz Walter ſonne and heire to the Earle of Huntington.
            
            The Lord Mountague.
            
            The Lorde Vaux.
            
            Sir Henrie Parker ſonne and heyre to the Lorde Merle.
            
            Sir William Winſore ſonne and heyre to the Lorde Winſore.
            
            Sir Iohn Mordant ſonne and heyre to the Lorde Mordant.
            
            Sir Frauncis Weſton.
            
            Sir Thomas Arondale.
            
            Sir Iohn Hudleſtone.
            
            Sir Thomas Poynings.
            
            Sir Henry Sauell.
            
            Sir George Fitz William of Lincolnſhire.
            
            Sir Iohn Tindale.
            
            Sir Tomas Ierney.
            
            On Saterday the one and thirtith of May, the QuéeneThe conueying of Queen Anne through the Citie to VVeſtm. was conueyed through London in order as followeth.
            To the intente, that the horſes ſhoulde not ſlide on the pauement, nor that the people ſhoulde be hurte by horſes, and the highe ſtréetes, where▪throughe the Quéene ſhould paſſe, were all graueled from the Tower vnto Temple barre, and rayled on eche ſide, wythin whiche raile ſtoode the Craftes along in their order from Grace Churche, where the Merchauntes of the Stiliarde ſtoode vntill the lyttle

Conduite in Cheape, where the Aldermen ſtoode, and on the other ſide of the ſtréete ſtoode the Coneſtables of the citie, apparelled in Ueluet and Silke wyth greate ſtaues in their handes, to cauſe the people to giue roume, and kéepe good order: and when the ſtréetes were ſomewhat ordered, the Mayor in a gowne of Crimoſin veluet, and a riche collar of Eſſes, with two footemen clothed in white and red damaſke, rode to the Tower, to giue hys attendaunce on the Quéene, on whome the Sherifes with their officers did awaite till they came to the Tower hill, where they taking their leaue rode downe the high ſtréetes, commaunding the Coneſtables to ſée roume and good order kept, and ſo wente and ſtoode by the Aldermen in Cheape, and before the Quéen with hir traine ſhould come, Grace-ſtreete and Cornehill were hanged with fine Scarlet, Crimoſin, and other grayned clothes, and in ſome places with riche Arras, and the moſte part of Cheape was hanged with cloth of Tiſſhew, Golde, Ueluet, and many riche hangings whyche made a goodlye ſhewe, and all the windowes, were repleniſhed with Ladies and Gentlewomen, to beholde the Quéene and hir traine, as they ſhoulde paſſe by. The firſte of the Quéenes company that ſette forwarde, were twelue French men belonging to the Frenche Embaſſadoure, clothed in contes of blewe Ueluet, wyth ſléeues of yellow and blew Ueluet, their horſes trapped with cloſe trappers of blewe ſarſenet powdred with white Croſſes: After them marched Gentlemen, Eſquiers, Knights, two and two: after them the Iudges: after them the Knights of the Bathe in violet gownes with hoods purfled with Miniuer, like Doctors: after them Abbots: then Barons: after them Biſhoppes: the Earles and the Marqueſſes: then the Lorde Chanceloure of Englande: after hym, the Archebyſhoppe of Yorke, and the Embaſſadoure of Venice: after them the Archebyſhoppe of Caunterburie, and the Embaſſadour of Fraunce: after rode twoo Eſquyers of honor wyth robes of eſtate

rolled and worne Bauldrike-wiſe aboute their neckes, wyth Cappes of eſtate, repreſenting the Dukes of Normandie and Aquitaine: after them rode the Mayor of London wyth hys Mace, and Garter in hys Coate of Armes, whyche bare alſo hys Mace of Westminster hall: after them rode the Lorde Wyllyam Howarde wyth the Marſhalls rod deputy to hys brother the Duke of Norffolke, Marſhall of Englande, whyche was Embaſſadoure then in Fraunce, and on hys righte hande rode Charles Duke of Suffolk for that daye highe Coneſtable of Englande, bearing the warder of ſiluer appertayning to the office of Coneſtableſhippe, and all the Lordes for the moſte parte were clothed in Crimoſin Ueluet, and all the Quéenes ſeruauntes or officers of Armes in Scarlet: next before the Quéene rode hir Chancelor bare headed: the Sergeaunts and Officers at Armes rode on both the ſides of the Lords: then came the Quéene in a white Litter of white cloth of Golde, not couered nor bailled, whyche was ledde by twoo Palfreys clad in white Damaſke downe to the grounde, heade and all, ledde by hir footemen: ſhée hadde on a Kertle of white cloth of Tiſſue, and a Mantle of the ſame ſurred wyth Ermyn, hir haire hangyng downe: but on hir heade, ſhée hadde a coy
                  •
               e wyth a Circlet aboute it full of ryche ſtones: ouer hir was borne a Canapie of Cloth of Golde wyth foure guylte ſtaues, and foure ſiluer Belles: for bearyng of the whyche Canapie, were appoynted ſixetéene Knightes, foure to beare it one ſpace on foote, and foure an other ſpace, according to their owne appoyntment: nexte after the Quéene rode the Lorde Browghe hir Chamberlayne: nexte after him Wyllyam Coffim, maſter of hir horſes, leading a ſpare horſe wyth a ſyde Saddell, trapped downe wyth cloth of Tiſſewe: after hym rode ſeauen Ladies in Crimoſin Ueluet, turned vppe wyth Cloth of Golde and of Tiſſewe, and theyr horſes

trapped wyth Golde: after them twoo Chariots couered wyth redde cloth of Golde, in the firſte Chariote were twoo Ladies, whyche were the olde Dutcheſſe of Norffolke, and the olde Marchioneſſe of Dorcet: in the ſeconde Chariot were foure Ladyes all in Crimoſin Ueluet: after them rode ſeauen Ladyes in the ſame ſute, their horſes trapped and all: after them came the thyrde Charyot all in white, wyth ſyxe Ladyes in Crimoſin Ueluet: nexte to them came the fourth Chariot all red with eyghte Ladyes alſo in Crimoſin: after whome followed thirtie Gentlewomen all in Ueluet and Sylke, in the Lyuerie of their Ladyes, on whome they gaue theyr attendaunce: after them followed the Guarde in coates of Goldeſmyths worke, in whyche order they rode forthe tyll they came to Fan-churche, where was made a Pageaunt, all of children apparelled like Merchantes, whyche welcomed hir to the Citie, wyth twoo proper propoſitions bothe in Frenche and in Engliſhe: and from thence ſhe rode vnto Grace Churche corner, where was a coſtlye and maruellous cunning Pageaunt made by the Merchantes of the Stiliarde, therein was the mounte Pernaſſus wyth the fountaine of Helicon, whyche was of white Marble, and foure ſtreames wythoute pype dydde ryſe an Ell hyghe and mette togyther in a little cuppe aboue the fountaine, whych fountaine ranne abundantly with rackte Reyniſhe Wine till night, on the mountaine ſate Apollo, and at hys féete ſate Caliope: and on euery ſide of the Mountayne ſate foure Muſes playing on ſeuerall ſwéete Inſtrumentes, and at theyr féete Epigrammes and Poeſies were written in golden Letters, in the whyche euerye Muſe according to hir propertie praiſed the Quéene.
            From thence the Quéene wyth hir traine paſſed to Leaden hall, where was a goodly Pageaunte with a tipe

and heauenly Roſe, and vnder the tippe was a goodly roote of Golde, ſette on a little mountaine enuironed wyth red Roſes and white, oute of the typpe came downe a Faulcon all whyte, and ſette vppon the roote, and incontinent came downe an Angel wyth greate melodie, and ſette a cloſe Crowne of Gold on the Faulcons head: and in the ſame Pageant ſate Saint Anne wyth all hir iſſue beneath hir: and vnder Mary Cleophe ſate hir foure children, of the whiche chyldren, one made a goodlye Oration to the Quéen of the fruitefulneſſe of Saint Anne, and of hir generation, truſting, that lyke fruite ſhoulde come of hir. Then ſhée paſſed to the Conduite in Cornehill, where were the thrée Graces ſe
                  •
               te in a Throne, afore whome was the ſpring of Grace, continually running wine: afore the fountaine ſate a Poet, declaring the propertie of euery Grace, that done, euery Lady by hirſelf according to hir propertie, gaue to the Quéene a ſeuerall gifte of Grace.
            That done, ſhe paſſed by the greate Conduite in Cheape, whiche was newly painted wyth armes and deuiſes, out of the whiche Couduite, by a goodlye fountaine ſette at the ende, ranne continually Wine both white and Claret all that afternoone: and ſo ſhe rode to the Standarde, whyche was richely painted with Images of Kings and Quéenes, and hanged with banners of Armes, and in the toppe was maruellous ſwéete harmony bothe of Songs and Inſtruments.
            Then ſhe wente forwarde by the Croſſe, whyche was newly guilte, till ſhe came where the Aldermen ſtoode, and then Maiſter Baker the Recorder, came to hir wyth lowe reuerence, making a proper and briefe propoſition, and gaue to hir, in the name of the Citie, a thouſand Mark in Golde in a purſe of Golde, whyche ſhée thankefullye accepted wyth manye good wordes, and ſo rode to the little Conduite, where was a riche Pageaunt full of melody and Songs, in whyche Pageaunte were Pallas, Iuno,
               
and Venus, and afore them ſtoode Mercurie, whiche in the name of the thrée Goddeſſes, gaue to hir a Ball of Gold deuided in thrée, ſignifying thrée giftes which theſe thrée Goddeſſes gaue to hir, that is to ſay, Wiſedom, Riches, and Felicitie.
            As ſhe entred into Pawles Gate, there was a prettie Pageant, in which ſate thrée Ladyes richly clothed, and in a circle on their head was written Regina Anna, proſper, procéede, and raigne. The Lady in the midſt had a Tablet, in the which was written Veni amica, coronaberis, and vnder the Table ſate an Angell with a cloſe Crowne. And the Lady ſitting on the right hand had a Tablet of Siluer, in whiche was written Domine dirige greſſus meos. And the third Lady had a Tablet of Gold, with letters of Azure written Confido in domino, and vnder their féete was written
            
               Regina Anna paris regis de ſanguine natam,
               Et paries populis aurea ſaecla tuis.
            
            And theſe Ladyes caſt downe Wafers, on the whiche the 
                  •
               ayd two Uerſes were written.
            From thence, ſhe paſſed to the Eaſt ende of Pawles Church againſt the Schoole, where ſtoode a Scaffolde, and Children well apparelled, which ſayde to hir diuers goodly Uerſes of Poets tranſlated into Engliſh, to the honor of the King and hir, which ſhe highly commended. And then 
                  •
               he came to Ludgate, whiche Gate was new garniſhed with Gold and Biſe, and on the Leades of Saint Martins Church ſtoode a goodly Quéere of ſinging men and children, which ſang new Ballets made in prayſe of hir grace.
            After that ſhe was paſt Ludgate, ſhe procéeded towarde Fléeteſtréete, where the Conduite was newly paynted, and all the Armes and angles refreſhed, and the Shalmes melodiouſly ſounding. Upon the Conduite was made a Tower with foure turrets, and in euery turret ſtoode one of the cardinall vertues with their tokens and properties, which had ſeueral ſpeaches, promiſing the Quéene neuer to leaue hir, but to be ayding and comforting hir: and in the midſt of

the Tower cloſely was ſuch ſeuerall ſolemne inſtruments, that it ſéemed to be a heauenly noyſe, and was much regarded and prayſed, and beſides this, the Conduite ran Wine, claret and redde all the after noone, ſo ſhe with all hir company, and the Maior, rode forth to Temple Barre, which was newly paynted and repaired, where ſtoode alſo diuers ſinging men and Children, till ſhe came to Westminster Hall, whiche was richly hanged with cloth of Arras, and newly glaſed, and in the midſt of the Hall ſhe was taken out of hir Litter, and ſo ledde vp to the high Deſke vnder the cloth of eſtate, on whoſe left hande was a Cupbord of tenne ſtages high maruellous riche and beautifull to beholde, and within a little ſeaſon was broughte to the Quéene with a ſolemne ſeruice in greate ſtanding ſpice plates, a voyde of ſpice, and ſutteltyes, with Ipocraſe, and other Wynes, whyche ſhe ſente downe to hir Ladyes, and when the Ladyes had drunke, ſhe gaue harty thankes to the Lordes and Ladyes, and to the Maior, and other that had giuen their attendance on hir, and ſo withdrew hirſelfe with a fewe Ladyes, to the White Hall, and ſo to hir Chamber, and there ſhifted hir, and after wente in hir Barge ſecretely to the King to his Manour of Westminster, where ſhe reſted that night.
            On Whitſonday, the firſt of June, the Maior cladde in Crimſon Ueluet, with his coller, and all the AldermenCoronation of Queene Anne. and Sheriffes in Skarlet, and the Counſell of the Citie, tooke their Barge at the Crane by ſeauen of the clocke, and came to Westminster, where they were welcomed, and brought into the Hall by Mayſter Treaſurer, and other of the Kings houſe, and ſo gaue their attendance, till the Quéene ſhoulde come foorth: betwéene eyght and nine of the Clocke ſhe came into the Hall, and ſtoode vnder the cloth of eſtate, and then came in the Kings Chappell, and the Monkes of Westminster, all in riche Coapes, and manye Biſhops and Abbots in Coapes and Miters, which went

into the midſt of the Hall, and there ſtoode a ſeaſon, then was there a ray cloath ſpread from the Quéenes ſtanding in the Hall, through the Pallace and Sanctuarie, whiche was rayled on both ſides, to the high Altare of Westminster, after that the ray cloth was caſt, the Officers of Armes appoynted the order accuſtomed. Firſt went Gentlemen, then Eſquires, then Knightes, then Aldermen of London in their Cloakes of Scarlet, caſt ouer thier Gownes of Scarlet. After them, the Judges in their Mantles of Scarlet, and Coyfes: then followed the Knightes of the Bath, béeing no Lordes, euery man hauing a white lace on his left ſléeue: then followed Barons and Uicountes in their Parliament Roabes of Scarlet: after them, came Earles, Marqueſſes, and Dukes in their Roabes of Eſtate, of Crimſon Ueluet, furred with Ermin, poudered according to theyr degrées. After them, came the Lord Chancellor in a Roabe of Scarlet, open before, bordered with Lettice. After hym, came the Kings Chappell, and the Monkes ſolemnely ſinging, with proceſſion. Then came Abbots and Biſhops mitered, then Sergeants and Officers of Armes, then the Maior of London with his Mace, and Garter in his Coate of Armes, then the Marqueſſe Dorcet in hys Roabe of Eſtate, which bare the Scepter of Gold, and the Earle of Arundell, which bare the rodde of Iuorie with the Doue both togither, then alone the Earle of Oxford, high Chamberlayne of England, which bare the Crowne. After him, the Duke of Suffolke in his Roabe of Eſtate, for that day being high Steward of England, hauing a long white rodde in hys hande, and the Lorde William Haward with the rodde of the Marſhalſhip, and euery Knight of the Garter had on his coller of the order. Then procéeded foorth the Quéene in a Circote and Roabe of purple Ueluet, furred with Ermine in hir heare, coyfe, and circlet, as ſhe had the Saterday, and ouer hir was borne the Canapie, by foure of the Cinque Portes, all in Chrimſon, with points of blew & red

hanging on their ſléeues, and the Biſhops of London and Winchester bare vp the lappes of the Quéenes robe, and hir trayne which was very long, was borne by the old Duches of Norffolke. After hir, followed Ladyes being Lords wiues, which had circotes of Scarlet, with narrow ſléeues, the breſt all Letice, with barres of powders according to their degrées, and ouer that, they had mantels of Scarlet furred, and euery mantel had Letice about the necke like a neckerchefe, likewiſe poudered, ſo that by the pouderings, theyr degrées might be knowne. Then followed Ladyes béeing Knightes wiues, in gownes of Scarlet, with narrowe ſléeues without traynes, only edged with Lettice, likewiſe had all the Quéenes Gentlewomen.
            When ſhe was thus brought to the high place made in the midſt of the Church betwéene the Quéere and the high Altare, ſhe was ſet in a rich Chaire, and after that ſhe had reſted a while, ſhe deſcended downe to the high Altare, and there proſtrated hirſelfe, while the Biſhop of Canterbury ſayd certayne Collects ouer hir. Then ſhe roſe, and the Biſhop annoynted hir on the head and on the breſt, and then ſhe was led vp agayne to hir Chaire, where after diuers oriſons ſayd, the Archbiſhop ſet the Crowne of Saint Edward on hir head, and then deliuered hir the Scepter of golde in hir right hand, and the rodde of Yuory with the Doue in yt left hand, and then all the Quéere ſong Te Deum &c▪
                which done, the Biſhop tooke off the Crowne of Saint Edward being heauie, and ſet on hir head the▪ Crowne made for hir, and ſo went to maſſe, and when the offering was begonne, ſhe deſcended downe and offered being crowned, and ſo aſcended vp agayne and ſate in hir Chaire till Agnus, and then ſhe wente downe, and knéeled before the high Alter, where ſhe receyued of the Archbiſhop the holy Sacrament, and then went vp to the place agayne. After that Maſſe was done, ſhe went to Saint Edwards Shrine, and there offered. After whiche offering done, ſhe withdrewe hir into a little place made for that purpoſe on the one ſide of the Quéere:

now in the meane ſeaſon euery Ducheſſe put on hir Bonet a coronell of Gold wrought with flowers, and euery Marchioneſſe put on a demy coronell of Gold, and euery Counteſſe a playne circle of Gold without flowers, and euery King at Armes put on a Crowne of Copper and gilt, all which were worne till night.
            When the Quéene had a little repoſed hir, the company returned in the ſame order that they ſet forth, and y• Quéene went Crowned, and ſo did the Ladyes aforeſayd: hir right hand was ſuſteyned by the Earle of Wilſhire hir father, and hir left hand by the Lord Talbot, Deputie for the Earle of Shrewſburie, and Lord Furniuall his Father: and when ſhe was out of the Sanctuarie within the Pallace, the Trumpets playde maruellous freſhly, and ſo ſhe was brought to Westminster Hall, and ſo to hir withdrawing Chamber, during which time, the Lords, Judges, Maior and Aldermen, put off their robes, mantles, and clokes, and tooke theyr whodes from their neckes, and caſt them about their ſhoulders, and the Lordes ſate onely in their Circotes, and the Judges and Aldermen in their Gownes, and all the Lords that ſerued that day, ſerued in their Circotes, and their whodes about their ſhoulders. Alſo, diuers officers of the Kings houſe being no Lordes, had Circotes and whodes of Scarlet, edged with Miniuer, as Treaſurer, Comptroller, and Mayſter of the Jewell houſe, but their Circotes were not gilt.
            While the Quéene was in hir Chamber, euery LordeThe ſetting at dinner of Qu. Anne. and other that ought to do ſeruice at the Coronation, did prepare them according to their dutie, as the Duke of Suffolke, high Steward of England, which was richly apparelled, his Doblet and Jacket ſet with orient Pearle, hys Gowne Chrimſon Ueluet embrothered, his Courſer trapped with a cloſe trapper, head and all to the ground of Chrimſon Ueluet, ſet full of letters of Gold of Goldſmiths worke, hauing a long white rodde in his hand. On his left 
                  〈◊〉
                rode the Lord William, Deputie for his brother, as

Earle Marſhall with the Marſhals rodde, whoſe Gowne was Chrimſon Ueluet, and hys Horſſe trapper purple Ueluet, cut on white Sattin, einbrothered with white Lions. The Earle of Oxford was high Chamberlayne, the Earle of Eſſex Caruer, the Earle of Suſſex Sewer, the Earle of Arundell chiefe Butler, on whome, twelue Citizens of London did giue theyr attendance at the Cupbord: the Earle of Darby Cupbearer, the Uicount Liſle Panter, the Lorde Burgeyny chiefe Larder, the Lorde Bray Almouer for him and hys copartners, and the Maior of Oxforde kepte the Buttrey barre, and Thomas Wyat was choſen Ewerer for Sir Henry Wyat hys Father. When all thyngs was readye and ordered, the Quéene vnder hir Canapye came into the Hall and waſhed, and ſate downe in the middeſt of the Table vnder hir cloath of Eſtate. On the right ſyde of hyr Chayre, ſtoode the Counteſſe of Oxforde Widowe, and on hyr lefte hande ſtoode the Counteſſe of Worcester all the dynner ſeaſon, whyche dyuers tymes in the dynner tyme dyd holde a fyne cloath before the Quéenes face when ſhe liſt to ſpitte, or do otherwiſe at hir pleaſure: and at the Tables ende ſate the Archbiſhop of Canterbury on the right hande of the Quéene, and in the middeſt, betwéene the Archbiſhop and the Counteſſe of Oxforde, ſtoode the Earle of Oxforde, with a white ſtaffe all dynner tyme, and at the Quéenes féete vnder the Table ſate two Gentlewomen all Dinner tyme. When all theſe thyngs were thus ordered, came in the Duke of Suffolke, and the Lorde William Howarde on Horſſebacke, and the Serieants of Armes before them, and after them the Sewer, and then the Knightes of the Bath, bringing in the firſt courſe, which was eyght and twentie diſhes, beſide ſutelties, and Shippes made of Waxe, maruellous gorgeous to beholde, all whych time of ſeruice, the Trumpettes ſtanding in the windowe, at the neather ende of the Hall played. When ſhe was ſerued of two diſhes, then the Archbiſhops ſeruice was

ſet downe, whoſe Sewer came equall with the thirde diſh of the Quéenes ſeruice on his left hande. After that the Quéene and the Archbiſhop were ſerued, the Barons of the Portes beganne the Table on the right hande next the wall, then at the Table ſate the Mayſters and Clearks of the Chancerie, and beneath them other Doctors and Gentlemen. The Table next the wall on the left hand by the Cupbord, was begonne by the Maior and Aldermen, the Chamberlayne, and Counſell of the Citie of London, and beneath them ſate ſubſtantiall Merchantes, and ſo downeward other Worſhipfull perſons. At the Table on the right hand in the midſt of the Hall ſate the Lord Chancellor, and other Temporall Lordes: on the right ſide of the Table in their Circotes, and on the left ſide of the ſame Table ſate Biſhoppes and Abbots in their Parliamente Roabes: beneath them, ſate the Judges, Serieants, and the Kings Counſell: beneath them, the Knightes of the Bathe. At the Table on the left hand in the middle part, ſate Dutcheſes, Marqueſes, Counteſes, Baroneſſes in their Roabes, and other Ladyes in Circotes, and Gentlewomen in Gownes, all whiche Gentlewomen and Ladyes ſate on the lefte ſide of the Table along, and none on the righte ſide, and when all were thus ſet, they were incontinent 
                  •
               er
               
                  ••
               d ſo quickly, that it was maruellous, for the ſeruitors gaue ſo good attendance, that meate, nor drinke, nor anye thing elſe néeded to be called for, which in ſo great a multitude was maruell. As touching the fare, there could be deuiſed no more coſtly diſhes, nor ſuttelties The Maior of London was ſerued with foure and thirtie diſhes at two 
                  •••
               rſes, and ſo were all hys bréethren▪ and ſuche as ſate a
                  •
                hys Table. The Quéene had at hir ſeconde courſe foure and twentye diſhes, and thirtie at the thirde courſe, and betwéene the laſt courſes, the Kings of Armes Crowned, 
                  〈…〉
                Officers of Armes 
                  〈…〉
                
               
                  •
               arges in three partes 
                  ••
                the Hall, and after ſtoode in theyr place, whiche was in the bekens of the Kings 
                  ••
               n
                  •
               h: and on the right hand out of

the Clayſte
                  •
                of Saint Stephons Chappell was made a little cloſe
                  •
               , in which, the King with diuers Embaſſadors ſtoode to beholde the ſeruice, the Duke of Suffolke, and the Lorde William, rode oftentimes about ye Hal, chéering the Lords, Ladyes, & Maior, & his brethren. After they in the Hall had dined, they had Wafers and Ipocraſe, and then they waſhed; and were commanded to riſe and ſtand ſtill in theyr places before the tables or on the formes till the Quéene had waſhed. When ſhe had taken Wafers and Ipocraſe, the Table was taken vp, and the Earle of Rutland brought vp the ſurnape, and layde it at the boordes ende, which immediatly was drawne and caſt by Mayſter Reade, Marſhall of the Hall, and the Quéene waſhed, and after the Archbiſhop, and after, the ſurnape was withdrawne: then ſhe roſe, and ſtoode in the midſt of the hall place, to whome, the Earle of Suſſex in a goodly ſpice Plate, brought a voyde of ſpice and cōfections. After him, the Maior of London brought a ſtanding cuppe of Gold, ſet in a cuppe of Aſſay of Golde, and after that ſhe had drunke, ſhe gaue the Maior the cuppe, with the cuppe of Aſſey, bycauſe there was no couer, according to the clayme of the Citie, thanking him and all hys bréethren of their payne. Then ſhe vnder hir Canapie departed to hir Chamber, and at the entrie of hir Chamber, ſhe gaue the Canapie with belles and all to the Barons of the Portes according to their clayme, with great thankes: then the Maior of London bearing his cuppe in his hande, with his bréethren, went through the Hall to their Barge, and ſo did all other Noblemen and Gentlemen, for it was ſire of the Clocke.
            On Mondaye, were the Juſtes at the Tilt before theIuſting. Kings Gate, where the Maior and his bréethren had a godly ſtanding, but there were ſew Speares broken, by reaſo
                  •
                the Horſſes would not coape.
            On Wedneſday, the King ſente for the Maior and 
                  •••
                bréethren to Westminster, and there he himſelfe gaue 
                  〈…〉
                them hartie thankes, with many▪ goodly words.
            
               On Midſommer euen deceaſſed Mary the French Quéen,Mary King Henries ſiſter deceaſſed. 
               
                  •••
               er to King Henrie the eyghte, and wife to Charles Duke of Suffolke, and ſhe was buryed at Saint Edmondſburie.
            
            The fifth of July, Quéene Katherine was proclaymed Prince Arthures widowe.
            The ſeauenth of July two Merchants were murthered on the Thamis by one Woolfe and hys wife.
            It was this yeare enacted, that Butchers ſhoulde ſellBeefe and Mutton ſolde by vvaighte. their Béefe and Mutton by waighte: Béefe for a halfe penny the younde, and Mutton for thrée far things, whyche beyng deuiſed for the greate commoditie of the realme, (as it was thought) hath proued farre otherwiſe, for at that time fatte 
                  •
               ren were ſolde for ſixe and twentie ſhillings and eighte 
                  •••
               ce the péece, fatte Weathers for thrée ſhillings and four pence the péece, fatte Calues of the lyke price, a fatte Lamb for twelue pence. The Butchers of London ſolde peny péeces of Béefe for the reléefe▪ of the pore, euery péece two pound and a halfe, ſometime thrée pound for a peny: and thirtéene, ſometyme fourtéene of theſe péeces for twelue pence: Mutton eight pence the quarter, and an hundred waight of béefe 
                  ••
                foure ſhillings and eight pence: what price it hathe growen to ſence, it néedeth not to be ſette downe. At thys tyme alſo, and not before, were forraine Butchers permitted to 
                  ••
               ll their fleſhe in Leaden hall market of London.
            
            The ſeauenth of September, being Sondaye, betwéeneByrth of Lady Elizabeth and hir chriſtning. 
               
                  ••
               rée and foure of the clocke at afternoone, the Quéene was 
                  ••
               ly
                  •
               ered of a fayre Lady, for whoſe good deliuerauncē 
               Te 
                     〈…〉
                  
                was ſung incontinently, and great preparation was 
                  ••
               de for the Chriſtning. The Maior and his brethren and 
                  •••
               tie of the chiefe Citizens were commaunded to be at the 
                  •
               hriſtning the Wedneſday following: Upon whiche daye 
                  ••
               e Maior ſir Stephen Pecocke in a gown of Crinioſin Uel
               
                  ••
               t, wyth his collar of Eſſes, and al the Aldermen in Scar
               
                  •••
                with collars and chaines, and all the Counſell of the Ci
               
                  〈…〉
                with them tooke their Barge at one of the clocke, and the 
                  〈…〉
                had another Barge, and ſo rowed to Greenewiche,
               
where were manye Lordes Knightes, and Gentlemen aſſembled: al the walles betwéene the Kings palace and the Friers, were hanged with Arras, and all the way ſtrewed with gréeue ruſhes. The Friers Church was alſo hanged wyth riche Arras: the Font was of ſiluer▪ and ſtoode in the middeſt of the Churche thrée ſteppes highe, whiche was couered with a fine cloth: and diuers Gentlemen with apro
                  •••
                and towels aboute their neckes gaue attendance aboute it, that no filth ſhoulde come to the font: ouer it hung a ſquare Canapie of Crimoſin Sattin friuged with Golde, aboute it was a rayle couered with red Say betwéene the Quéere & bodye of the Church was a cloſe place with a panne of fyr
                  •
                to make the childe ready in: when all theſe things were 
                  ••
               
               dered, the childe was brought to the Hall, and then euery
                  •
                man ſet forwarde: firſte the Citizens twoo and two, then Gentlemen, Eſquiers, and Chāplaines, nexte after them the Aldermen and the Maior alone, and nexte the King
                  ••
                Councell, then the Kings Chappell in Coapes, then Barons, Biſhoppes, Earles, the Earle of Eſſex bearing the couered Baſons guilte, after him the Marqueſſe of Excest
                     ••
                  
                with a Taper of Uirgin Ware, nexte him the Marqueſſe Dercet bearing the Salte, behinde him the Ladye Mary of Norffolke, bearing the Criſo
                  •
               e, whyche was verye 
                  •••
               he of Pearle and Stone. The olde Dutcheſſe of No
                     •
                  ffolke 
               
                  〈…〉
                the childe in a Mantle of purple Uel
                  •
               e
                  •
                wyth a long traine ſurred wyth Ermin. The D. of Norffolke with his Marſhals rod went on the right hand of the ſaid Dutches, & the Du
                  •••
                of Suffolke on the left hand▪ and before them went officers of Armes, ye Counteſſe of K
                     •••
                  
                bare the long traine of y• childes Mantle, and meane betwéene the childe & the Counteſſe of Kent went the Earle of 
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                & the Earle of Darby on eyther ſide, ſupporting the ſaid traine in the middeſt: ouer the child was borne a rich Canapieby the Lord Rochforde, the Lord Huſſe, the Lord William, Howard, & the Lord Thomas Howard the elder. After the child followed many
                  •
                La
                  •
               y
                  •
               s 
                  •
                Gentlewomē
               ▪ When ye child was come to the Church dore,

the Biſhop of London met it with diuers Biſhops & Abbots mytered, & began the obſeruaunces of the Sacrament. The Godfather▪ was Lord Tho
                     •
                  
                Archbiſhoppe of Canterburie, the Godmothers were the olde Dutcheſſe of Norffolke, & the olde Marchioneſſe of Dorcet widows, and the childe was named Elizabeth, and after that al things were done at the Church dore, the child was broughte to the Font and Chriſtened, & that done, Garter chiefe King of Armes cryed aloude, God of hys infinite goodneſſe ſend proſperous life and long to the highe & mightie Princeſſe of England Elizabeth,
                and then the Trumpets blewe, then ye child was brought vp to ye Aultar, & the Goſpel ſaid ouer it. After that immediatly the Archebyſhop of Canterburie confirmed it, the Marchioneſſe of Excester being Godmother, then the Biſhop of Canterbury gaue vnto the Princeſſe a ſtanding Cuppe of Gold, the Dutcheſſe of Norffolke gaue to hir a ſtandyng Cuppe of Golde fretted wyth Pearle, ye Marchioneſſe of Dorcet gaue 3. guilt bolles pounſed, with a couer, & the Marchioneſſe of Excester gaue 3. ſtanding boules grauen al guilt with a couer. Then was brought in Waffers, Confects, & I pocraſe, in ſuch plenty, y• euery man had as much as he would deſire: then they ſette forward ye Trumpets afore, going in the ſame order toward the kings palace, as they did when they came thitherward, ſauing that ye gifts that ye Godfather & Godmothers gaue, were borne before the child by 4. perſons, that is to ſay, firſt ſir Iohn Dudley bare the gift of the Lady of Excester, the L. Thomas Howard the yōger, bare the gift of the Lady Dorcet, the Lord Fitz Walter bare the gifte of the Lady of Norffolke, and the Lorde of Worcester bare the gifte of the Archebyſhop of Canterburie: and al the one ſide (as they went) was full of ſtaffe-torches, to the number of fyue hundreth borne by the Guarde, and other of the Kings ſeruantes: and aboute the childe were manye other proper Torches borne by Gentlemenne. And in this order they brought the Princeſſe to the Quéenes Chamber dore, and then departed.
            
               The 
                  •
               aior wente to the Kings Chamber, and tarryed there a whyle wyth his bréethren the Aldermen, and at the laſte, the Dukes of Norffolke and Suffolke came out from the King, and reported to the Mayor and his brethren, that the King thanked them hartily, and commanded them to giue them thankes in his name, and from thence they were had to the Seller and dranke, and ſo went to their Barge.
            The xxiij. of Nouember béeyng Sonday, on a ScaffoldeHoly Mayde of Kent. before the Croſſe at Paules, there ſtoode a Nunne profeſſed in the Priorie of Saint Sepulchre in Caunterburie, named Elizabeth Barton, with ſundry other perſons, and the Biſhop of Bangor, late Abbot of Hyde, there preaching, ſhewed their offences, from whence they were committed to the Tower of London.
            
            The xxviij. of Januarye, a great fiſh was taken at Blacke wall, called a Whale, whyche was broughte to Westminster to the King, and ſo backe to Broken Wharfe, and there cut out.
            The firſte of Aprill, Woolfe and his wife were hanged1534 VVoolfe and his vvife hāged. on two Gibbets, at the turning trée in Lambeth Marſhe, for murthering the two Merchant ſtrangers aforeſaide.
            The xx. of Aprill Elizabeeh Barton a Nunne profeſſed atThe holy Maid of Kent and other hanged and headed. 
               Saint Sepulchres in Canterburie, Edward Bocking,
                & Iohn Deering, two Monks of Chriſts Church in Canterburie, Hughe Riche,
                warden of the Friers Obſeruants in Canterburie, and Richard Risbe and another of his fellows of the ſame houſe. Richarde Maiſter Parſon of Aldington in Kent, and Henrie Golde Pryeſt, were drawn from the Tower of London to Tyborne, & there hanged & headed, &c. for ſundry conſpiracies in the matter of diuorce betwéene the Kynges Maieſtie and Quéen Katherine. At which time were alſo attainted of miſpriſion by acte of Parliament for the ſame matter, Iohn Fiſher Biſhop of Rochester, & Iohn Adeſon his Chaplain, Tho. Abell Prieſt, Thomas Gold Gentleman, and Thomas Laurence,
               Anno reg. 26 Regiſter to the Archdeacon of Canterburie.
            
            The ninth of July, Lorde Dacres of the North was arraignedLord Dacres of the North arraigned. at Westminster, of high treaſon, where he ſo wittily

confuted his accuſers, that to their great ſhame he was foūd not guiltie.
            The eleauenth of Auguſt, was all the places of the ObſeruantFriers houſes ſuppreſſed. Friers, as Grenewich, Canterbury, Richmont, Newarke, and Newcastell putte downe, and Austen Fryers ſet in their places, and the Obſeruants were putte in places of the Grey Fryers.
            
            The fourtéenth of Auguſt was a greate fire at Temple Bar
               Fire at Temple Barre. and certaine perſons burned.
            The ſixetéenth of Auguſte, was burned the Kings StableThe Kings Stable brent. at Charing Croſſe called the Mewes, wherin was burned many greate horſes, and greate ſtore of Haye.
            The one and twentith of September, Doctour Taylour
               Thomas Cro
                     •
                  
                  vvell Maſter of the Rolles. Maiſter of the Rolles, was diſcharged of that office, and Thomas Cromwell ſworne in his place the ix. of October.
            The Earle of Kildare dyed pryſoner in the Tower of London, and his ſonne Thomas Fitz Garet rebelled in Irelande, ſlew Doctour Allen Biſhop of Deueling, and tooke the kings Ordinaunce, wherefore the King ſente thither ſir William Skeuington with a company of ſouldiours.
            
               Nicolas Leueſon: William Denham, the 28. of September.
               
                  Sherifes. Maior. The Popes authoritie abrogated.
            
            
               Sir Iohn Champneis Skinner, the 28. of October.
            
            In Nouember, was held a Parliament at Westminster, wherein the Pope with al his aucthoritie was cleane baniſhed this Realme, and order taken, that he ſhould no more be called Pope but Byſhoppe of Rome, and the King to bée reputed and taken as ſupreame head of the Churche of Englande, hauing full aucthoritie to reforme all errours, hereſiesFirſte fruites & tenths giuen to the King. 1535 Anno reg. 27 Charter houſe Monkes. and abuſes of the ſame. Alſo the firſt fruits and tenths of all ſpirituall dignities and promotions, were granted the king, with a ſubſidy of the laity of twelue pence in y• pound, with a fiftéenth and a tenth.
            The nine and twentith of Aprill, the Prior in the Charter houſe at London, the Prior of Beuall, the Prior of Exham, Reynoldes
                a brother of Sion, and Iohn Haile Uicar of Thistleworth,
               
were all condemned of Treaſon, who were drawne, hanged and quartered at Tyborne the fourth of May, theyr heads and quarters ſet on the gates of the Citie al ſaue one quarter whyche was ſet on the Charterhouſe at London.
            
            The eighte of May, the King commaunded al about hysPolled heades. commaunded▪
                Courte to poll their heades, and to giue them example, hée cauſed hys own head to be polled, and from thence forth his bearde to be notted, and no more ſhauen.Hollanders condemned for heretiques.
            
            The fiue and twentith daye of Maye was in Saint Paules Churche at London examined ninetéene men and ſixe womē borne in Holland, whoſe opinions were, firſte, that in Chriſt is not two natures, God and Man: ſecondely, that Chriſte tooke neyther fleſh nor bloude of the Uirgin Mary: thirdlye, that children borne of Infidels ſhall be ſaued: fourthly, that baptiſme of Children is to none effecte: fifthly, that the Sacrament of Chriſtes bodye is but breade only: ſixtly, that hée who after his Baptiſme ſinneth wittingly, ſinneth deadly, and cannot be ſaued. Fourtéene of them were condemned, a man and a woman of them were burned in Smithfielde, the other twelue were ſent to other townes there to be brent.Charter houſe Monkes executed.
            
            The eightéenth of June, thrée Monks of the Charterhouſe at London, named Exmew, Middlemore, and Nidigate were drawne to Tyborne and there hanged and quartred.Byshoppe of Rocheſter beheaded.
            
            The two and twentith of June, Doctour Iohn Fiſher Byſhoppe of Rochester was beheaded on the Tower hill, hys head was ſet on London Bridge, and his body buryed within Barking Curchyard.
            The ſixte of July, ſir Thomas Moore was beheaded onSir Thomas Moore beheaded. the Tower hill, for deniall of the Kyngs Supremacie: and then the body of Doctour Fiſher Byſhoppe of Rochester was taken vp and buryed with ſir Thomas Moore in the Tower.
            
            Doctour Foxe the Kyngs Almoner was made Biſhoppe of Hereforde: and Hugh Latimer Biſhoppe of Worcester, the blacke Frier of Bristowe, was made Byſhoppe of Rochester.
            
            In Auguſt the Lorde Thomas Gerard ſonne to the earle of Kildare, was taken in Ireland, and ſent to the Tower of London▪
               
            
            
               In October the King ſente Doctour Lee and other to viſiteAbbeys▪ viſited. the Abbeys, Priories and Nunneries in Englande, who putte forth all religious perſons that woulde goe, and all that were vnder the age of foure and twentie yeres, and cloſed vppe the reſidue that woulde remayne, and tooke order, that no manne ſhoulde come to the houſes of women, nor women to the houſes of menne, but onelye to heare theyr ſeruice: all religious menne that departed, the Abbot or Prior to gyue them for their habite a Prieſtes gowne, and fortie ſhyllyngs of money: the Nunnes to haue ſuche apparell as Secular women weare, and to goe where they woulde. He tooke out of Monaſteries and Abbeys, theyr reliques and chiefeſt Jewels.
            
               Humfrey Monmouth: Iohn Cotes, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes.
            
            Theſe Sheriffes in the beginning of their yeare put away twelue Sergeants and twelue Yeomen, till they were forced by a Courte of common Councell to take them againe.
            Sir Iohn Allen being one of the Kinges Councell, was at the Kings requeſte, choſen Maior of London.
            
            
               Sir Iohn Allen Mercer, the 28. of October.
               Maior.
            
            This ſir Iohn Allen when he deceaſſed in Anno 1544.Charitable deedes of ſir Iohn Allen. and hadde béene twice Maior of London, and of Councel with the King, as is aforeſaide, he gaue to the Citie of London a riche collar of Golde, to be worne by the Maior, whyche Collar was firſte worne by ſir William Laxton on Sainct Edwards daye, to the election of the newe Maior, who gaue to euery Warde in London twentie pounde to be diſtributed to the pore houſholders, beſides to one hundreth and twentie perſons, thrée ſcore men euerie of them a gowne of broad cloth, and a blacke cappe, and thréeſcore women, to euerye of them a gowne of the like cloth, and a white kerchiefe.
            The eleauenth of Nouember, was a greate ProceſſionProceſsion. at London of all the religious men, thrée Biſhoppes, and foure Abbots mytered, whyche was for ioy the French King was recouered of hys health.
            
               In the moneth of December, the names of all ChauntriesNames of Chauntries. were taken, and who had the gifte of them.
            The eighte of Januarie dyed Lady Katherine Dowager
               Katherine Dovvager de ceaſſed. at Kimbalton, and was buryed at Peterborowe.
            
            The nine and twentith of January Quéene Anne was deliuered of a child before hir time, whych was borne dead.
            In a Parliament begonne in the moneth of Februarye,Aparliament. was graunted to the King and his heyres al religious houſesSmall houſes ſuppreſſed. 1536 Anno reg. 28 in the Realme of Englande, of the valewe of two hundred pound and vnder, with al lands & goods to them belonging: the number of theſe houſes then ſuppreſſed, were 376. the value of their lands then 32000▪ pound, and more by yere, the mouable goods (as they were ſold, Robin Hoods penniworths) 10000. pound, the religious were tourned oute to the worlde more than 10000.
            On May daye was a greate iuſting at Greenewich, where were Chalengers, the Lorde Rocheford and other, and Defendors,Iuſtes at Grenevviche. 
               Henrie Norice and other. From this Iuſtes King Henrie ſodainely departed to Westminster, hauing only with him ſixe perſons, of which ſodayne departure many menne maruelled.
            On the nexte morrowe, the Lorde Rocheford, brother to the Quéene, and Henrie Norrice, were brought to the Tower of London priſoners. Alſo the ſame daye, aboute fiue of the clocke in the afternoon, Quéene Anne Bolleine was brought to the Tower of London, by ſir Thomas Audley Lord Chancelour, the Duke of Norffolke, Thomas Cromwell
                Secretary, and ſir William Kingſton Conſtable of the Tower, and when ſhe came to the Tower gate, entring in, ſhe fell on hir knées before the ſaide Lordes, beſéeching God to helpe hir as ſhée was not guiltie of that whereof ſhe was accuſed, and then deſired the ſaide Lordes to beſéeche the Kings Grace to bée good vnto hir, and ſo they lefte hir there priſoner.
            On the xv. of May Quéene Anne was arraigned in the Tower of London on a Scaffold for y• purpoſe made in y• kings Hall, before the Duke of Norffolke, who ſate vnder ye cloth of Eſtate

as high Steward of England, with the Lord Chancellour on his right hand, the Duke of Suffolke on his left hande, with Marqueſſes and Lords, &c. and the Earle of Surrey ſate before the Duke of Norffolke his father, as Earle Marſhall of England. The Kings commiſſion being redde, the Conneſtable of the Tower, & the Lieutenant, brought the Quéene to the barre, where was made a Chaire for hir to ſit downe in, and there hir inditement was redde, whervnto ſhe made ſo wiſe and diſcrete anſweres, that ſhe ſéemed fully to cléere hirſelfe of all matters layd to hir charge: but being tried by hir Péeres, wherof the Duke of Suffolke was chiefe, ſhe was by them found giltie, and had iudgement pronounced by the Duke of Norffolke: and immediatly, the Lord Rochford the Quéenes brother was likewiſe arraigned and condemned: the Maior of London, his bréetherne the Aldermen, the Wardens, and four perſons moe of euery the twelue principall companyes béeing preſent. The xvij. of May, the Lorde Richford, brother to the Quéene, Henry Norris, Marke Smeton, William Brierton, and Francis Weſton, all of the Kings priuie Chamber, about matters touching the Quéene, were beheaded on the Tower hill, the Lord Rochfords body with the head was buryed in the Chappell of the Tower, the other four in the Church-yard there. On the xix. of May Quéene Anne was on a Scaffold (made for that purpoſe) vpon the gréene within the Tower of London, beheaded with the ſword of Caleis, by the handes of the hangman of that Towne: hir body with the head was buryed in the Quéere of the Chappell in the Tower.
            
            The xx. of May, the King marryed Lady Iane, daughterKing Henry married Lady Iane. to Sir Iohn Seymour Knight, which at Whitſontide was openly ſhewed as Quéene, and on Tueſday in the Whitſon wéeke, Sir Edwarde Seymour was created Uicount Beauchamp, and Sir Walter Hungerford made Lorde Hungerford.
            
            The eyght of June beganne a Parliamente, and theArticles of Religion deuiſed by the King. Cleargie held a Conuocation in Paules Churche, where

after much diſputing, and debating of matters, they publiſhed a Booke of Religion, entituled, Articles deuiſed by the Kings highneſſe. On Saint Peters night, the King & Quéene ſtoode at the Mercers Hall, and ſaw the watch.
            The xxix. of June, the King held a great iuſting & triumph at Westminster, where were ordeyned two Lighters madeTriumph at VVeſtminſter. like Shippes to fight vpō the water, one of the which braſt in the midſt, whereby one Gates Gentleman, a ſeruant of Maiſter Kneuits, was drowned in his harneis. In the other, a Gunne braſt hir Chamber, & maymed two of ye mariners.
            
               Thomas Cromwell, Secretary to the King, and Mayſter of the Rolles, was made Lord Kéeper of the priuie Seale.
            The ix. of July, the Lord Fitzwaren was created Earle of Bath, and ye morrow after, Thomas Cromwell was made Lord Cromwell. The xviij. of July, Lord Thomas Cromwell
               Thomas Cromvvell Lord priuie Seale, vicar generall. was made Knight, and high vicar generall ouer the Spiritualty vnder the King, and ſate diuers times in the Conuocation among the Biſhops, as head ouer them.
            The xxij. of July, Henry Duke of Richmond and Somerſet,
               Henry Duke of Richmount. Earle of Northampton, a Baſtard ſonne of King Henry, borne of the Lady Taileboiſe, that time called Elizabeth Blunt, dyed at Saint Iames, and was buryed at Thetford in Norffolke. This moneth of July, Lord Thomas Howarde,
               Lord Thomas Hovvard ſent to the Tovver. yongeſt brother to the Duke of Norffolke, was ſente to the Tower of London, for making a priuie contract of Matrimonie with the Lady Margaret Dowglas, daughter to ye Quéene of Scottes, by the Earle of Anguiſh, and néece to King Henry of England: the ſaid Lord Thomas was attaint by Parliament, and alſo the ſaide Lady Margaret Dowglas was after committed to the Tower for the ſame.
            In September, Thomas Cromwell Lorde priuie Seale, and Uizgerent, ſent out vnder the Kings Spiritual Seale, certayne Iniunctions to the Prelates and Cleargie of the Realme, charging Curates to preach and to teache their pariſhners, the Pater noster, Aue, and Creede, the Commaundements,Pater noſter creede and commandements. & articles of ye faith in Engliſh, with other articles.
            
               In the beginning of October, at a Siſe for the KingsCommotion in Lincolneshire. Subſidie kept in Lincolneſhire, the people made an inſurrection, and gathered nye twenty thouſand perſons, who tooke certayne Lords and Gentlemen of the Countrey, cauſing them to be ſworne to them vpon certayne Articles whiche they had deuiſed, and ſuch as refuſed to ſweare, they kepte priſoners, and beheaded a Prieſt, who was the Biſhop of Lincolnes Chancellour. Againſt thoſe, the King did ſend theCommotion appeaſed. Duke of Suffolke, the Earle of Shrewſhurie, and the Earle of Rutland, with a ſtrong power, whereof when the Rebelles heard, they deſired pardon, brake vp their armye, and departed home, but their Captaynes were apprehended and executed.
            The ix. of October, a Prieſt and a Butcher were hangedA Prieſt and a Butcher executed. at Windſore, for wordes ſpeaking in the behalfe of the Lincolneſhiremen, ye Butcher wiſhed ye good fellowes (as he tearmed them) in Lincolneſhire, to haue the fleſh on his ſtall, rather than to ſell it at ſuch price as he was offered: the Prieſt ſtanding by, likewiſe wiſhed them to haue it, for he ſaid they had néede of it.
            The men of Lincolneſhire being pacifyed, within ſixe dayesCommotion in Yorkeshire. after began an inſurrection in Yorkeſhire for the ſame cauſes: there people gathered to the number of fortie thouſand, who tooke the Archbiſhop of Yorke, and the Lord Darcy, and cauſed them to be ſworne to their partie.
            Agaynſte thoſe Rebelles, the Kyng ſente the Duke of Norffolke, the Duke of Suffolke, the Earle of Shrewſhurie, and the Marqueſſe of Excester wyth a greate Armye, wyth whome a Battayle was appoynted to haue béene foughte on the euen of Saint Simon and Iude, but as God woulde, there fell ſuche rayne the nighte before, that the two Armyes coulde not méete, wherevppon, they deſyred the Duke of Northfolke to ſue vnto the Kyngs Maieſtie for theyr pardon, and that they myghte haue their liberties, &c. whyche the Duke promiſed, and rode poſte to the Kyng then lying at Windeſore, to

know his pleaſure, and ſo appeaſed them. Sir Robert Aske,
               Commotion appeaſed. that was chiefe of this Rebellion, came to London, and was not only pardoned, but rewarded with great giftes.
            Sir Ralph Euers kept Skarbrow Caſtel in the North, béeingSir Ralph Euers his good ſeruice in the North. ſixe wéekes beſéeged by the Rebelles, twentye dayes whereof, he and all his companye (whiche were his onely friends ſeruants and tenants, and ſerued for good will to him) were forced to ſuſteyne themſelues with bread and water, and yet kept the ſame ſafe to the end of the ſayd Rebellion, and ſo deliuered it to King Henry, who ſente hym ſoone after to ſerue in the bordures againſt Scotland, where in great credite he continued his ſeruice, kéeping the Scottes without doing hurt to England, and with ſuch obedience of them, as within twentie miles of the bordures of Scotlande fore againſt him, there was not a Scotte but at his commandement, and ſo continued till he was killed in Anno 1545.
            
               Robert Paget Mer. Taylor: William Bowyer, the 28. of Se.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Sir Ralph Warreine Mercer, the 28. of October.
            
            The xij. of Nouember, Sir Thomas Newman Prieſt, bare a faggot at Pawles Croſſe, for ſinging Maſſe with good ale.Penaunce at Paules croſſe.
            
            The xiij. of Nouember, Maiſter Robert Pagington a Mercer of London, was ſlaine with a gunne, as he was going toRobert Pagington murthered. morrow Maſſe to Saint Thomas of Akers, nowe called the Mercers Chappell, but the murtherer was neuer openly knowne, till by his owne confeſſion made when he came to the Gallowes at Banbery, where he was hanged for felonie.
            The 22. of December, the Thames being frozen, the king and Quéene Iane rode through London to Greenewich.
            
            The third of February, was Thomas Fitzgarret, ſonneThe Barle of Kildare and fine of his Vnckles executed. and heire to the Earle of Kildare, beheaded, and fi
                  •
               e of hys Unckles drawne, hanged, and quartered at▪ 
               Tiborne for Treaſon. In the ſame moneth, Nicholas Muſgraue, Thomas Gilby, and other, ſtirred a new Rebellion, and beſéeged theA nevv commotion in Yorkeshire. Another conſpiracie. Citie of Carelile, from whence they were driuen, and many of them taken and put to death. Alſo the ſame moneth, Sir Francis Bigot, Sir Robert Conſtable, and other, beganne
                  •
               
               
conſpiracie, and for the ſame were attaynted.
            The xxix. of March, were twelue men of Lincolne drawne1537 to Tiborne, and there hanged & quartered, fiue were prieſtes, and ſea
                  •
               en were lay men, one was an Abbot, a Suffragan,Lincolneshir
                     •
                   men executed. Doctor Mackerell, another was the Uicar of Louthe in Lincolneſhire, and two Prieſts.
            In Aprill, through certayne commiſſions ſent into Sommerſetſhire
               
                  Anno reg. 29 A commotion in Sommerſetshire. to take vp Corne, the people began to make an inſurrection, which was by Mayſter Pawlet and other alayed, the beginners to the number of thréeſcore were condemned, whereof fourtéene were hanged and quartered, one of them was a woman.
            In June, the Lord Darcy, the Lord Huſſey, Sir Robert Conſtable, Sir Thomas Percy, Sir Francis Bigot, Sir Stephen Hamelton, Sir Iohn Bulmer and his wife, William Lomley, Nicholas Tempeſt Eſquier, Robert Aske, William Thurſt Abbot of Fountaynes, Adam Sodbury
                Abbot of Ger
                  
                     •
                  ax, the Abbot of Riuers, William Wold
                Prior of Birlington, were all put to death: Sir Robert Conſtable at Hull, ouer the gate called Beuerley gate: Aske, hanged in chaynes on a Tower at Yorke: Margaret Cheyny,
                otherwiſe Lady Boulmer, burned in Smithfield: Lorde Darcy beheaded at Tower hill: Lord Huſſey at Lincolne, and the other, ſixe in number, ſuffered at Tiborne.
            
            The xxvj. of Auguſt, the Lord Cromwell, Lorde priuie Seale, was made Knight of the Garter.
            The xij. of October, about two of the clocke in the morning,Prince Edvvard borne. was borne at Hampton Court Prince Edwarde, and Quéene Iane his mother left hir life the xiiij. of October. The xviij. of October, ye Prince was made Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornewall, and Earle of Chester.
            
            
               Edward Seymour Lord Beauchamp, the Quéenes brother, was made Earle of Hertford, and Sir William Fitz William Lord Admirall, was made Earle of Hampton, and Mayſter Pawlet was made Uiztreaſurer, Sir Iohn Ruſſell Comptroller of the kings houſe, Mayſter Henedge, Maiſter

               Long, Mayſter Kneuet of the Kings priuie Chamber, Knightes, Mayſter Coffin▪
                Mayſter Liſtar, and Mayſter Seimour the Quéenes brother, Knightes.
            
               Iohn Greſham: Thomas Lewen, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Sir Richard Greſham Mercer, the 28. of October.
            
            The xviij. of October, Edward Uiſcount Beauchamp was created Earle of Hertford, and Sir William Fitz william
               States created. Lord Admirall, was created Earle of Southampton, at Hampton Court. The ſame day, and in the ſame place, were made theſe Knightes, Sir Thomas Hennedge, Sir Thomas Seymer, Sir Richard Long, Sir William Coffin, Sir Michaell Liſtar, and Sir Henry Kneuet.
            
            On Alhallowen euen, Lord Thomas Howard, brother toLord Thomas Hovvard deceaſſed. the Duke of Norffolke, dyed priſoner in the Tower of London, and was buryed at Thetford, and then the Lady Margaret Dowglas was pardoned, and releaſſed out of the Tower.
            
            The xij. of Nouember, the corpſe of Quéene Iane was with great ſolemnitie conuayde from Hampton Court toward Windſore, and there buryed.
            The xxiiij. of February, being Sonday, the Roode ofRoode of grace shevved at Povvles. 
               Boxley in Kent, called the Roode of Grace, made with dyuers vices, to moue the eyes and lippes, was ſhewed at Powles Croſſe by the Preacher, which was Biſhop of Rochester, and there it was broken, and plucked in péeces.
            The xxv. of February, Sir Iohn Allen Prieſt, and alſo an Iriſh Gentleman of the Garets, were hanged and quartered at Tiborne.
            
            The ſecond of March, the Image of the Roode called Saint Sauiour at Bermondſey Abbey in Southwarke, was taken downSaint Sauiour in Southvvarke. by the Kings commandement.
            The xxj. of March, Henry Harfam Cuſtomer of P
                     ••
                  m
                  
                     •••••
                  , & Thomas Ewell, were hāged & quartered at Tiborne.
            
            The xxij. of May, Frier Foreſt was hanged by the midle in a chaine of Iron, and then brent in Smithfield, for denying1538 Anno reg. 30 Frier Foreſt brent. the King to be ſupreme head of the Church &c. with hym was brent the Image of Daruell Gatherine of Wales, and the

next night following, the Roode at Saint Margaret Paitins by Tower ſtreete, was broken all to p
                  •
               eces, with his Tabernacle that he ſtoode in.
            The xxvij. of May, was a great fire in Saint Margaret
               Fire in R
                     ••
                  d
                     •
                   Lane. 
               Patins Pariſh among the Baſketmakers, where were brent and periſhed in thrée houres, aboue a dozen houſes, and nine perſons cleane brent to death.
            
               Battayle Abbey, Martin Abboy, Stra
                     •
                  ford Abbey, Lewis, andAbbeys ſuppreſſed. other, were ſuppreſſed to the Kings vſe.
            The Images of our Lady of Walſingham and Ipſwich were brought vp to London, with all the Iewels that hung aboute them, and diuers other Images both in England and Wales, wherevnto any common Pilgrimage was vſed, for a
                  •
               oy
               
                  •
               ng of Idolatrie, all which were brente at Chelſey by the Lord priuie ſeale.
            The ix. of Auguſt, Edmond Conisby, one of the groomes of the Kings Chamber, was executed at Tiborne, for counterfeting the Kings Seale manuell.
            The firſte of September being Sonday, one Gratnell,
               Hangman hanged. Hangman of London, and two other, were hanged at the Wreſtling place by Clarken well, for robbing a Booth in Bartholmew Faire.
            The ſecond of September, Edward Clifford Gentlemā, was executed at Tiborne, for counter
                  •
               etting the Kings priuie Signet.
            This moneth of September, Thomas Cromwell Lorde priuie Seale, Uizgerent to the Kings highneſſe, ſente foorthThe Bible in euery Church to be redde. iniunctions to all Biſhops and Curats through ye Realme, charging them to ſée that in euery pariſh Church, the Bible of the largeſt volume, printed in Engliſh, were placed, for all men to reade on: and that a Booke of Regiſter were alſoRegiſter booke in euery Church to be kept. prouided and kept in euery pariſh Churche, wherein ſhall be written euery Wedding, Chriſtning, and Burying within the ſame pariſh foreuer.
            
               Saint Austi
                     ••
                  
                Abbey at Ca
                     •
                  terbury was ſuppreſſed, and the Shriue and goodes taken to the Kings it 
                  •
               eaſurie▪ as alſo

the Shrine of Thomas Becket in the Priory of Chriſt Church,
               Thomas Becket 
                     ••
                  ent. was likewiſe taken to the Kings vſe, and his bones ſcull and all, which was there found, with a péece broken out by the wound of his death, were all brent in the ſame Church by the Lord Cromwell. The Monkes there were commanded to change their habites &c.
            The xxj. of October, the Churche of Thomas Becket in London called the Hoſpitall of Saint Thomas of Akers, was ſuppreſſed.
            
               William Wilkinſon: Nicholas Gibſon, the 28. of Septem.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Sir William Forman Haberdaſher, the 28. of October.
            
            This Nicholas Gibſon Grocer, Sheriffe of London, builded a frée Schoole at Radcliffe, néere vnto London, appoyntingFree Schoole and Almes houſes at Radcliffe. to the ſame for the inſtruction of thréeſcore poore mens children, a Schoolemayſter and Uſher, with a ſtipend of tenne pound by the yeare to the Mayſter, and ſixe 
                  •
               . xiij 
                  •
               . iiij 
                  •
               . to the Uſher. He alſo builded there certayne Almes houſes for fourtéene poore and aged perſons, who quarterly▪ receiue ſixe ſhillings eyght pence the péece for euer.
            The fifth of Nouember, were Henry Marqueſſe of Exceſter Earle of Deuonſhire, and Sir Henry Poole Knight, Lord Mo
                     •
                  ntacute, and Sir Edward Neuill, ſent to the Tower, who were endited, for deuiſing to maynteyne promote, and aduance one Reignald Poole late Deane of Excester▪
                enemie to the King, beyond the ſea, and to depriue the King.
            The xvj. of Nouember, the blacke Friers in London was ſuppreſſed, the next day the white Friers, the grey Friers,Friers ſuppreſſed. and the Monkes of the Charterhouſe, and ſo all the other immediatly.
            The xxij. of Nouember, Iohn Lambert was brente inLambart brent. 
               Smithfield.
            
            The xxiiij. of Nouember, the Biſhop of Rochester preached at Pawles Croſſe, and there ſhewed the bloude ofBloud of Hales shevved at Pavvles Croſſe. Hales, and affirmed the ſame to be no bloud, but Honey clarified, and coloured with Saffrone, as it had bin euidently proued before the King and his Counſell. Alſo, 
                  ••
               ur
                  •
               
               
Anabaptiſtes, thrée men, and one woman, all Dutch, bareAnabaptiſtes. 
               
                  •
               aggots at Paules Croſſe the ſame day.
            The xxix. of Nouember, a man and a woman Dutch Anabaptiſtes, were brent in Smithfield.
            
            The ninth of January, were Henry Marqueſſe of Excester
               Earle of Deuonshire executed. Earle of Deuonſhire, and the Lord Mountacute, and Sir Edward Neuill, beheaded on the Tower hill. Two Prieſtes, Croftes and Colins, and Holand a Mariner, were hanged and quartered at Tiborne. Sir Geffrey Poole was pardoned.
            On Aſhe wedneſday, were Iohn Ioanes, Iohn Potter, andExecution in Poules Churchyard. 
               William Mannering, hanged in Paules Church-yard, for killing of Roger Cholmeley Eſquier in the ſame place.
            The third of March, Sir Nicholas Carew of Bedington in Sur
                     •
                  ey, Knighte of the Garter, and mayſter of the Kings Horſſe, was beheaded at the Tower hill, for béeing of counſell with Henry Marques of Excester, and Henry Poole Lorde Mountacute. The ix. of March, the King created Sir Williā
                  States created▪
                   Pawlet Knight, Treaſurer of houſhold, Lord Saint Iohn▪
                and Sir Iohn Ruſſell Comptroller of his houſhold, Lorde Ruſſell▪
                Sir William Parre, Lord Parre.
            
            The new Abbey of white Monkes at the Tower hill, and the Minories, Nunnes without Aldgate, were ſuppreſſed, 
                  •
               n the laſt of March.
            The xxviij. of Aprill, beganne a Parliamente, in the1539 which, Margaret Counteſſe of Saliſburie, Gertrude,
                wife to the Marqueſſe of Excester, Reignold Poole,
                Sir AdrianAnno reg. 31 Forteſcue, and Thomas Dingley, Knight of Saint Iohns, and diuers other were attaynted: and all the Religious houſes in England ſuppreſſed, and not ſuppreſſed, were graunted to the King for euer.
            The viij. of May, the Citizens of London muſtered at theGreat muſter a
                     •
                   London. 
               Miles end all in bright harneys, with coates of white ſilke, 
                  ••
                cloth, and cheynes of gold, in thrée great Battayles, the number was fiftéene thouſand, beſide wyfflers, and other awayters, who in goodly order paſſed through London to Westminster, and ſo through the Sanctuary, and round about

the Parke of S. Iames, and returned home through Holborne.
            
            No watch at Midſomer.
            Doctor Shakſton Biſhop of Saliſburie, and Doctor Latimer Biſhop of Worcester, reſigned their Biſhoprickes into the Kings hand the firſt of July.
            The viij. of July, Griffith Clearke, Uicar of Wandſworth,
               Vickar of VVandſvvorth and other executed. with his Chapleine and his ſeruant, and Frier Waire, were all four hanged and quartered at Saint Thomas Waterings.
            
            The tenth of July, Sir Adrian Forteſcue, and Thomas Dingley were beheaded.
            The ninth of September, the Nunnery of Clarkenwell
               Clarkenvvell and other ſuppreſſed. was ſuppreſſed.
            The xij. of October, the Nunnery of Halywell, and forthwith the Priorie of Saint Mary Oueries in Southwarke, and Saint Barthelmewes in Smithfield were ſuppreſſed, and al their lands and goodes taken to the Kings vſe.
            The ſeauenth of September, deceaſſed Doctor Stokeſley Biſhop of London, and was buryed in Paules Church.
            
               Iohn Feire: Thomas Huntlow, the 28▪ of September.
               
                  Sherifes. Maior. Thomas Huntlovv his charitie.
            
            
               Sir William Holleys Mercer, the 28 of October.
            
            This Thomas Huntlow Sheriffe, gaue to the Haberdaſhers certayne tenementes, for the which, they be bound to giue to tenne poore almes people of the ſame company, euery one of them eyght pence euery Friday for euer. And alſo at euery quarter dinner kept by the maiſters, to be giuen to euery one of thoſe tenne poore people a penny loa
                  •
               e, a pottell of Ale, a péece of béefe worth four pence in a platter, with porage, and four penc
                  •
                in money.
            The xiiij. of Nouember, Hugh Ferringdon Abbot ofAbbots of Reading & Glaſtonb
                     ••
                  y executed. 
               Reading, and two Prieſts, named Ruge and Onyon, for denying the Kings Supremacie, were hanged and quartered at Reading. The ſame day, was Richard Whiting Abbot of Glastonburie, hanged and quartered on Torre hill beſide his Monaſterie, for the ſame cauſe.
            The firſt of December, Iohn Beach Abbot of Colchester,
               
was likewiſe executed.
            In December, were appoynted to wayte on the KingsPencioners appoynted. highneſſe perſon, fiftie Gentlemen called Pencioners or Speres, vnto whome was appoynted fiftie pound the péece pearely.
            The third of January, was the Lady Anne of Cleeue receiuedKing Henry married Lady Anne of Cleue. at Blacke heath, and brought to Greenewich with great triumph: and the ſixth day of ye ſame moneth ſhe was maryed to King Henry.
            
            After Chriſtmas, the Priorie Church of Saint Mary Ouery
               Saint Mary Oueryes made a parish Church. in Southwarke, was purchaſed of the King by the inhabitants of the Borow, Doctor Gardener Biſhop of Wincheſter putting to his helping hand: they made thereof a pariſh church, and the little Church of Mary Megdalen ioyning to the ſame Priorie, was made all one Churche, and Saint Margarets in Southwarke a pariſh, was admitted to the ſame pariſh.
            The xij. of March, Henry Bowrcher Earle of Eſſex ridingEarle of Eſſex deceaſſed. a yong Horſſe, was caſt, and brake his necke, at his Manour in Eſſex. He was the eldeſt Earle in England.
            
            The xix. of March, Iohn Vere Earle of Oxforde, highEarle of Oxford deceaſſed. chamberlayne of Englande, deceaſſed at his Manour in Eſſex.
            
            Ther. of Aprill, Sir William Peterſon Prieſt, late commiſſarie1540 of Caleis, and Sir William Richardſon, Prieſt of Saint Maryes in Caleis, were both there drawne, hanged,Prieſts at Caleis executed. and quartered in the Market place for the Supremacie.
            The 18. of Aprill, Sir Thomas Cromwell, Lorde priuieCromvvell Earle of Eſſex. Seale, was created Earle of Eſſex, and high Chamberlayne of England.
            
            Alſo Gregory hys ſonne was made Lorde Cromwell.
            
            In a Parliament which began the xviij. of Aprill, wasSubſedie and four fifteenes. graunted to the King a ſubſedie of two ſhillings the pound Lands, and twelue pence goodes, and four fiftéenes.
            The xxiiij. of Aprill, Thomas Lord Audley, & ChancellorAnno reg. 32
               
of England, with Sir Anthony Browne, Maiſter of the King
                  •
               
               Lord Audley Knight of the Garter. Horſſe, were made Knightes of the Garter.
            On May day, was a great triumph of Juſting at Westminster, which Juſtes, had bin proclaymed in France, Flaunders,
               Iuſting of challengers. 
               Scotland, and Spayne, for all commers that woulde, againſt the challengers of Englande, which were, Sir Iohn Dudley, Sir Thomas Seymer, Sir Thomas Poynings, Sir George Carew Knightes, Anthony Kingſton, and Richarde Cromwell Eſquiers, which ſayd challengers came into the liſtes that day richly apparelled, and their Horſſes trapped all in white Ueluet, with certayne Knightes and Gentlemen riding afore them, apparelled all in white Ueluet, and white Sarſenet, and all their ſeruants in white dublets, and hozen cut after the Burgonion faſhion: and there came to Juſt againſt them the ſayd daye, of defendants, xlvj. the Earle of Surrey being the formoſt, Lord William Heyward, Lord Clinton, and Lord Cromwell, ſonne and heire to Thomas Cromwell Earle of Eſſex, and Chamberlayne of Englād, with other, which were all richly apparelled. And that day, Sir Iohn Dudley was ouerthrowne in the fielde, by miſchance of his Horſſe, by one Mayſter Breme defendant, neuertheleſſe, he brake diuers Speares valiantly after that: and after the ſaide Juſtes were done, the ſayde challengers rode to Durham place, where they kepte open houſholde, and feaſted the King and Quéene, with hir Ladyes, and all the Court.
            The ſeconde of May, Anthony Kingſton, and Richarde Cromwell, were made Knightes at the ſayd place.
            The third of May, the ſayde challengers did turney onTournying. horſſebacke with ſwords, and againſt them came xxix. defendants, Sir Iohn Dudley, and the Earle of Surrey running firſt, which the firſt courſe loſt both their gauntle
                  •
               s, and that day, Sir Richard Cromwell ouerthrew Mayſter Palmer in ye field off his Horſſe, to the great honor of the challengers.
            The v. of May, ſhe ſaid challengers fought on foote at the Barriers, & againſt thē, came xxx. defendants, which 
                  •
               oughtBarriers.
               
valiantly, but Sir Richard Cromwell ouerthrew that day at the Barriers Mayſter Culpeper in the field, and the ſixth of May, the ſayd chalengers brake vp their houſhold.
            The vij. of May, Sir William Weſton Knight, LordeSaint Iohns in Smithfield ſuppreſſed. Prior of Saint Iohns without Smithfield, dyed, and the King tooke all the Lands that belonged to that order into hys hands, to the augmentation of his Crowne, and gaue vnto euery of the Chalengers aboue written for a rewarde of their valiantneſſe, a hundred Markes, and a houſe to dwell in of yéerely reuenues out of the ſayd lands for euer.
            The 26. of May, was ſent to the Tower Doctour Wilſon, and Doctour Sampſon Biſhop of Chichester, for reléeuing certayne priſoners which denyed the Kings Supremacie, for the ſame offence Richard Farmer Grocer of London a richRichard Farmer in the Premunire. and wealthy man, was committed to the Marſhalſea, and after arraigned, and attaynted in the Premunire, and loſt all his goodes. Alſo, the kéeper of Newgate was ſent to the Marſhalſea, for giuing libertie to Doctor Powell and Doctour Abell his priſoners.
            The ninth of July, Thomas Lord Cromwell Earle ofThomas Lord Cromvvell beheaded. 
               Eſſex béeing in the Counſell Chamber, was ſodeinly apprehended, and committed to the Tower of London. The ninetéenth, he was attainted by Parliament, of hereſie and high Treaſon, and ye xxviij. of July, he was beheaded on the Tower hill with the Lord Walter Hungerford of Heitiſburie.
            
            In this moneth of July, King Henry by authoritie ofKing Henry deuorced from Lady Anne of Cleeue. Parliament, and Conuocation, was deuorced from Lady Anne of Cleeue.
            
            The xxx. of July Robert Barnes, Thomas Gerrard, WilliamSixe Prieſtes, three brent, three hanged. Ierome Prieſts, were burned in Smithfield. The ſame day, Thomas Abell, Edward Powell, and Richarde Fetherſtone, all thrée Doctours, were hanged and quartered, for denying the Kings ſupremacie of the Church.
            The fourth of Auguſt, were drawne to Tiborne ſixe perſons,Seauen executed at Tiborne. and one ledde, Lawrence Cooke, Prior of Dancalfe, William Horne,
                a lay brother of the Charterhouſe, Giles
               
               
               Horne Gentleman, Clement Philpot, Edmond Bromham Darby Kenham, Robert Birde, Iaruis Carrow, all put to death for Treaſon.
            The Ditches about London were clenſed.
            The eyght of Auguſt, Lady Katherine Haward, daughter to Edmond Lord Haward, was ſhewed opēly as QuéeneKing Henry married. at Hampton Court.
            
            The xj. of September, was hanged in Moore field a Strā
               ger,Harlots cauſe many murthers. named Iames Rinatian, who had ſlayne his Maiſter one Capon a Florentine in a Garden, for his Harlot.
            The later end of this yeare was a great drouth and aDry ſommer. great death of hote burning agues and flixes.
            The ſalt water flowed aboue London bridge.
            
            
               William Laxton: Martin Bowes, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Sir William Roche Draper, the 28. of October.
            
            The xxij. of December, Ralph Egerton, and Thomas Harman, ſeruant to Mayſter Flightwood, were executed for counterfetting the Kings great Seale in leade, wherewith they had ſealed diuers Patents counterfetted and antidated, making Strangers Deniſons, vnder the names of diuers Clearkes of the Chancerie, one Tuckefield being of their faction, robbed the Lord Audlyes Chappell and fledde, who béeing afterwarde apprehended at Caleis, whiche Towne he woulde haue betrayed, he ſlew himſelfe with a Dagger.
            In Aprill, certayne perſons began a new Rebellion in1541 Anno reg. 33 A nevv commotion in Yorkeshire. 
               Yorkeſhire, which were ſhortly after takē, & put to executiō in diuers places, of which, Leigh a Gētlemā, Tatarſal a Clothyer, and Thorneton a yeoman, were put to death at London, Sir Iohn Neuell Knight, a tenne perſons or moe, were put to death at Yorke.
            
            The ſeauen and twentith of May, the Counteſſe of Saliſburie
               Counteſſe of Salisburie beheaded. Damport and Chapman hanged. was beheaded in the Tower of London.
            
            The ninth of June, Damport and Chapman, two of the Kings Gard, were hanged at Greenewich for robbery.
            The tenth of June, Sir Edmond Kneuet, Knighte, of

               Norffolke, was arraigned before the Kings Juſtices (ſittingSir Edmond Kneue
                     •
                   arraigned, for ſtriking in the Court. in the great Hall at Greenewich) Mayſter Gage, Comptroller of the Kings houſhold, Mayſter Suthwell, Sir Anthony Browne, Sir Anthony Winkefield, Mayſter Wriſley, and Edmond Pecham, Cofferer of the Kings houſhold, for ſtriking of one Mayſter Clere of Norffolke, ſeruant with thē Earle of Surrey, within the Kings houſe in ye Tenis Court. There was firſt choſen to go vpō the ſayd Edmond, a Queſt of Gentlemen, and a Queſt of Yeomen, to enquire of the ſaide ſtripe, by the which inqueſts, he was found gilty, and had iudgement to loſe his right hande, wherevpon, was called to do the execution, firſt the Sergeant Chirurgion wyth hys inſtrumentes apperteyning to his Office: the Sergeant of the Woodyard with the Mallet and a Blocke wherevpon the hand ſhould lye: the Mayſter Cooke for the King with the knife: the Sergeant of the Larder to ſet the knife right on the ioynt: the Sergeant Farrer with his ſearing irons to ſeare the veynes: the Serieant of the Poultrey, with a Cocke, which Cocke ſhould haue his head ſmitten off vpon the ſame blocke, and with the ſame knife: the yeomen of the Chaundrie with ſeare clothes: the yeomen of the Skolerie with a panne of fire to heate the irons: a chafer of water to coole the endes of the irons: and two formes for all Officers to ſette their ſtuffe on: the Sergeant of the Celler with Wine, Ale, and Béere: the yeomen of the Ewrie in the Sergeantes ſtéede who was abſente, wyth Baſon, Ewre, and Towels. Thus euery man in hys Office readye to do the execution, there was called foorth Sir William Pickering Knight Marſhall, to bring in the ſayde Edmonde Kneuet, and when hée was broughte to the Barre, the chiefe Juſtice declared to hym his treſpaſſe, and the ſayde Kneuet confeſſing hymſelfe to bée giltye, humblye ſubmitted hym to the Kings mercie: for this offence hée was not only iudged to loſe his hand, but alſo his body to remayne in priſon, and his Landes and goodes at the Kings pleaſure. Then the ſayde Sir

               Edmund Kneuet deſired that the King of his benigne grace would pardon him of his right hande, and take the left, for (quoth he) if my right hand be ſpared, I may héereafter doe ſuche good ſeruice to his grace, as ſhall pleaſe him to appoynt. Of this ſubmiſſion and requeſt, the Juſtices forthwith enformed the King, who of his goodneſſe, conſidering the gentle heart of the ſayde Edmund, and the good reporte of Lords and Ladyes, graunted hym pardon, that he ſhould loſe neyther hand, land, nor goodes, but ſhould goe frée at libertie.
            The Lord Leonard Gray, being endited of certain points of Treaſon by him committed, as was alledged agaynſte him, during the ſeaſon that he was the Kings Lieutenant in Ireland, to witte, for deliuering his nephew Girald Fitz Garard, brother to Thomas Fitz Garard before executed, and alſo, for that he cauſed certaine Iriſhmen to inuade the lands of the Kings friends, whome he fauoured not: the fiue and twentith of June, he was arraigned at Westminster in the Kings bench, and appoynted to be tryed by Knightes, bycauſe he was a Lord by name, and no Lord of the Parliament, but he diſcharged the Jurie, and confeſſed the enditement, wherevpon, he had iudgement, & on ye xxvitj. of June, being S Peters euen, he was beheaded at Tower hill, where heThe Lord Leonard Grey beheaded. ended his life very quietly and godly.
            This noble man, as he was come of high lignage, ſo was he a right valiant and hardy perſonage, hauing in his time done his Prince and Countrey good ſeruice, both in Ireland, France, and other places, greatly to his commendation, although now his happe was thus to loſe his head.
            The ſame day that he ſuffered, there were executed at Saint Thomas Waterings thrée Gentlemen, Iohn Mantell, Iohn Frowdes, and George Roydon.
            
            They died for a murther committed in Suſſex (as theyr inditement imported) in company of Thomas Fines, Lorde Dacres of the South. The troth whereof was thus: theLord Dacres of the South ar
                  
                     •
                  aigned. ſayde Lord Dacres, through the lewde perſwaſion of ſome

of them, as hath bin reported, meaning to bunt in ye Parke of Nicholas Pelham Eſquier at Laughton, in the ſame Countie of Suſſex, béeyng accompanyed with the ſayde Mantel, Frowdes and Roydon, Iohn Cheyney, and Thomas Iſley, Gentlemen, and Richarde Middleton, and Iohn Goldwell Yeomen, paſſed from his houſe of Hurstmonſeux, the laſte of Aprill, in the night ſeaſon, towarde the ſame Parke, where they intended ſo to hunt, and commyng into a place called Pikehay in the pariſhe of Hillingley, they found one Iohn Buſbrigge, Iames Busbrigge, and Richarde Somener, ſtanding there togither: and as it fell out through quarrelling, there enſued a fray betwixte the ſayde Lorde Dacres and his company on the one part, and the ſaid Iohn and Iames Busbrig, and Richard Somener on the other, in ſo much, that the ſaid Iohn Busbrigge receyued ſuch hurt, that he dyed thereof the ſeconde of May nexte enſuing: wherevpon as well the ſayd Lorde Dacres, as thoſe that were there wyth hym, and diuers other likewiſe that were appointed to go another way to méete them at the ſayd Parke, were indited of murther, and the ſeauen and twentith of June, the Lord Dacres himſelfe was arraigned before the Lord Audley of Walden, then Lord Chauncelor, ſitting that day as high Steward of Englande, with other Péeres of the Realme about him, who then and there condemned the ſayde Lorde Dacres to dye for that tranſgreſſion, and afterwardes, the nine and twentith of June, being Saint Peters daye, at eleauen of the clocke in the forenoone, the Sheriffes of London, accordingly as they were appointed, were readye at the Tower to haue receiued the ſaide priſoner, and him to haue led to execution on the Tower hill, but as the priſoner ſhould come forth of the Tower, on Heire a Gentleman of the Lord Chancelors houſe came, and in the Kings name commaunded to ſtay the execution till two of the clocke in the afternoone, whyche cauſed many to thinke, that the King woulde haue graunted his pardon. But neuertheleſſe, at thrée of the clocke in the ſame afternoone, he was brought forth of the Tower, and delyuered to

the Sheriffes, who led him on foote betwixte them vnto Tyborne, where he dyed. His body was buryed in the Churche of Saint Sepulchres: he was not paſte foure and twentie yeres of age, when he came thus throughe greate miſhappe to hys ende, for whome many ſore lamented, and likewiſe for the other thrée Gentlemen, Mantell, Frowdes, and Roydon, but for the ſaide yong Lord, being a right towardly Gentlemā, and ſuch a one, as many had conceiued great hope of better proofe, no ſmal mone and lamentation was made, the more indéede, for that it was thought he was induced to attempt ſuche follis, which occaſioned his death, by ſome light heads that were then aboute him.
            The firſte of July, a Welchman a Minſtrell, was hanged and quartred for ſinging of ſongs, whiche were interpreted to be prophecying againſte the King.
            In the moneth of Auguſt, the King tooke his ProgreſſeProgreſſe to Yorke. towarde Yorke.
            
            About this time Westminster and Bristow were made Biſhopricke 
                  •
               .
            
               Rowland Hill▪ Henrie Sucley, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Sir Michaell Dormer Mercer, the 28. of October.
            
            On Chriſtmaſſe euen at ſeauen of the clocke at nighte, beganne a great fire in the houſe of ſir Iohu Williams Maiſter of the Kings Jewels, where many of thoſe Jewelles were brent, & more imbezeled.
            The Lady Katherine Haward whom the King had marryed, for hir vnchaſte liuing committed with Thomas Culpeper and Francis Derham, was by Parliament attainted, Culpeper and Derham were put to death at Tyborne, ye tenth day of December.
            The xxiij. of January the King was proclaymed King ofKing Henry K. of Irelande. Queene Katherine beheaded. 
               Irelande.
            
            The 1
                  •
               . of February the Lady Haward, otherwiſe called Quéene Katherine, and the Lady Iane Rocheforde, for beyng of hir Councel with Thomas Culpeper, were both beheaded within the Tower of London.
            
            
               The twel
                  •
               th of March, Iohn Dudley was created Viſcount Liſle, by the right of his mother Lady Elizabeth ſiſter and heire to ſir Iohn Grey, Viſcount Liſle, who was late wife to Arthur Plantagenet Viſcount Liſle late deceaſſed.
            The ſeauentéenth of March Margaret Dauy a Maid, wasA Maide boiled in Smithfielde. boyled in Smithfielde, for poyſoning thrée houſholdes that ſhe had dwelled in.
            The eight and twentith of Marche, the Parliament ſitting,1542 
               George Feres Burgeſſe for the Towne of Plimmouth, was arreſted in London vpon a condemnation, wherevppon the Sergeant at armes of the Common houſe, was ſente to the Counter in Bredstrete to fetch him, but the Clearks would not delyuer him, till the Sheriffes came them ſelues, who in the ende deliuered him: howbeit, this matter was ſo takē in the Common houſe, that the Sheriffes, the Clearks, and fiue officers, wyth the partie plaintife, were ſent to the Tower,
               The Sheriffes of London ſent to the Tovver. Anno reg. 34 and there laye two dayes, and were then deliuered by ye Speaker and common houſe: the Sheriffes were deliuered from all charges, excepte twentie pounde for their fées.
            In Maye the Kyng tooke a loane of money, of all ſuch as were valued worth fifty pound or vpwarde.
            In the moneth of Auguſt, Iames Erle of Deſmond in Irelande,
               The Earle of Deſmoude. came and ſubmitted himſelfe to the King, and ſo returned.
            The firſte of October, the greate Oneale of Irelande wasThe greate Oneale. created Earle of Tiron, and hys baſe ſonne Mathew Oneale Baron of Donmagan, for Shane Oneale the onely ſonne of his bodye lawfully begotten, was then little eſtéemed.
            The Duke of Norffolke entred Scotland the one and twentithDuke of Norffolke entred Scotlande. of October, burning and waſting all the Marches, and there tarried wythoute anye battel proffered by the King of Scottes, vntill the middeſt of Nouember.
            
               Henry Hoblethorne: Henry Hancots, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Iohn Coates Salter, the 28. of October.
            
            After the departure of oure armye from Scotlande, the Kyng of Scottes made a roade into Englande, and did muche

harme, but at the laſte ſir Thomas Wharton, and ſir WilliamScots ouerthrovvne. Muſgraue, wyth a fewe of the bordurers, met the Scots, where they being in number 15000. were ouerthrowne, in whiche conflicte was taken the Lorde Maxwell, the Earles of Glencarne and Saſſilles, wyth all the Capitaines of the army to the number of one and twentie, and on Saint Thomas euen the Apoſtle, they were broughte to the Tower of London, where they laye that night: the nexte daye they were by the Kings charge apparelled in ſilke, and rode through the Citie to Westminster, where they were ſworne to be true priſoners, and then were deliuered to the cuſtodie of dyuers noble menne, whyche honorably entertained them. At Newyeares tide they were ſent home againe, agréeing to certaine articles.
            The 9, of February a proclamation was made, wherebyVVhite meate licenced to bee eaten in Lent. the people were licenced to eate white meates in Lent, but ſtraightly forbidden the eating of fleſhe. Wherevppon, ſhortly after the Earle of Surrey with diuers Lords, Knights and Gentlemen, were impriſoned for eating of fleſhe in the ſame Lent, contrarie to the ſaide Proclamation.
            The 8. of May one Leche ſometyme Bayly of Lowth, who1543 Anno reg. 35 Somerſet▪ an Herault kylled. had killed Somerſet one of our Herraults of Armes at Dunbarre in Scotlande, was drawne to Tyborne and there hanged and quartred. And the twelfth of June, Edwarde Leche hys brother, and with him a Prieſt, for the ſame facte, were lykewiſe executed at Tyborne.
            
            This yeare the firſte caſte péeces of yron that euer wereFirſte yron peeces caſte. made in Englande, were made at Buckestede in Suſſex, by Ralfe Hoge and Peter Bawde.
            
            The thirde of June, the Obrine a Lorde in Irelande, and dyuers of the wilde Iriſhe, ſubmitted them to Kyng Henrie.
            
            In July the ſaide Obrine was created Earle of Clawricarde.
            
            The 12 of July King Henrie married Ladye KatherineKing Henrye marryed Ladye Katherine Par. Parre, late wife to the Lorde Latimer, and ſiſter to the Marqueſſe of Northampton at Hampton Courte.
            
            
               King Henry ſent ouer 6000. men to 
                  
                     〈…〉
                  , whetherAn army ſent to Landerſey. alſo came the Emperou
                  •
                with a greate armye, 
                  •••
                
               
                  〈…〉
                after came downe the Frenche King wyth a great army and, offered to gyue battaile to the Emperour, by reaſon whereof the ſiege was rayſed: then the Frenche men victualled the Towne, and on the morrowe being ready to giue battaile, the Frenche men made great ſhew, but dallyed out the day, and in the night departed.
            The eighte and twentith of July, Anthony Parſon, Robert Teſtwood, and Henrie Filmer were brent at Windſore.
            
            A greate death of the peſtilence was at London: and therefore Michaelmaſſe Terme was adiorned to Saint Albons.
            
            
               Iohn Tolous: Richarde Dobbes, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes.
            
            
               Sir William Bower Draper, the 28. of October.
            
            
               Sir Ralfe Warren, the 13. of Aprill.
               Maior.
            
            At Alhallowntide, a roade was made into Scotlande, by the garriſon there, who burned 60. Uillages, and tooke great prayes.
            The eightéene of December the Archebyſhoppe of Canterburies Pallaice at Canterburie was brent, and therein was brent his brother in law, and other men.
            The foure and twentith of December, William Lorde Parre, was created Erle of Eſſex, and ſir William Parre was created Baron Parre of Horton at Hampton Court. And on the 
                  〈…〉
                of January ſir Thomas Wriotheſley was created Ba
               
                  ••
               n of Wriotheſley at Hampton Courte.
            
            This yeare chaunced foure Eclipſes, one of the Sūnne ſhe fourtéenth of Januarie, and thrée of the Moone.Four Eclypſes.
            
            In the beginning of Lent, Lorde Edward Seymer Earle of H
                     •
                  reforde; was made Liuetenaunt of the North, and ſent th
                  •
               ther wyth an army.
            The ſeauenth of Marche, Germaine Gardner, andGermaine Gardner and others executed. Larke Parſon of Chelfea were executed at Tyborne, for denying the Kings Supremacie, wyth them was executed, for other offences one Singleton. And ſhortelye after, Aſhbey was likewiſe executed for the Supremacie.
            
               The x
                  •
               j. of Ma
                  •••
               ſir Io
                     ••
                   Dudley, Lord Liſle, Lord Ad
               
                  〈…〉
               
               1
                     •
                  44. with a great na
                  ••
                de 
                  〈…〉
                toward
                  •
                
               Scotlande. o
                  •••
                
               
                  •••
                The 
                  〈…〉
                of 
                  〈…〉
                Gun poulder houſe, called theHouſe blovvne vppe vvith gunpoulder. 
               Blacke 
                     〈…〉
                   in 
                     〈…〉
                   Smithfielde, was blown vppe and therein burned fiue men, a boy, and a woman.
            On May euen, dyed Lord Thomas Audley▪
                Lord Chacelour of Englande After whome ſuccéeded Lorde Thomas Wriotheſley.
            
            The iij. of May ſir Iohn Dudley Vicount Liſle hygh AdmirallAn armye ſente into Scotland. of Englande 
               
                  •
               rryued with his fléete of 200. ſaile in the Frith of Scotlande, where he landed dyuers of his menne, and tooke there diuers veſſels. The iiij. of May he landed the reſidue of his men at Lieth, & from thence marched forwarde in thrée greate battailes, whereof the ſaide Lorde Admirall led the vawarde, the Earle of Shrewſburie the rereward, and Edward Seimer Earle of Hertforde Lieuetenant General of the battell. Here they found the Scots to the number of 6000, horſemen beſides many footemen readye to ſtoppe their paſſage, who at the firſte, made as they would haue ſet on the vawarde, but after certaine ſhotte on both ſides, they 
                  ••
               
               dainely, leauing their artillerie behinde them, fled towarde Edenborough, the foremoſte in fléeing, was the Cardinall of Saint Androws, the Earle of Huntley Gouernour, Murrey and Bothwell, and then the Engliſhmen entred the town of 
                  〈…〉
               
               Lieth taken and ſpoyled. where they found ſuch riches, as they thought had not 
                  〈…〉
                in any towne of Scotland. The nerte day our army went towardes Edenborough: and when they approched neare, the Prouoſt of the town with other profered to haue delyuered the ſame, vpon conditiō, that the people might departe with bag and baggage, & the town to be ſafe from fire. Where vnto our Lieuetenant aunſwered, that he was ſente thither to take vengeance vpon them for their defeſtable falſhoode, and that vnleſſe they would yéelde vp the town ſimply wythout condition, and cauſe man, woman and childe, to departe into the fialdes, ſubmitting them to his pleaſure, he woulde put them to the ſworde, and their towne to the fire. The

proudſt aunſwered, that it were better for them 
                  〈…〉
                to their defence, and ſo departed and forth with the Lord Lie
                  •
               
               tenant cauſed the vaward to marche towards the Towne, which they did ſo couragiouſly, with help of the Engliſh gunners, that then kept the Scots from their Ordinance, and ſo entred Canie Ga
                     ••
                  , and there ſaw a great number of the Scots,
               Edenborough brent. and ſet fire on the towne, which continued thrée 
                  〈…〉
                after 
                  •
               arning. Shortly after came to the lord Lieutenāt by and, William Lord Eurie Wardē of the Eaſt March of England & gouernor of Barwike, with his ſon ſi
                  •
                
               Raphe Eurie, who alſo brought with them 1500. light horſmen, inhabiters of thoſe two Marches, whyche after they were come, did ſuche good ſeruice, that the army ſent away their ſhippes laden wyth ſpoyle, and diſlodged their campe out of Lieth, ſettyng fyre in euery houſe, and returned home by lande, ſpoyling euery Uillage and Fortreſſe as they paſſed.
            The xvj. of May proclamation was made for the enhanring of Golde to xlviij. 
                  •
               . and Siluer to iiij. s̄. the ounce. Alſo the king cauſed to be coyned baſe moneys, whych was ſinceBaſe moneys coyned. that tyme called downe, the fifth yeare of Edwasde the ſixth, and called in the ſecond of Quéene Elizabeth.
            
            On the xx. day of May paſſed through the Citie of London in warlike maner, to the number of 700. Iriſhmen, hauing for theyr 
                  〈…〉
               , Darts, and Hand guns, with Bag pipes 
                  〈…〉
                them: & in Saint Iar
                     •
                  es Parke beſides Westminster, they 
                  〈…〉
                before the King.
            In the moneth of June, the Letany or Proceſſion wasProceſsion in Englishe. 
               
                  ••
                forth in Engliſhe with commandement by the King to be generally vſed in Pariſhe Churches.
            The thirtéenth of July King Henrie with a goodlye com
               
                  〈…〉
                paſſed into France and encamped on the North fide ofKing Henrye vvent to Bol. Ioingne. 
               
                  〈…〉
               , after whoſe comming the Towne was ſo ſore bat
               
                  〈…〉
                wyth Gunne ſhotte, aud certaine Towers vnder
               
                  〈…〉
               , and ſo ſhaken wyth Gunne powlder, that after amoneths ſiege, the Captaine ſent worde to the Kyng,

that 
                  〈…〉
               e the
                  〈…〉
               , that all 
                  〈…〉
                wythin mighte departe 
                  •
               yth bagge and 
                  〈…〉
                King Henrie granted, and the Bello
                     •
                  
                  ners departed to the 
                  〈…〉
               r of 4▪ 454.
            The fiue and 
                  〈…〉
                of September, the King with his nobilitie 
                  ••
               tred into high B
                     •
                  l
                     •
                  ingne, and after returned from thence, 
                  •••
               ded at 
                  〈…〉
                the firſt of October.
            The ninth of October in the night, the French men came vnwares vpon the Engliſh men in baſe Boloigne, and ſlewe of them a greate number, howb
                  •
               it, they were ſhortly after chaced from thence, and the baſe Towne holden after in good quiet.
            
               Iohn Wilford Merchant Taylour: Andrew Iud, the 28. of S.
               
                  Sherifes. Maior. Priſes taken.
            
            
               Sir William Laxton Grocer, the 28. of October.
            
            This yeare was taken by the Kings Shyppes of the West Country, and of the Engliſhe coaſt the number of 300 French ſhippes and more, ſo that the Grey Friers Churche in London was laide full of Wine, the Austen Friers and Blacke Friers, were layde full of Hering and other fiſh that was taken going into Fraunce.
            
            The King demaunded a beneuolence of al his ſubiectes,A beneuolence demaunded. Spirituall and Temporall towardes his warres in France and Scotland.
            
            And the twelfth of January the Lorde Chauncelour, the Duke of Suffolke, and other of the Kings Councell began to ſit at Baynards Castell, where they firſte called before them the Mayor and Alderman, &c. And bycauſe Richard Read Alderman would not agrée to pay as they ſet hym: he was commaunded vpon paine to ſerue the King in hys wars of Scotlande, who departed from London the thrée and twentith of January. Alſo ſir William Ro
                     •••
                  
                Alderman, for words 
                  ••
                diſpleaſure taken by the Kings Councell, was by them ſentSir VVilliam Roche ſente to the Fleete. to the Fleete, where he remayned till Paſſion Sondaye.
            The ſixe and twentith of January, there camped on the Weaſt ſide of Boloigne beyond the Hauen, an army of French to the number of eightéene thouſand, where they laye tenne

dayes, and the ſixth of February, were put to flight, by the Earle of Hartford, and ſir Iohn Dudley Lord Admiral, then being Deputie of Boloigne▪
               
            
            The thirtéenth of February, a Prieſt was ſet on the Pillorie in Cheape, & burnt in both chéeks with the letters F & A. & a paper on his heade, wherein was written For falſe accuſing, whyche iudgement was giuen by the Lorde Chancelor in the Starre Chamber, a notable example of Juſtice: great cauſe haue I to wiſhe the lyke, to the lyke accuſer, who neuer yet repented, but cōtrariwiſe ſweareth and forſweareth that he neuer did any ſuche acte againſte his brother.
            In the beginning of March a roade was made into Scotlande towarde Gedworth by the Engliſhemen, who at the firſte gote greate praiſe, but they were ſo gréedy, and went ſo far, that a greate army of Scottes beſet them with thrée battels, where the Engliſhemen for the moſte part were ſlaine and taken at Panyer Howghe, among whome ſir Ralph Eure LordeAlderman of London taken priſoner. 
               Eure, and Warden of the Eaſt Marches was ſlayne, and Richard Read Alderman of London, wyth other taken priſoners by the Scots.
            
            Trinitie Terme was adiorned bicauſe of the warres.1545 Anno reg. 37
            
            About the xxv. of June was great tempeſt of wind in Darbiſhire, where through trées were ouer-turned, and dyuers Churches, Chappels and houſes, were vncouered. Alſo inHaileſtones f
                     •
                  
                  gured lyke men
                     •
                   heades. 
               Lancaſhire, there fell haileſtones as big as mens fiſts, which had diuers printes in them, ſome like mens faces, ſome like Gunne holes, &c.
            The ninetéenth of July, the French kings nauy commingFrenchemen arryued in Suſſe
                     •
                  . out of Newhauen and Deepe, arriued on the coaſte of England in Suſſex, afore Bright Hamsteade, where they ſette certaine of their ſouldiours alande to burne, but the Beacons were fyted, and the men came downe ſo thicke, that the French men fledde and did little hurte.
            The xix. of July, by miſfortune of ſhooting a Gun in one ofMen brent in the 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  ▪
                y• Hedgehogs a ſhip, afore Westminster, a 
                  •
               irken of gun-poul
               
                  •••
                fyred & ſlew 7. men, and the eight leaped into the Thamis,
               
and was drowned.
            The xx. of July the king being at Portſmouth, a goodly ſhipMary Roſe vvas drovvned. of Englande, called the Mary Roſe, with ſir George Carrowe the Captaine, and manye other Gentlemen were drowned in the middeſt of the Hauen, by greate negligence.
            The xxj. of July, the French Galleis & nauye came aforeFrenchmen landed in the Ile of VVight. 
               Portſmouth Hauen, and landed certaine of their army in the Ile of Wight, at Saint Helens Point, & there burned & encamped about two thouſande men, but they were ſoone driuen away with loſſe of their Captaine & many ſouldiors. Within few dayes after, the whole fléete remoi
                  •
               ed from the Wight
               Frenchmen landed at Nevvhauen in Suſſex. to a place in Suſſex, called Newhauen, four miles from Lewes, and there landed many Captaines & ſouldiors, who by the valiantneſſe of the Gentlemen and Yeomen of Suſſex, were ſlaine and drowned in the Hauen a great number of them, & the reſte hardly recouered their ſhippes and Galleis.
            In the moneth of Auguſt deceaſſed at Guilforde, Charles Brandon
                Duke of Suffolke; and Lorde greate Maiſter of the Kings houſholde, who was honorably buryed at Windſore.
            
            In Auguſt the Earle of Hereforde was ſent into Scotland,
               Erle of Herford ſent into Scotl. with an armye of 12000. menne, where he deſtroyed dyuers Townes, and greatly enda
                  •
               uaged the Scottes.
            
            The ninth of September ſir Iohn Dudley, Lorde Liſle,
               Lorde Admirall brene Treyport Lorde Adinirall of Englande landed with 6000. men at Treyport in Normandie, and there brente the Towne and Abbey with other houſes about it, and thir
                  ••
               e ſhips with a Barke that laye in the Hauen, with loſſe of fourtéene Engliſhmenne, and ſo re
                  •
               urned.
            The twelfth of September, the Churche of Saint Giles
               S. Giles churche brent. without Criplegate of London was brent.
            The eightéenth of October the Proceſſion was firſte begon in Paules Church to be ſung in Engliſh, and ſo commanded by Iniunction through the whole realme.
            
               George Barnes: Ralphe Allen, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Sir Martin Bowes Goldſmith, the 28. of October.
            
            The xxliij. of Nouember began a Parliament, wherein

was graunted to the Kyng a ſubſedie of two ſhillings eightChauntres, Colledges, and hoſpitals giuen vnto the King. pence of the pound in goods, & four ſhillings of the pound in lands: Alſo at Colledges, Chauntries, and Hoſpitalles, were committed to the Kings order, to alter and tranſpoſe, whyche he promiſed to do to the glorie of God, and the common profite of the Realme.
            In the latter ends of March, the Stewe in Southwarke was put down by the Kings commandement. In May the kings1546 The Stevves put dovvne. Anno reg. 38 VVilliam Foxley ſlepte more than fourteene dayes, and as many nightes. vvithout vvaking. ſhips tooke one of ye 
               French Kings Galleis with gret riches.
            The xxvij. of Aprill, being Tuiſday in Eaſter wéeke William Foxley Potte maker for the Mint in the Tower of London, fell aſléepe, and ſo continued ſléeping and coulde not be wakened with pricking, cramping or otherwiſe burning whatſoeuer, till the firſte day of the nexte Tearme, whyche was full fouretéene dayes, and as many nights or more, for that Eaſter Terme beginneth not afore ſeauentéene dayes after Eaſter. The cauſe of his thus ſléeping could not be knowen, thoughe the ſame were diligently ſearched for by the Kings Phiſitions and other learned menne, yea the King himſelfe examining the ſaide William Foxley, who was in all pointes found at his wakening to be as if he had ſlept but one night, and is yet liuing in the Tower of London, this preſent yeare of oure Lorde God. 1579.
            The thirtéenth of June being Whitſonday, a peace was proclaymed betwéene the Kings of England and France, with a generall Proceſſion in London.
            
            The ſeauen and twentith of June Doctour Crome recā
               ted at Paules Croſſe.
            
            The xvj. of July, were burned in Smithfied for the Sacrament,Anne Askevve and other brent▪
                
               Anne Askew, alias Keime, Iohn Laſſels, Nicholas O
                  
                     〈…〉
                  tle
                     •
                  
                Prieſt, Iohn Adlam Tailour, and Doctour Shaxton 
               
                  〈…〉
               time Biſhop of Saliſburie preached at the ſame fire, and 
                  〈…〉
               erecanted, perſwading them to doe the lyke, but they 
                  •
               oulde not.
            The xxj. of Auguſt came into Englande Claude de Honne
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                highe Admirall of Fraunce, who broughte with hym the

Sacre of Deepe, and twelue Galleis, he landed at the Tower
               Admirall of France came to London. 
               Wharffe, where he was honorably receiued, and broughte to the Byſhop of Londons Palaice, where he lodged two nights and then 
                  •
               ode to Hampton Courte where the King laye. By the waye Prince Edwarde receiued him with a companye of 500. coates of Ueluet with one ſléeue of cloth of Golde, and halfe the coate embrodered with Golde: there was in all to the number of 800. horſes.
            In September, the water of Finſburie was brought to ye
               Condit in Loth burie. Conduit at London wall, Saint Stephens in Colmanstreete, and Saint Margarets in Lothburie.
            
            
               Richard Iaruis. Thomas Curteyſe, the 28. of September.
               
                  Sherifes. Maior. Duke of Norf. folke, and Earle of Surrey ſente to the Tovver.
            
            
               Henry Hobrethorne Merchant Taylour, the 28. of Octob.
            
            The twelfth of December Thomas Duke of Norffolke, and Henry Earle of Surrey his ſon, was ſent to the Tower of London, the one by water, the other by lande.
            The thirde of Januarye, the Churche of the late Grey Friers in London was opened, & Maſſe ſung there: and that day preached at Paules Croſſe the Biſhop of Rocheſter, who declared the Kings gifte to the Citie of London, for the reléeuingKing Henry his gift to the Citie of London. of the poore people, whiche was by Patent vnder hys greate Seale. Saint Bartholomewe Spittle, the Churche of the Grey Friers, & two Pariſh Churches, the one of S. Nicholas in the Shambles, the other Saint Ewine in Newgate Market, all to be made one Pariſh Church of the Grey Friers Churche, & in lands he gaue for ye maintenance of the ſame 500. marke by yeare for euer, and this Church to be named Christchurch, founded by King Henrie the eight.
            
            
               Henrie Howard Earle of Surrey, was beheaded on the Tower
               Eatle of Surrey beheaded. 
               hill the xix. of Januarie.
            The xxviij. of January, king Henry deceaſed, appointingKing Henry deceaſſed. his firſt ſon Prince Edward ye ſecond Lady Mary his daughter by Quéen Katherine: and the thirde, Lady Elizabeth 
               
                  ••
                Quéene Anne Bolloine. He deceaſſed when he had raign
                  ••
                37. yeares, 9. moneths, and odde dayes, and was buried 
                  ••
                
               Windſore.
            
         
         
            
            ¶ Edward the ſixt.
            
            
            
               
                  EDvvarde the ſixt began his
               Anno reg. 1. raigne the eyghte and twentith of Januarie, Anno 1546. whē he was but 9. yeares olde. King Henrie his father by his will had appoynted for hys priuy councel, Doctour Cranmer Archbiſhoppe of Canterburie, Lord Wriotheſly Lord chāce celour, Cuthbert Tonſtall Byſhop of Durham wyth other to the number of ſixetéene.
            The firſt of February, the Earle of Hertford was nominate,Earle of Hert forde made L. Protector. elected and choſen, by all the executors, to be protector and chiefe Gouernor of the Kings perſon.
            The ſixt of February the Earle of Hertford Lord ProtectorKing Edvvarde made Knight. in the Tower of London, endued King Edwarde with the order of Knighthoode, and then immediatly the Kyng ſtanding vp, Henrie Hoblethorne Lorde Mayor of London was

called, who knéeling down, the kyng tooke the Sword of theLord Mayor of London made Knight. Lorde Protectour, and made hym Knight, whiche was the firſte that euer he made.
            The fourtéenth of February the corps of King Henry the eighte, was with great ſolempnitie and honor conueyed towardes Windſore, and there buried in the Colledge.
            The ſeauentéenth of February ſir Edward Seimer EarleDuke and Lordes created. of Hertforde and Lorde Protectour, was created Duke of Somerſet, the Lorde Parre Earle of Eſſex, was created Marques of Northampton, ſir Iohn Dudley Lorde Liſle, Lorde Admiral, was created Erle of Warwike, and Lord Chamberlaine of Englande, ſir Thomas Wriotheſley and Lorde Chauncelour, was created Earle of Southampton, ſir Thomas Seymer was made Lorde of Sudley, and highe Admirall, ſir Richard Riche, was made Lord Rich, ſir William Willoughbey was made Lord Willoughbey of Parham, ſir Edmond Sheffeld was made Lorde Sheffielde of Buterwike.
            
            King Ed. rode through ye citie of London towards Westminster, and as he paſſed on the South ſide of Paules Churcheyarde, an Argoſine came from the Battlements of the Stéeple of Paules Churche vpon a Cable, being made faſte to anPaules ſteeple lay at ancker. Ancker by the Deanes gate, lying on his breaſt, aiding himſelfe neither with hande nor foote, and after aſcended to the middeſt of the Cable, where he tumbled and played manye preaſie toyes, where at the King and the nobles hadde good paſtime. He was crowned at Westminster, on the xx. of February.King Edvvarde crovvned.
            
            The ſixth of Marche, the great Seale of Englande was taken1547 from ſir Thomas Wriotheſley, and on the morrowe the ſame was deliuered to the Lord Sent-Iohn Lord great Maiſter.
            The fiftéenth of May Doctour Smith recanted at Paules
               Doctor Smith recanted. 
               Croſſe.
            
            The Lorde Protectour and the reſt of the Councell ſentImages forbiddē
                Commiſſioners into all partes of the realme, willing them to take all Images out of their Churches, for the auoyding

of Idolatrie, wyth them were ſent diuers Preachers to perſwade the people from their beades, and ſuche lyke ceremonies, and at that time the going in Proceſſion was forbiddenProceſ
                     •
                  ion forbidden. to be vſed: & the Goſpel and Epiſtle were read in Engliſh.
            
            In the moneth of Auguſt, Edwarde Duke of Somerſet, Lorde, Protectour as Generall, and Iohn Dudley Earle of Warwike, Lorde Lieuetenant with a noble army were ſente into Scotlande, and neare to Edenborough, at a place calledMuſclboroughe fielde. Williom Patyn.
                
               Muuſcleborough the Engliſhemenne and Scottes mette, where betwéene them the tenth of Septeptember was foughte a cruell battel. The victorie whereof fell to the Engliſhmen and of the Scottes were ſlaine fouretéene thouſande, and taken priſoners, fiftéene hundred, whereof many were Gentlemē, and not aboue thrée ſcore Eegliſhmen ſlaine.
            The xxiiij. of October, Richarde Lorde Riche was madeLorde Rich L. Channcelor. Lorde Chauncellour.
            
               Thomas Whit Robert Cherſey, the 28. of September.
               
                  Sherifes. Maior. Free ſchoole at Holt.
            
            
               Sir Iohn Greſham Mercer, the 28. of October.
            
            This ſir Iohn Greſham founded a Fréeſchoole at Holt, a Market towne in Norffolke. Alſo at hys deceaſſe whiche was in Anno 1556. on the xxiij. of October, he gaue to euery warde in London ten pound to be diſtributed to the poore. And to 60. poore men & women, euery one of them thrée yards of broade cloth of eight or nine ſhillings ye yard, to be made in gowns readye to theyr backes: He gaue alſo to Maides marriages and to the Hoſpitals in London, aboue two hundred pounds in ready money.
            The fourth of Nouember, the Parliament beganne at Hestminster, in the which was graunted to the King al Chā
               tries,Chauntries and Chappels giuen to the King. frée Chappels, and Brotherhoodes: and an acte was made for the receyuing of the Sacrament, in both kindes of Breade and Wine.
            Ther vij▪ of Nouember was pulled downe the Roode in Paules Church, with Marie and Iohn, & all other Images in ye Church: then ye li
                  •
               e was done in al Churches in England.
            
            Alſo Eaſter folowing began the Communion and confeſsion

in Engliſhe, but no manne conſtrained thereto excepteAnno reg. 2. 1548 they woulde: but after Eaſter beganne the Seruice in Engliſhe in dyuers Pariſhe Churches, and at Whitſontide at Paules, by the commandement of the Deane. Barking Chappell nighe the Tower of London, and Saint Martins Le Graund nigh the Shambles were pulled down. Alſo the pariſh Churches, of Saint Nicholas in the Shambles, and Saint Ewyns within Newgate, were pulled downe, and the Pariſhioners, appointed to the late diſſolued Grey Friers Churche, whyche is now named Christes Church, founded by King Henrie the eight.
            
            The watche whiche hadde béene accuſtomed in London at Midſommer of long time laide downe, was nowe againe vſed, both on the euen of Saint Iohn and of Saint Peter, in as comely order as it had béene accuſtomed, whych watch was greately beautified by the number of more than thrée hundred Dimilaunces and light horſemen, that were prepared by the Citizens to be ſent into Scotlande for the reſcue of the Town of Hadington, and other kept by Engliſhmen in Scotland.
            
            On Saint Peters euen, Monſieur Daſſey, Lieuetenant toThe ſiege of Hadington. the French King, and the Reingraue of Fraunce, wyth the number of x. thouſand French and Almaines beſides Scots, beſieged the Towne of Hadington in Scotlande, defended by the Engliſhmen, vnto whoſe aide ſhortly after came from Barwike iij. E. horſemen, which were 700. men of armes and Dimitances, the Captaines whereof were ſir▪ 
               Robert Bowes, and ſir Thomas Palmer, whych horſemen not long after by the Frenchmen were encloſed, and the moſte part either ſlaine or taken with their Captaines before named: neuertheleſſe, our Engliſhmen defended the Town, often ſkirmiſhing wyth the French, and putting them to the worſe, vntill the twentith daye of Auguſt, and then came an army out of Englande of ſixetéene thouſande, of the whiche foure thouſande were Almaines, the Kyngs Lieuetenant was the Earle of Shrewſburie, the General of the Almaines was Captaine Courtney.
            
            At the comming of this armie, the Frenchemenne and Scottes in peaceable manner departed from before Hadington,
               
giuing our Captaynes and Souldiers great commendation for their ſeruice. Francis Earle of S
                     •
                  r
                     •
                  wſhurie after he had ſéene the Towne victualled and ſtored with freſh Souldiers and munitions, departed into England, and our mē kept the Towne of Hadington, oftentimes ſkirmiſhing with the Frenchmen and Scottes, till the twentith day of September,Hadington raſed by Englishe men. and then came with the Earle of Rutland with thrée thouſand Almaynes, and as many Borderers, who cauſed the To
                  •
               ne to be razed, and ſo brought their Ordinance and carriage to Berwike, and returned without battayle.
            On Saint Peters day, Stephen Gardiner Biſhop of Winchester,
               Bishop of VVincheſter ſent to the Tovver. preached at Westminster in the Courte before the King, for the which Sermon, he was on the morrow after ſent to the Tower of London.
            
            The vij. of July, a Prieſt was hanged and quartered inA Prieſt of Cornevvall executed. 
               Smithfield, for that he and other in Cornewall had ſlayne Mayſter Body, one of the Kings Commiſſioners, the others of his ſocietie, were put to death in diuers other partes of the Realme.
            This yeare, a great mortalitie by the peſtilence, was inGreat Peſtileuce in London. 
               London, wherefore, commaundement was giuen to all Curates and other hauing to do therwith, that no corps ſhould be buried before ſixe of the clocke in the morning, nor after ſixe of the clocke at night, and that there ſhould at the buriall of euery corpſe, be rong one bell at the leaſt, by the ſpace of thrée quarters of an houre.
            In September, dyed Quéene Katherine, late 
                  •••
               s to KingQueene Katherine dyed. 
               Henry, and after marryed to Sir▪ 
               Thomas Seymer Lorde Admirall.
            
               William Locke▪ Iohn A
                     •
                  li
                     •
                  e, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Sir Henry A
                     ••
                  ots Fiſhmonger, the 28. of October.
            
            The xvj. of Nouember, Saint Annes Church within Alderſgate
               Saint Annes Church brent. Anno reg. 3. Lord Thomas Seymer beheaded. of London was brent.
            The xvj. of January, Thomas Seymer Lord Admirall, and brother to the Lord Protector, was ſent to the Tower of London, & the xx. of March, he was beheaded on the Tower hill.
            
            
               The 
                  •••
               th o
                  •
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                Proclamation was made for the1549 
               
                  ••••
               e to be put downe through the whole 
                  〈◊◊◊〉
                tenth 
                  〈◊◊〉
                the 
                  •
               loyſten of Paules Church in 
                  〈◊〉
               
               ▪ 
               
                  •
               al
                  •••
                Pardon Churchyard, with the Daunce of Death▪ commonly called the Daunce of Paules about theDaunce of Paules pulled dovv
                     ••
                  e. ſame Cloyſter, coſtly and cunningly wrought, and the Chappell in the midſt of the ſame Church-yard, were all began to be pulled downe.
            Alſo▪ the Chernill houſe of Paules, with the ChappellCharnill houſe of Paules. there (after the Tombes and other Monuments of the dead were pulled downe, and the dead mens bones buryed in the fields) were conuerted into dwelling houſes & ſhoppes.
            About the ſame time, the Stéeple, and moſt part of theChurch of Saint Iohn by Smithfield blovvne vp. Church of Saint Iohn of Hieruſalem néere vnto Smithfield, was vndermined, and ouerthrowne with Gunne powlder, the ſtone whereof was applyed in the building of the Lorde Protectors houſe at the Strand.
            
            The xxiij. of Aprill▪ ſixe houſes at Broken Wharffe wereFire at Broken VVharffe. brent.
            In the moneth of May, by meanes of a Proclamation for e
                  ••
               loſu
                  •
               es▪ the Commons of Somerſetſhire and Lincolneſhire made a Commotion, and brake vp certayne ParkesCommotion in Sommerſetshire and Lincolneshire. of Sir William Herberds▪
                and Lord Sturtons▪ but Sir William Herberd 
               
                  •
               lew and executed many of thoſe Rebels.
            In July, the Commons of Eſſex and Kent▪ Su
                     •••
                  ke, and Norffolke, roſe agaynſt incloſures▪ and pulled downe dyuers Parkes 
                  〈◊〉
               .
            Alſo, the Commons of Cornewall and Deuonſhire, roſe againſtCommotion in Cornevvall and Deuonshire the Nobles and Gentlemen, and required not only that the incloſures might be diſparked, bu
                  ••
                alſo to haue their old Religion, and Acte of ſixe Articles reſtored: theſe 
                  ••
               ſée god the Citie of Excester, which was valiantly defended. Againſt theſe Rebels was ſent Iohn Lord Ruſſell, Lord priuie Seale, with a number of Souldyers, who entred the Citie of Excester the fifth of Auguſt, where they 
                  •
               lew and 
                  •
               ooke priſoners of the 
                  ••
               e
                  •••
               s more than four thouſand, andRebels ſubdued
               
after hanged diuers of them in the Towne and Countrey about. The Lorde Gray was alſo ſente with a number of Strangers, horſſemen, who in diuers conflictes ſ
                  •
               ew many people, and ſpoyled the Countrey.
            The laſt of July, William▪
                Lorde Marques of Northhampton,
               Commotion at Norvvich. Lord Sheffield ſlayne. Marciall Lavv. entred the Citie of Norwich and on the next morning, the Rebels alſo entred the Towne, burned part thereof, put the Lorde Marques to flighte, and ſ
                  •
               ewe the Lorde Sheffeld.
            
            In this meane time, diuers perſons were apprehended as ayders of the foreſayde Rebels, of the whiche, one was hanged within Aldgate, and another at the Bridge foote toward Southwarke, both on Mary Magdalens day.
            In the beginning of Auguſt, the French King determining to take the Iſles of Garneſea and Ierſea, did ſet there ſodeinlyThe French Kings Galleys inuaded Garneſea and Ierſea. vpon our Shippes with a great number of Galeis, but they were ſo manfully encountred by the Kings Nauie, that with the loſſe of a thouſand men, and great ſpoyle of their Galleis, they were forced to retire into France, and de
               
                  •
               i
                  •
               t from their purpoſe.
            The xvj. of Auguſt, a man was hanged without Biſhopſgate of London, and one other ſent to Waltham, and there executed, and diuers other in many places.
            The viij. of Auguſt, the French Embaſſadours gaue aFrenchmen apprehended. defiance to the Lorde Protectour, wherevpon, all Frenchmen with their goodes béeing no Denizens, were apprehended.
            The Rebels in Norffolke and Suffolke encamped thēſelues at Mount Surrey, in a wood called Saint Nicholas wood, néere vnto Norwich▪
                agaynſt whome▪ Sir Iohn Dudley Earle of Warwike went with 
                  •
               n Armye, where both he and a great number of Gentlemen méeting with the Rebelles were in ſuche daunger, as they had thought all to haue dyed in that place, but God that confoundeth the purpoſe of all Rebels, brought it ſo to paſſe, that as well there as in al other places, they were partly by power cōſtreined,

partly by promiſe of their 
                  •
               ar
                  ••
               n, perſwaded to ſubmitte themſelues to their Prince the Earle of Warwike entred the Citie of Norwich the xxvij. of Auguſt, when he had 
                  ••
               aineThe Earle of VVarvvicke vvent againſt the Rebels at Norvvich. aboue fiue thouſand of the Rebels, and taken their chiefe Captayne Robert Ket of Windham 
               
                  •
               anner, whiche mighte diſpend in Lands fiftie pound by yeare, and was worth in moueables, aboue a thouſand Markes, when he had put to execution diuers of the Rebels in diuers places about Norwich and returned.
            The xxviij. of Auguſt, tidings was brought to King Edward
               Nevvhauen by Boleyne vvon by the French. and the Lord Protector, that the Frenchmen had taken Blackneſſe, Hamiltew, and Newhauen by Boleyne, and had ſlayne all the Engliſhmen, and taken the Kings Ordinance and victualles, which was reported to be begunne by one Sturton, a Baſtard ſonne of the Lord Sturtons, which had betrayed Newhauen, and went himſelfe to the French Kings ſeruice: héere vpon, the Captayne of Bulleyne Barke, for feare of the French Army, conuayed all the Ordinance, Uictualles, goodes, and men of that Fort, to the high Towne of Bulleyne, and after their departing, with Gunpowder blew vp the Fort.
            About this time alſo, a Commotion began at Semer inCommotion in Yorkeshire. the North riding of Yorkeſhire, and continued in the Eaſt riding, and there ended: the principall rayſers whereof, were William Ombler of Eastheſ
                     •
                  e
                     ••
                  on yeoman, Thomas Dale, pariſh Clarke of Semer, and Steuenſon of Semer: being preuented by the Lord Preſident from riſing at Wintringham, they drew to a place at Semer by the Sea coaſt, and there by night rode to the beacon at Stax
                     •
                  o
                     •
                  , and ſet it on fire, and ſo gathered a rude route: then they went to Mayſter Whites houſe, and tooke him, and Clopton his wides brother, Sauage & Merchant of Yorke, and Bery, ſeruant to Sir Walter Mildmay, which four they murthered a mile from Semer, and there left thē naked: their number increaſed to thrée thouſand. On the xxj. of Auguſt, the Kings pardon was offered, which Ombler and other refuſed, who were ſhortly after

taken, and brought to Yorke, where Thomas Dale and otherRebels executed at Yorke. were executed the xxj. of September.
            The firſt of September, Edmond Bonar Biſhop of London, preached a Sermon at Powles Croſſe, for the which, he was accuſed vnto the Counſell by William Latimer, Parſon of Saint Lawrence Pountney, and Iohn Hoper, ſometime a white Monke, and ſo conuented before the Archbiſhop of Canterbury, and other Commiſſioners at Lambheath, on the twentith day of that ſame moneth, and ſente to the Marſhalſea: on the firſt of October, he was depriued of his Biſhopricke, for diſobeying the Kings order in Religion.
            
               Richard Turke: Iohn Yorke, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes.
            
            The viij. of October, after a common Counſell in the Guild hall at London, whether all the Lordes of the Counſell came, the Lord Chauncellor and other declared diuers abuſes of the Lord Protectour, deſiring the Citizens to bée ayding and aſſiſting with them, for the preſeruing of the Kings Maieſties perſon, which they greatly feared, béeing in his aduerſaries hands. The Lords dined with MayſterProclamation againſt the Lord Protectour. 
               Yorke, one of the Sheriffes, and in the afternoone, Proclamation was made in diuers places of the Citie, with Trompets, Heralts, and Kings at Armes, wherein was conteyned diuers Articles, touching the euill gouernement of the Lord Protector. The tenth of October, by a common Counſell at the Guild hall, was graunted fiue hundred men of the Citie (one hundred to be horſſemen) to be readie on the next morrow: and this day, the Lordes dined wyth Mayſter Turke the other Sheriffe.
            The xj. of October, the Lordes ſitting at the Lord great maiſters, Sir Anthony Wingfield Captayne of the Garde, was ſent to the King at Windſore, and ſeuered the Lord Protectour from his perſon, and cauſed the Gard to watch him fi
                  ••
                the Lords comming. On the morrow, the Lord Chancellour with the reſt of the Counſell, rode to Windſore to the King, and that night, the Lorde Protectour was put in ward into Beau
                     •
                  champs Tower in the Caſtell of Windſore.
            
            
               The xiiij. of October in the afternoone, the Duke of Sommerſet
               Lord Protector brought to the Tovver. was brought from Windeſore, riding through Oldbor
                     •
                  e in at Newga
                     •
                  e▪
                and ſo to the Tower of London, accompanyed with diuers Lordes and Gentlemen with thrée hundred horſe: the Lord Maior, Sir Ralph Warren, Sir Iohn Greſſham, Mayſter Recorder, Sir William Locke, and both the Sheriffes, and other Knightes, ſitting on their Horſſes againſt Soper La
                     •
                  e, with all the Officers with Halbards, and from Holbur
                     •
                  e bridge to the Tower, certayne Aldermen, or their deputies on Horſſebacke in euery ſtréete, with a number of houſholders ſtanding with billes as he paſſed. There was with him committed to the Tower, Sir Michaell Stanhope, Sir Thomas Smith, Sir Iohn Thin▪
                Knightes, Wolfe of the priuie Chamber, and Grey of Reading.
            
            The xvij. of October, King Edward came from Hampton Court to his place in Southwarke, and there dined, and afterKing Edvvarde rode through London. dinner, he made Mayſter Yorke one of the Sheriffes Knight, and then rode through the Citie to Westminſter.
            
            
               Sir Rowland Hill Mercer, the 28. of October.
               Maior.
            
            This Sir Rowland Hill cauſed to be made a Cauſey,Charitable deedes of Sir Rovvland Hill. commonly called Ouerlane pauement in the high way from Stone to Nantwich, in length four miles, for horſe and man, with diuers Lanes on both ſides the ſame Cauſey.
            He cauſed likewiſe a Cauſey to be made from Dunchurch to Branſen in Warwickeſhire, more than two miles of length, and gaue twentie pound in money toward the making of Roytton bridge, thrée miles from Couentrie.
            
            He made the high way to K
                     •
                  lborne néere to London.
            
            He made foure Bridges, two of them of ſtone, conteyning eyghtéene Arches in them both, the one ouer the 
                  •
               i
                  •
               er of Seuerne, called A
                     ••••
                   bridge▪
                the other Terne bridge, for that the water of Terne runneth vnder it, the other two of Timber at Stoke, and built a good part of Stoke Church.
            He builded one notable Fréeſchoole at Drayton in Shropſhire,
               Freeſchoole at Drayton in Shropshire. with Mayſter and 
                  ••••
               er, and ſufficient ſtipends for

them both, beſides conuenient Lodgings for the ſame.
            He alſo purchaſed a frée▪ Faire to the ſayd Towne, with a frée market wéekely, and a frée market for Cattell euery fourtéene dayes.
            He gaue to the Hoſpitall of Chriſtes Church in London inGift to Chriſtes hoſpitall. his life time fiue hundred pound in ready money, and a hundred pound at his deceaſſe.
            The xxix. of Nouember, Robert Kete, and William Kete
               Robert Kete and VVilliam Kete hanged. his brother were deliuered out of the Tower of London, to Sir Edmond Windham Knight, and Sheriffe of Norffolke, to be conueyed to Norwich, where Robert Kete was hanged in theynes on the toppe of Norwich Caſtell, and William Kete likewiſe hanged on the toppe of Windam Stéeple.
            In December, the Scottes tooke Burticragge in Scotland, andHolds in Scotland loſt. other holdes, then poſſeſſed by Engliſhmen, where they ſlew man, woman, and child, except Sir Iohn Lutterell the Captayne, whome they tooke priſoner.
            The xix. of January, Sir Iohn Ruſſell Lord priuie Seale,States created. was created Earle of Bedford: and Lord Saint Iohn Lorde great Mayſter, was created Earle of Wilſhire: and Sir William Paget, Comptroller of the Kings houſe, was made Lord Paget.
            
            The ſame day at night, were murthered by Saint Pulchers
               Peter Gambo and another Captayne murthered. Church againſt the Kings head without Newgate of London two Captaynes that had ſerued the King at Boloigne and elſe▪ where, the one was Sir Peter Gambo, the other Filicirga, which murther was committed by Charles Gauaro a Fleming, who came poſt from Berwike to do that acte: on the morrow, he with thrée of his company was taken in Smithfield by the Lorde Paget, and ſent to Newgate, and the four and twentith of January, they were all four, CharlesGauaro and other hanged. Gauaro, Balthaſar Gauaro, Nicholas Diſalueron, and Francis Deualaſco, had in a Cart to Smithfield, and by the way, at the place where the murther was done, Charles Gauaro had his right hand ſtriken off on the Cart whéele, and then all hanged in Smithfield.
            
            
               The xxij. of January, Iohn Earle of B
                     ••
                  ford▪ 
                  William
                
               
                  〈…〉
                
               Paget 
               
                  〈…〉
                
               William Peter Knight, one of the Kings Secretaries, and Sir Iohn Maſon Knight, chiefe Cleark
                  •
                of the Counſell, were ſent into France, Embaſſadors to the French King.
            The xxvij. of January, Humfrey Arundell Eſquier, Thomas
                     Anno reg. 4. Rebels executed. Holmes, Winſlow, and Bery, Captaynes of the Rebels in Deuonſhire, were hanged and quartered at Tiborne.
            
            On Candlemaſſe day, William Lord Saint Iohn EarleNevv Officers. of Wilſhire, Lord great maiſter, and preſident of the Counſell, was made Lord Treaſurer. Iohn Dudley Earle of Warwike, Lord great Chamberlayne, was made Lord great maiſter. William Parre, Marques of Northampton, was made Lord great Chamberlayne. Lord Wentworth was made Lord Chamberlain of houſhold. Sir Anthony Wing▪
                field Captayne of the Gard, was made Comptroller of the Kings houſe: and Sir Thomas Darcy Knight, was made Uizchamberlayne, and Captayne of the Gard: and the Earle of Arundell late Lord Chamberlaine, with the Earle of Southampton, were put off the Councell, and commaunded to kéepe their houſes in London.
            
            The vj. of February, the Duke of Somerſet was deliuered out of the Tower, and that night he ſupped at Sir IohnDuke of Somerſet deliuered. Yorkes one of the Sheriffes of London.
            
            The x. of February, one Bell, a Suffolke man, was hanged and quartered at Tiborne, for mouing a new Rebellion in Suffolke and Eſſex.
            
            The laſt of March, a generall peace was proclaymed betwéene1550 Peace proclaymed. The liberties of Southvvarke purchaſed. the Kings of England & France, the Emperour, & the Scottes.
            
            This time, the Lord Maior of London, and the Aldermen, purchaſed all the liberties of Southwarke which was in the Kings hands.
            The xij. of Aprill, Doctor Nicholas Ridley, late Biſhop of Rochester, was enſtalled Biſhop of London at Powles.Boloigne yeelded to the French.
            
            The xxv. of Aprill, the Towne of Boloigne was yéelded 
                  ••
               
               
the French 
               
                  •
               ing.
            The ſecond of May, Ioan Knell, alias Butcher, or Ioan ofIoan 
                     •
                  utcher brent. 
               Kent, was brent in Smithfield for Hereſie, that Chriſt tooke no fleſh of the virgin Mary.
            
            
               Richard Lion, Goddard Gorran, and Richard Irelande,
               Rebels of Kent executed. were executed the xiiij. of May, for attempting a new Rebellion in Kent.
            
            On Wedneſday in Whitſon wéeke, at a Court of Aldermen kept at the Guild hall, Sir Iohn Aliffe Knight, and mayſterAlderman of Southvvarke. of Backewell hall▪
                was ſworne Alderman of the Bridgewarde without, to haue the iuriſdiction of the Bourow of Southwarke, and thus was he the firſt Alderman that euer was there, who made vp the number of xxvj. Aldermen of London, whereas before that time had bin but xxv.
            Trinitie Tearme was adiourned till Michaelmas, forTearme adiourned. that the Gentlemē ſhould kéepe the Commons from commotion.
            The third of June, the Lord Liſle, ſonne and heire to the Earle of Warwike, was married to the Duke of Somerſets
               A marriage. 
               
                  •
               aughter at Sheene, the King Maieſtie being there preſent.
            The xj. of June, being Saint Barnabyes day, was kepteSaint Barnaby kept holy. holyday all London ouer, and the ſame day at night, the high 
                  •••
               tare in Paules Church was pulled downe, and a tableHigh Aultare in Paules pulled dovvne. 
               
                  •••
                where the Aultare ſtoode, with a vayle drawne beneath the ſteppes; and 
                  •
               n the Sonday next, a Communion was 
                  〈…〉
                at the ſame table, and ſhortly after, all the Aultars in London were taken downe, & tables placed in their 
                  〈…〉
               .
            This yeare was no ſuch watch at Midſomer as had binNo vvatch at Midſomer. 
               
                  〈…〉
               .
            The xxx. of July, Thomas Lorde Wriothſley Earle ofEarle of Southhampton deceaſſed. 
               
                  
                     ••
                  uth-hampton, Knight of the Garter, and one of the execu
               
                  〈…〉
                to King Henry the eyght, deceaſſed at Lincolne place in 
                  
                     〈…〉
                  orne, and was buryed in Saint Andrewes Churche 
                  〈…〉
               .
            
               Auguſtine Hinde: Iohn Lion, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Sir Andrew Iud Skinner, the 28. of October.
            
            
               This Sir Andrew Iud erected one notable FréeſchooleFreeſchoole at Tonbridge. at Tonbridge in Kent, wherein be brought vp and nouriſhed in learning, great ſtore of youth, as well bred in that Shire, as brought from other Countreys adioyning, a noble acte, and correſpondent to thoſe that haue bin done by like worſhipfull men and other in old time within the ſame Citie of London.
            
            He alſo builded Almes houſes for ſixe poore almesAlmes houſes. people, nigh to the pariſh Church of Saint Helen within Biſhopſgate of London, and gaue Landes to the companye of the Skinners in the ſame Citie, amounting to the value of thréeſcore pound thrée Shillings eyghtpence the yeare, for the which, they bée bound to pay twenty pound to the Schoolemayſter, and eyght pounde to the Uſher of hys frée Schoole at Tonbridge yearely for euer, and foure Shillings the wéeke to the ſixe poore almes people at SaintAnno reg. 5. Helens aforeſayde, eyghtpence the péece wéekely, and fiue and twentie Shillings fourpence the yeare in Coales amongſt them for euer.
            On Saint Valentines daye, at Feuerſham in Kente, 
               
                  •
               n
                  •
                
               Arden a Gentleman was murthered by procurementeArden murthered. of hys owne wife, for the which fact, ſhe was the fouretéenth of Marth brente at Canterburie▪ 
                  Michaell
                Mayſter Ardens man was hanged in cheynes at Feuerſha
                     •
                  , and a mayden bre
                  •
               te▪ 
               Mosby and hys ſiſter were hanged in Smithfielde at London▪ 
                  Gréene
                which had fledde, came agayne certayne yeares after, and was hanged in cheynes in the high way agaynſte Feuerſham, and Blacke Will the Ruffian that was hired to do that acte, after his firſt 
                  •
               ſcap
                  •
               
               ▪ 
               
                  •
               a
                  •
                apprehended, an
                  •••
               rente on a Scaffold al Fliſ
                     •
                  ing i
                  •
                
               Z
                     •
                  la
                     •
                  d.
            
            The fourtéenth of February, Stephen Gardener BiſhopBishop of VVincheſter depriued. of Winchester, was depriued of hys Biſhopricke, and committed to the Tower agayne: into his place was 
                  ••
               anſlated Doctor Poynet, who before was Biſhop of Rocheſter.
            
            
               The fifth Aprill, Sir Thomas Darcey 
               
                  •
               i
                  ••
               ham
                  •
               ertaine,155
                     •
                  
                and Captayne of the 
                  •
               ard, was created Lord Darcey at Greenewich▪
               
            
            The four and twenty of Aprill, George of Paris a DutchmanAn Arian brent. was brent in Smithfield for an Arian.
            The fiue and twenty of May, about noone, was an EarthquakeEarthquake. at Blechingly, Godstone, T
                     •
                  tſer, Rig
                     •
                  te, Croydon, B
                     •
                  n
                     •
                  ng
                     ••••
                   Al
                     •
                  erie▪
                and diuers other places in Sout
                     •
                  ery.
            
            The ninth of July, the baſe moneys (coyned in the timeFirſt fall of the baſe moneys. of King Henry the eyght, and King Edward the ſixth) was proclaymed the Shilling to goe for nine pence, the grete for thrée pence, which tooke▪ effect immediatly after the Proclamation was made.
            The fiftéenth of Aprill, the infections ſweating ſickeneſſeSvveating ſickneſſe. beganne at Shrewſburie, which ended not in the North part of England vntill the ende of September. In this ſpace what number dyed, it can not be well accompted, but certayne it is that in London in few dayes nine hundred andIohn Cai
                     •
                  s. ſixtie gaue vp the ghoſt: it began in London the ninth of July, and the twelfth of July it was moſt vehement, which was ſo terrible, that people being in beſt health, were ſodeinly taken, and dead in four and twentie houres, and twelue, or leſſe, for lacke of ſkill in guiding them in theyr ſweate. And it is to bée noted, that this mortalitie fell chieflye or rather on men, and thoſe alſo of the beſt age, as betwéene thirtie and fortie yeares: alſo, it followed Engliſhmen as well within the Realme, as in ſtrange Countreys: wherefore this Nation was much afeard of it, and for the time beganne to repent and remember GOD, but as the diſeaſe relented, the deuotion decayed. The firſt wéeke dyed in London eyght hundred perſons.
            The ſeauentéenth of Auguſt, the Shilling which of lateSecond fall of the baſe moneys was called downe to nineyence▪ was called downe to ſixe pence, the grote to two pence, the halfe grote to one pennie, the pennie to an halfe peny.
            
               Iohn Lambert▪ Iohn Cowper, the 28▪ of September.
               Sheriffes.
            
            
               The 
                  ••
               . of October, at Hampton Court, Lorde MarquesDuke
                        •
                      and E
                        •
                     r
                        •
                     es created. Dorſet was created Duke of Suffolke: the Earle of Warwike was created Duke of Northumberland: the Earle of Wilſhire was created Marques of Winchester: Sir William Harbert, mayſter of the hor
                  ••
               e, was made Lorde of Karmarden, and created Earle of Pembroke. He alſo made William Cicill his Secretarie▪ Knight, Mayſter Iohn Checke, one of hys Schoole mayſters Knight, Mayſter Henry Dudley Knight, Mayſter Henry Deuell Knight.
            The 
                  •••
               . of October, Edward Seymer Duke of Somerſet,
               Duke of Somerſet brought to the Tovver. the Lord Grey of Wilton, Sir Ralph Vane, Sir Thomas Palmer, Sir Miles Partridge, Sir Michaell Sta
                     •
                  hope, Sir Thomas Arundell Knightes, and diuers other Gentlemen, were brought to the 
                  
                     •
                  ower of London. The next morrow, the Dutcheſſe of Somerſet was alſo brought to the Tower. The libertiesLiberties of the Stilyard ſeaſed. Maior. Nevv Coyne. of the Stil
                  •
               ard were ſeaſed into the Kings handes.
            
               Sir Richard Dobbes Skinner, the 28. of October▪
               
            
            The xx
                  •
               . of October, was proclaymed a new coyne both of Siluer and Gold, So
                  •
               e
                  •••
               es of thirtie Shillings, Angels of 
                  •
               e
                  •
               ne Shillings &c.
            The vj. of Nouember, the olde Quéene of Scottes rode through London towards Scotland with a great company ofQueene of Scottes rode through London. 
               Engliſhmen way
                  •
               ing vpon hi
                  •
               , after ſhe had layne four dayes in the Biſhop of Londons p
                  •••
               ace.
            The firſt of December, the Duke of Somerſet▪
                was arraigned▪
               Duke of Somerſet arraigned. at Westminster, and there acquited of trea
                  •
               o
                  •
               
               ▪ but condemned of 
                  •
               el
                  •
               nie▪ The vij. of December, was a muſter of Horſſemen before the King at Saint Iames. The xx. ofMuſter of horſſemen. December, the gre
                  •
               e Sea
                  •
               e was taken from the Lord Rich, and 
                  •••••
               ere
                  •
                to D. G
                     •••••
                  e
                     •
                  e Biſhop of E
                     •
                  ly▪
                Doctor Dunſtall Biſhop of Durham, was ſent 
                  •
               o y• 
               Tower of London. The xx
                  ••
               . of January, Edward Duke of Somerſet was beheaded onDuke of Somerſet beheaded. the Tower h
                     •
                  ct. The 
                  •
               ame morning early the Conſtables of euery warde in London (according to a precept directed from the Counſell to the Maior) ſt
                  •
               eightly 
                  •
               h
                  •••
               ged euery h
                  ••••
               
               hold of the ſame 
                  ••••
               e not to depart any of them out of their

houſes before tenne of the clocke of that day, meaning therby to reſtreyne the great number of people, that otherwiſe were like to haue bin at the ſayde execution: notwithſtanding by ſeauen a clocke the Tower hill was couered with a great multitude, repayring from all partes of the Citie, as well as out of the ſuburbes, and before eyght of the clocke the Duke was brought to the Scaffold, incloſed with the Kings Gard, the Sheriffes Officers, the Warders of the Tower, and other with halberds: the Duke being ready to haue bin executed, ſodeinly the people were driuen into aGreat feare vvith ſmall cauſe. great feare, few or none knowing the cauſe, wherefore I thinke it good to write what I ſawe concerning that matter.
            The people of a certayne Hamlet, which were warned to be there by ſeauen of the clocke to giue their attendance on the Lieutenant, now came through the poſterne, and perceyuing the Duke to be already on the Scaffold, the for
               
                  ••
               ſt began to runne, crying to their fellowes to follow faſt after, which 
                  •
               odelneſſe of theſe men being weaponed with billes and halber
                  •
               s thus running, cauſed the people which 
                  •••••
                ſaw them, to thinke ſome power had come to haue reſcued the Duke from execution and therefore to crie away away, wherevpon the people ranne ſome one way, ſome another, many fell into the Tower Ditch, and they which 
                  •
               arried, thought ſome pardon had bin brought, ſome ſayd it thundered, ſome that the ground moued, but there was no ſuch matter.
            The xvij. of February, on which day was receyued the Bookes of the reliefe of all the wardes of London, towardes the new Hoſpitals, by the Kings commiſſioners, the Counſell dined a
                  •
                Mayſter Cowpers the Sheriffe, and after dinner, Mayſter Thomas Curteys Alderman came thither to ſpeake with the Lord Chancellour for a matter he had depending afore him in the Chancerie, but for his miſde
               
                  ••••
               o
                  •
               r in words, and 
                  ••
               gnes to the Lord Chancellour at that time, the ſayde Mayſter Curteys was committed to

warde in the Fleete.
            
            The ſixe and twentith of February, Sir Ralph
                     •
                  a Vane,
               
                  Anno reg. 6. Sir Ralpha Vane and other executed. and Sir Miles Partridge, were hanged on the Tower hill, Sir Michaell Stanhope, with Sir Thomas Arundell, were beheaded there.
            The laſt of Aprill, through negligence of the Gunnepowlder1552 makers, a certayne hou
                  •
               e néere to the Tower of London, with thrée Laſt of Powlder, was blowne vp andHouſe blovvne vp vvith Gunpovvlder. brent, the Gunpowlder makers being fiftéene in number, were all ſlayne.
            The xvj. of May, was a goodly muſter of Horſſemen made before the King in the Parke at Greenewich▪
               
            
            Under the Kings Banner, his band of Pencioners, inMuſter of Horſſemen. number. 15
                  •
               . euery Pencioner two great Horſſes, and a Gelding, the Lord Bray their Lieuetenaunt.
            The Lord Marques of Winchester high Treaſurer▪ vnder his Banner the 
                  〈…〉
               
               ▪ one C▪ men.
            The Duke of North
                     ••
                  berlande, greate▪ mayſter of the Kings honſhold, vnder the white Lion and the ragged ſtaffe, fiftie.
            The Duke of Suffolke, vnder the Unicorne in the Starre. C. x.
            The Earle of 
                  
                     •••
                  for
                     ••
                  
                Lorde Pri
                  •
               ie Seale vnder the Goate, C.
            The Marques of Northumpton high Chamberlayne, vnder the Mayden head. C.
            The Earle of Warwike mayſter of the Kings horſes, vnder the white▪ Lion▪ fifty.
            The Earle of Huntington vnder his Banner, fifty.
            The Earle of Ru
                     •
                  la
                     •
                  d vnder the Peacocke, fifty.
            The Earle of Pembroke vnder the gréene Dragon, fifty.
            The Lord Darcy vnder the Maydens body, fifty.
            The Lord Cobham vnder the Sarizens head, fifty.
            The Lord Clinton Lord Admirall vnder ye Anker, fifty.
            The Lord W
                  •
               rden of the fiue Portes, vnder the Roſe in the Sunne b
                  ••••
               es. 
                  •
               
               ▪
            
            
               The xxvj. of July, began the preparing of the Grey Friers
               Grey Fri
                     •••
                   in London a
                     •
                   Hoſpi
                     •
                  all
                     •
                  . houſe in London, for the poore father 
                  •
               eſſe Children: and alſo, in the later end of the ſame moneth, began the repayring of Saint Thomas Hoſpitall in Southwarke, for poore impotent and lame perſons.
            The i
                  •
               j. of Auguſt, at Middleton, xj. miles from Oxford, aA Monſter. woman brought f
                  ••
               th achild, which had two perfect bodyes from the na
                  •
               ell vpward, and were ſo ioyned togither at the na
                  •
               ell, that when they were layd in length, the one head & body was Eaſtward, and the other Weſt: the legges for both the bodyes grew out at the midſt where the bodyes ioyned, and had but one iſſue for the excrements of both bodyes, they liued xvi
                  •
               j. dayes, and were women children.
            The vi
                  •
               j. of Auguſt, were taken at Queeneborough i
                  ••
               . greatGreat Fishes. Fiſhes called Dolphins: and the 
                  •
               éeke following at Blacke Wall, were vj. more taken, and brought to London, the leaſt of them was more than any▪ Hor
                  ••
               e. This moneth of Auguſt, began the great prouiūon for the poore in London, towardes the which, euery man was contributorie, and gaue certaine money in hand, and co
                  •
               enanted to giue a certayne wéekely.
            The commons of the Citie of London being aſſembled inFour electione for one Sheriffe▪
                their Guild hall on the firſt of Auguſt, elected Iohn Grimes Clothworker to be Sheriffe for the yeare following, who refuſed, and payd his fine of two hundred pound. The vj. of Auguſt, the commons choſe Thomas Clayton▪
                Baker, who likewiſe refuſed, and payde his fine. The xv. of Auguſt, the commons choſe Iohn Browne Mercer, who alſo refuſed, and payde his fine. The xix. of Auguſt, the commons choſe Iohn Maynard Mercer, who tooke the ſame in good part, and ſerued.
            
               William Garrard: Iohn Maynard, the 28. of September.
               
                  Sherifes. Great Fishe
                     •
                   taken.
            
            The ſeauenth of October, were thrée great Fiſhes called Whirlepooles taken at Graueſend, which were drawne vp to the Kings Bridge at Westminster.
            
            In this moneth of October, the King demaunded of the Merchant Aduēturers by way of preſt of euery broad cloath

then ſhipped to Bawmes 
                     •
                  art, twentie Shillings ſterling toA pre
                     •
                  t by the Merchant Aduenturers. be payde at Antwarp for certayne dette there, and they to haue the Kings band for the repayment thereof, which did at that time amount to more than. xlviiij. thouſand pound.
            The xvij. of October, the Sergeants feaſt was kept atSergeants feaſt. 
               Greys Inne by Oldborne, Mayſter Robert Brooke Recorder of London being the principall of the new Sergeants, and ſixe more beſides him, the Lorde Maior and Aldermen béeing bidden to the ſayde feaſt, rode from the Lord Maiors houſe vp Friday ſtréete through Cheape, and out at Newga
                     •
                  e, all in their Scarlet Gownes to the ſaid Greys Inne.
            
            
               Sir George Barne Habe
                     •
                   daſher, the 28. of October.
               Maior.
            
            This Sir George Barne gaue a Wind
                  ••
               ill in Finſ
                     ••
                  r is
               Charitable deedes of Sir George Barne. 
               Field to the Haberdaſher
                  •
                of London, the profites thereof to be diſtributed to the poore Al
                  •
               es people of the ſame company. Alſo, to the par
                  •••
                Church of S. Barthelmew the little, certayne tenements, for the which the Parſon and Churchwardens be bounde to diſtribute to the poore people of the ſame Pariſh xvi
                  •
               j. pence in bread euery Sonday for euer.
            The firſt of Nouember, being the feaſt of All Saintes,Booke of common Prayer. the new Seruiſe Booke called Of common Prayer, begonne in Paules Church, and the like through the whole Citie, the Biſhop of London Doctor Ridley executing the ſeruice in Paules Church in the fore
                  •••
               ne in his Rochet only, without Coape or Ueſtment, preached in the Quire, and at after n
                  ••
               ne he preached at Paules Croſſe, the Lord Maior, Aldermen, and Craftes, in their beſt Liueries being preſent, which Sermon, tending to the ſetting forth the ſayde late made Booke of common Prayer, continued till almoſt fiue of the clocke at night, ſo that the Maior, Aldermen, and companyes entred not into Paules Church as had bin accuſtomed, but departed home by Torchlight. By this Booke of common Prayer, all Coapes and Ueſtments were forbidden through Englande, and Prebendes of Paules left off their hoods, the Biſhops left their Croſſes, &c. as by an Acte of Parliament more at large is ſet out.
            
               After the feaſte of all Saints, the vpper Quéere in Saint Paules Churche in London where the highe A
                  •
               ltare ſtoode, was broken downe, and al the Quéere thereabout: and the table of the Cōmunion was ſet in the lower Quéere, where the Prieſts ſing.
            The thrée and twentith of Nouember, the children wereFirſt children in Chriſtes hoſpital taken into ye hoſpital at the Grey Friers called Christes Hospitall, to the number of almoſt foure hundred. And alſo ſ
                  •
               eke and pore people into the Hoſpital of Saint Thomas in Southwarke, in whiche two places, the children and pore people ſhoulde haue meate, drinke, lodging, and cloth of the almes of the Citie.
            On Chriſtmaſſe daye in the afternoone, when the LordeFirſte shevve of the children in Chriſts hoſpital▪
                Maior and Aldermen rode to Paules, al the children of Chriſtes Hospitall, ſtoode in array from Saint Laurence Lane in Cheape toward Paules, al in on Lyuerie of Ruſſet Cotten, the men children with red Caps, the women children kerchiefs on their heades, all the Maiſters of the Hoſpitall foremoſt: nexte them the Phi
                  ••
               tions and four Surgeons, and betwéen euery twentie children one woman kéeper, whych children were in number 340.
            The King kept his Chriſtmaſſe with open houſholde atLorde of merry diſportes. 
               Greenewiche, George Ferrers
                Gentleman of Lincolns Inne, being Lorde of the merry diſportes all the twelue dayes, who 
                  •••
               pleaſantly and wiſely behaued himſelfe, that the King had greate delight in his paſtimes.
            On Monday the fourth of January, the ſaide Lorde ofThe Sherifes 
                     •
                  . of Miſrul
                     •
                  . mery diſportes came by water to London and landed at the Tower Wharffe, entred the Tower, and then rode through Tower ſtreete, where he was receyued by Vawce Lorde of Miſrule to Iohn Maina
                     •
                  d one of the Sheriffes of London, and ſo conducted throughe the Citie with a great company of yong Lordes and Gentlemen to the houſe of ſir George Barne Lorde Mayor, where he with the chiefe of his company dy
               
                  •
               ed, and after had a greate banquet, and at his departure, the Lorde Mayor gaue him a ſtanding Cup with a couer of

ſiluer and guilt, of the vale 
                  •••
                of ten pounde, for a rewarde, and alſo, ſet a Hog
                  •••
               ad of 
                  〈…〉
               , and a Barrel of Béere at hys Gate, for his traine that folowed▪ hym, the reſidue of his Gentlemen and ſ
                  •
               rn a
                  •
               ntes dyned▪ at other Aldermens houſes, and with the Sheriffes, and ſo departed to the Tower Wharffe againe, and to the Courte by water, to the great commendation of the Maior and Aldermen, and highly accepted of the King and Counaell.
            In the moneth of January, the King fell ſicke of a coughAnno reg. 7. at Whitehall, whyche gréeuouſlye encreaſed, and at the laſte, ended in a Conſumption of the Lights.
            The firſte of Marche beganne a Parliament at Westminster,
               A Parliament. and all the Lordes Spiritual and temporall aſſembled that daye in the Whitehall in their Robes▪ where a Sermon was preached in the Kings Chappell, by Doctor Ridley Biſhoppe of of London, and his Maieſtie with diuers Lords receyued the Communion▪ Which being done, the King with the Lordes in order, went into the Kings greate Chamber1553 on the Kings ſide, which that day was prepared for the Lordes houſe: the King ſitting vnder his clo
                  •
               h of Eſtate, and al the Lordes in their degrées, the Biſhoppe of Ely Doctor Godrike Lorde Chauncollor, made a Propoſition for the king, whyche being ended, the Lordes departed. This was done, bycauſe the King was ſickly.
            The 
                  〈…〉
                after, the Burgeſſes ſate in the Common houſe at Westminster, and choſe for their Speaker, Maiſt
                  ••
                Diar▪ one of the late made Sergeants at the lawe.
            The 
                  •
               1. of Marche, being good Friday, the Parliament brake vppe, and was clearely diſſolued at the Kinges Pallaice of White hall, at ſeauen of the clocke at night.
            The thirde of Aprill▪ being Monday after Eaſter daye, the children of Chriſts Hoſpitall in London▪
                came from thēce thorough the Citie to the Sermon kepte at Saint Marie Spittle, all clothed in plonket Coates, and red Cappes, and the maiden childrē in the ſame Lyuerie, with kerchefs on their

heades, all whiche with their matron and other 
                  〈…〉
                were there placed on a Scaffolde of eight Stages, and there ſate the ſame time, whiche was a goodly ſhewe.
            The tenth of Aprill the Lorde Mayor of London was ſentBridevvell gyuen to the Citie of London. for to the Courte at White hall, and there at that time, the Kings Maieſtie gaue to him for to be a w
                  •
               rk
                  •
                houſe for the 
                  ••
               re and ydle perſons of the Citie of London▪
                
               
                  ••••
                
               
                  〈…〉
                of Bridewel, and ſeauen hundred marke land of the Sauoy rents, wyth all the beds and bedding of the Hoſpitall of the Sauoy, towardes the maintenaunce of the ſaide work-houſe of Bridewell.
            
            The eleauenth of Aprill the Lord Maior was preſented to the King in his Pallaice of White hall at Westminster, and was made knight by his Maieſty, and the ſame day the king remoued in the afternoone to Greenewiche.
            
            In this Moneth of April, and in May, commiſſions wereIevvelles and Church plate called into the Kings handes. directed throughe Englandes, for all the Churche goods remaining in Cathedrall and pariſhe Churches, that is to ſaye, Jewels of Golde and Siluer, Croſſes▪ Candleſtickes, Sen
               
                  ••••
               , Chalices, and all other ſuche like, with their readye money, to be deliuered to the Maiſter of the Kings Jewels in the Tower of London, all Coapes and Ueſtmentes of cloth of Gold, cloth of Tiſſewe, and Siluer, to the Maiſter of the kings Wardrobe in London, the other Coaps, Ueſtmēts, and ornaments to be ſolde, and the money to be deliuered to the Kings Treaſurer, reſeruing to euerie Churche, one Chalice or Cuppe, with Table clothes for the Communiō board, at the diſcretion of the Commiſſioners.
            The twentith of May, by the encouragement of one SebaſtianVoyage to Moſcouy. Cabotte, thrée great ſhips wel furniſhed were ſette 
                  •••
               th for the aduenture of the vnknowen voyage to Muſco
                  
                     •••
                  , and other eaſte partes by the North Seas, diuers Merchants and other, being frée of that voyage, yéelded towards the charges of the ſome fiue and twentie pounds apéece. 
                  •••
                
               George Barnes & 
                  〈…〉
                
               William Garrard being y• principall

               
                  〈…〉
                there in.
            About the ſame time two other ſhips were ſent ſéeke aduentures Southwards.
            Whiles King Edward lay dangerouſly ſicke, Lord Gilforde
               Three notable marriages at D
                     •
                  
                  rham place. the Duke of Northumberlandes fourth ſonne, marryed Lady lane the Duke of Suffolkes daughter, whoſe mother being then ali
                  •
               e, was daughter to Mary King Henries ſiſter, whiche was firſte marryed to the Frenche King, and after to Charles Duke of Suffolke. Alſo the Earle of Pembrookes eldeſt ſon marryed Lady Katherine, the ſaid Dukes ſecond daughter, and the Erle of Huntingtons ſonne, called Lord Haſtings, marryed the Dukes yongeſt daughter.
            King Edward being about the age of ſixetéene yeares endedKing Edvvarde deceaſſed. his life at Grenewich on the ſixth of July, when he hadde raigned ſixe yeares fiue moneths, and odde dayes, and was buried at Westminster. He was in this his youth a Prince of ſuch towardneſſe, in vertue, learning, and al godly gifts, as ſeldome hath bin ſée
                  ••
                the like.
            The eight of July, the Lorde Maior of London was ſenteKing Edvvards death opened. for to the Courte, then at Greenewich, and to bring with him fi
                  •
               e Aldermen, as many Merchaunts of the Staple, an
                  〈…〉
                manye Merchaunt Aduenturers, vnto whom by the Councell was ſe
                  ••
               da
                  ••
               y declared the death of King Edwarde, and alſo ho
                  •
               e he hadde ordained for the ſucceſſion of the Crown by his letters Patents, to the whych they were ſworne, and charged to kéepe it ſecrete.
            The tenth of July, in the afternoone aboute thrée of th
                  •
               
               Lady Iane proclaimed Queene clocke, Lady Iane daughter to Frauncis Ducheſſe of Suffolke, (
                  〈…〉
                Ian
                  •
                was ma
                  •••••
                to the Lord Gilford Dudley, fourth 
                  ••
               nne to the Duke of Northumberlande) was con
               
                  ••
               eyed by water to the Tower of London, and there receyued as Quéene. After fiue of the clocke the ſame afternoone, was proclamation made of the death of King Edwarde the 
                  •••
               th, and howe he had ordained by his letters Patents, bearyng ba
                  ••
                the 
                  〈…〉
                and twentith of June laſte paſt, that the 
                  〈…〉
                
               Iane, (as is afore ſaide) ſhoulde be heyre to the Crowne of

               Englande, and the heire males of hir bodye, &c.
            The eleauenth of July, Gilbert Potte, Drawer to NinionGilbert Potte punished in Cheape. Saunders Uintner, dwelling at Saint Iohns head wythin Ludgate, who was accuſed by the ſaid Saunders his Maiſter, was ſet on the Pillorie in Cheape, with both hys eares nayled, and cleane cutte off, for wordes ſpeaking at time of the proclamation of Lady Iane, at which execution was a Trū
               pet blown, and a Harrault read his offence, in preſence of one of the Sheriffes, &c.
            Aboute fiue of the clocke the ſame day in the afternoone,Men drovvned at Lon. bridge. 
               Ninion Saunders, Maiſter to the ſaid Gilbert Potte, and Iohn Owen a Gunner, comming from the Tower of London by water in a Whirrie, and ſhooting London bridge, towardes the Blacke Friers, were drowned at Saint Mary Locke, and the Whirrie men ſaued by their Ores.
            The twelfth of July, worde was broughte to the Councell, beyng then in the Tower with the Ladye Iane, that the Lady Marie, eldeſt daughter to King Henrie the eighte was at Keninghall Castell in Norffolke, and wyth hir, the Earle of Bathe, ſir Thomas Cornwallis and other, and alſo, that the Earle of Suſſex, and Maiſter Henrie Ratcliffe his ſonne were 
                  ••
               mmyng towardes hir: wherevppon, by ſpéedy Councell it was there concluded, that the Duke of Suffolke with certayne other Noblemen, ſhould go towards the Lady Mary, to 
                  •••
               che hir vp to the Tower: thys was firſte determined: but by night of the ſame daye, the ſaide voyage of the Duke of Suffolke was cleane diſſolued, by the ſpeciall meanes of the Lady Iane hys daughter, who takyng the matter heauily, wyth wéepyng teares, made requeſt to the whole Councel, that hir father might 
                  •
               arry at home in hir company. Whervppon the Councel perſwaded with the Duke of Northumberlande, to take that voyage vpon him, ſaying, that no man 
                  〈…〉
                ſo 
                  ••
               t therefore, bycauſe that he hadde atchieued the victorie in Norffolke once already, and was therefore ſo feared, 
                  〈…〉
                none durſte once li
                  ••
               e vp their weapon againſt him: be
               
                  〈…〉
                that, he was the beſte man of warre in the Realme,

as well for the ordering of his Campes and Souldicures; bothe in battaile and in their tentes, as alſo by experience, knowledge and wiſdome, he coulde bothe animate his army with wittie perſwaſions, and alſo pacifie and alay hys ennimyes pride wyth hys ſtowte courage, or elſe to diſſuade them if néede were from their enterpriſe▪ Finally, ſaid they, this is the ſhort and long, the Quéene will in no wiſe graunte, that hir father ſhall take it vpon him: wherefore (quoth they) we thinke it good, if it may pleaſe your Grace, it lyeth in you to remedy the matter. Well quoth the Duke then, ſince ye thinke it good, I and mine will go, not doubting of your fidelitie to the Quéenes Maieſtie, whych now I leaue in youre cuſtodie: ſo that nighte he ſente for bothe Lordes, Knightes, and other that ſhoulde goe wyth hym, and cauſed all things to be prepared accordynglye: then wente the Councell in to the Ladye Iane, and tolde hir of theyr concluſion, who humblye thanked the Duke for reſeruing hir father at home, and beſéeched him to vſe hys diligence, whereto he aunſwered, that he woulde doe what in hym laye.
            The morrowe following, greate preparation was made, the Duke early in the mornyng called for his owne harneſſe, and ſawe it made ready at Durham place, where he appointed all his retinue to méete.
            The ſame daye Cartes were laden with Munition and Artillerie, and fielde péeces were ſet forwarde.
            The ſame forenoone the Duke moued efte ſoones the Counſell to ſende their powers after hym, as it was before determined, the ſame to méete wyth hym at Newe Market, and they promiſed they woulde. He ſayde further to ſome of them: My Lordes, I and theſe other noble Perſonages, with the whole army that nowe goe forth, as well for the behalfe of you and yours, as for the eſtabliſhing of the Quéenes highneſſe, ſhall not only aduenture our bodies and lyues amongeſt the bloudy ſtrokes and cruell 
                  〈◊〉
               
               
of our aduerſaries in the open fieldes, but alſo wée do leaue the conſeruation of our ſelues, chyldren, & families at home here with you, as altogyther committed to youre truth and fidelities, whome, if we thoughte ye woulde throughe malice, conſpyracie, or diſſention leaue vs youre friendes in the Bryars and betraye vs, wée coulde as well ſundry wayes foreſee and prouide for our owne ſafegards, 
                  ••
                anye of you, by betraying vs, can doe for yours. But nowe vppon the onelye truſte and faithfulneſſe of youre honors, whereof we thinke our ſelues moſte aſſured, wée do hazarde oure liues, whyche truſte and promiſe if ye ſhall violate, hoping thereby of lyfe and promotion, yet ſhall not God coumpt you innocent of our blouds, neyther acquite you of the ſacred and holy othe of allegeaunce made fréely by you to thys vertuous Lady the Quéenes highneſſe, who by your and our enficement is rather of force placed there
               
                  ••
               , than by hir ownſéeking and requeſt. Conſider alſo, that Gods cauſe, whyche is the preferment of hys worde, and 
                  ••
               a
                  •
               e of Papiſtes entraunce, hathe béene (as yée haue here before alwayes layde) the originall grounde wherevpon ye 
                  ••
               en at the firſte motion graunted your goodwils and con
               
                  •••
               ts therevnto, as by your handes writing appeareth, and 
                  ••
               inke not the contrarye, but if yée meane deceyte, thoughs not forthewyth, yet hereafter God will reuenge the ſame.
            I can ſaye no more, but in thys trouble ſome tyme wyſh you to vſe conſtant heartes, abandoning all malice, enuye, and priuate affections: and therewithall the firſte courſe for the Lords came vp, wherefore the Duke ſhut vp his talke wyth theſe wordes, I ha
                  •
               e not ſpoken to you in thys ſorte 
                  •
               ppon anye miſtruſte I haue of youre trueth
                  •
               , of whyche alwayes I haue euer hitherto conceiued a truſty confidence, but I haue put you in remembrance thereof what chance of variance ſo euer might grow amongſt you in mine abſence,

and this I pray you, wiſh me not worſe good ſpéede in this iorney, than ye woulde haue to your ſelues. My Lord, ſaith one of them, if ye miſtruſte anye of vs in this matter, your Grace is farre deceyued, for whyche of vs can waſhe hys handes cleane thereof? and if we ſhoulde ſhrincke from you as from one that were culpable, which of vs can excuſe himſelfe to be guiltleſſe? therefore herein your doubt is too farre caſte. I praye God it be (quoth the Duke:) let vs go to dinner: and ſo they ſate downe. After dinner the Duke wente in to the Quéene, where his Commiſſion was by that tyme ſealed, for his Lieutenantſhippe of the army, and then tooke his leaue of hir, and ſo didde certaine other Lordes alſo.
            Then as the Duke came through the Councell Chamber, he tooke his leaue of the Earle of Arundale, who prayed God be with his Grace, ſaying, he was ſorie it was not his chance to goe with him and beare him companye, in whoſe preſence he could finde in hys hearte to ſpende hys blo
                  •
               de euen at his féete: then the Earle of Arundale tooke Thomas Louell the Dukes boy by the hande, and ſaide, farewel gentle Thomas with al my heart. Then the Duke, with the L. Marques of Northampton, the Lorde Grey, and dyuers other, tooke their Barge, and went to Dirham place, and t
                  •
                
               White hall, where that night they muſtred theyr men: and the next day in the morning the Duke departed with the number of 600. menne, or there aboutes. And as they rode thorough Shordi
                     •
                  che, ſaith the Duke to the Lorde Grey, the people preaſſe to ſée vs, but not one ſayeth God ſpéede vs.
            The ſame daye ſir Iohn Gates and other went oute a
                  ••••
                the Duke.
            By this time worde was broughte to the Tower, that the Lady Mariae was 
                  ••
               ed to Framing
                     •
                  a
                     •
                   Caſtell in Suffolke▪
                where the people of the Country almoſte wholly reſorted to h
                  ••
               : 
                  •
                that 
                  •••
                
               Edmond Pec
                     •
                  am, ſir Edward Haſtings, and the Lor
                  •
                
               Windſore, with other
                  •
               ; were 
                  〈◊〉
                Quéene Marie 
               
                  ••
                
               B
                     •
                  ckinghamſhire, ſir Iohn Williams in Oxfordſhire &c.
            
            About this time, ſixe ſhips well manned, that were a
                  •
               
               poynted

to lye before Yarmouth, and to haue taken the Lady Mary if ſhe had fled that way, were by force of weather driuen into the Hauen, where one Maiſter Iernigham was rayſing power on the Ladye Maries behalfe, who hearing thereof, came thither, wherevppon the Captaines tooke a boate and wente to the Shippes, but the Saylers and ſouldiors aſked Maiſter Iernigham what he woulde haue, and whether he would haue their Captaines or no, and he ſaid yea, Mary ſaide they, ye ſhall haue them or we will throwe them into the bottome of the Sea, but the Captaines ſaide forthwith, that they would ſerue Quéene Mary willingly, and ſo broughte forth their men, and conueyed with them their great ordinaunce: Of the commyng of theſe Shippes the Ladye Mary was wonderfull ioyous, and afterwarde doubted little the Dukes puiſſaunce: but when newes therof was broughte to the Tower, eche manne there beganne to draw backward, and ouer that, word of a greater miſchiefe was broughte to the Tower, that is to ſaye, that the Noblemens tenaunts refuſed to ſerue their Lords againſt Quéen Marie.
            
            The Duke thoughte long for his ſuccoures, and wrote ſomewhat ſharplye to the councell at the Tower, in that behalfe, as well for lacke of men as of munition, but a flender aunſweare had he againe: And from that time forward, certaine of the Councell, to wéete, the Earle of Pembrooke, and ſir Thomas Cheyney Lorde Warden, and other, ſought to gette oute of the Tower to conſulte in London, but coulde not yet.
            The ſixetéenth of Iuly, being Sonday, Doctor Ridley Biſhoppe of London, by commaundement of the Councel, prea
               
                  •
               hed at Paules Croſſe, where he vehementlye perſwaded the 
                  •
               eople in the title of ye Lady Iane, late proclaimed Quéene, 
                  •
               nd inueyed earneſtly againſte the title of Lady Mary, &c.
            
            The ſame ſixetéenth of Iuly, the Lorde Treaſurer was 
                  ••
               ne oute of the Tower to his houſe in London at nighte, and 
                  ••
               rthwith about ſeauen of the clocke the Gates of the Tower
               
vpon a ſodayne were ſhut vppe, and the kayes borne vp to the Lady Iane, which was for feare of ſome packing in the Lorde Treaſurer, but he was fetched agayne to the Tower, about twelue of the clocke in the night.
            The xviij. daye, the Duke perceyuing, that the ſuccours promiſed came not to him, and alſo, receyuing from ſome of the Councell Letters of diſcomforte, he returned from Bury backe agayne to Cambridge.
            
            The ninetéenth of July, the Counſell, partelye moued with the right of the Lady Maries cauſe, partly conſidering, that the moſte of the realme, was wholy bent on hir ſide, changed theyr minds and aſſembled themſelues at Bainard
                     •
                  
                Caſtel, where they communed with the Earle of Pembrooke, and immediately with the Maior of London, certaine Aldermen, the Sheriffes, Garter King at Armes, and a Trumpet, came into Cheape, where they proclaymed the Ladye Mary daughter to King Henry the eyght, and Quéene Katherine, Quéene of Englande, Fraunce and Irelande Dofendor of the Faith, &c. and the ſame night the Earle of Arundele & the Lord Paget rode in poſte to Quéene Mary.
            
            The xx. of July, Iohn D. of Northumberlande, hauing ſure knowledge, y• the Lady Mary was by the nobilitie & others of the Councell remayning at London proclaymed Quéene: aboute fiue of the clocke the ſame night, he with ſuche other of the Nobilitie as were in his company, came to the Market Croſſe, and callyng for an Harrault, hymſelfe proclaymed Quéene Mary, and among other he threwe vppe hy
                  •
                owne Cap, and wythin an houre after he had Letters from the Councell (as he ſaid) that he ſhoulde forthwith diſmiſſ
                  •
                his army, and not to come within tenne myles of London▪
                fo
                  •
                if he did, they woulde fight wyth hym, the rumour where
                  •
                was no ſooner abroade, but euerie man departed. And ſhortlye after, the Duke was arreſted in the Kings Colledge 
                  〈…〉
                one Maiſter Slegge Sergeant at Armes. At the laſte, letters were brought from the Councell at London, that al 
                  〈…〉
                ſhoulde goe eche his way: Wherevpon the Duke ſayde 
                  〈…〉
               
               
them that kepte him, yée doe me wrong to withdrawe my libertie, ſée you not the Counſels letters wythoute exception, that all men ſhoulde go whither they would. At which wordes, they that kepte hym and the other Noblemen, ſete them at libertie, and ſo contynued they for that night, inſomuche, that the Earle of Warwicke was readye in the morning to haue rode away, but then came the Erle of Arundel frō the Quéen to ye Duke into his Chamber, who went out to méete him, & as ſoone as he ſaw the Earle of Arundale, he fel on hys knées, & deſired hym to be good to him for the loue of God, cōſider (ſaith he) I haue done nothing but by the cō
               ſents of you and all the whole Councell: My Lorde (quoth the Earle of Arundale) I am ſente hither by the Quéenes Maieſtie, and in hir name I doe arreaſt you, and I obey it my Lorde (quoth he) I beſéeche you my Lorde of Arundale (quoth the Duke) vſe mercy towardes mée, knowing the caſe as it is, my Lorde (quoth the Earle) yée ſhoulde haue ſought for mercie ſooner, I muſte doe accordyng to my commaundement, and therewith he committed the charge of him, and of other to the Guarde and Gentlemen that ſtoode by.
            The xxv. of July, the Duke with other were brought vp to the Tower of London, vnder the conducte of Henry Earle of Arundale, and thus was the matter ended without bloudſhed, whiche men feared woulde haue brought the death of many thouſandes.
         
         
            
            ¶ Queene Mary.
            
            
               
                  portrait of Queen Mary
               
            
            
               
                  MAry, the eldeſt daughter of King Henrie the eyghte, beganneAnno reg. 1. hir raigne the ſixth of July, in the yeare 1553. when ſhée diſſolued hir camp at Framingham, whyche was to the number of thyrtie thouſande menne, the Earle of Suſſex béeing Liuetenant of the armye, victualles were of ſuche plentye, that a Barrell of Béere was ſolde for ſixe pence wyth the Caſke, and foure greate loaues of bread for a peny.
            Afterwarde, being accompanied wyth a goodlye bande of Noblemenne, Gentlemen and Commoners, gathered out of all partes of the Realme, ſhe came to London and entred the Citie through Aldgate, vppe to Leaden hall, then downe Graſſe ſtreete, Fenchurche ſtreete, Marte Lane, Tower ſtreete, and ſo into the Tower the thirde daye of Auguſte, where Thomas Duke of Norffolke, Doctoure Gardener late ByſhoppePriſoners pardoned. of Winchester, and Edwarde Courtney ſonne

and heyre to Henrie Marque
                  •
                of Excester▪
                priſoners in the 
                  〈…〉
               , knéeling 
                  •••
                the hill within the ſa
                  ••
                
               
                  
                     •
                  ower▪
                were pardoned and diſcharged.
            The fifth of Auguſt, Edmond Bonner late Byſhoppe of London▪
                priſoner in the Marſhalſea, and Cutbe
                     •
                  t To
                     •••
                  all the olde Biſhop of Durham priſoner in the Kings bench, had their pardons▪ and were reſtored to their Seas. Shortelye after all the Byſhops which had bin depryued in the time of king Edward the ſixth, were reſtored to their Biſhoprickes, and the other which were placed in King Edwardes time, remoued:Bishops reſtored and other diſplaced. alſo all beneficed men that were married, or woulde not forſake their opinion, were put out of their liuings, and other knowen to be 
                  ••
                the contrary part, were ſet in y• ſame, eſpecially if any were alyue▪ that had of late bin put out of the ſame, as Biſhop Day of Chichester, Heath
                of Worcest: &c.
            
            The 9. of Auguſt in the afternoone, the Quéene helde an Obſequie in the Tower for King Edwarde, the Dirge beyng ſung in Latine, & on the morrow a Maſſe of Requiem, wherealBuriall of Kyng Edvvard. the Quéene with hir Ladies offered. The ſame daye the corps of King Edward was buried at Westminster, the Lorde Treaſurer, the Earle of Pembrooke, and the Earle of Shrewſburie being chiefe Mourners, with dyuers other Noblemen and other. Doctour Day▪
                Byſhop of Chichester preached at the ſaid buriall, and al the ſeruice with a Communion was in Engliſhe.
            The 11. of Auguſt certaine Gentlemen minding to paſſeMen drovvne
                     •
                   at London bridge. vnder London bridge in a Whyrrie, were there ouerturned, and ſeauen of them drowned, one was Maiſter T. Bridges 
               
                  •
               onne.
            The 13. of Auguſte Maiſter Bourne a Chanon of Paules, preaching at Paules Croſſe▪
                not onelye prayed for the deade, but alſo declared, that Doctour Bonner Byſhoppe of London (late reſtored, and therein preſence) for a Sermon by hym 
                  〈…〉
                in the ſame place, vpon the ſame Goſpell, was about foure yeares 
                  ••
               uce, vniuſtly caſte into the vile priſon of the Marſhalſea, and there kepte during the raigne of King Edwarde,
               
whyche ſaying ſo offended ſome of the audience, that they breaking ſilence, ſaide the Biſhoppe had preached abhomination, other ſome cryed (meaning of the Preacher) pull him oute, pull hym oute, and ſome béeing neare the Pulpit, beganne to clyme, wherewith the Preacher ſtepped backe, and one Maiſter Bradforde, a Preacher of King Edwardes tyme, ſtepped into his place, and gentlye perſwaded the audience to quietneſſe and obedience, alleadging Saint Paule to the Romaines: Let euery ſoule ſubmitte himſelfe to the authoritie of the higher powers, &c. neuertheleſſe Maiſter Bourne ſtanding by Mayſter Bradford, one threwe a Dagger at hym, whych hit a ſide poſte of the Pulpit, andA Dagger throvvne at the Preacher. rebounded backe againe a greate waye, where vppon Mayſter Bradford brake off hys ſpeach, and forced hymſelfe with the helpe of Iohn Rogers, an other Preacher, to conuey Maiſter Bourne oute of the audience, whyche wyth greate labor they broughte into Paules Schoole.
            The xviij. of Auguſt Iohn Dudley Duke of Northumberlande, William Parre
                Marques of Northampton, and the Erle of Warwike ſonne and heire to the Duke, were arraigned at Westminster hall before Thomas Duke of Norffolke, high Steward of Englande, where the Duke of Northumberland wyth greate reuerence towardes the Judges, proteſted hys faith and allegeance to the Quéene, whome he confeſſed gréeuouſly to haue offended, and ſaide, that he meante not to ſpeake anye thing in defence of his tact, but requeſted to vnderſtand the opinion of the Courte in twoo poyntes: Firſt▪ whether 
                  •
                man doing anye acte by aucthoritie of the Princes Councel, and by warrant of the greate Seale of England, and doyng nothing without the ſame, might be charged with Treaſon for any thing whiche he might doe by warrant thereof: Secondly, whether any ſuch perſons as were equally culpable in that crime, and thoſe, by whoſe letters and commaundementes he was directed in all his doyngs, myghte bée hys Judges, or paſſe vppon hys tryall as hys Péeres.
            
               Wherevnto was aunſweared, that as cōncerning the firſte, the greate Seate, (whiche he layde for hys warrant)▪ was not the Séale of the lawful Quéene of the Realme) nor paſſed by aucthoritie, but the Seale of an Uſurper, and therefore coulde be no warrant to hym. As to the ſecond, it was alleadged, that if anye were as déepely to bée touched in that caſe as hymſelfe, yet ſo long as no atteynder were of recorde agaynſte them, they were neuer the leſſe perſons able in Lawe to paſſe vppon anye tryall, and not to bée chalenged therefore, but at the Princes pleaſure. After whyche aunſweare, the Duke vſed fewe wordes, but confeſſed the inditement, by whoſe example▪ the other priſoners arraigned with him did the like, and therevppon had iudgement.
            And when iudgement was gyuen▪ the Duke ſaid, I beſéech you my Lords all to be humble futers to the Quéenes Maieſtie, and to graunte mée foure requeſtes, whyche are theſe▪ 
               
                  •
               yr
                  •••
                that I maye haue that death whyche Noble 
                  〈…〉
                haue hadde in tymes paſte, and not the other▪ Secondartly, that hir Maieſtie will be gratious to my chyldren, whyche maye hereafter doe good ſeruice, conſyderyng, that they wente by my commaundement, who am theyr father, and not of their own trée willes. Thyrdlye, that I maye haue appoynted to me ſome learned manne for the inſtruction and quiet of my conſcience. And fourthlye, that ſhée will ſende twoo of the Councell, to commune wyth mée, to whome I will declare ſuche matters as ſhall be expedient for hir, and the common weale: and thus I beſéech you al to pray for me.
            On the ninetéenth of Auguſte were arraigned at Westminster, ſir Iohn Gates, ſir Henrie Gates, ſir Andrew Dudley, and ſir Thomas Palmer, where, wythout anye Queſt they pleaded guiltie, & ſubmitted themſelues to the Quéens mercy, and ſo had iudgement.
            
               There of Auguſt Doctdure Watſon Chaplaine to the Byſhop of Wincheſter preached at Paules Croſſe, by the Quéen
                  •
                appoyntment, and for feare of the like 
                  •
               un
                  ••
               lie, as had béen the Sonday laſte paſte, certaine Lordes of the Counſell repayred to the Sermon, as the Lorde Treaſourer, the Lord priuie Seale, ye Earle of Bedforde the Earle of Pembrooke, the Lorde Wentworth, the Lorde Bliche, and ſir Honrie Ge
                     •
                  o
                     •
                  
                  g
                     ••
                  
                Capitayne of the Guarde, wyth two hundred of the Guarde, whych foode aboute the Preacher with Halbert
                  •
               . Alſo the Maior 
                  ••
               d warned the Companies of the Cittie
                  ••
               
               Preacher at Paules Croſſe guarded. be preſent in their Ly
                  ••
               eries▪ whyche was well accepted of the Quéenes Counc
                  ••
               l, and the Sermon▪ was quietly ended.
            The xxij. of Auguſt Iohn Duke of Northumberlande was beheaded on the Tower hill, whoſe bodye with the head was buryed in the 
                  〈…〉
               
               ▪ by the bodye of Edwarde late Duke of Somerſet, 
               
                  •
               o that there lyeth before the highe Aultare 
                  •
               w
                  •
                Dukes between two Quéenes, to wéere▪ the Duke of 
                  
                     〈…〉
                  , and the Duke of Northumberlande, betwéen Quéene Anne, and Quéene Katherine, all foure beheaded▪ At the ſame time and place alſo, was likewiſe beheaded ſir Iohn Gates,
               Sir Iohn Gates and ſir Thomas Palmer beheaded. and ſir Thomas Palmer, whyche ſir Iohn Gates in that place vſed fewe words, but layd
                  •
                downe his hea
                  •
                withoute an
                  ••
                kerchef, and had the ſame ſt
                  •••
               en off at thrée blowes. Syr Thomas Palmer, as loone as he came to the Staffolde, tooke euerye manne by the hande, and deſyred them to praye for hym: then putting off his gowne, he leaned vpon the Eaſte rayle, and ſayde theſe words in effecte: My Maiſters (quoth he) God ſaue 
                  〈…〉
               
               ▪ it is 
                  •
               ot 
                  〈…〉
                
               
                  •••
               o you wherefore I come hither, whyche I haue worthilye well defe
                  •••
               ed at Gods handes, for I knowe it to be h
                  ••
                diuine ordinance, by this meanes to call me to his mercie, and to teache me to knowe myſ
                  •
               tre, what I am, and wherevnto we are all ſubiecte: I thanks hys mercifull goodnes, for he hath cauſed me to learne more in one litle darke corne
                  •
                
               
                  〈…〉
                
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                  ▪
               
               
than euer I learned by any trauell in ſo many places as I haue bin, for there (I ſay) I haue ſéene God, what he is, and how vnſearcheable his wonderous workes are, and how infinite his mercies be: I haue ſéene there my ſelfe throughly, and what I am, nothing but a lump of ſinne, earth, duſt, and of all vileneſſe moſt vileſt: I haue ſéene there and know what the world is, how dayne, deceiptfull, tranſitorie, and ſhort it is, how wicked and loathſome the workes thereof are in the ſight of Gods Maieſtie, how he neyther regardeth ſhe man
                  •
               ees of the proude men and mighty ones, neyther deſpiſeth the humbleneſſe of the poore and lowly which are i
                  •
                the ſame world: Finally, I haue ſéene there what death is, how néere hanging ouer euery mans head, and yet how vncertayne the time, and how vnknowne to all men, and how little it is to be feared: and ſhould I feare death? or be ſadde therefore? haue I not ſéene two dye before mine eyes? yea, and within the hearing of mine eares? no, neyther the ſ
                  •
               rinckling of the bloud, or the ſheading thereof, nor the bloudy Axe it ſelfe ſhall make me afrayd: and now taking my leaue to the ſame, I pray you all to pray for me: come on good fellow (quoth he) art thou he that muſt do the déede? I forgiue thée with all my heart, and then knéeled downe, laying his head on the blocke, ſayd, I will ſée how méete the 
                  〈…〉
                is for my necke, I pray thée ſtrike not yet, for I haue a few prayers to ſay, and that done, ſtrike on Gods name, good leaue haue thou: his Prayers ended, and deſiring each man to pray for him, he layd downe his head agayne, and ſo the executioner tooke it from him at one ſtroke.
            The xxiij. of Auguſt, the Quéene deliuered the greateNevv Lord Chancellour. Seale to Doctour Gardener Biſhop of Winchester, and made him Lord Chauncellour.
            The xxvij. of Auguſt, the ſeruice began in Latin to béeLatine ſeruice. ſong in Paules Church in London.
            
            The xxvj. of Auguſt in the euening, the notableſt ShippeGreat Harry a Shippe brent▪
                in England called the great Harry, was brent at Wolwich by negligence of the Mariners, ſhe was of burthen a M. tunne.
            
               The 
                  ••
                of September, the Quéene demanded a preſt of 
                  •
               
               Preſt to the Queene. Citie of London of twentie M. pound, to be repayde agayne within fourtéene dayes after Michaelmas next following, which ſumme was leuied of the Aldermē, & 120. cōmoners.
            The third of September, Edward Courtney was createdEarle of Deuonshire created. Earle of Deuonſhire at Richmond.
            
            The iiij. of September, was proclaymed certayne new coynes of gold and ſiluer, a Soueraigne of gold of xxx. s̄, theNevv Coynes. halfe Soueraigne xv. s̄, an Angell of x. s̄, the halfe Angel v. s̄. Of ſilner the grote, halfe grote, and peny. All baſe coynes to be currant as before. Alſo the ſame day by Proclamation, was pardoned the Subſidie of iiij. s̄. the pound Landes,Subſedie pardoned. and two ſhillings eyghtpence the pound of mouable goods, graunted in the laſt Parliament of King Edward the ſixth.
            The fourtéenth and fiftéenth of September, Mayſter Latimer and Doctour Cranmer Archbiſhop of Canterbury, were ſent to the Tower of London.
            
            
               Thomas Offeley: William Huette, the 28. of September.
               Sheriffes.
            
            The xxvij. of September, Q. Mary came to the Tower by water, accōpanied with yt Ladye Elizabeth hir ſiſter, & other Ladies, before whoſe ariual was ſhot a gret peale of gūnes.
            The laſt of September, Quéene Mary rode through the Citie of London towards Westminster, ſitting in a Charryot▪
               Coronation. of cloth of Tiſſew, drawne with ſixe Horſſes, all trapped with the like cloth of Tiſſew. She ſate in a gowne of purple▪ Ueluet, furred with poweered Grmin, hauing on hir head a caule of cloth of tinſel, beſet with perle and ſtone, & aboue the ſame vpon hir head, a round circlet of gold, beſet ſo richly with pretious ſtones, that the value there of was ineſtimable, the ſame caule and circle being ſo maſſy & p
                  •
               derous, that ſhe was fayne to beare vp hir head with hir hand, and the Canapy was borne ouer hir Charyot. Before hir rode a number of Gentlemen & Knightes, then Judges, then Doctors, then Biſhops, th Lords, then ye Counſel; after whom followed y• Knightes of the Bath in their roabes, the Biſhop of Winchester 
               
                  •
               . Chancellour, & the Marques of Winchester L. high Treaſurer, next came ye D. of Norffolke, and after him

the Earle of Oxford, who bare ye ſword before hir, the Maior of London in a gowne of Chrimſon Ueluet bare the Scepter of gold &c. after ye Quéenes Chariot, Sir Ed. Haſtings led hir horſe in his hād: then came another Chariot, hauing a couering all of cloth of ſiluer all white, & vj. horſſes trapped with ſhe like, therin ſate the Lady Elizabeth, and the Lady Anne of Cleue, then Ladies & Gentlewomē riding on horſes trapped with red veluet, and their gownes and kirſ
                  •
               es likewiſe of red veluet: after them followed two other Chariots couered with red ſattin, and the horſes betrapped with the ſame, & certaine Gentlewomen betwéene euery of the ſaid Chariots riding in Chrimſon ſattin, their horſes betrapped with the ſame, the nūber of the Gentlewomē ſo riding were xlvj. beſides them in the Chariots. At Fenchurch was a coſtly Pageant made by the Genewayes: at Graſſechurch corner there was another Pageant made by the Easterlings. At the vpper end of Graſſestr
                     •
                  ete there was another Pageant made by the Florentines very high, on the top whereof there ſtoode iiij. pictures, and in ſhe midſt of them and moſt higheſt, there ſtood an Angell all in gréene, with a Trompet in his hand, and when the Trompetter who ſtood ſecretly in the pageant did ſound his tromp, the Angel did put his tr
                  •
               mp to his mouth as though it had bin the ſame that had ſounded, to the great maruelling of many ignorant perſons: this Pageant was made with iij. thorough faires or gates &c. The Conduit in Cornehill ran wine, and beneath y• Conduit a Pageant made at the charges of the Citie, and another at the great Conduit in Cheape, and a fountaine by it running wine. The Standard in Cheape new painted, with the Waytes of the Citie aloft therof playing. The Croſſe in Cheape new waſhed & burniſhed. One other Pageant at the little Conduit in Cheape next to Paules made by the Citie, where the Aldermen ſtoode, and when ye Quéene came againſt them, the Recorder made a ſhort propoſition to hir, and then the Chā
               berlaine preſented to hir in the name of the Maior and the Citie, a 
                  ••
               r
                  ••
                of cloth of gold, and 
                  •
                thouſand marlies of 
                  ••
               l
                  •
               in it: then ſhe rode forth, and in Paules Church-yarde

againſt the Schoole, one Maiſter Heywod ſate in a Pageant vnder a Uine, and made to hir an Oration in Latine and Engliſh. Then was there one Peter a Dutchman ſtoode on the weathercocke of Paules ſtéeple, holding a ſtreamer in his hand of fiue yards long, and waning therof, ſtoode ſometime on the one foote, and ſhooke the other, and then knéeled on his knées, to the greate maruell of all people. He had made two Scaffoldes vnder him, one aboue the croſſe, hauing torches and ſtreamers ſet on it, and one other ouer the bole of the croſſe, likewiſe ſet with ſtreamers and torches, which could not burne, the wind was ſo great: the ſaid Peter had ſixtéene pound thirtéene ſhillings fourpence giuen hym by the Citie for his coſtes and paynes, and all his ſtuffe. Then was there a Pageant made againſt the Deane of Paules gate, where the Quereſters of Paules playde on Uials, and ſong. Ludgate was newly repaired, paynted, and richly hanged, with minſtrels, playing and ſinging there▪ then was there another Pageant at the Conduit in Fléeteſtréete, and the Temple barre was newly paynted and hanged. And thus ſhe paſſed to White hall at Weſtminster, where ſhe tooke hir leaue of the Lord Maior, giuing hym greate thankes ſor his paynes, and the Citie for their coſt, On the morrow, which was the firſt day of October, the Quéene went by water to the old Pallace, and there remayned till about eleuen of the clocke, and then went on foote vpon blew cloath, being rayled on eyther ſide, vnto Saint Peters Church, where ſhe was ſolemnely crowned and a▪ noynted by the Biſhop of Winchester, which Coronation and other ceremonies and ſolemnities then vſed according to the old cuſtome, was not fully ended till it was nigh foure of the clocke at night that ſhe returned from the Church, before whome was then borne thrée ſwords ſheathed, and one naked. The great ſeruice that day done in Westminster hall at dinner by diuers noblemen, would aſke long time to write. The Lorde Maior. of London and twelve Citizens kept the high Cupb
                  ••
               rd of plate as Butlers, and ye Quéen
                  •
               
               
gaue to the Maior for his fée a cuppe of gold with a couer waying ſeauentéene ounces.
            The fifth of October, the Parliament began at Westminster.
               Parliament.
            
            The fiue and twenty day of October, the Barge of Graues end, a Catch running vpon hir, was ouerturned, and fourtéeneGraues end Barge ouerturned. perſons drowned, and ſixtéene ſaued by ſwimming.
            
               Sir Thomas White Merchant Taylor, the 28. of October.
               Maior.
            
            This Sir Thomas White, a worthy patron and protector of poore Scholers and learning, renued or rather erected aCharitable deedes of Sir Tho. VVhite. Colledge in Oxford, now called Saint Iohns Colledge, before Bernard Colledge. He alſo erected Schooles at Bristow and Reading. Moreouer, this worſhipfull Citizen in his life time gaue to the Citie of Bristow two thouſand pounds of ready money to purchaſe lands to the yearely value of 120. pound, for the which it is decréed, that the Maior, Burgeſes and Communaltye of Bristow, in Anno. 1567. and ſo yearely during the tearme of ten yeares then next enſuing, ſhould cauſe to be payd at Bristow, one hundred pound of lawfull money. The firſt 800. pound to be lent to ſixtéene poore yong men Clothiers, and frée men of the ſame Towne, for the ſpace of tenne yeares, fiftie pound the péece of them, putting ſufficient ſureties for the ſame, and at the end of ten yeares, to be lent to other ſixtéene, at the diſcretion of the Maior, Aldermen, and foure of the common Counſell of the ſayde Citie. The other two hundred pound to be employed in the prouiſion of Corne, for the reliefe of the poore of the ſame Citie, for their ready money, without gaine to be taken. And after the end of tenne yeares on the feaſt day of Saint Barthelmew, which ſhall be in Anno. 1577. at the Merchant taylors Hall in London, vnto the Maior and communaltie of the Citie of Yorke, or to their Attourney aucthoriſed, an hundred and four pound, to be lent vnto four yong men of the ſayde Citie of Yorke, fréemen and inhabitants, (Clothiers alway to be preferred,) viz. to euery of them fiue and twenty pound, to haue and occupie the ſame for the terme

of tenne yeares, without paying any thing for the loane, the four pound ouerplus of the 104. pound, at the pleaſure of the Maior and communaltie for their paines to be taken about the reſcepts and paymentes of the ſayd 100. pounde. The like order in all poyntes is taken for the deliuerie of 104. pound in the yeare 1578. to the Citie of Canterbury. In the yeare 1579. to Reading 1580. to the company of the Merchant Taylours 1581. to Glocester 1582. to Worcester, 1583. to Excester, 1584. to Sal
                     •
                  ſburie, 1585. to Westchester, 1586. to Norwich, 1587. to South-hampton, 1588. to Lincolne, 1589. to Winchester, 1590. to Oxford, 1591. to Heriford Eaſt 1592. to Cambridge, 1593. to Shrewſburie, 1594. to Lin, 1595. to Bathe, 1596. to Derby, 1597. to Ipſwich, 1598. to Colchester, 1599. to Newcastell. And then to begin againe at Bristow one 140. pound, the next yeare to the Citie of Yorke, and ſo foorth to euery of the ſayd Cities and Townes, in the like order as afore, and thus to continue for euer, as in the indentures tripartite, more playnely may appeare.
            Cardinall Poole, who had long time bin forth from thisCardinal Poole. Realme, and now in great eſtimation in the Court of Rome, was ſent for by Quéene Mary to returne into his Countrey of England.
            
            The third of Nouember, the weathercocke of Paules was ſet vp, which cocke wayed fortie pound, his lengthVVeathercock of Paules. from the bill to the tayle was four foote, and his breadth ouer the wings thrée foote and a halfe, the which cocke béeing of copper, was ouer gilt.
            The thirtéenth of Nouember, Doctor Cranmer Archbiſhop of Canterbury, Lady Iane that was before proclaymed Quéene, and the Lord Guilford hir huſband, were arraigned at the Guild hall of London, and condemned of Treaſon.
            The Parliament was diſſolued on the ſixth of December. And on the one and twentith of December, beganneLatine ſeruice in the Church. throughout England the Church ſeruice to be done in Latine, as was enacted by the laſt Parliamente, and as the

ſame had bin left in the laſt yeare of King Henry the eyght.
            In the beginning of the moneth of January, the Emperour ſent a noble man called Ecmondane, and certayne other Embaſſadors into England, to conclude a marriage betwéene King Phillip his ſonne, and Quéene Mary of Englande.
            
            The fourtéenth of January, D. Stephen Gardener Biſhop of Winchester, Lord Chancellour of England, in the Chamber of preſence at Westminster, made to the Lordes, Nobilitie, and Gentlemen, an Oration very eloquent, wherein hée declared that the Quéenes Maieſtie, partly for amitie, and other waightie conſiderations had, after muche ſuite on the Emperours and Prince of Spaynes behalfe made, determined by the conſent of the Counſell and Nobilitie, to match hir ſelfe with the ſayde Prince in moſt godly and lawfull matrimonie, and declared further, that ſhe ſhould haue for hir ioynter thirtie thouſand Duckets by the yeare, with all the lowe Countrey of Flanders, and that the iſſue (if there happened any) betwéene them two lawfully begotten, ſhould bée heire as well to the Kingdome of Spayne, as alſo to the ſayde lowe Countrey. He ſayde therefore that they were all bound to thanke GOD that ſo noble, worthy, and famous a Prince would vouchſafe ſo to humble hymſelfe as in thys marriage to take vppon hym rather as a Subiect, than otherwiſe, for the Quéene and hir Counſell ſhoulde rule all thynges as 
                  ••
               e dyd before, and that there ſhoulde bée of the Counſell no Stranger, neyther to haue the cuſtodie of anye Fortes or Caſtels &c. nor beare anye rule or office in 
                  •
               he Quéenes houſe, or elſe-where in all Englande, with 
                  •
               yuers other Articles there by hym rehearſed, where
               
                  ••
               e hée ſayde the Quéenes pleaſure and requeſt was, 
                  ••
               at lyke good Subiectes for hir ſake, they woulde moſt 
                  •••
               inglye receyue him with reuerence, ioy, and honoure.
            
               The next day, the Lord Maior of London, with his bréethren the Aldermē, were ſent for to the Court, and to bring with them fortie of the head commoners of the Citie, vnto whome before the Counſell, the Lord Chancellour made the like Oration, deſiring them to behaue themſelues like good ſubiects with all humbleneſſe and reioycing.
            The purpoſe of this marriage was ſo gréeuouſly taken of diuers men, that for this and for Religion, they in ſuchConſpiracy. ſort conſpired againſt the Quéene, that if the matter had not broken out before the time by them appoynted; men thought it would haue brought much trouble and daunger.
            The xxv. of January, Sir Iohn Gage, Lord Chamberlayne, certified the Lord Maior of London, that Sir ThomasCommotion in Kent by Sir Thomas VViat Wyat with certayne other Rebels were vp in Kent aboute Maydestone, wherevpon, great watche was kepte, and that night the Lord Maior rode about to peruſe the ſame, and euery night after two Aldermen did the like: in the day time the gates of the Citie were warded by ſubſtantiall Citizēs.
            The xxvij. of January, the Lord Treaſurer came to the Guild hall from the Counſell, to requeſt the Citizens to prepare fiue hundred footemen well harneſſed, to go agaynſte Wyat, which was granted, and made ready the ſame night, and on the morrow were deliuered to their Captaines, and ſent to Graueſend by water. The xxix. of January, the Duke of Norffolke, with the Captayne of the Gard, and other ſouldiers,The Duke of Norffolke ſente againſt VVyat. and the Captaine and Souldiers that were ſent from London, minded to aſſault Rochester Caſtell, where Wyat and his people lay, but before the ſetting forward of theſeVVyat ſtrengthened vvith the Queenes Ordinance. men, the Duke ſent Mayſter Nory an Herault vnto Rocheſter with the Quéenes Proclamation of pardon to all ſuch as would deſiſt from their purpoſe, who comming to the bridge, woulde haue gone through into the Citie, but they that kept the bridge would not ſuffer him till that the Captayne came, who at the laſt granted the ſame to be read 
                  ••
                the Citie, but holding a Dagge againſt him, cryed ſpeak
                  ••
                ſoftly, or elſe they would ſhoote him thorough, ſo that they

would not ſuffer the people to heare the Proclamation, which béeing ended, each man cryed they had done nothing wherefore they ſhould néede any pardon, and in that quarrell which they had taken in hande, they would lyue and dye: neuertheleſſe at the laſt Sir George Harpar receyued the pardon outwardly, and béeing receiued vnder the Duke of Norffolkes protection, came on forwarde againſte the Kentiſhmen, and euen as the company were ſet in a readineſſe, and marched forward toward the Bridge, Brette béeing Captayne of the fiue hundred Londoners, of which, the more parte were in the fore-ward, turned himſelfe aboute, and drawing out his ſword, ſayd theſe or like words: Mayſters, we go about to fight againſt our natiue Countreymen of England and our friends, in a quarrell vnrightfull, and partly wicked, for they conſidering the great and manyfolde miſeries which are like to fall vpon vs, if we ſhall be vnder the rule of the proude Spanyards, are héere aſſembled to make reſiſtance of their comming, for the auoyding of ſo great miſchiefes and inconueniences likely to light, not only vpon themſelues, but on euery of vs and the whole Realme, wherefore I thinke no Engliſh heart ought to ſay againſt them, much leſſe by fighting to withſtande them, and therefore I and others (meaning ſuch as were in that ranke with hym) will ſpende our bloud in the quarrell of this worthy Captayne Mayſter Wyat, and other Gentlemen héere aſſembled: which words once pronounced, each man turned their Ordinance agaynſt their folowers, and therevpon cryed a Wyat a Wyat, of which ſodeyne noyſe, the Duke, the Captayne of the Gard, and other béeing abaſhed, fledde forthwith: immediatly came in Mayſter Wyat and hys company on horſſebacke, ruſhing in amongſt as well the Garde as the Londoners, and ſayde, ſo many as wyll come and tarrye wyth vs, ſhall be welcome, and ſo many as wyll departe, good leaue haue they, and ſo 
                  •
               ll the Londoners, parte of the Gard, and more than thrée 
                  •
               artes of the retinue, wente to the Campe of the Kentiſhmen,
               
where they ſtill remayned. At this diſcomfiture, the Duke loſt eyght péeces of braſſe, with all other munition and Ordinance, and himſelfe with few other hardly eſcaped. The laſt of January, Wyat and his company came to Dertforde, and the next day they came full and whole to Greenewich and Depeford, where they remayned Thurſeday, Fryday, and the foorenone of Satterday. On the Fryday which was Candlemas day, the moſt parte of the houſholders of London, with the Maior and Aldermen were in harneſſe, yea this day and other dayes the Juſtices, Sergeants at the Lawe, and other Lawyers, pleaded in harneſſe.
            In this meane time, Henry Duke of Suffolke, Father to the Lady Iane, fléeing into Leycesterſhire and Warwikeſhire with a ſmall companye, in diuers places as he went made Proclamation agaynſt the Quéenes marriage with the Prince of Spayne &c. but the people enclined not to him.
            The firſt of February, Proclamation was made at London, that the Duke of Suffolke was diſcomfited, and fled with his two bréethren. And alſo, that Sir Peter Carow, with his vnckle Sir Gawyn Carow and Gibbes, were fledde into France, and further, that the Quéene did pardon the whole Camp of the Kentiſhmen except Wyat, Harpar, Rudſtone, and Iſeley, and that who ſoeuer could take Sir Thomas Wyat, except the ſayde foure perſons, ſhould haue an hundred pound Lands to hym and his heires for euer. The ſame day in the afternoone being Candlemas euen, the commons of the Citie aſſembled in their Liueries at the Guild hall, whether the Quéene with hir Lords and Ladyes cameQueene Mary came to the Guild hall in London. riding from Westminster, and there after vehement wordes againſt Wyat, declared that ſhe meant not otherwiſe to marrie, than the Counſell ſhould thinke both honourable and commodious to the Realme, and that ſhe could continue vnmaryed, as ſhe had done the greateſt part of hir age, and therefore willed them truly to aſſiſt hir in repreſſing ſuch as contrarie to their duties rebelled. When ſhe had

done, vnderſtanding that many in London did fauour Wyats part, ſhe appoynted Lord William Howard Lieutenant ofLord VVilliam Hovvard Lieutenant of the Citie. the Citie, and the Earle of Pembroke General of the Field, which both prepared all thyngs neceſſarie for theyr purpoſe.
            In the meane ſeaſon, to wéete, the third day of February,VVyat came into Southvvarke. about thrée of the clocke in the after noone, Sir Thomas Wyat and the Kentiſhmen marched forwarde from Depeford towards London with fiue Ancients, béeing by eſtimation about two thouſand, which their comming ſo ſoone as it was perceyued, there was ſhot off out of the white Tower ſixe or eyght ſhotte, but miſſed them, ſometime ſhooting ouer, and ſometime ſhort. After knowledge thereof once had in London, forth with the Draw Bridge was cut downe, and the Bridge Gates ſhutte. The Maior and Sheriffes harneſſed, commanded each man to ſhutte in their ſhoppes and windowes, and to be ready harneſſed at their dores, what chance ſoeuer might happen. By this time was Wyat entred into Kentstreete, and ſo by Saint Georges Churche into Southwarke. Himſelfe and part of hys company came in good aray downe Barmondſey ſtreete, and they were ſuffered peaceably to enter Southwarke without repulſe, or anye ſtroke ſtricken, eyther by the inhabitants, or of any other: yet was there many men of the Countrey in the Innes, reyſed and brought thither by the Lorde William and other, to haue gone againſt the ſayd Wyat, but they all ioyned themſelues to the Kentiſhmen, and the inhabitantes with their beſt enterteyned them. Immediatly vpon the ſayde Wyats comming, hée made Proclamation that no Souldyour ſhoulde take anye thyng, but that hée ſhoulde pay for it, and that hys commyng was to reſiſt the Spaniſh Kyng. &c.
            At the Bridge foote he layde two péeces of Ordinance, and beganne a greate trenche betwéene the Bridge and hym. Hée layde one other péece of Ordinance of Sainte Georges, and one going into Bermondſey ſtreete, and one other toward the Biſhop of Winchesters houſe.
            
               On Shroue Tueſday the ſixth of February, Sir Thomas Wyat remoued out of Southwarke, towarde Kingston Bridge, which was done vpon this occaſion. The nighte before hys departing out of Southwarke, by chance as oneVVyat remoued out of Southvvarke. of the Lieutenants men of the Tower named Thomas Menchen rowed with a Sculler ouer againſt the Biſhop of Winchesters place, there was a waterman of the Tower ſtaire, deſired the ſayde Lieutenants man to take him in, who did ſo, which béeing eſpyed of Wyats men, ſeauen of them with Harguebuſſes, called to them to land agayne, but they would not, whereupon, each man diſcharged their péece, and killed the ſayd waterman, which forthwith falling downe dead, the Sculler with much payne rowed through the Bridge to the Tower wharffe with the Lieutenants man, and the dead man in his boate, which thing was no ſooner knowne to the Lieutenant, but that euen the ſame night, and the next morning, he bent ſeauen great péeces of Ordinance Euluerings, and Demi-Canons, full againſt the foote of the Bridge, and againſt Southwarke, and the two Stéeples of Saint Oliues, and Saint Mary Oueryes, beſides all the péeces on the white Tower, one Culuering on Diueling Tower, and thrée Fauconets ouer the Water gate, which ſo ſoone as the inhabitants of Southwarke vnderſtoode, certayne both men and women came to Wyat in moſt lamentable wiſe, ſaying, Sir, we are all like to be vtterly vndone and deſtroyed for your ſake, oure houſes ſhall by and by bée throwne downe vpon our heads, to the vtter ſpoyle of thys Borough, with the ſhotte of the Tower, all ready bente and charged towardes vs, for the loue of God therefore take pitie vppon vs: at whiche wordes hée béeyng partly abaſhed, ſtayde awhile, and then ſayde:
            I pray you my friendes bée contente a whyle, and I will ſoone eaſe you of this miſchiefe, for God forbid that you or the leaſt héere ſhould be killed or hurt in my behalfe. And ſo in moſt ſpéedye manner hée martched awaye.

As he marched towards Kingstone, he met by chance a MerchantVViat marched tovvards Kingſtone. named Chriſtopher Dorell, whome he called, ſaying, Coſen Dorell I pray you commend me vnto your Citizens the Londoners, and ſay vnto them from me, that when libertie and fréedome was offered them, they woulde not receyue it, neyther woulde they admitte me to enter within their Gates, who for theyr fréedome, and the diſburthening of theyr gréefes, and oppreſſion by Strangers, would haue franckely ſpente my blond in that their cauſe and quarrell, but nowe well appeareth theyr vnthankefulneſſe to vs their friendes which meaneth them ſo much good, and therefore they are the leſſe to bée moned héereafter, when the miſerable tyrannie of Strangers ſhall oppreſſe them, and ſo hée wente forwarde. This daye by nighte hée came to Kingstone, where the Bridge was broken, and kepte on the other ſyde by two hundreth men, wherefore Wyat cauſed a two péeces of Ordinance to be layde on the ende of the Bridge, whiche ſo feared them on the other ſyde, that they durſt not abyde, then cauſed hée thrée or foure of hys Souldyers to leape into the Thamis, and to ſwimme to the other ſyde, who lewſed the Weſterne Barges whyche there lay tyed, and ſo brought them ouer, and by that meanes he paſſed the water: it was woonderfull what paynes hée tooke himſelfe comming on foote amongſt them, neyther dyd they ſtay anye whitte all that nyghte, but came almoſt to Brayneforde or euer they were diſcryed by the Quéenes ſcoutes, who there by chaunce méeting Brette and hys companye, Brette ſayde to the ſcoute, backe villayne, if thou goe farther to diſcouer any thing héere, thou ſhalte dye out of hande, the ſcoute returned in great haſt.
            The ſame day in the afternoone, were two men hangedExecution in Paules Churchyard. on a Gibbet in Paules Church yard by Marciall law, the one being ſeruant to the Duke of Suffolke, and late Sheriffe of Leycester, the other a Baker, one of the white coates ſent out of the Citie agaynſte Wyat, and the ſame

day came tidings that the Duke with his bréethren were taken.
            The ſame day towards night, there was laden tenne or twelue Cartes with Ordināce, as Billes, Pikes, Speares, bowes, arrowes, powlder, ſhotte, ſhouels, mattockes, baſkets, and other munitions, two Cul
                  •
               erings, one Sacre, thrée Fawcons, and a Fawconet, all which ſtuffe ſtayde in Paules Church yard. The ſame night alſo aboute fy
                  •
               e of the clocke, a Trompetter went about, and warned all horſſemen and men of armes to be at Saint Iames field, and all footemen alſo to be there by ſixe of the clocke in the next morning.
            The Quéenes ſcoute vpon his returne to the Court, declared Wyats béeing at Brayneforde, whiche ſodeyne newes, made all in the Courte wonderfullye afrayde, Drommes went through London at four of the clocke, commanding all Souldiours to armour, and ſo to Charing croſſe.
            
            
               Wyat hearing that the Earle of Pembroke was come into the fields, he ſtayde at Knightes bridge vntill day, where his men being very wéerie with trauell of that night, and the day before, and alſo partly féebled and faint, hauing receyued ſmall ſuſtenance ſince their comming out of Southwarke reſtleſſe. There was no ſmall ado in London, and likewiſe the Tower made great preparation of defence. By tenne of the cloke the Earle of Pembroke had ſet his troupe of horſſemen on the hill in the high way aboue the newe bridge, ouer againſt Saint Iames: his footemen were ſet in two battels, ſomewhat lower, and néerer Charing Croſſe, at the lane turning downe by the bricke wall from Iſlington ward, where he had ſet alſo certayne other horſſemen, and he had planted his Ordinance vpon the hill ſide. In the meane ſeaſon, Wyat and his company planted his Ordinance vpponVVyat in Saint Iames fielde. a hill beyond Saint Iames, almoſt ouer againſt the Parke corner, and himſelfe after a few words ſpoken to his Souldyers, came downe the old lane on foote, hard by the Court gate at Saint Iames, with four or fiue auntients, his menne

marching in good array. Cuthbert Vaughan and a two antients turned downe towarde Westminster. The Earle of Pembrokes horſſemen houered all this whyle without mouing, vntill all was paſſed by ſauing the tayle, vpon which they did ſet, and cut off: the other marched forward in array, and neuer ſtayd or returned to the ayde of theyr tayle: the greate Ordinance ſhotte off freſhly on both ſydes: Wyats Ordinance ouerſhotte the troupe of Horſſemen. The Quéenes Ordinance, one péece ſtrake thrée of Wyats company in a rancke vpon the heads, and ſlaying them, ſtrake through the wall into the Parke: more harme was not done by the greate ſhotte of neyther partie. The Quéenes whole battayle of footemen ſtanding ſtill, Wyat paſſed along by the wall towardes Charing Croſſe, where the ſayde Horſſemen that were there, ſet vppon parte of them, but was ſoone forced backe. At Charing Croſſe there ſtoode Sir Iohn Gage Lorde Chamberlayne wyth the Garde, and a number of other, béeing almoſt a thouſande, the which vppon Wyats comming, ſhotte at hys companye, but at the laſt fledde to the Court gates, which certayne purſued, and forced wyth ſhotte to ſhutte the Court gates againſt them. In thys repulſe, the ſayde Lorde Chamberlayne and others were ſo amazed, that manye cryed Treaſon in the Courte, and hadde thought that the Earle of Pembroke, who was aſſaulting the tayle of hys Enimies, hadde gone to Wyat, takyng hys parte agaynſt the Quéene: there was running and trying out of Ladyes and Gentlewomen, ſhutting of dores and windowes, and ſuche a ſhriking and noyſe, as was wonderfull to heare. Wyat wyth hys menne marched ſtill forwarde all along to Temple Barre, and ſo thorough Fleetestreete, tyll hée came to the Bell Sauadge, an Inne nigh vnto Ludgate, wythout reſiſtance, hys menne goyng not in any good order or array. It is ſayde, that at Strand, certayne of the Lorde Treaſurers hand, to the number of thrée hundreth men,

whereof, the Lorde Chidioke Powlet his ſonne was Captayne, met them, and ſo going on the one ſide, paſſed by them going on the other ſide, without any thing ſaying to them. Alſo this is more ſtrange, the ſayde Wyat and hys company paſſed along by a greate companye of harneſſed men whiche ſtoode on both ſides the ſtréetes, without anye withſtanding them. And as he marched forward through Fléeteſtréete moſt with their ſwords drawne, ſome cryed Quéene Mary hath graunted oure requeſt, and giuen vs pardon, other ſayde, the Quéene hath pardoned vs, thus ſome of Wyats men came euen to Ludgate and knocked, calling to come in, ſaying there was Wyat, whome the Quéene had graunted to haue their requeſtes, but the Lorde William Howarde ſtoode at the Gate, and ſayde auant Traytor, thou ſhalt not come in héere. Wyat a while ſtayde, and reſted hym vppon a ſtall ouer agaynſte the Bell Sauadge Gate, and at the laſt ſéeing hée could not gette in to the Citie, and béeing deceyued of the ayde hée hoped for, returned backe agayne in array towards Charing Croſſe, and was neuer ſtopped, till hée came at Temple barre, where certayne Horſſemen which came from the fielde mette them in the face, and then beganne the fyghte agayne, tyll Clarenſus an Herraulte came and ſayde to Mayſter Wyat, Sir, you were beſt by my counſell to yéelde, you ſée thys daye is gone agaynſteVVyat taken. you, and in reſiſting, you can gette no good, but bée the death of all theſe your Souldioures, to youre great perill of Soule: perchance you maye fynde the Quéene mercifull, and the rather, if yée ſtint ſo greate bloudſhead as is lyke héere to bée. Wyat héerewyth béeyng ſomewhat aſtonyed (although hée ſawe hys menne bente to fyghte) ſayde well, if I ſhall néedes yéelde, I wyll yéelde me to a Gentleman, to whome, Sir Mawrice Barkeley came ſtreight, and bade hym leape vp behynde hym, and another tooke Thomas Cobham and Wyllyam Kneuet, & ſo carryed them behinde them vpō their horſſes to

the Courte then was taking of menne on all ſides. It is ſaide, that in thys conflicte one Pikeman ſetting his backe to the wall at Saint Iames, kepte ſeauentéene horſſemen off hym a greate tyme, and at the laſte was ſlaine. The whole number on bothe ſides ſlaine at thys battaile paſſed not fortie perſons, as farre as coulde be learned by them that viewed the feld, but there were many ſore hurte. The noyſe of women and children, when the conflicte was at Charing Croſſe, was ſo greate, that it was hearde to the toppe of the white Tower, and alſo the great ſhotte was well diſcerned there out of Saint Iames fielde, there ſtoode vpon the Leades, the Marques of Northampton, ſir Nicholas Poines, ſir Thomas Pope, Maiſter Iohn Seimer and other.
            About fiue of the clocke, Thomas Wiat, William Kneuet, Thomas Cobham, two brethren name Mantels, and Alexander
               VViat ſent to the Tovver. 
               Bret were broughte by ſir Henrie Ierningham by water to the Tower priſoners, where ſir Philip Deny receyued them at the Bulwarke, and as Wiat paſſed by he ſaide, goe Traitor, there was neuer ſuche a Traytor in Englande, to whome ſir Thomas Wiat turned and ſaide, I am no Traitor, I woulde thou ſhouldeſt well knowe, thou arte more Traitor than I, it is not the point of an honeſte man to call me ſo, and ſo went forth, when he came to the Tower Gate, ſir Thomas Bridges Lieuetenant tooke in through the Wicket, firſte Mantele, and ſaide: Ah thou Traitour, what haſt thou and thy companye wrought? but he holding down hys head ſaide nothing: Then came Thomas Kneuet, whome Maiſter Chamberlaine Gentleman Porter of the Tower tooke in: Then came Alexander Bret, whome ſir Thomas Pope tooke by the boſome ſaying: oh Traitoure, howe couldeſt thou finde in thy hearte to worke ſuche a villany, as to take wages, and being truſted ouer a bande of men, to fall to hir enimyes, returning againſte hir in battell: Bret anſwered yea, I haue offended in that caſe: Then came Thomas Cobham, whome ſir Thomas Poines tooke in, and ſaid, alas Maſter Cobham, what wind headed you to worke ſuch

treaſon, and he aunſwered, oh ſir I was ſeduced. Then came in ſir Thomas Wyat, whome ſir Iohn Bridges tooke by the collar and ſaide, oh thou villaine and vnhappy traytour, howe couldeſt thou finde in thy hearte to worke ſuch deteſtable treaſon to the Quéenes Maieſtie, who gaue thée thy life and liuing once already, althoughe thou diddeſt béefore this time beare armes in the fielde againſt hir, and now to yéeld hir battel &c. if it were not (ſaith he) but that the law muſte paſſe vpon thée, I woulde ſticke thée throughe with my Dagger, to the whyche, Wyat holding hys armes vnder his ſide, and lookyng gréeuouſlye with a grimme looke vpon the Lieutenant, ſaid, it is no maiſtery nowe, and ſo paſſed on. Thomas Wyat hadde on a ſhyrte of Maile, wyth ſléeues very fayre, thereon a Ueluet Caſſocke, and a yellow Lace, with the windlace of his Dag hanging thereon, and a paire of Bootes on his legges, and on his head a fayre Hatte of Ueluet, with broade bone-worke Lace aboute it. William Kneuet, Thomas Cobham, & Bret, were the like apparelled.
            On the morrow and the next day folowing, were brought into the Tower priſoners, George Cobham, ſir Wyllyam Cobham, Anthony Kneuet, Hugh Booth, Thomas Vain, Robert Rudſtone, ſir George Harper, Edwarde Wyat, Edward Fogge, George Moore, and Cutbert Vaughan.
            
            The tenth of February, the Earle of Huntington and other Gentlemenne, and to the number of thrée hundred horſſemenne, broughte into the Tower as priſoner the Duke of Suffolke, and the Lord Iohn Grey hys brother from Couentrie, where the Duke hadde remayned thrée dayes after his taking in the houſe and cuſtody of Chriſtopher Warren Alderman there.
            The eleauenth day ſir Henry Iſley who had fledde, was brought into the Tower priſoner in an old Fréeſe coate, and olde payre of hoſen, all his apparell not worth foure ſhillings: the ſame daye came in twoo of the Culpepers, one Cromar, & Thomas Rampton the Duke of Suffolks ſecretary.
            The twelfth of February, being Monday, about tenne of

the clocke, there went out of the Tower to the Scaffold on the Tower hill, the Lorde Guilforde Dudley, ſonne to the Duke of Northumberlande, huſband to the Lady Iane Grey daughter to the Duke of Suffolke: and without the Bulwarke gate Maiſter Thomas Offley one of the Sheriffes of London, receyued hym and brought him to the Scaffolde, where after a ſmall declaration, he knéeled downe and ſaid his prayers, then holdyng vppe hys eyes and handes to Heauen wyth teares, at the laſt he deſired the people to pray for hym, and after was beheaded: hys body beyng layde in a Carre, and hys head in a cloth, was broughte into the Chappel within the Tower, where the Ladye Iane, whoſe lodging was in Maiſter Partridges houſe, did ſée hys deade carcaſſe taken oute of the Carre, as well as ſhe did ſée hym before aliue going to his death, a ſight to hir worſe thā death. By this time was there a Scaffolde made vpon the Gréene ouer againſte the white Tower, for the Lady Iane to dye vppon, who béeing nothyng at all abaſhed neyther with feare of hir owne death, whyche then approched, neyther wyth the ſighte of the dead carcaſſe of hir huſbande when he was broughte into the Chappel, came forth, the Lieuetenaunt leading hir, wt countenance nothing abaſhed, neither hir eies any thing moiſtned with teares, with a Booke in hir hande, wherein ſhe prayed vntill ſhée came to the ſaid Scaffolde, whereon when ſhe was mounted, ſhe was beheaded: whoſe deaths were the more haſtened for feare of further troubles and ſtirre for hir Tytle, lyke as hir father had attempted.
            The fourtéenth and fiftéenth of February, aboute the number of fiftie of Wyats faction, were hanged, on twenty paire of Gallows made for that purpoſe in diuers places about the Citie▪
            
            The xvij. of Februarye, was proclamation made, that all Straungers ſhoulde auoide the Realme within xxiiij. dayes nexte enſuing, vpon paine of their goodes to be confiſcate, (al Frée denizens, Merchants, and Embaſſadors excepted.)
            
               The xviij. of February, Bright, one of the Captaines of the Londoners that fledde to Wiat, and two and twentie perſons more of the Kentiſhmen, were deliuered to the Sheriffe of Kent, to be executed in dyuers places of Kent, but for theKentishmen pardoned. moſte parte, they were all pardoned.
            The xxij. of February, certaine of Wiats faction, to the number of four hundred and more, were led to Westminster, coupled togither with halters about their neckes, and there in the Tylt yarde, the Quéene (who looked forth of hir Gallery) pardoned them.Duke of Suffolk beheaded.
            
            The xxiij. of February, Henrie Grey Duke of Suffolke, was beheaded on the Tower hill.
            
            The xj. of Marche William Lorde Howard Admirall of Englande, was created Baron Howard of Effingham, at Westminster.
               Erle of Deuonshire ſent to the Tovver.
            
            The xv. of March, the Earle of Deuonſhire was apprehended and committed to the Tower for ſuſpition to haue cō
               ſented to Wiats conſpyracie.
            The xviij. of Marche, being Palmſonday, the Lady Elizabeth, the Quéenes ſiſter, was by the Lord Treaſurer and the Earle of Suſſex, conueyed to the Tower of London, fromParliament. 
               Westminster by water.
            The tj. of Aprill, the Parliament beganne at Westminster, whyche was appoynted to haue béene kepte at Oxforde.
               Barons created.
            
            The v. of Aprill, ſir Iohn Williams was created Baron of Tame and Saint Iames.
            
            The vij. of April, ſir Edward North, was created Baron of Chartlege at Saint Iames. The viij. of Aprill ſir Iohn a Bridges was created Baron Chondoys of Sudley Saint Iames.
               Catte hanged in Cheape.
            
            The ſame viij. of Aprill, then being Sonday, a Catte with hir head ſhorne, and the likeneſſe of a Ueſtment caſte ouer hir, with hir fore téete tyed togither, and a round péece of paper like a ſinging Cake betwixte them, was hanged on a Gallowes in Cheape, neare to the Croſſe, in the Pariſh of Saint Mathew, whyche Catte being taken downe, was carryed to the Biſhoppe of London, and he cauſed the ſame to

be ſhewed at Paules Croſſe, by the preacher Doctor Pendleton.
            
            The x. of Aprill, Doctor Cranmer Archbyſhop of Canterburie,
               Diſputation at Oxforde. Doctour Ridley Byſhoppe of London, and Hugh Latimer once Biſhop of Worcester, were cōueyed priſoners from the Tower of London to Windſore, and after from thence to Oxforde, there to diſpute wyth the Diuines and learned men of the contrary opinion.
            The xj. of April, ſir Thomas Wiat was beheaded on theThomas VViat beheaded. 
               Tower hill, and after quartred, hys quarters were ſet vppe in dyuers places, and hys head on the Gallowes at Hay hill neare Hyde Parke, from whence it was ſhortly after ſtolne & conueyed awaye.
            The xxvtj. of Aprill, Lorde Thomas Grey, brother to the late Duke of Suffolke, was beheaded.
            The xiiij. of May, Gerrard Fitz Garret was created Erle of Kyldare, and Baron of Ophelley for him and his heyres, at Saint Iames.
            
            
               William Thomas Gentleman, and other, were apprehended, for conſpyring Quéene Maries death, the ſame William Thomas for the matter, was drawne to Tyborne, and hanged and quartred the xviij. of May.
            The xix. of May, Ladye Elizabeth was conueyed from the Tower of London by water to Richemonde, from thence to Windſore, and ſo by the Lord Williams to Ricot in Oxfordſhire, and from thence to Woodstocke.
            
            The xxv. of May, Edward Courtney Earle of Deuonſhire,
               The Erle of Deuonshire ſent to Fodringaye. was deliuered oute of the Tower by ſir Ralph Chamberlaine of Suffolk, and ſir Thomas Treſham Knights, who conueyed him to Fodringay Castel in Northamptonſhire, there to remaine vnder their cuſtodie.
            The x. of June, Doctoure Pendleton preached at Paules
               A Gunne shotte at the preacher. 
               Croſſe, at whome a Gunne was ſhotte, the pellet whereof went very neare him, and lighte on the Churche wall. But the ſhooter coulde not be founde.
            The xxtj. of June, was Proclamation made, forbidding the ſhooting in handgunnes, and bearing of weapons.
            
               The fiftéenth of July, Elizabeth Croft a wenche abo
                  •••
               
               
                  Anno reg. 2. A Spirite in a vvall. the age of eightéene yeares, ſtoode vppon a Scaffolde at Paules Croſſe all the Sermon tyme, where ſhée confeſſed, that ſhe being moued by dyuers lewde perſons therevnto, hadde vppon the fouretéenth of Marche laſte before paſſed counterfaited certayne ſpeaches in an houſe withoute Alderſgate of London, thoroughe the whyche, the people of the whole City were wonderfully moleſted, for that all men mighte heare the voice but not ſée hir perſon. Some ſaide it was an Angell and a voyce from Heauen, ſome the holy Ghoſte, &c. Thys was called the Spirite in the Wall: ſhe hadde laine whiſtling in a ſtraunge whiſtle made for that purpoſe, whiche was giuen hir by one Drakes: then were there dyuers companions confederate with hir, whiche putting thēſelues among the preaſſe, tooke vppon them to interprete what the Spirite ſaide, expreſſing certaine ſeditious words againſte the Quéene, the prince of Spaine, the Maſſe, and Cōfeſſion, &c.
            The xix. of July, the prince of Spaine arriued at Southampton, the fourth day after he came to Wincheſter in the euening, and there going to Churche was honorably receyued of the Byſhoppe, and a greate number of Nobles: the nexte daye he met with the Quéene, wyth whome he had long familiar talke. On Saint James daye, the marriage was ſolempnized betwéene him and Quéene Mary, at whyche time theThe marriage of King Philip and Queene Mary. Emperors Embaſſadour being preſent, pronounced, that in conſideration of the marriage, the Emperor had giuen vnto his ſonne the Kingdome of Naples. The ſolempnitie of thys marriage being ended, the King of Harraults proclai
                  ••
               ed their Tytle as foloweth: Philip and Marie by the grace ofThe Kings ſtile. God, King and Quéene of Englande, Fraunce, Naples, Hieruſalem, and Ireland, Defendors of the Faith, Princes of Spaine and Sicile, Archdukes of Austrich Dukes of Millaine, Burgundy and Brabant, Counties of Aspurge, Flaunders, and Tyrroll: whyche being ended, the Trumpets blewe, the Kyng and Quéene came forth hand in hande, and two Swords borne before them. Shortly after King Philip and Quéene Marie
               
remoued frō 
               Winchester to Baſing, frō thence to Windſore, then to Richemont, from thence by water to Southwarke, acompanyed with the Noble men & Ladies, the King in one barge, the Quéeni
                  •
                an other, and landed at the Biſhop of Wincheſters ſtaires neare to S. Mary Oueries Church, & ſo paſſed through that place and parke, into Suffolke place, where they reſted that night. And the next day being the xviij. of Auguſt, they rode thorough Southwarke ouer the Bridge, and ſo thorough London, where they were with great prouiſion receiued of ye
               A man ſlyding from Paules ſteeple. citizens, & paſſing through Paules Churchyard, a man came 
                  •
               lydyng, as it were flying, vpon a rope, from Paules Stéeple.
            The ſecond of September, ſir Anthony Browne Maiſter of the Horſe, was put by, and made Marques Mountague, for him and his heires Males, with the gifte of xx. markes the yeare of Surrey, at Hampton Court.
            
            
               Dauid Woodroffe: William Cheſter, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Sir Iohn Lion Grocer, the 28. of October.
            
            The xxvj. h
                  •
                October, a Spaniard was hanged at Charing Croſſe, for killing of an Engliſhman, there was offeredA Spaniard hanged. for his life by other ſtrangers 500. Crownes, but all that woulde not ſtay Juſtice.
            The xij. of Nouēber, the parliament began at Westminster.
            
            The xxiiij. of Nouember, Cardinall Poole came out of Brabant into England, and was receiued with much honour: he was by Parliament reſtored to hys olde dignitie, that he was put from by King Henrie, and ſhortly after came into the Parliament houſe, where the King, Quéene, and other ſtates were preſent. Then he declared the cauſe of his Legacie, firſt exhorting them to returne to the Communion of the Churche, and reſtore to the Pope hys due aucthoritie. Secondly, he aduertiſed them to giue thankes to God that had ſent them ſo bleſſed a King and Quéene. Finally, he ſignified, for ſo much as they had with gret gentleneſſe reſtored him to his honor & dignitie, that he moſt erneſtly deſired to 
                  •
               ee them reſtored to the heauenly court, & vnitie of ye church.
            The nexte day the whole Courte of Parliament drewe

out the fourme of a ſupplication, the ſumme whereof was, that they greatlye repented them of that Sciſme that they hadde lyued in, and therefore deſired the King, Quéene, and Cardinal, that by their means they might be reſtored to the boſome of the Churche, and obedience of the Sea of Rome.
            
            The nexte daye the King, Quéene, and Cardinall, being preſent, the Lorde Chauncellour declared what the Parliament had determined concerning the Cardinalles requeſt, and offered to the King and Quéene, the Supplication béefore mentioned, which being read, the Cardinall in a large Oration, declared howe acceptable Repentance was in the ſight of God, &c. And immediately, makyng prayer vnto God by aucthoritie to him committed, abſolued them. Whē al this was done, they wente all vnto the Chappell, and there ſinging Te Deum, wyth greate ſolempnitie declared the ioy, that for this reconciliation was pretended.
            The xxviij. of Nouember, the Lorde Maior of London,
               The Queene bruted to bee vvith childe. wyth the Aldermen in Scarlet, and the Commons in their Lyueries, aſſembled in Paules Churche at nine of the clocke in the forenoone, where Doctoure Chadſey one of the Prebendes preached in the Quéere, in preſence of the Biſhoppe of London, and nine other Biſhoppes, and read a Letter ſent from the Quéenes Counſell, the tenour whereof was, that the Byſhoppe of London ſhoulde cauſe Te Deum to be ſung in all the Churches of hys Dioceſſe, wyth continuall prayers for the Quéenes Maieſtie, whiche was conceyued and quicke with chylde: the Letter being read, he beganne his Sermon wyth this Antitheme: Ne timeas Maria, inuenisti 
                     •
                  nim gratiam apud Deum: His Sermon being ended, Te Deum was ſung, and ſolempne Proceſſion was made of Salue festa dies, all the circuit of the Churche.
            The ſeconde of December, Cardinall Poole came from Lambeth by water, and landed at Paules Wharffe, and from thence to Paules Churche, with a Croſſe, two Pillers, and two Pollaxes of ſiluer borne before him. He was there receyued by the Lord Chauncelor with Proceſſion, where hée

tarryed til the King came from Westminster by lād at eleauen of the clocke, and then the Lorde Chauncellour entred Paules Croſſe and preached a Sermon, taking for his Theame theſe wordes: Fratres, ſcientes quia hora eſt iam nos de ſomno ſurgere, &c. In the whyche Sermon he declared, that the Kyng and Quéene had reſtored the Pope to his ſupremacie, and the thrée eſtates aſſembled in the Parliament, repreſenting the whole body of the Realme, had ſubmitted themſelues to the ſame. The ſermon beyng ended, the king departed towards Westminster, and with him the Lord Cardinall, wyth the Croſſe onelye borne before hym.
            The xxvij. of December, Emanuell Philibert Prince ofPrince of Piamount. 
               Piamont, and Duke of Sauoy, wyth other Lordes, were receiued at Graueſende by the Lorde priuie Seale and other, and ſo conueyed along the riuer of Thamis vnder London bridge to Westminster.
            
            The ninth of Januarye, the Prince of Orange béeing receyued at Graueſend, was conueyed along the Riuer of Thamis, and landed at the Duke of Suffolkes place.
            The xij. of January, the ſaid Prince of Orange, with otherPrince of Orange. Lordes, was conducted by the Lorde Chamberlaine to the Tower of London, where was ſhewed vnto hym the ordinaunce, artillerie, munitions, and armourie, with the mint &c. and ſo was broughte into the white Tower, frō whence, as he returned throughe the long Gallorie, al the priſoners ſaluted hym, vnto whome the Prince ſaid, he was ſorie for their captiuitie, and truſted the King and Quéene woulde be good vnto them: at his departing from the Tower, he gaue the Gunners ten péeces of Flemiſh Golde at v. s̄. the péece, and the warders other ten péeces, as a rewarde.
            The xviij. of January, the Lord Chancellor, the Biſhop of Ely, the Lorde Treaſorer, the Earle of Shrewſburie, the Comptroller of the Quéenes houſe, Secretary Bourne, and ſir Richard Southwell Maiſter of the Ordinaunce and Armorie, came to the Tower of London, and there ſitting in commiſſion, diſcharged priſoners as followeth: the Archbiſhop

of Yorke, ſir Ioh. Rogers, ſir Iames Crofts, ſir Nicholas Throck.Priſoners diſcharged. morton, ſir Nicholas Arnolde, ſir Edward Warner, ſir George Harper, ſir William Sentlow, ſir Andrew Dudley, ſir Gawin Carrewe Knights, William Gibs eſquire, Cuthbert Vaughan, Harington, Tremaile and others.
            The fourth of February, Iohn Rogers Uicar of Saint Sepulchres,
               Iohn Rogers brent. was brent in Smithfielde.
            
            The ſeuenth of February, the Lord Strange being marryedIuogo de Can. to the Earle of Comberlands daughter at the Courte, the ſame daye at night was a goodly paſtime of Iuogo de Canne by Creſſet light.
            The xviij. of February Thomas Thurlebe Biſhop of Ely,
               Embaſſadours ſent to Rome. 1558 Erle of Deuonshyre deliuered. and Anthony Lord Montacute with other, tooke their iorny towardes Rome, Embaſſadors from the King and Quéene.
            Agaynſt Eaſter, the Lord Courtney Earle of Deuonſhire, came againe to the Courte, and about ten dayes after, the Lady Elizabeth came likewiſe to the Quéene, both at Hampton Court, where the Quéene had taken hir Chamber, to bée delyuered of childe, but all proued contrarie, for ſhe neyther hadde childe nor greate hope to haue anye.
            On Eaſter daye a Prieſte ſometime a Monke at Biciter
               VVilliam Flovver brent at VVeſtminſter. named William Branche alias Flower, with a Wood knife wounded an other Prieſt as he was miniſtring the Sacrament to the people in▪ 
               Saint Margarets Churche at Westminster, for the whiche facte, the ſaide William Flower the xxiiij. of Aprill had his right hand ſmitten off, & for opinions in matters of religion was burned in the Sanctuary nighe to Saint Margarets Churchyarde.
            In May, Cardinall Poole, the Lorde Chauncellor, theEmbaſſadoures ſent ouer to Callais. Earle of Arundale, and the Lorde Paget wente ouer Sea to Callais, and neare vnto Marke treated with the Emperors & French Kings cōmiſſioners, for a peace to be had betwéen the ſaid Princes, Cardinall Poole being preſident there, who returned againe into Englande, aboute the middeſt of June, without any agréement making. The x. of May, William Coneſtable alias Fetharſtone, a Millars ſon about the age 
                  ••
               
               
eightéene yeres, who had publiſhed King Edwarde the ſixthA Millers ſonne fained to bee K. Edvvarde the 
                     •
                  ixte. to be alyue, and ſometime named himſelfe to be King Edwarde the ſixth, was taken at Eltham in Kent, and conueyed to Hampton Courte, where beyng examined by the Counſell, he requyred pardon, and ſaide he wiſte not what he did, but as he was perſwaded by manye: from thence he was ſent to the Marſhalſea, and the xxij. of May he was carryed in a Cart thoroughe London to Westminster wyth a paper on hys head, wherein was written, that he hadde named hymſelfe to be Kyng Edwarde. After he had bin carried aboute Westminster ball before the Judges, he was whipped about the Pallaice, and then through Westminster into Smithfielde, and then baniſhed into the North, in whyche Countrey he was borne, and had bin ſometime Lackey to ſir Peter Mewtas.
            
            The firſte of Julye, Iohn Bradford was burned in Smithfielde,
               Bradford brent. Anno reg. 3. this Bradford was a man of very ſober and honeſt life, and therefore the Biſhops woulde gladly haue had him recant and abiure his opinions.
            The xij. of Auguſte, was a terrible fighte on the ſea betwéene the Dutchmen and Frenchmen, néere to Romney Marſh, whereas xj. ſhips were brent and ſuncke.
            In thys moneth of Auguſt, in Suffolke, at a place by the Sea ſide, all of harde ſtone and pibble, called in thoſe parts a Shelfe, lying betwéen the towns of Orford and Alborough, where neuer grewe Graſſe, nor anye earth was euer ſéene, there chaunced in this barraine place, ſodainely to ſpring vppe without anye tyllage or ſowing, great abundaunce of Peaſon, whereof the poore gathered (as men iudged) aboueThe neceſsity of the poore by God releeued▪
                an hundred quarters, yet remayned ſome rype, and ſome bloſſoming, as many as euer there were before, to the whiche place rode the Biſhop of Norwich, & the Lord Willoughbey with others in greate number, who found nothyng but harde rockey ſtone the ſpace of thrée yardes, vnder the roots of thoſe Peaſon, whyche rootes were greate and long, and 
                  •
               erye ſwéete, &c.
            On Bartholomew euen, after the Lorde Maior and Aldermen

of London, hadde ridden aboute Saint Bartholomews
               Diſputation at Chriſtes Hoſpitall, as had bene accuſtomed at S. Bartholomevvs in Smithfielde. faire, they came to Chriſts Hoſpital within Newgate, where they heard a diſputation betwéene the Schollers of Paules Schoole, Saint Anthonies Schoole, and the Schollers of the ſaid Hoſpitall, for whom was prouided thrée games, which was thrée Pennes, the beſt Pen of ſiluer and guilte, valued at v. s̄. wonne by a Scholler of Saint Anthonies Schoole, & the Maiſter of that Schoole had vj. s̄. viij. d. the ſecond, a Pen of ſiluer parcel guilt, valued at iiij. s̄. wonne by a Scholler of Paules Schoole, and hys Mayſter had v. s̄. in money: the thyrde a Pen of ſiluer, valued at iij. s̄. wonne by a Scholler of the ſaide Hoſpitall, and his Maiſter had iiij. s̄. and there were two Prieſtes Maiſters of Arte appointed for Judges, whyche had eache of them a ſiluer Rule for their paines, valued at vj. s̄. viij. d. the péece. The diſputation beyng ended, the Maior and Aldermen entred the Hall where the chyldren of the Hoſpital vſe to dyne, and hadde fruite and wine, and ſo departed.
            King Philip wente ouer ſeas, and landed at Callais onKing Philip vvent ouer into Flaunders. the fourth of September, where he was honorably receyued by the Lorde Deputie, and the Maior of the Staple of Callais, an Alderman of London named ſir Andrew Iudde, who preſented his Maieſtie wyth a Purſe and a M. Marks of Golde in it: that night the Kyng was lodged in Staple Inne: and on the morrowe he departed from Callais towards Bruſſels in Brabant, to viſite the Emperour hys father: he gaue at his departing among the ſouldyours of the town of Callais, M. crowns of gold, and there accompanied him in his iorney of Engliſh Lords, the Earle of Arundale, Lorde Steward of the Quéenes houſe, the Earle of Penbrooke, the Earle of Huntington, and others.
            On Michaelmaſſe euen, the priſoners that laye in theNevv Counter in VVoodſtrete Counter in Bredstreete, were remoued to a newe Counter made in Woodstreete of the Cities purchaſe and building, the whiche remouing was confirmed by a common counſell aſſembled at the Guild hall for that purpoſe.
            
               On the laſte of September, by occaſion of greate windeGreat lande vvaters. and raine that had fallen, was ſuche greate floudes, that that morning the Kings Palaice at Westminster, and Westminster hall was ouerflowen wyth water, vnto the Stayre foote, goyng to the Chauncerie and Kings Benche, ſo that when the Lorde Mayor of London ſhould come to preſent the Sheriffes to the Barons of the Exchequer, all Westminster hall was full of water, and by reporte there, that morning, a Whirrie man rowed with his Boate ouer Westminster Bridge, into the Pallaice Courte, and ſo through the Staple gate, and all the Wooll Staple into the Kings ſtréete: & all the Marſhes on Lambeth ſide, were ſo ouerflowen, that the people from Newington Church coulde not paſſe on foote, but were carryed by boate from the ſaid Church to the Pinfold, neare to Saint Georges in Southwarke.
            
            
               Thomas Leigh: Iohn Machil, the 28. of September.
               
                  Sheriffes. Ridley and Latimer brent.
            
            The xvj. of October Doctor Ridley, and Maiſter Latimer were brent at Oxforde.
            
            
               Sir William Garrard Haberdaſher, the 28. of October.
               
                  Maior. Firſt fruites and tenths reſtored to the Cleargie.
            
            In October and Nouember a Parliament was holden, in the whych the Quéene yéelded vp vnto the Spirituall men, the firſt fruits and tenths of all Biſhoprickes, Benefices, & Eccleſtaſticall liuings. In this Parliament was grauntedA ſubſedie. to the King and Quéene a ſubſedie of the Layty from v. l. to x. l. viij. d. of the pound, from x. l. to xx. l. xij. d. of the pound, and from xx. l. vpwarde xvj. d. of the pound, and al ſtrangers double, and the Cleargie granted vj. s̄. of the pounde.
            Doctor Storie and other were appointed by the Cardinal, to viſite euery Pariſh Churche in London and Middleſex, to ſée their Reliques repayred, and the Images of the Cruci
               
                  •••
               
               ▪ wyth Mary and Iohn thereon to be fixed.
            
               Stephen Gardener Byſhoppe of Winchester, ChauncellorDoctor Gardner deceaſſed▪
                
               
                  ••
                
               Englande dyed the ix. of Nouember, and was buryed at Winchester.
            
            On Newyeres day the Quéene gaue the great Seale to Doctor Nitholas Heath Archebyſhoppe of Yorke, and made

him Lorde Chauncellor, ſhée likewiſe gaue the priuie ſeale to the Lorde Paget, and made him Lord priuie Seale, theſe were bothe Londoners borne.
            In thys moneth of February, the Lord Maior of London, and the Aldermen entred into Bridewell, and tooke poſſeſſion thereof, accordyng to the gifte of King Edward, nowe confirmed by Quéene Marie.
            
            The xxvj. of February, William Coneſtable alias Fetharſton,
               The Millers ſon fayning to be King Edvv. was arraigned in the Guild hall of London, who had cauſed letters to be caſte abroad, that King Edward was aliue, and to ſome he ſhewed hymſelfe to be King Edward, ſo that many perſons both men and women were troubled by him, for the which ſedition the ſaid William had bin onte whipped, and deliuered, as is aforeſaide: But nowe he was condemned, and the thirtéenth of March, he was drawne, hanged and quartred at Tyborne.
            
            A Blazing Starre was ſéene at all times of the nighte, the ſixth, ſeauenth, eight, ninth, and tenth of Marche.
            The xxj. of March, Doctor Cranmer Archbyſhop of Canterburie
               Doctor Cranmer brent. was burned at Oxfolde: and the ſame day Cardinal Poole ſang his firſte Maſſe at Greenewiche in the Fryers Church: on Sunday next he was conſecrated Archbiſhop of Canterbury. The xxv. of March, beyng the feaſt of the AnnunciationCardinall Poole Archebishoppe. 1556 Nevvgate ſette on fire. of our Lady▪ Cardinal Poole receiued ye Pall with yt then vſed ceremonies & ſolemnities at Bow church in Cheap.
            
            The xxviij. of March, at ten of the clocke before noone, a part of Newgate called Manningshal was brent to the groūd, & no priſoners loſt. A conſpiracie was made by certain perſons,Conſpiracie. whoſe purpoſe was to haue robbed the Quéenes Exchequer, called the receit of the Exchoquer, in ye which there was of the Quéenes treaſure aboue 50000. 
                  •
               . the ſaue time to the intent they might be able to maintaine was againſte
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                the Quéene. This matter was v
                  ••
               or
                  •
               t
                  •
                by one of the conſpiracie, whereby Vdall, Throckmorton, Peckham, Iohn Dani
                
               
                  〈…〉
                fled 
                  ••
                into 
                  〈…〉
                Sir 
                  〈…〉
                Kingdo
                  ••
                was apprehended▪ & 
                  〈…〉
               
               
by the way comming towarde London.
            
            The xxviij. of Aprill, Iohn Thro
                     •
                  kmorton and RichardeThro
                        •
                     kmorton and other executed. V
                     •
                  dall were 
                  •
               awne to Ty
                     •
                  orne, and there hanged and quartred.
            The xix. of May, William Stanton was likewiſe executed.
            The viij. of June, William Roſſey, Iohn Redike, and Iohn Bedell were executed at Tyborne.
            
            The xviij. of June, one Sands a yonger ſon to the LordeSandes hanged for robbery. 
               Snnds, was hanged at Saint Thomas of Waterings for a robbery that he & other had cōmitted on Whitſonday laſte, of foure thouſande pounde.
            The xxvij. of June, thirtéene perſons were brent at Stratford
               Thirtene brent at Stratforde. Anno reg. 4. Daniell and Peckham▪
                the Bowe.
            
            The viij. of July, Henrie Peckham & Iohn Daniell were hanged and headed on the Tower hill, and their bodies buried in Barking Church.
               Conſpiracie.
            
            Aboute this time one Clober, whyche ſometime kepte a ſchoole at Dys in Norffolke, with thrée brethren, whoſe names were Lincolne, pretended an inſurrection, and woulde haue gathered the people at a marriage, vnto the whiche the brethren promiſed either of thē to bring an hundred horſe with men▪ at whyche tyme by them appointed, the ſaide Clober gaue charge to a ſeruant of hys, to watche in a Lane nighe to the Churche where they ſhoulde méete, and as ſoone as he ſawe any horſe
                  •
               a
                  •
                commyng thitherwarde, to giue hym warning wyth all ſpéede. So it chaunced (by the wil of God) that certaine men ryding through that Lane, to ſome other place aboute their buſineſſe, came aboute ſuche an houre as Clober had appointed, vpon fight of which men, hys ſayd ſeruauntre tourned to his Maiſter, and tolde hym that hys friendes were come: and immediatly the ſaid Clober ſtoode vppe in the Pariſhe Church of Yaxſle, and read a trayterous proclamation of purpoſe prepared, whyche beyng ended, & ſéeing his part was too weake, for that his mates were not come, beganne to flée, but one Maiſter▪ 
               Shireman purſued

and tooke him at a Towne called Eye in Suffolke, and was kepte in priſon vntill the nexte Seſſions at Saint Edmondſburie, and hys thrée mates being broughte to him, were there all togyther drawne, hanged and quartred.
            In the laſte yeare beganne the hote burning Feuers,Seauen Aldermen deceaſſed in London. whereof dyed many olde perſons, ſo that in London there dyed ſeauen Aldermen in the ſpace of tenne moneths, whoſe names were Henrie Herdſon, who deceaſſed the two and twentith of December, 1555. ſir Richard Dobs late Maior, ſir William Laxton late Maior, ſir Henrie Hoblethorne late Maior, ſir Iohn Champneis blind, late Maior, ſir Iohn Ayleffe late Sheriffe, and ſir Iohn Greſham late Maior, who deceaſſed the thrée and twentith of October Anno 1556.
            
               William Harper: Iohn White, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Sir Thomas Offeley Merchant Taylor, the 28. of October.
            
            The one and twentith of Nouember, Iohn Fecknam lateAbbot of VVeſtminſter. Deane of Paules in London, was made Abbot of Westminster, was ſtalled, and tooke poſſeſſion of the ſame: and fourtéene Monkes more receyued the habite with him that daye of the order of Saint Benet.
            
            The ſaid one and twentith of Nouember, a man wasFalſe accuſer ſet on the Pillorie and brente in bothe cheekes: vvoulde to God all ſuch accuſers vvere ſo vvell marked. broughte from Westminster hall ryding wyth his face to the horſe taile, and a paper on his heade, to the Standarde in Cheape, and there ſet on the Pillorie, and then burned with an hote yron on bothe his chéeks, with two letters F and A. ſor Falſe Accuſing one of the Courte of the Common place in Westminster at Treaſon: the like iuſtice I once wiſhed, to the like accuſer of his Maiſter and eldeſt brother, but it was aunſweared, that in ſuche caſe coulde be no remedy, though the accuſer himſelf were in the ſame fact found the principal offender: where through it followeth, the accuſer neuer ſhewed ſigne of ſhame (the waye to Repentance) but terribly curſeth, and blaſphemouſly ſweareth he neuer committed anye ſuch acte, though the ſame be regiſtred before the honorable, the Quéenes Maieſties high Commiſſioners, and what horrible ſlāders, wt threts of murder he daily bruteth,

the knower of all ſecretes, God I meane, knoweth, vnto whome I refer the cauſe, being comforted with this ſentence of the Prophet Dauid: Fret not thy ſelfe with theſePſalme. 
                        •
                     7. curſſed harmefull men, neyther enuie angerly theſe workers of wickedneſſe, for like graſſe anon ſhall they be cut downe, and like the greene freſh bent of the flower ſhall they wither away &c.
            
            The xvj. of December, Gregory Carpenter Smith, andA Stranger vvould haue murthered the keeper of Nevvgate. a Frenchman borne, was arraigned for making counterfeite keyes, wherewith to haue opened the lockes of Newgate, to haue ſlayne the kéeper, and let forth the priſoners, at which time of his arraignement, hauing conuayed a knife into his ſléeue, he thruſt it into the ſide of William Whitrents his fellow priſoner, who had giuen witneſſe againſt him, ſo that he was in great perill of death thereby, for the which fact, he was immediatly taken from the barre into ſhe ſtréete before the Juſtice hall, where his hand being firſt ſtriken off, he was hanged on a Gibbet ſet vp for that purpoſe: the kéeper of Newgate was arraigned and indicted, for that the ſayd priſoner had weapon about him, and his hands looſe which ſhould haue bin bound.
            The fourth of January, a Shippe before Greenewich (theGunne shot into the Court at Greenevvich. Court being there) ſhotte off hir Ordinance, one péece béeing charged with a bullet of ſtone, which paſſed through the walles of the Court, and did no more hurt.
            The xxvij. of February, an Embaſſadour came to London
               Ambaſſadour from Muſcou
                     •
                  
                  ▪
                from the Emperour of Muskouy and Ruſland, who was reteiued at Tottenham by ye Merchants Aduenturers of London, riding in veluet coates, and chaines of golde: the Lorde Mountagew with the Quéenes Pencioners mette him at Iſeldonne townes ende: and at Smithfield barres, the Lorde Maior and Aldermen in Scarlet receyued him, and conuayed him through the Citie vnto Maiſter Dimockes houſe in Fanchurch ſtréete, where he lodged vntill the twelfth of May, and then returned to Muſcouy.
            
            The Lorde Sturton and his men cruelly murthered

Mayſter Argile and his ſo
                  〈…〉
               : he cauſed them to be ſtrikenLord Sturton executed. downe with clubbes, then their throtes to be cut, and after to be buryed in his owne houſe fifteene foote déepe▪ for the which, he was arraigned and condemned at Westminster, and after conuayed from the Tower of London through the Citie, and ſo to Saliſburie, and there hanged, with four of his men ſeruants the ſixt of March.
            King Philip returned into England, and the xxiij. of MarchKing Philip returned into England. paſſed through London with the Quéene and Nobles of the Realme.
            The xxiiij. of Aprill, Thomas Stafford, and other Engliſhmen
               1557 Thomas Stafford tooke Scarborough Caſtell. to the number of xxxij▪ perſons, comming out of France, tooke the Caſtell of Scarborough in the Countrey of Yorke, which they enioyed two dayes, and then were taken by the Earle of Westmerland, and brought to London.
            The laſt of Aprill, Thomas Percy Eſquire, was made Baron Percy at Westminster and on the next morrow whichPercy Earle of Northumberlande. was the firſt of May, he was created Earle of Northumberland▪
                and the Quéene, gaue him all the Lands which had bin his 
                  •
               unceſters remaynig
                  •
                in hir handes.
            The eyght and twentyth day of May, Thomas Stafford was beheaded on the Towerhill, and on the morrow▪ thrée ofThomas Stafford beheaded. his company, to wéete, Streightly or Stretchley, Bradforde, and Proctor, were drawne to Tiborne, and there hanged and quartered.
            The ſeauenth of June, open warre was proclaymed againſtVVario vvith France. the French King.
            The ſixth of July, the King paſſed ouer to Caleis, and ſo into Flanders, where he made great▪ prouiſion for warre againſtEnglishmen ſent to Saint Quintins. the French King. The ſame moneth, the Quéene ſent ouer an Army of one thouſand horſſemen, foure thouſand footemen, and two thouſand Pioners, to ayde Kyng Philip, whereof the Earle of Pembroke was Generall. The Lord Robert Dudley mayſter of the Ordinance.
            The xv. of July, dyed the Lady Anne of Cleeue at Chelſey, and was buryed at Westminster.
            
            
               The tenth of Augu
                  ••
               , were taken of France the chiefeſtAnno reg. Captaynes, the Duke of Mou
                     •••
                  morency Conneſtable of France, and his ſonne Monſieur de Merne, the Duke of Monpencier,
               Noble men 
                     •
                   France taken priſoners. the Duke of Long
                     •
                  lile, the Marſhall of Saint Andrew, the Reinegr
                  ••
               e 
                  ••••
               uell of the Al
                     •
                  day
                     ••
                  s, 
                     
                        〈…〉
                     ,
                the Cou
                  ••
                de Ro
                     •••
                  foucauſt, the 
                  〈◊〉
                of 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  , the Baron of Cur
                     •••
                  , the Prince of Man
                     •••
                  , beſides many Gentlemen and Captaynes.
            The xvi
                  •
               . of Augu
                  ••
               , the Towne of Saint Quintins was taken by King Phillip, with the help of Engliſhmen; at the ſéege whereof, the Lord Henry Dudley, yongeſt
                  •
                ſonne to Iohn late Duke of Northumberland, was ſlayne wyth a Gunne.
            This yeare before harueſt, wheate was ſolde for ſoureDearth and plenty. Marke the quarter, malt at four and fortie ſhillings y• quarter, beanes and rye at fortie ſhillings the quarter, and peaſe at ſixe and fortie ſhillings eyghtpence, but after harueſt, wheate was ſold for fiue ſhillings the quarter, malt at ſixe ſhillings eyghtpence, 
                  •
               ye at thrée ſhillings and four pence, ſo that the pennie wheate lo
                  ••
               e that wayde in London the laſt yeare but eleuen ounces Troy, wayed now ſixe and fiftie ounces Troy. In the Countrey, wheate was 
                  •
               olde for four ſhillings the quarter, of malt 
                  •
               ou
                  ••
                ſhillings eyght pen
                  ••
               , and in ſo me place a 
                  ••
               ſhell 
                  •••
               ie 
                  〈◊〉
                p
                  •
               o
                  •
               nd of Candles which was four pence.
            The ſeauenth of September, at ſeauen of the clocke atIohn Caiu
                     •
                  . night, in a blacke rayny cloude in the Weſt was 
                  ••
               ene a Raynebow the Moone in the Eaſt riſen one hour before, and 
                  •
               aire ſhilling, 
                  •••
                a 
                  〈…〉
                before.
            
               Richard 
                     〈…〉
                   A
                     ••
                  ham, the 2
                     •
                  . of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Sir Thomas 
                     〈…〉
                  , the 28. of October.
            
            The thirtith of Nouember, Sir Thomas Treſſham knyghte, receyued the order of the Croſſe, and was made Lorde of Sainte Iohns of Hieruſalem in Englande.
            
            The firſt of 
                  〈…〉
                the Frenchne 
               
                  •
                
               
                  •
               ame 
                  ••
                
               
                  
                     •
                  a
                     ••
                  is with

a great Army, and within four dayes were mayſters thereof▪
               Caleis loſt by the Englishmen. and ſhortly after wan all the péece
                  •
                
               
                  •
               n that ſide the Sea, To many it ſéemed ſtrange, that ſuch a Towne which ſo many yeares had bin fortified with all munitions that could be deuiſed, ſhould now in ſo ſhort ſpace be taken of our enimies. The Counſell of England reyſed great power to haue gone to the defence of that Towne, but ſuch tempeſt of wind aroſe, as the like in many yeares had not bin ſéene, whereby no Shippe coulde brooke the Sea, till it was too late for that matter.
            The xviij. of January, Edward Haſtings Knight of the Garter, Lord Chamber layne to the Quéene, was created Baron Haſtings of Lowghborough at Westminster.
            
            The xx. of January, began a Parliament at Westminſter.
               A Parliament.
            
            In the moneth of March, a preſt was graunted to the Quéene by the Citizens of London, of twentie thouſandeA preſt to the Queene. pound, which was leuied of the companyes, for the which ſumme to be repayde agayne, the Quéene bound certayne1558 Lands, and alſo allowed for intereſt of the money twelue pound of euery hundreth for a yeare.
            The French, King in
                  •
               aded Flanders, ſpoyled and brente Dunke
                     •
                  k
                     ••
                  
                before King Phillip could come to reſcue, but beforeDunkirke in Flanders brent. the Frenchmen returned out of Flanders, the Flemings and the Engliſh Shippes méeting with them vpon the ſands betwéene Dunkerke and Grauelin
                     •
                  , ſlew of them a great number.
            The x
                  •
               . of July, within a mile of Notingham, was a maruellousAnno reg. 6. tempeſt of thunder, which as it came through two Townes, beate▪ downe all the 
                  〈◊〉
                and Churches, the belles were caſt to the out ſide of the Church yardes, and ſome webbes of leade four hundreth f
                  ••
               te into the field, writhen like a paire of gloues.
            The Riuer of Trent 
               
                  •••
               ing betwéene the two Townes, the water with the mud in the bottome was caryed a quarter of a mile and caſt againſt the trées, the trées were pulled vp by the rootes, and caſt twelue ſcore off. Alſo, a child was

taken forth of a mans hands two Speares length hye, and carryed a hundred foote, and then let fall, wherewith hys arme was broke, and ſo dyed. Fiue or ſixe men there about were ſlayne, and neither fleſh nor ſkinne periſhed: there fell ſome hayleſtones that were fiftéene ynches about &c.
            This yeare in harueſt time, the quart
                  •
               rne agues continued in like manner, or more vehemently, than they had done the laſt yeare paſſed, where through died many olde people, and ſpecially Pri
                  •••
               es, ſo that a great number of pariſhes were vnſerued, and no Curates to be gotten, and much Corne was loſt in the field for lacke of workemē and labourers.
            
               Iohn Halſe: Richard Campion, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Sir Thomas Leigh Mercer, the 28. of October.
            
            In the beginning of this Maiors yeare, Corne roſe to fourtéene ſhillings the quarter, and wood waxed ſcant in London, and was ſold for thirtéene and fourtéene ſhillings the thouſand of 
                  •
               illets, and coles at tenpence the ſacke, by reaſon of the great death and ſickneſſe the laſt Sommer for lacke of hēlp and carriage.
            King Philip being abſent out of the Realme, and Quéene Mary being dangerouſly ſicke, ended hir life at hir Manour of Saint Iames by Charing croſſe the xvij. of Nouember, in the yeare 1558. when ſhe had raigned fiue yeares, four monethes, and odde dayes. The ſame daye, deceaſſed Cardinall Poole at Lambheath, and a little before, two of hir Phiſitions, beſides diuers Biſhops and noble men. Quéene Mary was buryed at Westminster, and Cardinall Poole at Canterbury.
            
         
         
            
            ¶ Queene Elizabeth.
            
            
            
               
                  ELizabeth our moſt gratious
               Anno reg. 1. and ſoueraigne Lady, ſecond daughter to King Henry the viij. to the great comfort of Englande, was with full conſent proclaimed Quéene of England, France and Irelande, Defender of the Fayth &c. on the xvij. of Nouember, in the yeare of oure Lorde God. 1558. Forthwith, the Portes and Hauens were ſtopped, and none ſuffered to paſſe out of the Realme without licence. Proclamation was made, forbidding all men to Preach, ſaue ſuch as ſhould be appoynted: alſo, to alter any rytes or Ceremonies vſed in the Church ſaue as it was in hir graces Chappell.
            The xxiij. of Nouember, Quéene Elizabeth came fromThe Queene commeth from Hatfild. 
               Biſhops Hatfield in Hertfordſhire, vnto the Lord Northes houſe in the late Charterhouſe of London, the Sheriffes of London
               
méeting hir Grace at the farther ende of Barnet Towne within the Shere of Middleſex, and ſo rode before hir, till the came to the Charterhouſe Gate next Alderſgate, where hir Grace remayned.
            On Monday, the eyght and twentith of Nouember, aboutThe Queene 
                     •
                  emoueth to the Tovver. two of the clocke in the after noone, Quéene Elizabeth rode from the Lorde Northes houſe, along by the Barbycane, in at Creeplegate, then along by the wall to Biſhopſgate, which Gate was richly hanged, where the Waytes of the Citie playde, and ouer againſt the Kings head Tauerne, a Scholler of Paules Schoole made a ſhort Oration to hir Maieſtie in Latin Uerſes, the company of the Mercers ſtanding in theyr rayles next the Scholler, and ſo all the other Companyes of the Citie in order from thence to Mart Lane ende, nexte vnto Barking Church in Tower ſtreete, the Lorde Maior of London riding wyth Mayſter Garter King at Armes, bearing a Scepter before hir Maieſtie, whiche Lorde Maior mette hir at the Charterhouſe Gate nexte Alderſgate, where Mayſter Recorder ſaluted hir Grace in the name of the Lorde Maior and the whole Citie, and ſo with Lordes, Knightes, and Gentlewomen richly apparelled, brought hir to the Tower of London: but when hir Grace entered at Mart Lane, a peale of Gunnes beganne to be ſhotte off at the Tower, whiche continued almoſt halfe an houre.
            The fifth of December, the Quéene remoued by water from the Tower to Somerſet place néere to the Strand.
            
            The xiij. of December, the corpſe of Quéene Mary was honourably conuayed from Saint Iames to the Abbey ofQueene Mary buryed. 
               Westminster, and there placed vnder a rich Hearſe decked with penons, banners, and Schutchions of the Armes of Englande and France, where ſhe remayned that nighte, and on the morrow, after the Maſſe of Requiem, and a Sermon preached by Doctor White Biſhop of Winchester was ended▪ ſhe was buryed in the Chappell of King Henry the ſeauenth on the North ſide.
            
               The xxiiij. of December, was ſolemne obſequie kept inObſequie for Charles the Emperour. the Abbey of Westminster for Charles the fifth late Emperour, which deceaſſed in Spayne in the moneth of September laſt paſt, Quéene Maryes herſe yet ſtanding, altered with the Armes of the Emperour, and richly hanged with a rich pall-cloth of gold lying on the hearſe, the Emperours Embaſſadour being chiefe mourner, with other Péeres and Lords of England aſſiſtant with him &c.
            The firſt of January, the Lord Maior and Aldermen gaue in commandement to euery warde in London, that theProceſsion, Epiſtle, and Goſpell in English. Parſon or Curate in euery Pariſh Church in London, ſhould reade the Epiſtle and Goſpell of the day in the Engliſhe tong in the Maſſe time, and the Engliſh Proceſſion then vſed in the Quéenes Chappell, according to a Proclamation ſent from hir Maieſtie and priuie Counſell, proclaymed in the Citie of London the xxx. of December, which commandement was that day obſerued in moſt pariſh Churches of the Citis.
            The ninth of January in the morning, the Image of Thomas Becket which ſtoode ouer the dore of the MercersImage of Thomas Becket throvvne dovvne. Chappell in London toward the ſtréete, was found broken and caſt downe, and a bill ſet on the Church dore deprauing the ſetters vp thereof.
            The xij. of January, the Quéenes Maieſtie remoued from hir place of White hall to the Tower by water, the Lorde Maior of London, and his bréethren the Aldermen, in their Barge, and all the Craftes of the Citie in their Barges richly decked with targets and banners of euery myſterie. The Batchelers of the Maiors companie in their Barge, with a Foyſt, hauing thrée toppes, trimmed and richly decked to wayte on them, which ſhotte off gunnes all the way: all theſe awayted on hir Maieſtie, who tooke hir Barge about two of the clocke in the after noone, the Lord Maior folowing after, and euery company in order, with great melodie of muſicall inſtruments, till hir grace was through London bridge, and landed at hir priuie ſtaire of the Tower
               
               Wharffe, and then the Maior, after leaue taken, and thankes of the Quéene, returned through the Bridge with the floud, and landed at the Three Cranes Wharffe in the Uintrie.
            The xiiij. of January, at which time the Londoners had made ſumptuous prouiſion, the Quéenes Maieſtie paſſed through the Citie of London to hir Palace at Westminster:
               Coronation. the next day ſhe was Crowned by Doctor Oglethorp Biſhop of Carelile.
            
            The xxv. of January, began a Parliament at Westminſter,
               Parliament. before the States whereof, Doctour Coxe, late come from beyond the Seas, and ſometime Schoolemayſter to King Edward the ſixth, made a learned Sermon.
            In this Parliament, the firſt fruites and tenthes were granted to the Crowne, and alſo the ſupreme gouernemēt ouer the ſtate Eccleſiaſticall. Likewiſe, the Booke of commō Prayer, and adminiſtration of the Sacraments in our vulgar tongue was reſtored, to be done as in the time of King Edward the ſixth.
            In the Eaſter Holydayes preached at the Spittle Doctour Bill the Quéenes Almoner, Doctour Coxe, and Doctour Horne, the two laſt came lately from beyond the ſeas. On Lowſonday the ſeconde of Aprill, Mayſter Sampſon made the rehearſall Sermon at Paules Croſſe.
            
            The iij. of Aprill, the Quéenes Maieſtie appoynted a cō
               ference or diſputation to be had at Westminster Church, betwéene1559 the olde Biſhops, and certayne learned men lateA conference at VVeſtminſter. come from beyond the Seas, concerning matters of Religion, but the matter came to ſmall effect.
            The ſeauenth of Aprill was a peace proclaymed betwixt England and France. And the like betwéene hir Maieſtie, and the King and Quéene of Scotland.
            
            The xix. of Aprill, was kepte the Serieants feaſt in the 
                  ••
               ner Temple, and nine Serieants were there made, Mai
               
                  ••
               er Reignald Chamley Recorder of London being one of y• ix.
            A Subſidie of ij. s̄. viij. d. the pound of moueable goods wasSubſidy granted granted, and the Parliament diſſolued the vij. of May.
            
               The ſeconde of July, the Citizens of London had a muſterThe Citizens of London muſtered at Greenevvich. afore the Quéenes Maieſtie at Greenewich in the Parke of fourtéene hundred men, whereof eyght hundred were Pikemen, all in fine Corſelets, foure hundred Haquebuts in ſhirtes of mayle with morians, and two hundred Halberters in almanriuets, which were furniſhed and ſet forth by the companyes of the Citie of London: they had to euery hundred two wiffelers, richly apparelled, and twelue wardens of the beſt companyes riding in coates of blacke Ueluet to conduct them with drommes and fifes, and ſixe Enſignes, all in Jerkins of white Bridges Satten, cutte and lined with blacke Sarſenet, with cappes, hoſen, and ſkarfes according: the Captaynes Robert Conſtable, and Mayſter Saunders, brought them in battayle ray afore the Quéene, euen as they ſhould haue fought, which made a goodly ſhewe before hir Maieſtie, the Emperoures and French Kings Embaſſadours béeing preſent.
            In the moneth of July, the olde Biſhops of England then liuing, were called and examined by certayne of ye QuéenesBishops depriued. Maieſties Counſayle, where the Biſhops of Yorke, Ely, and London with other to the number of thirtéene or fourtéene, for refuſing to take the oth touching the Quéenes ſupremacie and other Articles, were depriued from their Biſhoprickes. And likewiſe, were diuers Deanes, Archdeacons, Parſons, and Uicars, depriued from their Benefices, and ſome committed to priſon in the Tower, Fléete, Marſhalſea, and Kings bench.
            Commiſſioners were likewiſe appoynted for the eſtabliſhingCommiſsioners. of Religion through the whole Realme. For London were appoynted Sir Richard Sackuile Knight, Doctou
                  •
                
               Horne a Diuine, Doctour. Huicke a Ciuilian, and Mayſter Saluage, who called before them diuers perſons of euery pariſh, and ſware them to enquire and preſent vpon certayne iniunctions.Iniunctions.
            
            Alſo, the houſes of Religion, erected by Quéene Mary,
               Houſes ſuppreſſed. as the Monkes of Westminster, Nunnes and bréethre
                  •
               
               
of Sion and Sheene, the blacke Friers in Smithfielde, and the Friers of Greenewich were all ſuppreſſed.
            On the euen of Saint Barthelmew, the daye and theChurch ymages burned. merrow after &c. were burned in Paules Church yarde, Cheape, and diuers other places of the Citie of London, all the Roodes and other Images of Churches, in ſome places the Coapes, Ueſtments, Alter clothes, Bookes, Banners, Sepulchers, and Roode loftes were burned.
            The fifth of September about midnight, fell a greate tempeſt at London, in the ende whereof, a great lightning, with a terrible clappe of thunder ſtrake the Spire (béeing ſtone) of the Stéeple of Alhallowes Churche in Bredstreete,
               Churches in London ſtriken and broken by tempeſt. about a tenne foote beneath the toppe, out of the which fell a ſtone that ſlew a Dogge, and ouerthrew a man playing with the ſame Dogge, and the Spire of the Stéeple was ſo periſhed, that not long after the ſame was taken downe with leſſe charges to the Pariſh, than the repayring woulde haue coſt. And at the ſame inſtant, by the ſame tempeſt, one of the South dores of Saint Dioniſe Churche in Fenchurch ſtreete, with the dore of the Reueſtrie of the ſame Churche, were both ſtricken thorough and broken.
            The eyght and ninth of September, a ſolemne ObſequieObſequy for the French King. was kepte in Paules Churche at London, for Henry the French King departed, who dyed of a wound giuen by the County Mountgomerie, at a triumph, iuſting in the Citie of Paris, whereof he dyed about the tenth daye of July.
            About the laſt of September, Iohn Duke of Finland, ſecondeEmbaſſadour from Svvethen. ſonne to Guſtabus Kyng of Swethen, was ſente by hys father to treate a marriage for hys eldeſt brother Ericus, with the Quéenes Maieſtie of Englande: he arriued at Harwich in Eſſex, and was there honourably receyued & enterteyned by ye Earle of Oxford, which ſaid Earle, & the Lord

               Robert Dudley, with a goodly baude of Gentlemen and yeomen, conueyed him to London, where he was receyued of diuers Knightes and Gentlemen of the Court, on the fifth of October, and was with his trayne of about the number of fiftie perſons well horſſed, conuayed to the Biſhop of Winchesters place in Southwarke, where he was lodged during his abode héere, and remoued from thence two dayes before Eaſter homeward, and ſped on his meſſage as may appeare by that which foloweth, takē out of Iohannes Lewenclaij comment. de bellis Moſcorum.
            
            
               Ericus King of Sweden, ſonne of Guſtabus late King of the ſayde Kingdome, hauing committed to priſon his brother Iohn Duke of Finlande, whome a little before he had employed into England on an Embaſſage to the Quéenes Maieſtie, whome he ſued to for marriage, and had his ſute reiected, agayne the ſecond time ſolicited hir Maieſtie in the ſame ſuite, notwithſtanding (to his great diſhonor, and (as it fell out) his iuſt diſgrace) he attempted the ſame matter with the yongeſt daughter of Phillip Lantgraue Vanheſſen, at whoſe hand (hauing the ſeconde tyme bin reiected of hir Maieſtie héere) the matter béeyng knowne there, he alſo not onely receyued a denyall, but the Lady was by hir Father beſtowed vppon Adolfe Duke Van Holſt, UnckleIohannes Lewenalaij. of Frederike Kyng of Denmarke, then enemie of the ſayde Erice. Thus farre Iohannes Lewenclaij.
            
            
               Thomas Lodge: Roger Martin, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior. Anno reg. 2.
            
            
               Sir William Hewet Clothworker, the 28. of October.
            
            About this time, many men of warre were conueyed out of France into Scotlande, and there placed in Townes and Fortreſſes, as in the Towne of Leeth, Dunbarre, Inskith, and other, whereby it was to bée ſuſpected that they would ſodeynely inuade thys Realme, wherevpon, the Quéenes Maieſtie ſente the Duke of Norffolke towardsDuke of Norffolke ſent into Scotland. 
               Scotland as Generall with an army, who remayned at Berwike.
            
            
               In the moneth of Aprill, the Lord Grey Wilton entred1560 
               Scotland with an army of tenne thouſand, and beſéeged the towne of L
                     •
                  th, where betwéene the French and the EngliſhLord Grey beſeeged Lieth. were often ſkirmiſhes, and many ſlayne on both ſides, for few were taken priſoners.
            In May, a noble man of France, by licence of the Quéenes Maieſtie, paſſed through England into Scotland, to talke with the Quéene Dowager and the Frenchmen, for the appeaſing of this matter, who at his returne agayne into England, obteyned of the Quéenes Maieſtie to ſend Sir William Ciuill Knight, hir Maieſties principall Secretary, with Mayſter Doctour Wootton, to treate with the Frenchmen, who by their wiſedomes; ſo well ordered the matter, that they agréed vpon a peace, which was concluded in thirtéene Articles, the Frenchmen to depart, to the great quietneſſe and ſafetie both of England and Scotland, and therevpon, hir Maieſtie reuoked hir army, after the fortes there were raſed, without any ſeyſure or holding of any péece within Scotland.
            
            The fifth of July, through ſhooting of a gunne whiche brake in the houſe of one Adrian Arten a Dutchman, in Crooked Lane, and ſetting fire on a Firken and Barell of Gunpowder, four houſes were blowne vp, and diuers otherHouſes blovvn vp. ſore ſcattered, nine men and women ſlayne, and diuers other ſore bruſed.
            On Michaelmas euen before noone, was publiſhed byThe third fall of the baſe money. Proclamation, that the Teſtone coyned for twelue pence, and in the reigne of King Edward the ſixt, called downe to ſixe pence, ſhould now forthwith (of the beſt ſort, marked with the Portculeys) be taken for four pence halfepeny, the ſeconde, marked with the Greyhound, for two pence farthing, the thirde and worſt ſorte not market as afore, not to be taken for any value: the grote ſhould be taken for two pence, the two peny péece for a peny &c. And ſhortly after,Nevv coyne offine ſiluer. hir grace reſtored to hir ſubiects fine ſterling money, for their corrupt and baſe coyne, calling the ſame to hir Maieſties mintes according to the rate before mentioned.
            
               
               Chriſtopher Draper: Thomas Rowe, the 28. of Septemb.
               Sherifes. Maior. Anno reg. 3.
            
            
               Sir William Cheſter Draper, the 28. of October.
            
            The Quéenes Maieſtie made great preparation of armour, niunition, and powder, to be in a readineſſe to defend hir Realme, if néede ſhould happen.
            The xxj. of March, a notable Grammer Schoole was founded by the Mayſter, Wardens, and aſſiſtāts of the worſhipfullThe merchant Taylors free Schoole. company of the Merchant Taylors of London, in the pariſh of Saint Laurence Pountney in the ſame Citie, the worſhipfull Emanuell Lucar, Robert Roſe, William Mericke, Iohn Sparke, and Robert Duckington then béeing Mayſter and Wardens of that company.
            The tenth of Aprill, was one William Gefferey whipped1561 from the Marſhal ſea in Southwarke, to Bethlem without Biſhopſgate of London, for that he profeſſed one Iohn Moore to be Chriſt our ſauiour: on his head was ſet a paper, wherein was written as followeth, William Gefferey a moſt blaſphemous Heretike, denving Chriſt our fauiour in Heauen.
               VVilliam Geffrey vvhipped. The ſayd Gefferey being ſtayd at Bethlem gate, Iohn Moore
                was brought forth, before whome, William Gefferey was whipped till he confeſſed Chriſt to be in Heauen. Then the ſayde Iohn Moore being examined, and anſwering ouerthwartly,A falſe Chriſt vvhipt. was commanded to put off his coate, dublet, and ſhirte, which he ſéemed to do very willingly, and after béeing tied to the Cart was whipped an arrowes ſhoote from Bedlem, where at the laſt he alſo confeſſed Chriſt to bée in Heauen, and himſelfe to be a ſinfull man: then was Iohn Moore ſente agayne vnto Bedlem, and William Gefferey to the Marſhalſea, where they had layne priſoners nigh a a yeare and a halfe, the one for profeſſing himſelfe to be Chriſt, the other a Diſciple of the ſame Chriſt.
            On Wedneſday the fourth of June, betwéene fourePanles Steeple on fire. and fyue of the clocke in the after noone, the Stéeple of Paules in London béeing fired by lightning, braſt foorth (as it ſéemed to the beholders) two or thrée yards beneath the foote of the Croſſe, and from thence, brent down the Sphere

to the ſtoneworke and belles, ſo terribly, that within the ſpace of foure houres, the ſame Stéeple, with the roofes of the Church ſo much as was timber or otherwayes combuſtible, were conſumed, which was a lamentable ſighte, and pitifull remembraunce to the beholders thereof.
            The length of Paules Church in London is 2690. foote.
            The breadth thereof is 1
                  •
               0. foote.
            The heigth of the Stéeple was 520▪ foote, whereof the ſtone worke is 260. foote.
            And the Spere which now is burnt, was likewiſe 260. foote.
            
               Alexander Auenon: Humfrey Baskeruild, the 28. of Sep.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Sir William Harper merchant Taylor, the 28. of October.
            
            This Sir William Harper founded a frée Schoole in the Towne of Bedford (where he was borne, and lyeth buryed)Free Schoole at Bedford. and hath giuen a competent liuing for a Schoolemayſter there to teach and inſtruct children in vertue and learning vnto the worldes end.
            The fiftéenth of Nouember, the Quéenes Maieſtie publiſhedNevv coynes▪
                a Proclamation, wherin ſhe reſtored to the Realme dyuers ſmall péeces of Siluer money, as the péece of ſixe pence, foure pence, thrée pence, two pence, and a pennie, thrée halfe pence, and thrée farthings. And alſo, forbadde all forreyne Coynes to bée currant within the ſame Realme, as well Gold as Siluer, calling them into hir maieſties Mintes, except two ſortes of Crownes of Golde, the one the French Crowne, the other the Flemiſh Crowne.
            The xxvj. of December, Sir Ambroſe Sutton, alias Dudley Knight, called Lord Ambroſe Dudley was created Baron Liſle, and afterward the ſame day Earle of Warwike at Westminster.
            
            This yeare in Englande were many monſtrous birthes. In March, a Mare brought forth a foale with one body andAnno reg. 4. two heads, and as it were a long tayle growing out betwéene the two heads. Alſo, a Sow farowed a PiggeMonſtrous birthes. with foure legges like to the armes of a man childe,

with hands and fingers &c.
            In Aprill, a Sow farrowed a Pigge with two bodyes, eight féete, and but one head, many Calues and Lambes were monſtrous, ſome with collers of ſkinne growing about their neckes, like to the double ruffes of ſhirtes and nekercheffes then vſed.
            The xxiiij. of May, a man child was borne at Chichester in Suſſex, the hea
                  •
               
               ▪ armes, and legges whereof, were lyke a Notamy, the breſt and belly monſtrous bigge from the nauell, as it were a long ſtring hanging: about the necke a great coller of fleſh and ſkinne growing like to the ruffe of a ſhirt or nekerchefe, comming vp aboue the eares pleyting and folding &c.
            The Quéenes Maieſtie in September, addreſſed a band of hir Subiects to the Towne of Newhauen in Normandy:
               Going to Nevvhauen. who were embarked at Porteſmouth, bycauſe that Hauen is moſt apt for tranſportation to that place, vpon whoſe arriuall, the Towneſmen and inhabitants ioyfully ſurrendred themſelues and their Towne into the poſſeſſion of the Quéenes maieſtie, which was kept by Engliſhmen from September 1562. to the 29. of July then next following, which was in the yeare 1563. The gouernour of which band was the right honourable the Earle of Warwicke, who with the Captaynes ſeruing there (which were of great experience) and Souldyers trayned by them to knowledge of ſeruice, togither with part of the old approued garriſon of Barwike, did at that time both manfully defende the péece, and valiantly encountred by ſundrie ſkirmiſhes and conflictes with the Countie Reingraue and his band, the moſt part whereof were happily atchéeued, to the 
                  •••
               eats ouer throwe of the aduerſaryes parte, and ſingular commendation of ours.
            
               William Allin: Richard Chamberlaine, the 28. of Sept.
               
                  Sherifes. Maior. Anno reg. 5. Tempeſt at Leyceſter.
            
            
               Sir Thomas Lodge Grocer, the 28 of October.
            
            On Saterday ye xvj. of January, a great tempeſt of wind and thunder happened in the Towne of Leycester, whiche

vncouered 411. bayes of houſes, and ouerturned manye.
            The ix. x. and xj. of February, Westminster hall was ouerſlowen1563 wyth water, and Holland in Lincolneſhire was drowned by rage of winde and water.
            When the Frenchemen with huge armies aſſembled outeIohn Cai
                     ••
                  . of all partes of Fraunce, to recouer the place of paſſage, the ſtopping whereof by our power was the double woe of their common wealth there bred throughe the ſeaſon of the yere and putrifactiō of the aire, a miſerable & infortunate plague among our men, whyche maruellouſly encreaſed, with the death of diuers of the beſt captains & ſouldiors, where withal there folowed a cruel and quicke ſiege, whereat was preſent the yong Kyng hymſelfe, the Quéene hys mother, the beſte tryed number of warlike ſouldiours within the whole Countrey, beſides an other ſorte of yong and olde that cared not for life or lande, ſo their aduenture might winne againe the cauſe of their diſtreſſe: wyth this generall ayde, the mariſhes were made paſſable and firme ground, whych by men of great experience was thought impoſſible: and with common helpe the Cannons were placed, the Caſtell and wals were battered, and ſundrye breaches made beyond expectation, howbeit they were rewarded by oure Gunners, and made to taſte the bitter fruit of their deſperate approche, to their greate terrour and annoyaunce, the Earle of Warwike wyth the remnant of our Capitaines and ſouldiors in couragious order ſtanding at the ſeuerall breaches ready to defende their aſſaultes, whyche perceyued by the enimy, they cauſed their Trumpets to ſound the blaſt of Emparle, that compoſition of eyther parte mighte be made, to auoide the imminent ſlaughter, and effuſion of bloude. This offer ſéemed not vnméete, bothe parties concluded, the Towne was delyuered the nine and twentith of July, wyth condition, that the Engliſhemen ſhould departe. When the towne in this ſorte was ſurrendred to the Frenche, and the greateſt part of our garriſon ſhipped, many ſicke perſons were lefte behind, impotent and vnable to help themſelues The miſery

whereof Edwarde Randolfe Eſquier hygh Marſhall of the Towne (who was appointed to tarry and ſée the vttermoſte of oure compoſition accompliſhed) perceiuyng, moned with naturall pitie of his Countreymen relinquiſhed withoute comforte, cauſed the ſaide ſicke perſons to bée carryed aboorde, not ſparing his own ſhoulders (at that time feeble and full of the plague) hymſelfe and hys men ſtill bearing and helping the poore creatures on Ship-boorde, a rare facte, worthy rewarde, and no doubte in remembrance with God, the true recorder of mercifull deſerts.
            As ye haue hearde, the plague of peſtilence being in thePeſtilence. Towne of Newhauen, through the number of ſouldiors that returned into Englande the infection thereof ſpread into dyuers partes of this Realme, but eſpecially the Citie of London was ſo infected, that in the ſame whole yeare, that is to ſay, frō the firſt of January 156
                  •
               . till the laſt of December. 1563. there dyed in the Citie and Liberties thereof, containing 108. pariſhes of all diſeaſes, xx. M. iij. C. lxxij. and of the108. parishes in London, beſides 
                     ••
                  
                  ▪ in the ſuburbs plague, (being parte of the number aforeſaide) xvij. M. ii
                  •
               j. C. ii
                  •
               j. perſons. And in the out pariſhes adioyning to y• ſame Citie, being xj. pariſhes, dyed of al diſeaſes in the whole yeare itj. M. tj. C. lxxx. and vitj. perſons▪ and of them, of the plague tj. M. vtj. C. xxxtj. perſons, ſo that the whole number of all that dyed of all diſſeaſes, as well within the Citie and Liberties, as in the out pariſhes, was xxitj. M. vj. C. & and lx. & of them, there dyed of the plague, xx. M. one hundred thirtie and ſixe.
            The eight of July in the morning, hapned a great tēpeſtTempeſt at London. of lightning and thunder, where through a woman & thrée kyne were ſlaine in the Couent▪ Garden neare to Charing Croſſe: At the ſame time in Eſſex a man was torne to péeres as he was carying haye, hys barne was borne downe, and hys haye brent, bothe ſtones and trées were rent in many places.
            The Counſell of Kyng Philip at Bruxels, commaunded proclamation to be made in Antwerpe and other places, that

no Engliſh ſhip with anye clothes ſhoulde come into anye places of their lowe Countries: their colour was (as they ſaide) the daunger of the plague whyche was that tyme in London, and other places of England: notwythſtanding, they woulde gladly haue gotten our Woolles, but the Quéenes Maieſtie, throughe ſute of oure Merchaunt Aduenturers, cauſed the Wooll fléete to be diſcharged, and our Cloth fléet was ſente to Emden in Eaſt Friſelande aboute Eaſter nexte following in Anno 1564.
            Forſomuche as the plague of Peſtilence was ſo hote inThreefolde plague to the poore Citizens of London. the Citie of London, there was no Terme kepte at Michaelmaſſe: to be ſhorte, the poore Citizens of London, were thys yeare plagued with a thrée folde plague, peſtilence, ſearcity of mony, and dearth of victuals: the miſery whereof, were too long here to wryte, no doubte the poore remember it, the riche by flight into the Countries made ſhifte for themſelues, &c.
            An Erthquake was in the moneth of September in dyuersEarthquake. places of thys realme, ſpeciallye in Lincolne and Northamptonſhires.
            
            
               Edwarde Bankes: Rowlande Haywarde, the 28. of Septem.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Sir Iohn White Grocer, the 28. of October.
            
            After the election of this Maior, by the Counſels letters, the Quéenes Maieſties pleaſure was ſignified to Sir Thomas Lodge, then Maior, that forſomuche as the plague was to greate in the Citie, the newe Maior elected ſhoulde kéepe no feaſt at the Guild hall, for doubte, that throughe bringing togither ſuche a multitude, the infection might encreaſe, for that wéeke there dyed wythin the Citie and out Pariſhes, more than two thouſande: wherefore this ſir Iohn White tooke his othe at the outermoſte Gate of the Tower of London.
            
            From the firſte daye of December, till the twelfth, was
                  Anno reg. 6. Lightning and▪ thunder. ſache continuall lightning and thunder eſpecially the ſame twelfth day at night, that y• like had not bin ſéene nor heard by any man then liuing.
            
               In the moneth of December, was driuen on the 
                  •
               hore 
                  ••
                
               Grimſ
                     ••
                  e in Lincolneſhire, a monſtrous fiſhe, in length nynetéene yardes, his taile fiftéene foote broade, and ſixe yardes betwéen hys eyes, twelue men ſtoode vpright in hys mouth to get the oyle.
            For that the plague was not fullye ceaſed in London,
               Terme kepte at Hertforde. Hillarye Tearme was kepte at Hertforde Caſtell beſides Waer.
            
            Thys yeare an honorable and ioyfull peace was concluded,1564 betwixte the Quéenes Maieſtie and the Frenche Kyng, their Realmes, Dominions and Subiectes, whyche peace was proclaymed with ſounde of Trumpet, at hir Caſtell of Windſore, and▪ alſo at London on the thyrtéenth daye of Aprill.
            The plague (thankes be to God) being cleane ceaſed in London, both Eaſter and Midſommer Terme were kepte at Westminster.
            
            Throughe the earneſt ſuite of the Armourers there was on the vigile of Saint Peter a Watche in the Citie of London,
               VVatche on S. Peters euen. whyche did onelye ſtande in the higheſt ſtréetes▪ as Cheape, Cornehill, and ſo forth to Aldgate, whyche Watche was to the commons of the City as chargeable, as when in times paſt it had béene commendably done.
            The fifth of Auguſte, the Quéenes Maieſtie in hir Progreſſe
                  Abrah. Hartwell. The Queenes Progreſſe thorough Cambridge. came to the Uniuerſitie of Cambridge, and was of all the Students (being inueſted according to their degrées taken in the Schooles) honorably and ioyfully receiued in the Kings Colledge, where ſhe did lye during hir continuaunce in Cambridge▪
                The dayes of hir abode were paſſed in Scholaſticall exerciſes of Philoſophie, Phiſicke and Diuinitie, the nightes in Comedies and Tragedies, ſette for the partlye by the whole Uniuerſitie, and partly by the Studentes of the Kyngs Colledge.
            At the breakyng vp of the Diuinitie acte, being on Wedneſday, the ninth of Auguſte, (on the whyche daye ſh
                  •
               e rode through the Town, and viewed the Colledges, thoſe goodly

and auncient monuments of Kyngs of Englande, hir Noble Predeceſſours) ſhée made wythin Saint Macies▪
                Church a notable Oration in Latine, in the preſence of the whole learned Uniuerſitie, to the Studentes greate comforte. The 
                  •
               erte daye ſhe wente forwarde on hir Pregreſſe to Fihchingbrooke by▪ 
               Huntington.
            
            The thyrtith daye of Auguſt, was enacted by a commonOut cryer and Bellman for the daye. Councell of the Citie of London▪
                that all ſuche Citizens as from thence-forth ſhould be 
                  •
               inſtrained 
                  〈…〉
                their houſhold 
                  ••
               u
                  ••
               e, leafes of houſes or ſuche like, ſhoulde firſte cauſe the ſame to be cried throughe the Citie by a man wyth a Bell, and then to be ſolde by the common out cryer appoynted for that purpoſe, and he to retaine one farthing of the ſhilling for his paines.
            The xx. daye of September aroſe great floudes in the rinerGreate 
                     ••
                  onds in the Thamis. of Thamis, where-through the Marſhes neare adioyning were ouerflowed, and manye Cattell drowned.
            The creation of ſir Robert Sutton alias Dudley Knight ofCreation of a Baron. the Garter, and Maiſter of the Horſſe, to the Quéenes Maieſtie, who was created Baron of Denbigh, and after Earle of Leicester on Michaelmaſſe daye at Saint Iames, wyth the gifte of the Manour of Killingworth▪
                and other things there to hym and hys heires, to the yerely valewe of four and twentie pounde and better. Firſte, the ſaide Lord attended on the Quéenes highnes, to the Chappel, and from the Chappell to ſeruice, and when he was returned to the Chamber of Preſence, the ſaide Lord with other departed to the Lord Chamberlaines Chamber, and ſhifted them, the ſaid Lord Robert in his Surcote with the Hoode, his mantle borne before hym by the Lorde Hunſdon, and ledde by the Lord Clinton Lorde Admiral by the right hand, and the Lord Strange on the lefte hande, in their Parliament Robes, Garter bearing the Patent, and before him the Officers of Armes, and ſo procéeded into the Chamber of Preſence, where the Quéenes Highneſſe ſate vnder the cloth of Eſtate with the Noble men on ech ſide of hir, the Embaſſador of France was

alſo preſent with another ſtraunger an Italian, and when the fai
                  •••
                Lorde with the other came in the Quéenes ſight, they made theyr o
                  ••
               yſaunce thrée tymes, the ſaide Lorde knéeled 
                  〈…〉
               , after the whyche Gatter preſented▪ the Letters pattents to the Lord Chamberlaine, and he preſented the ſame to the Quéenes Highneſſe, who gaue it to ſir William Cecil Secretary, who read the ſame with a loude voyce, and at the wordes of Creduimus, the Lord of Hunſdon preſented the Mantle to the 
                  〈…〉
                Maieſtie, who putte on the ſame, whereby he was treated Baron of Denbigh for hym and hys heyres: then the pattent was read out to the ende, after the whyche hée delyuered it to the Quéene agayne, & hir Highneſſe gaue it to the ſaide Lord, who gaue hir Maieſtie moſt humble thankes, and he roſe vp and departed to the Chamber then came from, the Trumpettes ſounding before hym. Then bée ſhifted hym of thoſe Robes, and put on the RobesCreation of an Earle. of Eſtate of an Earle, and béeing ledde by the Earle of Suſſex on the righte hande, and the Earle of Huntington, on hys lefte hande, the Earle of Warwike bearing his Sworde the Pomell vpward, and the girdle, aboute the ſame, al in their Robes of Eſtate, the Lorde Clinton Lorde Admirall in hys Parliament robes, bearing his Cap with ye Coronal, Garter▪
                before him hearing his Patent, and the other officers of Armes before him, they procéede as afore into the Chamber of Preſence, where, after they hadde made their obeyſance, the ſaide Earle 
                  •
               néeled downe, and Garter delyuered hys patent to the Lorde Chamberlaine, who gaue the ſame to the Quéenes Maieſtie, and hir highneſſe gaue the ſame to ſir Wiliam Cecil Secretary to reade, who read the ſame, and at the words, Cincturam Glady the Earle of Warwike preſented the Sworde to the Quéenes Highneſſe, who gyrte the ſame aboute the necke of the ſaide newe Earle, puttyng the poynt vnder hys lefte army, and after hir Maieſtie putte on his Cappe with the Coronall, then hys Patent was read out to the ende, and then the ſaide Secretary deliuered it againe

to the Quéene; and hir Highneſſe gaue it to the ſayde newe Earle of Leicester, who gaue hir humble thankes for the ſame, and then he aroſe and wente into the Councell Chamber to dynner, the Trumpets ſounding before, and at dinner he ſate in hys kyrtle, and there accompanyed him the foreſayde Embaſſadour of Fraunce, and the ſaide Italian, wyth dyuers other Earles and Lordes, and after the ſecond courſe, Garter with the other Officers of Armes, proclaymed the Quéenes Maieſties Stile, and after, the Stile of the ſayde Earle, for the whyche they had fiftéene pounde, to 
                  •
               éete, for hys Baronie f
                  •
               ue pound, and for his 
                  •
               arledoms tenne pounde, and Garter had hys Gowne of blacke 
                  •
               elnet garded wyth thrée gardes of the ſame, layde on wyth Lace, fyned throughe wyth blacke Taffata, and garded on the inner ſide with the ſame, and on the ſléeues xxxvitj. paire of Aglets of Golde.
            
               Du
                     •
                  reſnoble & puiſſant ſeigneur Robert Cante de Leycest
                     •
                  e Baron de Denbighe, Cheualier du treſnoble Ordre de la Iarretierrè, & Grand Eſquier de la Royne nostre Souuereigne.
            
            
               Edwarde Iackeman: Leonell Ducket, the 28. of September.
               
                  Sheriffes. Obſequy for the Emperour.
            
            The ſeconde of October in the afternoone, and the morrowe in the forenoone, a ſolempne obſequie was holden in Saint Paules Churche at London, for Ferdinando late Emperour departed.
            The ſeauenth of October at eight of the clocke at night,Anno reg. 7. the North partes of the Element ſéemed to be couered wyth flames offyre, procéeding towards the middle of the firmament, where, after it had ſtayed nigh one houre, it deſcended Weſt, and all the ſame night (being the next after the chāge of the Moone) ſéemed as light as it had bin daye.
            
               Sir Richard Mallery Mercer, the 28. of October.
               Maior.
            
            The twentith of Nouember in the morning, throughe negligence of a Maiden with a Candle, the ſnuffe falling in an hundred pounde waighte of gunne poulder, thrée houſes in Bucklerſlourie; werefore ſhaken, and the Maide dyed two dayes after.
            
               The d
                  •
               e and twentith of December begaſ
                  •
               e a Fro
                  •
               e,The Thani
                     ••
                   
                  
                     •
                  roſen ouer. whyche 
                  •••
                
               
                  〈…〉
                ſo extreamly, that on Neweyeres euen, people wēt ouer and along the Thamis on the Ice from London bridge to Westminister, ſome played at foote ball as boldely there, as if it had bin on the dry land, diuers of the Court being then at Westminster, ſhotte dailye at prickes ſette vpon the Thamis 
                     •
                  , And the people both men and women went on the Thamis in greater number, than in anye ſtréete of the Citie of London: On the thirde daye of January at night it beganne to thawe, and on the fifth daye was no Ice to bée ſéene betwéene London bridge and Lambeth, whyche cauſed greate 
                  •
               loudes and highe waters, that bare downe Bridges and houſes, and drowned manye people in Englande, eſpeciallyOvves bridge borne dovvne. in Yorkeſhire, Owes bridge was borne away wyth other.
            The thyrde daye of February, Henry Stuarte Lord Darlo
                     ••
                  ,
               Henry Stuarte marryed the Quene of Scots aboute the age of ninetéene yéeres, eldeſt ſonne of Mathew Earle of Leunex, (who wente into Scotlande at Whitſontide before) hauing obtayned licence of the Quéenes Maieſtie, tooke his iorney towarde Scotland, accompanied with 
                  •
               iue of his fathers men, where, when he came, was honorablye receyued, and lodged in the Kings lodgings, and in the Sommer following, marryed Marie Quéene of Scotlande.
            
            Aboute this time for the Quéenes Maieſtie were choſen and ſent commiſſioners to Bruges, the Lorde Montacute Knight of the honorable order of the Garter, Doctour Wotton one of his Maieſties honorable Counſell, Doctor Haddō
               on
                  •
                
               
                  ••
                the Maiſters of 
                  〈…〉
                to hir highneſſe with other:1565 Maiſter Doctor Aubrey was for the Merchant Aduenturers of Englande. They came to Bruges in Lent, Anno. 1565. & continued there till Michaelmaſſe followyng, and then was the diet prolonged till March, in 1566: and the Commiſſioners returned into Englande.
            
            The two and twentith of Aprill, the Ladye Margaret
               Lady Liunex ſente to the Tovver. Counteſſe of Liunex, was commaunded to kéepe hir Chamber

at the White hall, where ſhe remayned till the xxtj. of June, & then conueyed by ſir Frauncis Knolles, & the Guard to the Tower of London by water.
            On Midſomer day Donell Mac Cartie More, was created Baron of Valencia, and afterwarde the ſame daye Earle of Glankerre at White hall.
            
            On S. Peters euen at night, was the like ſtanding watchVVatche at Midſo
                     •
                  uer. in London, as hadde béene on the ſame nighte twelue moneths.
            The xvj. of July, about nine of the clocke at night, beganTempeſt at Chel
                     ••
                  forde. a tempeſt of lightning and thunder, wyth ſhowres of haile, whyche continued til thrée of the clocke the nexte morning ſo terrible, that at Chelmſforde in Eſſex 500. acres of corne were deſtroyed, the Glaſſe windowes on the Eaſt ſide of the Towne, and of the Weaſt and South ſides of the church were beaten downe, wyth alſo the tiles of their houſes, beſide dyuers Barnes, Chimneys, and the battlements of the Churche whiche were ouerthrowen. The like harme was done in manye other places, as at Leedes, Cranebrooke, Douer, &c.
            
            
               Chriſtopher Prince and Margraue of Baden, wyth Cicelie
               Margraue and Marques of Baden. his wyfe ſiſter to the King of Swethlande, after a long and daungerous iorney, wherein they had trauelled almoſte xj. moneths, ſayling from Stokeholme, croſſing the Seas ouer into Lifeland, from whence by land they came aboute by Polland, Pruſcy, Pomerland, Meckeburge, Friſeland, and ſo to Ant
                  
                     •
                  arpe in Brabant, then to Callais; at the laſte in September 
                  〈…〉
                at Douer, and the xj. day of the ſame they came to London, and were lodged at the Earle of Bedfordes place, neare vnto Iuie bridge, where, wythin foure dayes after, that is to 
                  •
               aye, the xv. of September, ſhe trauelled in childe bed, and was delyuered of a man childe, whyche childe the laſte of September was chriſtned in the Quéenes Maieſties chappell of White hall at Westminster, the Quéenes Maieſtie in 
                  〈…〉
                owne perſon being Godmother, the Archebyſhoppe of Canterburie, and the Duke of Norffolke Godfathers: at the

c
                  •
               ri
                  •••
               ing the Quéene gaue the childe to name Edwardus Fortunatus, for that God had ſo gratiouſly aſſiſted hys mother, in ſo long and daungerous a iourney, and brought hir ſo ſafe to lande in that place whyche ſhe moſte deſired, and that in ſo ſhorte time before hir deliueraunce.
            
               Iohn Riuers: Iames Hawes, the 28. of September.
               
                  Sherifes. Maior. Mariage of the Earle of VVarvvike.
            
            
               Sir Richarde Champion 
                     •
                  rape
                     •
                  , the 28. of October.
            
            The eleauenth of Nouember, the right honourable Ambroſe Earle of Warwike, marryed Anne eldeſt daughter to the Earle of B
                     •
                  dforde: for the honor and celebration of whiche noble marriage, a goodlye chalenge was made, and obſerued a
                  •
                
               
                  
                     •
                  estminster at the T
                  •••
               , with ech one ſixe courſes▪ at the Tourney twelue ſtrokes with the Sword, thrée puſhes wyth the punchion ſtaſte: and twelue blowes with the Sworde at Bar
                  •
               iars, or twentie if any were ſo diſpoſed.
            At tenne of the clocke the ſame daye, a valiant ſerui
                  •
               eableRobert Thomas ſlaine. man, called Roberte Thomas, Maiſter Gunner of Englande, deſtrous alſo to honour the fea
                  ••
                and marriage day in conſideration the ſaide Earle of Warwike was Generall of the Ordinaunce wythin hir Maieſties Realmes and Dominions, made thrée traines of great Chambers, which terribly yéelded forth the nature of their voyce, to the greate aſtoniſhment of diuers, who at the fyring of the ſeconde, was vnhappilye ſtaine by a péece of one of the Chambers, to the greate ſorrowe and lame
                  ••
               ation of many.
            The foure and twentith of December, in the mornyngAnno reg. 8. there roſe a greate ſtorme and tempeſt of winde, by whoſe rage the Thames and Seas ouerwhelmed many perſons, and the greate Gates 
                  ••
                the Weaſte ende of Paules Church in London, (betwéene the whyche ſtandeth the Brazen Piller)Paules Gate blovven open. were, throughe the force of the winde, then in the weaſterne parte of the worlde 
                  •
               lo
                  •
               en open.
            In January, M
                     •
                  nſ
                     •
                  eur Ra
                     •
                  buley 
               
                  •
                Knight of the OrderOrder of Sainte Michaell. in Fraunce, was ſent ouer into Englande, by the French King Charles the ninth of that na
                  ••
               e, wyth the Order, who 
                  ••
                
               Windſore, was ſtalled in the behalfe of the ſaide French King

wyth the Knighthoode of the moſte honorable order of the Garter: and the four and twentith of January, in the Cha
                  •
               
               pell of hir Maieſties Pallaice of White 
                     •
                  all, the ſaide Monſieur Rambuley inueſted Thomas Duke of Norffolke, and Robert Earle of Leicester, wyth the ſaide order of Saint M
                     •
                  
                  chaell.
            
            The Mar
                  •
               u
                  •
               s of Baden, and the Ladye Cecilie his wyfe,1566 
                     •••
                   Ma
                     •
                  q
                     •
                  es of Baden returneth. 
               
                  ••
               ſter to the King of Swethen, who came into this land in the meneth of September laſte paſte, as before is declared, béeing then by the Qéenes eſpeciall appointment at theyr arriuall honorably receyued by the Lord Cobham, an honorable Baron of this Realme, and the Ladye his wife one of the Quéenes Maieſties pri
                  •
               ie Chamber, nowe in the moneth of Aprill, Anno. 1569. departed the ſame againe, the Marques a fewe dayes before hys wife, being both cenducted by a lyke perſonage the Lorde of Aburgaueny to Douer.
            
            Certaine houſes in Cornehill, being firſt purchaſed by theThe Burſe in Cornehill. Citizens of London, were in the moneth of February cryed by the Bell man, and afterwarde ſolde to ſuche perſons as ſhoulde take them downe and carry them from thence, whiche was ſo done in the moneths of Aprill and May next following. And then the grounde beyng made plaine at the charges alſo of the Cittie, po
                  ••
               eſſion thereof was by certaine Aldermen, in name of the whole Citizens, giuen to ye right worſhipfull ſir Tho. Greſham Knight, Agent to the Quéens Highneſſe, there to buylde a place for Merchantes to aſſemble in, at hys owne proper charges, who on the ſeauenth of June layde the firſte ſtone of the foundation (being Bricke) and forth-with the work-men followed vpon the ſame with ſuche diligence, that by the Moneth of Nouember, in the yeare of our Lorde 
                  ••
               67▪ the ſame was couered wyth Slate.
            The commiſſioners before named appointed for the matters of Flaunders, kéepyng their dyet at Bruges, agréed to referre the whole matter to the Princes on bothe ſides, and if they coulde not agrée, then the Merchants to haue fortie dayes to repayre home with their merchaundiſe, and in the

meane t
                  •••
               , all things to ſtande as they were then. Dure C
                  ••••
               iſſioners departed frō 
               Bruges about the xxvj. of June.
            The xxxj. of Auguſt ye Quéenes Maieſtie in hir progreſſeThe Queenes progreſſe to Oxforde. came to the Uniuer
                  ••
               tie of Oxforde, and was of all the Studentes, whyche had looked for hir commyng thyther two yeares, ſo honorably and ioyfully receyued, as eyther theyr l
                  •
               ya
                  •
               n
                  •••
               e towardes the Quéenes Maieſtie, or the expectation of their 
                  ••
               iendes did requyre. Concerning orders in diſputa
                  ••
               on, and other Academicall exerciſes, they agréede much wyth thoſe, which the Uniuerſitie of Cambridge had vſed two yeres before. Comedies alſo and Tragedies were played in Chriſtes Churche, where the Quéenes Highneſſe 
                  ••
               dged. Among the whych, the Comedie entituled Palemon
               Miſfortune at Oxford. and Arcet, made by Maiſter Edwards of the Quéenes Chappel, had ſuche tragicall ſucceſſe as was lamentable: For at that time by the fall of a wall and a payre of ſtaires, & great pre
                  •
               ſſe of the multitude, thrée men were ſlaine.
            The fifth of September after diſputations, the Quéene at the humble ſute of certaine of hir Nobilitie, and the King of Spa
                     ••
                  es Embaſſadour, made a briefe Oration in Latine to the Uniuerſitie, but ſo wiſe and pithie, as England maye reioice, that it hathe ſo learned a Prince, and the Uniuerſitie may tri
                  ••
               ph, that they haue ſo noble a Patroneſſe.
            The vj▪ of September after dinner, hir Grace comming from Chriſts Churche ouer Carfox, and ſo to Saint Maries, the Scholers ſtanding in order according to their degrées, euen to the Eaſt gate, certaine Doctors of the Uniuerſitie did ride before in their Scarlet gownes and hoodes, & Maiſters of Arte in black
                  •
                
               
                  ••
               wn
                  •
                and hood
                  •
               s. The Maior alſo with certaine of his drethren did ryde before hir in Scarlet to the ende of Magdalene 
               
                  •••
               dge, where their liberties ended: but the Doctors and Maiſters went forward ſtill to Sho
                     •
                  ouer, a myle and more out of Oxforde, dicauſe their Liberties extended ſo farre, and there after Orations made, hir Highne
                  •••
                with thankes to the whols Uniuerſitie, dade them farewel, and rode to Rycote.
            
            
               
               Richarde Lambert: Ambroſe Nicholas, the 28. of Septemb.
               Sherifes.
            
            
               Iohn Langley, the 4. of Aprill.
            
            
               Sir Chriſtopher Draper Iremonger, the 28. of October
               
                  Maior. Souldiors tranſported into Irelande.
            
            The valiant Captaine Edward Randolfe Eſquier, lieutenant of the Ordinaunce, and Colonell of a thouſand footemen, in September laſt paſte, was wyth his band embarqued at Bristow, and within few dayes after, landed at Knocfergus in the North parts of Ireland, and went thence by water to a place called Derry, by which paſſeth ye riuer of Longfoile, there the ſaide Colonell in ſhorte ſpace fortified, to the greate annoyaunce of Iohn Oneale, and by greate foreſight and experience, guarded hymſelfe and hys charge, till the ſaid Oneale (to hinder and diſturbe his abode there) th
                  ••
               
               ▪ of Nouēber arriued with a great army of Kerne Galawgl
                     •
                  ſſ
                     •
                  s and horſſemen, wyth whome the ſaide Captaine Randolfe encountred, and him there ſo diſcomfited, as after that conflicte he durſte neuer approche the Quéenes power, and to his perpetuall fame, the ſaid Captaine by reaſon of his bold and hardie onſet that daye loſte his life.
            
               Charles Iames, the ſixth of that name, ſonne to HenrieYong Prince of Scots chriſtned. Anno reg. 9. Stuarte Lord of Darnley, and Marie King and Quéene of Scots was borne in Edenberough Caſtel the ninetéenth of June laſt paſt: and the eightéenth of December, thys yeare ſolemnly Chriſtned at Striueling, whoſe Godfathers at the Chriſtning were, Charles King of Fraunce, and Philibert Duke of Sauoy, and the Quéenes Maieſtie of Englande was the Godmother, who gaue a Font of Golde curiouſly wrought and enameled, weighing 333. ounces, amounting in value to the ſumme of 1043. 
                  •
               . 19. s.
            The tenth of February in the morning, Henrie Stuarte
               King of Scottes murdered. Lorde of Darneley before named King of Scots, by Scottes in Scotlande, was ſhamefully murdered the reuenge whereof remaineth in the mightie hande of God.
            The xxij. of February the Lady Margaret Dowglaſſe coū
               teſſe of Leunex, mother to the ſaide King of Scottes, was diſcharged out of the Tower of London.
               
Within the ſpace of ten moneths laſte paſte dyed ſeauenSeauen Aldermē deceaſed in Lō
                  don. Aldermen of London, the firſte Edwarde Bankes deceaſſed the ninth of July, Anna 1566. R. Chamberlaine late Sherife, ſir Martin Bowes, ſir R Malory, ſir William Hewet, & ſir Thomas White late Maiors, then Richarde Lambart one of the Sheriffes for that yeare, the 4. of Aprill, Anno 1567.
            The xxij. of Aprill, by greate miſfortune of fyre in the1567 The Tovvn of Oſſeſtry brente thrice in thyrtie yeares. Towne of Oſſestrie in Wales twelue myles from Shrewſburie, to the number of 200. houſes, to ſaye, ſeauen ſcores wythin the walles, and thrée ſcore without in the Suburbes, béeſides cloth, corne, cattel, &c. were conſumed, whyche fire began at two of the clocke in the forenoone, and ended at f
                  •••
               , to the great maruelling of many, that ſo great a ſpoile in fo ſhort time ſhould happen. Two long ſtréets▪ with great riches of that town were brent in Anno. 1542. And lykewiſe or worſe in Anno. 1544.
            The xxiiij. of Aprill, the Sergeants feaſte was kepte at Greis Inne neare vnto Holborne, and there were at that timeSergeants feaſte made ſeauen newe Sergeants of the lawe.
            The xxvij. of May in the towne of Milnal in Suffolke eightMilnal in Suffolke brent. myle from Newmarket, 37. houſes, beſides barnes, ſtables, & ſuch like were cōſumed with fire in the ſpace of two houres.
            
               Shane Oneale, who had moſt trayterouſly rebelled againſtShane Oneale diſcomfited. Statuta Regni Hiberniae. Edmond Campion▪
                  
                the Quéenes Maieſtie in Ireland, & had done manye greate outrages in the partes of V
                     •
                  ster, was this yeare▪ wyth hys greate loſſe manfully repelled from the ſiege of Dundalke by the garriſon thereof, and afterward through the great valiancie of ſir Henrie Sidney Knight of the order, & Lord Deputie of Irelande, he was ſo diſcomfited in ſundry conflictes, with the loſſe of 3500. of his men, that nowe foreſéeyng hys declination to be iminant, he determined to put a colle
                  •
                about his necke, & diſguiſing himſelfe, to repayre to the Lord Deputy, & patiently to require his pardon to haue his life▪ But Neil Ma
                     •
                  keuer hys Secretary, who had incited him to this rebellion, perſwaded hym firſte to trye and treate the friendſhip of certaine wilde Scots that then ſay 
                  〈…〉
                in

               Clan Ibon▪
                vnder the conducting of Alexander Oge, and Mec Gilliam Buske, whoſe father and vncle Shane Oneale hadde lately kylled, in an ouerthrow giuen by the Scots: neuertheleſſe, he wel liking this perſwaſion, went to the ſaide camp the ſecond of June▪ where after a diſſembled entertainment, and quaffing of Wine, Gilliam Buske▪
                burning wyth deſire of reuenge of his fathers and vncles death, and miniſtryngShane Oneale ſlayne. quarrelling talke, iſſued out of the Tent, and made a feay vppon Oneales▪
                men, and then gathering togither hys Scots in a throng, ſodainely entred the Tent againe, who there, wyth their ſlaughter▪ Swordes, hewed in péeces Shane Oneale, hys Secretarie, and all hys company, excepte a verye fewe whych eſcaped by flyght.
            The 8. of June ſir Thomas Sackuile Knight, was created Baron of Buckhurst, at Westminster in the Quéenes Palaice.
            On Saint Iohns euen at nighte, was the like ſtandyngVVatche at Midſomer. watche in London, as had béene on Saint Peters euen in the yeare before paſſed.
            The xxix. of July, Charles Iames the yong Prince ofCreation in Scotlande. 
               Scotlande, after a Sermon made by Iohn Knokes, was crowned King of Scots at Sterling Churche, where were read certaine Commiſſions, wyth the Quéenes priuy ſeale at them for the eſtabliſhing of the ſame. The firſt for hir reſignation of the Crowne, and gouernement of the yong Prince hir ſonne. The ſeconde, to aucthorize the Earle of Murrey, to be Regent during his minoritie. The thirde, to gyue authoritie and power to ſeauen other, ioyning with the ſayde Erle of Murrey, in caſe he ſhoulde refuſe to exerciſe the ſame alone, that is to ſaye, the Duke of Cha
                     ••
                  leroy, the Earles of Leunex, Argyle, Athelmorto▪ 
                  
                     •
                  lencarne and Marre: the commiſſions béeing ended, the Byſhoppe of Akelley, wyth twoo Superintendents, procéeded to the Coronation, the Earle Morton and Lorde Hume tooke 
                  •
               the for the King, that hée ſhoulde rule in the faith, feare, and loue of God, to maintaine the Religion then preached in Scotlande, and perſecute all aduerſaries to the ſame, &c.
            
               The whole ceremony of the coronation was done in their mother tongue, and at that time the Quéene of Scottes was priſoner at Loughleuen.
            
            
               Thomas Ramſey: William Bonde, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Sir Roger Martin Mercer, the 28. of October.
            
            After a drye Summer followed a ſharpe Winter, wyth ſuche a ſcarcitie of Fodder and Hay, that in dyuers places the ſame was ſolde by waighte, as in Yorkeſhire, and in the Peake, Haye was ſolde for fiue pence the ſtone: there followed alſo a greate death of cattel, eſpecially of horſe & ſhéepe.
            In the moneth of January, the Quéenes Maieſtie ſente into the narrow ſeas thrée of hir ſhips, named the Antelope, the Swallow, and the Aide, and one Barke named the Phoenix, the whiche were manned with v. C. men: and hir Highneſſe appointed the charge of thoſe ſhips and men, to Mayſter William Holſtoke Eſquier, Comptroller of hir Highneſſe ſhippes, who had commaundement to ſtay the ſubiects of King Philip, and according to hys duetie and charge▪ hée vſed ſuche diligence, that on the eleauenth of Marche nexte following, he mette with eleauen ſaile of Flemiſhe▪
                Hoyes, vppon Bolongne, whyche came from Roan
                     •
                  , and in them foure hundred and odde Tuunes of Gaſcoigne and French Wines, whyche they intended to haue conueyed into Flaunders, but William Holſtoke ſtayed al the ſaide Hoyes, & ſent them to London, where they made their diſcharge, and the Flemings diſappointed.
            Moreouer, on the eight and twentith of March▪ the ſaid William Holſtoke ſeruing in the Antelope at that preſent Admirall, in his company being William Winter the yonger, (at that time Uizadmirall) ſeruing in the Ayde, and 
                  •
               . Baſing Capitaine of the S
                     ••
                  llowe, and Thomas Generley Captaine of the Phoenix, me
                  •
               te in the narrowe Seas wyth fouretéene ſayle of greate H
                  •
               lkes, whych were come out of Portingale, and bounde to Flaunders, theyr chiefe lading béeyng Portingale▪
                Salte, and yet hadde good ſtore of Spaniſhe Rialles of Plate, and alſo greate ſtore of Spices,

the which fourtéene Hulkes did mainteyne their fight for the ſpace of two houres, and after that they did perceyue that they could not preuayle, the ſayd W. Holſtoke and hys company tooke eyght of the ſame Hulkes, whereof ſixe were ſent into the Riuer of Thamis, and the Admirall and Uizadmirall of the ſayd Hulkes, being two great Shippes, which W. Holſtoke himſelfe did take, were conuayed to Harwich, and there diſcharged.
            The xxviij. of March, through vehement rage and tempeſtGreat vvinds. of windes, many veſſels in the Thamis, with two Tiltebeates before Graueſend were ſunke and drowned.
            The xxvj. of June, deceaſſed Thomas Yong ArchbiſhopArchbishop of Yorke deceaſſed. of Yorke, at his manour of Shefield, and was honourably buryed at Yorke.
            
            This yeare, Car
                  ••
               nall Odet Chaſtilion fléeth out ofPeter Ram
                     ••
                  . 
               France into England, where he remayned till the yeare of our Lord 1570▪ and then dyed at Canterbury, and was there b
                  •
               ryed in Christes Church.
            
            
               Iohn Oleph: Robert Harding, the 28. of September.
               Sheriffes.
            
            The xj. of October, were taken in Suffolke at Downam bridge 
               
                  •
               éere vnto Ipſwich, eyghtéene monſtrous fiſhes, ſomeMonſtrous fishes. of them conteyning xxvij. foote in length, the other xxiiij. or xxj. foote a péece at the leaſt.
            
               Sir Thomas Roe merchant Taylor, the 28. of October.
               Maior. Sherife.
            
            
               Iames Bacon, the 26. of Nouember.
            
            At the coſtes and charges of the Citizens of London, a new Conduit was builded at Walbrooke corner, néere toNevv Conduit at VValbroke. Anno reg. 11 
               Downegate, which was finiſhed in the moneth of October, the water whereof is conuayed out of the Thamis.
            
            The xvij. of January, Philip Meſtrell a Frenchman, andA Frenchman executed. two Engliſhmen, were drawne from Newgate to Tiborne, and there hanged, the Frenchman quartered, who had coyned gold counterfeit, the Engliſhmen, the one had clipped ſiluer, the other caſt Teſtons of Tinne.
            The xxviij. of March, the Pencioners well appoynted1569 Muſter of Pe
                     •
                  
                  tioners. in armour on horſſebacke, muſtered before the Quéenes

Maieſtie in Hide Parke beſide Westminster.
            
            A great L
                  •
               tt
                  •
               m being holden at London in Paules Churchyard
               A Lottary at London. at the We
                  〈…〉
               ore, 
                  •••
                
               
                  •
               ego
                  •
                to be drawne the eleuenth of January, and continued day and night, till the ſixth of May, wherein the ſayd drawing was fully ended.
            Sir Thomas Roe Lord Maior of London, cauſed to be encloſedBuriall for dead prepared. with a wall of bricke, nigh one acre of ground, néere vnto Bedlem without Biſhopſgate, to be a place of buriall for the dead, of ſuche pariſhes in London as lacked conueniente ground within their ſayd pariſhes.
            A ſtanding watch on Saint Iohns euen at Midſomer, and Sir Iohn White Alderman rode the circuite, as the Lorde Maior ſhould haue done.
            The xxvij. of Auguſt, Andrew Gregoreuich Sauin, Embaſſadour from Muſcouy, lauded at the Tower Wharffe, andEmbaſſador from Muſcouy. was there receyued by the Lord Maior of London, the Aldermen, and Sheriffes in Scarlet, with the merchants aduenturers in coates of blacke veluet all on horſebacke, who conuayd him riding through the Citie to the: Muſcouy houſe in S
                     •
                  ding Lane there to be lodged.
            The plague of peſtilence ſome what raigning in the CitieTerme adiorned. of London, Michaelmas Terme was firſt adiourned vnto the thirde of Nouember, and after vnto Hillarie Terme next folowing.
            
               Henry Bechar: William Danne, the 28. of September.
               Sheriffes.
            
            The xj. of October, Thomas Haward Duke of Norffolke, was brought from Burnam beſide Windſore by land to Westminster,
               Duke of Norffolke ſent to the Tovver. and from thence by water to the Tower of London priſoner, Sir Henry Neuill being his kéeper.
            
               Sir Alexander Auenon Irnemonger, the 28. of October.
               
                  Maior. No Maiors feaſt.
            
            This Maior went by water to Westminster, and there tooke his oth as hath bin accuſtomed, but kept no feaſt at the Guild hall, leaſt through comming togither of ſo great multitude, infection of the peſtilēce might haue increaſed. That wéeke, from the one and twentith vnto the eyght and twentith of October, there dyed in the Citie and out pariſhes

of all diſeaſes 152. of the which 51. were accompted to dye of the plague.
            On Monday the fourtéenth of Nouember, Thomas Percy
               The Earles of Northumberland & VVeſtmerland rebelled. Earle of Northumberland béeing at Topclife, receyued the Quéenes maieſties letters to repaire to the Court, and the ſame day at night, certayne conſpirators perceyuing the ſayde Earle to be wauering and vnconſtant of promiſe made to them, cauſed a ſeruante of hys, called Bekewith, (after hée was layde in hys bedde) to buſtle in, and to knocke at hys chamber dore, willing hym in haſt to ariſe and ſhifte for hymſelfe, for that hys enimies (whome hée tearmed to bée Sir Oſweld Vlſtrop, and Mayſter Vaghan) were about the Parke, and had beſette him with numbers of men, wherevpon hée aroſe, and conuayde hymſelfe away to hys kéepers houſe: in the ſame inſtant, they cauſed the Belles of the Towne to be rong backwarde, and ſo rayſed as many as they could to that purpoſe▪
            
            The next night, the Earle departed thence to Branspith, where he mette with Charles Neuill Earle of Westmerland, and other theyr confederates, after which time, by ſundrie Proclamations, they abuſing the Quéenes ſubiects, commaunded them in hir highneſſe name to repaire to them in warlike manner, for the defence and ſuretie of hir Maieſtles perſon, ſometymes affirming theyr doyngs to bée with the aduiſe and conſent of the Nobilitie of the Realme, who in déede were wholly bente (as manyfeſtly appeared) to ſpende theyr liues in dutifull obedience, agaynſte them and all other Traytors, ſometymes pretending for conſcience ſake to ſéeke to reforme Religion, ſometymes declaring that they were driuen to take thys matter in hand, leaſt otherwiſe for raigne Princes might take it vpon them, to the great perill of this Realme.
            The xvj. day, they came to Durham, and forthwith wentRebels rent the Byble. to the Minſter, where they tare the Bible, Communion Bokes, and other ſuch as therewere. The ſame night they

went agayne to Branspith, and on the morrow to Darington, where they had holywater, but no Maſſe, for want of veſtments. From thence, they ſente their Horſſemen to gather togither ſuche numbers of men as they coulde. The xviij. the Earle of Northumberland went to Richmond, then to Northalarton, after to Borow bridge, and on Sonday, the twentithAnno reg. 12 of Nouember, he with his Lady Counteſſe of Northumberland, met agayne with the Earle of Westmerland at Ripon, and there had Maſſe, where (to get the more credite among the fauourers of the olde Romiſh Religion) they had a croſſe with a banner of the fiue woundes borne before them by Richard Norton, and that night they went to Borow bridge, and on the Monday to Wether
                     •
                  ie, on whiche daye at nighte ſome bands of them entred T
                     •
                  dcaster, and tooke a two hundred footemen, chacing their Captaynes which were leading them towards Yorke to the Earle of Suſſex. On Tueſday, they muſtered on Clifford moore, nigh vnto Bramham moore, where they were a ſixtéene hundred horſſemen, and a four thouſand footemen, which was the greateſt number that euer they were. From thence, they intended to haueThe number of the Rebels. marched toward Yorke, but their mindes being ſodeinly altered, by report they heard that Sir George Bowes had muſtered within the Biſhopricke, and Richmondſhire, and leuyed greate bands, on the Wedneſday they returned agayne to Wetherby, on Thurſeday to Northalerton, on Fryday to Richmond, on Saterday Westmerland wente to Rabyes hys owne houſe, on Sonday at night the Earle of Northumberland came to him there. On Monday, Tueſday, and Wedneſday, they muſtered in all Richmondſhire and the Biſhopricke, beſtowing their footemen in bands vnder Captaynes leading: and the ſame day, which was the laſt of Nouember, they beſéeged Barnard or Barne Caſtell vpon Teſe, builded byBernards Caſtel beſeeged. 
               Barnard Bayllioll about Anno domini 1174. which Caſtell was valiantly defended by Sir George Bowes and Roberte Bowes his brother the ſpace of eleuen dayes. In the meane ſpace, the Earle of Westmerland and his Lady went to Durham
               
with ſeauen or eyght hundred horſe, where they remayned till the thirtéenth of December, in which ſpace, to wéete the ſeauenth day of December, Sir Iohn Foſter, WardenSkirmish vvith the Rebels. of the middle marches, accompanyed with Sir Henry Percy, did giue to the ſayd Earle a great ſkirmiſh. The ſixth of December, Sir George Bowes put forth of the Caſtell two hundred horſemen, whereof two perſons were ſlayne, and thirtie taken by the Rebels. The tenth of December, SirBarnards Caſtel deliuered to the Rebels. 
               George Bowes deliuered the ſayd Caſtell, vnder compoſition to depart with armour, munition, bagge and baggage, and forthwith marched with his garriſon towardes Yorke. In this meane time, to wéete, on the xxiiij. of Nouember, the Quéenes Maieſtie had cauſed the ſayd Earles of Northumberland
               The Earles of Northumberland & VVeſtmerland proclaymed Traytors. and Westmerland to be proclaymed Traytors, with all their adherents and fauourers, and forthwith prepared an army to be ſent out of the South for their ſuppreſſion. The Lord Scrope, warden of the Weſt marches, had called vnto him the Earle of Cumberland, and other Gentlemen of the Countrey, and they kepte the Citie of Carelile. The Earle of Suſſex the Quéenes maieſties Lieutenant generallThe Earle of Suſſex the Queenes Lieutenant generall in the North againſt the Rebels. in the North, had on the xvij. of Nouember there publiſhed the like Proclamation (in effect) as after was publiſhed by hir▪ Maieſtie againſt the ſayde Rebels, and alſo ſent out to all ſuch Gentlemen as he knew to be hir Maieſties louing ſubiects vnder his rule, who came vnto hym with ſuch number of their friends, as he was able in fyue dayes to make aboue fiue thouſand horſemen and footemen, and ſo being accompanyed with the Earle of Rutlande his Lieutenant, the Lord Hunſdon general of his horſemen, William Lord Eure, who had the leading of the rereward of the footemen, and Sir Ralph Sadler Treaſurer, who all came to Yorke with their ſeruants, on Sonday the xj. of December, they marched from Yorke towards Topclife, the x
                  •
               j. they tarryed at Sezay, where Sir George Bowes with his power comming from Barnards Castell (as is a foreſayde) mette him, and was made Marſhall of the Armye: then

they wente to Northalarton, to S
                     •
                  icto
                     •
                  , to Croftbridge, and ſo to Actay, on the which day, the Rebels fledde from Durham (hauing called their companye Chriſtopher Neuill frent Hertlepoole; who were fortifying there) to Exham, where they abode thrée dayes.
            The Earle of S
                     ••
                  ſſex Lieutenant with his power, wente from Actay to Durham, then to Newcastell, and the twentith of December to Exham, from whence, the Rebels were gone the nighte before to Naworth, where counſayling with Edwarde Dacres concerning theyr owne weakeneſſe, as alſo how they were purſued by the Earle of Suſſex and hys power of ſeauen thouſande, euen almoſte at theyr héeles: and moreouer, that the Earle of Warwike, theThe Earle of VVarvvike ſent againſt the Rebels. Lorde Clinton, Lorde Admirall of Englande, and the Lorde Ferrers; Uiſcount Hereford, with afarre greater armye of twelue thouſande out of the South, whereof the ſayde Earle of Warwike was Generall, was not farre behynde them at Borowbridge.
            
            The nexte nighte, the two Earles of Northumberlande and Westmerlande, wyth ſundry of their principall Gentlemen,The Earles of Northumberland & VVeſtmerland fledde. vnknowne to theyr aſſociates, fledde to Herlaw in Scotlande: the other Rebels were ſhortly after taken by the Earle of Suſſex and hys power, without any reſiſtance.
            The fourth and fifth of January, did ſuffer at Durham
               Rebels executed at Durham. to the number of thréeſcore and ſixe Conſtables and other, amongſt whome, an Alderman of the Towne, and a Prieſt called Parſon Plom
                     •
                  ree were the moſt notable: then 
                  •••
               r Gro
                     •••
                   Bowes Marſhall, finding manye to bée faultors in the foreſayde Rebellion
                  •
               , dyd ſée them executed in euery Markette Towne and other places, betwiete Nowcastell and Wetherby, about thréeſcore miles in length, and fortie miles in breadth.
            The one and twentith of January, a Prentiſe was hanged on a gibbet at the North end of Finke Lane in London, (to the enſample of other) for that he y• thirtéenth of December

had ſtriken hys mayſter with a knife, whereof hée dyed.
            The two and twentith of February, Leonard Dacre ofLeonard Dacr
                     •
                   
                  
                     ••
                  edde into Scotland. 
               Harlſey, in the Countie of Yorke Eſquire, hauyng rayſed a number of people, the Lorde Hunſdon and other ſetting on hym with a companye of valiaunt Souldyers, flewe manye of hys people, and forced hym to flée into Scotlande.
            
            On good Friday the ſeauen and twentith of March, Simon1570 Digby of Askewe, Iohn Fulthorp
                of Iſilbecke in the Countie of Yorke Eſquires, Robert Peneman of Stokeſley,
               Rebels executed at Yorke. 
               Thomas Biſhop the yonger of Poklinton in the ſame Countie of Yorke Gentlemen, were drawne from the Caſtell of Yorke, to the place of execution called Knauestmire, halfe a mile without the Citie of Yorke, and there hanged, headed, and quartered, their foure heads were ſet on the four principall gates of the Citie, with foure of their quarters, the other quarters were ſet in diuers places of the Countrey: Oſcolph Clesbe was with them drawne to the gallowes, and returned agayne to the Caſtell.
            
               William Earle of Pembroke, Baron of Cardiffe, KnighteThe Earle of Pembroke deceaſſed. of the Garter, one of the priuie Counſell, and Lord Stewarde of the Quéenes maieſties houſholde, deceaſſed the eyghtéenth of April, and was buryed in Saint Paules Church at London.
            
            The ſeauentéenth of Aprill, the Earle of Suſſex LieutenantThe Earle of Suſſex made a iourney into Scotland. generall in the North, with the Lord Hunſdon, Lorde gouernour of Barwike, & Warden of the Eaſt Marches, and mayſter William Drewry high Marſhall of Barwike, with all the garriſon and power of the fame, began a iourney into Scotlande, and the ſame night came to Warke, twelue miles from Barwike, and ſo the next morrow entred into Tiuidale, and marching in warlike order, they brēt, ouerthrew, raſed & ſpoyled all the Caſtels, Townes, & villages of their enimies, till they came to the Caſtell of Moſſe ſtanding in a ſtrōg mariſh belōging to the L. of Bucklugh, which likewiſe

was raſed, ouerthrowne and brent, and ſo marched forward and brent the whole Countrey before them, till they came to Craling. The ſame day, Sir Iohn Foſter Warden of theSir Iohn Foſter vvith a garriſon entred Scotlād. middle marches, with the garriſon and force of the ſame, entred likewiſe into Tiuidale vpon Expes gate, ſixtéene mile from Warke, where in like order they brent, raſed, and ſpoyled the Countrey before them, till they came to a ſtrong Caſtell called Craling, in the poſſeſſion of the mother of the Lord Ferniherſt, which likewiſe they ouerthrew, raſed, and brent. There both the Armies mette, and ſo marched by the Riuer of Tiuite, raſing, burning, and ſpoyling Caſtels and pyles along the Riuer, till they came to Gedworth, where they both lodged, and were curteouſly receyued. The next day the Lorde Seſ
                     •
                  ord, Warden of the middle Marches of Scotlande, came in with all the principall men of hys kinred to the Lorde Lieutenante, and did ſubmitte themſelues, and were aſſured, for that they had not receyued the Engliſh Rebels, ayding or aſſiſting them, neyther had made any inuaſion into Englande. The ninetéenth, the Armie deuided into two partes, the one parte whereof paſſed the Riuer of Teuite, and brent the Caſtell of Ferniherst, and all other Caſtels and Townes belonging to the Lorde of Ferniherst, Huntill and Bedrell, and ſo paſſed to Mint, where both the Armyes mette agayne, and ſo brente on bothe ſides the Riuer, till they came to a greate Towne called Hawicke, where they intended to haue lodged, but the Scottes had vnthatched the houſes, and brent the thatch in the ſtréetes, and themſelues fledde with moſt parte of theyr goodes, but by the induſtrie of the Engliſhmen, the timber was alſo burned with the thatch, ſauing one little houſe of ſtone of Dunlamrickes, wherein my Lord lay that night. The twentith daye, the Armie marched forwardes to a houſe of the Lorde of Bucklugh, whych they ouerthrew with powder, and then marched Northwarde to the Riuer of Tiuet, where they brente and ſpoyled ſuche Caſtels, pyles, and Townes, as belonged to the Lorde

of Fernihurſt and Bucklogh, their kinſmen and adherents, and that night returned to Gedworth. The one and twentith day, part of the army went to the Riuer of Bowbent, vnder the leading of the ſayde Marſhall, where mayſter George Heron, Réeper of Tiuidale and Ridſdale, with them of that Countrey, mette with him, and ioyning togither, rode on, burning and ſpoyling all on both ſides of the Riuer, and the other part marched to the Riuer of Trile, where they waſted and brent all on both ſides the Riuer, and returned to Kilſey, where the Lord Lieutenant lodged of purpoſe to beſéege Hewme Caſtell in the nighte, and the Lorde Gouernour with his company went to Warke, to bring the ordinance from thence in the morning, which was diſappoynted by the negligence of ſuch as were put in truſt for thoſe matters, who ſuffered the cariage Horſſes to returne to Barwike the daye before, which ſhould haue drawne the ſame, ſhe lacke whereof, cauſed the Lorde Lieutenant, wyth the whole armye, to returne to Barwike the two and twentith of Aprill, in all which time, there was neuer any ſhewe by the Scottes made, to reſiſt or defende theyr Countrey.
            The Lorde Scrope Warden of the Weſt marches, entredThe Lorde Scrope entred Scotland. 
               Scotland the eyghtéenth of Aprill, brente and ſpoyled thoſe partes almoſt to Domfrees, he had diuers conflictes, gaue ſondry ouerthrowes, tooke many priſoners, and returned ſafely. During all theſe inuaſions, the marches of Englande in all places were ſo guarded by the Lorde Euers, Sir George Bowes, and other of the Biſhopricke, as the Scottes durſt not once offer to enter into Englande, ſo that not one houſe was burned, nor one Cow taken out of Englande. There were raſed, ouerthrowne, and brent in thys iourney, aboue fiftie ſtrong Caſtels and pyles, and aboue thrée hundred Townes and Uillages, ſo that there be very few in the Countrey, that eyther haue receyued our Engliſh Rebels, or inuaded England, that eyther haue Caſtell, 
                  •
               yle, or houſe for themſelues or theyr tenantes, beſides

the loſſe of their goodes. The xxvj. the Lord Lieutenant accompanyed with the Lord Gouernour, the Marſhall, and diuers luſtie Gentlemen, Captaynes, and Souldyers, to the number of three thouſand, ſet forward to Warke, and ſo to Hewme Castell, whiche Caſtell they beſéeged till the ſame was yéelded, the Lorde Gouernour, the Marſhall, and dyuers other, tooke poſſeſſion for our ſoueraigne Ladye the Quéenes Maieſtie, and expelled the Scortes that were therein, to the number of 168. perſons, in their apparell on their backes only, without armour, weapon, bagge or baggage, among whome there were two Engliſhmen, one Hiliard the Earle of Northumberlands man, and a vagrant perſon named William Godſwher, which both were carried to Barwike
               Rebels executed at Barvvike and there executed the xxtiij. of May. The Lord Lieutenant placed in the Caſt
                  ••
               l Captayne Wood, and Captayne Pikeman, with two hundred Souldyers, and ſo returned to Barwike the xxix. of Aprill, where he reſted very euill at eaſe, hauing in the trauaile taken ouermuch colde, wherewith he was driuen into an extreame ague.
            The fourth of May, he ſente mayſter Drewry Marſhall with the number of two thouſand, to take Fauſt Castell, which at the firſt comming was deliuered to the Marſhall, who expelled the Scottes in number tenne, and placed fourtéene of our Engliſhmen againſt all Scotland, it is ſo ſtrong a place, and ſo returned to Barwike. The eleuenth of May, the Lord Lieutenant made four Knightes, viz. Sir William Drewry,
               Knightes made by the Earle of Suſſex. Sir Thomas Manners, Sir George Care, ſir Robert Conſtable. And the ſame day, Sir William Drewry being Generall, ſet forwarde toward Edenborough with diuers foote bands with ſhotte armed▪ p
                  ••
               es and péeces of great Ordinance, to ioyne with the Earles of Leunox, Murton, Glencarne, and Marre, and other of the Kings power of Scotland, in purſuing of the Engliſh Rebels, and ſuch of the Scottes as ſupported them, as the Duke Hamelton and other, who were in armes at Lithcoe, twelue miles from, Edenborough, to defend their cauſe. The 
                  •
               ort ſayd new Knightes with their

bands came to Edenborough the thirtéenth of May, and there reſted thrée nightes, and departed from thence to Lithcoe, where the Regent was ſlayne. The xvij. the footemen marched to Faukirke, ſixe myles from Sterling, and Sir William Drewry with the horſſemen, marched to Sterling to ſée the King, whome they found ſo perfect in all things as age and nature could permitte. The xviij. they departed to the footebands, and ſo togither marched to Glaſcoy, where the Lorde Hamelton had beſéeged a houſe of the Kings, but hearing of their comming, he fledde with diſhonour, and the loſſe of 29. of his men. The xix. the generall with other horſſemen and ſome ſhotte, paſſed to Dunbarton, to view the ſtraytes of the Caſtell there, being kept by the Lord Fleming, the Biſhop of Saint Andrewes, and other his adherents, to the Quéene of Scottes vſe. Our generall ſent his Trumpetor to require a parley with aſſurance ſafely to returne, wherevnto the Lord Fleming ſubtilly conſented, and minding ſo to wind him into his danger, conueyed certayne ſhot, and armed men into a ſecret place, ſo that our Generall comming alone to haue parlyed, his Trumpetor not returned, they ſhotte at him, meaning to haue ſlayne him, but he beſtowed his Piſtolettes as fréely at them as they at him, and returned to his companye and ſo to Glaſco, from whence, Sir George Care being maruellouſly offended with the ſubtill dealing of the Lord Fleming, wrote a letter of challenge to combate with him body for body, which the Lord Fleming by his letter of anſwere refuſed, wherevpon Sir George Care wrote a ſharp and pithie replie &c.
            The one and twentith day, our Generall accompanyed with the Gentlemen and horſemen, went to Dunbritton agayne to parley with the Lorde Fleming, vpon his promiſe that hée 
                  ••
               oulde méete him thrée miles from the ſayde Caſtell, but the place of parley béeing viewed, was found to be ſubiect to the ſhotte of the Caſtell, and therefore our Generall required another place, which woulde not be graunted by the Lord Fleming.
            
            
               The. xxij. the Lord of Lenox, the Lord Glencarne, and the Lord Simple, with their friends and tenaunts, came to our Generall, and muſtered before Glaſco, to the number of four thouſand horſemen and footemen.
            The. xxiij. oure Generall with the whole armye marched towarde the Caſtell of Hamelton, and there had parley with the Captayne, whoſe name was Arthur Hamelton, but he would not deliuer the Caſtell, wherevpon, our Ordinance being placed, was ſhot very ſor
                  •
               , but did no great harme, for that they were field péeces.
            The. xxiiij. our Generall gaue ſommons to the ſayde Caſtell which would not yéeld, wherevpon, he ſent to Starling for bigger Ordinance for the batterie, and ſo went from thence, accompanyed with the Earles of Lenox and Mortayne, with the horſemen and certayne ſhotte, marched in the Countrey to a faire houſe of the Abbots of Kelwing néere adioyning, whoſe name was Gawyn Hamelton, whiche houſe they burned, and vtterly ſpoyled, with ſeauentéene houſes more of good countenance of that name, whereof one was the Lord Lanhappes, which had marryed with the ſiſter of Iames Hamelton of Bedwilhough whiche ſlewe the Regent. There was burned ſeauen other faire houſes thereaboutes, not of that name, but of alie: beſides thoſe, there were diuers of their kinred and alie, that came in wyth humble ſubmiſſion, and aſſured themſelues, promiſing their obedience to their King &c.
            The. xxv. of May in the morning, was found hanging at the Biſhop of Londons palace gate in Paules Church-yard, aA Bull from Rome, hanged on the Bishop of Londons gate. Bull which lately had bin ſent from Rome, conteyning dyuers horrible treaſons againſt the Quéenes maieſtie, for the which, one Iohn Felton was ſhortly after apprehended, and committed to the Tower of London.
            
            The. xxvtj. of May, Thomas Norton, and Chriſtopher, of Yorkeſhire, being both condemned of high treaſon, for the lateThe Nortons 
                     ••
                  ecuted. Rebellion in the North, were drawne from the Tower of London to Tiborne, and there hanged, headed, and quartered.
            
               The xxvtj. of May, the Caſtell of Hamelton was yéeldedHamelton in Scotland yelded to the English. to Sir William Drewry, generall of our Army, and by him preſently ſpoyled and brent, there was in the houſe 34. mē.
            The xxviij. Sir George Care with the horſemen came to Lithco, where the whole army mette. This day, a very faire houſe, with the whole Towne of Hamelton was brent. The xxix. they brent an houſe of the Dukes called Kemyell, and another at Lithco: the whole Towne, and diuers other faire houſes was yéelded to our generall, who returned to Edenborough and ſo to Barwike the third day of June.
            A conſpiracy was made by certayne Gentlemen and otherConſpiracy in Norffolke. in the Countrey of Norffolke, whoſe purpoſe was on Midſomer day, at Harlestone faire, with ſound of Trumpet and Drumme, to haue reyſed a number, and then to proclayme their diueliſh pretence againſt Straungers and other. This matter was vttered by Thomas Kete one of the conſpiracie, vnto Iohn Kenſey, who forthwith ſente the ſame Kete with a Conſtable to the nexte Juſtice, before whome, and other Juſtices, he opened the whole matter, wherevpon, mayſter Drewgh Drewry immediatly apprehended Iohn Throgmorton, and after him, many Gentlemen of the Citie of Norwich, and the County of Norffolke, who were all committed to priſon, and (at the nexte Seſſions of gaile deliuerie at the Caſtell of Norwich, the ſeauentéenth of July, before Sir Robert Ca
                     •••
                  
                Knight, Lord chiefe Juſtice, Gilbert Gerrard the Quéenes Attourney generall, and other Juſtices) tenne of them were indicted of high Treaſon, and ſome others of contempte, diuers of them were condemned, and had iudgement the one and twentith of Auguſt, and afterward thrée of them were hanged, bowelled, and quartred, which were Iohn Throgmorton of Norwich Gentleman, who ſtoode mute at his arraignement, but at the gallowes confeſſed himſelfe to be the chiefe conſpiratour, and that none had deſerued to dye but he, for that he had procured them: with him was executed Thomas Brooke of Rolſbye Gentlemā the thirtith of Auguſt,

and George Redman 
               
                  ••
                
               Cn
                     ••
                  geleford Gentleman was likewiſe executed the ſecond of September.
            The fourth of Auguſt, the Duke of Norffolke was remomouedThe Duke of Norffolke remoued. from the Tower of London to the Charterhouſe néere vnto Smithfield.
            
            The ſame day was arraigned at the Guild hall of London
               Felton arraigned. 
               Iohn Felton, for hanging a B
                  •
               ll at the gate of the Biſhop of Londons palace, and alſo two yong men for coyning and clipping of coyne, who all were found giltie of high Treaſon, and had iudgement to be drawne, hanged, and quartered.
            The eyght of Auguſt, Iohn Felton was drawne from Newgate into Paules Church-yard, and there hanged on a gallowesFelton and others executed. new ſet vp that morning before the Biſhops palace gate, and being cut downe aliue, he was bowelled and quartered. After this, the ſame morning, the Sheriffes returned to Newgate, and ſo to Tiborne with two yong men which were there executed for coyning and clipping, as is aforeſayd.
            The two and twentith of Auguſt, the Earle of Suſſex
               A iourney into Scotland by the Earle of Suſſex. Lord Lieutenant generall for the Quéenes Maieſtie in the North, and the Lord Scrope, warden of the Weſt marches, with diuers other, marched from C
                     •
                  relile with the Quéenes army, and force of the North, as well of Horſemen as footemen into Scotland, paſſing ouer the Riuers of Eske, Leuin, and Sarke, which Riuer of Sarke parteth England and Scotland, and ſo to Dornocke wood, belonging to Edward Vrone the Lord of Bonſhow, and then to Anno
                     •
                  na, a ſtrong houſe of the Lorde Harris, which they raſed and ouerthrew with other there aboutes: from thence to Hodhim, which they brente and blew vp: from thence to Kennell, a Towne belonging to the Lorde 
                  
                     •
                  owhill, which they brente: from thence to Domfries, which they ſacked and ſpoyled of ſuch paltrie as the fugitiues had left, and alſo raſed and ouerthrewe a ſumptuous houſe belonging to the Quéene of Scottes, in the kéeping of the Lorde Harris: then paſſing

the 
                  〈…〉
                of Longher, they brent and ſpoyled Cowhilles and Pow
                     •
                  racke, and returned to D
                     •
                  m
                     ••••
                  s, and ſo to the Towne of Bankend▪
                which they brente, with another houſe perteyning to William Maxwell of the Iſles, and ſo to the Caſtell of Carlauoracke, ſtanding in a mariſh iuſt to an arme of the Sea, which parteth Aunerdall and Gallaway, which Caſtell they blew vp, and returned homeward, tranſporting theyr Ordinance ouer quickſands and bogges, where neuer the lyke was done before, and ſo came to Darnoke wood.
            
            The eyght and twentith of Auguſt, they marched towards Garelile, where by the way they brent and ouerthrew two houſes, the one being Arthur Greames, alias Carelile, the other Rich George, two notable Théeues. The ſame day at night after the Lordes comming to Carlile, he made Knightes, Sir Edward Haſtings, Sir Frances Ruſſell, SirKnightes made by the Earle of Suſſex. 
               Valentine Browne, Sir William Hilton, Sir Robert Stapleton, Sir Henry Curwen, Sir Simon Muſgraue.
            
            
               Fraunces Bar
                     •
                  ame William Boxe the 28. of September.
               Sherifes.
            
            The 
                  〈…〉
                of On other 
                  •
               t night, happened a terrible tempeſt of winde and rayne, both on the Sea and Lande, byHigh vvaters vvhich drovvned many. meanes whereof▪ many Shippes and other veſſels were drowned, about midnight, the waters ouerflowing, drowned many medowes, paſtures, townes, villages, cattell, houſes, and goodes, to the vtter vndoing of a great number of ſubiectes of this Realme: beſides the loſſe of many men, women, and children, ſome drowned in theyr beddes, ſome in the wayes trauelling &c. As you may reade more at large in a Booke thereof made by Thomas Knell Miniſter.
            
               Sir Rowland Haward Clothworker, the 28. of October.
               Maior. Anno reg. 13
            
            The xxiij. of January, the Quéenes Maieſtie accompanyed with hir Nobilitie, came from hir houſe at the Strand, called Somerſet place, and entred▪ the Citie of London by Temple Barre, Fleetestreete, Cheape, and ſo by the North ſyde of the Burſſe, to Sir Thomas Greſſhams in Byſhoppes gate ſtreete, where ſhée dyned. After Dinner,

hir grace returning through Cornehill, entred the 
                  ••
               rſſe on the Southſide, and after hir higneſſe had viewed euery part thereof, aboue grounde, eſpecially the Pawne, which was richly furniſhed with all ſortes of the fineſt wares inRoyall Exchange. the Citie, ſhe cauſed the ſame Burſſe, by an Heralt and a Trumper to be proclaymed The Royall Exchange, ſo to bée called from thencefoorth, and not otherwayes.
            The ſeauentéeuth of February, at a place called Kynnaſton,
               A ſtrange kinde p
                     ••
                  arthmouing. néere Marclech hill, in the Countie of Hereforde, was ſéene the ground to open, and certayne rockes with a péece of grounde, remoued and wente forwarde the ſpace of foure dayes, making at the firſt a terrible noyſe as it went on the earth▪ it remoued it ſelfe betwéene ſixe of the 
                  ••
               o
                  •
               ke in the euening, and ſeauen the nexte morrow fortie paces, carying greate trées and Shéepecoates, ſome Shéepecoates with thréeſcore Shéepe in them, ſome trées fell into the chinkes, other that grew on the ſame ground, grow now as firmely on a hill, and ſome that ſtoode Eaſt, ſtand Weſt▪ and thoſe that ſtoode Weſt ſtan
                  •
                Eaſt▪ The depth of the hol
                  •
                where it firſt brake
                  •••
               , is thirtie foote, the breadth of the breach is eyght ſcore yardes, and in length aboue twenty ſcore yardes. It ouerthrew Kinastone Chappell. Alſo, two high wayes be remoued nigh one hundred yardes, with the tr
                  •••
                of the hedge rowes. The grounde in all is ſire and twentie acres, and where tillage grounde was, there is paſture lefte in place, and where was paſture, there is tillage grounde gone vpon it. The grounde as it remoued, draue the earth before it, and at the lower part ouerwhelmed the ground, ſo that it is growne to a greathyll of twelue faddome high. It rempued from Saterday till Monday at night following, and ſo ſtayd.
            The ſecond of Aprill, a Parliament began at Westminſter,
               1571 wherein was graunted to the Quéenes maieſtie▪ (towarde hir great charges, in repreſſing the late RebellionParliament. in the North, and purſuing the 
                  •
               a
                  •
               de▪ Rebels and theyr

faultors, whych were fledde into Scotlande) by the Cleargy▪ a ſubſidie of ſixe ſhillings in the pounde, and by the Tempora
                  •
               ties two fiftéens, with a ſubſidie of two ſhillings and eight pence in the pounde.
            The firſt, ſecond & third of May, was holden at Westminster
               Iuſtes at VVeſtminſter. before y• Quéenes Maieſtie, a ſolemne Iuſt, at the Tilt, Turney, and Barriars. The Challengers were Edwarde Carle of Oxford▪ 
                  Charles Hawarde,
                ſir Henrie Lee, and Chriſtophér Hatton Eſquier, who all dyd very valiantly, but the chiefe honour was gyuen to the Earle of Oxforde.
            
            The firſte of June, Iohn Storie a Doctor of the CannonDoctor Story executed. Lawe, who before had béene condempned of hygh treaſon, was drawne from the Tower of London to Tyborne, and there hanged, bowelled and quartred, hys head ſette on London bridge, and hys quarters on the gates of the Citie.
            The eightéenth of June, in Trinitie Tearme, thereA Combate appoynted at Tu
                     •
                  
                  hill. was a combate appoynted to haue béene foughte for a certaine Manour and demaine lands belonging therevnto, in the Iſle of Hartie, adioyning to the Iſle of Sheppey in Kent, Simon Lowe
                and Iohn Kyme were Plaintifs, and hadde broughte a Writ of right againſt Thomas Paramore, who affered to defende hys righte by battell, wherevppon the Plaintifs aforeſaide, accepted to anſweare hys challenge, offering likewiſe to defende their right to the ſame Manour and landes, and to proue by battell, that Paramore had no righte nor good tytle to haue the ſame Manour and landes. He
                  •••
               ppon the ſaide Thomas Paramore broughte before the Judges of the common pleas at Westminster, one George Thorne, a bigge, broade, ſtrong ſet fellowe: and the Plaintifs brought Henrie Nailor Maiſter of Defence, and ſeruant to the right Honorable Earle of Leicester, a proper ſlender man, and not ſo 
                  •
               all as the other: Thorne caſte downe a Gauntlet, whyche Naylor tooke vp. Upon the Sondaye before the battell ſhoulde be tryed on the next morrowe, the matter was ſtayed, and the parties agréed, that Paramore being in poſſeſſion ſhoulde haue the lande, and was vounde

               
                  ••
                500. 
                  •
               . to conſider the Plaintifs, as vpon hearing the matter, the Judges ſhould award. The 
                  〈◊〉
                Maieſty was ye
               The quarrell of combate ſtayed take
                  •
                vp of the matter, in this wi
                  ••
                It was thought good, y• for Paramores aſſurance, the order ſhould be kept touching ye combate, and that the Plaintifs Low & Kyme, ſhould make defaulte of appearaunce, but that yet ſuch as were ſureties for Naylor, theyr Champions appearaunce, ſhould bryng hym in, and lykewyſe thoſe that were ſureties for Thorne, ſhould bring in the ſame Thorne, in diſcharge of their hand, and that the Courte ſhoulde ſitte in Tuthil fieldes, where was prepared one plot of grounde one and twentie yardes ſquare, double railled for the combate, wythoute the weſt ſquare, a ſtage béeyng ſette vp for the Judges, repreſenting the court of the common pleas. All the compaſſe wythoute the Lyſtes, was ſet wyth Scaffolds one aboue another, for people to ſtande and beholde. There were behind the ſquare where the Judges ſate, two tentes, the one for Naylor, the other for Thorne Thorne was there in the morning timely, Naylor aboute ſeauen of the clocke came through London, ap
                  ••
                parelled in a dublet and galeygaſcoigne bréeches, al of Crimoſin Satten cut and raced, a Hat of blacke Ueluet with a red feather and bande, before hym Drummes and Fifes playing: the Gantlet yt was caſt down by George Thorne, was borne before the ſaid Naylor vpon a ſwords point, and his Baſton (a ſtaffe of an elle long, made Taper wiſe tip
                  •
                with Home,) wyth hys ſhielde of hard Leather, was borne▪ after hym, by A
                     •
                  kam a Yeoman of the Quéene 
                  •
                Guarde: he came into the Pallaice at Westminster, and ſtaying not long before the Hall dore, came backe into the Kings ſtréet, and ſo along thorough the Sanctuary, & Tuthil ſtréet, into ye field, where he ſtaid til paſt ix. of the clocke, & thē ſir Ierome Bowes brought him to his tent. Thorne being in the Tent with ſir Henry Cheiney long before. About x. of the clocke, ye court of common pleas remoued, & came to the place prepared: when the Lord chiefe Juſtice with two other hys aſſociates were ſet, then Lowe was called ſolem
                  ••
               ly to come

in, or elſe he to loſe his Writ of right. Then after a certain time the ſureties of Henrie Naylor were called to bring in the ſayd Naylor, Champion for Simon Lowe, & ſhortly thervpon, ſir Ierome Bowes leading Nailor by the hand, entreth with him the lyſtes, bringing hym downe that ſquare, by which he entred, being on the left hād of the Judges, & ſo about til he came to the next ſquare iuſt againſt the Judges, & there making curteſi
                  •
               , firſt with one leg, & then wyth the other, paſſed forth til be came to the middle of the place, & then made the lyke obeyſance, & ſo paſſing till they came to the Bar, there he made the like curteſie, and his ſhield was held vp aloft ouer his head: Nailor put off his nether ſtocks, & ſo bare foote and bare legged, ſaue his ſilke S
                  •
               auilonions to ye ankles, & his dublet ſléeues tyed vp aboue the elbow, & bare-headed, came in as is aforeſaid. Then were the ſureties of George Thorne called to bring in the ſame Thorne, & immediatly ſir Henrie Cheyney entring at the vpper ende on the right hand of the Judges, vſed the like order in coming about by hys ſide, as Naylor had before on that other ſide, & ſo comming to the Bar with like obeyſance, helde vp his ſhield. Proclamation was made, that none ſhould touch the Bars, nor preſume to come within the ſame, except ſuch as were appoynted. After all this ſolempne order was finiſhed, the L
                  •
               chiefe Juſtice rehearſing the maner of bringing the Writ of right by Simon Low, of the anſwere made thervnto by Paramore, of the procéeding therein, and how Paramore had chalenged to defend his right to the lande by battel, by his Champion Thomas Thorne, and of the accepting the, tryall that was by Lowe, with his Champion Henrie Naylor, & then for default in appearance in Lowe, he adiudged the land to Paramore, & diſmiſſed the Champions, acquitting the ſureties of their band
                  •
               . He alſo willed Henrie Naylor, to render againe to George Thorne his Gauntlet, wherevnto the ſayde Naylor aunſweared, that hys Lordeſhyp myghte commaunde hym any thing, but willingly he would not render the ſaide Ga
                  •
               tlet to Thorne excepte hée

coulde winne it and further he chalenged the ſaide Thorne to playe wyth hym halfe a ſcore blowes, to ſhew ſome paſtime to the Lorde chiefe Juſtice and the other there aſſembled, but Thorne aunſweared, that hée came to fighte, and woulde not playe. Then the Lordo chiefe Juſtice commending Naylor for his valiaunt courage, commaunded them bothe quietly te departe the fielde, &c.
            The ſixetéenth of July Rebecca Chamber, late wyfe toA vvoman brēt at Maydſtone. 
               Thomas Chamber of Herieiteſham, was founde culpable of poyſonyng the ſaide Thomas Chamber hir huſbande, at the aſſiſes holden at Maidstone in the Countie of Kent. For the which farre (hauyng well deſerued) ſhe was there brent on the nexte morrowe.
            The ſeauenth of September, the Duke of Norffolke wasDuke of Norffolke ſent to the Tovver. remoued from the Charterhouſe, to the Tower of London priſoner.
            The two and twentith of September deceaſſed Iohn Iewell
               Bishoppe of Salisbury deceaſſed. Byſhoppe of S
                     •
                  liſburie, in hys life a moſt eloquent and diligent Preacher, but a farre more painfull and ſtudious Writer, as hys workes remayning beare witneſſe, whereby hys fame ſhall neuer dye.
            
               Henrie Milles: Iohn Braunche, the 28. of September.
               
                  Sherifes. Maior. The Chriſtians victorie againſte the Turkes
            
            
               Sir William Allin Mercer, the 28. of October.
            
            The ninth of Nouember, great reioycing was made at London with hanquetting and bonefyres, for ioye of the late come newes, of a maruellous victorie obtayned by the chriſtian army by ſea, againſt the Turkes the ſixth of October laſt paſſed, wherein were taken and ſunke of the Turkes Galleis and Brygantines, two hundred and thyrtie, there were ſlaine of the Turkes more than thyrtie thouſande, beſides a great number of priſoners taken, and aboute twelue thouſande Chriſtians▪ that had bin ſlaues wyth the Turkes, were ſet at libertie. The Chriſtians loſte ſeauen Galleys, andAnno reg. 14 were ſlaine aboute ſixe or ſeauen thouſande.
            The thyrtith of December Reynolde Grey was by theEarle of Kent. Quéenes Maieſtie reſtored Earle of Kent.
            
            
               The thyrtéenth of January deceaſed Sir William Peter
               Sir VVilliam Peter deceaſſed Knight, who for hys iudgement and pregnant witte, hadde béene Secretary and of priuie Councell to foure Kings and Quéenes of thys Realme, and ſeauen times Lorde Embaſſador abroade in forraine landes: he augmented Exceter Colledge in Oxforde, with landes to the value of an hundred pounde by yeare: and alſo builded 
                  •
               enne Almes houſes in the pariſhe of Ingerstone for twenty pore people, ten within the houſe, and tenne wythout the houſe, hauyng euerye one two pence the daye, a winter gowne, and two loade of wood, and among them, féedyng for ſixe Ky
                  •
               e Winter and Sommer, and a Chaplaine to ſaye them ſeruice daylye.
            The ſixetéenth of January, the Lorde Thomas Hawarde
               Duke of Norffolke arraigned▪
                Duke of Norffolke was arraigned in Westminster hall, before George Lorde Talbot Earle of Shrewſburie, hyghe Steward of Englande for that daye, and there by hys Péeres founde guyltie of hyghe treaſon, and hadde iudgement accordynglye.
            The eleauenth of February, Kenelme Barney, and EdmondeMather, Barney and Roli
                        •
                      executed. Mather, were drawne from the Tower of London: and Henrie Rolfe from the Marſhalſea in Southwarke, all thrée to Tyborne, and there hanged, bowelled, and quartred for treaſon: Barney and Mather for conſpiracie, and Rolfe for counterfayting the Quéenes Maieſties hande.
            The Quéenes Maieſtie hearing credibly by report, thatConueyers of Belles, Lead & other churche goods, are to be punished to the example of their too many follovvers. certaine lewde perſons, vnder pretence of executing Commiſſions for inquiries to be made, for lands concealed, contrarye to hir Maieſties meaning chalenging lands, 
                  ••
               ocks of money, Plate, &c. letting not alſo to make pretence to the Belles, Lead and other ſuche thyngs belonging to Pariſhe Churches or Chappels. Hir Maieſtie meaning ſpéedily to wythſtande ſuche manner of vnlawfull practiſes, commaunded, that al Commiſſions then extant, and not determined▪ for inquiſition of any manner of concealementes, 
                  •
               houlde be by Superſidias, oute of hir Exchequer reuoked. 
                  ••
               d alſo appoynted ſpéedye remedye to be had againſt ſuche

               
                  〈◊〉
               , as more a
                  •
                large app
                  ••••
               th by a Proclamation, 
                  ••
               iſ
                  〈…〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  ••
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  ••
                haue ſome ſpeciall 
                  ••
               r
                  •
               
               ▪ 
               
                  〈◊◊〉
                to the 
                  〈◊〉
               , but▪ alſo to the refor
                  ••
               ng 
                  ••
                
               
                  〈◊◊〉
                and iniurious attempts, of dyuers that of late time by other colour th
                  •
                for hir▪ Maieſties vſe, had taken away the lead of Churches and Chappels▪ yea and Belles alſo out of Stéeples▪ and other co
                  •
               mon g
                  ••
               d
                  ••
                belonging to pariſhes, an example not to be ſuffred vnpuniſhed, nor vnreformed. And ſo hir Maieſtie e
                  •
               t
                  ••••
               es chargeth hir Juſtices of hir Aſſiſe to prouide ſeuere remedy, bothe for puniſhement and reformation thereof. Dated at Westminster the thirtéenth daye of February, the fourteenth yers of hir raigne.
            The tenth of March deceaſſed ſir William Pawlet knight,Sir VVilliam Pavvlet Lorde Treaſourer deceaſſed. Lorde Sent-Iohn Earle of Wiltſhire, Marques of Winchester, Knight of the Honourable order of the Garter, one of the Quéenes Maieſties priuy Counſell▪ and Lorde high Treaſorer of England, at his Manour of Baſing. Thys worthy man was borne in the yeare of our Lorde 148
                  •
               . the firſte yeare of King Richarde the thirde, and lyued aboute the age of 87. yeares▪ in ſixe Kings and Quéenes dayes. He ſerued fiue Kings and Quéenes, Henrie the ſeauenth▪ 
               Henrie the eight, Edwarde the ſixth, Quéens Marie, and Quéene Elizabeth. All theſe he ſerued faithfully, and of them was greately fauoured. Hymſelfe did ſée the chyldr
                  •
               n of hys children
                  •
                children, growen 
                  •
               o the 
                  •••
               ber of 
                  •
               03. A
                  ••••
                bleſſing gyuen by God to men of hys 
                  ••••
               ing.
            The xxv. and xxvj. of March, by the commaundement of the Quéenes Maieſtie, hir Councel▪ the Citizens of London aſſembling at their 
                  •••••
               all Halles, the Maiſters choſe oute 
                  •
               he mo
                  ••
               e 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  •••
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                perſons of euerye their companies, to 
                  〈…〉
               e
                  •
                of thrée thouſande, whom they appoynted to be Pikemen and 
                  〈◊〉
               
               ▪ 
               
                  •
               h
                  •
                Pikemen were forthwith armed in 
                  •
               a
                  •••
                
               
                  ••
               r
                  •
               e
                  ••
                and 
                  ••••
               r furniture, according there vnto▪ the Gunners had euery of them hys Callyuer, with the furniture, and 
                  〈◊〉
                on theyr hea
                  •
               es▪ To theſe

were appoynted dyuers valiant Capitaines, who to 
                  ••
               aine them vp in warlike 
                  •
               ea
                  ••
               , 
                  〈◊〉
                them 
                  ••
               r
                  •
               ce euery wéeke▪ ſometimes in the Artillery yarde, teaching the Gunners to handle their péeces, ſometime at the Miles end▪ and in Saint Georges fielde, teaching them to ſkyrmiſhe. In the whyche ſkyrmiſhe wythe Miles end the tenth of Aprill, one of the 
                  〈◊〉
                of the Goldſmiths company▪ was ſhot in the 
                  〈◊〉
                wyth a péece of a ſcowring ſticke lefte in one of the Calyuers whereof he dyed, and was buryed the twelfth of Aprill in S. Paules, Churcheyarde, al the Gunners marching from the Miles end in battaile ray, ſhotte off theyr Calyuers at hys graue.
            On May day they muſtred at Grenewich before ye Quéens Maieſtie▪ where they ſhewed manye warlike feates, but were hindred by the weather, whych was all day ſhowring▪ they returned that nighte to London, and were diſcharged on the nexte morrowe.
            The fourth of May Walter Deueroux, Lorde Ferrers ofEarles of Eſſex and Lincolne created. 
               Chartley, and Viſcount of Her
                     •
                  fonde was created Earle of Eſſex: And Edwarde Fines Lorde Clinton, and Say, hyghe Admirall of Englande, was created Earle of Lincolne.
            
            The eight of May, the Parliament beganne at Westminster,
               Barons made. and that ſame daye in the Parliament by the Quéenes Maieſties Writtes, ſir Henrie Compton Knight, Lorde of Compt
                     •
                  n in the Hole, ſir Henry Cheyney Knight, Lorde of Tudington, ſir William Pawlet Knight of Baſing, and ſir Henrie Norrice Knight, Lorde of Rycote, were called Barons into the higher houſe. In this Parliament, for ſo muche as the whole Realme of England was excéedingly peſtred with Roags, Uagabonds, and ſturdy beggers, by meanes wherof, dayly hapned diuers horrible murders, theftes, and other greate outrages, it was enacted, that all perſons aboue the age of fourtéene yeres, beyng taken begging, vagrant, andRoags brente through the 
                     •
                  are. wandring miſorderly, ſhoulde be apprehended, whipped, & brent through the gri
                  ••
               le of the right eare, with a hote yron of one ynch compaſſe for the firſte time ſo taken.
            
               The foure and twentith of May, Martin Bulloke was hanged on a Gibbet by the Well with two Buckets in Biſhoppes gate ſtréete of London, for robbing and moſt ſhamefullye murdering of a Merchaunt named Arthure Hall, in the Perſonage of Saint Martine by the ſaide Well. Thys Martin hadde procured the ſaide Arthure Hall▪
                to come to the ſayd Perſonage, to buy of hym certaine Plate, but after the ſaide Arthure hadde well viewed the ſame, he ſaide, this is none of your Plate, it hathe Doctor Gardeners marke, & I knowe it to be his: that is true, ſaid Martin Bullocke, but he hath appoynted me to ſell it, &c. After thys talke, whyles the ſaid Arthure was weighing the Plate, the ſame Martin fetcht out of the Kitchen a thicke waſhing Bée
                  •
               le, and commyng behinde hym▪ ſtrake the ſaide Arthure on the head, that hée felled him with the firſte ſtroke, and then ſtrake hym againe, and after tooke the ſaide Arthures Dagger, and ſticked hym, and wyth hys knyfe cut hys throate, and after woulde haue truſſed hym in a Danſke Cheſte, but the ſame was too ſhorte: wherevppon he tumbled him downe a paire of ſtayres, and after thinking to haue buryed hym in the Seller, hys legges being broken with the fyrſt fal, and ſtiffe, he coulde not drawe hym downe the Seller ſtaires béeyng wynding, wherefore he cutte off hys legs wyth an Hatchet, and in the ende truſſed hym with Strawe in a drye▪ fat, and ſaying it was his apparell and Bookes, cauſed the ſame to be carryed to the water ſide, and ſo ſhipped to Rye.
            
            The ſixe and twentith of May, the right honorable Earle of Lincolne, departed from London towardes Fraunce Embaſſador, being accompanyed with the Lords Dacres, the Lord Riche▪
                the Lord Talbot, the Lord Sandes, and the Lord Clinton, ſir Arthure Chambernowne, ſir Ierome Bowes, and ſir Edwarde Haſtings▪
                Knightes, wyth dyuers other Gentlemen, who takyng ſhip at Deuer▪
                cutte ouer to Bolongne, where they were very honorably receyued, & from thence conueyed by iorneys to Paris, where they were lodged in a houſe of ye kings named Le Chasteau de Loure, being attended on by the

Kings Officers.
            Fiue dayes after, they wente to the King at a houſe called Madril, where the Kyng wyth his two brethren, the Admirall, and the moſte parte of the Nobles of Fraunce mette them a diſtance from the place, and broughte them into the houſe, where they dyned, and remayned till Sondaye followwyng, from whence the Kyng and hys nobles, with the nobles of Englande, came to Paris, the Kyng, his two brethren, and oure Embaſſador ryding in one Coche togither, and the Nobles of England and Fraunce being ſo placed, alſo in Coches, came to the ſaide Caſtell of Loure, and there dyned. After dinner, the King, our Embaſſadour, with the Nobibilitie of bothe Realmes, wente to a Churche named Saint Germaine, where the Frenche King, his brethren and Nobilitie hearde Euenſong, the Noble men of Englande, withdrawing them into a Chappell, til Euenſong was done, were then fetched thence by the Nobles of Fraunce, to the Kyng and hys brethren that awayted their commyng, where wasLeague vvith Fraunce confirmed in Fraunce. confirmed the league, (whyche hadde bin concluded at Blois the ninetéenth of April,) deputies beyng there for the French partie, Frauncis Momorencie, Reignold Virago, Sebaſtian de Lanbeſpine, and Paul de Foix. And for the Quéene of Englande ſir Thomas Smith, and Maiſter Walſingham Embaſſadors.) Thys being done, they departed without the wals of Paris, to a Garden of pleaſure, where they ſupped, after ſupper the King departed to his place of Madrill, and the nobles of Englande to the Caſtell of Loure. On Monday the Admirall feaſted the Nobles of Englande. On Tuiſday the Duke of Aniow the Kings brother, and on Wedneſday the Duke of Alanſon hys yonger brother, and ſo paſſed in banquetting and feaſting, wyth riche giftes on bothe partes.
            On Fridaye, the Nobles of Englande tooke leaue of the King, and on Sonday came to Saint Dennis, and after to Bolongne, where they tooke ſhippe, and returned into Englande the fourth of July.
            The ſecond of June in the morning, betwéen the houres

of ſeauen and eight, Thomas Hawarde Duke of Norffolke, was beheaded on a Scaffolde ſette vpon the Tower hill.
               The Duke of Norffolke beheaded.
            
            Aboute the ninth of June, Frauncis Duke of Momorencie,
               French Embaſſadors. chiefe Marſhall of Fraunce, Gouernour and Lieutenant of the Iſle of Fraunce, Generall to Charles the ninth Kyng of Fraunce, and Paule de Foix of the priuie Councell to the ſaide King, and Bertrande de Saligners, Lorde de la Mothefenalon, Knightes of the order of Saint Michael, Embaſſadors for the ſame King, arryued at Douer.
            
            The fouretéenth day they ſhotte London bridge towards Somerſet houſe at the Strande, where they were lodged.
            The fiftéenth daye beyng Sundaye, the ſaide EmbaſſadoursLeague vvith Fraunce confirmed at VVeſtminſter. repayred to the White hall, where they were honorablye receyued of the Quéenes Maieſtie, with hir Nobilitie, and there in hir Graces Chappell, aboute one of the clocke in the afternoone, the Articles of treatie, league or confederacie and ſure friendſhip (concluded at Blois the ninetéenth of Aprill, as is afore ſhewed) betwixt the Quéenes Maiſtie, and the Frenche King, being read, the ſame was by his Maieſtie and his Embaſſadours confirmed, to be obſerued and kepte, wythout innouation or violation, &c. The reſte of that day wyth great part of the night following was ſpent in greate triumph, with ſumptuous banquets.
            The eightéenth of June the feaſte of Saint George was holden at Windſore, where the French Embaſſadoures were royally feaſted, and Frauncis Duke of Momorencie, wasS Georges feaſt at VVindſore. ſtalled Knight of the moſte honorable order of the Garter.
            The eight and twentith daye of June, the afore named Embaſſadoures departed from London towardes Fraunce.
            
            The fouretéenth of June, Thomas Lorde Wharton deceaſſed in his houſe of Chanon Rowe at Westminster.
            
            The thyrtéenth daye of July, the Qu
                  〈…〉
                Maieſtie atLorde Treaſorer, Lord priuie Seale L. Chamberlaine vvyth other officers. 
               White hall made ſir William Cecil Lorde o
                  〈…〉
                
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                  hley, Lorde highe Treaſorer of Englande: Lorde Willi
                     〈…〉
                   
                  
                     〈…〉
                  awarde late Lorde Chamberlaine, Lorde priuie▪ Seal
                  〈…〉
                The Earle of

               Suſſex, Lorde Chamberlaine: ſir Thomas Smith principall Secretarie: and Chriſtopher Hatton Eſquier, Captaine of the Guarde, &c.
            The two and twentith of Auguſt, Thomas Percie EarleEarle of Northumberland beheaded. of Northumberlande, late of Topcliffe, who hadde béene béefore attainted by Parliament of highe Treaſon, as béeyng one of the principall conſpiratoures in the late rebellion, and nowe broughte oute of Scotlande, whether he hadde fledde, was beheaded at Yorke, aboute twoo of the clocke in the afternoone, on a newe Scaffolde ſet vppe for that purpoſe in the Market place.
            In this moneth of Auguſte, ſir Thomas Smith one of theEnglishmē ſente to Vlſtar in Irelande. Quéenes Maieſties priuie Councell, carefully tending the reformation of Irelande, ſent hys ſonne Thomas Smith Eſquyre thither, with a Colonie of Engliſhemen, to inhabite the Ardes in Vlster.
            
            
               Richarde Pipe: Nicholas Woodroffe, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Sir Lionell Ducket Mercer, the 28. of October.
            
            The eyghtéenth of Nouember in the mornyng, was
                  Anno reg. 15 A ſtrange Starre appeared. ſéene a Starre Northwarde verye brighte and cleare in the Conſtellation of Caſſiopeia, at the backe of hir Chaire, whiche wyth thrée chiefe fixed Starres of the ſaide Conſtellation, made a Geometrical figure loſinge wiſe, of the learned menne called Rombus: thys Starre in bigneſſe at the fyrſte appearing ſéemed bigger than Iupiter, and not muche leſſe than Venus when ſhe ſéemeth greateſt: alſo the ſaid Starre neuer changing hys place, was carryed about with the daylye motion of Heauen, as all fixed Starres commonlye are, and ſo contynued (by little and little, to the eye appearyng leſſe) for the ſpace of almoſte ſixetéene Moneths, at what tyme it was ſo ſmall, that rather thoughte by exerciſe of ofte viewyng myghte imagine the place, than any eye coulde iudge the preſence of the ſame: and one thyng is herein chieflye to be noted, that by the learned ſkill and

conſent of the beſt and moſt expect Mathematicians, which obſerued the ſtate, property and other circumſtances, belonging to the ſame Starre) it was found to haue bin in place Celeſtiall farre aboue the Moone, otherwiſe than euer anye Comet hathe bin ſéene, or naturally can appéere. Therefore it is ſuppoſed, that the ſignification thereof is directed purpoſely and ſpecially to ſome matter not naturall, but celeſtiall or rather ſuperceleſtiall, ſo ſtraunge as from the beginning of the worlde neuer was the like.
            The four and twentith of Nouember, Edward Earle ofEarle of Darby deceaſſed. 
               Darbie, Lord Stanley, and Strange, of Knocking, Lord and Gouernor of the Iſle of Man, Knight of the noble order of the Garter, and one of the Quéenes Maieſties priuie Councell, deceaſſed at his houſe called Latham in Lancaſhire. His life and death deſeruing commendation, and crauing memorie to be imitated, was ſuche as followeth. His fidelitie vnto two Kings, and two Quéenes in daungerous times, and greate rebellions, in whyche time, and alwayes, (as cauſe ſerued.) He was lieutenant of Lancaſhire and Cheſhire, and lately offered tenne thouſande men to the Quéenes Maieſtie of his owne charge for the ſuppreſſion of the laſt rebellion. His godlye diſpoſition to his tenantes, neuer forcing anye ſeruice at their handes, but due payment of their rent. His liberalitie to ſtrangers, and ſuch as ſhewed themſelues gratefull to him. His famous houſe kéeping, 220. in checkroll neuer diſcontinuing ye ſpace of xlij. yere. His féeding eſpecially of aged perſōs twice a day lx. & od, beſids al cōmers thrice a wéeke appoynted for hys dealing dayes, and euerye Good Friday theſe xxxv. yeres one with another, 2700. with meate, drinke, money, and money worth. There was neuer Gentleman or other that waited in his ſeruice, but had allowance from him to haue as wel wages as otherwiſe for horſe and man. His yearely portion for the diſpenſes of hys houſe 4000. l. His cunning in ſetting bones diſ-ioynted or broke. His deliuery of hys George and Seale to the Lord Straunge, wyth exhortation, that hée myghte kéepe it ſo

vnſpotted in fidelitie to his Prince as he had, and his ioye that he dyed in the Quéenes fauoure, his ioyfull parting thys world, his takyng leaue of all his ſeruants by ſhaking of handes, and his remembraunce to the laſt daye.
            The eyght and twentith of Nouember, Iohn Hall Gentleman,Hall and VVilkinſon executed and Oſwald Wilkinſon, late of Yorke, and Gailour of Yorke Caſtell, (béeyng before arraigned and condemned of treaſon) were drawne from the Tower of London to Tiborne, and there hanged, bowelled and quartred.
            Thys yeare a greate and ſharpe froſt almoſte continuallyeGreate froſte & a sharp vvinter. laſted, from before the feaſte of all Saints, till after the feaſte of Epiphany of oure Lorde, wyth ſometimes greate and déepe ſnowes, and ſometimes raines, whych fréezed as faſte as the ſame fell to the ground, where-through at Wrotham in Kent, and manye other places, the armes & boughes of trées, béeing ouer-charged wyth Ice, brake off, and fel frō the ſtockes of the ſame trées, alſo the wind continued north and eaſt, till after the Aſcention day, wyth ſharpe froſtes, and ſnowes, whereby followed a late Spring.
            The twelfth of Januarye, William Lorde Haward BaronLorde priuie Seale deceaſſed of Effingham, Lorde priuie Seale, Knight of the noble order of the Garter, and one of the priuie Councell, deceaſſed at Hampton Courte.
            
            The eyghtéenth of January, William Lorde Somerſet,
               Earle of VVorceſter ſente into Fraunce. Earle of Worcester, beganne hys iorney towardes Fraunce, to the chriſtning of the Kings daughter there, in ſteade of the Quéenes Maieſtie of Englande, who ſente wyth hym a Font of Golde for that purpoſe, weyghing 326. ounces.
            The ſaide Earle wyth manye of his company were robbedEarle of VVorceſter robbed on the Sea. vpon the Sea by Pyrates, of muche of their baggage, and thrée or four of their men ſlaine.
            In Fraunce he and his traine were honorablye receyued.
            At the chriſtning he gaue the chylde to name Elizabeth, and returned into Englande the ſeauen and twentith of Februarye.
            In the Moneth of February, through ſundry hainous cō
               plaintes

brought to the Quéenes Maieſtie and hir Counſel of Pyrates that kepte the narrowe ſeas, doing manye robberies, as alſo the robbing of the Earle of Worcester, (as is aforeſaid) hir Highneſſe, by the aduice of hir honorable counſell, tooke order wyth the Lorde Admirall of Englande, that he ſhoulde ſende to the Seas ſhippes and men to ſcowre the narrow Seas, and to apprehende ſo manye Pyrates ſhips, as mighte be mette with: and for the better doing thereof, it pleaſed hir Maieſtie to ſende one of hir owne ſhippes named the Swallowe, to be the Admiral, vnder the charge of William Holſtocke of London Eſquyre, Comptroller of hyr Highneſſe ſhippes, who hadde wyth hym the Gyllian, the Barke Garet, and the Barke of Yarmouth, and 360. able marriuers, gunners & ſouldiours in the ſaide thrée ſhippes, and and one Barke whyche ſcowred the narrowe ſeas, from the North Forelande as farre Weaſtwardes as Falmouth inPyrates on the VVeaſt Seat. 
               Cornwall, and tooke twentie ſhippes and Barkes of ſundrye nations, viz. Engliſhe, Frenche and Flemings, (but all Pirates) and in faſhion of warre. He apprehended in thoſe ſhippes and Barkes to the number of 900. men of all nations, and ſent them to warde to Sandwiche, Douer, Wighte and Porteſmouth, (wherof thrée of them that robbed the Earle of Worcester, were ſhortlye after executed at Wight) alſo the ſaidPirats executed 
               William Holſtocke, did reſcue and take from the aboueſaide Pyrats ſhippes fiftéene other Merchant ſhippes, laden with Marchandiſe, that were their priſes, being of ſundry nations, and ſet at libertie the ſaid fiftéene Merchaunt ſhippes and goodes, whiche done, he returned to Portſmouth, and there ended his voyage in March.
            
               Peter Ramus in hys Commentaries of the wars of France,
               Peter Ramus. writeth thus. The Earle of Worcester paſſing into France, certaine Frenchemen and Flemings ſet vppon hym, tooke from him one of his ſhips and kylled certaine of hys men, wherevpon the Quéene of Englande takyng diſpleaſure, ſente the Lorde Admirall (ſaith he) wherein he miſtooke the matter, for Maiſter William Holſtocke was ſente (as is aforeſaide)

who ſet vpon all the ſhippes French and Flemings, tooke and carryed awaye what ſo came to hande, ſo that xx. of Mongomeries ſhippes were loſt, who was goyng to Rochell, with the number of fiftie ſhippes well furniſhed oute of Englande, wyth money there borrowed, (but neuer repayed:) thus his nauie being diminiſhed of thoſe twenty ſhippes, when hée ſaw the kings nauie néere to Rochel, he directed his courſe an other way, landed at Bel Iſle, and tooke bothe the Iſle and Caſtel.
            The fourth of Marche, a man was hanged in chaines inA man hanged in Saint Georges fielde. 
               Saint Georges fielde beyonde Southwarke of London, for murdethe the Gaylour of Horſham in the ſame fielde.
            The ſeauentéenth of Marche deceaſſed Reinolde Grey ofEarle of Kent deceaſſed. 
               Ruthen, Earle of Kent, at Herneſey, and was buryed at Saint Giles withoute Creeplegate.
            
            Aboute the ſame time dyed Edmonde Lorde Chandos.
            
            The fiue and twentith of Marche, beyng Wedneſday in1573 George Saūders murdered at Shooters hill. Eaſter wéeke, and the feaſte of the A
                  •
               n
                  ••
               ciation of our Lady, George Browne cruelly murdered two honeſt men néere vnto Shooters hill in Kent, the one of them was a wealthie Merchant of London, named George Saunders, the other Iohn Bean of Wolwich, whyche murder was committed in maner as followeth.
            On Tuiſdaye in Eaſter wéeke (the foure and twentith of Marche) the ſaide George Browne receyuing ſecreate intelligence by letter frō Maiſtreſſe Anne Drewrie, that maiſter Saunders ſhoulde lodge the ſame night at the houſe of one Maiſter Barnes in Woolwiche, and from thence goe on foote to Saint Mary Cray the nexte morning, lay in wayte for him by the waye, a little from Shooters hill, and there ſlewe bothe hym and Iohn Bean, ſeruant to Maiſter Barnes
                     •
                  : but Iohn Bean hauyng ſenne or eleauen woundes, and béeyng left for dead, by Gods prouidence reuiued agayne, and créeping awaye on all foure, was founde by an olde manne and his maiden, and conueyed to Woolwiche, where he gaue euident markes of the murtherer.
            
               Immediatelye vpon the déede doing, Browne ſent Maiſtreſſe Drewrie worde thereof by Roger Clement, (among them called Truſtie Roger) he himſelfe repaired forthwith to the Courte at Greenewiche, and anone after him came thither the report of the murther alſo. Then departed he thēce vnto London, and came to the houſe of Maiſtreſſe Drewrie, where, thoughe he ſpake not perſonallye wyth hir, after cō
               ference hadde with hir ſeruant Truſtie Roger, ſhe prouided him twentie pounde that ſame daye, for the whych ſhe laide certaine Plate of hir owne, and of Maiſtreſſe Saunders to guage. On the nexte morrowe being Thurſeday (hauing intelligence, that Browne was ſoughte for) they ſente hym ſixe poundes more by the ſame Roger, warnyng hym to ſhift for hymſelf by flight, whyche thing he forflowed not to doe: neuertheleſſe the Lordes of the Quéenes Maieſties Councell, cauſed ſpéedy and narrowe ſearche to be made for hym, that vppon the eight and twentith of the ſame moneth, hée was apprehended in a mans houſe of his owne name at Rochester, and being brought backe againe to the Court, was examined by the Councel, to whom he confeſſed the déede as you haue hearde, and that he had often times before pretended & ſought to do the ſame, by the inſtigation of the ſayde Maiſtreſſe Drewrie, who had promiſed to make a marriage betwéene hym & Maiſtreſſe Saunders, (whome he ſéemed to loue exceſſiuely) neuertheleſſe he proteſted (thoughe vntrulye) that Maiſtreſſe Saunders was not priuie nor conſenting therevnto. Upon his confeſſiō he was arraigned at y• Kings Bench in Westminster hall the xviij. of Aprill, where hée acknowledged himſelfe guiltie, & was condempned as principal of the murder, according to which ſentence, he was excuted in Smithfield on Monday the xx. of April, at which time alſo vntruely (as ſhe hir ſelfe confeſſed afterward) he labouredGeorge Brovvn hanged in Smith fielde. by al meanes to cleare Maiſtreſſe Saunders of cōmitting euill of hir body with him, & then flung himſelfe beſides the Ladder: he was after hanged vp in chaines neare vnto the place where he had done the facte.
            
               In the meane time miſtreſſe Drewry & hir man being examined, as well by their owne confeſſions, as by falling out of the matter, (and alſo by Browns appeachment thought culpable) were committed to warde. And after miſtreſſe Saunders being deliuered of child, and churched (for at the time of hir huſbāds death ſhe looked preſently to lie downe) was vpon miſtreſſe Drewryes mans confeſſion, and other great likelyhoodes, likewiſe committed to the Tower, and on Wedneſday the ſixth of May, arraigned with miſtreſſe Drewry at the Guild hall, the effect of whoſe enditemēt was, that they by a letter written, had bin procurers of the ſayde murther, and knowing the murther done, had by money and otherwiſe relieued the murtherer, wherevnto they pleaded not giltie, howbeit, they were both condemned as acceſſaries to Mayſter Saunders death, and executed inAnne Sanders, Anne Drevvry, & truſty Roger hanged. 
               Smithfield the thirtéenth of May, being Wedneſday in the Whitſon wéeke, at which time they both confeſſed themſelues giltie of the fact. Truſty Roger, miſtreſſe Drewryes man was arraigned on Fryday the eyght of May, and béeing there condemned as acceſſarie, was executed with hys miſtreſſe, at the time and place aforeſayd. Not long after,Anthony Brovvne hanged at Yorke. 
               Anthony Browne, brother to y• forenamed George Browne, was for notable felonies conuayed from Newgate to Yorke, and there hanged.
            The tenth of Aprill, ſeauen Pirates, which (among other) had bin taken on the North Seas, were ledde fromPirats hanged at VVapping. 
               Southwarke to Wapping, and fiue of them were there hanged, the other two had their pardon at the gallowes.
            The ſeauentéenth of Aprill, a Chandlers wife without Aldreds gate of London, who had practiſed hir huſbands deathFour vvomen on the Pillorie. by poyſoning and other wayes, was ſet on the Pillory in Cheape, with thrée other women, who had bin of hir counſell, two of them were with hir there whipped.
            This yeare, the Quéenes maieſtie of Englande being mouedAyd ſent into Scotlād againſt the Caſtell of Edenborough. by the Regent of Scotlande, in the behalfe of the yong King of Scottes hir Couſen, ſente a power of 1500. Engliſhmen,
               
to the ſéege of Edenborough Caſtell, Sir William Drewry Knight, Marſhall of Barwike▪
                to be Generall of hir forces there, with Captaynes as foloweth, Sir Francis Ruſſell Knight, Captayne Reade of Barwike, as theſe folowing alſo, Captayne Yaxley, Captayne Wood, Captayne Brickwell, Captayne Pikeman, Captayne Gamme, Captayne Cace, Captayne Carew, Captayne Erington Prouoſt Marſhall, Captayne Aſtoll, Captayne Sterlee Captayne of the Pioners, and Captayne Barton alſo of the Pioners. Diuers other Gentlemen alſo went thither to ſerue of their owne frée willes, as Sir George Carie Knight, Sir Henry Lee Knighte, Mayſter Thomas Cecil, Maiſter Michaell Carie, Mayſter Henry Carie, Mayſter William Knolles, Mayſter Thomas Sutton, Mayſter Cotton, Mayſter Kelway, Mayſter Dier, Mayſter Tilney, Mayſter William Killigrew, Mayſter Wlliam Selby, and other. Sir William Drewry with the Captaines, Gentlemē, & number of ſouldiers before mentioned, paſſed from Barwike to Lieth, frō whence, on the xxv. day of April, they marched on to Edenborough, entred ye town, & the ſame day ſommoned▪ y• Caſtell in forme as followeth:Tho. Churchyard.
            
            Sir William Kirkandie, ſometime of Graunge Knighte, for as much as the Quéenes Maieſtie my ſoueraigne Lady, vpon the earneſt requeſt of hir deare cooſin y• King of Sots, your ſoueraign Lorde, made to hir highneſſe by his regent nobilitie, and ſtates of this realme, after al good meanes vſed to haue reduced you to dutifull obedience of his authority by treatie, which hither to you haue not duely hearkened vnto, to the only hinderaunce of the vniuerſall peace in this realme, by withholding that his highneſſe Caſtle, meaning as it ſéemeth, to reſerue the ſame for a receptacle of forraine forces, to the manifeſt daungers both of this realme, and of my ſoueraigneſſe, and therefore neceſſarie to remoue ſo perilous a daunger to both the realmes, for which conſideration hir Maieſtie hath ſente hir ayde and ſuccours of men, ordinaunce and munition, vnder my charge and leading, for the repugnation and recouerie of the ſayde Caſtel, to the

ſaide Kings vſe and behalfe, and therefore according to hyr Maieſties commandement and commiſſion, this ſhal be in due manner to warne, require and ſummon you, that you render and deliuer the ſaide Caſcell, with the whole ordinaunce, artillerie, munitions, Jewels, houſholde ſtuffe and ſuch other implements within the ſame, to me and the vſe and behalfe of the King your ſoueraigne, and his regent in his name, immediately after this my letter of Summons, or knowledge of the ſame, ſhall come to you, which if you obey, as of duetie you oughte, then ſhall I in hir Maieſties name enterpone my ſelfe to trauaile with the regent, counſel, and nobilitie here, for ye ſafetie of your liues &c. Otherwiſe if you continue in your former obſtinacie, abyding the Canon, then no further to looke for grace or fauour, but you and the reſt within that Caſtell to be purſued to the vttermoſt, and holden as enemies to hir maieſtie, your owne ſoueraigne & Countrey▪ Giuen at Edenburgh by me ſir Williā Drurie Knighte, generall of hir Maieſties forces nowe in Scotland, this xxv. of April. 1573.
            The Lord Grange Captain of ye Caſtell, notwithſtāding this ſomonāce, refuſed vtterly to yéeld y• Caſtel, who thervpō receiued ſuch anſwere frō ye general, as ſtoode not to his contentation. Herevpon were the Pioners ſet in hand to caſte trenches, and to raiſe mounts in places conuenient, to plāt the ordinaunce vppon. And then began the ſiege of the Caſtell in fiue places, where were erected 5. mounts. The firſt was for the regent called the King mount. The ſeconde for ſir William Drurie general there. The third was gouerned by ſir George Carie. The fourth by ſir Henrie Lee. The fifth by Maiſter Thomas Sutton Maiſter of the ordinance in the Northe parte of Englande. There was at thys ſiege as is reported 1500. Engliſhmen▪
                and of Scottes fiue hundred, there was alſo one with another péeces of Artillery 30. ſixe Canons, nine halfe Canous, ix Culuerings, ſixe Sakers. They within ſpared not to beſtow ſuch as they had, as wel at ye pioners as ſouldiours, in ſo much ye diuerſe were hurt,

and ſome ſ
                  •
               ayne, before the trenches and mountes might be brought to perfection, but they within eſcaped not frée, eſpecially after that the trenches and mountes were brought in ſtate to defende the aſſaylants, who watching and warding in the trenches, anſwered them within the Caſtell very roughly. On the xvij. of May, began the battery of the Caſtell, ſo that there were xxx. Canons ſhotte off againſt the ſame, and ſo well beſtowed at Dauids Tower, that by the ruines therof then and after, the force of the Engliſh Canons were eaſte to be ſéene. The xviij. xix. and xx. of May, the Canons and Demy Canons were not ydle, but the xxj. the whole battery began on each ſide the Caſtell, from the trenches and mounts very hotly, and ſtill they within ceaſed not to make anſwer againe with their artillery, killing and hurting diuers both Engliſh and Scottes, but ſuch was the diligence of the Engliſh Gunners, that they diſplaced the Ordinance in the Caſtell, and ſtroke one of their chiefe Canons iuſt in the mouth, whereby the ſame was broken in péeces. The xxvj. of May, the aſſault was giuen at ſcauen of the clocke in the morning to the Spurre, which by the hardy manhoode of the aſſaylants was wonne, and was no ſooner entred by the Engliſhmen, but that the Generals Enſigne was ſhewed, and ſpread vpon the front and toppe thereof, to the great diſcomfort of them within the Caſtell. In the meane time, whileſt theſe were appoynted to giue the aſſault thus to the Spurre, there were certayne Engliſhmen and Scottes commaunded to make a countenance of an aſſault at the Weſt ſide of the Caſtell, whereby thoſe that aſſaulted the Spurre, might the more eaſily obteyne their purpoſe, but they raſhly aduenturing farther than they had in commandement, were beaten backe and repulſed, with xxviij. or xxx. of their company ſlayne and hurt. The ſame day towarde night, they within the Caſtell by a Drumme demaunded parley, which being graunted, with aſſurance of all hoſtilitie from that houre vnto the xxviij. of May, the Lord Peterroc was let downe by a rope from the Caſtell, and afterward

the Lord Graunge himſelfe Captayne of the Caſtell, and Robert Meluin came likewiſe downe to talke with the Generall, and ſuch other as were appoynted to accompany him: herevpon at length, to wéete the ſaid xxviij day of May, the Caſtell was ſurrendred into the hands of Sir WilliamEdenborough Caſtell yeelded to the Englishmen. Drewry, and ſo it reſted in his poſſeſſion for the time, and his Enſigne was ſet vp and ſpread during the ſame time, in ſundry places of the Caſtell, and afterwards to the great honor of England, by him it was deliuered vnto the vſe of the King of Scottes, and part of the ſpoyle of the Caſtell was giuen to the Souldyers, the Canons and Artillerie, with certayne other inſtruments, left to the King. If the Engliſhmen by force had taken it, it was decréed that they ſhould haue had the whole ſpoyle except the Artillerie, and ſo ſhoulde haue enioyed it by the ſpace of thrée dayes.
            Cauſes of deliuerie of the Caſtell were theſe:
            
               1 Lacke of water: the well within the Caſtel was ſtopped and defiled by the ruines of the Caſtell: the other well without the Caſtell could not ſerue them, for that there was a mount made to hinder them. Another water there was which was vnknowne to them which were without, and was taken from them when the Spurre of the Caſtell was taken, out of the which they were wont to haue a pint a day for euery Souldiour.
               2 Diuers ſicke.
               3 Diuers hurt.
               4 Not many to maynteyne ye Caſtel, which had no ſpace to take any teſt, they were ſo plyed and ouerwéeryed.
               5 Diuers deuided in opinion.
               6 Some were no Souldyers.
               7 No ayde was to be loked for.
            
            The xvi. of June, the priſoners were deliuered by the ſayd Sir William Drewry, in preſence of ſundry Scottes and Engliſhmen, vnto the Regent, and that done, the ſame day, the ſayd Sir William Drewry with his power departed toward Barwike. The names of the priſoners were theſe, Sir

               William Kerkandie Larde of Graunge, and Captaine of the Caſtell of Edenburgh. The Lord Hume. The Lord Ledington Secretarie. The Lord of Peterroe Coneſtable of the caſtel. The Counteſſe of Arguile. The Lady of Ledington. The Lady of Graunge, with others.
            The vij. of June betwene the houres of one and two ofHaile in Northamptonshire. the clocke in the afternoone, a greate tempeſt of hayle and rayne happened at Tocester in Northamptonſhire, where-throughe ſixe houſes in that Town were borne down, and xiiij. more ſore periſhed with the waters which roſe of that tempeſt, the haile ſtones were ſquare and ſixe ynches about: one childe was there drowned, and many ſhéepe and other cattel, whiche when the Water was fallen, manye of them were lying on the hyghe hedges, where the waters had left them.
            The xvj. of June Thomas Woodhouſe, a prieſte of Lincolneſhire,
               Tho. VVoodhouſe. who had laine long priſoner in the Fleete, was arraigned in the Guilde Hall of London, and there condemned of highe treaſon, who hadde iudgemente to be hanged and quartered, and was executed at Tiborne the ninetéenth of June.
            The xvj. of Auguſt, Walter Earle of Eſſex, accompanyedEarle of Eſſex and the L. Rich vvith other ſayled into Ireland. with the Lord Rich, and diuerſe other gentlemen, imbarked themſelues in ſeuerall ſhippes at Leirpoole, and the winde ſitting very well, toke their voyage towardes Ireland. The Earle after many and great daungers on the ſea, at length wanne Copemans Ilands, from whence in a Piniſe of captaine Perces he was brought ſafe to Knock fergus. The Lorde Riche with the like dangers landed at Caſtel Kilclife, where being mette by Captaine Malby, Maiſter Smith, and Mayſter Moore Pentioners, was conducted to Inche Abbey Maſter Malbis houſe, where he had in a readineſſe on the morrow morning a hundred and fiftie horſſemen for their ſafeguarde to Knockefergus, beſide fiftie Kernes which wente a foote through the Wooddes: there was amongſt theſe a thirtie bowes with a Baggepipe, the reſt had Dartes. Sir Brian
               
               Makephelin had prayed the Countrey, and taken awaye what was to be carryed or driuen, but on the ſixth of September he came to Knockefergus to the Earle of Eſſex, and there made his ſubmiſſion: the number of Kyne were eſtéemed thirtie thouſande, beſide ſhéepe and ſwine.
            After him Ferdoroughe Macgillaſtike, the blinde Scottes ſonne, Roze, Oge, Macwilline did the like, and diuerſe other ſent their meſſengers to the Earle, to ſignifie that they wer at his Lordſhips diſpoſition, as the Barron of Dongarrow, Condenel, Odonel, and the Captaine of Kylulto. The Earle of Eſſex hauing the Countrey of Clanyboy and other.
            The Quéenes Maieſtie of England directed hir letters toEarle of Eſſex captain generall of Vlſtar in Ireland. the Lord deputie of Irelād, willing him to make by commiſſion the Earle of Eſſex Captaine generall of the Iriſhe nation in the prouince of Vlster, and to deuide the country won, Clenyboy and elſewhere &c.
            
               Iames Haruy: Thomas Pulliſon▪ the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Iohn Riuers Grocer, the 28. of October.
            
            The xj. of October Peter Burchet Gentlemanne (of the middle Temple) with hys dagger, ſodainly aſſayled, cruelly wounded, and ment to haue murdered a ſeruiſable Gentleman named Iohn Hawkins Eſquire, as he with ſir WilliamPeter Boucher vvoūded maſter Havvkens. Winter, and another gentleman, rode towards Westminster, in the high ſtreate neare to the Strande, beyond the Tē
               ple barre of London, for which fact the ſayd Burchet being apprehended and committed to the Tower, was after examined concerning the facte, who aunſwered that he tooke the ſayde Mayſter Hawkins for another Gentleman, and being further examined, he was founde to holde certaine erroneousPeter Burchet found to be an Hereticke. opinions, for the which he was ſente to the Lollardes Tower, from thence being called into ye conſiſtorie of Pauls Church, before ye right reuerend father Edwin B. of London, & other, & by them examined, he ſtoode in his opinions, till ye
               
ſentence of death, as an heretike was readie to haue bin pronounced againſt him on the fourth of Nouember, but through the earneſt perſwaſions of diuers learned men, who tooke great paynes in that matter, he renounced, forſwore, and abiured his opinions for erroneous and damnable, promiſing neuer to returne to them, and alſo willinglyPeter Burchet abiured his hereſie, and ſubmitted himſelfe to do penance. to do and performe all ſuch penance as the Biſhop his ordinarie ſhould enioyne him. The ix. of Nouember the ſayd Peter Burchet was remoued from the Lowlards Tower to the Tower of London, where on the nexte morrow about noone, whileſt one that had kept him company was gone downe, and locked the dore after him, leauing another with him called Hugh Longworth, who ſtoode at the window reading in the Byble, the ſayd Burchet walking vp and downe in the chamber, tooke a billets end out of the fire, and knocked the ſayd Longworth on the head, and left not till he hadPeter Burchet killeth his keeper. ſtriken him ſtarke dead, for the which on the next morrow, he was arraigned and condemned at Westminster, and then returned to Somerſet houſe, where he remayned that nighte, and on the next morrow, being the twelfth of Nouember, he was brought to the gibbet, where after his right hande being ſtriken off, and nayled to the gibbet, he was hangedPeter Burchet hanged. nigh the place where he wounded maiſter Hawkins.
            
            This yeare about Lammas, wheate was ſold at London
               Anno reg. 16 for thrée ſhillings the buſhell, but ſhortly after it was reyſed to four ſhillings, fiue ſhillings, ſixe ſhillings, and before Chriſtmas to a noble and ſeauen ſhillings, which ſo continued long after: béefe was ſold for twenty pence, and twoDearth vvithout ſcarcitie. and twenty pence the ſtone, and all other fleſh and white meates at an exceſſiue price, all kind of ſalt fiſh very déere, as fyue hearings two pence &c. yet great plentye of freſhe fiſhe, and oft times the ſame very cheape: peaſe at foure Shillings the buſhell, otemeale at foure Shillings eyght pence: bay ſalt at thrée Shillings the buſhell &c. All thys dearth notwithſtanding (thankes be giuen to God) there was no want of any thing to him that wanted not money.
            
               The fourth of Aprill being Palme Sunday, there was1574 taken ſaying of Maſſe in the Lorde Morleis houſe within Aldgate of London, one Albon Dolman Prieſt, and the LadyPrieſts ſaying Maſſe apprehended. 
               Morley with hir children and diuers others, were alſo taken hearing of the ſayde Maſſe. There was alſo taken the ſame day and houre for ſaying Maſſe at the Lady Gilfordes in Trinitie Lane, one Oliuer Heywood Prieſt, and for hearing of the ſayd Maſſe, the ſayde Lady Gilford, with diuers other Gentlewomen. There was alſo taken at the ſame inſtant in the Lady Brownes houſe in Cow Lane for ſaying Maſſe, one Thomas Heywood Prieſt, and one Iohn Couper Prieſt, with the Lady Browne: and diuers other, were likewiſe taken, being hearers of the ſayd Maſſe. All which perſons were for the ſame offences indicted, conuicted, and had the law according to the Statute in that caſe prouided. There was alſo found in their ſeuerall Chappels, dyuers latin Bookes, Beades, Images, Palmes, Challices, Croſſes, Ueſtments, Pires, Pares, and ſuch like.
            Countie Mongomery was taken in Normandy in thePeter Ramus▪
                Caſtell of Donfro, on the xxvij. of May.
            The ix. of July, at ſixe of the clocke at night, in the Jſte of Thanet beſides Rameſgate in the Pariſh of Saint Peter vnder the Clift, a monſtrous fiſh or Whale of the Sea didA monſtrous fish, but not ſo monſtrous as ſome reported, for his eyes being great, vvere in his head, and not in his baeke ſhoote himſelfe on ſhore, where for want of water, beating himſelfe on the ſands, he dyed about ſixe of the clocke in the next morning, before which time he roared, and was heard more than a mile on the land. The length of this Fiſh was two and twenty yards, the nether iaw twelue foote the opening, one of his eyes being taken out of his head, was more than ſixe horſe in a cart could draw, a man ſtoode vpright in the place from whence the eye was taken, the thickneſſe from the backe whereon he lay, to the toppe of his bellie (which was vpward) was fourtéene foote, his tayle of the ſame breadth, betwéene his eyes twelue foote, thrée mē ſtood vpright in his mouth, ſome of the ribbes were xvj. foote lōg, his tong was xv. foote long, his liuer two cart loade, into

his noſtrels any man might haue crept: the oyle being boyled out of the head was Parmaſitie, the oile of his body was whitiſhe, and ſwéete of taſte.
            The ſeauenth of Auguſt, a ſolempne Obſequie was keptObſequie at Paules for the Frenche Kyng. Peter Ramus.
                in Saint Paules Church at London for Charles the ninth King of Fraunce, who being poyſoned, deceaſſed on the thyrtith of May laſte before paſſed.
            The fiftéenth of Auguſt, being Sunday, Agnes Bridges
               Agnis Bridges & Rachell Pinder at Paules Croſſe for counterfayting to be poſſeſſed. a maide about the age of xx. yeres, & Rachell Pinder a wench about the age of xj. or xij▪ yeres olde, who both of them hadde counterfaited to be poſſeſſed by the diuel (whereby they had not onely maruellouſlye deluded many people, both menne and women, but alſo diuers ſuch perſons, as otherwiſe ſéemed to be of good wit and vnderſtanding) ſtoode before the Preacher at Paules Croſſe, where they acknowledged theyr hypocriticall counterfayting, wyth penitent behauioures, requyring forgiueneſſe of God and the worlde, and the people to pray for them. Alſo their ſeuerall examinations and confeſſions were there openly read by the Preacher, and afterwards publiſhed in Print, for the further poſteritie hereafter to beware of the like deceiuers.
            The fourth of September in the afternoone, ſuch a ſtormA lad of 1
                     •
                  . yeres olde drovvned in a Chanell at London. of rayne happened at London, as the like of long time coulde not be remembred, where-through the Chanels of the City ſodainelye ryſing, ran with ſuche forcible courſe towardes the common ſhores, that a lad of the age of eightéene yeres, minding to haue leapte ouer the Chanell néere vnto Downgate, was borne ouer with the ſtreame, and by the ſame carryed from the Conduit there, towardes the Thamis, wyth ſuche a ſwiftneſſe, that no man wyth ſtaues or other wayes coulde ſtaye hym, tyll he came againſte a Cart whéele that ſtoode in the water gate, afore which time he was drowned and ſtarke dead.
            
               Thomas Blanke: Anthony Gammage, the 28. of Septemb.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Iames Hawes Clothworker, the 28. of October.
            
            This Maior wente by water to Westminster, and there

tooke his othe, as hathe bin accuſtomed: he kepte no feaſt atNo Maiors feaſte at Guild hall. the Guyld hall, althoughe greate prouiſion hadde béene made for that purpoſe, but dyned at his owne houſe, wyth his brethren the Aldermen: the Companies dined at theyr ſeueral Halles. This was done by appointment of the Quéenes Maieſties Councell, to auoide infection of the plague, like to haue encreaſed by comming togither of ſuch a multitude. This wéeke from the two and twentith to the eighte and twentith of October, deceaſſed in the Citie and Liberties contayning 108. pariſhes of al diſſeaſes 166. of the whiche number 75. were accompted to dye of the plague.
            Michaelmaſſe Terme, whyche hadde béene adiournedTerme adiorned. by Proclamation, began at Westminster on the ſixth of Nouember. The ſame ſixth daye in the morning, there hapned two greate Tydes at London in the Thamis, the firſt byTvvo tydes in one houre. courſe, the other within one houre after, which ouerflowed the Marſhes, with many vaults & ſellers neare adioyning.
            The fouretéenth of Nouember, being Sundaye, aboute midnight following, diuers ſtrange impreſſions of fire and ſmoke were ſéene in the ayre, to procéede foorth of a blacke Cloude in the North towardes the South, whych ſo continued till the nexte morning that it was day light. The next night following, the Heauens from all partes did ſéeme to burne maruellous ragingly, and ouer our heads, the flames from the Horizon rounde aboute ryſing did méete, and there double and roll one in an other, as if it had béene in a cleare Fornace.
            The eightéenth day at night were very ſtormy & tempeſtuousAnno reg. 17 of windes oute of the South (I haue not knowne the like out of that quarter) eſpecially after midnight, till the nexte morning that it was day light. Theſe are to be receyued as tokens of Gods wrath ready bente agaynſte the worlde for ſinne nowe aboundyng, and alſo of his greate mercie, who doeth but onely ſhewe the rod wherewith wée dayly deſerue to be beaten.
            Thys yeare at London after harueſt, the price of Wheate

began by little and little to fall, from ſeauen Shillings to thrée Shillings the buſhell, at which price it ſtayed (little or nothing riſing or falling) all the yeare after, but bay ſalte was rayſed from thrée ſhillings to foure ſhillings, fiue ſhillings,Bay ſalt deare. and ſixe ſhillings the buſhell, the like whereof had neuer bin ſéene or heard within this Realme.
            The four and twentith of February, the feaſt of Saint Mathie,
               Flyes in February, the number ſtrange. on whiche day, the faire was kepte at Tewkeſburie, a ſtrange thing hapned there, for after a floud, which was not great, but ſuch as thereby the medowes néere adioyning were couered with water, in the afternoone there came downe the Riuer of Seuerne greate numbers of flyes and béetels, ſuch as in Sommer euenings vſe to ſtrike men in the face, in great heapes, a foote thicke aboue the water, ſo that to credible mens iudgement, there were ſéene within a paire of butte lengths of thoſe flies aboue a hundred quarters. The milles thereaboutes were damned vp with them for the ſpace of foure dayes after, and then were cleanſed by digging them out with ſhouels: from whence they came is yet vnknowne, but the day was cold and a hard froſt.
            The xxvj. of February, betwéene foure and ſixe of theEarthquake. clocke in the afternoone, great Earthquakes happened in the Cities of Yorke, Woorcester, Glocester, Bristow, Hereford and in the Countreys about, which cauſed the people to runne out of their houſes, for feare they ſhould haue fallen on their heads. In Tewkeſburie, Bredon, and other places, the diſhes fell from the cupbords, and the Bookes in mens ſtudyes from the ſhelues. In Norton Chappell, the people béeing on their knées at euening prayer, the ground moouing, cauſed them to runne away, in great feare that the dead bodyes woulde haue riſen, or the Chappell to haue fallen: parte of Rythen Caſtell fell downe, with certayne bricke chimneys in Gentlemens houſes. The bell in the Shiere hall of Denbigh was cauſed to toll twice by ſhaking of the hall &c.
            On Eaſter day, which was the third of Aprill, about ix.

of the clocke in the forenoone, was diſcloſed a congregation1575 of Anabaptiſtes Dutchmen, in a houſe without the barres of Aldgate at London, whereof xxvij▪ were taken and ſent toAnnabaptiſtes bare faggots at Paules Croſſe. priſon, and four of them bearing faggots recanted at Paules Croſſe on the xv▪ day of May in forme as followeth.
            
               
                  
                     
                        WHereas I. I. T. R. H. being ſeduced by the Diuell the ſpirit of errour, and by falſe teachers his Miniſters, haue fallen into certayne moſt deteſtable and damnable hereſies, namely:
                        1 That Chriſt tooke not fleſh of the ſubſtance of the bleſſed virgin Mary.
                        2 That infants of the faithfull ought not to be baptized.
                        3 That a Chriſtian man maye not be a Magiſtrate, or beare the ſword or office of aucthoritie.
                        4 That it is not lawfull for a Chriſtian to take an othe.
                        Now by the grace of God, and through conference wyth good and learned Miniſters of Chriſt his Church, I do vnderſtand and acknowledge the ſame to be moſt damnable, and deteſtable hereſies, and do aſke God, héere before hys Church, mercy for my ſayd former errours, and do forſake them, recant and renounce them, and abiure them from the bottom of my heart, profeſſing that I certaynely beléeue
                        1 That Chriſt tooke fleſh of the ſubſtance of the bleſſed virgine Mary.
                        2 That infants of the faithfull ought to be baptized.
                        3 That a Chriſtian man may be a Magiſtrate, or beare the ſword and office of aucthoritie.
                        4 That it is lawfull for a Chriſtian to take an othe.
                        And further I confeſſe, that the whole Doctrine and Religion eſtabliſhed and publiſhed in this Realme of England, as alſo that which is receyued and preached in the Dutch Church héere in this Citie, is ſound, true, & according to the word of God, wherevnto in all things I ſubmit my ſelfe,

and will moſt gladly be a member of the ſaid Dutch church, from henceforth vtterly abandoning and forſaking all and euerye Anabaptiſticall errour.
                        This is my faith nowe in the whiche I do purpoſe and truſt to ſtand firme, and ſtedfaſt vnto the end, & that I may ſo doe, I beſéech you all to pray with me and for me, to God the heauenlye father in the name of his ſonne our ſauiour Jeſus Chriſt.
                     
                  
               
            
            The like recantation was made by them afterwardes in the Dutch Church.
            The xvij. day of May, about midnight folowing, y• rightArchbishop of Canterburie deceaſed. reuerende Father in God Matthew Parker, Doctour of diuinitie, Archbiſhop of Canterburie deceaſed at Lambeth, and was there honorablye buried, on whoſe Tombe being of blacke Marble, is written this Epitaph, made by Doctour Walter Haddon.
            
            
               Sobrius & prudens, ſtudiis excultus & vſu,
               
                  Integer & verae religionis amans,
                  Walter Haddon.
               
               Matthaeus vixit Parkerus, fouerat illum,
               Aula virum 
                     〈…〉
                  nem, fouit & aula ſenem.
               Ordine r
                     ••
                   g
                     •
                  ſſ
                     ••
                  , recti defenſor & 
                     ••••
                  .
               Vixerat ille 
                     ••
                   mortuus ille re
                     •
                   est.
            
            This reuerend Father examined throughly the Engliſhe tranſlation of the holy Bibles, wherein he partlye vſed the helpe of his brethren Biſhoppes, and other Doctours, and cauſed the ſame to be newly printed▪ in the largeſt volume, for the furniture of many churches then wanting. Alſo making diligent ſearche for the antiquities of the Brytons, and Engliſhe Saxons, to the end thoſe monuments might be carefully kepte, he cauſed them to be well bounde and trimlye couered, and ſuch wherof he knew very few examples to be extant (among the which was Matthew Paris, Matthew Florilegus and Thomas Wallingham) hée cauſed to be printed. The famous Pallace of his ſea at Canterburie by long continuaunce decayed and conſumed with fire, he renewed, builded, & fully reſtored with the charges of more thā xiiij▪ C. li.
            He founded a Grammer ſchole in Rachdale in the Coū
               tie

of Lancaſter.
            
            To Corpus Christi Colledge in Cambridge he procured 13 Schollerſhips, and bare the charges in making and furniſhing two Chambers for ſcholers, and the inward Librarie of the ſame Colledge.
            Item he gaue to y• outward & inward Librarie of y• ſaide Colledge a goodly company of printed bookes, & a great nū
               ber of written bookes of great antiquitie & muche value.
            Item he procured to y• ſaid Colledge, y• patronage of S. Marie Abchurch
                in Londō. Item he hath founded two felowſhips in ye ſaid Colledge, & procured one Charter of Mortmaine to the ſum of C. li. by year
                  •
               . Item he hath giuen to y• ſame Colledge of ſiluer plate double guilte 309. ounces 3 quarters, & ſurrendered to them a leaſe with the improuement of xiiij. pound viij. ſhillings yearely for xvij. yeares.
            Item 100. l. to y• maintenance of a fier in y• Hall frō Halamas to Candlemas, & by his laſt will & teſtament 500. l.
            
            Item to diuerſe ſcholers chābers within y• ſaid colledge, diuers bedſtéeds, with ſufficient bedding & bookes to remain for euer. Item he hath founded for euer v. Sermons to be preached in diuerſe places of Norffolke euery yeare in rogation wéeke, & xl. ſhillings to be deuided at Norwich to y• poore and other. Item to the Citie of Norwich one Baſon & Ewre of ſiluer and double guilt. 175. ounces.
            Item to y• town of Ma
                     •
                  ſal in Norffolke for euer an anuitie of 50. ſhillings to be deuided to the poore, with a Sermon in Rogation wéeke.
            Item to Gu
                     •••
                  
                and Caius Coledge an
                  •
                ſcholerſhip, with a ſtanding 
                  •
               up & a pot of ſiluer double guilt 55. ounces thrée quarters, and one neſt of goblets wyth a couer ſiluer & gilt, with a number of good bookes to their Librarie.
            Item to Trinitie Hall one ſcholerſhip, a ſtanding cup and a pot of ſiluer and guilt, 53. ounces, a neaſt of goblets ſiluer and gilt with a couer, and bookes to their librarie.
            Item to the Uniuerſitie librarie fiftie olde antient written bookes, and fiftie printed bookes.
            
               The xxj. of May being Whitſoneuen, one man and tenAnnabaptiſtes banished. women Anabaptiſts Dutch, were in the conſiſtory of Paules condemned to be brent in Smithfield, but after great paynes taking with them, only one woman was conuerted, the other were baniſhed the land. On the firſt of June, the nine women being ledde by the Sheriffes officers, the man was tyed to a Cart and whipped, and ſo all conueyed from Newgate to the waters ſide, where they were ſhipped away neuer to returne agayne.
            The xij. of June, ſtoode at Paules Croſſe fiue perſons Engliſhmen,
               Fiue perſons of the familie of loue ſtoode at Paules Croſſe. of the ſect tearmed The family of loue, who there confeſſed themſelues vtterly to deteſt as well the aucthour of that ſect H. N. as all hys damnable errours and Hereſies.
            The xxij. of July, two Dutchmen Anabaptiſts, were brent in Smithfield, who dyed in great horror with rearingAnnabaptiſtes brent. and crying.
            The xxx. of July in the afternoone was a great tempeſtThunder and hayle. of lightening and thunder, where through both men and beaſtes in diuers places were ſtriken▪ dead. Alſo▪ at that time ſell great abundance of hayle, whereof the ſtones in many places were founde to be ſixe or ſeauen ynches about.
            The fourth of September, being Sunday about ſeauen of the clocke in the morning, a certayne Glaſſe houſe whichThe glaſſe houſe brent. ſometime had 
                  •••
                the Croſſed friers hall, néere to the Tower of London, braſt out on a terrible fire, wherevnto, the Lord Maior, Aldermen and Sheriffes with all expedition repaired, and practiſed there all meanes poſſible, by water, buckets, hookes, and otherwiſe to haue quenched it, all which notwithſtanding, whereas the ſame houſe in a ſmall time before had conſumed great quantitie of wood by making of fine drinking glaſſes, now it ſelfe hauing within it néere fortie thouſand billets of wood was all conſumed to the ſtone walles, which walles greatly defended the fire from ſpreading farther, and doing any more harme.
            
               The xxvj. of September, a Pulters wife in the pariſh ofFoure chyldren at one burden. Chriſtes church within Newgate of London, was deliuered & broughte to bed of iiij. children at one burden, al females, or maiden children, whiche were Chriſtned by the names Elizabeth, Mary, Margaret, and Dorothy, and the ſame day Moneth the mother was buried, but al the foure children liuing and in good liking were borne to church after hir.
            
               Edward Osburne, Wolſton Dixſey, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Ambroſe Nicholas Salter, the 28. of October.
            
            This Maior went by water to Westminster and there tooke his othe as hathe béene accuſtomed, he kepte no feaſte in the Gild-hall, but dyned at his owne houſe with his brethren the Aldermen and other. The Companyes dyned at their ſeuerall Halles, &c. This was done as in the yeare laſte béefore paſſed, to auoide the infection of the plague, whyche myghte haue encreaſed by commyng togyther of greater number. That wéeke from the two and twentith vnto the eight and twentith of October, deceaſſed in the Citie and Liberties, of al diſeaſes 132. of the which number 36. were accompted to dye of the plague. The next wéeke following ending the thirde of Nouember (thankes be gyuen to God therefore) there deceaſſed of all diſſeaſes but 110. and of thē of the plague but 26.
            The eleauenth of February, Anne Aueries widowe, forſwearing
                  Anno reg. 18 God punisheth periurie. hirſelfe for a little mony that ſhe ſhould haue paid for ſixe pounde of Towe, at a ſhop in Woodstreete of London, fell immediately downe ſpéechleſſe, caſting vp at hir mouth in great abundance, and with horrible ſtinke, the ſame matter, whych by natures courſe ſhould haue bin voided downwardes, til ſhe dyed: a terrible example of Gods iuſt iudgement vpon ſuch as make no conſcience of ſwearing againſt theyr brother.
            The fiftéenth of February, Edmond Grindale ſometimeArchbishop elected. Biſhop of London, late Archbiſhop of Yorke, was in the Charterhouſe of Saint Paules Churche at London, elected. Archbyſhoppe of Canterburie.
            
            
               The 
                  •••
               h of Marche in the nighte, throughe a great 
                  ••••
               
               T
                     ••••
                  e boa
                     •
                  e drovvned. of winde, then in the Northweaſte, a Ty
                  •
               re 
                  •••••
                wyth aboute the number of one and thirtie perſons, menne and women comming from Graueſend towarde London, were all drowned, one boy excepted.
            The xxx. of May, Tho. Greene Goldſmith was drawen from Newgate of London to Tyborne, & there hanged, he
                  •
               ded,1576 Greene hanged. and quartered, for clypping of eoyne both gold and ſiluer.
            The fiftéenth of June Martin Frobiſher, being furniſhed of Aduenturers, with two ſmall Barkes and one PinneſſeFrobishers firſte voyage for the diſcouerie of Cataya. departed from Blacke wall, vppon hys voyage for the beſcone
                  •
               e of a paſſage to Cataya, by the Northweaſt Seas.
            Upon the firſte of July he hadde ſighte (as he iudged) of Freeſlande, but durſte not approche the ſame, by reaſon of the greate Ice that lay alongeſt the coaſte: not far from thence, he loſte his Pinneſſe, and one of his Barkes, who miſtruſting the daunger of tempeſtes, retourned home, wyth reporte, that thoyr Generall Martin Probiſher was caſte awaye, whych worthie Captaine notwithſtanding continued his courſe North weaſt beyonde anye manne that hathe heretoford diſcouered, and the twentith of Julye had ſighte of a highe lande, whyche he named Queene Elizabeths Forelande, and after that another Forelande with à greate paſſage, diuiding (as it were) the two maine landes aſunder,8 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  ▪
                thys place he named Frabiſhers Straites. After he hadde paſſed ſixtie leagues further, he wente aſhoare, found the ſame to be in habited with ſauage people caughte one of them into hys Barke, and returning, arriued in Englande in the moneth of Auguſte following: one of hys company brought from thēce a péece of a blacke ſtone, much like to a Sea cole in colour, whiche being broughte to certaine Goldfiners in London, to make a ſay thereof, found it to holde Golde, and that very richely for the quantitie.
            The xix. of July, a woman was brente at Tunbridge in Kent, for poyſonyng of hir huſband: And two dayes béefore, a man named Oxley, was hanged at Maidstone for being acceſſarie

to the ſame facte.
            The tenth of Auguſt, a ſtrange péece of worke, & almoſt incredible, was brought to paſſe by an Engliſhman, born within the Citie of London▪
                & a Clearke of the Charcerie, named Peter Bales, who by his induſtrie and practize of hys pen cō
               triued & writ within the compaſſe of a peny, in Latine, the Lords prayer, the Créede, the ten Commādements, a prayer to God, a prayer for the Quéene, his Poſte, his name, y• day of the moneth, the yere of our Lord, & the raigne of the Quéene: And vpon the ſeauentéenth of Auguſte nexte following at Hampton Court he preſented the ſame to the Quéens Maieſtie in the heade of a Kyng of Golde, couered wyth a Chriſtall, and preſented therewith an excellent Spectacle by him deuiſed for the eaſier reading thereof, wherewith hir Maieſtie read all that was written therein, wyth greate admiration, & commended the ſame to the Lordes of the Councell, and the Embaſſadours, & did weare the ſame many times vpon hir finger.
            The moneth of Auguſt, many complaints béeyng broughte to the Quéenes Maieſtie and hir Councell vppon the Fluſhingers for greate ſpoyles and robberies by them daylye committed vpon hir highneſſe Subiectes, hir Maieſtie gaue order to put foure good Ships, and two Barkes of hir own to the Seas, vnder the charge of Maſter William Holſtocke Eſquier, Comptroller of all hir highneſſe ſhips, with eleauen hundred men, victualled for ſixe wéekes, in whiche time was by them taken eighte Fluſhingers. Shippes, and Barkes, prices, and two hundred and twenty Sea rouers in them, who were ſente alande to ſundry priſons.
            
               Walter Deueroux, Earle of Eſſex, and Erle Marſhall of Irelande, Knight of the order of the Garter, falling ſicke of a Laſke on the one and twentith of Auguſte was gréeuouſlye formented by the ſpace of two and twentie dayes, & deceaſſed on the twelfth of September at Diuelin in Ireland.
            
            
               William Kempton: George Barne, the 28. of September.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Sir Iohn Langley, the 28. of October.
            
            The x. of Nouember, in ye Citie of Worcester, a cruell & vnnaturall

brother (as an other Caine) murdered hys owneMurderer of his brother hanged. natural and louing brother, 
                  〈…〉
                out his wames with an axe, then cutte his throate, and after buryed hym vnder the Harth of a Chimney, thinking thereby (thoughe wrongfully) yet quietly to haue enioyed his brothers goods, long before in his poſſeſſion, but not long after this ſecreate murder comming to light, the murderer was rewarded according to hys deſerts.
            The ſeauentéenth of Marche, through a ſtrange tempeſtAnno reg. 19 whych happened in the North néere to a towne called Richmonde, not onely Cotages, Trées, Barnes, and Hayſtackes,Patricke Brumton ouerturned. but alſo the moſte parte of a Church called Patrike Brumton, was ouerthrowen, with moſte ſtraunge fightes in the ayre bothe terrible and tearefull.
            The ſixe and twentith of Marche, the new Conduit néere vnto Oldborne, and a Standart with one C
                  •••
               e at Oldborne
               1577 Charitable actes of Maiſter Lāb▪ Oldborne Conduit builded. bridge, were begon to be founded by William Lambe, ſomtime Gentleman of the Chappel to King Henrie the eyght, now Citizen and Clothworker of London▪
                the water wherof is conueyed in Pipes of Lead from diuers ſprings to one head▪ and from thence to the ſaide Conduit and Standarte more than two thouſande yardes in length, all whyche of hys owne coſtes and charges, amounting to the ſumme of fiftéene hundred pound, was fully finiſhed the four and twē
               tith of Auguſte in the ſame yeare.
            Moreouer, the ſaide William Lambe hathe gyuen to the worſhipful Company of the Stationers in London, a legacie of ſixe pound thyrtéene ſhillings and four pence the yere for euer, to the ende, that thoſe Stationers ſhall in the Pariſhe Churche of Saint Faith vnder Paules Churche, diſtribute to twelue pore people euerye Friday twelue pence in money, and twelue pence in breade, whyche hath bin truely put in bre theſe ſeauentéene or eightéene yeares before this preſent yeare. 1580.
            Item, to Chriſtes Hoſpitall in London, yearely for euer after his deceaſſe ſixe pounde, and one C. pounde in money

to purchaſe landes for the ſayde Hoſpitall, beſides manye other coſtlye déedes there done as maye appeare.
            Item to Saint Thomas Hoſpitall in Southwarke foure pounde yearely after hys deceaſſe.
            Item, to the Hoſpitall called the Sauoy, ſounded by King Henrie the ſeauenth, he minded to haue giuen one hundred pounde in money, to purchaſe lands for the ſame Hoſpital, but bycauſe ſuche agréementes coulde not be concluded vpon as he reaſonablye required, hys contribution that waye ceaſed, ſore againſt his wil, as manifeſtly appeareth by his charitable giftes to the ſaide Hoſpitall ſomtyme ten pound at once to buy bedding with.
            Item, to the Company of Clothworkers in London, four pounds the yere for euer. Alſo more to the ſame Clothworkers, he hathe gyuen hys owne dwelling houſe wyth other landes and tenements to the value of thyrtie pounde the yeare, to the intente they ſhall hyre a Miniſter to ſaye diuine ſeruice euerye Sundaye, Wedneſdaye, and Friday, and that foure Sermons euerye yeare after hys deceaſſe be preached in the Chappell or Churche to the ſaide houſe béelongyng, called Saint Iames in the Wall by Criplegate, and alſo to gyue to twelue poore men yearly, on the fyrſte of October, to euerye one a gowne of good Frize readye made, a ſhyrte of good Locoram, and a paire of ſtrong ſhoes, and twelue poore women twelue Gownes of the like Fréeſe, twelue ſmockes, and twelue paire of ſhoes for euer.
            Item, he hath erected a Fréeſchoole & ſixe Almes houſesFreeſchole and Almes houſes at Sutton in Kent. adioyning at Sutton Valence in Kent, where he was borne, and hathe appointed for the Maiſter twentie pounde, and ye Uſher, ten pound yerely for euer, and to the ſixe almes houſes tenne pounde yearelye, wyth an Orcharde and Gardens.
            Item, towarde the maintainaunce of a Frée-ſchoole at Maidstone in Kent, tenn
                  •
                pounde yearelye, after hys deceaſſe.
            Item, to ſette poore Clothiers aworke in the Countie of

               Suffolke, one hundred pounde in ready money.
            Item, to the Townes of Ludlow and Bridgenorth, to eche of them one hundred pounde in ready money to ſette poore men on worke.
            In the moneth of Aprill, the decayed ſtone houſe, calledTovver on Lō
                  don bridge taken dovvne. the Tower vppon London bridge, was begonne to be taken downe, and the heades of Traytors being remoued thence, were ſette on the Gate at the Bridge foote, towarde Southwarke.
            
            The ſeauentéenth of May, Richard Robinſon Goldſmith,Robinſon hāged was drawen from the Tower of London to Tyborne, and there hanged for clipping of Golde.
            The one and thyrtith of May, Martin Frobiſher with oneSeconde voyage to Cataya. ſhip and two Barks furniſhed for that purpoſe, ſayled from Harwiche in Eſſex, towards Cataya by the Northweaſt Seas, and entred his ſtraites, beyond Quéene Elizabeths Forlande, aboute thyrtie leagues, where he went on ſhore, and fyndyng ſtore of Golde Ore, fraught his Shippe and Barke, caught a man, woman, and childe of that Countrie, & then on the four and twentith of Auguſt returning from thence, arryued at M
                     •
                  forde Hauen in Wales, on the twentith of September next following
            The twentith of June, William Lumley a poore man inNeceſsity of the poore relieued. the pariſhe of Elmeley in the Countie of Worcester, being kept in priſon by a wealthie Widow, he hauing a Mare of xxij. yeres olde with foale, within thrée dayes after hys Mare did foale a Mare colte, the which immediatly had an Udder, out of the which was milked that ſame day a pinte of Milke, and euery day after gaue aboue thrée Pintes, to the great ſuſtentation of the ſaid pore mans wife and chyldren, the which Colte continued in that ſorte long time after, as hathe bin ſéene of many thouſandes.
            The 4. 5. and 6. dayes of July, was the Aſſiſes holden atStrange ſicknes at Oxforde. 
               Oxforde, where were arraigned and condemned one Rowlande Ienkes, for his ſeditious tongue, at whych time there aroſe amidſt the people ſuch a dampe, that almoſt all were

ſmothered, very few eſcaped that were not taken at that inſtant: the Jurors dyed preſently. Shortely after dyed ſir Robert Bel Lorde chiefe Baron, ſir Robert de Olie, ſir William Babington, Maiſter Weneman, Maiſter de Olie high Sheriffe, Maiſter Dauers, Maiſter Harcurt, Maiſter Kirle, Maiſter Pheteplace, Maiſter Greenewoode, Maiſter Foſter, Maiſter Naſhe, Sergeant Baram, Maiſter Steuens, &c. there died in Oxforde 300. perſons, and ſickned there, but dyed in other places 200. and odde, from the 6. of July to the 12. of Auguſt, after which day dyed not one of that ſickneſſe, for one of thē infected not another, nor any one womā or child died therof.
            On Sunday the 4. of Auguſt betwéen ye houres of 9. & 10.Tempeſt in Norffolke. of the clocke in the forenoone, whileſt the Miniſter was reading of the ſecond leſſon in the pariſh Church of Bliborough, a towne in Suffolke, a ſtrange and terrible tempeſt of lightning and thunder ſtrake through the wal of the ſame churche into the ground almoſt a yarde déepe, draue down al the people on that ſide, aboue xx. perſons, then renting the wal vp to the Reueſtrie, cleft ye dore, & returning to the Stéeple, rent the Timber, brake the Chimes, and fled towarde Bongey 6. miles off. The people that were ſtricken downe, were found groueling more than halfe an houre after, whereof a man more than xl. yeres, & a boy of xv. yeres old were found ſtarke dead, the other were ſcorched. The like flaſhe of lightning and crackes of thunder, rent the pariſh Church of Bongey 9. miles from Norwich, wroong in ſunder the wyers and whéeles of the clocke, ſlewe two men which ſate in the Belfrey when other were at Proceſſion, and ſcorched an other whiche hardly eſcaped.
            The Tower vpon London bridge, being taken downe, &The tovver on London bridge nevve builded. a new foundation drawen, ſir Iohn Langley, Lord Maior of the Citie of London laid the firſt ſtone the xxviij. of Auguſte, in preſence of the ſheriffes of London, and the two Bridge Maiſters, Thomas Battes, and Robert Aske.
            
            
               Nicholas Backhouſe: Frauncis Bowyer, the 28. of Septemb.
               Sherifes. Maior.
            
            
               Sir Thomas Ramſey Grocer, the 28. of October.
            
            
               The ninetéenth of Nouember, the newe Sergeantes at
                  Anno reg. 20 Sergeants feaſte the Lawe, ſeauen in number, helde their feaſte in the Temple at London.
            
            The thyrtith of Nouember, Cuthbert Maine was drawen,Cutbert Maine executed. hanged, and quartered at Lawnceston in Cornewall, for preferring Romaine power.
            The ſeauentéenth of Januarye, one Simon Pembrooke
               Example of Sorcerers. dwelling in Saint Georges pariſhe in Southwarke, beyng vehementlye ſuſpected to be a Coniurer, by commaundement of the ordinarie Judge for thoſe partes, appeared in the pariſh Churche of Saint Sauiour, at a Courte holden there, whyche Simon béeing buſied in entertainyng a Proctor, and hauyng money in his hande, leaned hys head vppon a Pewe, wherein the Proctor ſtoode: whyche after he had done a certaine ſpace, the Proctor beganne to lifte vppe hys heade, to ſée what hée ayled, and found him departing out of lyfe, and ſtraightway the ſaide Simon fel downe, ratling a little in the throate, and neuer ſpake worde after: this was done euen as the Judge came into the Churche, who ſaid it was the iuſt iudgement of God towardes thoſe that vſed Sorcerie, and a greate example to admoniſh other to feare the iuſtice of God. After his clothes being opened, there were foūd aboute hym fiue diueliſhe Bookes of Coniuration and moſt abhominable practiſes, with a picture of Tinne of a manne hauyng thrée Dice in hys hande, with this writing, Chaunce Dice fortunately, and dyuers papers of ſuche like matters, as he had dealt in for men, ſuch as are mentioned in Leuiticus the twentith Chapter and ſixth verſe: If any ſoule turne himſelfe after ſuche as worke with ſpirites, and after ſoothſayers, to goe a whoring after them (ſayth the Lorde) I wil put my face againſte that ſoule, and will cutte him off from among my people.
            The third of February, early in the morning Iohn Nelſon,
               Nelſon executed. for denying the Quéenes Supremacie, and ſuch other trayterous wordes againſte hir Maieſtie, was drawen from Newgate to Tyborne, and there hanged, bowelled and quartred.
            
               The ſeauenth of February, one named Sherewood wasSherevvood executed. drawen from the Tower of London to Tyborne, and there haged, bowelled and quartered for the like treaſon.
            The ninth of Marche, ſeauen Pyrates were hanged atPirats hanged. 
               Wapping.
            
            The fiftéenth of February, Iohn de Ley a Frenchman, & fiue Engliſhe Gentlemen, were conueyed from the Tower of London towarde Norwiche, there to be araigned and executed, for coyning of money counterfaite.
            The tenth of March deceaſſed the Lady Margaret Counteſſe1578 of Leunex, and was buryed at Westminster the thyrde of Aprill.
            The one and thyrtith of Maye, Martin Frobiſher wythFrobishers third voyage. fiftéene ſaile of good Shippes, manned, victualled, and other wayes wel appoynted, departed from Harwich in Eſſex, on hys thyrde voyage towardes Cataya.
            
            The one and thyrtith of July, after many attempts, and ſundrye times being putte backe by Ilandes of Ice in hys ſtraights, he recouered his long wiſhed Porte, and came to Ancker in the Ilandes, newly by hir Maieſtie named Meta Incognita, where (as in the yeare before) they fraughte theyr ſhippes with Golde Ore oute of the Mines, and then on the laſte of Auguſte returning thence, arriued ſafely in England about the firſte of October.
            
               George Bond: Thomas Starkie, the 28. of September.
               
                  Sherifes. Maior. Anno reg. 21 Caſsimere receyued.
            
            
               Sir Richarde Pipe Draper, the 28. of October.
            
            The two and twentith of Januarie, about ſeauen of the clocke at night, Iohn Caſsimere Counte Palatine of Rhene, Duke of Bauare, landing at the Tower of London, was there by diuers Noblemen and others honorably receiued, and conueyed by Creſſet light and Torche lighte to ſir Thomas Greſhams houſe in Biſhops gate ſtréete, where he was feaſted and lodged till Sunday nexte that he was by the Nobilitie fetched to the Courte at Westminster, and after lodged in Somerſet houſe.
            
               On the eight of Februarie, he was made Knight of the Garter, and on the fouretéenth of Februarie, departed from London homewardes, with greate rewardes giuen by the Quéenes Maieſtie, the Nobilitie, men of honor, the Maior of London and the Citizens.
            The fourth of Februarie, and in the night following, felDeepe Snovve. ſuch abundance of Snowe, that on the fifth in the morning, the ſame was founde at London to lye two foote déepe in the ſhalloweſt, and otherwiſe, being driuen by the winde, very boyſterous in the Northeaſt, on Bankes, an ell, or yard and halfe déepe, in the whiche drifts of Snow in the Countries, manye cattell, and ſome men and women were ouerwhelmed and loſte, it ſnowed till the eight daye, and fréezed till the tenth. Then followed a thawe wyth continuall raine a long time after, whyche cauſed ſuche high flouds, that theGreate lande vvater floudes. Marſhes and lowe groundes being drowned for the tyme, y• water roſe ſo high in Westminster hall, that after the fall therof, ſome fiſhes were founde there to remaine.
            The ſeauentéenth of Februarie, a yong man was hangedOne hanged at Miles end. in chaines, on the miles end by London, for murdering of a man in a Garden of Spep
                     •
                  n heath pariſhe.
            The twentith of February, deceaſſed ſir Nicholas Bacon,
               Lorde Keeper deceaſſed. Lorde kéeper of the greate Seale of Englande, who was honorably buried vnder a ſumptuous Monument or Tombe, (by him in his life time erected) in Paules Churche of London the ix. of March. He alſo in his life time gaue for ſixe Scholers, to be founde in Benet Colledge at Cambridge, to eache of them thrée pounde ſixe ſhillings and eight pence the yeare for euer.
            The foure and twentith of Aprill, fell ſuch a ſnowe betwixt1579 the houres of foure of the clocke in the morning, and nine of the clocke before noone, that at London ſome was foūd to lye almoſt one foote déepe.
            The fiue and twentith of Aprill, ſir Thomas Bromley Knight, was made Lorde Chauncelor of Englande.
            
            
               Mathew Hamont of Hetherſet, by his trade a Plough

Wright, thrée myles from Norwiche, was conuented beforeAn Heretike brent at Norvviche. the Byſhop of Norwiche, for that he denyed Chriſte 
                  ••
               t the time of hys appearaunce it was obiected, that he had publiſhed theſe Hereſies followyng.
            That the newe Teſtament and Goſpell of Chriſte are but mere fooliſhneſſe, a ſtorie of menne, or rathera mere fable.
            Item, that man is reſtored to grace by the méere mercy of God, wythout the meane of Chriſts bloud, death, and paſſion.
            Item, that Chriſte is not God, nor the Sauiour of the world, but a méere man, a ſinfull man, and an abhominable Idoll.
            Item, that al they that worſhippe him are abhominable Idolaters: And, that Chriſte didde not riſe agayne from death to life by the power of his Godhead, neither, that hée did aſcende into Heauen.
            Item, that the holy Ghoſte is not God, neither, that there is any ſuche holy Ghoſte.
            Item, that Baptiſme is not neceſſarie in the Churche of God, neither the vſe of the ſacrament of the body & bloude of Chriſt.
            For the whyche hereſies, he was condemned in the Conſiſtorie, and ſentence was read againſte him by the Biſhop of Norwich, the fouretéenth of Aprill, and therevppon deliuered to the Sheriffes of Norwich, and bycauſe he ſpake wordes of blaſphemie againſt the Quéenes Maieſtie, and others of hir Counſell, he was by the Recorder Maiſter Sergeant Windham, and the Maior ſir Robert Wood of Norwich, condemned to loſe bothe hys eares, whyche were cutte off the thyrtéenth of Maye in the market place of Norwiche. And afterwardes, the twentith of Maye he was brent in the Caſtell ditche of Norwiche.
            
            This yere in the moneth of May, Marke Scaliot BlackeA locke, & kāy, vveyghed but one vvheate corne. ſmith, Citizen of London, borne in the pariſh of Saint Clements wythoute Temple Barre, for 
                  •
               yall of Workemanſhippe,

made one hanging Locke of Yron, Stéele, and Braſſe, of eleauen ſeuerall péeces, a pipe Kay, fyled thrée ſquare, wyth a Potte vpon the ſhotte and the bowe wyth two Eſſes, all cleane wrought, whyche weighed but one Graine of Gold, or Wheat corne: he alſo at the ſame time made a Chaine of Golde of 43. Linckes, to the whyche Chaine the Locke and Kay being faſtened, and put aboute a Flyes necke, ſhe drew the ſame with eaſe, all whyche Locke and Kay, Chaine and Flye weyghed but one Graine and halfe, a thing almoſt incredible, but that my ſelfe amongeſt other haue ſéene it.
            The firſte of June, deceaſſed Robert Horne Doctoure ofBishop of VVin cheſter deceaſed Diuinitie, Byſhoppe of Winchester, and Prelate of the moſt honorable order of the Garter, at Winchester place in Southwarke, and was buryed at Winchester.
            
            The ſeauentéenth day of July, the Quéenes moſte excellentTrayterous fact of T. Appletree. Maieſtie, being on y• riuer of Thamis, betwixt hir Highneſſe Mannour of Greenewiche and Detteforde, in hir priuie Barge, accompanyed with Mounſier Schemere the French Embaſſadour, the Earle of Lincolne, and Maiſter Uizchamberlaine, &c. with whom ſhe entred diſcourſe about waightie affaires: it chanced, that one Thomas Appletree a yong man and ſeruant to Maiſter Henrie Carie, with two or thrée children of hir Maieſties Chappell, and one other named Barnard Acton, being in a Boate on the Thamis, rowing vp and downe betwixte the places afore named, the foreſaide Thomas Appletree hadde a Caly
                  •
               er or Harquebuze, whych he hadde thrée or foure times diſcharged with Bullet, ſhooting at randone very raſhly, who by greate miſfortune ſhot one of the Watermen, being the ſeconde man nexte vnto the Bales of the ſaide Barge, labouring with hys Oare, (whyche ſate wythin ſixe foote of hir Highneſſe) cleane throughe bothe hys armes: the blows was ſo greate and gréenous, that it moued him out of his place, and forced hym to crye and ſcrit
                  •
               he oute piteouſlye, ſuppoſing hymſelfe to be ſlaine, and ſaying, he was ſhot thorough the body. The man bléeding abundantly, as though he had had 100. Daggers thruſt into him, the Quéenes Maieſtie ſhewed

ſuch noble courage as is moſte wonderfull to be heard and ſpoken of, for beholding him ſo maimed, and bléeding in ſuche ſorte, ſhe neuer baſhed thereat, but ſhewed effectually a prudent and magnanimous heart, and moſte curteouſlye comforting the pore man, ſhe had him be of good chéere, and ſaide, he ſhoulde want nothing that mighte be for hys eaſe, commaunding him to be couered till ſuche time as he came to the ſhoare, till whyche time he laye bathing in his owne bloude, whiche might haue bin an occaſion to haue terrified the eyes of the beholders. But ſuche, and ſo greate was the courage and magnanimitie of oure dread and ſoueraigne Ladye, that it neuer quayled. To be ſhort, Thomas Appletree and the reſt were apprehended and broughte before hir honorable Counſel, who with great grauitie and wiſedome employed their times very carefully, and with greate diligence examined the ſaide Appletree and his companions, and finding the caſe moſte hainous and wicked, iuſtlye pronounced againſte hym the ſentence of Death, and commitThomas Appletree should haue ſuffered death on the 21 of Iuly. him to the Marſhalſea in Southwarke, from whence the Tuiſday following he was brought throughe the Citie with the Knight Marſhalles men, ledde vp to the Tower Hill, and ſo to Radcliffe vppe to Blacke wall, and ſo downe to the water ſide, where was a Gibet: ſet vppe, directly placed béetwixte Dertforde and Greenewiche, for the execution of this male factour, who in déede very pitifully bewayled the offence hée had committed, and as well in priſon as by the way prepared himſelfe very penitently and willingly to offer his body to the death.
            Thus verye godlye he purpoſed to finiſhe his miſerable and wretched life, and ſo prepared himſelf to aſcend and goe vppe the Ladder, and being on the ſame, he turned himſelfe, and ſpake to the people as followeth: Good people, I am come hither to die, but God is my iudge, I neuer in my life intended hurte to the Quéenes moſt excellent Maieſtie, nor meant the harme of anye creature, but I praye to God with all my heart, long to proſper and kéepe hir Highneſſe

in health, who bleſſe and defende hir from all perilles and daungers, who proſper hir in all hir affaires, and bleſſe hir moſte Honorable Counſell, gyuing them grace to doe all things to the glory of God, and the benefite of thys realme: But of all things, I am moſte ſorie for my offence, and wofully bewaile the ſame: and more, I am penitent and ſorie for my good Maiſter, Maiſter Henrie Carie, who hathe béene ſo gréeued for my fault, ſuffering rebuke for the ſame: I woulde to god I had neuer bin borne that haue ſo gréeuouſlye offended him. And wyth that the teares guſht oute of his eyes verye faſte. This ſaide, he perſwaded all men to ſerue God, and to take an example by hym, and euerye night and morning moued them deuoutly to ſay the Lords prayer. And as the executioner had put the roape about his necke, the people cryed, ſtay, ſtay, ſtay, and with that came the righte Honorable ſir Chriſtopher Hatton Uizchamberlaine to hir highneſſe, who enquired what he had confeſſed, and being certified, as is before expreſſed, he vayled his bonet, and declared, that the Quéenes Maieſtie had ſente him thither bothe to make the cauſe open to them how haynous and gréeuous the offence of the ſaid Thomas Appletree was, and further to ſignifie to him hir gratious pleaſure: and ſo continued his meſſage, as ye may reade it printed by it ſelf, and annexed to this diſcourſe. Whyche, when he had declared, the Hangman was commanded to take the roape from his necke. Appletree being come downe from the Ladder, receiued his pardon, and gaue God and the Prince praiſe, for ſo greate a benefite as he had by hir moſt gratious bountie receiued. This done, Maiſter Uizchamberlaine ſaid: Good people pray for the Quéenes Maieſtie, and then was this prayer ſaide, whyche is vſually read (for the preſeruation of hir Maieſtie) in the Church: O Almightie and euerliuing God, the Lord of Lordes, and King of Kings, whyche doeſt from thy throne beholde all the dwellers of the earth, moſte hartily we beſeeche thee with thy fauour to beholde our moſte gratious Soueraigne Lady Queene Elizabeth, &c.
               
Wherevnto all the people ioyfully accorded to ſaye, Amen, trying. God ſaue the Quéene, caſting vp their Cappes.
            Thus was the dead man reſtored to life, and broughte backe to the Marſhalſea againe, euen as he was led thence to the place of execution, where he by the way moſte ioyfullye prayed for the ſecuritie of the Quéenes Maieſtie.
            
               
                  
                     
                        The mercifull meſſage of the Quenes Maieſtie, ſent by the right Honorable Sir Christopher Hatton, to the place where Thomas Appletree ſhoulde haue ſuffered for hys traytour-like action, ſet downe worde for worde ſo neare as coulde be gathered.
                        
                           MAiſter Carie, hir moſte excellent Maieſtie is pleaſed to ſend me to deliuer hir commandmentThe people doubted of a pardon at his firſte ſpeach. to you touching this man nowe héere preſently to dye. And firſt, I thinke it not oute of purpoſe to notifie his offence to theſe good people, whereby he is not onely worthy this puniſhment: but in iudgement of forraine nations, and by cenſure of forraine lawes, ſhould be delyuered to the tormentors, to endure ſuche torture, as the qualitie of hys offence in ſo high a caſe by good pollieie ſhoulde condignely deſerue.
                        And to ſpeake of this facte, ſuche it was, and ſo fearefull,The people maruellous attē
                              
                                 •
                               tiue to heare. as my heart quaketh, and my eyes can not refraine teares, to repeate it againe amongeſt you. (God for hys mercies ſake ſhielde and defende hir moſte excellent Maieſtie, that moſte mightily hathe digeſted the notable daunger.) And ſo I will tel you of this tragedie in courſe as it fell out.
                        It liked hir Highneſſe, in reſpecte of the greate heate, to take the ayre of the water, where in graue and waightie negotiation, ſhe paſſed the time in diſcourſe with the French

Embaſſador by y• ſpace of an houre or two. In hir returne itThe cauſe is declared vvhy hir Maieſtie tooke vvater. pleaſed hir to take dyuers pauſes, and the rather, bicauſe ſhe earneſtly read a Booke, wherein it ſéemed for recreations ſake ſhe tooke ſome delight. By meanes whereof, (euen as it pleaſed God wth his holy hande, as it were, to directe hir ſafetie) ſhe commaunded the Bargemen to ſlacke their labour,Only Gods prouidēce in ſauing hir Maieſtie frō the shotte. and ſlowly to paſſe on, where, if they hadde haſted but two ſtrokes more, they had brought hir Royal perſon to the ſhotte it ſelfe.
                     
                  
               
            
            Theſe wordes were ſcarcely ſpoken out by hir Maieſtie, but this Caitiue moſte vnhappily (I muſte ſaye moſte diueliſhly) diſcharged his Arquebuze, ſtrōgly charged with Bullet, into the Barge where hir Maieſtie was. (God that hath defended hir, thou moſt mightie God euer vouchſafe to kéep hir.) With this blowe the ſeconde man to the bayles of theA ſtrange and horrible terrour neuer heard nor ſeene the like in England before Barge, wythin ſixe foote of hir Royall perſon, was ſtricken down from his ſeate, and woūded through both his armes, whiche hir Maieſtie beheld, and kingly handled this cauſe, as euen ſtraight I will tell you.
            My Lordes of hir Maieſties Counſel diſperſed abroadeThe ſodaine greate feare of the Lords of the Counſel at the hearing of theſe 
                     •
                  errible nevves. in their affaires, hearing of this moſte perilous aceidente, returned to Courte, wyth ſuche ſpéede, as the waight of ſuch a cauſe might moue them to do, and there with feareful and louyng applauſure towarde hir Maieſtie, did moſte holily thanke our God for his ſingular help in the preſeruation of oure moſte deare and righteous Soueraigne.
            That done according, with their loues, and dueties of ſeruice to God, hir Maieſtie, and this whole eſtate: after deliberate and moſte graue conſultation of the cauſe, they al moſte humbly on their knées beſoughte the Quéene, thatThe Counſell moſt deſious to punishe this fact this ſlaue mighte ſuffer, not this death, but tenne thouſande deaths, (if ſo it were poſſible in nature to doe) for his ſo raſh and fearefull offence. Suche, in déede, mighte the offence haue bin, whiche God for his mercies ſake hathe moſte fauourably forbidden, that it mighte hane rought vp to Heauen, and ſhoulde moſte miſerably not onely haue plagued

this hir owne lande, but all the true ſeruants of God dyſperſedIt vvas ſtraunge to ſee the people ſtaring in M. Vischamberlaines face, ſome vveeping, ſome trembling at the ſpeaking of theſe vvordes. through Chriſtendome: our Religion, and true faith in Jeſus Chriſte, whyche wée enioye wyth vnſpeakable comforte of frée conſcience, mighte hereby haue ſuffred confuſion, and perſecution of bloude, and vengeance amongſt vs. Our peace, and ſecure eſtates, encreaſed with excéeding wealthes, and nouriſhed with moſt ſwéete quietneſſe of life by thys hir moſte happy gouernement, and raygne of twentie yeares, might hereby haue bin turned to blouty warres, the fruites whereof is burning and ſpoyling of houſes and goods, rauiſhing and deſtroying of wiues and chyldren. And what vengeance ſoeuer the worlde can bring forth, the ſame ſhoulde haue fallen on vs, I ſaye on vs, then the moſt miſerable men in the worlde. And therefore heare me I praye you▪ Let vs acknowledge before God wyth all humbleHere they lyfte vp both handes and eyes to heauen, ſaying: God bleſſe hir Maieſtie, God bleſſe hir Maieſty. &c. thankefulneſſe theſe vnſpeakable benefites, whych we haue enioyed, and ſtill ſhall doe, while God vpholdeth hir bleſſed life and ſtate amongeſt vs: The loſſe and lacke of whome, can not but bring on vs all theſe calamities, and ten thouſande moe; whyche I cannot foreſée. If then by theſe, and al other benefites, whyche you poſſeſſe, féele, and taſte of, youHere the people vvith tears shevved themſeſues moſt ſorrovvful of theſe tragicall ſpeaches. finde how ineſtimable and pretious a Jewell thys our déere Soueraigne is for vs, and amongeſt vs, what plague, forment, or puniſhment, could ſuffiſe you for reuenge on him, that by anye meanes ſhoulde depriue you of ſuche heauenly and worldly felicities, as dayly by hir holy hande are miniſtred amongeſt you? But I will meddle no further wyth theſe matters. I knowe you thanke God for them, and wyth true and faithfull obedient heartes, wyll euer ſerue hir moſte excellent Maieſtie, whome he hathe made hys Miniſter to diſtribute al theſe bleſſyngs into your boſomes.
            And now, if it pleaſe you, you may wyth maruell heareThis ſodaine ſtraunge pardon amazed the people. the Meſſage I come of. I bryng mercie to thys manne, the gratious pardon of oure moſt deare Soneraigne, who with hir mercifull eye, beholdyng the cleareneſſe of this mannes heart, frée from euill thought, and conſequentlye from prepenſion

of any malicious fact againſt hir perſtō, vouchſaſethThe greatneſſe of hir Maieſties mercie ſeemed ſuch, as the people betvveene ioyes and ſorrovves vvere a
                  
                     •••
                  ſed. to put him from the Gall
                  •
               wes. A notable action of compaſſion procéeding from a heauenlye minde, and ſo farre different from the common nature of man, forced into a fearefull iealouſie of liſſe of life, as hath neuer bene read nor hearde of.
            If caſually a man ſuffer hurte in the fields by an arrowe ſhot by chance at rouing markes, how reuengefully y• partyA true deſcription of mans fraile nature in ſeeking reuenge, confirmed vvith examples. offended will follow his proceſſe of felonie, I haue oft ſéene, and the law doth well allow it. If in the Court the meaneſt ſ
                  •
               ruing man ſtrike his felow with his fiſt ſo that he bléede, he is to looſe the ſame hande. Many other examples may be giuen you, both touching the caſualitie in this mans fact, & touching the place, and preſence, wherein it chaunced to bée done.
            But our Quéene looketh neyther on hir prerogatiue, on th
                  •
                power of hir lawes, nor on the perill of hir perſon, butHere he noteth the heauenly diſpoſition of hir Maieſtie, far different from the nature of man, in pardoning ſo great an offence againſt lavve and nature. with the nobilitie of hir hearte, the daunger onely done to hir ſelf, doth as you heare, fréely pardon it. And in the ſacred word of hir kingly eſtate I proteſt it vnto you, ſhe hath firmly auowed that ſhe had rather haue ſuffered, the woūds the Bargeman now hath, ten folde, than the meaneſt of vs all, or of any ſubiectes, ſhould ſuffer the ſlaunder of ſo tyranous or trayterous a fact, yea▪ or of the prepenſion, or forethought of ſo horrible a treaſon toward hit, thoughe it were in facteSee the exceeding loue of a prince tovvarde hir ſubiectes, in excuſing all accidents vvithout any ſuſpition of ill meaning. Here al the people shouted out Amen, Amen. neuer executed.
            Wherein to all our ſingular comfortes, it pleaſed hir wt moſte princely affection and earneſtneſſe, graciouſlye to affirme, that neuer Prince had better, nor more kinde true ſubieas. God for his mercie direct vs euer to be ſo, & with our due gratefulneſſe to ſacrifice at hir kinglye féete oure bloude and liues for hir ſeruice ſake, when occaſion ſhal cal vs thereto.M. Carie vvas maiſter to this 
                     •
                  ude Appletree, and Knight Marshal for that day appointed.
            
            One other thing I finde hir Maieſtie troubled with, y• is, the ſorrow this noble yong Gentleman, M. Henrie Carie hath ſuffered in continuall grieft of his hart for the offence

of his man, who through the vaine iealouſie of ſome euill diſpoſed perſons, hath likewiſe borne ſome ſlaunder of the cauſe. But it ſuffiſeth to cleare him, that no intente of malice, nor forethought of this fact▪ is found in the partie himſelfe.M. Caries commendation. His conuerſation beſides with excéeding faith and diligence in hir highneſſe ſeruice, will euer deliuer him, as a moſt acceptable Gentleman frée from this and al other euil in the ſight of hir Maieſtie and all the worlde. I ſhall not néede therefore to ſpeake of him, for hys cauſe néedeth none excuſe.
            Here may you behold the rare goodneſſe of our great andHe reciteth the Queenes vertues, and moſt vvorthſly commendeth hir rare courage in ſuch a perilous chance. gracious Miſtreſſe, full of religion and pietie, Juſtice and mercie, Temperance and magnanimitie (and that I cannot but tell you) of the moſt conſtant and noble courage that euer liued: the proofe wherof (the cauſe heard, whereat I was preſent) I leaue to your iudgements.
            Hir Maieſtie taking proſpecte out of the vales of hyrBehold hir princely ſtoutneſſe nothing diſmayed at thir ſodaine terror, but vvith ſuch care to this pore vvounded man, and vvith ſuche countenaunce to the Embaſſador, that she ſeemed a mother to the one, & a Queen to the other. Barge, at the very inſtant did ſée the man ſtricken, and behelde his fall, and hearde as it were, his deadly ſcr
                  •
               tch, whō ſhe immediately commaunded to be taken vp, and then beholding him all embrued with bloude, commaunded hys woundes to be lapped vp with a ſcarffe of hir owne, and ſo with hir moſt conſtante and amiable countenaunce, continued hir entertaynement of the Ambaſſadoure, as thoughe there had bene no ſuch matter. Afterwardes the man began to fainte, hir highneſſe then commaunded a cloke to be put on his bodye, with other ſuche neceſſarie reliefes as̄ were there preſentlye to be hadde, without alteration of countenaunce.
            Beholde this kinglye hearte, and courage of rar
                  •
                magnanimitie,Hir highneſſe magnanimitie mingled vvith mercie, the one moſt comfortable to hir ſubiectes, and the other moſt terrible to hir foes▪
                ſéeing, as it were, the preſente death of the next to hir, neyther feared hir owne life, nor was diſmayed with this treaſonable chaunce. An action more than maruellous in hir ſexe. Hereof howe muche wée maye reioyce, I want witte to tell you. But in one worde, hir highneſſe, that

with hir ſingular wiſedome and policie hath preſerued hir Empire theſe twentie yeares in moſte ioyfull peace, wyth thys courage & magnanimitie will (no doubt) as mightily defende vs in the moſte cruell wars. God therefore euer bleſſe hir, and let vs with oure handes ſtretched vp to Heauen, and oure eyes fixed on the ſeate of God, praye for hir long life, and moſte proſperous raigne ouer vs. ThomasAn earneſt exhortation to pray. Appletree▪
                receiue thy life from hir moſt excellent Maieſtie, and pray to God on thy knées for hir all thy dayes to come.Here Maiſter Vizchāberlaine kneeled on hys knees vvith al the people, pray ſing God for hir Maieſties ſafe deliuerie. And ſo the people being moued to prayer for hir Maieſties moſte happy eſcape, and for the bleſſing of God to lengthen hir dayes for many any many yeares, he fell on hys knées with great deuotion amongeſt them, and ſo departed with excéeding ioy to the people, and a thouſand bleſſings on him ſelfe.
            A Shippe called the thrée halfe Moones, manned with xxxviij. men, and well fenced with munitions, ſette fromIohn Fox delyuered 269. Chriſtians ou
                     •
                  e of captiuitie of the Turkes. 
               Porteſmouth, towarde Ciuill a Citie in Spaine, but falling into the ſtreightes, were taken by the Turkes, putte in their Galleys, their clothes torne from their backes, and then ſet to the Ores▪ where their fare was ſcant of bread, vnholeſome water, and plentie of ſtripes. Nigh to the Citie of Alexandr
                     •
                  a▪
                being a Hauen Towne, vnder the dominion of the Turkes, there is a Ro
                  ••
               e very fencible, where into the Turkes doe cuſtomably bring their Galleis on ſhoare euery yere in the Winter, and there do trimme them againſt the Spring time. In whyche roade there is a priſon, wherein the Captiues and ſuche priſoners as ſerue in the Galleis are putte for all that time, vntill the Seas be calme and paſſable for the Galleis, euery priſoner laden with yrons on their legs. Into whiche priſon theſe Chriſtians were putte, and faſte warded all the Winter ſeaſon, but ere it was long, the Maiſter and the owner, by meanes offriendes were redéemed: the reſte abyding whyle they were all throughe their yll vſage and worſe fare: myſerablye ſtarued, ſauing one Iohn Fox, who being ſomewhat ſkilfull in the Crafte of a

Barber, by reaſon thereof made great ſhift in helping his fare now and then with a good meale, till at the laſt God ſente him fauour in the ſight of the kéeper of the priſon, ſo that he had leaue to go in and out to the Roade at his pleaſure, paying a tertayne ſtipend vnto the kéeper, and wearing a locke about his legge, which libertie likewiſe ſixe more had vpon like ſufferance, who, not being ſuſpected to ſtart aſide, had libertie to go in and out at the ſayd Roade, and to returne agayne at night.
            In the yere of our Lord 1577. in the Winter ſeaſon, the Galleis comming to their accuſtomed harborough, and being diſcharged of all their Maſtes, Sayles, and other ſuch furnitures, and all the mayſters and marriners of them being lodged in their owne homes, there remayned in the priſon of the ſayd Roade 268. Chriſtian priſoners, who had bin taken by the Turkes force, and were of ſixtéene ſundry Nations, among the which, there were thrée Engliſhmen, whereof, one was named Iohn Fox of Wodbridge, another William Wickney of Porteſmouth, and the third Robert Moore of Harwich, which Iohn Foxe hauing bin thirtéene or fourtéene yeares vnder their gentle intreatance, minding his eſcape, tooke good heart vnto him. Not farre from the Roade, at one ſide of the Citie, ther was a certain victualling houſe which one Peter Vnticaro a Spanyard had hired, this Peter had bene priſoner aboue 30. yeres, & neuer practiſed any means to eſcape, but kepte himſelfe quiet, vntill now that this Iohn Fox vſing much thether, brake one to another their minds concerning the reſtreynt of their libertie, ſo that this Iohn Fox opening vnto this Vnticaro the deuice which he minded to practiſe, made priuie one more to their intent, which thrée debated of this matter at ſuche time as they coulde méete togither, in ſo much, that at ſeauen wéekes ende they had concluded how the matter ſhould be done, who making fiue more priuie to their deuiſe, determined in thrée nightes after to accompliſh their purpoſe, wherevpon the ſame Iohn Fox, and Peter Vnticaro, and the other ſixe, appoynted to

met altogither in the priſon the laſte day of Decēber, where this I. Fox certified the reſt of the priſoners of their intent, & deliuered vnto them a ſort of files, whiche he had gathered for that purpoſe, charging them to be readie diſcharged of their prons by eight of the clocke on the next day at nighte. On the next day at night this Fox & his other ſixe companions came al to the houſe of Peter Vnticaro, and when it was time to put in practiſe their deuice, ſent the ſayd Peter to the Maiſter of the Roade▪
                in the name of one of the maiſters of ye Citie, who deſired him to méete him there, promiſing him, that he could bring him backe againe, wherevppon the kéeper agréed to go with him, willing the warders not to bar the gate, ſaying he would turne agayne with all ſpéede. In the meane ſeaſon the other ſeuē had prouided them of ſuche weapons as they could. The kéeper nowe being come vnto the houſe, and perceyuing no light, nor hearing any noyſe, ſuſpected the matter and returned backwarde, but Fox ſtā
               ding behind a corner of the houſe, ſtepped forth to him: who perceyuing it to be I. Fox (ſayde 
                  •
                
               Fox) what haue I deſerued of thée, that thou ſhouldeſt ſéeke my death? thou villaine (quoth Fox) haſt bin a ſuccour of many Chriſtians bloude, and therewith he lift vp his ſword and ſtroke him ſo mayne a blowe, as therewithall he claue his heade, ſo that he fell deade to the grounde: then Peter and the reſt came forth, and went toward the roade, wherinto they entred ſoftly: where were ſixe warder
                  •
                whom one of them aſked, who was ther, quoth. Fox and his company all friendes, which when they were wythin, fel on the ſixe men and diſpatched thē quickly. They Fox barred the gate, and planted a Canon againſt it, and entring into the Gaylers lodge, they founde the Keyes of the priſon by his beds ſide, and there they had better wepons than before. In this Chamber was a Cheſt, wherein was muche treaſure all in Duckets, whiche Peter and two more opening, ſtuffed themſelues ſo full as they coulde, betwéene their ſhirts and theyr ſkinne, which Fox would not touche, but ſaid he ſought for his and their libertie, and not

for mony. Now theſe eight being armed wt ſuch weapons as they liked, & comming to the priſon, Fox opened the gates & dores & called forth all the priſoners, whom he ſet, ſome to ramming vp the gate, ſome to the dreſſing vp of a Galley, the beſt in the roade, called the Captain of Alexandria▪
                wher into ſome carried maſtes, Sayles, Ores & other furniture. At the priſon were certaine warders, whō 
               Fox and his cō
               pany ſlew, in the killing of whom, there were eight Turkes, which got thē to the top of the priſon, vnto whom Fox & his company were fain to aſcende by ladders, where they found a hote ſkirmiſhe, for ſome of them were ſlayn & ſome woū
               ded: Peter Vnticaro & the other two that had armed thē with the Duckets were ſlaine, as not able to welde themſelues, being peſtered with the weight of the treaſure. Amongſt the Turkes was one thruſt through, who fell of from the top of ye priſon wall, & made ſuch a noyſe, yt the inhabitantes there about, came and dawed him, ſo yt they vnderſtood y• caſe, how the priſoners were occupied, wherewith they rayſed bothe Alexandrîa, whiche laye on the Weſt ſide of the roade, and a Caſtle whiche was at the Cities ende nexte the roade, & alſo one other fortreſſe whiche laye on the North ſide, ſo y• now they had no way to eſcape but one▪ which by mans reſon might ſéeme impoſſible to be a way for them. But to bée ſhort, the ſaid Galley being trimmed vp, whereinto euerye man leaped, they hoyſte vp ſayles & yéelde themſelues to ye mercie of God, in whoſe hande is both wind and weather: & now being on flote and out of y• ſafetie of y• roade, the two Caſtels haue ful power vpon the ſame, but ſuche was the worke of God for their deliueraunce, y• no one of them was touched we xlv. ſhot which came thūdring about their ears, & thus ſayling are ſoone out of the Canons reach, the Turkes hauing no Gallyes trimmed to make after them. Whē the Chriſtians were ſafe out of the enemies coaſt, Iohn Fox willed them all to be thankefull vnto almightie God for theyr deliuerie, and moſt humblye to fall vppon their knées, be
               
                  •
               éeching him to ayde them vnto their friendes lande, &c.

After which prayers made to God, they felt to labour with the oare, ſtriuing to come to ſome Chriſtian land, but the winds were diuers▪ and victuals fayled them, ſo that eyght of them dyed by famin, to the aſtoniſhment of all the reſt: but it fell out that vpon the xxix. day after they ſet from Alexandrî
                     •
                  , they fell on the Il
                  •
                of Canadie, and landed at Gallipoly, where they were well cheriſhed by the Abbot and Monkes there, who cauſed them to ſtay while they were well refreſhed and eaſed. When they thought good, hauing leaue to depart from thence, they ſayled along the coaſt till they arriued at Tanento, where they ſold their Galley, and deuided the price, 
                  •
               uery man hauing a part thereof. The Turkes purſued the Chriſtians, and ſcoured the Seas where they could imagin that they bent their courſe, and the Chriſtians had departed from thence on the one day in the morning, whē ſeauen Galleis of the Turkes came thither that night, as it was certified by thoſe who f
                  •
               llowed Fox and his company fearing leaſt they ſhoulde haue bin met wyth. And then they came a foote to Naples, wher they departed aſunder, euery man taking him to his next way home, from whence Fox toke his iourney vnto Rome, where he was wel entertayned of an Engliſheman, who preſented his worthy déed to the Pope who rewarded him liberally, and gaue him letters to the King of Spaine, where he was well entertayned of him, who for his worthy enterpriſe, gaue hym in fée twentie pence a daye: from whence being deſirous to come into his owne Countrey, he came thyther at ſuch time as he conueniently could whiche was in the yeare of our Lorde. 1579. and being come into England, went vnto the Courte, & ſhewed all his trauaile vnto the Counſell: who conſidering that he had ſpent a great part of his youth in ſhraldome and bondage, ex
                  •
               ēded to him their liberalitie to maintayn hym in hys age, to their great honors, and encouragement of all true harted Chriſtians.
            This yeare in the moneth of September was finiſhed ye
               Tovver on London bridge finished. newe and moſt beautifull Tower on London bridge, the foū
               dation

whereof was layde in the moneth of Auguſt, Anno. 1577. as more at large is ſhewed.
            In the moneth of September & October, fell great winds
                  
                     •
                  ouds. and raging floudes in ſundry places of this Realme, where through many men, cattel and houſes wee drowned. In ye towne of Newport the cotages were borne downe, the corne loſt, paſture grounde ouerwhelmed, and cattayle drowned. In the towne of Bedford the water came vp to the Market place, where Cupbords, Cheſtes, ſtooles and forme
                  •
                ſwam about the houſes, their fewel, corne and hey was wrackt & borne away. Alſo the towne of Saint Edes in Huntingtonſhire was ouerflowen ſodainely in the night, when al men were at reſt, ye waters brake in with ſuche a force, yt the town was almoſt al defaſed, the ſwans ſwam down the Market place, & al the town about the boats did floate. Gormanchester was ſodainely ſuppreſt, their houſes flowen full of water when men were at their reſt, their cattaile were diſtroyed aboute the 14. of October. The ſea did ſwell, the Merchāts loſt their goods, many were drowned, which were after found both on ſand and land in great numbers.
            Martin Caltrope: Iohn Hart Sherifes.the, 28. of September.
            Sir Nicholas Woodroofe Habardaſher, the 28. of Octob.Maior.
            
            On Saterday the 21. of Nouember,Anno reg. 20 Sir T, Greſham deueaſed. ſir T. Greſham knight Agent to the Q. highneſſe (who had in his life time builded the Royal Exchange in London, as is afore ſhewed) deceaſed at his houſe in Biſhops Gate ſtréete of London, and was buried in the Pariſh Church of Saint Elen the▪
            
            On the xxviij. daye of Marche, one Francis, alias Marmaduke
               1580 One hanged in Cheape for murdering of Serieant Grace. Glo
                  ••
               r was hanged on a gibbet ſet vp for that purpoſe by the Sta
                  •••
               rd in Cheape, for wilfully murdering Serieāt Grace, after he was by him arreſted. Alſo on the next morow being the nine and twētith day of March, one Richard Tod, that ſhoulde haue be
                  •
               e hanged in Eastſmithfielde by the Tower, for murdering of Miſtreſſe Skinner a widow there, was hanged at Tiborne.
            
            
               The ſixth of Aprill being Wedneſdays in Eaſter wéekeEarthquake. about ſix of ye clocke toward euening, a ſodayne Earthquake hapning in London, & almoſt generally through out England, cauſed ſuche amazedneſſe of the people as was wonderfull for the time, and cauſed them to make their earneſt prayers vnto Almightie God. The great clocke bell in the Palaice at Westminster ſtroke of it ſelfe againſte the hammer wyth ſhaking, as diuerſe clockes and Bels in the Citie and elſewhere did the like the Gentlemen of the Temple being at Supper, ranne from the Tables and out of theyr Hal with theyr kniues in their handes, a péece of the Temple Church fell downe, ſome ſtones fell from Pauls Churche. And at Christes Churche in the Sermon while a ſtone fell from the toppe of the Church whiche killed out of hand one Thomas Grey an Apprentice, & an other ſtone alſo bruſed his felowe ſeruaunte named Mabel Eueret, ſo that ſhe liued but foure dayes after: diuerſe other were ſore hurt with running out of the Church: diuerſe chimneyes in the Citie part of them fell downe the houſes were ſo ſhaken. This Earthquake continued in or about London not paſſing one minute of an houre, and was no more felt: but Eaſtwarde in Kent and on the ſea coaſt it was felt thrée times. As at Sandwich at ſixe of the clocke, the land not only quaked, but the ſea ſo foamed, that the ſhippes tottered. At Douer alſo at the ſame houre was the like, ſo that a péece of the Cliffe fel into the ſea with alſo a péece of the Caſtle wall there. A péece of Saltwood Caſtle in Kent fell downe, and in the Church of Hide the Bels were harde to ſounde. A péece of Sutton Churche in Kent fell downe, the Earthquake being there bothe hear
                  •
                and felte. And in al theſe places and other in Eaſt Kent, the ſame was felt thrée times to moue, to wit at vj. at ix. 
                  •
                xj. of the clocke.
            The ninetéenth of Aprill, the Ferrye at Lambeth wasFe
                     •
                  ry at Lambeth drovvned. drowned, with fiue men and foure horſes, other two menne and fiue horſſes ſwam to land and were ſaued.
            The firſt day of May, after xij. of the clocke in the nighte,Earthquake i
                     •
                   Kent. was an Earthquake felt in diuers places of Kent, namely at Aſhforde, Great Chart, &c. which made the people there, to riſe

out of their beds, and rū to the Churches, where they called vpon God, oy earneſt prayers to be merciful vnto them.
            The xviij. day of May about one houre before Sun ſetting diuerſe Gentlemen of worſhip, & good credite, riding fromCaſtels & Ships ſeene in the ayre 
               Bodman in Cornewal towards Foy, there appeared to their ſéeming in y• Northeaſt, a very great miſtor fog, muche like vnto the ſea: and the forme of a cloude in the faſhiō of ſome gret Caſtel, with flags, & ſtreames thereon, as it were ſtanding in the Sea, whiche preſentlye vaniſhed awaye. In whoſe ſtéede, and in néere the ſame place, appeared another cloud which altered into the likeneſſe of a great Argoſie, furniſhed with Maſtes, and other neceſſaries, & hir ſayles ſéeming ful of winde, made hir way on the Southweaſt of the Caſtel, hauing ſtreamers and flags very warlike, with two boates at either ſterne. There incontinent appeared againe the forme of a Caſtel, and behinde the ſame came folowing on the Southweaſt ſide, another greate Argoſie, furniſhed as the firſte. This being paſt, there appeared thrée or foure Galeis with their Maſtes and flags in warlike ſort, hauing boates at their ſternes, and thereby appeared other ſmall clouds to the number of xij. which altered into the proportion of the ſayde Caſtels, and one following another, as ſoone as any of them vaniſhed other came in their roomes, & thys continued the ſpace of an houre. Shortly after the ſightes
                  T. Churchyard. VVonders in VViltshire, and Somerſetshire. in ye ayre aforeſayde a worthy Gentleman in the Countrey writ to a right good gentleman in ye Court, y• there was ſéen vpon a downe called Brodwels Downe, in Somerſetſhire, lx. perſonages all clothed in blacke, a furlong in diſtance frō thoſe ye beheld them, & after their appearing, and a little while tarying, they vaniſhed away, but immediately, another ſtrāge company in like maner colour and number appeared in the ſelfe ſame place, and they encountred one another, and ſo vaniſhed away. And the thirde time, appeared that number againe all in bright armour and encountred one another. & ſo vaniſhed away: iiij. honeſt mē which ſaw it, reporting ye ſame abrode, wer examined therof, before ſir George Nortō,
               
to whom they 
                  〈…〉
               , that thoſe things they had ſéene were true, as here before is reherſed: Moreouer it is credibly told of many honeſt men, that fiue miles from Blonſdon in Wiltſhire, a crie of houndes was hearde in the ayre, the ſelfe ſame day that the 
                  •••
               ſte Earthquake was, and the noyſe was ſo great that was 
                  ••
               de, that they ſéemed three or foure ſcore couple, where 
                  ••
                
               
                  〈…〉
                
               
                  •
               ſe 
                  ••
               ke the
                  ••
                Greyhoundes, thinking ſome gentlemen had b
                  •
               n hunting in the chaſe, and thoughte to courte: yet ſo
                  ••
                of 
                  ••
               oſe that went out of their houſes, ſéeing nothing below abrode, loked vpwards to the ſkyes, and there eſpyed in the ayre fiue or ſixe houndes perfectlye to be diſerned: Now (ſayth mine authour) I doubt not but thouſands hold this newe
                  •
                for 
                  ••
               bles innented for pleaſure, but I proteſt before God & mā, I can beléeue a great deale more ſtranger matter than this, in this ſtraunge worlde: for the people ſo eſtraunge themſelues from God by vſing manye ſtrange faſhions, & clapping on new conditions & natures, ye except he ſhew ſome miracles, his godhead would quickly be forgotten on Earth, and men would beléeue there wer no other world but this. Thus farre Thomas Churchyarde.
            
            The xiij. of June about ſixe of the clocke in the mornyng at Shipweſh, within Bothel Barony in Northumberland, there happened a tempeſt of lightning & thunder, after the which, of a ſodayne came a great ſhoure of hayle ſtones, amongſt ye which wer ſtones of diuers ſhapes, maruellous to behold.
            The xvij. day of June laſt paſt, in the pariſhe of Blamſdon, in Yorkeſhire, after a great tempeſt of lightning and thunder, a woman of foure ſtoure yeares old named Ales Perin, wasA monſtrous childe. deliuered of a ſtraunge and hideous Monſter, whoſe heade was like vnto a 
                  〈…〉
                or heade peece, the face like vnto a mans face except 
                  〈…〉
                which was founde and ſmall, like to the mo
                  •
               th of a 
                  〈…〉
               , the 
                  •
               orepa
                  •
               t of the bodye lyke vnto a manne, hauyng 
                  •
               ight legges, not one like vnto an other, and a tayle halfe a yarde long. Whiche Monſter brought into the world no other newes, but an admiration of the deuine workes of God.
            
               The xxij. of Septēber, at Fennestanton in Huntingtonſhire,
               Child monſterous. one Agnes wife to William Linſey, was deliuered of an vgly & ſtrange Monſter, which had a face all blacke, the necke red, the mouth & eyes like a Lion, ouer the forehead a roule of fleſh, which might be turned vp with ones finger, on the hinder part of the head a lump of fleſhe proportioned like a feather and hollow, with one eare growing vppon the loweſt part of the chéeke, the belly big and harde, the armes big, hauing fiue fingers & a thumbe on either hand, and in place of toes on the left foote, fiue fingers & a thumbe, on the right foote a thumbe and ſeauen fingers, in the place of the priuities the ſhape both of male and female, &c.
            
               Ralph Woodcocke: Iohn Alat, the 28. of September.
               
                  Sheriffes. Blaſing Starre.
            
            On the x. of October (ſome ſayth on ye ſeuenth) appeared a blaſing Star in the South, buſhing toward the Eaſt, which was nightlye ſéene deminiſhing of his brightneſſe vntill the one and twentith of the ſame moneth.
            The xvij. day of October were made 8. Serieante at law,Serieants feaſt▪
                to wit firſt William Fleetewood Recorder of London, ye ſecōd Edward Flowerdew, the third Thomas Snagge, ye fourth W. Peryam, the fifth Robert Halton, ye ſixth Iohn Clench, ye ſeuēth Iohn Puckering, ye eight Thomas Warmeſley, maiſter Snag was ſicke, and therefore had a writ directed to two maiſters of the Chauncerie to take his othe, and ſo was ſworne in hys Chamber at Greys Iane, the other ſeuen were ſworn at Westminster, and helde their feaſt in the new Temple at London.
            
            The Quéenes Maieſtie being informed that in ſundryeProclamation againſt the family of Loue. places of the realme, certain perſons ſecréetly teach damnable hereſies, contrarie to diuerſe principall Articles of our beliefe and Chriſtian fayth, who to colour their ſecte, name themſelues The family of Loue, and then as many as ſhal be allowed by them to be of that family, to be electe and ſaued, and all others of what Church ſoeuer they be, to be reiected and damned: And for that vpon conuenting of ſome of them before the Biſhops and ordinaries, it is found y• the ground of their ſect is mayntayned by certaine leude, Heritical, and

ſeditious bookes, firſt made in the Dutche tong, and laſtlye tranſlated into Engliſh, and printed beyond the Seas, and ſecretly brought ouer into the Realme, the authour wherof they name H. N. &c. And conſidering alſo it is founde, that theſe ſectaries hold opinion, that they maye before any Magiſtrate eccleſiaſtical or Temporall, or any other perſon not being profeſſed to be of their ſect, by othe or otherwiſe denye any thing for their aduātage, ſo as though many of thē are wel knowen to be teachers & ſpreaders abroade of theſe dā
               gerous and damnable ſects, yet by their own cōfeſſion they cannot be condemned. Therfore hir Maieſtie being very ſorie to ſée ſo greate an euill by malice of the Diuell, to be brought into this hir realme, & by hir Biſhops and ordinaries, ſhe vnderſtandeth it very requiſite, not onely to haue theſe dāgerous Heretickes & ſectaries to be ſeuerely puniſhed, but that alſo all other meanes be vſed by hir Maieſties royall authoritie, which is giuē hir of God to defēd Chriſts Church, to roote thē out from further infecting of hir realm, ſhe hath thought méete and conueniente, and ſo by hir proclamation, commaundeth that all hir officers and miniſters Temporall, ſhall in all their ſeuerall vocations, aſſiſt the Biſhops of hir Realme, and all other perſons eccleſiaſtical, to ſearche out all perſons duely ſuſpected to be eyther teachers, or profeſſors of the foreſayde damnable ſectes, and by all good meanes to procéede ſenerelye againſte them, beyng found culpable, by order of the lawes eyther eccleſiaſtical or Temporall, and that alſo ſearche be made in all places ſuſpected, for the bookes and writings mayntayning the ſayds Hereſies and ſectes, and them to diſtroye and būrne, &c. as more at large appeareth by the ſayd proclamation, giuen at Richmond the third of October, and proclaymed at London on the nintéenth of October.
            
               Iohn Branche Draper, the 28. of October.
               
                  Maior. The concluſion.
            
            Thus good reder, I haue colected theſe my Chronicles of England from the firſt cōming of Brute into this Iſlande, of whome it toke the name of Brytaine, vntill this preſente

yeare of Chriſt our ſoueraigne. 1580. and the. 23. yeare of our ſoueraigne Lady Flizabeth by the grace of God, Quéene of England Fraunce and Ireland, defender of the Faith, &c. whom I pray God long and many yeares to proſper ouer vs to his glorie, and deſire the to take theſe my trauell in good parte, like as I haue painefully (to my greate coſtes and charges) out of manye olde hidden Hiſtories and Recordes of antiquitie, broughte the ſame to light, and fréely for thy great commoditie beſtowed them vpon thée.
         
         
            
               The ſeauen ages of the Worlde.
               
                  THe firſt age from the creation of Adam to the floud of Noe, which continued yeares
               1659
               2 The ſecond from Noe to Abraham.
               
               292
               3 The third from the birth of Abraham till the departing of Iſrael out of Aegipt.
               
               503
               4 The fourth from the departing of Iſrael out of Aegipt, till the building of the Temple.
               482
               5 The fift from the building of the Temple til the Captiuitie of Babilon.
               414
               6 The ſixth from the captiuitie of Babilon, till the byrth of our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt.
               614
               7 The ſeauenth beginning at the birth of our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt, hath continued till this preſent yeare of our Lorde 1580, and ſhall laſt to the worlds ende.
                
            
            
               ❧ The age of the Worlde at the birth of our Sauiour Chriſt was 3962. The age of the worlde this preſente yeare of our Lord. 1580. is 5542.
         
         
            
            ¶ Of the vniuerſities in England, and Colledges in the ſame, vvith the founders, and principall benefactours.
            
               I Haue before time reioyced (ſayeth Eraſmus Roterdam) that England was ſo wel furniſhed with ſo many men of excellent learning, but now I begin to enuie hir felicitie, for that ſhe ſo floriſheth with all kind of literature, that by taking the commendation therof from the other Regions, ſhe doth as it were maruellouſly obſcure them. And yet this commē
               dation is not as now firſt due to England, in the whiche (it is well knowen) haue bene of long time, men of greate learning. The vniuerſities proue this to be true, which haue for their antiquities and worthyneſſe, contended with the moſt auntient, and worthy vniuerſities in the worlde.
            
               
                  Cambridge (as ſome learned writers doe affirme) wasCambridge. firſt frequented with Philoſophers and Aſtronomers, procured from Athens by Cantaber a Spaniarde, in the time of Gurguntius, who was King of Brytaine, before the byrthe of Chriſt, yeares. 375
               
                  Peter Colledge was erected of two auntiente HoſtellesPeter Colledge. (ſometime belonging vnto the Brethern de paenitentia Ieſu Christi) by Hughe Baleſame, ſometyme Pryor of Elye. Anno. 1256
               This Hugh was afterwarde the tenth Byſhop of Elye, and finiſhed this Colledge in Anno. 1284
               
                  Clare Hall, was firſte builded by Richarde Badowe thenClare Hall. Chauncellour of the ſtudents there, and the ſame was called Vniuerſitie Hall. 1326
               It was ſince that enlarged by Gualter Thacſteede Mayſter of the ſaid Hall, who with conſent of the ſaide Richarde Badow, reſigned the foundation thereof to Elizabeth Ladye of Clare, thirde daughter of Gilbert, and ſiſter and one of the heyres of the laſte Gilbert de Clare Earle of Gloucester, who

was firſte married to Iohn Burgh Earle of Vlster in Ireland, after to Theobald of Verdon, and thyrdly, to ſir Roger Damarie, and hadde iſſue by them all, ſhe I ſaye named it Clare Hall. 
               
               
                  Pembrooke hall was founded by Marie of Valentia, daughterPembrooke hall to Guydo Erle of Saint Paul in France, wife to Adomare de Valentia, Earle of Pembrooke, ſhe obtained of King Edwarde the thyrde, whoſe couſin ſhe was, to found this Colledge in hir owne grounde, with purchaſing two or thrée tenements there by, and named it Aulade Valence Mariae. Anno. 1343.
                
                  Corpus Christi Colledge was firſte begunne to be buyldedCorpus Chriſti Colledge. by the Alderman and brethren of Corpus Christi Guild.
               
               This Colledge was brought ſo farre forth, the rather by the help of Saint Maries Guilde and fraternitie, newly adioyned to the other Guilde. 1344.
               In the yere 1353. they did elect Henrie Erle of Darby and Lancaster, who ſhoulde obtaine them fauour for the purchaſing of Mortmaine, for ſuche landes and tenementes, as after manye did ſell them. This Earle of Darby in the eyghte and twentith yeare of Edwarde the thyrde, was created the firſte Duke of Lancaster, and then they elected hym their Alderman, who recogniſed theyr ſtatutes, not by the Dukes Seale, but by the Seale of the Aldermen of that Guilde. 
               
               
                  Trinitie hall, was firſt an Hoſtell, purchaſed by Iohn Cranden
                  Trinitie hall, ſometime Prior of Ely, who procured it for his brethren the Monkes of that houſe, to be Students there, in y• tyme of Edwarde the thyrde, whyche Hoſtell was afterward purchaſed by William Bateman Biſhoppe of Norwich, who builded this Colledge of Trinitie hall vpon the ſaide grounde being the firſte Founder thereof, he deceaſſed in the yeare of Chriſte. 1354.
               
                  Gunuile and Caius Colledge, was firſt founded by EdmundGunuile and Caius Colledge▪
                      Gunuile, ſometime Parſon of Terington in Norffolke, he gaue it to name Gunuile hall, as appeareth by his ſtatute. 1348.
               At his deceaſſe, he leauing a good maſſe of money, commended

the further finiſhing of the ſame Hall to William Bateman Biſhoppe of Norwiche, who with the aſſent of the Aldermen and brethren of the Guildes of Corpus Christi & our Lady, changed with them the ſaid houſe, with their houſe called the Stone hall, where nowe Gunuile and Caius Colledge ſtandeth. 1353.
               
                  Iohn Caius Doctoure in Phiſicke, ſometime fellow, and late Maiſter of the ſaide Colledge, hath enlarged the houſe, and nowe made a ſecond foundation, with gyuing certaine Manours and lands to the ſame. 1557.
               
                  Kings Colledge was firſt founded by King Henrie the ſixth,Kings Colledge in the yeare of Chriſt. 1441.
               The ſame King altered the forme of hys firſte foundation in the yeare of Chriſte. 1443.
               
                  Edwarde the fourth, in diſpleaſure of the firſte foundation, wythdrewe from the Colledge ſo muche lande as the firſte Founder hadde gyuen them, but afterwardes hée reſtored them to the inheritaunce of fyue hundreth markes. 
                     •••
                  
               
               After hym Henrie the ſeauenth finiſhed that notable Chappell, begonne by Henrie the ſixth, to the glazing, ſtalles, and pauing with Marble, whych was done by king Henrie the eight.Queenes Colledge. 
               
               
                  Queenes Colledge was begonne by Lady Margaret, wife to Kyng Henry the ſixth. 1446.
               Shée procured Mortmaine of an hundred pound by yere. Anno. 1448.
               At the interceſſion of Andrew Ducket, ſometime principall of Barnarde Hostell, (whiche Hoſtell he gaue to the ſaide Colledge.) He was Parſon of Saint Buttolphs in Cambridge, who by his owne money and help of others, purchaſed certaine tenementes, and builded his Colledge, beyng the firſt Preſident of the ſame, who gaue as well by hys life, as by hys Teſtament dyuers ſummes and parcels of lande, and alſo procured certayne gyftes of the Duke of Clarence, of Cicelie
                  
Dutcheſſe of Yorke, of Richarde Duke of Gloucester, of Anne Dutcheſſe of the ſame, of Edwarde Earle of Saliſburie, Maude
                   Counteſſe of Oxforde, and Marmaduke Lumley Biſhop of Lincolne, with diuers other. Elizabeth wife to King Edwarde the fourth finiſhed that whyche Quéene Margaret hadde begonne in the yeare 1465.
               
                  Katherine hall was founded by Robert Woodlarke DoctorKatherine hall. of Diuinitie, and Prouoſt of the Kings Colledge, & Chancellor to the Uniuerſitie, as is teſtified by the Charter of K. Henrie the ſixth, bearing date the 37. yeare of his raigne, whyche was the yeare of Chriſt 1459.
               
                  Ieſus Colledge was founded by Iohn Alcocke, the 29. ByſhopIeſus Colledge. of Ely, who did conuert the Monaſtery of Saint Ra
                        ••
                     gond, (the Abbeſſe liuing a diſſolute life, the Monaſterie then deſtitute of gouernement, the edyfices fallen in ruine, and in concluſion the Nuns, departing thence leauing it deſolate) into a Colledge of Chaplaines and Scholers, the yeare of Chriſte 1446.
               This Iohn Alcocke was borne in Kingstone vppon Hull, and therefore builded there a Fréeſchoole. 
               The rentes of Ieſus Colledge hathe bin more amplified by ſir Robert Reade Knight, Doctour Eleſton, Doctor Royſton and Doctor Fuller. 
               
               
                  Christes Colledge was founded by King Henry the ſixth,Chriſts colledge who named it Gods Houſe, as it was ſometime a greate Hoſtell ſo called: King Henry the ſeauenth granted hys Charter to Lady Margaret hys mother, Counteſſe of Richemont & Darby, to encreaſe the Students there, tranſlating it at hir diſpoſition, ſo that from thenceforth it ſhould be called Chriſtes Colledge. 1505.
               
                  Saint Iohns Colledge, being firſte an Hoſtell of religious Chanons, was erected by Nigellus the ſeconde Biſhoppe of Ely, Treaſourer to King Henrie the firſte, the yeare of Chriſte 1134.
               Thoſe Chanons lyued by the name of the Hoſpitall and

brethren of Saint Iohn, vntil the yere of Chriſt 1510. though at that time ſo farre decayed, that there was but a Prior, & two brethren, and by the dilapidations of their goods moueable and vnmoueable, they abaſed their reuenues within the ſpace of ten yeres laſt paſte, from the ſumme of an hundred and fortie pounde, to thirtie pounde, &c. Wherevpon King Henrie the eight, Richarde Byſhop of Winchester, Iohn
                   Biſhoppe of Rochester, Charles Somerſet
                   Lorde of Herbert, Thomas Louell, Henry Marne,
                   & Iohn Sent-Iohn Knights, Henry Horneby and Hugh Aſhton Clearks, executors of ye teſtament of Lady Margaret Counteſſe of Richmont & Darby, grandmother to King Henry the eight, & mother to King Henry the ſeuenth, vpon the ſuppreſſiō of the ſaid priorie, ſhe being preuented by death, leauing behinde hir ſufficient goodes, and committing the ſame to thoſe hir friendes and executors, they erected the ſaide Colledge. 
               
                  Magalene Colledge was firſte an Hoſtell or Hall inhabitedMagdalene Colledge. by dyuers Monkes of ſundrye Monaſteries: Edward Duke of Buckingham tranſlated the ſame to a Colledge, naming it Buckingham Colledge, who builded vp the Hall in the yeare of Chriſte. 1519.
               After him Thomas Audley of Walden ſometime Chauncellor of Englande, tooke on him to be Founder of the ſaide Colledge, and going aboute to eſtabliſhe the ſame, was preuented by death, ſo that what he had begonne, he left vnperfect, and altogither vnfiniſhed. 
               
                  Trinitie Colledge was founded by King Henrie the eighte,Trinitie Colledge. in the yeare of Chriſt. 1546.
               This Colledge was builded in the plot where ſomtime Edwarde the thyrde builded his houſe, called the Kings hall, in the yeare of Chriſt. 1334.
               There was ioyned vnto this Hall a Colledge called Michael houſe, with an Hoſtell called Phiſicke Hostell, and after the building there (being made of thrée) King Henrie the eight named it Trinitie Colledge. 
               
               
                  Michael houſe was firſte founded by Harnious de Stanton
                  
Prieſt, Chauncellor of the Exchequer to Edwarde the ſecond, of whome he obtained licence to erect the ſaide Colledge in the yeare of oure ſauiour Chriſt 1324.
               ¶ And thus farre of the Uniuerſitie of Cambridge, with the Colledges and Halles in the ſame.
            
            
               ¶ The Vniuerſitie of Oxford was inſtituted by King Alfred a Saxon, after the byrth of Chriſte. 873. yeares: And hathe Colledges.
               
                  
                     VNiuerſitie Colledge, founded in the time of KingVniuerſitie Colledge. 
                  Alfred, by ſir William Archdeacon of Dureſme in the yeare▪ 873.
               The Uniuerſitie Church, alias Saint Marie Church, was begun to be reedified in ye time of Doctor Fitz-Iames after Biſhoppe of London: he procured much money towardes the building of it. The battlements of it were full of Pinacles, but by tempeſt were moſt of thē thrown down in one night.Balioll colledge 
               
               
                  Baliol Clledge was founded in the tyme of Edwarde the firſt, by Iohn Balioll K. of Scotland in the yere of Chriſt. 1263.
               
                  Merton Colledge was founded in the time of Edwarde theMerton Colledge. firſte, by Walter Merton Byſhoppe of Rochester, the yeare of Chriſt 1276.
               
                  Excester Colledge, was founded in the time of Edward theExceſter Colledge. ſeconde, by Walter Stapleton Biſhoppe of Excester. 1316.
               And augmented in the time of oure Soueraigne Ladye Elizabeth, by ſir William Peter Knight, in the yere of Chriſt Anno. 156
                     •
                  .
               
                  Oriall Colledge, was founded in the time of Edwarde theOriall Colledge ſeconde, by ſir Adam Browne, Almoner of the ſaid King, the yeare of Chriſte 13
                     •
                  3.
               
                  Queenes Colledge was founded in the time of Edwarde theQueenes Colledge. thyrde, by Robert Egliſhfielde, in his owne grounde, and by

him called the Queenes hall, he was Chapleine to the Lady Philip, wife to the ſame Edward, the yeare of Chriſt▪ 1340.
               
                  Newe Colledge, was founded in the time of King Richard
                  Nevv Colledge the ſeconde, by William Wickham Byſhoppe of Winchester, the yere of Chriſt 1375.
               
                  Lincolne Colledge was founded in y• time of Henry the fifth,Lincolne Colledge. by Richard Fleming Biſhop of Lincolne 1430. and augmented in Richard the thirds time, by Thomas Rotheram Byſhop of Lincolne in the yere 1479.
               
                  Alſoule Colledge was founded in the time of King Henry y•
                  Alſoule Colledge. ſixth, by Henry 
                        •
                     iche
                        •
                     y Archbi. of Canterburie in y• yere 1437. He alſo founded Barnard Colledge in Oxford, ſince ſuppreſſed by K. Hēry the eight, & now reedified by ſir Thomas White, and by him called Saint Iohns Colledge. 
               
               
                  Diuinitie Schoole was founded in the time of King Henry
                  Diuinitie ſchoole. the ſixth, by Humfrey Duke of Gloucester. 1447.
               
                  Magdalen Colledge was founded in the time of king Henry
                  Magdalen Colledge. the ſixth, by William Wainflet Biſh. of Winchester. 1459. He builded a good part of Eaton Colledge, begon by Henry y• ſixth: he builded a Fréeſchoole at Wamflet. 
               
               
                  Braſen noſe Colledge was founded in y• raigne of King Henry
                  Braſe noſe Colledge. the ſeuenth, by Wil. Smith B. of Lincolne, in the yere 1513.
               The ſame William Smith ſometime Biſhop of Lichfielde, ordayned an Hoſpitall there for pore folkes, and a Gramer Schoole for pore folkes children: Alſo at Farneworth, where he and his parents had their originall, he beſtowed x. pound the yere foreuer, to one that ſhould teach a Gramer ſchoole. 
               
                  Corpus Christi Colledge was founded in the raigne of Henrie
                  Corpus Chriſti Colledge. the ſeauenth, by Richard Foxe Biſhop of Winchester, himſelfe being a Fellow in Pembrooke hall in Cambridge: he endowed the ſame Colledge with 40. 
                     •
                   8. s̄. 11. d. of yerely rent for euer, the yere 1516.
               
                  Christes Churche was founded in the time of Henry theChriſtes church. eight, by Thomas Wolſey Cardinal, & Archebiſhop of Yorke, in the yere of Chriſt 1539.
               And finiſhed by the ſame K. Henry ye eight, in ye yere 1546.
               
                  
                  Trinitie Colledge was founded in the tyme of Quéene Mary,
                  Trinitie Colledge. by ſir Thomas Pope Knight. 1556.
               
                  Saint Iohn Baptists Colledge was founded in the time ofSaint Iohns Colledge. Quéene Mary, by ſir Thomas White Knight, late Maior of London in the yeare of Chriſt 1557.
               
                  Oxford hath Halles.
                  Brodegate hall,
                  Harte Hall,
                  Magdalen hall,
                  Alborne hall.
                  Saint Marie hall,
                  
                     White hall,
                     VValter Stap
                           •
                        
                        ton. VVilliam VVainflet.
                  
                  Newe Inne,
                  Edmond hall.
               
               IN the Uniuerſities of Englande (ſaith Eraſmus Roterodame) there be certaine Colledges, in the whych there is ſo muche Religion, ſo ſtraight diſcipline, in ſuch integritie of life, that if you did ſée it, you woulde neglecte in compariſon of them, all Monkiſh rules and orders.
               All the Cities in Englande, many Market Townes, and ſome Uillages, haue frée Gramer Schooles erected in them for the further encreaſe of learning and vertue. Uertuous men haue to the perpetuall regiſtring of their good names done theſe good déedes, learned men haue not bin al the dooers. Some therefore for the ſupplie in other, of that whiche wanted in themſelues, haue done wiſely, al to this purpoſe, that vertue and learning vnited and knit togither, mighte in this our age make a learned vertuous world, haue done godly. It were muche (they are ſo many) in a ſmall roume to comprehend them, but the chiefe and worthy patrones of the reſt are.
               
                  
                     
                        Eaton Schoole,
                        
                           Henry the the ſixth 1443.
                        
                     
                     
                        Westminster.
                        
                           Quéene Elizabeth.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        Winchester.
                        William Wickham Biſh. of Win.
                     
                     
                        Paules Schoole in London.
                        
                           Iohn Collet 1510.
                        
                     
                     
                        Saint Anthonies in London
                        
                           by Iohn Tat.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        Merchant Taylors Schoole in London,
                        
                           by the Merchant Taylours 1560.
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            ¶ A Table of the principall matters contayned in this Chronicle.
            
               ABbot of Weſtminſter putte to his ſhiftes. Pag. 256
               Abbot of Glaſtenburie commitied a filthy act. Pag. 165
               Abbot of Saint Albons his policie. Pag. 152
               Abbayes viſited. Pag. 1005. ſuppreſſed. Pag. 1013
               Aberconway builded. Pag. 301
               Abingdon ſpoyled. Pag. 464
               Acres of land in Englād numbred. Pag. 165
               Aduoultry puniſhed by death amongſt the Infidels. Pag. 103
               
                  Adrian an Engliſhman Pope. Pag. 207
               
                  Adam Tarleton Biſhop of Hereford accuſed of treaſon and depriued of hys temporalties. Pag. 346. his ſophiſticall letter Pag. 357. made Byſh. of Worceſter. Pag. 359. Biſhop of Wincheſter. Pag. 367. dyed. Pag. 393
               Admiral of Frāce came to Londō. Pag. 1034
               
                  Albon firſt Martire. Pag. 65
               
                  Albertus Emperour. Pag. 66
               Albons Church founded. Pag. 105
               Almesburie builded. Pag. 134
               
                  Alfred King of Weſt Saxons. Pag. 122
               
                  Albe firſt King of South Saxons. Pag. 94
               Aldermen in London. Pag. 268
               Alice Perce. Pag. 467
               
                  Ales Hackney being long buried was taken vp againe. Pag. 869
               Almes houſes founded at the Croſſed Friers. Pag. 930
               Alderman of London ſent into Scotlād taken priſoner. Pag. 1031.
               Alderman of Southwarke firſt. Pag. 2047
               Ambaſſadours ſente to Rome. Pag. 1096. to Caleis. Pag. 1069. from Sweden. Pag. 1113. from Muſcouie. Pag. 1103
               
                  Amphabel Martire. Pag. 65
               Antonius Gordianus. Pag. 64
               
                  Antonius Emperour. Pag. 64
               Antonius Philoſophus. Pag. 54
               
                  Androgius King. Pag. 30
               Andrewes Churche in Rocheſter founded. Pag. 92
               Andreds Ceſter. Pag. 94
               Andreds walde. Pag. 117. in Suſſex and Hamſhiere. Pag. 125
               Anger a Caſtel in Eſſex founded. Pag. 212
               Anthonies Church in London builded. Pag. 870
               
                  Agnes Dayntie on the Pillorie. Pag. 745
               Anabaptiſtes bare Faggots. Pag. 1015. Anabaptiſtes brent. ibid.
               Anabaptiſtes bare faggottes at Paules croſſe. Pag. 1181. baniſhed. Pag. 1184. brent. ibi.
               
                  Anne of Cleaue died at Chelſey. Pag. 1104
               
                  Anne Marchioneſſe of Pembroke. Pag. 980
               Anſwere of a Pope. Pag. 395
               Anthonies Church in Londō built. Pag. 870
               
                  Anne Sanders, Anne Drurie, and truſtie Roger hanged. Pag. 1169
               
                  Anth. Broune Knight of the Garter. Pag. 1018
               Annes Church in London brent. Pag. 1039
               
                  Anne Askew with others brent. Pag. 1033
               
                  Apollos Temple at Delphos. Pag. 25
               Apuldore in Kent. Pag. 125
               Apoſtata brent. Pag. 255
               Apparell appointed to Harlots. Pag. 427
               Archbiſhops of London. Pag. 56
               
                  Archemalus King. Pag. 5
                     •
                  
               
               
                  Archegallo King depriued. Pag. 29
               Archeflamins. iij. Pag. 27
               Archbiſhop of London reproueth Vortiger and is by him ſlaine. Pag. 81
               
                  Arthur King. Pag. 84
               Archbiſhop of Yorke with his Croſſe caſt out of the Kings Chaple. Pag. 184
               Archbiſhop of Yorke plucked from his ſeate, throwne to the ground & beaten. Pag. 211
               Archbiſhop of Yorke drawne from the Alter to priſon. Pag. 220
               Archbiſhop of Yorke couetous. Pag. 264
               Archbiſhop of Canterburie beateth &

woundeth the Prior and Chanons of Saint Bartholomew in Smithfielde. Page. 272
               Archebishoppe of Yorke George Neuil empriſoned at Hames, and his goods confiſcate. Pag. 733
               An army ſent to Landerſey. Pag. 1027
               Archbiſhoppes Pallaice at Canterburie brent. Pag. 1027
               Articles of religion deuiſed by the king. Page. 1007
               Arden murdered. Pag. 1048
               An Arian brent. Pag. 1049
               An army ſent into Scotlande. Pag. 1028
               Arthure firſte ſonne to King Henry the ſeauenth borne. Pag. 861
               An army ſent into Scotlande. Pag. 870
               Archbiſhop of Canterburie deceaſſed. Page. 1182.
               Archbiſhoppe newly elected of Canterburie. Pag. 1185
               Arthure of Britaine murdered. Pag. 233
               Aſclepiodatus. Pag. 67
               Aurelius Probus. Pag. 64
               Aurelianus. Pag. 64
               Auſtine the Monke came into Britaine. Page. 91
               Auſtins Churche at Canterburie founded. Pag. 91
               Auntient lawes of Englande remaine in Kent onelye. 
                     •
                  52
               Auſtins in Briſtowe builded. Pag. 213
               Auguſtine Friers Churche in London. Page. 430
               Aubrey de Ver created Earle of Oxford. Page. 515
               Audley made Lorde Chauncellour Pag. 980 Knight of the Garter. Pag. 1058
               Aide ſent into Scotlande againſt Edemborough Caſtell. Pag. 1169
            
            
               B.
               BAſe moneys coyned. Pag. 1029
               Bayliffes of London. Pag. 219
               Bathe Abbey founded. Pag. 105
               Bachiler Maior of London. Pag. 865
               Bath a Biſhops ſea. Pag. 172
               Barons created. Pag. 1090
               Baſianus Emperour. Pag. 64
               Baſing. Pag. 121
               Baſtard brother diſheriteth the lawfull, and after murdereth him. Pag. 462
               Bamburgh builded. Pag. 20
               Bangor builded. Pag. 23
               Bathe builded. Pag. 22
               Barons of the Britaines murdered. Pag. 82
               Britons ſtate miſerable. Pag. 83
               Banquetting houſe built in Callais. Pag. 927 defaced by tempeſt. Pag. 928
               Barnardes Caſtell builded by Barnard Bayllioll. Pag. 209 beſieged. Pag. 1138
               Baynard Lorde of Dunmow builded Baynards Caſtle in Lōdon. Pag. 178. throwen downe. Pag. 242. newe builded. Pag. 874
               Barons in armor againſt King Iohn. Pag. 245 excōmunicate by the Pope. Pag. 246. Pag. 248 they ſent for Lodowike. Pag. 248
               Barons in armor againſt King Henry the thirde. Pag. 278 againſt King Edwarde the ſeconde. Pag. 341
               Bathe burned. Pag. 189
               Battell of the Danes at Aſhendune. Pag. 120
               Battayle at Haſting. Pag. 147. againſte the Welche. Pag. 188. of the Standard. Pag. 190. at Lewes in Suſſex. Pag. 283. at Euſham. Pag. 287. at Fankirke in Scotl. Pag. 306. at Striueling. Pag. 333. at Morleys. Pag. 390. of Crecie. Pag. 396. on the ſea. Pag. 417. at Poyters. Pag. 444. on the ſea. Pag. 465. at Shresburie. Pag. 553. at Bramham Moore Pag. 570. of Agencourt Pag. 593. at Vernole in Perche. Pag. 621. at S. Albons. Pag. 674. at Northampton. Pag. 699 Wakefield. Pag. 707. at Mortimers croſſe. Pag. 708. at Towton. Pag. 712. at Barnet. Pag. 727. at Thewkesburie. Pag. 728. at Stoke. Pag. 863. at Blackeheath. Pag. 870
               Battel Abbey buylded. Pag. 166
               Battell of Gnats. Pag. 509
               
                  
                  
                     •
                  arwike wonne by Edwarde the firſte. Pag. 306. betrayed. Pag. 339. deliuered to the Scots. Pag. 712. won by the Earle of Warwicke▪ Pag. 715. wonne by the Scottes and recouered again by the Earle of Northumberland. Pag. 477. & 497
               Barbican of London. Pag. 373
               Bay ſalt deare. Pag. 1180
               Bedford towne. Pag. 105. Pag. 114. beſieged. Pag. 189
               Bedforde Caſtle beſieged. Pag. 259
               
                  Benet a Mōke brought glaſing into this land. Pag. 111
               Beda famous. Pag. 111
               Bewly builte. Pag. 251
               Beaufleete in Eſſex. Pag. 125
               Beuerley brent. Pag. 215
               Beranbridge. Pag. 114
               Bewmariſe Caſtel builded. Pag. 307
               Beggers murdered. Pag. 310
               Biefe and Mutton firſt ſold by weighte. Page. 999
               Berking in Eſſex founded. Pag. 100
               Belins gate in London. Pag. 27
               
                  Belinus and Brennus king. Pag. 24
               Beſton Caſtel builded. Pag. 254
               Bermonſey founded. Pag. 165
               Benſinto
                     •
                  . Pag. 114
               Biſhoprickes in England. Pag. 2
               Biſhoprickes in Wales. Pag. 11
               Biſhoppe of Exceſter drawne out of hys Church. Pag. 279
               Biſhop of Chicheſter murdered. Pag. 651
               Biſhop of Salisburie murdered. Pag. 664
               Biſhop of Durham murdered. Pag. 164
               Biſhop of Ely put to his ſhiftes. Pag. 222
               Biſhops gate of London builded. Pag. 746
               Biſhop of Rocheſter beheaded. Pag. 1004
               Biſhops depriued. Pag. 1112
               Biſhoppe of Wincheſter ſent to the Tower. Pag. 1039. depriued. Pag. 1048
               Biſhops reſtored & other diſplaced. Pag. 1067
               Bible commaunded to be had in euerye Church in Engliſhe. Pag. 1013
               Bilney burned. Pag. 978
               
                  Bladud king. Pag. 22
               Blaſing ſtarres. Pag. 116. Pag. 179. blaſing ſtar. Pag. 179 285. 297. 636. 550. 3679. 1100.
               Blacke Heath fielde. Pag. 688▪ 870
               Blacke Friers in Holborne. Pag. 273 in London. Pag. 298
               Blanke charters burned. Pag. 546
               Blaſing ſtarre. Pag. 182
               
                  Bledgabredus king. Pag. 31
               
                  Blewbeard hanged. Pag. 651
               Bloude rayned Pag. 23. Pag. 117. Pag. 211. ſprang out of the Earth. Pag. 174. bloud of Hales. Pag. 1014
               
                  Boniface his Epiſtle to Ethelbald. Pag. 102
               Bones of men monſtrous. Pag. 167
               Bones of Arthur found. Pag. 221
               Boſten ſpoyled and brent. Pag. 302
               Bow Church ſuſpended. Pag. 302
               Bow ſteeple builded. Pag. 897
               Booke written againſt Luther by King Henrie the eight. Pag. 930
               Booke of Common prayer ſet forthe. Page. 1054
               Bokeland. Pag. 297
               Boloigne yeelded to the French. Pag. 1046
               
                  Bonars heade broken. Pag. 271
               Bridge at London. Pag. 3
               Brute arriued in Brytaine. Pag. 17
               Brutaine ſo named of Brute. Pag. 17
               Brutaine deuided into three. Pag. 18
               Brother ſlue brother. Pag. 24
               Brytaine tributarie to the Brutaines. Pag. 34
               Brytaines barbarous. Pag. 34
               Braſen Image of Cadwaline caſt downe▪ Page. 118
               Brakenburie Coneſtable of the Tower. Page. 826
               Bridge of London new made. Pag. 204
               Bridge of ſtone begun at London. Pag. 211 finiſhed. Pag. 238
               Bridge at Stratford vpon Auen. Pag. 865
               Bridges borne downe▪ Pag. 299
               Brimsburie with the bridge builded. Page. 130
               Briſtow Caſtel built. Pag. 181. beſieged. Pag. 189
               Brytains houſe in Holland. Pag. 37
               Brytains bodyes painted. Pag. 59
               
                  Brentford. Pag. 137
               Bretan receyued the Faith. Pag. 55
               Bruite Greneſhilde King. Pag. 20
               Bradford brent. Pag. 1097
               Bridwel giuen to the Citie of London. Page. 1057
               
                  Browne hanged in Smithfield. Pag. 1168
               Burſſe begun in Cornehill. Pag. 1129
               Burton vpon Trent. Pag. 135
               Burgondie inuaded by the Engliſhe. Page. 457
               
                  Boundwica a woman of Britaine. Pag. 40. 41. 42. 43.
               Britains had all things common. Pag. 41
               Bury Abbey ſpoyled and brent. Pag. 353
               Burial forbidden to W. Conqueror. Pag. 167
               Buckingham Caſtel builded. Pag. 129
               
                  Bul hanged on the Biſhops of Londons gate. Pag. 1146
               
                  Burdet beheaded. Pag. 747
               Buriall of King Edward the ſixth. Pag. 1067
               P. Burchet wounded Maiſter Hawkins Pag. 1175. founde an Hereticke. ibid. kylleth his keeper. Pag. 1176. hanged. ibid.
            
            
               C.
               CArliele builded. Pag. 21
               Caratacus. Pag. 38
               
                  Caligula his expedition into Britain. Pag. 36
               Caius. Pag. 65
               Canterburie builded. Pag. 21. Caſtell buylded. Pag. 34
               Canterburie defaced by fire. Pag. 270
               Canterburie prouince deuided into Pariſhes. Pag. 92
               Canterburie brent. Pag. 209
               Canterburie ouerflowed, by breaking out of bornes. Pag. 294
               
                  Caporus King. Pag. 31
               
                  Caſſibelanus King. Pag. 34
               Cambridge builded. Pag. 29
               
                  Cairleon vpon Vske builded. Pag. 27
               
                  Capenus King. Pag. 31
               
                  Carauſius vſurped Britaine. Pag. 65
               
                  Careticus King. Pag. 88
               
                  Cadwalin King. Pag. 88
               
                  Cadwalader King. Pag. 89
               
                  Cadwine king. Pag. 88
               
                  Catellus King hung vp oppreſſors. Pag. 3
                     •
                  
               
               Caſtels at Notingham, Yorke and Lincolne builded. Pag. 161
               Cardife Caſtle builded. Pag. 181
               Carliele repayred and the Caſtell builded. Pag. 172
               Carlile a Biſhops Sea. Pag. 185
               
                  Canutus the Dane King of England. Pag. 139
               King of foure kingdomes. Pag. 140
               Cardinals robbed. Pag. 337
               Cambridge ſore periſhed by fire. Pag. 306
               Cane in Normandy ſpoiled by. E. Pag. 3. 394
               Carliele conſumed by fire. Pag. 303
               Caleice beſieged by E. Pag. 3. Pag. 398. deſcribed and builded. Pag. 400. yeelded. Pag. 402
               Caleice like to haue bene betrayed. Pag. 410
               Caleice beſieged by the Duke of B. Pag. 639
               Caleice loſt by the Engliſhmen. Pag. 1106
               Caſtle at Ethelingey builded. Pag. 123. Monaſterie builded. Pag. 127
               Carcaſon in Fraūce burned by the Engliſh. Pag. 438
               
                  Caple Alderman of London. Pag. 868
               Cardinal Wolſey the ſtorie of his life & vpriſing deſcribed. Pag. 904
               Cardinal Campeius came into Eng. Pag. 923
               Cardinal Poole came into Englād. Pag. 1093
               Caſtel at Tourney built. Pag. 922
               Catte hanged in Cheape. Pag. 1090
               
                  Cecilius King. Pag. 28
               
                  Caeſar Iulius his firſt voyage into Brytain Pag. 31. his ſecond & third voyage. Pag. 32. ſubdued Brytaine. Pag. 33. ſlaine. Pag. 34. London yeelded to Caeſar. Pag. 33
               
                  Cerdike firſt King of the Weſt Saxōs. Pag. 113
               
                  Cerdikes Shore. Pag. 113
               
                  Cerdikes Forde. Pag. 113
               Cheſter a Citie. Pag. 21
               Cheſſe a game deuiſed. Pag. 23
               Chartſey in Surrey founded. Pag. 100
               Chartley Caſtle builded. Pag. 254
               Chriſtians firſt in Brytaine. Pag. 5
                     •
                  
               
               
                  Cheſter repayred. Pag. 129
               Churchyardes appointed to Bury. Pag. 117
               Chaſtitie before beautie to be preferred Page. 121
               Charing Croſſe. Pag. 305
               Children were eaten of their parentes. Page. 336
               Chicheſter brent. Pag. 182
               Chriſtes Church in London foūded. Pag. 180
               Children of King Henrie drowned. Pag. 183
               Cheſter Abbey. Pag. 172
               Chriſt was borne. Pag. 35
               Children of Engliſhmen ſolde in common markets. Pag. 107
               Chipenham. Pag. 121
               Chicheſter builded. Pag. 34. &. 94
               Chipingham in Wilſhire. Pag. 123
               Chicheſter brent. Pag. 214
               
                  Chriſanthus deputie in Brytaine. Pag. 77
               
                  Chirinus King. Pag. 30
               Cheſter repayred. Pag. 54
               Chriſt counterfaite. Pag. 255
               Charterhouſe of London founded. Pag. 406
               
                  Chicheley his teſtament. Pag. 612
               Church ſeruice altered. Pag. 587
               Cheſt in the Guild Hal of London. Pag. 464
               Chappell at Weſtminſter for Henrie the ſeauenth. Pag. 875
               Chriſt Church ſuppreſſed. Pag. 908
               Charterhouſe Monkes executed. Pag. 1003. 1004.
               Charitable deeds of ſir Iohn Allen. Pag. 1005
               Charitie of Thomas Huntlowe. Pag. 1016
               Churches pulled downe. Pag. 1038
               Churche of Sainte Iohn by Smithfielde blowne vp. Pag. 1040
               Charnel houſe of Paules conuerted to dwellings. Pag. 1040
               Charitable deedes of ſir Rowland Hill. Page. 1044
               Charitable deeds of George Barnes. Pag. 1054
               Charitable deedes of ſir Thomas White. Page. 1075
               Church Images brent. Pag. 1113
               Churches in London ſtriken and broken by Tempeſt. Pag. 1113
               Charitable actes of Maiſter William Lambe. Pag. 1188
               Ciliceſter a Citie. Pag. 84
               Ciceſter brent. Pag. 88
               Cirenceſter. Pag. 114
               Citizens of Canterburie againſte the Monkes of Chriſts Church. Pag. 354
               Citizens of Norwich againſt the Prior. Page. 647
               
                  Claudius a Romaine. Pag. 37. 39
               Clearkenwel. Pag. 177
               Clearkes of Oxford baniſhed. Pag. 281. diſcord betwixte the Clearkes and laye men. Pag. 307
               Cleargies landes required. Pag. 499
               
                  Clopton Maior of London. Pag. 865
               Cleargie cōdemned in premunire. Pag. 978
               Cleargie ſworne to the King. Pag. 979
               Counties or ſhieres in England. Pag. 1
               Cornewal deſcribed. Pag. 12
               
                  Cordila Queene. Pag. 22
               Crowne of gold firſt worne in Eng. Pag. 24
               Conſpiracy in Ireland againſt King Herie the ſixth. Pag. 862
               Coronation of Q. Anne Bulleine. Pag. 916
               
                  Coilus King. Pag. 30
               
                  Coilus King. Pag. 54
               Colcheſter builded. Pag. 54. beſieged & ſpoiled, repayred again. Pag. 129. beſieged. Pag. 248
               
                  Comodus Emperour. Pag. 57
               
                  Coil King. Pag. 67
               
                  Constantius Emperoure. Pag. 67. dyed at Yorke. Pag. 68
               
                  Constantine the great. Pag. 68
               
                  Constantinus Emperour. Pag. 69
               Conſtance. Pag. 70
               Constantius. Pag. 70
               
                  Constantine King. Pag. 86
               Comet appeared. Pag. 135. 180
               Couentrie priuiledged. Pag. 146
               
                  Comen Earle of Northumberland ſlaine. Page. 161
               Conſpiracie againſt William Conqueror. Page. 165
               
                  Cogſhall in Eſſex. Pag. 199
               Coneſtable of Colcheſter loſt his owne life, to ſaue the Kings life. Pag. 205
               Colledge at Lambeth. Pag. 229
               Corne full of vermine. Pag. 264
               Corne deare. Pag. 234. 276. 300. 641
               Corne cheape. Pag. 867
               
                  Constantine hanged. Pag. 257
               Coyne bace. Pag. 271
               Conuerts their houſe founded. Pag. 863
               Colledge of Saint Laurence Poultney founded. Pag. 364
               Comodities of peace. Pag. 404
               Cobham Colledge. Pag. 460
               Counſellers banniſhed the Court. Pag. 506
               Counſel of Conſtance. Pag. 5
               Colledge and Hoſpital at Higham Ferres. Pag. 630
               Conſpiracie diſcloſed. Pag. 588
               Conſpiracie of Abingdon. Pag. 634. at Couentrie. Pag. 933
               Colledge at Tateſhal. Pag. 640
               Cooke Maior of London. Pag. 720
               Coyne enhaunced. Pag. 716. newe. Pag. 717. 877.
               Colingborne beheaded. Pag. 847
               Combat for the kingdome. Pag. 138
               Combat at Reading. Pag. 204. betwene two Dukes. Pag. 528. at Weſtminſter. Pag. 479
               Combat foughte at Weſtminſter betwixt Iohn de Viſcount born at Cipres and Thomas Delamarch baſtard ſonne to Philip king of France, before king Edwarde the thirde. Pag. 428
               Combat. Pag. 496. in Smithfielde. Pag. 633. 643.
               at Tothil. Pag. 644. in Smithfield. Pag. 647. &
               649. at Tothill. Pag. 1151
               A Cooke boyled in Smithfielde. Pag. 978
               Coyners and clyppers executed. Pag. 980
               Conduite in Lothburie. Pag. 1034
               Commotion in Somerſet and Lincolne ſhires. Pag. 1040. in Cornewall and Deuonſhire. Pag. 1040. in Yorkeſhire. Pag. 1042
               in Somerſetſhire and other places. Pag. 1009. 1110. &. 1111.
               Coronation of Queene Marie. Pag. 1072
               Counter remoued into Woodſtreete firſt. Pag. 1098
               Coronation of Queene Elizabeth. Pag. 1111
               Conference of religion at Weſtminſter. Page. 1111
               
                  Creda firſt King of Mertians. Pag. 101
               Criklade a towne. Pag. 128
               Criples gate of London. Pag. 166
               Crockard and Pollard falſe moneys. Pag. 310
               Creation of Dukes and Erles. Pag. 500. 527.
               degraded. Pag. 543
               
                  Crosby Sherife of London, his gift to the Citie. Pag. 725
               Criples gate of London builded. Pag. 749
               Croſſe in Cheape builded. Pag. 862
               Creations at Bridewel. Pag. 940. of the Erle of Leiceſter. Pag. 1123
               
                  Croomewell maiſter of the Rolles. beheaded. Pag. 1003 1019
               
                  Cranmer brent. Pag. 1100
               
                  Cunobelinus King. Pag. 35
               Cups of braſſe by the high wayes. Pag. 109
               
                  Custos of London Coneſtable of the Tower. Pag. 303. 305
               Conduit in Cheape builded. Pag. 302
               Conduite in Cornehill builded. Pag. 550
               Conduite in Cheape builded. Pag. 748
               Conduite in Fleeteſtreete builded. Pag. 640
               Conduite in Graſſeſtreete builded. Pag. 865
               Conduit at Biſhops gate builded. Pag. 878
            
            
               D.
               DAunce of Paules. Pag. 567
               Daunſey in Eſſex. Pag. 99
               Danes arriued in Englande. Pag. 117. at Lindſfarne. Pag. 118. Portland an Ile. Pag. 117
               Danes ſpoyled London. Pag. 119
               Danes ſpoyled Wincheſter. Pag. 120
               Danes had a victorie at Reading. Pag. 120
               Danes in England murdered. Pag. 135
               Danes deſtroyed Canterbury and murdered their Archbiſhop. Pag. 135. their tyrannie. Pag. 136
               Danes poſſeſſe all Englande. Pag. 139
               Dane gilte. Pag. 142
               Danes Church without Temple bar. Pag. 142
               
                  Darkeneſſe in Paules Church. Pag. 262
               
                  Dauid king of Scots taken. Pag. 399
               
                  Dampot and Chapman two of the Guarde hanged. Pag. 1020
               
                  Dakers of the North arraigned. Pag. 1022
               Daunce of Paules pulled downe. Pag. 1040
               Dagger throwne at a Preacher. Pag. 1060
               Denmarke contributorie to Brytayne. Page. 27. 28
               
                  Dedantius king. Pag. 30
               
                  Detonus king. Pag. 30
               Decius. Pag. 64
               Deorham. Pag. 114
               Dearth in England that mens fleſh was eaten. Pag. 162
               Delacraſe Abbey. Pag. 254
               
                  Delapoole Duke of Suffolke murdered. Page. 651
               Death in London. Pag. 874
               Dearth without ſcarcitie. Pag. 1176
               Diſputation at Chriſts Hoſpital. Pag. 1098
               Diſputation at Oxford. Pag. 1091
               Deſcription of Englande. Pag. 1
               
                  Dinellus king. Pag. 31
               Ditch about London. Pag. 137. Pag. 244. cleanſed Page. 875
               Ditche aboute the Tower of London. Page. 220
               Diſſention at Oxforde, the Citizens indited. Pag. 430. 505. 510
               Diuell in likeneſſe of a Frier. Pag. 550
               
                  Domitianus Emperour. Pag. 54
               Doncaſter. Pag. 19
               Douer Caſtel builded. Pag. 34. beſieged. Pag. 250 ſpoyled by Frenchmen. Pag. 307
               Dorcheſter a Biſhop Sea. Pag. 114
               Donemouth. Pag. 117
               Downmowin Eſſex. Pag. 178
               Donwich ſpoyled. Pag. 300. by Tēpeſt. Pag. 302.
               Dogges fleſh good meate. Pag. 336
               Dragons ſeene. Pag. 263. 297
               Durham a Biſhops Sea. Pag. 135
               
                  Ducket hanged in Bow Church. Pag. 301
               Dukes baniſhed. Pag. 529
               Duke of Burgoigne enamored on the Counteſſe of Salisburie. Pag. 622
               Drie Sommer. Pag. 1020
               Duke of Buckingham accuſed of Treaſon. Pag. 928. beheaded. Pag. 929
               Duke of Norffolke ſent into Scotland. Page. 1114
               Duke of Norffolke and Earle of Surrey ſent to the Tower. Pag. 1034
               Duke of Somerſet brought to the Tower Pag. 1044 arained. Pag. 1050. beheded. Pag. 1052
               Duke of Northumberlande and others beheaded. Pag. 1070
               Duke of Suffolke beheaded. Pag. 1090
               Duke of Norffolke ſent to the Tower, Pag. 1154. araigned, Pag. 1155. beheaded. Pag. 1162
            
            
               E.
               
                  EBranke king. Pag. 19
               Eaſt Saxons. Pag. 88. 98
               Eaſt Angles. Pag. 84. 96
               Earthquake. Pag. 133. 165. 169. 180. 182. 185. 202. 205. 212. 214. 270. 271. 274. 297. 491. 497. 630. 1049. 1121. 1210.
               Earle Waren excommunicate for aduoutry, Pag. 337
               Earle of Northumberland ſlaine by the commons there. Pag. 864
               Earle of Deuonſhire created. Pag. 1072
               Earle of Warwicks mariage. Pag. 1128
               Earle of Warwick ſente againſt the Rebels. Pag. 1140
               Earles of Northumberlande and Weſtmerland fledde. Pag. 1140
               Earle of Deuonſhire executed. Pag. 1015
               Earle of Surrey beheaded. Pag. 1034
               Earle of Hertforde made Lord Protector. Pag. 1035
               Erle of Deuonſhire to the Tower. ſent to Fodringay. Pag. 1090 1071
               Earle of Kent reſtored. Pag. 1154
               Earle of Darby deceaſed. Pag. 1164
               Earle of Northūberland beheaded. Pag. 1165
               Earle of Worceſter ſent into Fraunce & robbed on the Sea. Pag. 1163
               Earle of Eſſex with others ſayled into Ireland. Pag. 1174. Captaine general. Pag. 1175
               
                  
                  Ebbe Abbeſſe of Coldingham. Pag. 121
               Edenbourgh builded. Pag. 20. yeelded to the Engliſhmen. Pag. 1173. brent. Pag. 1029.
               
                  Edmond King of Eaſtangles martired by the Danes. Pag. 97
               
                  Edmond Ironſide king. Pag. 137
               
                  Edrike of Statun the Traytour. Pag. 137. 138
               
                  Edwine of the Weſt Saxōs a vicious king depriued. Pag. 132
               
                  Edgar K. crowned at Bath. Pag. 132. reſtored Monaſteries. Pag. 133. eyghte kings rowed him. Pag. 133
               
                  Edwarde ſonne to Edgar murthered by his ſtepmother. Pag. 134
               Edmonds Burie builded. Pag. 140
               Edwarde Confeſſour. Pag. 142
               Edmonds Burie brent. Pag. 245
               
                  Edward the firſt king. Pag. 296
               
                  Edward the ſecond king. Pag. 325. impriſoned Pag. 349. depoſed. Pag. 350. murdred. Pag. 357.
               
                  Edwardle Bruſe beheaded. Pag. 338
               
                  Edward the third king. Pag. 352. elected King of Almaine. Pag. 404. dyed. Pag. 469
               
                  Edwarde the ſeconde bruted to be aliue. Page. 359
               Edendon founded. Pag. 393
               
                  Edward Earle of March. Pag. 711. crowned. Pag. 712 martired. Pag. 715. taken priſoner. Pag. 723. eſcaped. ibid. fledde. Pag. 724. returned. Pag. 726. made knightes at London. Pag. 735. banqueted the Maior of Londō. Pag. 749. ended his life. Pag. 750. his deſcription. Pag. 752. Oration at his death. Pag. 758. his Concubines. Pag. 799
               
                  Edward Lord Grey made Earle of Kent. Page. 713
               
                  Edward the ſixth borne. Pag. 1011. beganne to raigne. Pag. 1035. made knight. ibid. deceſed. Pag. 1058
               Egueſham. Pag. 114
               Egelburge. Pag. 114
               Egbrightſtone. Pag. 123
               
                  Elanius king. Pag. 28
               
                  Elidurus king. Pag. 29
               
                  Eldrea king. Pag. 30
               
                  Eliud king. Pag. 30
               Elye minſter founded. Pag. 97. Pag. 111. a Biſhops ſea. Pag. 180
               Elder brother ſeeketh fauour of the yō
                  ger brother, but it would not be obtayned. Pag. 179
               Elſing ſpittle founded. Pag. 366
               
                  Elianor Cobham apprehended. Pag. 644. indited of treaſon. Pag. 645. did penance. Pag. 646
               
                  Elizabeth now Queene of England hyr birth, Pag. 999. hir chriſtning. Pag. 1000
               Lady Elizabeth ſent to the tower. Pag. 1090
               
                  Emerianus king. Pag. 30
               Emperour came to London. Pag. 930
               England firſt ſo called. Pag. 118
               Enſigne of the Danes. Pag. 123
               Engliſhmen beſieged the Caſtel of Argilla in Barbarie. Pag. 128
               England deuided. Pag. 138
               Englande conquered by woodden bowes. Pag. 46
               England interdicted. Pag. 236. releaſed. 244
               Engliſh ſhips ouercome by Spaniar. Pag. 475
               Entercourſe with Flaunders. Pag. 870
               Engliſhmen ſent to Saint Quint. Pag. 1104
               Engliſhmen ſent to Vlſtar in Irelād. Pag. 1163
               Epiſtle of Elutherius. Pag. 55
               Epiſtle of Boniface to king Ethelbald. Pag. 102
               
                  Erchenwine firſt king of Eaſt Saxōs. Pag. 98.
               Eſſendune in Eſſexe. Pag. 138
               Exchequer at Northampton. Pag. 237
               Exchequer at Yorke. Pag. 306
               Exchequer at Yorke. Pag. 340
               
                  Ethelbert king of Kent. Pag. 90. chriſtened. Pag. 91
               
                  Ethelburge poyſoned hir husband Butricus king of Weſt Saxons. Pag. 118. hir miſerable end. ibid.
               Ethelingey, the noble Iland. Pag. 123
               
                  Etheldred king of Weſt Saxons, Pag. 134
               Eueſham founded. Pag. 102
               Exceſter builded. Pag. 34
               Exceſter the Danes wintered there. Pag. 122
               Exceſter a Biſhops Sea. Pag. 135
               Exceſter beſieged. Pag. 160. &. 188
               Executiō in Pauls churchyard. Pag. 1015. 1083
            
            
               
               F.
               FAmine. Pag. 166. 172
               Fals accuſer of his elder brother hanged. Pag. 227
               Farendon founded. Pag. 251
               Fat Cow. xvj. pence. Pag. 420
               Fall of money. Pag. 1049. ſecond fall of money. ibid. &. Pag. 1115
               Falſe Chriſt whipped. Pag. 1116▪
               
               
                  Faelix Biſhop of Donwich. Pag. 96▪
               
               Fernehame in Southſex. Pag. 125
               Feuerſham in Kent founded. Pag. 195
               Feete and hands of many mē cut of. Pag. 257
               Feaſt of Saint George at Windſ
                     •
                  r. Pag. 415
               Free Schoole at Bedford founded. Pag. 1117
               
                  Felton arraigned and executed. Pag. 1148
               Fire-light forbidden to the Engliſh. Pag. 153
               Fiſh like a man. Pag. 214. like armed knights Pag. 245. monſtrous. Pag. 268
               Fikets felde. Pag. 585
               Fire at Baynardes Caſtle. Pag. 652
               
                  Fitz Water drowned. Pag. 636
               Fire nigh Ludgate of London. Pag. 674
               Fire at Leaden Hal. Pag. 846. in Breadſtreete Pag. 859. in Roode lane. Pag. 1013. at Temple barre. Pag. 1003. at Broken wharfe. Pag. 1040
               Friſte fruites and tenthes giuen to the King. Pag. 1003. reſtored to the Cleargie. Page. 1099
               Firſt ſhew of children in Chriſts Hoſpitall. Pag. 1055
               Fifteenes granted at a Parliament. Pag. 1017
               Fiue perſons of the familie of loue ſtode at Paules Croſſe. Pag. 1184
               Flyes venomous. Pag. 23
               Florianus. Pag. 64
               Flauius. Pag. 64
               Flemmings ſent into Wales. Pag. 180
               Floudes of water. Pag. 269. 272. 274. 1123. 276
               Flint Caſtell builded. Pag. 297. raſed to the ground. Pag. 299
               Fleete dike at London which ſometime bare ſhippes ſore decayed. Pag. 322
               Florences of Gold. Pag. 388
               Flemmings robbed by the kētiſhmen. Page. 724
               
                  Ferrex and Porrex kings. Pag. 24
               Foreſt in Hampſhire. Pag. 166
               Fodringhey Colledge founded. Pag. 574
               Foure Eclipſes. Pag. 1027
               
                  Foxley of the Tower Potmaker ſlept. Pag. 14. dayes and as manye nightes without waking. Pag. 10
                     •
                  3
               Frawe a riuer. Pag. 122
               Froſt great. Pag. 172. Pag. 234. Pag. 293. Pag. 299. Pag. 194. Pag. 638. Page. 923
               Free Schoole and almes houſes at Ratcliffe. Pag. 1014
               Frier Forreſt brent. Pag. 1012
               Free Schoole at Drayton in Shropſhire. Page. 1032
               Free Schole at Tonbridge. Pag. 1048
               Frenchmen landed in the Ile of Wight. Pag. 1032. at Newhauen in Suſſex. ibid
               Frenchmen attached. Pag. 930
               Frenchmen arriued in Suſſex. Pag. 1031
               Friers houſes ſuppreſſed. Pag. 1003. againe. Page. 1014
               Free Schole at Walthamſtow. Pag. 903
               Fray in Saint Dunſtans Church of London. Pag. 568
               Frier tormented to death. Pag. 494
               Friers of the ſacke. Pag. 316
               French nauie taken. Pag. 501
               Fray againſt the ſtilyarde men. Pag. 867
               Fier at the ſtarre in Breadſtreete. Pag. 643. on London bridge. Pag. 877
               Frier Randulph ſlayne. Pag. 632
               French men land in Wales. Pag. 565
               Fraunce. Pag. 390
               Frier Randulph ſent to the Tower. Pag. 604
               Fray at Wreſtling. Pag. 673
               
                  Fulgen king. Pag. 30
               Fullenham or Fulham. Pag. 124
               Foure children borne at one burdē. Pag. 1183
               Flyes in Februarie in greate number. Page. 1180
               Frobiſhers firſt voyage to Cataya. Pag. 1186
               Froſt and a ſharp winter. Pag. 1165
            
            
               
               G.
               GAlley halfepence forbidden. Pag. 597
               
                  Gardiner hrent. Pag. 640
               Gaſcoigne wine ſold for fortie ſhillings the tun. Pag. 873
               Garnodo won from the Turke. Pag. 866
               Gardins about Londo ſtroyed to make Rome for Archers. Pag. 872
               Gatehouſe of the middle Temple newe built. Pag. 905
               
                  Gambo and another Captaine murdedered. Pag. 1045
               Germany toke the name. Pag. 20
               
                  Gernucius king. Pag. 30
               
                  Germanus and Lupus Biſhops. Pag. 77
               Gerend on 
                     •
                  ourded. Pag. 206
               Geffrey Chaucer. Pag. 548
               
                  George Plontagenet made Duke of Clarence. 
                     •
                  13
               
                  Geffrey whipped for hereſie. Pag. 1116
               
                  Gifford Angoliſme created Earle of Huntington. Pag. 471
               
                  Gilbert Pot puniſhed in Cheape. Pag. 1059
               Glamorgan. Pag. 23
               Glaſtenburie. Pag. 58
               Gloceſter founded. Pag. 102
               Gloceſter. Pag. 114. brent. Pag. 177. burned. Pag. 183
               Gloceſter Caſtle take by the Baros Pag. 279
               Gloceſter Church brent Pag. 310
               Gloceſter beſieged. Pag. 282
               
                  Glamorgan and Morganocke wonne. Pag. 170
               Glaſtenburie builded. Pag. 116
               Glaſtenburie brent. Pag. 213
               
                  Gorbodug king. Pag. 24
               
                  Gorbomanus king. Pag. 29
               
                  Gorbonian king. Pag. 30
               Goſpell preached in England. Pag. 57
               Godwin Sands. Pag. 173
               Good Parliament. Pag. 467. euil Parliament Pag. 519. lay mans Parliament. Pag. 559
               Golden Roſe ſent from Rome. Pag. 933
               Gold enhaunſed. Pag. 941
               Grantham builded. Pag. 29
               Grantbridge or Cambridge Pag. 122
               Grey Friers in England. Pag. 259
               
                  Grifithe of Wales brake his necke out of the Tower of London. Pag. 269
               
                  Graueſend Biſhop of London. Pag. 315
               Groates & halfe groates coyned. Pag. 420
               Grey Friers in Londō an Hoſpital Pag. 1053
               Great and wonderful tempeſtes. Pag. 1106
               
                  Gardner made Lord Chauncellour. Pag. 1071 deceaſed. Pag. 1099
               Great Hary a ſlip brent. Pag. 1071
               Great ſeale taken from the Lord Riche. page, Pag. 1050
               Greenewich Towne builded. Pag. 240
               Giles Church brent. Pag. 1032
               Great flouds. Pag. 1099
               Great fiſhes. Pag. 1053
               Great muſter in London. Pag. 1015
               
                  Gwindolen Queene. Pag. 19
               
                  Gurgustus king. Pag. 23
               
                  Gurgustius King. Pag. 28
               
                  Guinthelinus king. Pag. 28
               
                  Gurguinus king. Pag. 30
               
                  Guinouer wife to Arthur. Pag. 81
               Gurmondcheſter builded. Pag. 88
               
                  Guy Earle of Warwicke ſlew Colbronde. Page. 131
               
                  Guiſnes gotten by the Engliſh. Pag. 421
               Gunnes muented. Pag. 480
               Guilde Hall in London builded. Pag. 573
               Gunne ſhot at the Preacher. Pag. 1091
            
            
               H.
               
                  HAdrianus a Romaine. Pag. 54
               Hadley in Eſſex. Pag. 124
               
                  Harold a Dane King. Pag. 141
               
                  Hardicanutus king. Pag. 142
               
                  Harold king. Pag. 146. ſlaine. Pag. 147
               Hartes leapt into the Sea. Pag. 240
               Hales Owen reedified. Pag. 251
               Halfepence and farthings round. Pag. 299
               Handes of men cut of for reſcuing of a priſoner. Pag. 306
               
                  Hastings brent▪ Pag. 472
               Harlow Caſtel wonne. Pag. 721
               Hayle ſtones. Pag. 18. ynches about. Pag. 870
               
                  Hayle in Northamptonſhire did muche harme. Pag. 1174
               Haileſtones figured like mē heads. Pag. 103
               Hangman hanged Pag. 1013
               
                  Helius king. Pag. 31
               
                  Helen mother to Constantine. Pag. 69
               Hengeſt Saxon. Pag. 80. king of Kent. Pag. 83
               
                  Hengest firſt king of Kent. Pag. 190
               Hereforde Biſhoppes Sea founded. Pag. 106
               Hereford brent. Pag. 164
               
                  Hen
                        •
                     ie the firſt. Pag. 176
               Hereford brent. Pag. 189
               
                  Henrie the ſeconde king Pag. 200, wenteagainſt the Welchmen. Pag. 201
               
                  Hergelius Patriarke. Pag. 214
               Hedges burned. Pag. 237
               
                  Henrie the third King. Pag. 252
               Herdesmen go toward Ieruſalem. Pag. 340
               Hugh Spencer executed. Pag. 349, 350
               
                  Henrie Percy created Erle of Northumberland. Pag. 471
               
                  Henrie baſtard of Spaine. Pag. 475
               Herfleete beſieged. Pag. 589
               
                  Henrie ſonne to Iohn of Gaunt created Duke of Hereforde. Pag. 527▪ accufeth the Duke of Norffolke Pag. 528, baniſhed Pag. 529 returneth into Englande Pag. 532. choſen king. Pag. 540 crowned 
                     •
                  42 conſpiracie againſte him. Pag. 544. entreth Scotlande. Pag. 547. in great daunger. Pag. 549, marieth the dutches of Brytaine Pag. 553. conſpiracie againſt him. Pag. 563. writeth to the Pope. Pag. 571. ended his life. Pag. 576
               
                  Henrie Beauchamp created duke of Warwicke. Pag. 648
               
                  Henrie Lord Bourcher made Earle of Eſſex. Pag. 713
               
                  Henrie ſon to Henrie the ſeauenth borne Page. 865
               
                  Henrie ſonne to Henrie the fourth made prince of Wales. Pag. 541. his demean of at his fathers deathe. Pag. 576. crowned king Pag. 583. entreth Normandie. Pag. 588. Pag. 599. returneth home Pag. 597. deceaſed. Pag. 614
               
                  Henrie the ſixth borne at Windſor. Pag. 612 King of England and of Fraunce. Pag. 618 crowned. Pag. 633. at Paris. Pag. 635. fled into Scotlande Pag. 712. diſherited. Pag. 713 taken Pag. 717 
                     •
                  eſtored. Pag. 725. ſent to the Tower priſoner. Pag. 727. murdered. Pag. 729. his cō
                  mendation. Pag. 730 his Colledge. Pag. 731. his death. Pag. 756. buried at Windſor. Pag. 84
                     •
                  
               
               
                  Edward Prince borne in Sanctuarie: Pag. 726 Pag. 807. King of Englande. Pag. 7
                     ••
                  . his aunſwere to his mother▪ Pag. 805 murdered. Page. 828
               
                  Henrie Earle of Richmonde landed at Mylford hauen. Pag. 851. proclaymed king Pag. 858, drowned Pag. 861. beſieged Buloigne Pag. 866▪ builded a Chapple at Weſtminſter. Pag. 875. Hoſpitall of the Sauoy. Pag. 891. deceaſed ibidem. his ſepulchre. Pag. 892
               
                  Hingwer the Dane ſlayne. Pag. 123
               
                  Honorius Emperour. Pag. 73
               Hokenorton a towne. Pag. 129
               Houndſdich. Pag. 139
               Hofen a payre for a king three ſhillings Page. 168
               Howſes blowne down in Cheape. Pag. 170
               Hoſpital of Saint Leonard at Yorke foū
                  ded. Pag. 175
               Hoſpitall of Saint Giles. Pag. 183
               Hoſpital of Saint Croſſe builded. Pag. 185
               Hoſpital of ſ. Thomas in Southwark. Pag. 244
               Hoſpitall at Oxford. Pag. 263
               Hoſpital of Saint Marie at London. Pag. 265
               Hoſpital at Leceſter founded. Pag. 365
               Hogges in Normandie brent by Edward the third. Pag. 394
               Hoſpitall at Kingſton founded. Pag. 461
               Houſekeeping of the Earle of Warwike Page. 722
               Houſe at London bridge fell into the Thames. Pag. 748
               Humber a Riuer. Pag. 18
               
                  Humfrey Duke of Gloceſter chalengeth to cōbat with Philip D. of Burgoign Pag. 625. marieth Elianor Cobham. Pag. 631. dyed at Bury. Pag. 650. debate betwene the D. of Glo. and the Bi. of Wincheſter. Pag. 627
            
            
               
               I.
               I Ago King. Pag. 23
               Saint Iames in Briſtowe builded. Pag. 181
               Iames Churche at Garlike Hithe builded. Pag. 349
               
                  Iaqueline Dutcheſſe of Henalt. Pag. 623 married to the Duke of Glouceſter. Pag. 624
               
                  Iames ſon to the King of Scottes taken. Pag. 567. releaſed of his impriſonment. Pag. 629
               
                  Iacke Cade a rebel. Pag. 652. Pag. 653 entred London. Pag. 659. pardoned. Pag. 661. beheaded. Page. 663
               Iames houſe purchaſed by the king Pag. 798
               
                  Ida firſte King of the Northumbers. Pag. 107
               Iewels hāged and left in the high wayes not touched but of the owners. Pag. 127
               Iewes robbed. Pag. 220. impriſoned. Pag. 238. ſpoyled. Pag. 246. their Synagogue. Pag. 262
               Iewes borne in Englande. Pag. 273. hanged Page. 275
               Iewe drowned. Pag. 277. Iewes ſpoyled. Pag. 278
               Iewes executed. Pag. 298. their Synagogues deſtroyed. Pag. 301. baniſhed. Pag. 304
               Iewes and Leapers poyſoned waters. Pag. 341
               Iedworth in Scotland brent. Pag. 933
               Iewels and Church Plate called into the Kings hande. Pag. 10
                     •
                  7
               
                  Ioſeph of Aramath. 
                     •
                  7
               
                  Iohn the Kings ſonne made Lord of Irelande. Pag. 294
               
                  Iohn the Kings brother rebelled. Pag. 221. 223
               
                  Iohn King. Pag. 230. diuorced. Pag. 231. ſommoned to the Frenche Courte. Pag. 232. reſigned the Crowne and abſolued. Pag. 243. croſſed to Hieruſalem. Pag. 245. fled. Pag. 249. hys treaſure drowned. Pag. 250
               
                  Iohn Eure helde landes in Scotlande. Pag. 319
               
                  Iohn Kirby hanged. Pag. 480
               
                  Iohn Ball hanged. Pag. 489
               
                  Iohn Wraw hanged. Pag. 491
               
                  Iohn Philpots worthineſſ
                     •
                   Pag. 476. Pag. 479. deceaſſed. Pag. 495
               Murder in Weſtminſter Church. Pag. 477
               
                  Iohn Northamptons ſedition. Pag. 493
               
                  Iohn Holand created Erle of Huntingtō. Page. 507
               
                  Iohn Duke of Lancaſter entreth Spaine. Pag. 500. made Duke of Aquitaine. Pag. 510 marryeth Katherine Swinford. Pag. 518. dyeth. Pag. 530
               Iohn Gower. Pag. 548
               
                  Sir I. Oldeastel cōuict. Pag. 584. executed Pag. 599
               
                  Iohn Beaufort made Duke of Somerſet. Page. 647
               
                  Iohn Dauy loſte hys hande in Cheape. Page. 713
               
                  Iohn Duke of Bedford regent of France married Anne daughter to the Duke of Burgoigne. Pag. 619
               Saint Iohns in Smithfielde ſuppreſſed. Page. 1019
               
                  Ione Butcher brent. Pag. 1047
               Ile of Shepey. Pag. 115
               Ile of Wight firſte chriſtned. Pag. 115
               Ile of Ely beſieged. Pag. 247
               Ipſwiche beſieged. Pag. 198
               Iron gunnes firſt caſt. Pag. 1026
               Irelande inhabited. Pag. 28
               Iſſue of William Conquerour Pag. 167
               Iſtleworth by the Thamis. Pag. 279
               
                  Iſabel the Queene ſent into France returned and made an army againſte the King hir husbande. Pag. 348. ſhee beſieged Briſtow. Pag. 347
               Ithanceſter, a Citie in Eaſt Sax. Pag. 99
               
                  Iuall King. Pag. 30
               
                  Iulius Frontinus a Romaine. Pag. 45
               
                  Iulius Agricola a Romaine. Pag. 45
               
                  Iulius Seuerus a Romaine. Pag. 54
               Iulius Amilianus. Pag. 64
               Iulius Maximus. Pag. 64
               Iulius Philippus. Pag. 64
               Iulianus Apostata. Pag. 71
               Iuſtices puniſhed. Pag. 304
               Iuſtes at Lincolne. Pag. 405. at Windſore. Pag. 408. at Woodſtocke. Pag. 431. in Smithfielde. Pag. 459
               Iuſtes in Smithfielde. Pag. 718. at Richmont. Pag. 866. in the Tower of London. Pag. 874
               
                  Iur
                     •
                  rs on the Pillerie. Pag. 718
               Iuſting of Chalengers. Pag. 1018
               Iuſtes at Greenewich. Pag. 1006
               Iuſtes at Weſtminſter. Pag. 1151
               Iuſtices condemned. Pag. 507
               Inſurrection in the North. Pag. 864
               Ill May day. Pag. 923
               
                  Iuogo de Can a paſtime at Court. Pag. 1096
               Images brent at Cherſie. Pag. 1013
               Images forbidden. Pag. 1036
               Image of Thomas Becket defaced &c. Pag. 1110
            
            
               K.
               
                  KInimacus king. Pag. 23
               
                  Kymarus king. Pag. 28
               Kingdome of Northumberland. Pag. 87
               Kentiſh Saxons. Pag. 89
               Kings euill healed. Pag. 145
               Kenſham builded. Pag. 181
               Kenelworth Priorie & Caſtel built. Pag. 181
               Kenelworth Caſtel beſieged. Pag. 290. yeelded. Pag. 291
               Knighten guilde. Pag. 102
               Knarisborow. Pag. 251
               Kenington or Kingſton Caſtle. Pag. 283
               King of Man. Pag. 387
               Kings a Prince and other. Pag. 455
               King Caſtle. Pag. 465
               King and Queene of Denmarke arriued in England. Pag. 932
               King Henries marriage with Queene Katherine called in queſtion. Pag. 959
               King Henrie ſupreme head of the church Page. 978
               King Henrie the eighte beſieged Turwine. Pag. 898
               Kings ſtable brent. Pag. 1003
               King Henrie married Lady Iane. Pag. 1007
               King Henrie his gift to the Citie of Lō
                  don. Pag. 1034
               Sir Edmund Kneuet araigned for ſtriking one in the Court. Pag. 1021
               King Henrie married Ladye Anne of Cleaue. Pag. 1017
               King Henrie Pag. 8. went to Boloigne. Pag. 1029
               Knightes made by the Earle of Suſſex. Page. 1144
            
            
               L.
               LAncaſter builded. Pag. 28
               Lanthony founded. Pag. 178
               Late harueſt. Pag. 364
               Labaſtie in Frāce brent by the Eng. Pag. 425
               
                  Lambert brent. Pag. 1014
               Lambeth Ferry drowned. Pag. 1010
               
                  Leil King. Pag. 21
               Legion of the Romaines. Pag. 21
               Leceſter built. Pag. 22. repayred. Pag. 130. Monaſterie. Pag. 206
               Legetoun or Lutone in Hertfordſhire. Page. 129
               
                  Leedes Caſtle in Kent built. Pag. 163. beſieged Page. 342
               
                  Lewes in Suſſex. Pag. 172
               Leſnes in Kent founded. Pag. 212
               
                  Lewes arriued in England. Pag. 249. returned into Fraunce. Pag. 253
               Legat put to his ſhiftes. Pag. 266
               Leaden Hall builded. Pag. 649
               
                  Lewes de Bruges Lord Grantehuſe made Earle of Wincheſter. Pag. 738
               Legate from Rome. Pag. 959
               Letanie in Engliſh. Pag. 1029
               Llhanpatren Vaier Caſtel builded. Pag. 298
               Licinius Valerianus. Pag. 64
               Licinius Gallicinus. Pag. 64
               Lichfielde an Archbiſh. Sea. Pag. 105. 110. 130
               Lincolne Minſter founded. Pag. 109. a Biſhops Sea. Pag. 166. burned. Pag. 183. beſieged. Page. 191
               Lincolne Colledge in Oxford. Pag. 1217
               Librarie at Yorke. Pag. 112
               Liganburge. Pag. 114
               Limen a Riuer. Pag. 124
               Lieth taken and ſpoyled. Pag. 1028. beſieged Page. 1115
               Lincolneſhire men executed. Pag. 1011
               Liberties in Southwark purchaſed. Pag. 1046
               Liberties of the Stilyarde ſeaſed. Pag. 1050
               Lightning and thunder. Pag. 1121
               
                  Londō builded. Pag. 18. tooke name of Lud. Pag. 31. repayred and made habitable. Pag. 124 empaired by fire. Pag. 134. brent. Pag. 166. Pag. 185. Pag. 187. bridge brent. Pag. 241
               Liberties of London ſeaſed. Pag. 274. taken and helde by the Earle of Gloceſter. Pag. 292. vncurteous to the King. Pag. 512
               Liberties ſeaſed. Pag. 513
               London the Kings eſpeciall Chamber▪ Page. 814
               
                  Locrine King. Pag. 18
               
                  Lollius Vrbicus a Romane. Pag. 54
               Lombards goodes confiſcate. Pag. 376
               Lord Caſſels ſlayne. Pag. 557▪
               
               Loue to King Henry the vij. Pag. 861. 864
               Lord Dacres of the North arraigned▪ Page. 1003
               Lone of money to the King. Pag. 861. 864
               Lord of merrie diſportes. Pag. 1055
               Lord of miſrule. Pag. 1055
               Locke and key weyed but one wheate corne. Pag. 1195
               
                  Lud King repaired London. Pag. 31
               Ludgate builded. Pag. 31
               
                  Lucius King. Pag. 54. baptiſed. Pag. 55
               Ludlow Caſtell taken. Pag. 285. towne ſpoyled. Pag. 691
            
            
               M.
               
                  MAdan King deuoured. Pag. 19
               Marcus Antonius. Pag. 64
               
                  Macrinus Emperour. Pag. 64
               
                  Maximius a Romane. Pag. 66
               
                  Maximus Emperour. Pag. 71
               
                  Malgo King. Pag. 87
               Maldune in Eſtſex. Pag. 99. 129
               Martins Church at Douer founded. Pag. 93. by Ludgate. Pag. 88
               Malmesbury buylded. Pag. 115
               
                  Marius King. Pag. 58. 
                     ••
                  ew Roderike King of Pictes. Pag. 54
               Mancheſter repaired. Pag. 130
               Maior of London repaireth to Paules wherefore. Pag. 158. Pag. 219. yearely choſen. Pag. 237▪ rowed to Weſtminſter. Pag. 674. conſeruer of the Thamis and Medway two Riuers. Pag. 864. feaſt kepte at the Guild hall. Pag. 874
               
                  Mawde the Empreſſe. Pag. 190. obteyned the crowne. Pag. 191. fled. Pag. 192. beſeeged. Pag. 194. flyeth. Pag. 194. Walingford beſeeged. Pag. 190. Pag. 195
               Marleborough Caſtell beſeeged. Pag. 224▪
               
               Mart at Weſtminſter. Pag. 271
               Mad Parliament. Pag. 276. at the new Temple. Pag. 277
               Martins Churche in the Vintrey newe builded. Pag. 309▪
               
               
                  Margaret daughter to Edward the fourth marryed to the Duke of Burgoigne▪ Page. 719
               Martin Swart. Pag. 863
               Merchants of England receyued with proceſsion. Pag. 872
               Merchant Taylors. Pag. 876
               Maltot. Pag. 490
               Mayd boyled in Smithfield. Pag. 102
               Margraue and Marqueſſe of Baden landed at Douer. Pag. 1127. returneth out of England. Pag. 1129
               
                  Mempriſius King deuoured. Pag. 19
               
                  Merianus King. Pag. 31
               Mercians or middle▪ England. Pag. 88▪ 100
               Medeſhamſted now Peterborough. Pag. 101
               Medway a Riuer. Pag. 124. drie. Pag. 181
               Meaſures reformed. Pag. 176
               Men brought from new found Ilandes. Page. 875
               Men drowned at London bridge. Pag. 1059. againe. Pag. 1067
               Mercers Chappell in London. Pag. 292
               Midleton or Milton in Kent. Pag. 125
               Min
                     •
                  s or coyning places. Pag. 130. in Ireland. Page. 239
               Michelney. Pag. 131
               Minories without Aldgate founded. Pag. 306
               Middleton in Dorſetſhire brent. Pag. 330
               Michaels Church in Crooked lane builded. Pag. 462
               
                  Morgen King. Pag. 22
               
                  Mortalitie. Pag. 23. Pag. 336. more of kine. Pag. 340
               Mother ſlew hir ſonne. Pag. 24
               
                  Morindus King deuoured by a mōſter. Pag. 28
               
                  Morgan King. Pag. 30
               
                  Mordred the Traytor ſlayne. Pag. 86. hys children ſlayne. Pag. 87
               Monkes. Pag. 1200. ſlayne. Pag. 108
               Monaſterie at Wincheſter founded. Pag. 127
               Monſter. Pag. 235. 270
               Monſters appeare. Pag. 553. Monſter. Pag. 1053
               Monſtrous birthes. Pag. 1117
               Montgomery Caſtell founded. Pag. 258
               Monaſteries rifled. Pag. 162. 307
               Monmouth Caſtell raſed. Pag. 286
               
                  Mortimer eſcaped out of the tower. Pag. 346
               
                  Mortimer beheaded. Pag. 362
               Mayden of God. Pag. 633. brent. Pag. 634
               Mouing of the earth. Pag. 1150
               Monkes goodes confiſcate. Pag. 376
               Mooregate of London builded. Pag. 587
               Mercers prentiſes of London againſt the Pag. 8
                     •
                  
                  ▪ ſtrangers. Pag. 679
               
                  
                     
                        •
                     . Monox his almes deedes. Pag. 902
               
                  Mulmucius King. Pag. 24
               Muſter of horſſemen. Pag. 1050. agayne. Pag. 1052
               Muſter at Greenewich by Londoners. Page. 1112
               Merchant Taylors freeſchoole founded. Page. 1116
               Mary Roſe a Shippe drowned. Pag. 1032
               Men brent in the Hedgehog a Ship. Pag. 1031
               
                  Mathew Hamont an Heretike brent. Pag. 1195
               
                  Marmaduke Glouer hanged in Cheape. Page. 1209
               Monſtrous child. Pag. 1212. 1213
               Magdalen colledge in Cambridge. Pag. 1220
               Merton Colledge in Oxford. Pag. 1221
               Magdalen Colledge in Oxford. Pag. 1217
               Magdalen Hall in Oxford. Pag. 1223
               Mary Hall in Oxford. Pag. 1223
               Michaell houſe in Cambridge. Pag. 1220
            
            
               N.
               NOble men that came with William Conquerour. Pag. 153
               Names of Chantries taken. Pag. 1006
               
                  Nero a Romaine. Pag. 3
                     •
                  
               
               Newcaſtell vpon Tine founded. Pag. 172. the towne drowned. Pag. 378
               New Abbey by the Tower of London founded. Pag. 407
               Newgate of London builded. Pag. 619. on fire. Pag. 1100
               New Teſtament firſt printed in engliſh. Page. 967
               Newman prieſt bare a fagot at Paules Croſſe for ſinging Maſſe with good Ale. Pag. 1010
               New Coyne. Pag. 1072▪ againe. Pag. 1115. agayne. Page. 1117
               Newhauen by Bolleine wonne by the French. Pag. 1042
               Nightwalkers in London did murther all they mette. Pag. 209
               Night as light as the day. Pag. 1125
               Norwich a Biſhops ſee. Pag. 173. brent. Pag. 208. Pag. 294. citie walled. Pag. 315. ſteeple brent. Pag. 715. brent. Pag. 890
               Notingham brent. Pag. 191. beſeeged. Pag. 198
               Nonne Eaten founded. Pag. 206
               Northampton beſeeged. Pag. 282
               Noble of gold. Pag. 574
               Newelme hoſpitall. Pag. 652
               Nunnes burnt in their Abbey. Pag. 121
               
                  Nelſon executed. Pag. 1192
               Newport towne ouerflowed. Pag. 1209
               New Colledge in Oxford. Pag. 1217
               New Inne in Oxford. Pag. 1223
            
            
               O.
               
                  OCT auius Augustus a Romane. Pag. 34
               Order of the Garter founded at Windſore. Pag. 415
               Ocation made by the D. of Buckinghā. Pag. 811. the ſame Duke of Buckingham beheaded. Pag. 845
               
                  Otto of Bromſwike chalengeth combate with Iohn Duke of Lancaſter. Pag. 426
               
                  Owen Glendouerdew. Pag. 551. Pag. 557. his ſonne taken. Pag. 563
               
                  Owen Tewther brake out of Newgate. Pag. 640. beheaded. Pag. 709
               
                  Oxford builded. Pag. 20. an Vniuerſitie. Pag. 127. Caſtel builded. Pag. 163. forſakē. Pag. 237. Orial Colledge in Oxforde. Pag. 1221
               Out
                     •
                  rier and Bell man for the daye. Pag. 1123
               Owes bridge borne downe. Pag. 1126
            
            
               P.
               PArkes. Pag. 4
               
                  Policletus a Romaine. Pag. 43
               P
                     •
                  te a riuer in Eaſtſex. Pag. 99
               Parliamēt at Wincheſter. Pag. 288. at Marleborow. Pag. 293. at Weſtminſter. Pag. 297. at Barwicke. Pag. 306. at Stepen
                     •
                  eth. Pag. 309. at Carelile. Pag. 319. at Northampton. Pag. 326. at Yorke. Pag. 343. at Northampton. Pag. 358. at Salisburie. Pag. 359. at Wincheſter. Pag. 360. at Notingham. Pag. 361. at Yorke. Pag. 367. at Northampton. Pag. 370. at London. Pag. 372▪ Pag. 374. at Weſtminſter. Pag. 381. at London. Pag. 386. at Weſtminſter. Pag. 387. Pag. 420. Pag. 427. Pag. 431. Pag. 458. Pag. 611. at London. Pag. 619. Pag. 624. of Battes at Leyceſter. Pag. 629. at Weſtminſter. Pag. 631. Pag. 636. at Bury. Pag. 650. at Weſtminſter. Pag. 664. at London. Pag. 679. at Couentrie. Pag. 691. at Weſtminſter. Pag. 700. Pag. 713. Pag. 718. Pag. 738. Pag. 861. Pag. 86
                     •
                  
                  ▪ 
                  
                     ••
                  t the Blackefriers. Pag. 932. 968
               Paules Church in London founded. Pag. 92. brent. Pag. 166. repaired ibidem, newe work. Pag. 276. Pag. 335. weathercocke blowne downe Pag. 878. new Schole. Pag. 894. ſteeple brent. Pag. 1116. gates blowne open. Pag. 1128.
               Parſon of Saint Mildreds brent. Pag. 859
               Poultery priſed. Pag. 310
               Pageants new made in London. Pag. 930
               Pariſhes in England. Pag. 932. in London. Page. 1120
               Paginton ſlayne with a gonne. Pag. 1016
               Pallace at Weſtminſter brent. Pag. 897
               Patrike-Brumpton ouerturned. Pag. 1188
               
                  Peniſellus King. Pag. 31
               
                  Petronius a Romayne. Pag. 44
               
                  Pertinax Emperour. Pag. 58
               Peters Church in Cornehill a Biſhops ſee. Pag. 56
               
                  Pellagius a Britayne. Pag. 73. an heretike. Pag. 7
                     •
                  
                  ▪ confuted. Pag. 78
               Peterborow founded. Pag. 101
               Peterpence payd to Rome. Pag. 116
               Peſtilence great in England. Pag. 405
               Peſtilence. Pag. 568
               Saint Petro
                     •
                  us at Bodmin in Cornewall. Pag. 131
               Peſtilence. Pag. 271. Pag. 478. Pag. 510. Pag. 747. Pag. 166. Pag. 172
               Peterborow burned. Pag. 182
               Peter of Pomfret. Pag. 241. hanged. Pag. 243
               Peter Colledge. Pag. 1216
               Pierce Plowman his viſions. Pag. 387
               Peterpence forbidden to be payd. Pag. 461
               Penbroke hall. Pag. 1217
               Pecocke Biſhop of Chicheſter abiured. Page. 682
               Perkin Werbecke. Pag. 825. Pag. 868. Pag. 869. Pag. 871. hanged. Pag. 873
               
                  Philip king of Caſtile landed in England. Pag. 878
               Pictes firſt inhabit the marches. Pag. 28
               Pickering builded. Pag. 30
               
                  Pirthus king. Pag. 31
               Pilton priorie. Pag. 131
               Piked ſhoes forbidden. Pag. 717
               Pirates hanged. Pag. 271
               Priuiledges vnto Saint Edmondsbury. Page. 131
               Prieſts married remoued. Pag. 163
               Prieſt at Maſſe ſlayne with thunder. Pag. 208
               Prieſts became theeues. Pag. 460
               Priſoners in Newgate and Ludgate dyed. Page. 586
               Porcheſter builded. Pag. 28
               
                  Porrex king. Pag. 30
               Portgreues of London. Pag. 218
               Porter of the Tower headed. Pag. 586
               Poſterne by the Tower of London fell. Page. 642
               Prodigious ſignes. Pag. 31
               Porteſmouth. Pag. 84
               Popes authoritie abrogated. Pag. 1003
               Powled heads commanded. Pag. 1004
               Prouoſts of London. Pag. 218
               
                  Prouinciall counſell at Oxford. Pag. 255
               Proclamation againſte the family of loue. Pag. 1213
               Prince of Wales the kings eldeſt ſon. Pag. 311
               Priuiledge to Clothworkers. Pag. 373
               Priorie and hoſpitall of Saint Bartholmew in Smithfield founded. Pag. 178
               Printing firſt. Pag. 687
               Preached at Paules Croſſe Doctor Goddard. Pag. 724
               Priſoners of the Marſhalſea brake out. Pag. 877
               Prieſts ſaying Maſſe apprehended. Pag. 1177
               Priories ſuppreſſed by Cardinall Wolſey. Pag. 939
               Prince Arthur married. Pag. 874. deceaſſed. ibidem. 
               Priſoner brake frō the ſeſsiōs houſe. Pag. 959
               Prince of Piamont came into England. Page. 1095
               Prince of Orange conducted to the Tower of London. Pag. 1095
               Publicans whipped. Pag. 203
               Publicans with their bloudy proceſsion. Pag. 409
               Plimmouth ſpoyled. Pag. 556
            
            
               Q.
               QVatbridge or Catwarbridge in Eſſex. Pag. 126
               Quaffing and drunkennes puniſhed. Pag. 133
               Queeneheth in London. Pag. 270
               Queenes Attourney ſlayne. Pag. 685
               Queeneborough Caſtell builded. Pag. 461
               Queene tooke Sanctuary. Pag. 724. 767
               Queene of England chaſed. Pag. 279
               Queenes Colledge in Cambridge. Pag. 1217
               Queenes Colledge in Oxford. Pag. 1221
            
            
               R.
               RAmſey founded. Pag. 133
               Rampire builded at Caleis. Pag. 401
               Ralph Stafford ſlayne. Pag. 498
               
                  Redargius King. Pag. 31
               Rebellion in Kent and Eſſex. Pag. 480
               Recorder of London Fitz William. Pag. 817
               Regiſter booke in euery Church to bee kept. Pag. 113
               Religious houſes graunted to the king. Page. 1015
               
                  Rimo King. Pag. 30
               Richborough. Pag. 36
               Riot and euill life the deſtruction of the Britaines. Pag. 79
               Ripendun or Ripon. Pag. 122
               Richarde the firſt King. Pag. 216. tooke hys voyage to Hieruſalem. Pag. 220. taken priſoner. Pag. 222. builded the walles of Vienna. Pag. 223
               Riot in London. Pag. 292
               Riſebanke Caſtell builded. Pag. 403
               Rye ſpoyled. Pag. 471
               Richard Scrope Archbiſhop of Yorke rebelleth. Pag. 563 beheaded. Pag. 564
               Richard the ſecōd made prince of Wales. Pag. 468. crowned King. Pag. 470. married. Pag. 489. Pag. 518. entreth Scotlād. Pag. 497. Pag. 498. arriueth in Ireland. Pag. 517. Pag. 530. returneth againe. Pag. 533. betrayed and taken. Pag. 537. brought to the Tower. Pag. 539. murthered 
                     ••
                  6. buryed. Pag. 584
               Richard Wich brent. Pag. 642
               Richard D. of Yorke wrote to Hēry the ſixth. Pag. 666. ſworne to H. the Pag. 6. Pag. 672. attainted. Pag. 691. his articles. Pag. 693. ſlain. Pag. 707
               Richarde Plantagenet made Duke of Gloceſter. Pag. 713
               Richard Duke of Gloceſter deſcribed. Pag. 755. made Protector. Pag. 770. his oration. Pag. 771. his proclamation. Pag. 796. taketh on him to be King. Pag. 822. crowned. Pag. 825. ſlayne at Boſworth field. Pag. 857. buryed at Leyceſter. Pag. 858
               
                  Riuallo King. Pag. 23
               Ripendune a Towne. Pag. 105
               Richmond builded. Pag. 874
               
                  Rodianus King. Pag. 31
               Rocheſter Caſtell builded. Pag. 34. beſeeged. Pag. 124. brent. Pag. 185. Pag. 188. Pag. 212. beſeeged. Pag. 246 Pag. 283. bridge of ſtone builded. Pag. 569
               Rome builded. Pag. 23. ſpoiled by the Gothes

76. ſacked. Pag. 938
               Round table. Pag. 81
               
                  Robert Duke of Normandy wente to Hieruſalem. Pag. 173. had tribute of King Henry. Pag. 177
               
                  Roſamond concubine to Henry the ſecond. Pag. 212
               
                  Robert Fitz Stephen entred Irelande. Pag. 206
               ranſomed. Pag. 224. woūded to death. Pag. 229
               Robert hoode. Pag. 217
               
                  Robert Fitz Water valiant. Pag. 242
               Roger Bacon. Pag. 263
               Robert Grosted. Pag. 270. 275
               Rotte of Sheepe. Pag. 297
               Round table at Killingworth. Pag. 298
               
                  Robert Fitz Water Baner bearer of London. Pag. 311
               Roades wonne by the Chriſtians. Pag. 332
               Round table at Windeſore. Pag. 389
               Robert Knolles. Pag. 425. 456. 464
               
                  Robert Vere created Duke of Ireland. Pag. 501. flieth. Pag. 504. buryed. Pag. 518
               Sir Robert Knolles dyeth. Pag. 568
               Roane beſeeged. Pag. 600
               
                  Roger Bolingbroke abiured at Paules Croſſe. Pag. 644. endited of treaſon. Pag. 645. executed. Pag. 646
               Roſe of gold. Pag. 650
               
                  Robin of Ridſdale. Pag. 722
               
                  Roger Shaueloke ſlew himſelfe. Pag. 865
               Roode of Grace ſhewed at Paules. Pag. 1012
               Royalexchange whē ſo firſt named. Pag. 1150
               
                  Iohn Rogers brent. Pag. 1096
               
                  Rudhudibras King. Pag. 21
               
                  Runcorne towne and Caſtel builded. Pag. 130
            
            
               S.
               
                  SAmulius King. Pag. 31
               Saxons ſent for by the Britons. Pag. 80. deſcribed. Pag. 147
               Salisburie the olde builded. Pag. 34. Pag. 114. the new Towne & Church. Pag. 262. brēt. Pag. 264
               Sanctuary mē fet out of Saint Martins, Sanctuary men frayed with the Londoners. Pag. 674. by the Sheriffes of London. Pag. 643
               Sandwich ſpoyled. Pag. 682
               Sermons at Saint Mary Spittle, the Maior of London with his breethrea placed there. Pag. 746
               Serieants feaſt. Pag. 716. Pag. 869. Pag. 876. Pag. 895. Pag. 1054. Pag. 1192. Pag. 1213
               Sanctuary abuſed. Pag. 776. Sanctuary men executed. Pag. 867
               Sanders murthered. Pag. 1167
               Scotland deſcribed. Pag. 4
               Schoole of Engliſhmen at Rome. Pag. 119
               Scholers of Oxford did penance. Pag. 266. againſte the burgeſſes. Pag. 281. wente to Stamford. Pag. 369
               Scholers of Cambridge agaynſte the towneſmen. Pag. 272
               Scottes did homage. Pag. 170. Pag. 177. Pag. 231. Pag. 367. deliuer Scotland to King Edward the firſt. Pag. 305. brent the ſuburbs of Yorke. Pag. 340. reſigned the crowne of Scotland to King Edward the thirde. Pag. 365. enter Northumberland. Pag. 492. Pag. 499. Pag. 508. Pag. 551. ouerthrowne. Pag. 1026. their King murthered. Pag. 1131
               Scarcitie of bread. Pag. 952
               Seuerne a Riuer. Pag. 19
               
                  Seuerus Emperor. Pag. 58. died in Britaine. Pag. 60
               Seuerus Alexander. Pag. 64
               Selbey a Biſhops ſee. Pag. 95
               
                  Sebba of a King became a Monke in Paules Church, and was there buried. Page. 100
               Serpent with two heads. Pag. 409
               
                  Seuenoke Maior of Lōdō a fondling. Pag. 602
               
                  Sebastion Gabbato hys voyage. Pag. 872. brought men from the new llāds. Pag. 875
               Shaftesburie builded. Pag. 21. Monaſterie founded. Pag. 127
               Shrewsbury repaired. Pag. 130
               Shepheards aſſembled. Pag. 274
               Sheepe tranſpoſed. Pag. 717
               
                  Shores wife hir deſcription. Pag. 798
               
                  Shaw Maior of London, and his brother a Doctor. Pag. 801. his ſermon. Pag. 808
               
                  Shine brent. Pag. 871. builded. Pag. 874. brent. Pag. 878.
               Gallery fell. Pag. 879
               Sheriffes of London ſente to the Tower. Pag. 1025
               
                  Siluius King. Pag. 31
               Seege of Hadington. Pag. 1038
               Small houſes ſuppreſſed. Pag. 1006
               South Saxons. Pag. 84. 93
               Sonnes appeared fiue in number. Pag. 263
               Southampton. Pag. 36. ſacked and brente by the french. Pag. 376
               Stamford builded. Pag. 22. an Vniuerſitie. Pag. 22. beſeeged. Pag. 198
               Somerſet an Herald killed. Pag. 1026
               Stafford repaired. Pag. 130
               
                  Stephen King. Pag. 187. taken. Pag. 191. deliuered. Pag. 193. fled. Pag. 194
               Standard in Cheape. Pag. 635
               Stephen Langton. Pag. 236
               Stortford Caſtell ouerthrowne. Pag. 239
               
                  Story executed. Pag. 1151
               Strangers drowned. Pag. 247. robbed. Pag. 271. lodged within Engliſhe hoſtes. Pag. 624. and. Pag. 642
               Strange Starre appeared. Pag. 1163. blaſing Starre. Pag. 1213
               Statutes of Marton. Pag. 266
               States crea. Pag. 1012. 1015. 1036. 1045. 1050
               Streetes of London cheyned. Pag. 279
               Steeeple of Bow in Cheape fell downe. Page. 294
               Stockes market in London. Pag. 300
               Stoneheng. Pag. 84
               Steeple at Waltham brent. Pag. 647
               Steeple of Paules in Lōdon, of Baldoke in Hartfordſhire, & of Walden in Eſſex, & Kingſtō in Surrey on ſire. Pag. 648
               Strumpets ſet on the Pillorie. Pag. 641. baniſhed. Pag. 738
               Stoke field. Pag. 863
               Stewes in Southwarke putte downe. Page. 1033
               
                  Suetonius a Romane. Pag. 39
               Sudbury in Suffolke. Pag. 125
               Swaneſcoupe or Swaneſcombe in Kent. Page. 150
               Suruey of all England. Pag. 388
               Subſidie. Pag. 465. 624. 631
               Sweating ſickneſſe. Pag. 860. 923. 1049
               Saint Germans in Cornewall a Biſhops ſee. Pag. 131. 132
               Saint Nicholas at Exceſter founded. Page. 166
               Saint Martins le graund founded. Pag. 166
               Saint Iohns in Colcheſter founded. Page. 179
               Saint Andrew in Northampton founded. Pag. 179
               Saint Iohns in Smithfield. Pag. 177
               Saint Stephens Chappell at Weſtminſter. Pag. 428
               Saint Nicholas Mount kepte by the Earle of Oxford. Pag. 738
               Souldyers tranſported into Irelande. Page. 1131
               Sprite in a wall. Pag. 1092
               Sainte Iohns Colledge in Oxforde. Page. 1223
               Spanyard hanged. Pag. 1093
               Snow deepe. Pag. 1194
               Stranger woulde haue murthered the keeper of Newgate. Pag. 1103
               Saint Mary Hall in Oxford. Pag. 1223
               Shippe chaſed to the Tower Wharffe of London. 
               Sherewood executed. Pag. 1193
               Suite to the Court of Rome forbidden. Pag. 969
            
            
               T.
               TAcitus. Pag. 64
               Tamworth repayred. Pag. 130
               Taxe great. Pag. 165. 478. 480. 557
               Taxe of the tenth penny graunted to the King. Pag. 864
               Tanners ſonne claymed the Crowne. Page. 336
               Tenthes gyuen too the Churche. Page. 119
               
                  Templers Knightes. Pag. 183
               Temple new in London. Pag. 214
               Templers apprehended. Pag. 326. cōdemned. Pag. 330. brent. Pag. 331
               Tearme kept at Harford. Pag. 1122
               Thamis a Riuer deſcribed. Pag. 3. dryed. Pag. 181. Pag. 202. frozen. Pag. 1126
               
                  Theomantius King. Pag. 34
               
                  Theodotius Emperour. Pag. 76
               Thewkesbury founded. Pag. 102
               Thilwall built. Pag. 130
               Thetford a Biſhops ſee. Pag. 166
               
                  Thomas Becket Chancellor. Pag. 201. tooke his oth to the King, and was made Chancellor. Pag. 203 fled. Pag. 204. murthered. Pag. 207
               Theeues in priſon deuoured one the other. Pag. 336
               Theeues like vnto friers. Pag. 338
               
                  Thomas Earle of Lancaſter beheaded. Pag. 343
               
                  Thomas of Woodſtoke created Earle of Buckingham. Pag. 471
               
                  Thomas the baſtard. Pag. 729. beheaded. Pag. 736.
               
                  Thomas Wolſey Bacheler of Art at fiftene yeares of age. Pag. 904. Scholemaiſter to the Marques Dorſets children. ibid. gat a benefice. ibid. ſet in the ſtockes by Sir Iames Paulet. Pag. 905. reuenged his impriſonmente. ibid. Chaplen to Sir Iohn Naphant. ibid. Chaplen to King Henrie the vij. ibid. Ambaſſadoure to the Emperour. Pag. 906. Deane of Lincolne. Pag. 908. Kings Almoner. ibid. of the priuie Counſel to King Henry the etght. ibid. Byſhoppe of Turney. Pag. 901. Biſhop of Lincolne. ibid. Archbiſhop of Yorke. ibid. Cardinall. Pag. 911. Lorde Chauncellour. Pag. 912. Biſhop of Wincheſter. ibid. Ambaſſadour the ſecōd time. Pag. 916. rideth to meete the Emperor. Pag. 390. ſuppreſſed priorys to build his Colledges in Oxford and in Ipſwich. Pag. 939. ſente Ambaſſadoure the third time. Pag. 929. his pompous riding. Pag. 943. declareth in the Starre Chamber what honorable peace he had concluded. Pag. 932. diſcharged of the great Seale Pag. 966. arreſted. Pag. 972. ſickneth. Pag. 974. deceaſeth at Leiceſter. Pag. 978
               S. Thomas Moore made Chancellour. Pag. 967 diſcharged of the Chancellerſhip. Pag. 980 beheaded. Pag. 1004
               
                  R. Thorne his charitie in London. Pag. 979. in the towne of Briſtoll. ibid.
               
                  Thomas Mowbrey created Earle of Notingham. Pag. 471
               
                  Thomas Mawbrey created Duke of Norffolke. Pag. 527. baniſhed. Pag. 529. dyeth. Pag. 544.
               Threfold plague to the citizēs of L. Pag. 1121
               Tilbery in Eſſex. Pag. 99
               Title of Edw. the thirde to Fraunce. Pag. 358
               Tower of London built. Pag. 27. Pag. 34. fortified Pag. 267. bulwarkes fel down. Pag. 268. yeelded to the Maior of London. Pag. 725
               Toceter repayred. Pag. 129
               Toades deuour a man. Pag. 213
               Tower on London Bridge. Pag. 630. fell. Pag. 640
               Tourney within the tower of Lōdō. Pag. 874
               Trebonianus. Pag. 64
               Trent a Riuer. Pag. 122. dried vp. Pag. 180
               Triumph at London for the victory againſt the Scottes. Pag. 309
               Traytor to his maiſter miſerably ended. Page. 845
               Tree of common wealth a booke, by whome compyled. Pag. 895
               Trayterous fact of Tho. Apeltree. Pag. 1196
               Tweede a Riuer. Pag. 4. 5
               Teukesbury builded. Pag. 165
               Tunne in Cornehill. Pag. 300. 309
               Turnebull challengeth the combat. Pag. 365. and is ouercome. Pag. 266
               Turneamēt at Dertford, and in Cheape of London. Pag. 363
               Turwin yeelded to King Henry the viij. Pag. 899. raced and burnt. Pag. 900
               Turney beſeeged by K. H. the viij. Pag. 900
               Thomas Greſſham Knight deceaſſed. Page. 1209
               Trinitie Hall in Cambridge. Pag. 1217. Colledge. Pag. 1220
            
            
               
               V.
               
                  VIgenius and Peridurus kings. Pag. 30
               
                  Vrianus king. Pag. 30
               
                  Veſpatian a Romaine. Pag. 37. 45
               
                  Vectius Volanus a Romaine. Pag. 44
               Valerius. Pag. 65
               
                  Verolamium a Citie. Pag. 65
               Valerius Maximus. Pag. 66
               
                  Valentinian Emperour▪ Pag. 71
               
                  Vrſula the Virgine. Pag. 72
               
                  Vortiger king. Pag. 77
               
                  Viher Pondragon king. Pag. 84
               
                  Vortiporus king. Pag. 87
               
                  Vffa firſt king of Eaſtangles. Pag. 96
               
                  Vulfrune Hampton in Staffordſhiere. Pag. 128
               Vale royall founded. Pag. 301
               Victuals priſed. Pag. 335
               Vicar of Wandſworth and others executed. Pag. 1016
               Voyage to Muſcouie. Pag. 1056
            
            
               W.
               WAles diſcribed. Pag. 16
               Wayes foure begon Pag. 24. finiſhed. Pag. 27
               Warwicke builded. Pag. 28. repayred. Pag. 130.
               Warwike towne, Caſtle, Colledge. Pag. 183
               Caſtle new builded. Pag. 206
               Walebrooke. Pag. 67
               Walles about Colcheſter builded. Pag. 69
               Walles aboute London builded. Pag. 69. repayred. Pag. 246. 276. 746.
               Wall of Adrine. Pag. 54. of turfe. Pag. 59, Pag. 75. of ſtone. Pag. 76
               Walles of Vienna built by King Richard the firſt. Pag. 223
               Wales inuaded by William Rufus. Pag. 173.
               Waltham in Eſſex. Pag. 147
               Watrisburie repayred. Pag. 130
               Warham Caſtle. Pag. 122
               Warwel builded. Pag. 134
               Ware in Hartfordſhire builded by the Danes. Pag. 126
               Water Dome. Pag. 210
               Warren and Toll free to the Citizens of London. Pag. 250
               
                  Walter Stapleton Biſhop of Exceſter beheaded. Pag. 349
               Wardes in London diſcharged of fifteens. Pag. 630. 722
               Water fludde. Pag. 166. 306. 370
               Watche at Midſomer againe vſed. Pag. 1038.
               on Saint Peters euen. Pag. 1122
               Warwike Earle wente againſt the Rebels at Norwich. Pag. 1042
               Warre with Fraunce. Pag. 1104
               Weſtminſter founded. Pag. 98. reedified. Pag. 254 enlarged. Pag. 270. Churche and Pallace brent. Pag. 309
               Worceſter a Biſhops Sea. Pag. 102
               Weſtminſter Hall builded. Pag. 174. repayred. Pag. 527. ouerflowed with water. Pag. 1119
               Weſtminſter and Briſtol made Biſhopprickes. Pag. 1024
               Weſt Saxons. Pag. 113
               Weſt Cheape in London brent. Pag. 285
               Welchmen rebel. Pag. 547
               Wels a Colledge founded. Pag. 116. Cathedral Church builded. Pag. 117
               Whitington a place ſo called. Pag. 121
               Winburne. Pag. 121
               Wheate at twelue pence a quarter. Pag. 302
               Wheate forbidden to be made in malte. Page. 337
               Whit meats allowed to be eatē in Lent. Page. 1026
               Whot Sommer, corne cheape. Pag. 303
               Wincheſter builded. Pag. 21
               
                  Wilfride Biſhop. Pag. 94
               Winchelcombe founded. Pag. 106
               Wibandune. Pag. 114
               Wincheſter a Biſhops Sea. Pag. 115. Colledge builded. Pag. 561
               Wigmore repayred. Pag. 129
               Wilton in Wiltſhire. Pag. 122
               Wily a riuer. Pag. 122
               Witham in Eſſex. Pag. 129
               Wincheſter brent. Pag. 177. 192
               
                  William Rufus king. Pag. 168. ſlaine. Pag. 174.
               Winchelſey drowned. Pag. 273
               
                  William Biſhop of London. Pag. 159
               
                  Wight taken Pag. 471. inuaded. Pag. 557
               
                  William with the beard. Pag. 226
               
                  William Searle executed. Pag. 558
               Waters ouerflowe. Pag. 560
               Wines priſed. Pag. 231. 501
               
                  William Wikham Biſhop of Wincheſter. Page. 561
               Wiclife. Pag. 469
               
                  William Fitz. Wil. being elected Sherife of London and abſenting himſelf diſfranchiſed. Pag. 895
               
                  William Stafford made Earle of Deuonſhiere. Pag. 713
               
                  Wil Herbert made Erle of Pēbroke. Pag. 713
               
                  Wiats commotion in Kent. Pag. 1078. came into Southwarke. Pag. 1081. remoued out of Southwark. Pag. 1082. taken. Pag. 1086. ſent to the Tower. Pag. 1087. beheaded. Pag. 1071
               
                  W. Wales of Scotland brought to London, and executed to death. Pag. 316
               Windes great. Pag. 641
               Wich of Ey brent. Pag. 645
               Wlfrunhampton. Pag. 890
               Worceſter reſtored. Pag. 133. brent. Pag. 181
               Worceſter defaced by fire. Pag. 185. Pag. 190. befieged. Pag. 196. &. Pag. 282
               Woodneſfielde in Staffordſhire. Pag. 128
               Wolues deſtroyed in England. Pag. 133
               
                  Wolfe and his wife hanged. Pag. 1002
               Wooll ſtaple at Sandwich. Pag. 305
               Wooll forbidden to be conueyed ouer the Seas. Pag. 373
               Wooll ſtaple in England. Pag. 428. 463
               Wooll ſtaple at Calaice. Pag. 459
               Woman brente at Maydſtone for poyſoning hir husband. Pag. 1154
               Wonders in Wiltſhire. Pag. 1211
               Wreſtling at London. Pag. 256
            
            
               Y.
               YOrke builded. Pag. 20. Minſter founded. Page. 109
               Yorke taken by the Danes and Normans. Pag. 125. brent. Pag. 161
               Yorke ſore periſhed by fire. Pag. 188. brent. Page. 212
               Yorke Minſter brent. Pag. 715
               Yonger brother beguileth the elder. Pag. 178
               Yonger brother impriſoneth the elder and putteth out his eyes. Pag. 179
               Yonger brother falſely accuſeth his elder brother. Pag. 227
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            Faultes eſcaped in the Printing▪
            
            
               
                  
                     Page.
                     Lyne.
                     Faultes.
                     Corrections.
                  
                  
                     18
                     11
                     of a vertidian
                     vert a Diana
                     
                  
                  
                     18
                     12
                     fichule
                     fechel
                  
                  
                     18
                     13
                     Archiuis
                     Architremio
                  
                  
                     20
                     16. 17
                     now called
                     omit (now)
                  
                  
                     20
                     23
                     namely
                     now
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        6
                     6
                     Brutus
                     Brennus
                  
                  
                     32
                     30
                     Saeua
                     Scaua
                  
                  
                     32
                     35
                     Saeua
                     Scaua
                  
                  
                     35
                     9
                     filthyly
                     fealtie
                  
                  
                     36
                     9
                     Monrigus
                     Menrigus
                  
                  
                     56
                     30
                     Clauus
                     Eluanus
                  
                  
                     56
                     32
                     Erwydes
                     Drewydes
                  
                  
                     64
                     36
                     ſtangled
                     ſtrangled
                  
                  
                     98
                     33
                     Eucius
                     Lucius
                  
                  
                     102
                     23
                     Verche
                     Vtriche
                  
                  
                     255
                     3
                     Oſwards
                     Oſwalds
                  
                  
                     272
                     21
                     at Wales
                     
                     in Wales
                     
                  
                  
                     280
                     14
                     Winchester
                     Worcester
                  
                  
                     371
                     28
                     Biphingdon
                     Biphingdon
                  
                  
                     406
                     37
                     Nicholas
                     Michaell
                  
                  
                     490
                     36
                     ordayned as
                     ordained Chācellor as
                  
                  
                     515
                     21
                     Albeit
                     Aubrey
                  
                  
                     515
                     26
                     Euers
                     Deuerois
                  
                  
                     540
                     35
                     Diamonde
                     demaund
                  
                  
                     562
                     10
                     wardes
                     wooddes
                  
                  
                     604
                     4
                     Wellam
                     Pellam
                  
                  
                     633
                     6
                     nineteene
                     nine
                  
                  
                     636
                     19
                     long buried
                     long ſince buryed
                  
                  
                     640
                     7
                     Friers
                     Quier
                  
                  
                     734
                     14
                     xi.
                     xl.
                  
                  
                     749
                     32
                     Capriex
                     Captiet
                  
                  
                     817
                     33
                     them to
                     to them
                  
                  
                     859
                     16
                     Sherenton
                     Sherehuttun
                  
                  
                     860
                     13
                     Thomas Maior
                     Thomas Hill Maior
                  
                  
                     865
                     14
                     
                        Stratford of y• 
                        Lāgthorne
                     
                     Stratford Langthorne
                  
                  
                     867
                     22
                     & ſome his
                     and ſome of his
                  
                  
                     867
                     25
                     repriued
                     repried
                  
                  
                     932
                     8
                     Seretarie
                     Secondarie
                  
                  
                     935
                     21
                     ſhould, he
                     ſhoulde ſeeme, he
                  
                  
                     937
                     28
                     burned▪
                     
                     turned.
                  
                  
                     1033
                     15
                     as many
                     xv.
                  
                  
                     1090
                     28
                     Sudley Saint
                     
                        Sudley at Saint
                     
                  
                  
                     1
                           •
                        99
                     30
                     Relianes
                     Rodeloftes
                  
                  
                     1185
                     35
                     Charterhouſe
                     Chapterhouſe
                  
                  
                     110
                           •
                        
                     
                     7
                     Redike
                     Dedike
                  
                  
                     1188
                     19
                     now
                     ſence
                  
                  
                     1101
                     18
                     Clober
                     Cleber
                  
                  
                     1215
                     1
                     ſoueraigne
                     ſauiour
                  
               
            
         
      
   