
      
         
            
            
            
               THE COPYE OF THE SELF SAME VVORDES, THAT MI LORDE Sturton ſpake preſently at his Death, beyng the .vi. day of March, in the yeare of our Lorde. 1557. amonge the people as his Confeſſion, deſiringe the people to take Example by hym, and to kepe no Enuy in their hertes for that is the roote of all euylles.
            
               
                  GOOD people, I am come hither to dye, I am come hither to dye, and iuſtly Condempned for mine offences by the law, what myne offences were I am ſure you vnderſtand, whiche was for a moſt cruell and deteſtable murther by my commaundement don and comitted, wherfore I ſhal deſire you al for goddes ſake to let mee be an Enſample to you al, and to al the worlde and beware that yee lette no malice take roote in your hertes, for that is the vtter dyſſtroier of al vertue, I ſhal deſire you al, and al the worlde, to forgiue me, and ſpeciallye thoſe poore women, Children, and kinſfolke, of them whom I haue cauſed ſo cruelly to be murthered, that God may put it into their hertes, for Chriſtes ſake, & for Charite to forgiue me, and if there be any here, or els where, whom I haue offended, I ſhal deſire you al for charite ſake to forgiue me, & if there be any of you who hath offēded me, I do from the bottome of my hert forgiue them, as frely as I truſt God of his mercye hath forgiuen me being mooſt ſory and repentant, & when I ſhall departe out of thys world, that you wil ſay al, Lord take his ſpirit into thy hands, & I ſhal alſo deſire you for chriſtes ſake to ſay with me on your knees our Lordes Praier, which is the Pater noſter, & ſo turning him to the Eaſt, & ſayd the Lordes Praier, which done, he deſired Sir John Sowch to forgiue him, who anſwered that he dyd forgiue him frō the bottome of his hert, & then going higher on the Ladder ſaid, good people pray for me, & ſo wynkyng with his eyes ſayd, I charge the O Satan in Goddes name to depart from me, and ſuffer my ſoule to reſt in the lord, & than ſayd. 
                  Domine accipe ſpiritum meum.
                And ſo departed this world: on whoſe ſoule God haue mercy.
         
         
            ¶ The Praier of the Lord Stourton which he ſpake kneling on his knees deſiring the people to praye for hym and alſo ſay with him.
            
               
                  LOrd herken to my wordes, conſider the thought of mine hert, behold howe lowde I cry vnto the, let my iuſt Praier enter into thine eares which vnfaynedly commeth from myne hert, here me lord for I am poore and diſtitute of mans helpe, take care for my ſoule, ſaue me thy ſeruaunt which wholy truſt in the, haue mercye vpon me O Lord, for I wil neuer ceaſe criynge to the for helpe for thou art my lorde, and more merciful than my tonge can expreſſe, as aduer ſite aſſaileth me I wyll cry and cal for helpe vnto the, I wil cal vpon the in the day time, and in the night my cry ſhal not be hid from the. O thou god of heauens, the maker of the waters and lorde of al creatures, here me a pore ſynner callyng vpon the, and putting my hole truſt in thy mercy, O lord what great pleaſures thou haſte prepared for me in heauen, that I ſhould delight in no earthly thynge but in the, my moſt pleaſure is to cleue faſte vnto the, and in the to ſet my hope and truſt, haue mercy vpon me O Lord, O Lorde, God haue mercy vpon me for thy manifolde mercies ſake forgiue me al myne offences: I cōmit my ſpirit into thy handes, deliuer me frō the power of darknes of this world, thou haſt redemed me O Lord God of trueth.
            
            
               ❧ 
               In te domine ſperaui non confunder in eternum, in iuſticia tua libera me.
            
            ¶ Inclina ad me aurem tuam accelera. et.c,
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            Imprynted by Wyllyam Pickeringe dwellynge vppon London brydge.
         
      
   