
      
         
            
            
            The Anatomie
of Abuses:
Contayning
A DISCOVERIE, OR BRIEFE
Summarie of such Notable Vices and Imperfections,
as now raigne in many Christian
Countreyes of the Worlde: but (especiallie)
in a verie famous ILANDE
called AILGNA: Together, with
most fearefull Examples of Gods Iudgementes,
executed vpon the wicked for the
same, aswell in AILGNA of late, as in
other places, elsewhere.
            
               Uerie Godly, to be read of all true Christians,
euerie where: but most needefull, to
be regarded in ENGLANDE.
            Made dialogue-wise, by Phillip Stubbes.
            
            Seene and allowed, according to order.
            
               MATH. 3. ver. 2. Repent, for the kingdome of God
is at hande.
            
               Lvc. 13. ver. 5. I say vnto you (saith Christ) except
you repent, you shall all perish.
            ¶Printed at London, by Richard
Iones. 
                  ••••
               aij. 1583.
         
         
            
            
            To the Right Honorable,
Phillip Earle of Arundell: Phillip
Stubbes wisheth helth of body & soule, fauour
of God, increase of Godly honour, reward
of laudable vertue, and eternall
felicitie, in the Heauens,
by IESVS Christ.
            NOBILITAS Patriae DECVS
            
               THE Lord our God (right
honorable) hauing by the power of
his word, created Heauen and Earth,
with all thinges what soeuer, for the
comfort and vse of Man: the last of
all other (euen the sixt daye) made
Man after his owne similitude and
likenesse, that in him he might be glorified aboue all
other Creatures. And therfore, wheras in making of
other thinges, he vsed onely this Woord, FIANT, be they
made, or let them be made: when he came to make Man,
as it weare aduysing himselfe, and asking councell at his
wisdome, he said, FACIAMVS HOMINEM, let vs make▪ Man,
that is a wōderful Creature: and therfore is called in greek
MICROCOSMOS, a litle world in himself. And truely he
is no lesse, whether we consider his spirituall soule, or his
humaine body. For what Creature is theare vppon the
face of the Earth comparable to man, either in body or in
mind? what creature hath a soule immortall inherent in
his body, but onely Man? what Creature can forsee things

to come, remember things past, or iudg of things present,
but onely man? what Creature beareth the ymage of God
about with him, but Man? what Creature is made so erect
to behould the Heauens, as man? What Creature may be
likened to man, either in proportiō of body, or gifts of the
soule? And (finally) what Creature hath the promise of the
resurrectiō & glorificatiō of their bodies, & of eternall life
but onely Man? Than seeing the Lorde hath made Man
thus glorious, and preferred him in euery degree, before al
other Creatures (the Angelicall Creatures set a part) it is
manifest, he hath done it to some end & purpose, namely,
that he might be glorified in him, and by him aboue all
other his works, according to the measure of his integritie
excellency and perfection. And hereby we may learn that
it is the will of GOD, that we bend all our force to the
aduauncing of his glorious Name, the edification of his
People, and the building vp of his Church, which he hath
redemed with the bloud of his deare Sonne.
            Which thing (mee think) is notably figured foorth vnto
vs in the .25. of EXODVS wher the Lord commaunded
Moyses to build him a Tabernacle, or howse of prayer, to
this end and purpose (doubtles) that therin his lawe might
be read, his Ceremonies practised, Sacrifices, Victimates &
Holocaustes offred, and his glorious Name called vppon
and obeyed. To the erection wherof, euery one conferred
some what, some brought gold, some siluer, & some brasse,
lead & tinne, other brought silk, purple, skarlet, and other
ornaments, and the meanest brought some what, namely,
skins heare, sand, lyme, morter, wood, stone, and such like.
Euen so (right honorable) would the Lord haue euery one
to conferre some what, euen such as he hath, to the building
of his spirituall howse, the Church purchased with
the bloud of Christ. Wherfore seeing it is so, that euery
one is to further this spirituall building to his possible
power, I haue rather chosen with the simplest, and meanest
sort to bring, though but heyre, sand, skins, lyme, morter,

wood or stones, than altogether to contribute nothing.
            Not doubting, but that the chief Maister and Builder
of this howse, Christ Iesus, will not dislike, but accept of
my poore contribution, no lesse than he did of the poore
wydowes Mite, to whom was imputed that she had cast
more, in Gazophilatium Templi, into the treasury of the
Temple, than all the rest: for what she wanted in effect,
that she supplyed in affect, And for that also the Lord our
GOD committing his talēts to euery one, whether more
or lesse, not onely requireth of vs the same againe simply,
but also, as a straight computist, demaundeth interest and
gaine of euery one of vs: & for that not only, he is a murtherer
& a Homicide before God, who slayeth or killeth,
a Man with materiall sword▪ but he also, vho may preuent
the same, and will not. And not onely, he is guiltie of
haynous transgression that committeth any euill really,
but also he who consenteth to it as he doth, who holdeth
his peace, or he who by any means might auoid it, and either
for negligence wil not, or for feare of the world dare
not. Therfore, albe it, that I haue receiued, but one poore
talēt, or rather the shadow of one, yet least I might be reproued
(with that vnprofitable Seruaunt) for hyding my
small talent in the Earth▪ not profiting therwith at all, either
my self, or others, I haue aduētured the making of this
litle treatise, intituled, (The Anatomy of Abuses,) hoping
that the same (by diuyne assistance) shall somewhat conduce
to the building of this spirituall howse of the Lord.
            And although I be one (most honorable Lord) that can
do least in this Godly course of life (palpable barbarisme
forbidding mee so much as once to enter into Wysdomes
school) yet for that somewil not, for feare of losing worldly
promotion (though in the meane tyme they lose the
Kingdome of Heauen,) Other some dare not for displeasing
the world: I say, for these, & semblable causes together,
with the zeale and goodwill I beare vnto my Countrey,
and feruent desire of their conuersion and amendement,

I haue taken vpon me the contryuing of this book:
Which GOD, graunt may be with like plausible alacritie
receiued, as with paines and good will, I haue published
it, for the benefit of my Cuntrey, the pleasure of the Godly,
and amendement of the wicked. And I doubt not,
that as none, but the wicked, and peruerse whose gawld
backes are tutched, will repyne against mee, so the Godly
and vertuous, will accept of this my labour, and trauaile
herein, whose gentle fauour and goodwill, shall counterpoyse,
(and farre surmount with mee) the maligne stomacks,
and stearn countenances of the other. After that
I had (right honorable) fully perfected this booke, I was
minded, notwithstanding, both in regard of the straungenes
of the matter it intreateth of, and also in respect of the
rudenesse of my penne, to haue suppressed it for euer, for
diuerse and sundrie causes, and neuer to haue offred it to
the viewe of the world. But, notwithstanding, being ouercome
by the importunat request, and infagitable desire of
my freinds, I graūted to publish the same, as now you see,
is extant.
            But, when I had once graunted to imprinte the same, I
was in greatter doubt than before, fearinge, to whome I
might dedicate the same so rude and impolished a worke.
And withall I was not ignorant, how hard a thing it is in
these daies to finde a Patrone of such books as this, which
sheweth to euery one his sin, and discouereth euery Mans
wicked waies, which indeed, the vngodly cā not at any hād
abyde, but as it were mad-mē disgorging their stomacks
(Cum in Authorē tum in codicem plenis buccis,
& dentibus plusquàm caninis rabidè feruntur:)
they rage, they fume and rayle both against the AVTHOR
and his booke. Thus (vacillante animo) my minde
wandring too and fro, and resting, as it weare in extasie
of despaire, at last I called to mind your honorable Lordship,
whose praises haue pearced the Skyes, and whose laudable
vertues are blowen, not ouer the realme of England

onely, but euen to the furthest costs and parts of the world.
            All whose vertues, and condigne prayses, if I should
take vppon mee to recounte, I might as well number the
starres in the Sky, or grasse of the Earth.
            For, for Godly Wysdome, and zeale to the truth, is
not your good Lordship (without offence be it spoken)
comparable with the best? For sobrietie, affabilite, and
gentle curtesie to euerie one, farre excelling many.
            For your great de
                  •
               otion and compassion to the poore
oppressed, in all places famous: For Godly fidelitie, to
your Soueraigne, loue to the CVNTREY, and vertues
in generall, euerie where most renowmed.
            But least I might obscure, your Worthie commendations
with my vnlearned penne, (lytle, or no thing
at all emphaticall) I will rather surcease, than further
to proceed, contenting my selfe rather to haue giuen a
shadowe of them, than to haue ciphered them foorth,
which indeed are both infinit, and inexplicable.
            In consideration (whereof) not withstanding that
my Booke be simpler, baser, and meaner, than that it may
(without blushing) present it self to your good Lordship
(being farre vnworthie of such an honorable Personage)
yet accordinge to your accustomed clemency
I most humbly beseache your good Lordship to receiue
the same into your honors Patrociny and protection, accepting
it as an infallible token of my faithfull heart,
seruice, and good will towardes your honorable Lordship:
For proofe whereof, would GOD it might once
come to passe, that if not otherwyse, yet with my humble
seruice, I might shewe foorth the faithfull and euer
willing heart I beare in brest to your good Lordeship,
protesting before Heauen and Earth, that though
power want yet shall fidelitie, and faithfulnes faile neuer.
            And because, this my Booke is subiect (my verie good
Lord (to as many reproches, tauntes and reproofes, as euer
was any litle book (for that few cā abyde to haue their sin
                  •
               
               
detected) therfore I haue had the greatter care to commit
the same to the guardance and defence of your honour,
rather than to manie others, not onely for that GOD hath
made your honour a Lamp of light vnto the world, of true
nobilitie and of al integritie and perfection, but also hath
made you his substitute, or vicegerent, to reforme vices,
punish abuses, and correcte sinne.
            And as in mercie he hath giuen you this power and autoritie,
so hath he giuen you a hungrie desire to accomplish
the same according to his will: Which zeal in your
sacred brest, the LORD increase for euer.
            And as your Lordship knoweth, reformation of maners
and amendement of lyfe, was neuer more needfull, for,
was pride (the chiefest argument of this Booke) euer so
rype? Do not, both Men and Women (for the most part)
euery one in generall go attyred in silks, veluets, damasks,
satans, and what not? which are attyre onely for the nobilitie
and gentrie, and not for the other at anie hand? Are
not vnlawfull games, Playes and Enterluds, and the like
euery where vsed? Is not whordome, couetousnes, vsurie &
the like daylie practised without all punishment or lawe?
            But hereof I say no more, referring the consideration,
both of these and the rest, to your Godly wysdome. Beseaseaching
your good Lordship, to perdon my presumption
in speaking thus much, for (Zelus domini huc adegit me:)
the zeal of my God hath dryuen me heather.
            Knowinge, that the LORD hath ordeined you, to
himselfe a chosen vessell of honour, to purge his Church
of these Abuses, and corruptions, which as in a table are
depainted and set foorth in this litle booke.
            Thus I cease to molest your sacred eare
                  •
               s any further with
my rude speaches, most hūbly beseaching your good Lord
ship not onely to admit this my Book into your honours
patronage and defence, but also to persist the iust Defender
therof, against the swynish crew of rayling ZOILVS
and flowting MOMVS, with their complices, to whome

it is easier to depraue all things, than to amend any thing
them selues. Which, if I shall perceiue to be accepted of
your honour, besides that I shal not care for a thousand others,
disliking the same, I shall not only think my self to
haue receiued a sufficiēt guerdon for my p
                  •••
               es, & shalbe
therby greatly incoraged (if GOD permit) hereafter, to
take in hand some memorable thing to your immortall
prayse, honour and renowne, but also shall daylie pray to
GOD, for your good Lordship long to continue,
to his good pleasure and your harts desire,
with increase of Godly honour, reward
of laudable vertue, and
eternall felicitie in the
HEAVENS, by
Iesus Christ.
            Columna gloriae virtus.

                  Your Honors to commaund,
PHILLIP Stubbes.
            
         
         
            
            A PREFACE
TO THE READER.
            
               
                  I Thought it conuenient (good
Reader, who soeuer thou art, yt
shalt read these my poore laboures)
to admonish thée (least haply
yu mightest take my woords
otherwise than I meant them)
of this one thing: That wheras in the processe
of this my booke, I haue intreated of certen exercyses,
vsually practised amongest vs, as namely
of Playes and Enterludes, of dauncing, gaming,
and such other like: I would not haue
thée so, to take mée, as though my speaches tended,
to the ouerthrowe and vtter disliking of all
kynd of exercyses in generall: that is nothing
my simple meaning. But the particulare Abuses,
which are crept into euery one of these seuerall
exercyses, is the onely thing, which I think
worthie of reprehension.
            For, otherwise (all Abuses cut away) who séeth
not, yt some kind of playes, tragedies and enterluds
in their own nature, are not onely of great
anciētie, but also very honest and very commendable

exercyses, being vsed and practised in most
Christian common weales, as which containe
matter (such they may be) both of doctrine, erudition,
good example and wholsome instruction?
And may be vsed in tyme and place conuenient,
as conducible to example of life and reformation
of maners. For such is our grosse & dull nature,
that what thing we sée opposite before our eyes,

                  •
               o pearce further, and printe déeper in our harts

                  •
               nd minds, than that thing, which is hard onely
with the eares, as Horace, the hethen Poët can
witnesse. Segnius irritant animum, dimissa per
aures, quàm quae sunt hominum occulis obiecta.
So, that when honest & chast playes, tragedies,
& enterluds, are vsed to these ends, for the Godly
recreatiō of the mind, for the good example of life,
for the auoyding of that, which is euill, and learning
of that which is good, thā are they very tollerable
exercyses. But being vsed (as now commonly
they be) to the prophanation of the Lord
his sabaoth, to the alluring and inuegling of the
People from the blessed word of God preached,
to Theaters and vnclean assemblies, to ydlenes,
vnthriftynes, whordome, wantōnes, drunkēnes,
and what not? and which is more, when they
are vsed to this end, to maintaine a great sort of
ydle Persons, doing nothing, but playing and
loytring, hauing their lyuings of the sweat of
other Mens browes, much like vnto dronets deuouring
ye swéet honie of ye poore labouring bees,

than are they exercyses (at no hand) sufferable.

                  •
                But being vsed to the ends that I haue said,
they are not to be disliked of any sober, and wise
Christian.
            And as concerning dauncing, I wold not haue
thée (good Reader) to think that I condemne the
exercyse it self altogether, for I know the wisest
Sages and the Godlyest Fathers and Patriarches
that euer liued, haue now and than vsed the
same, as Dauid, Salomon, and many others: but
my woords doo touch & cōcerne the Abuses thereof
onely. As being vsed vppon the Sabaoth
day, from morning vntill night, in publique assemblies
and frequencies of People, Men & women
together, with pyping, fluting, dromming,
and such like inticements to wantonnesse & sin,
together with their leapinges, skippings, & other
vnchast gestures, not a few. Being vsed, or rather
abused in this sort, I vtterly discommend it.
            But vppon the otherside, being vsed in a mans
priuat-chamber, or howse for his Godly solace,
and recreation in the feare of GOD, or otherwise
abroade with respect had to the time, place
and persons, it is in no respect to be disalowed.
            And wheras I speake of gaming, my meaning
is not, that it is an exercise altogether vnlawful.
For, I know that one Christian may play with
another, at any kind of Godly, honest, ciuile game,
or exercise, for the mutuall recreation one of
the other, so that they be not inflamed with coueitousnes,

or desire of vnlawfull gaine: for the
cōmaundemēt saith, thou shalt not couet: wherfore,
if any be voide of these affections, playing rather
for his Godly recreation, than for desire of
filthie lucre, he may vse the same in the feare of
God: yet so as the vse therof be not a let, or hinderance
vnto him, to any other Godly exploit.
            But, if a man make (as it weare) an occupation
of it, spending both his tyme and goods therein,
frequenting, gaming howses, bowling allyes,
and such other places, for gréedinesse of lucre, to
him it is an exercise altogether discommendable
and vnlawfull. Wherfore, as these be exercyses
lawfull, to them that know how to vse them
in the feare of GOD, so are they practises at no
hand sufferable to them that abuse thē, as I haue
shewed. But take away the abuses, the thinges
in themselues are not euill, being vsed as instruments
to Godlynes, not made as spurres vnto
vice. There is nothing so good, but it may be abused,
yet because of ye abuses, I am not so strict,
that I wold haue the things, themselues remooued,
no more than I wold meat and drinke, beit
is abused, vtterly to be taken away.
            And wheras also I haue spoken of the excesse
in Apparell, and of the Abuse of the same, as wel
in men, as in women generally, I wold not be
so vnderstood, as though my speaches extēded, to
any, either noble, honorable, or worshipful: for, I
am so farre from once thinking that any kind of

sumptuous, or gorgeous attire is not to be worn
of any of them, as I suppose them rather Ornaments
in them, than otherwise.
            And that they both may, and for some respects,
ought to were such attire (their birthes callings,
functions and estats requiring the same) for causes
in this my Booke laid downe, as maye appeare,
and for the distinction of them from the
inferiour sorte, it is prouable both by the Woord
of GOD, Ancient Writers, and common
practise of all ages, People and Nations, from
the beginning of the World, to this day.
            And therfore, when I speake generally of the
excesse of Apparell, my meaning is of the inferiour
sorte onely, who for the most parte do farre
surpasse, either noble, honorable, or worshipfull,
ruffling in Silks, Ueluets, Satens, Damasks,
Taffeties, Gold, Siluer, and what not? with
their swoords, daggers, and rapiers guilte, and
reguilte, burnished, and costly ingrauen, with all
things els, that any noble, honorable, or worshipfull
Man doth, or may weare, so as the one
cannot easily be discerned from the other.
            These be the Abuses, that I speake of, these
be the euills, that I lament, and these be the persons
that my words doo concerne, as the tenure
of my Booke consideratly wayed, to any indifferent
READER doth purport.
            This much I thought good (Gentle Reader)
to informe thee of, for thy better instruction, as

well in these few points, as in all other the like,
whersoeuer they shall chaunce to occurre in my
Booke. Beseaching thée, to construe al things
to the best, to beare with the rudenes therof, and
to giue the same thy good-woord, and
gentle acceptaunce. And
thus in the LORD,
I bid thée, farewell.
            
               Thyne to vse in the Lord,
PHILLIP Stubbes.
            
         
         
            
            Phillippus Stubeus
CANDIDO LECTORI.
            
               OFfendit nimia te garrulitate libellus
               fortè meus, Lector miror id ipse nihil.
               Obsitus est etenim verborū colluuione
               plusquàm vandalica, rebus & insipidis.
               Quare si sapias operam ne perdito post hac
               nostra legendo, legas vtiliora, vale.
            
            
               ¶Idem in Zoilum.
               ZOILE cum tanta rabie exardescis in omnes,
               nō aliter rabidus, quàm solet ipse canis:
               Dent
                     •
                   Theonino rodens alios, calamoque,
               incessens hos, qui nil, nocuere tibi:
               Vipeream in cunctos vibrans O Zoile linguam,
               linguam quā inficiunt toxica dira tuam:
               Cum Debacchandi sinis 
                     •
                  it Zoile nullus,
               hora quieta tibi nullaque praetereat:
               Cum tumeas veluti ventrosus ZOILE bufo,
               demiror medius quòd minus ipse crepes.
            
            
               ¶Aliud in eundem.
               Daemones ad tetrum descendat Zoilus antrum,
               hunc lacerent furiae, Cerborus ore voret▪
               
               Imprecor at misero quid paenas, cui satis intus?
               daemona circumfert pectore namque suo.
            
            
               ¶Eiusdem aliud.
               Si tibi prolixus nimium liber iste videtur
               pauça legas, poterit sic liber e
                     ••
                  e breuis.
            
         
         
            
            A. D. In cōmendation
of the Author
and his Booke.
            IF Mortall-man may challenge prayse,
            For any thing done in this lyfe:
            Than may our Stubbes, at all assayes,
            Inioy the same withouten stryfe.
            Not onely for his Godly zeale,
            And Christian life accordinglie:
            But also for this booke in sale,
            Heare present, now before thine eye:
            Herein the Abuses of these dayes,
            As in a glasse thou mayest behold:
            Oh buy it than, hear what he sayes,
            And giue him thankes an hundred sold.
         
         
            
            I. F. In Commendation
of the AVTHOR
and his Booke.
            SHall men prophane, who toyes haue writ,
            And wanton pamphlets store,
            Which onely tend to noorish vice:
            And wickednes the more,
            Deserue their praise, and for the same,
            Accepted be of all,
            And shall not this our AVTHOR than
            Receiue the Lawrell pall?
            Who for good will in sacred brest
            He beares to natiue soyle,
            Hath published this Godly Booke,
            With mickle paine and toyle.
            Wherein, as in a Mirrour pure
            Thou mayest behold and see,
            The vices of the World displayed
            Apparent to thy eye.
            He flattereth none, as most men do,
            In Hope to game a price:
            But shewes to all their wickednesse,
            And Gods diuyne Iustice.
            A Godlyer booke was neuer made,
            Nor meeter for these dayes:
            Oh read it than▪ thank GOD for it,
            Let T'HAVTOR haue his praise.
         
         
            
            THE AVTHOR
AND HIS BOOKE.
            
               NOw hauing made thée, seelie booke,
               and brought thée to this frame:
               Full loth I am to publish thee,
               lest thou impaire my name.
            
            
               The Booke.
               Why so? good Maister, what's the cause,
               why you so loth should be,
               To send mée foorth into the World,
               my fortune for to trye?
            
            
               The Author.
               This is the cause, for that I know,
               the wicked thou wilt moue,
               And eke because thy ignoraunce:
               is such, as none can loue.
            
            
               The Booke.
               I doubt not, but all Godly Men,
               will loue and like mée well,
               And for the other I care not,
               in pride although they swell.
            
            
               
               The Author.
               Thou art also no lesse in thrall,
               and subiect euery way:
               To MOMVS and to ZOILVS crew,
               who'le dayly at thée bay.
            
            
               The Booke.
               Though MOMVS rage, and Zoilus carpe:
               I feare them not at all,
               The Lord my GOD in whom I trust,
               shall soone cause them to fall.
            
            
               The Author.
               Well, 
                     ••
                  th thou wouldest so faine be gone,
               I can thée not withhold:
               Adieu therfore, GOD be thy speade,
               And blesse thée a hundred fold.
            
            
               The Booke.
               And you also good Maister mine,
               GOD blesse you with his grace:
               Preserue you still, and graunt to you
               In Heauen a dwelling place.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            The Anatomie of
the Abuses in AILGNA.
            ¶The Interlocutors, or Speakers.
            Spudeus. Philoponus.
            
               
                  God geue you
good morow, Maister Philoponus.
            
            
               Philo.
               And you also, good
Brother Spudeus.
               
            
            
               Spud.
               I am glad to sée you in good health,Flying fame oftentimes lyeth,
for it was bruted abroad euery where in our
countrey (by reason of your discontinuance, I
thinke) that you were dead, long agoe.
            
            
               Philo.
               In deede, I haue spent some tyme abroad,
els where, then in my natiue countrey,
(I must needs confesse) but, how false that Report
is (by whom soeuer it was first rumored,
or▪ how farre so euer it be dispersed) your present
eyes can witnesse.
            
            
               
               Spud.
               I pray you, what course of lyfe, haue
you lead in this your longe absence, foorth of
your owne countrey?
            
            
               Philo.
               Truely (brother) I haue lead the life
of a poore Trauayler,The place wher the Authour hath trauayled. in a certaine famous Ilande,
once named, Ainabla, after, Ainatirb:
but nowe presently called Ailgna, wherein I
haue liued these seuen winters, and more, trauailing
from place to place, euen all the Land
ouer indifferently.
            
            
               Spud.
               That was to your no litle charges, I
am sure?
            
            
               Philo.
               It was so: but what thā? I thank God
I haue atchieued it,Trauailing chargeable. and by his dyuine assistance
prosperously accomplished it, his glorious
name (worthie of all magnificence) bee eternally
praysed therefore.
            
            
               Spud.
               And to what ende, did you take in
hand this great trauayle, if I may be so bould
as to aske?
            
            
               Philo.
               Truely, to sée fashions, to acquainte
my selfe with the natures, qualities, properties,The causes that moued the author to take this trauaile in hand
and conditions of all men, to breake my
selfe to the worlde, to learne nurture, good demeanour,
& cyuill behauiour: to sée the goodly
situation of Citties. Townes and Countryes,
with their prospects, and commodities: and finally,
to learne the state of all thinges in generall:
all which I could neuer haue learned
in one place. For who so sitteth at home, euer

commorante or abiding in one place, knoweth
nothinge, in respecte of him, that trauayleth
abroade: and hee that knoweth nothing,
is lyke a brute Beaste, but hee that knoweth
all thinges (whiche thinge none doeth but
God alone) hee is a God amongest men. And
séeing there is a perfectiō in knowledge, as in
euery thing els, euery man ought to desire
that perfection: for in my iudgement, there is
as muche difference (almost) betwixt a man
that hath trauayled much,The differēce betwixt a mā the hath trauayled, and a man that hath not. and him that hath
dwelt euer in one place, (in respect of knowledge,
and science of things) as is betwen a
man lyuinge, & one dead in graue. And therfore
I haue had a great felicytie in trauayling
abroade.
            
            
               Spud.
               Seing that by diuyne prouidence, we
are heare met together, let vs (vntill we come
to ye end of our purposed iorney) vse some 
                     •
                  onference
of the state of the World now at this
daie▪ as well to recreate our minds, as to cut
of the tedyousnes of oure iorneye.
            
            
               Philo.
               I am very well contente so to doe,
beinge not a litle glad of your good companie:
For, Comes facundus in via, pro vehiculo
est. 1. A good Companion too trauayle
withall,The benefite of a good Companion to trauayle withall. is in steade of a Wagon,

or Chariot. For as the one doth ease the painfulnes
of the way, so doth the other alleuiat ye
yrksomnes of the iourney intended.
            
            
               Spud.
               But, before I enter combat with you
(because I am a countrey man,A request to auoid offēce. rude and vnlearned:
& you, a Cyuilian, indued with great
wisdome, knowledge and experience) I most
humbly beseech you, that you wyl not be offended
with me though I talke wt you somwhat
grosly, without eyther polished wordes, or fyled
speeches, which your wisdom doth require,
and my insufficiencie and inabylitie is not of
power to affoorde.
            
            
               Phil.
               Your spéeches (I put you out of doubt)
shal not be offensiue to mée, if they be not offensiue
to God, first.
            
            
               Spud.
               I pray you, what maner of Countrey
is that Ailgna, where you say you haue trauailed
so much?
            
            
               Philo.
               A pleasant & famous Iland, immured
aboute with the Sea,Ailgna, a goodly cūtry. as it were with a
wall, wherein the aire is verie temperate, the
ground fertile, and abounding with all things
either necessary to man, or néedefull for beast.
            
            
               Spud.
               What kinde of people are they that
inhabite there?The people of Ailgna.
               
            
            
               Philo.
               A strong kinde of people, audacious,
bold▪ puissant, and heroycal, of great magnanimitie,
valiauncie and prowes, of an incomparable
feature, of an excellente complexion, and

in all humanitie, inferiour to none vnder the
Sunne.
            
            
               Spud.
               This people, whome God hath thus
blessed, must needes bee a verie godly people,
eyther els they be méere ingrate, to God the
authour of all grace, & of these their blessinges
especially?
            
            
               Philo.
               It gréeueth me to remember their
liues, or to make mention of their wayes,The liues of the people of Ailgna. for
notwithstanding that the Lorde hath blessed
that Lande, with the knowledge of his truth
aboue all other Landes in the world, yet is
there not a people more abrupte, wicked, or
peruerse, liuing vpon the face of the earth.
            
            
               Spud.
               From whence spring all these euills
in man, for we sée euerie one is inclined to sin
naturally, and there is no fleshe which liueth,
and sinneth not?
            
            
               Philo.
               All wickednes,From whēce all euilles spring in mā. mischiefe, and sinne,
(doubte you not brother Spud.) springeth of
our auncient ennemie the Deuill, the in
                     •
                  eterate
corruption of our nature, and the intestine
malice of our owne hearts, as from the originals
of all vncleannes, & impuritie whatsoeuer.
But we are now newe creatures, and
adoptiue children, created in Christ Iesus to
doe good woorkes,We ought to haue no dealing with the workes of the fl
                        •
                     sh, which God hath prepared
for vs to walke in. Wherefore wee ought to
haue no fellowship with the workes of darknesse,
but to put on the armour of light Christ

Iesus, to walke in newnesse of life and to
worke our saluation in feare and trembling,
as the Apostle saith, and our sauiour Christ
biddeth vs so work, as our workes may glorifie
our heauenlye Father. But (alas) the
contrarie is most true, for there is no sinne,
that was euer broached in any age, which
florisheth not nowe. And therfore the fearfull
daie of the Lord cannot be farre of: at
which day all the World shall stand in flashing
fier, and than shall Christ our Sauiour
come marching in y• clowdes of heauen, with
his Taratantara sounding in each mans eare:
arise you Dead,The day of Dome not regarded. and come to iudgement, and
than shall the Lord reward euery Man after
his owne workes. But how little this is
esteemed of, & how smally regarded, to cōsider
it greeueth me to the very harte, and there is
almost no life in mee.
            
            
               Spud.
               It is but a follie to greeue at them,
who sorowe not for them selues. Let them
sinck in their owne sinne:Euery Man must answer for him selfe. lyue well your selfe
& you shall not answeare for them, nor they for
you. Is it not writen? vnusquisque portabit
suū onus. Euery one shall beare his own burden.
Anima quae peccauerit, ipsa morietur
ye soule that sinneth shall dy: wherfore surcease
to sorow or greeue any more for them: for they
are such, as the Lord hath cast of into a reprobat
sence, & prei
                     •
                  dicat opinion, & preordinat

destruction, that his power, his glorie and iustice
may appeare to all the World.
            
            
               Philo.
               Oh brother, ther is no christē mā, in
whose hart shineth scintillula aliqua pietatis,
any sparke of God his grace, which will not
gréeue to sée his brethren & sisters in the Lord,
members of the same body, coheyres of ye same
kingdom, & purchased with one & the same inestimable
price of Christ his bloud, to runne
thus desperatlie into the gulphe of destruction
and laberinth of perdition. If the least and
meanest member of thy whole body, be hurt,
wounded, cicatriced or brused, doth not the
hart, and euerie member of thy body,The mutuall harmonie of one member with an other feele the
anguish and paine of the grieued parte, seking
& endeuouring them selues, euery one in his
office & calling, to repaire the same, and neuer
ioying, vntill that be restored again to his former
integritie & perfection? Which thinge in
the balance of Christian charity, consideratly
weighed, may mooue any good Man to mourn
for their defection, and to assay, by all possible
means, to reduce them home again, that their
soules maie be saued in the daye of the Lord.
And the Apostle commandeth vs, that we be
(alter alterius emolumento) an ayde and helpe
one to an other. And that we do good to all
men, dum tempus habemus, whylest we haue
tyme. To wéepe with them that weepe,
to mourne with them that mourne, and

to be of like affection one towardes an other.
And common reason aduertiseth vs, that wee
are not borne for our selues onelie: for, Ortus
nostri partem patria, partem amici, partem parentes
vendicant. Our Countrey challengeth
a part of our byrth, our brethren and frendes
require an other parte,No mā born for himselfe. and our parentes (and
that optimo iure) doe vendicate a third parte▪
Wherefore I will assay to doe them good (if I
can) in discouering their abuses, and laying open
their inormities, that they séeing the gréeuousnes
of their maladies, & daunger of theyr
diseases, may in time seeke to the true Phisition,
& expert Chirurgion of their soules Christ
Iesus, of whome onelie commeth all health &
grace, and so eternally be saued.
            
            
               Spud.
               Séeing that so many and so haynous
sinnes do raigne and rage in Ailgna, as your
wordes import, and which mooue you to such
intestine sorrowe, and griefe of minde, I pray
you describe vnto me more perticularly, some
of those Capitall crimes, and chiefe Abuses,
which are there frequented, and which dishonour
the maiestie of God the most, as you suppose?
            
         
         
            
            A particuler description
of PRIDE, the principall Abuse:
and how manifold it is in AILGNA.
            
               PHILOPONVS.
               
                  YOu do well to request me to
cipher foorth vnto you parte
of those great Abuses (and
Cardinall Uices) vsed in
AILGNA, for no man in
anie Catalogue, how prolixe soeuer, is able to
comprehend the summe of all abuses there in
practise.The number of Abuses infinite. And whereas you woulde haue mee
to speake of those Capitall or chiefe Abuses,
which both are deadly in their owne nature,
and which offende the maiestie of God moste.
Mée thinke you shake hands with the sworne
enemies of God the Papistes, who say, there
are two kindes of sinne, the one veniall, the other
lethall or deadly.All sinne in it owne nature is mortall. But you must vnderstand,
that there is not the least sinne, that is
committed eyther in thought, woorde, or déede,
(yea, Vae vniuersae iustitiae nostrae, si remota
misericordia iudicetur. Wo be to all our righteousnes,
if mercie put away they should bee
iudged:) but it is damnable, dempta misericordia
Dei, if the mercie of God be not extended.
And againe, there is no sinne so gréeuous,
which the grace and mercy of God is not able

to counteruaile withal, & if it bee his pleasure
to blot it out for euer. So yt you see now, there
is no sinn so venial, but if the mercie of God,
be not stretched out, it is damnable: nor yet anie
sinne so mortall, which by the grace and
mercie of God, may not bee done away. And
therfore as we are not to presume of the one,
so wee are not to despaire of the other. But to
returne againe to ye satisfying of your request.
The greatest abuse,The greatest abuse which offendeth god most▪ is pride. which both offendeth god
moste, & is there not a little aduaunced, is the
execrable sinne of Pride, and excesse in apparell,
which is there so ripe, as the filthie fruits
thereof haue long since, presented themselues
before the throne of the maiestie of God, calling
and crying for vengeance day and nighte
incessantly.
            
            
               Spud.
               Wherfore haue you intēded to speak
of Pride the first of all, geuing vnto it the first
place in your tractation? Because it is euill in
it selfe, and the efficiente cause of euill, or for
some other purpose?
            
            
               Philo.
               For no other cause,Pride the begyning of all euill. but for that I
thinke it to bee, not onely euill and damnable
in it owne nature, but also the verie efficient
cause of all euills. And therfore the wise man
was bolde,ECCLES. 10. to call it Initium omnium malorum,
the beginning and welspring of al euils.
For as from the roote all natural thinges doe
grow, & take their beginning: so from ye cursed

roote of pestiferous Pride do all other euilles
sproute, and thereof are ingenerate. Therfore
may Pride be called not improperly, Matercula
& origo omniū vitiorū,
                  What is it but pride dares attempt it. the mother and
nurse of al mischief: for what thyng so haynous,
what cryme so flagitious, what deed so
perillous, what attemptso vēterous, what enterpriseso
pernicious, or what thing so offēsiue
to God or hurtful to mā, in all ye world, which
mā (of himselfe a very Sathanas) to maintain
his pride withall, wil not willingly atchieue?
hereof wee haue too muche experience euerye
day, more is the pittie.
            
            
               Spud.
               How manyfold is this sin of Pryde,
whereby the glorie of God is defaced, and his
maiestie so gréeuously offended?
            
            
               Philo.
               Pride is tripartite, namely, ye pryde
of the hart,Pride is three fold, pride of the hart, pride of the mouth and pride of apparell. the pride of the mouth, & the pryde
of apparell, which (vnles I bee deceiued) offendeth
God more then the other two. For as ye
pride of the heart & mouth is not opposite to ye
eye, nor visible to the sight, and therefor intice
not others to vanitie & sin (notwithstanding
they be gréeuous sinnes in the sight of God) so
the pride of apparel, remaining in sight, as an
exemplarie of euill, induceth the whole man
to wickednes and sinne.
            
            
               Spud.
               How is the pride of ye hart cōmitted?
            
            
               Philo.
               Pride of the hart is perpetrate, whē
as a man lifting him selfe on highe, thinketh

of himself, aboue that which he is of himselfe:
dreamyng a perfection of himselfe, when he is
nothyng lesse: And in respect of himselfe, contempneth,
vilefieth and reproacheth all men,
thinking none comparable to him selfe, whose
righteousnes, notwithstanding, is lyke to the
polluted cloth of a menstruous woman:
               Therfore, the Pryde of the Heart, maye
bée saide,What pride of the hart is. too bée a Rebellious elation, or
lyftynge vppe of the mynde, agaynste the
Lawe of God, attrybutynge and ascrybynge
that vnto himselfe, whiche is proper
to God onely. And although it bee the Lorde,
Qui operatur in nobis velle, & posse, who worketh
in vs both the wil and power to do good,
Ne gloriaretur omnis caro, leaste anie fleshe
should boste of his owne power and strength,
yet Pride, with his Cosin germayn Philautia
                  PHILAVTIA. which is Selfeloue, perswadeth him, y• he hath
néede of no mans helpe but his owne: that he
standeth by his own proper strength & power
and by no mans els, & that he is al in all, yea,
so perfect and good, as no more can be exacted
of hym.
            
            
               Spud.
               How is Pride of wordes, or pride of
mouthe, committed?
            
            
               Philo.
               Pride of the mouth,How pride of wordes, or of the mouth is committed. or of wordes, is,
when we boast, bragge or glorie, eyther of our
selues, our kinred, consanguynitie, byrth, parentage,
and suche like: or when we extol our

selues for any vertue, sanctimonie of lyfe, sincerytie
of Godlynes, which eyther is in vs, or
which we pretend to be in vs. In this kinde
of Pride (as in the other) almost euery one offendeth:
for shal you not haue all (in a maner)
boast & vaunt themselues of their Auncetors,
and progenitors? saying, & crying with open
mouth: I am a Gentleman, I am worshipful,
I am Honourable, I am Noble, and I can
not tell what: my father was this, my father
was that: I am come of this house, and I am
come of that: Wheras, Dame Nature, bryngeth
vs all into the worlde, after one sorte, and
receiueth all againe, into the wombe of our
mother, I meane, the bowelles of the earth, al
in one and the same order and manner, without
any difference or diuersitie at all, wherof
more hereafter shalbe spoken.
            
            
               Spud.
               How is Pride of Apparell cōmitted?
            
            
               Philo.
               By wearyng of Apparell more gorgeous,How pride of apparel is perpetrate & cō
                     mitted.
sumptuous & precious than our state,
callyng or condition of lyfe requireth, wherby,
we are puffed vp into Pride, and inforced
to thinke of our selues, more than we ought,
beyng but vile earth and miserable sinners.
               And this sinne of Apparell (as I haue sayde
before) hurteth more then the other two: For
the sinne of the heart, hurteth none, but the
Author, in whom it bréedeth, so long as it bursteth
not foorth into exteriour action: And the

Pride of the mouth (whiche consisteth, as I
haue sayd, in ostenting and braggyng of some
singular vertue, eyther in himselfe, or some other
of his kinred, and which he arrogateth to
himselfe (by Hereditarie possession, or lineall
dissent) though it be meere vngodly in it own
nature, yet it is not permanent, (for wordes
fly into the aire, not leauing any print or character
behinde them to offend the eyes.) But
this sinne of excesse in Apparell, remayneth as
an Example of euyll before our eyes, and as a
prouocatiue to sinne, as Experience daylye
sheweth.
            
            
               Spud.
               Would you not haue men to obserue
a decencie,A decorum to be obserued. a comlinesse & a decorum in their
vsuall Attyre? Doeth not the worde of God
commaund vs to do all things decenter, & secundum
ordinem ciuilem: decently, and after
a cyuile maner?
            
            
               Philo.
               I would wish, that a decencie, a comly
order, and as you say, a decorum were obserued,
as well in Attyre, as in all things els:
but, would God the contrarie were not true:
For most of our nouell Inuentions and new
fangled fashions,Our apparell rather deformeth, than adorneth vs. rather deforme vs then adorne
vs: disguise vs, then become vs: makyng
vs rather, to resemble sauadge Beastes and
stearne Monsters, then continent, sober and
chaste Christians.
            
            
               Spud.
               Hathe this contagious infection, of

                  Pride in Apparell, infected and poysoned any
other countrey, beside Ailgna, suppose you?
            
            
               Philo.
               No doubt, but this poyson hath shed
foorth his influence, and powred foorth his stinking
dregges ouer all the face of the earth, but
yet I am sure, there is not any people vnder
the Zodiacke of heauen, how clownish, rurall
or brutish soeuer, that is so poisoned with this
Arsnecke of Pride, or hath drunke so deepe of
the dregges of this Cup, as Ailgna hath, with
griefe of conscience I speake it, with sorow I
sée it, and with teares I lament it.
            
            
               Spud.
               But I haue heard them saye, that other
Nations passe them,No Cuntrey so drunken with pride as Ailgna. for exquisite brauery
in Apparell: as, the Italians, the Athenians,
the Spaniards, the Caldeans, Heluetians, Zuitzers,
Venetians, Muscouians, and such lyke:
now, whither this be true or not, I greatly desire
to knowe.
            
            
               Philo.
               This is but a visour, or cloke, to hide
their Sodometrie withall: onelye spoken, not
prooued: forged in the deceiptfull Mint of their
owne braynes: For (if credit may be giuen
to ancient writers,) the Egyptiās are said, neuer
to haue chāged their fashion, or altered the
forme of their first Attire, from the beginning
to this day: as Iacobus Stuperius, lib. de diuer
sis nostrae aetatis habitibus, Pag. 16, affirmeth:
The Grecians, are saide, to vse but one kynde
of Apparell without any chaunge: that is to

wit: a longe Gowne, reaching downe to the
grounde.
               The Germaynes, are thought to be so precise
in obseruing one vniforme fashion in Apparell,
as they haue neuer recéeded from their
first Origina: as the said Stuperius sayth, in
these wordes: Non enim mores leuiter mutare
vetustos, Germanus vnqnam consueuit
incola: Whiche in Englysh Uerse, is thus
muche in effect.
               ¶The Germayne people neuer vse,
               lightly to chop and chaunge
               Their customes olde, or els Attyre,
               wherin abroade they range.
               ¶The Muscouians, Athenians, Italians,
Brasilians, Affricanes, Asianes, Cantabrians,
Hungarians, Ethiopians, or els, what
Nation soeuer, vnder the Sunne, are so farre
qehinde the people of Ailgna, in exquisitnesse
of Apparell, as in effect, they estéeme it litle or
nothyng at all, so it repell the colde, and couer
their shame: yea, some of them are so smally
addicted therto, that settyng apart all honestie
and shame, they go cleane naked. Other some
meanly apparelled, some in Beasts skinnes,
some in haire, & what euer they can get: some
in one thing, some in another, nothing regarding
eyther hosen, shoes, bands▪ ruffes, shirts,
or any thing els. And the ciuilest nations that
are, bee so farre estraunged from the pride of

of apparell that they esteme him as brauelye
attyred that is clothed in our carzi
                     •
                  s, frizes,
ruggs, and other kinds of cloth, as we do him
that is clad all ouer in silkes, veluets, satens,
damasks, grograins, taffeties, and such like.
So that herby you sée, that they speak vntruly
that say, that other nations exceede them in
brauerie of apparell. For it is manifest that
all other Nations vnder the sun how strange,
how new, how fine, or how comly soeuer they
think their fashiōs to be, when they be cōpared
with the dyuerse fashions, & sundrie formes
of apparell in Ailgna, are most vnhandsame,
brutish and monstrouse. And herby it
appeareth that no People in the World is so
curiouse in new fangles, as they of Ailgna be.
But graūte it were so, and admit that others
excelled them, (which is false) shall we do
euill, because they do so? shall their wickednesse
excuse vs of sinne, if we commit the like
& worse? shall not the soule that sinneth dye?
wherfore let vs not sinne of presumptiō, with
the multitude, because they do so, least we be
plagued with them because we doe the like.
Moreouer those Cuntreyes are rich and welthie
of them selues,Other countreyes not to be blamed though they, go in silk
                        •
                      veluets, and why: abounding with all kinde
of preciouse ornaments, and riche attyre, as
silks, veluets, Satens, damasks, sarcenet,
taffetie, chamlet, and such like (for al these are
made in those foraine cuntreyes) and therfore

if they weare them, they are not muche to bee
blamed, as not hauing anie other kind of cloathing
to couer themselues withall. So if wee
would contente our selues with such kinde of
attire,Other Countryes esteme not so muche of silkes, veluets, as we do. as our owne Countrey doeth minister
vnto vs, it were much tollerable. But wee
are so surprised in Pride, that if it come not
from beyond the seas, it is not worth a straw.
And thus we impouerish our selues in buying
their trifling merchandizes, more plesant thā
necessarie, and inrich them, who rather laugh
at vs in their sléeues, than otherwise, to sée our
gret follie in affecting of trifles, & departing wt
good merchandizes for it. And howe litle they
estéeme of silkes, veluets, satens, damasks, and
such like, wee maye easely see, in that they sell
them to vs for wolles, frizes, rugges, carzies,
and the lyke, whiche they coulde neuer doe, if
they estéemed of them as much as we doe. So
that you sée they are forced of necessytye to
weare such riche attyre, wanting other things
(whereof we haue store) to inuest themselues
withall. But who séeth not (excepte wilfullie
blynde) that no necessitie compelleth vs to
weare them hauing abundāce of other things
to attire our selues with, both hansomer, warmer,
and as comlie as they in euerie respecte?
But farre fetched, and deare boughte, is good
for Ladyes they say.
            
            
               Spud.
               Doe you thinke it not permitted to
any hauinge store of other necessary clothing
                     •
                  
                  
to weare, silks, veluets, taffeties, & other suche
riche attyre, of what calling soeuer they be of?
            
            
               Ph.
               I doubt not,Euery man may weare apparell according to his callinge. but it is lawfull for ye potestates,
the nobilitie, the gentrie, yeomanrie,
and for euerye priuate subiecte els to weare
attyre euery one in his degrée, accordinge as
his calling and condition of life requireth, yet
a meane is to be keept, for, omne extremum
vertitur in vitium, euery extreme, is turned
into vice. The nobilitye (though they haue store
of other attyre) and the gentrie (no doubte)The nobility may weare gorgiouse attyre, and why.
may vse a rich, and preciouse kynd of apparell
(in the feare of God) to innoble, garnishe & set
forthe their byrthes, dignities, functions and
callings, but for no other respecte, they may
not in any maner of wyse. The maiestrats also,
& Officers in the weale publique, by what
tytle soeuer they be called (accordinge to their
abylities) may were (if the Prince, or Superintendent
do Godly commaund) costlie ornaments
and riche attyre,Maiestrats may were sumptuouse attyre & why to dignifie their callings,
and to demonstrat and shewe forth, the
excelency, and worthines of their offices, and
functions, therby to strike a terroure & feare
into the harts of the people, to offend against
the maiesty of their callings: but yet would
I wish, that what so is superfluous or ouermuche,
either in the one, or in ye other, shold be
distributed to the helpe of the pore members
of Christ Iesus, of whom an infynite number

daylie do perish, thorowe wante of necessarie
refectiō, and due sustentation to their bodies.
And as for the priuat subiects, it is not at any
hand lawful that they should weare silke, veluets,
satens, damasks, gould, siluer and what
they list (though they be neuer so able to maintain
it) except they being in some kinde of office
in the common wealth,Not lawfull for priuate subiectes to weare sump
                     
                        ••
                     ous attyre. do vse it for the
                     •
                  
dignifying and inno
                     ••
                  ing of the 
                     •
                  ame. But
now there is such a confuse mingle mangle of
apparell in Ailgna, and such preposterous excesse
therof, as euery one is permitted to flaūt
it out, in what apparell he lust himselfe, or
can get by anie kind of meanes. So that it is
verie hard to knowe, who is noble, who is
worshipfull, who is a gentleman, who is not:
for you shall haue those, which are neither of
the nobylitie gentilitie, nor yeomāry, no, nor
yet anie Magistrat or Officer in the common
welth,Hard to know a Gentleman from another by apparell. go daylie in silkes, veluets, satens, damasks,
taffeties▪ and such like, notwithstanding
that they be both base by byrthe, meane
be estate, & seruyle by calling. This is a great
confusion & a general disorder, God be mercyfull
vnto vs.
            
            
               Spud.
               If it be not lawfull for euery one, to
weare, silks, veluets, satens, damasks, taffeties,
gold, siluer, preciouse stones, & what not,
wherfore did the Lord make & ordein them?
            
            
               Philo.
               I denie not, but they may be worne

of them, who want other things to cloth them
withal, or of ye nobylity, gentilytie, or magistery,
for the causes abouesaid,Wherfore the lord made riche ornamentes▪
                   but not of euery
proud 
                     ••
                  xnet indifferentlie, that haue store of
other attyre inough▪ And yet did not the Lord
ordeane these riche ornaments and gorgiouse
vestments to be worne of all men, or of anie,
so muche as to garnish, bewtifie, and set forth,
the maiesty & glorie of this his earthly kingdome:
For, as cloth of gold, Arase, tapestrie, &
such other riche ornamēts, pendices and hangings
in a house of estate, serue not onely to
manuall vses and seruyle occupatiōs, but also
to decorate, to bewtifie & become the house,
and to shewe the riche estate and glorie of the
owner:Wherto riche ornamentes do serue▪
                   so these riche ornaments and sumpteouse
vestments, of the earthly territory of
this World, do not onelie serue to be worn of
them, to whome it doth appertaine (as before)
but also to shew forth, ye power, welth, dignity
riches, and glorie of the Lord, the Author of
all goodnesse. And here in, the prouidence
and mercy of God appeareth most plainelye,
for wher there is store of other clothing there
hath he geuen, lesse store of silks, veluets, satens,
damasks▪ and such like: and wher there
is plenty of them, there is no clothing els, almost,
& thus the Lord did deale, for that euery
cuntrey ought to contente themselues, with
there owne kind of attyre: except necessytie

force the contrarie, for than we are to vse our
libertie in the feare of God.
            
            
               Spud.
               I praye you let mee intreate you, to
shewe me wherefore our apparell was giuen
vs, and by whome?
            
            
               Philo.
               Your requeste is both diffuse and intricate,
and more than my weake and infirme
knowledge is able to comprehend:When, where, and for what cause our app
                        •
                     rell was geuen vs. yet, least I
might bee adiudged vnwilling to doe good, I
will assay to doe the best I can.
               When the Lord our God▪ a spiritual, intellectible
vnderstanding substance, incomprehensible,
immensurable, & inaccessible, had by his
woord, and heauenly wisedome Christ Iesus,
created and made ye world, & all things therin
contayned, ye sixte day he created man, after
his own similitude and likenes, in innocencie,
holines, righteousnes, & all kind of perfection,
he placed him in Paradise terestrial cōmaunding
him to tyl & manure ye same. Thā ye deuil,
an old maligner of mankind, who before was
an Angel in heauē, & through sin of pride in arrogating
to himselfe ye seate & throne of Gods
maiesty, cast down into ye lake of hell, enuying
                     •
                  
mans glorious estate, which he than had lost,
came vnto man in Paradise,The fall of man by the malice of the deuill. & inticed him (o
                     ••
                   torteouse
serpent) to eat of ye forbidden fruite▪
wherof the Lorde God had forbidden him t
                     •
                  
tast, on pain of his life: notwithstāding, Ada
                        •
                     
                  
condescending to his wife her perswasions, o
                     •
                  
                  
rather to the Serpent, hauing buzzed his venemous
suggestions into their eares, tooke of
the apple, & did eat, contrary to ye expresse commandement
of his God. This done their eyes
were opened, thei saw their nakednes, & were
not a litle ashamed (& yet before sin was committed,
they being both naked, were not ashamed,
but sin once committed, they became vncleane,
filthie, lothsome, & deformed) & sewed
them garmēts of fig leaues together, to couer
their shame withall. Than the Lord pittying
their miserie, & loathing their deformity, gaue
thē pelts, & felles of beasts to make them garments
withall, to the end that their shamefull
parts might lesse appeare: yet some are so brasen
faced & so impudent,Impuden
                        •
                      beasts. that to make y• deuill
& his members sport, will not sticke to make
open shew of those parts, which God cōmaundeth
to be couered, nature willeth to be hid, &
honesty is ashamd once to behold or looke vpō.
            
            
               Spud.
               I gather by your words thrée speciall
poynts. First, yt sin was the cause why our apparell
was giuen vs. Secondly, yt God is the
author, & giuer therof. Thirdly, yt it was giuē
vs to couer our shame wt all, & not to féed ye insatiable
desires of mēs wātō & luxurious eies?
            
            
               Philo.
               Your collectiō is very true. Than seeing
yt our apparel was giuē vsWherfor our apparell was geuen vs. of god to couer
our shame, to kéep our bodies frō cold, & to bee
as pricks in our eies, to put vs in mind of our

frailties, imperfections and sin, of our backslyding
from the cōmaundements of god and
obedience of the highest, and to excite vs the
rather to contrition, and compunction of the
spirit, to bewayle our misery, & to craue mercy
at ye mercifull hands of God, let vs be thākfull
to God for them, be sorie for our sinnes,
(which weare the cause therof) and vse them
to the glory of our God, & the benefyte of our
bodies and soules, against the great day of the
Lord appeare. But (alas) these good creatures,
which the Lord our God, gaue vs for the
respects before rehearsed, we haue so peruerted,
as now they serue in stead of the deuills
nettes, to catche poore soules in: for euery one
now adaies (almost) couet to deck and painte
their liuing sepulchresMens bodies lyuing sepulchres. or erthly graues (their
bodies I meane) with all kind of brauerie,
what soeuer can be deuised, to delight ye eyes
of the vnchast behoulders, wherby God is dishonored,
offence is encreased, and much sinne
daylie committed, as in further discourse shall
plainly appeare.
            
            
               Spud.
               Did the Lord cloth our first parents
in leather, as not hauing any thing more preciouse
to attyre them withall, or for that, it
might be a permanent rule, or patern vnto vs
(his posterity) for euer, wherafter we are of
force to make all our garments, so as it is not
now lawfull to go in richer arraye, without

offendinge his maiestie?
            
            
               Philo.
               Although ye Lord did not cloth thē so
meanly, for that he had nothing els, more preciouse
to attyre them withall (for Domini est
terra, & plenitudo eius, the earth is the Lords
and the fulnesse therof, saith the Lord by his
Psalmist: And by his Prophet. Gold is myne,
siluer is myne, and all the riches of the world
is my own) yet no doubt, but he would yt this
their meane & base attyre, should be as a rule,
or pedagogie vnto vs, to teach vs yt we ought
rather to walke meanelye,In our apparell we ought rather to oby necessity, than to feed vanity. and simplye, than
gorgiously, or pompously: rather seruing presente
necessitye, than regarding the wanton
appetits of our lasciuiouse mindes: Not withstandinge
I suppose not, that his heauenlye
maiesty would, that those garments of lether,
should stand as a rule or pattern of necessytie
vnto vs, wherafter we shold be boūd to shape
all our apparell for euer, or els greeuouslye to
offende: but yet by this, we may sée, his blessed
will is, that we should rather go an ace beneth
our degrée, than a iote aboue. And yt any simple
couering pleaseth the Godly, so that it repell
the colde, and couer the shame, it is more
than manifest, as well by the legends both of
prophane Historyographers Cronologers, and
other writers, as also by the censures, examples
and lyues of all Godly, since the beginning
of the world: And if the Lord would not,

that the attyre of Adam, should haue been
                     •
                  
                  ▪
signe, or patterne of mediocritie vnto vs,Adā his meankind of attire was a 
                        •
                     igne 
                        〈◊〉
                      mediocrity vnto vs 
                        •
                     n our 
                        •
                     pparell. h
                     •
                  
both in mercy would, & in his almighty power
could haue inuested them in silks, veluets satens,
grograins, gold, siluer, & what not. But
the Lord our God foresawe, that if he had clothed
man, in rich and gorgiouse attyre (suche
is our proclyuitye to sinne) he wold haue bene
proude therof as we sée it is come to passe at
this day (God amend it) and therby purchase
to himselfe, his body and soule, eternall damnation.
            
            
               Spud.
               Than it seemeth a thinge materiall,
and of great importāce, that we resemble our
first Parēts in austerity, and simplicity of apparell,
so muche as maye be possible, doth it
not?
            
            
               Philo.
               I put no religion in goinge,No religion reposed in apparell. or not
goinge in the like simple attyre of our parēts
Adam, & Eua, (as our Papistes, Papists? no,
Sorbonists, Sorbonists? no, Atheists, atheists?
no, plaine Sathanists do, placing all thier religion
in hethen garments, & Romish raggs)
so that we obserue a meane and exceade not
in pride. But notwithstanding, if we approched
a litle nearer them, in Godly simplicitie
and Christian sobrietie, both of apparell and
maner of lyuinge, we should not onely please
God a great deale the more, and enritche our
Cuntrey, but also auoyd many scandals & offēces,

which grow daily by our excessiue ryot▪
and ryotouse excesse in apparell. For doth not
ye apparell styrre vppe the heart to pride?The fruite of Pride. doth
it not intice others to sinne? and doth not sin
purchase hell the guerdon of pride?
            
            
               Spud.
               But they say, they please God, rather
than offend him in wearing this gorgiouse attyre,
for therby the glory of his workmanship
in them doth more appeare. Besides that, it
maketh a man to be accepted, and esteemed of
in euery place: wheras otherwise, they should
be nothing lesse.
            
            
               Philo.
               To think that the Lorde our God is
delighted in the splendente shewe of outward
apparell,The Lord accepteth no man after his apparell. or that it setteth forth y• glory of his
Creatures, and the maiesty of his kingdom I
suppose ther is no mā (at least no perfect christian
man) so bewitched or assotted. For that
weare, as much, as to say, that stinking pride,
& filthie sinne, tended to the glory of God, so
that the more we syn the more we increase
his prayse and glorye. But the Lord oure
God is so farre from dilightinge in sinne,
that he adiudgeth them to eternall Death,
and damnation, that committe the same.
Than who is he that will take pleasure in
vayne apparell, which if it be worne but
a whyle, will fall to ragges, and if it be
not worne, will soone rotte or els be eaten
with mothes. His wayes are not our
                     •
                  
                  
wayes, his iudgements, not our iudgements,
as he sayth, by his Prophet: and wheras they
holde, that Apparell setteth foorth the glory of
his Maiestie in his creatures, makynge them
to appeare fairer,No attyre can make the creature of God seeme fayrer. than other wyse they would
of themselues, it is blasphemously spoken, and
muche derogateth, from ye exellency and glory
of his name. For saith not God by his prophet
Moyses, that after he had made all creatures,
he beheld them all, & behould they weare (and
especially mā, the excellentest of all other his
creatures, whom he made after his own similitude
& liknesse) excedinge good? And were all
creatures good & perfect, & only mā not perfect
nor faire inough? If these their speeches were
true (which in the fulnesse of their blasphemie
they shame not to speake) thā might we easily
conuince the Lord of vntrue speaking, who in
his sacred word, informeth vs, that mā is the
perfectest Creature, & the fayrest of al others,
yt euer he made (excepting the heuenly spirits,
& Angelical creatures) after his own liknesse:
as before. O mā who arte thou, that reasonest
with thy Creator? shall the clay say vnto the
potter, why hast thou made me thus?Euery one is to contente him selfe with his creation and to pr
                        •
                     yse God for it. Or can
y• clay make himselfe better fauored than the
potter, who gaue him his first stamp & proportion?
Shall we think that stinking pride, can
make the workmāshippe of the Lord to seeme
fayrer? Than why did not the Lord cloth vs

so at ye first? or at least, why gaue he not commaundemēt
in his will, & testament which he
sealed with the price of the bloud of his sonne
to cloth our selfes in riche & gorgiouse apparel
to set forth his glory ye more? But away with
these dogs, & hellish haggs, who retaine this
opiniō, that cursed pride glorifieth God, & setteth
forth or bewtifieth his workmāshippe in
his creatures. In vain is it, for me to expostulat
with them, for doubtles nō hould this, but
such as be misecreants (or deuills incarnate)
& men cast of into a reprobate sence,The Lord ou
                        •
                      God is a consuming fire, to destroy all impeniten
                        •
                      si
                        •
                     ner
                        •
                     . whom I
beseech the Lord in the bowels of his mercy,
either speedely to cōuert that they perish not,
or els confounde, yt they hurte not, that peace
may be vppō Israel. Thus hauing sufficiently
(I trust) refelled their false positiōs, I leaue
them to the Lord, beseechinge them (as they
tender their own saluation linguas cōpescere
digitis: to stoppe their sacrilegiouse mouthes
with ther fingers, & not to spit against heauen
or kicke against the pricke as they do, anie
longer. For the Lord our God is a cōsuming
fier, & vpon obstinate sinners shal raine down
fire & brimston, & consume them in his wrath.
This is our portion acquired by sinne.
            
            
               Spud.
               But what say you to the other branch
of their conclusion, namely, that Apparell maketh
them to be accepted, and well taken in
euery place?
            
            
               
               Philo.
               Amongest the wicked, and ignorante
Pezants, I must néedes confesse, they are the
more estemed, in respect of their apparell, but
nothing at all the more, but rather the lesse,
amongest the godly wyse. So farre of will all
wyse mē be,The wise will not accept of any, after apparell. from accepting of any for his gay
apparell onely, that (be he neuer so gallantly
painted, or curiously plumed in the deceiptfull
                     •
                  
fethers of pride) they wil rather cōtemne him
a great deale ye more, taking him to be a mā,
puffed vp with pride and vaine glorie, a thing
both odiouse, & detestable to God & good men
And seeing it cānot stand with the rule of god
his iustice, to accept or not to accept any ma
                     •
                  
for his apparell, or any other externe shew 
                     〈◊〉
                  
deceiptfull vanytie, it is manifest, that ma
                     •
                  
doinge the contrarie, is a Iudas to the truth, 
                     〈◊〉
                  
Traytor to iustice, & an enemy to the Lord 
                     〈◊〉
                  
wherfore farre be that from al good christian
                     •
                  
and if those that go richely clothed should b
                     •
                  
esteemed ye rather for their rich apparel, tha
                     •
                  
                  à contrario must those that go in meane, an
                     •
                  
base attire, be the more contemned, and despised
for their pouertie. And than should Chris
                     •••
                  
Iesus our great Ambassador from the king 
                     〈◊〉
                  
heauen, & only Sauiour, be comtemned: for 
                     〈◊〉
                  
came in poore, & mean array: but Christ Iesu
                     •
                  
is blessed in his pore raggs, and all others ar
                     •
                  
cōtemned in their rich & precious attyre. U
                     ••
                  der
a simple cote, many tymes lyeth hid grea
                     •
                  
wisdom & knowledg: & cōtrarely vnder bra
                     •••
                  
                  
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   somtime is couered great ydiotacy and
folly.Wisdom not tyed to exteriour pompe of apparell. Hereof euery daies successe offreth proofe
sufficient, more is the pytie.
            
            
               Spud.
               Wherfore would you haue men accepted,
if not for Apparell?
            
            
               Philo.
               If any be so foolish to ymagin, that he
shalbe worshipped, reuerencedReuerence due to vertue not to attyr
                        •
                     . or accepted the
rather for his apparell, he is not so wyse, as I
pray God make me. For surely for my part,
I will rather worshippe & accept of a pore mā
(in his clowtes, & pore raggs) hauing ye gifts
and ornamēts of the mind, than I will do him
yt roisteth & flaunteth daylie & howrely, in his
silks, veluets, satens, damasks, gold or siluer,
what soeuer, without ye induments of vertue,
wherto only al reuerence is due. And therfore
as any mā is indued, or not indued with vertue,
& true godlynesse, so will I reuerence, or
not reuerence, accept, or not accept of him:
wherfore if any gape after reuerēce, worship,
or acceptation, let them thirst after vertue, as
namely, wisdome, knowledge, discretion, modestie,
sobrietie, affability, gentlenesse, & suche
like, than can they be without reuerence, or
acceptatiō no more than ye sonne can be wtout
light, the fire wtout heat, or the water wtout
his naturall moysture.
            
            
               Sp.
               Thā I gather you would haue mē accepted
for vertue & true Godlines, wold you not?
            
            
               Ph.
               I would not only haue mē to be accepted
& reuerenced for their virtue (though the

chiefest reuerence is onely to be attributed to
him,Wherfore man is to be worshiped and had in reuerence. whose sacred brest, is fraught with vertue,
as it may well be called, the Promptuarie
or Receptorie of true wisdome and Godlines,
but also (in parte) for their byrthes sake, parentage
and consāguinitie, and not only that,
but also, in respect of their callings, offices and
functions, whether it be in the Temporal Magistery
a or Ecclesiastical presbitery (so lōg as
they gouerne godly and well:) For, the Apostle
sayth, that those Elders which gouerne
wel amongst vs, are worthie of double honor:
But yet, the mā whom God hath blessed with
vertue and true godlynes, thoughe he be neyther
of great byrth nor callynge, nor yet any
Magistrate whatsouer, is worthie of more reuerence
and estimation then any of the other,
without the ornaments of ye minde & gifts of,
vertue aboue said. For what preuayleth it to
be borne of worshipfull progenie,Gentilitie without vertue is no gē
                     tilitie. and to be
destitute of all vertue, which deserueth true
worship? what is it els, then to carie a golden
Swoorde in a Leaden Scabbarde? Is it any
thyng els, then a goldē Coffyn or painted Sepulchre,
makyng a fayre showe outwardly,
but inwardly is full of all stinche, & lothsomnes?
I remember once I red a certaine storie
of one, a Gentleman by byrth and parentage,
who greatly reproched, and withall disdayned
an other, for that he was come to great authorytie

onely by vertue, being but a poore mans
child by byrthe: What? saith the Gentleman
by birth, arte thou so lustie? Thou arte but a
coblers sonne,The exordium of virtue, is the exordium of gentilitie, & worship, and want of the one, is the decay of the other. and wilt thou compare with
me, being a Gentleman by byrth, and calling?
To whome the other answeared, thou arte no
Gentleman, for thy gentilitie endeth in thee
and I am a Gentleman, in that my gentilitie
beginneth in me. Meaning (vnlest I be deceiued)
that the wante of virtue in him, was the
decay of his gentility, and his vertue was the
beginning of true gentilitie in him selfe: for
virtue therfore, not for apparell, is euerye one
to be accepted. For if we should accept of men
after apparell onely respecting nothinge els,
thā shold it come to passe, that we might more
esteme of one, both meane by birth, base without
virtue, seruyle by calling, & poore in estate,
more than of some by birthe, noble, by virtue
honorable and by callinge laudable. And the
reason is because euery one, tagge and ragge,
go brauer, or at least as braue as those that be
both noble, honorable and worpshipfull.
            
            
               Spud.
               But I haue hard say, there is more
holynesse in some kynd of apparell, than in
othersome, which makes them so much to affecte
varytie of fashions, I thinke.
            
            
               Philo.
               Indéed I suppose that the summe of
their religion, doth consiste in apparell.No holynes in apparell. And to
speake my conscience I thinke there is more

or as muche holynesse in the apparell, as in
them, that is iust none at all. But admit that
there be hoylnesse in apparell (as who is so infatuat
to beleue it) than it followeth that the
holynes pretended is not in them, & so be they
plaine Hipocrits to make shew of that, which
they haue not. And if ye holines by there attire
presaged be in them selues, thā is it not in the
garments, & why do they than attribute that
to the garments, whiche is neither adherente
to the one nor yet inherent in the other? Or if
it wer so, why do they glory of it to the world,
but I leaue them to their follie, hastinge to
other matters more profitable to intreate of.
            
            
               Spud.
               But I haue hard them reason thus.
That which is good in it own nature, cannot
hurt:An argument trimly contryued. apparell is good, and the good Creature
of God, ergo no kynde of apparell can
hurte. And if there be anie abuse in it, the
apparell knowethe it not. Therfore take
awaye the abuse, and let the apparell remaine
still, for so it maye (say they) without
anie hurte at all.
            
            
               Philo.
               These be well seasoned reasons, and
substantiall asseuerations in déed, but if they
haue no better arguments to leane vnto, than
these, their kingdome of Pride will shortlie,
fall without all hope of recouerie againe.
               The apparell in it owne nature is good,
and the good Creature of God (I will not denie)

and cannot hurte except it be thorowe
ouer owne wickednesse abused. And therfore
wo be to them that make the good Creatures
of God instruments of dampnation to them
selues, by not vsing them, but abusing them.
And yet not withstanding, it maye be said, to
hurte, or not to hurte, as it is abused, or not abused.
And wheras they would haue the abuse
of apparell (if any be) taken away, and
the apparell to remain still, it is impossible to
supplant the one, without the extirpation of
the other also. For it is trulye said, sublata
causa, tollitur effectus: But not, subrepto effectu,
tollitur causa.
                  Vnpossible to take away pride, except sumptuouse apparell be taken away also. Take away the cause, and
the effecte falleth, but not contrarylye, take
away the effect, and the cause falleth. The
efficiente cause of Pride is gorgiouse attire,
the effect is pride it selfe ingenerate by attire:
But to begin to plucke awaie the effecte (to
wit pride) and not to take awaye the cause
first (namelie sumptuouse attyre) is as if
a man intendinge to suppl
                     ••
                  t a Trée by the
rootes, should begin to pull 
                     •
                  he fruite, and
braunches onelye, 
                     •
                  or to pull downe heauen,
should dig in the earthe, workinge altogether
preposterouslie, and indyreclye.
               And the reason is, these two collaterall
Cosins, apparell, and Pride (the Mother
and DaughterApparell and pride combined togetheas mother, & daughter. of mischiefe) are so combinate
together, and incorporate the one in

the other, as the one can hardlie be dyuorced
from the other, without the distructiō of them
both. To the accomplishmente wherof God
graunte that those holsome lawes, sanctions,
and statuts, which by our most gracious and
serene princesse (whome Iesus preserue for
euer) and her noble, and renoumed Progenitors,
haue beene promulgate, and enacted hertofore,
may be put in execution. For in my
opinion, it is as impossible for a man, to were
preciouse apparell, and gorgiouse attyre, and
not to be proude therof (for if he be not proud
therof, why doth he weare suche riche attire,
wheras meaner is both better cheape, easier
to be had, as warme to the bodie, and as decent,
and comly to any chast christians eye?)
as it is for a man to cary fire in his bosōe,Vnpossible not to be proud of rich attyre. and
not to burne. Therfore would God euery mā
might be compelled to weare apparell, according
to his degrée, estat, and condition of life:
which if it were brought to passe, I feare least
some who ruff
                     ••
                   now in silks, veluets, satēs,
damasks, gold siluer, and what not, shold be
glad to weare frize cotes, & glad if they might
get them.
            
            
               Spud.
               What is your opiniō? did the people
of the former world so much esteeme of apparell,
as we doe at this present day, without respect
had either to sex, kind, order, degrée estat,
or callinge?
            
            
               
               Philo.
               No doubt but in all ages, they had
their imperfectiōs and faults, for Hominis est
errare, labi, & decipi, it is incident to man, to
erre, to fall, and to be deceiued.The Godly haue euer detested pride of apparell. But notwithstandinge
as the wicked haue alwayes affected
not onelie pride in apparell, but also all
other vices whatsoeuer, so the chaste Godly,
and sober Christians, haue euer eschewed this
excesse of apparell, hauing a speciall regard to
weare suche attyre as might neyther offend
the maiestie of God, prouoke them selues to
pride nor yet offend any of their Brethren in
any respecte. But (as I haue said) not onely
the Godlie haue detested and hated this vaine
superfluitye of apparell in all tymes since the
beginning of the Worlde,The verie hethen haue cō
                     temned sumptuouse apparell. but also the verie
panims, the heathen Philosophers, who knew
not God▪ (though otherwise, wyse Sages, and
great Clarks) haue contemned it, as a pestiferouse
euill: in so muche as they haue writ
(almost) whole volumes against the same, as
is to be seene in most of their Books yet extant.
            
            
               Spud.
               Are you able to proue that?
            
            
               Philo.
               That I am verie easilye,Testimonie
                        •
                      of hethen people who derided rich
                        •
                      attire. but of an
infinyte number, take a taste of these few.
Democrates béeing demaunded, wherin the
bewtie, and comlie feature of man, or woman
consisted? aunswered, in fewnes of speaches
well tempered together, in virtue, in integrity

of life, and suche like. Sophocles seinge one
weare gorgeouse apparell, said to him, thou
foole, thy apparell is no ornamente to the, but

                     〈◊〉
                   manifest shewe of thy follie. Socrates being
asked what was the greattest ornamente
in a woman? answered, yt which most sheweth
her chastitie, and good demeanoure of body,
and mind & not sumptuouse attyre, which
rather sheweth her adulterate life. Aristotle
is so district in this point, that he would haue
men to vse meaner apparell, than are permitted
them by the lawe: The Wife of Philo
the Philosopher,
                  Virtue is the comlyest ornamēt of all. being vppon a tyme demaunded
why she ware not gold, siluer, and
preciouse garments, said, she thought the vertues
of her husbande sufficiente ornaments
for her. Dionisius the king sente the richest
garments in all his wardrobes to the noble
Womē of the Lacedemonians, who returned
them from whence they came, sayinge, they
would be a greatter shame to them, than honore.
Kinge Pirrus sente riche attyre to
the Matrones of Rome, who abhorred them,
as menstruous clowtes. The conceiued
opinion amōgest the Grecians to this day is,
that it is neither gold, nor gorgiouse attyre
that adorneth either Man or Woman, but
vertuous conditions, and such like. Diogines
                  Dio
                        •
                     ines his 
                        •
                     suerity.
so much contemned sumptuous attyre, that
he chose rather to dwell in wildernesse amongest

brute beasts, all his lyfe longe than in
the pompouse courts of mightie kings one
daye to be commorante. For he thought
if he had the ornaments of the minde, that
he was than faire ynoughe, and fine inough
also, not, needing any more.
               A certen other Philosopher, addressed
himselfe towards a kings courte in his Philosophers
attyre, that is in meane, base and
poore aray: But soe sone as the Officers
espied him, they cried awaie with that rogue,
what dothe he soe nie the kinges maiestye
courte.
               The poore Philosopher seing it lighten so
fast, retyred back, for feare of their thunderclappes,
and repayringe home, appaireled
himselfe, in riche Attyre, and came againe
marchinge towards the court, he was no sooner
in sight, but euery one receiued him plausiblie,
and with great submission, and reuerence.
When he came in presence of the
kinge, and other mightie potentats, he kneled
down, and ceased not to kisse his garmēts.
The king and nobles marueylinge not a litle
therat, asked him, wherfore he did so?
               Who aunswered,The example of a Philosopher deriding the pompe 
                        〈◊〉
                      World. O noble kinge, it is
no marueyle, for that whiche my vertue and
knowledge could not doe, my Apparell
hath brought to passe. For I comminge
to thy gates in my PHILOSOPHERS
                  
weede, was repelled, but hauing put vpon me
this riche attyre, I was brought to thy presence
with as great veneration and worship
as could be. Wherby is to be séene in what
detestation he had the stinkinge Pride of apparell,
takeing this occasion to giue the King
to vnderstand the inormious abuse thereof,
and so to remoue the same as a pestilent euill
out of his whole dominion & kingdome. I read
of a certen other Philosopher that came before
a king,The exāple of a Philosopher who spat in the kings face. who at the same tyme, had inuited
his nobles, to a feast or banquet, the Philosopher
comming in, and seinge no place to
spit in (for euery place was hanged with cloth
of gold, cloth of siluer, tinsell, arrace, tapestrie,
and what not) came to the kinge and spat in
his face, saying, it is méet (o king) that I spit
in the fowlest place. This good Philosopher
(as we may gather) went about to withdraw
the king from taking pleasure or delight, in
the vaine glistering shewe, either of apparell
or any thing els, but rather to haue consideration
of his owne filthynes, miserie, & sinne,
not rysing vp into pride, and spitting against
heauen, as he did, by dilighting in prowde attyre
and gorgeouse ornaments. Thus we sée
the verie painims, and heathen people, haue
from the beginning dispysed this excesse of apparell,
both in them selues, and others, whose
examples heerin god graunt we may folowe.
            
            
               
               Spud.
               But you are not able to proue that
any good Christians, euer set light by precious
attire, but alwayes estéemed it as a speciall
ornament to the whole man, As for these
Heathen they were fooles, neyther is it materiall,
what they vsed, or vsed not?
            
            
               Philo.
               I am able to prooue, that euen from
the beginning of the world, the chosen and peculiar
people of God, haue contemned proude
Apparel, as things (not onely) not necessarie,
but also as very euilles themselues,Probatiō, that the former world hath contemned pompouse attyre. and haue
gone both meanely and poorely in their vsuall
attyre. What say you to our Grandfather Adam,
and Eua our Mother? Were they not clothed
in peltes, and skins of beasts? Was not
this a meane kinde of Apparell thinke you?
Was it not vnsitting to sée a womā inuested
all ouer in leather? But yet the Lord thought
it precious, and seemelie ynough for them.
               What saye you to the noble Prophet of the
world Elias,
                  Elias. did hee not walke in the solitude
of this worlde in a simple playne mantell or
gowne, girded to him with a girdle of leather?
Elizeus ye Prophet,Elizeus. Samuell. did not he in a manner the
verie same. And what say you to Samuell the
golden mouthed Prophet, notwithstanding yt
hee was an Archprophet, and a chiefe seer of
that time, did hee not walke so meanely, as
Saul seking his fathers Asses, could not know
him from the reste, but asked him, where was

the séers house? This must néeds argue that
he went not richer then the common sorte of
people in his time.The children of Israell. The Children of Israell
béeing the chosen people of God, did they not
weare their Fathers attire fortie yéeres togither
in the wildernes? was not Iohn the Baptist
                  Iohn Baptist.
clothed with a garment of Camels heare?
girded with a thong of the skin of the same insted
of a girdle or succinctorie about his loines
Peter
                  Peter. the déere Apostle of our Sauiour, was
not distinct from the rest of his Felowes, Apostles
by any kinde of rich apparel, for then
the maid would not haue said I know thée by
thy tung, but rather by thy apparel.
               The Apostle Paul writing to the Hebrues
saith, that the persecuted Church, bothe in his
time, and before his dayes were clothed some
in Shéep skinnes, and some in Gote skinnes,
some in Camels heare, some in this and some
in that, and some in whatsoeuer they coulde
get, for if it would hide their shameful parts,
and kept them from the colde, they thought it
sufficient, they required no more: but to speak
in one woord for all, did not our Sauiour Iesus
Christ weare the very same fashion of apparell,
that his Cuntrey-men vsed, that is a
cote without a seame either knit or weaued?
which fashions the Palestynians vse there,The humility and pouertie of Christe vppon earth. yet
to this day, without any alteration or chaūge
as it is thought. This his attyre, was not

very hansome (one would think,) at the least
it was not curious, or new fangled, as ours
is, but as the Poet wel said, initimur in vetitum

                        •
                     ēper cupimus
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      negata, desired things
forbid, and couet things are denied vs, lothing
the simplicitie of Christe, and abhorring the
christian pouertie and godly mediocritie of
our Forefathers in apparel, are neuer content
except wée haue sundry sutes of apparel,
one diuers from an other, so as our Presses
crack withall, our Cofers bruse, and our
backs sweat with the cariage therof: we must
haue one sute for the forenoone,Superfluitie of apparell With dyuersitie of fashions. another for ye
afternoone, one for the day, another for the
night, one for the workeday, another for the
holieday, one for sommer, another for winter,
one of the newe fashion, an other of the olde,
one of this colour, another of that, one cutte,
an other whole, one laced, another without,
one of golde, and other of siluer, one of silkes
and veluets, and another of clothe, with more
difference and varietie than I can expresse:
god be merciful vnto vs and hasten his kingdōe
that all imperfectious may be doon away.
            
         
         
            A peculiare Discription
of apparell in A
                  •
               lgna by degrees
            YOu haue borne me in hand of many and
gréeuous abuses reigning in Ailgna, but
now setting aparte these ambagies and

superfluous vagaries) I pray you describe vnto
me more particularly the sundrie abuses in
Apparell there vsed, running ouer by degrées
the whole state thereof, that I maye sée as it
were the perfect Anatomie of that Nation in
Apparell, whiche thinge I greatlye desire to
knowe.
            
               Philo.
               Your request séemeth both intricate,
and harde, considering there bee Tot tantae
maeryadaes inuentionum, So manie, and so
fonde fashions, and inuentions of Apparell euerie
day. But yet, lest I might be iudged vnwilling
to shewe you what pleasure I can, I
will assay (pro virili mea, omnibus neruulis
vndi
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      extensis) with all the might and force
I can, to satisfie your desire. Wherefore to begin
first with their Hattes.
               Sometimes they were them sharp on the
crowne, pearking vp like a sphere, or shafte of
a stéeple,The diuersity of hattes in Ailgna. standing a quarter of a yard aboue ye
crowne of their heades, some more, some lesse,
as please the phantasies of their mindes. Othersome
be flat, and broad on the crowne, like
the battlements of a house. An other sort haue
round crownes, sometimes with one kinde of
hande, sometime with an other, nowe blacke,
now white, now russet, now red, now gréene,
now yellowe, now this, nowe that, neuer content
with one colour, or fashion two dayes to
an ende. And thus in vanitie they spende the

Lorde his treasure, consuming their golden
yeares, and siluer dayes, in wickednes & sin.
And as the fashions bee rare and straunge, so
are the thinges wherof their Hattes be made
diuerse also: for some are of silke, some of veluet,
some of taffetie, some of sarcenet, some of
wooll,The sundrie things wherof hattes be made. & which is more curious, some of a certaine
kind of fine haire, far fetched, and deare
bought you maye bee sure. And so common a
thinge it is, that euerie Seruingman, Countreyman,
and other, euen all indifferently, do
weare of these hattes. For he is of no account
or estimation amongst men, if hee haue not a
veluet, or a taffatie Hatte, and that muste bee
pincked and cunningly carued of the beste fashion.
And good profitable Hattes bee they, for
the longer you weare them, the fewer holes
they haue. Besides this, of late there is a new
fashion of wearing their Hattes sprung vp amongst
thē, which they father vpon ye Frenchmen,
namely, to weare them without bandes,
but how vnséemelie (I will not say how Assy)
a fashion that is,Wering of hattes without bandes. let the wise iudge. Notwithstanding
howe euer it bee, if it please them, it
shall 
                     〈◊〉
                   displease me. An other sort (as phantasticall
as the rest) are content with no kind
of Hatt, without a great bunche of feathers of
diuerse and sundrie colours, peaking on toppe
of their heades,Wering of Feathers in hattes. not vnlyke (I dare not say)
Cockscombes, but as sternes of pride and ensignes

of vanitie, and these fluttering sayles
and fethered flags of defiance to vertue (for so
they are) are so aduaunced in Ailgna that eeuery
Childe hath them in his hat or cap, many
get good liuing by dying and selling of thē,
and not a fewe prooue them selues more the
                     •
                  
fooles in wearing of them.
            
            
               Spud.
               These Fethers argue the lightnes of
their fond imaginations, and plainly cōuince
them of instabilitie and folly, for sure I am,
hansome they cannot be, therefore Ba
                     •
                  ges of
pride they must needs be, which I think non
                     •
                  
wil weare but such as he like them selues.
               But to your intended discourse.
            
            
               Philo.
               They haue great and monsterous ruffes,Great ruffes deformed & ill fauored.
made either of Cambrick, holland, lawn
or els of some other the finest cloth that can be
got for money, whereof some be a quarter of
a yard deep, yea some more, very few lesse.
               So that they stand a full quarter of a yarde
(and more) from their necks hanging ouer
their shoulder poynts, insted of a vaile. But
if Aeolus with his blasts, or Neptune with
his stormes, chaunce to hit vppon the crasie
bark of their brused ruffes, then they goe flip
flap in the winde like rags flying abroad, and
lye vpon their shoulders like the dishcloute of
a 
                     •
                  lutte. But wot you what? the deuil, as in
the fulnes of his malice, first inuented these

great ruffes, so hath hée now found out also
two great stayes to beare vp and maintaine
this his kingdome of great ruffes (for the deuil
is king and prince ouer all the children of
pride) the one arch or piller wherby his kingdome
of great ruffes is vnderproppedTwo arches or pillers to vnder proppe the kingdom of greatruffes withall, videlicet supportasses, and starche. is a certaine
kinde of liquide matter which they call
Starch, wherin the deuill hath willed them
to wash and diue his ruffes wel, which when
they be dry wil then stand stiffe and inflexible
about their necks.
               The other piller is a certain deuice made of
wyers crested for ye purpose, whipped ouer either
with gold, thred, siluer or silk, & this hée
calleth a supportasse or vnderpropper. This
is to be supplyed round about their necks vnder
the ruffe, vpon the out side of the band, to
beare vp the whole frame & body of the ruffe,
from falling and hanging down.
            
            
               Spud.
               This is a deuice passing all the deuices
that euer I sawe or heard of. Then I perceiue
the deuill not onely inuenteth mischeif,
but also ordaineth instrumentall meanes to
continue the same.
               These bands are so chargeable (as I suppose
that but fewe haue of them, if they haue,
they are better monyed them I am?
            
            
               Philo.
               So few haue them as almost none is
without them, for euery one how meane or

simple soeuer they bee otherwise, will haue of
them thrée or foure apéece for fayling. And as
though Camericke,Euery pesant hath his stately bands & monstrouse ruffes, how cost lie so euer they be. Holland, Lawne, and the
finest cloth that maye bee got anie where for
money, were not good inough, they haue them
wrought all ouer with silke woorke, and peraduenture
laced with golde, and siluer, or other
costly lace of no small price. And whether
they haue Argente to mayntaine this geare
withall or not, it forceth not muche, for they
will haue it by one meane or other, or els they
will eyther sell or morgage their Landes, (as
they haue good store) on Suters hill, & Stangate
hole, with losse of their lyues at Tiburne
in a rope.
            
            
               Spud.
               The state and condition of that Land
must néedes be miserable, and in tyme growe
to greate scarcitie and dearth, where is such
vayne Prodigalitie, and excesse of all thynges
vsed.
            
            
               Philo.
               Their Shirtes, which all in a manner
doe weare (for if the Nobilitie or Gentrie
onely did weare them, it were somedeal more
tollerable) are eyther of Camericke, Holland,
Lawne,The shirts vsed in Ailgna. or els of the finest cloth that maye bée
got. And of these kindes of Shirts euerie one
now doth weare alike: so as it may be thoght,
our Forefathers, haue made their Bandes &
Ruffes (if they had any at all) of grosser cloth,
and baser stuffe, than the worst of our shirtes

                  
                     •
                  re made of now a dayes. And these shurts
(somtimes it happeneth) are wrought through
out with nedle work of silke, and suche like,
and curiouslie stitched with open seame, and
many other knackes besydes, mo than I can
describe.
            
            
               Spud.
               These be goodly shurts indeed, & such
yet as will not chafe their tēder skinnes, nor
vlcerat their lyllie white bodyes, or if they do,
it wil not be much to their gréeuances I dare
be bound. Is it anie maruell, si Cristas erigant
& cornua attollant, if they stand vppon
their pantoffles, and hoyse vp their sayles on
highe, hauinge these dya
                     ••
                  ond shurts on their
delicate bodies: but how soeuer it is, I gather
by your words, that this must néeds be a nice,
and curious People, who arethus nusseled vp
in such daintie attyre.
            
            
               Philo.
               It is very true,Nicenes of apparell maketh the body tender. for this their curiosity,
and nicenes in apparell (as it were) transnatureth
them, makinge them weake, tender
and infirme, not able to abide such sharp conflicts
and blustering stormes, as many other
people, both abraode farre from them, and in
their confines nie to them, do daylie sustaine.
I haue hard my Father, with other wyse Sages
affirme, that in his tyme within the compasse
of foure or fyue score yeres, when men
went clothed in black, or white frize coates, in
hosen of Huswyues carzie of the same colore,

that the shéep bore them (the want of making
and wering of which clothe, together with the
excessiue wering of silks, veluets, satens, damasks,
taffeties, and such like, hath and doth
make many a thousand in Ailgna, as poore
mendicāts to begge their bread) wherof some
weare strait to the thigh, othersome litle bigger:
and when they ware shurts of hempe, or
flax (but now these are to grosse,Our predecessours weringe meaner apparell were stronge than we. our tēder stomacks
cannot easilye disgest such roughe and
crude meats) men weare stronger than we,
helthfuller, fayrer complectioned, longer lyuinge,
and finallye, ten tymes harder than
we, and able to beare out any sorowe or paynes
whatsoeuer. For be sure this pampering
of our bodies, makes them weker, tenderer,
and nesher, than otherwyse they would be if
they were vsed to hardnesse and more subiect
to receiue anye kind of infection or maladie.
And rather abbreuiat oure dayes by manye
yeres than extenuate our liues one minut of
an houre.
            
            
               Spud.
               I thinke no lesse: For how stronge
men were in tymes past▪ how lōg they lyued,
and how helthfull they weare, before suche
Nicenes, and vayne pamperinge curiositie
was inuented, we may reade, and many that
lyue at this daye, can testifie. But now
through our fond toyes and nice inuentions,
we haue brought our selues into suche pusillanimitie,

and effeminat condition, as we
may seeme rather nice dames, and yonge
gyrles, than puissante ag
                     •
                  nts, or manlie men,
as our Forefathers haue bene.
            
            
               Philo.
               Their dublettes are noe lesse monstrous
than the reste:The monstrous dublet
                        •
                      in Ailgna. For now the fashion
is, to haue them hang downe to the middest
of their theighes, or at least to their priuie
members, beeing so harde-quilted, and
stuffed, bombasted and sewed, as they can
verie hardly eyther stoupe downe, or decline
them selues to the grounde, soe styffe and
sturdy they stand about them.
               Now what handsomnes can be in these
dubblettes whiche stand on their bellies, like
or muche bigger than a mans codpeece, (so
as their bellies are thicker than all their bodyes
besyde) let wyse men iudge. For, for
my parte, handsomnes in them, I see none,
and muche lesse profyte.
               And to be plaine, I neuer sawe any weare
them:Great bellied dublets b
                        •
                     token gourmā
                     dice, gluttony and such like. but I supposed him to be a man inclined
to gourmandice, gluttonie and suche
like.
               For what may these great bellies signifie
els, than that either they are suche, or els are
affected that way. This is the truest signification,
that I could euer presage, or diuyne
of them. And this maye euerye one

iudge of them that séeth them, for certaine I
am there was neuer any kinde of apparell euer
inuented, that could more disproportion
the body of man then these Dublets wt great
bellies hāging down beneath their Pudenda,
(as I haue said) & stuffed with foure, fiue or six
pound of Bombast at the least: I say nothing
of what their Dublets be made,Dublettes of dyuerse fashions. some of Saten,
Taffatie, silk, Grogram, Chamlet, gold
siluer, & what not? slashed, iagged, cut, carued,
pincked and laced with all kinde of costly la
                     ••
                  
of diuers and sundry colours, for if I shoulde
stand vpon these particularities, rather time
then matter would be wanting.
            
            
               Spud.
               These be the strangest doublets that
euer I heard of, and the furdest from hansomnes
in euery respect, vnlesse I be deceiued.
            
            
               Philo.
               Then haue they Hosen,Hosen of diuerse & sundry fashions. which as
they be of diuers fashions so are they of sundry
names. Some be called french-hose, some
gally-hose and some Uenitians. The french-hose
are of two diuers makings, for the cōmon
french-hose (as they list to call them) contayneth
length, breadth, and sidenes sufficient,
and is made very round. The other contayneth
neither length, breadth nor sidenes, (béeing
not past a quarter of a yarde side) wherof
some be paned, cut and drawne out with costly
ornaments, with Canions annexed reaching
down beneath their knées▪
               
               
                  The Gally-hosen are made very large, and
wide reaching downe to their knées onely,
with thrée or foure guardes a péece laid down
along either hose. And the Uenetian-hosen,
they reach beneath the knée to the gartering
place of the Leg, where they are tyed finely
with silk points, or some such like, and laied
on also with rewes of lace, or gardes as the
other before. And yet notwithstanding all
this is not sufficient, except they be made of
silk, veluet, saten, damask and other such precious
things beside: yea euery one, Seruing
man, and other inferiour to them in euery
condition,The 
                        〈…〉
                      hosen. wil not sticke to flaunte it out in
these kinde of hosen, with all other their apparel
sutable therunto.
               In times past, Kings (as olde Historiographers
in their Bookes yet extant doo recorde)
would not disdaine to weare a paire of hosen
of a Noble, tenne Shillinges, or a Marke
price, with all the rest of their apparel after
the same rate: but now it is a small matter
to bestowe twentie nobles, ten pound, twentie
pound, fortie pound, yea a hundred pound
of one paire of Bréeches. (God be mercifull
vnto vs.)
            
            
               Spud.
               This is a wunderful excesse as eu
                     ••
                  
I hearde of, woorthy with the Swoorde 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  Iustice rather to be punished, then with pap
                     ••
                  
and pen to be so gentlie confuteed.
            
            
               
               Philo.
               Then haue they nether-stocks to
these gay hosen,The diuersity of neither-stocks worne in Ailgna. not of cloth (though neuer so
fine) for that is thought to base, but of Iarnsey
worsted, silk, thred and such like, or els at
the least of the finest yarn yt can be, and so curiouslye
knit with open seam down the leg,
with quirks and clocks about the ancles, and
sometime (haply) interlaced with gold orsiluer
threds, as is wunderful to behold. And to such
insolency & outrage it is now growen, that euery
one (almost) though otherwise verie poor
hauing scarce fortie shillings of wages by the
yéer wil be sure to haue two or thrée paire of
these silk neither-stocks, or els of the finest
yarne that may be got, though ye price of them
be a Ryall or twentie shillinges, or more,
as commonly it is, for how can they be lesse?
when as the very knitting of them is worth
a noble, or, a royall, and some much more?
               The time hath béene, when one might haue
clothed all his body well, for lesse then a pair
of these neither-stocks wil cost.
            
            
               Spud.
               I haue seldome hearde the like,The mis
                        •
                     rie of these daies I
think verely that Sathan p
                     •
                  ince of darknes &
Father of pride, is let loose in y• land, els it
could neuer so rage as it dooth, for y• like pride
(I am fully perswaded) is not vsed vnder the
sonne, of any nation or people how barberous
so euer, wherfore wo be to this age and thrise
accursed be these dayes, which bring foorth

such sowre frutes, & vnhappie are that people,
whom Sathan hath so bewitched, & captiued in
sin. The Lord holde his hād of mercy ouer vs.
               
            
            
               Philo.
               To these their nether-stocks, they
haue corked shooes, pinsnets,Corked shoes Pantoffles, and pinsnets. and fine pantofles,
which beare them vp a finger or two frō
the ground, wherof some be of white leather
some
                     •
                   of black, and some of red: some of black
veluet, some of white, some or red, some of
gréen, raced, carued, cut and stitched all ouer
with silk and laid on with golde, siluer, and
such like: yet notwithstanding, to what good
vses serue these pantofles, except it be to wear
in a priuate house, or in a mans Chamber, to
kéepe him warme? (for this is the onely vse
wherto they best serue in my iudgement)Pantoff
                        •
                     es, & slippers are a let to those that go abrod in them. but
to go abroad in them as they are now vsed al
together, is rather a let or hinderāce to a man
then otherwise, for shall he not be faine to
knock, and spurn at euery stone, wall or poste
to kéep▪ them on his feet? wherfore to disclose
euen the bowels of my iudgement vnto you,
I think they be rather worne abrode for nicenes,
thē either for any ease which they bring,
(for the contrary is moste tru
                     •
                  ) or any hansōnes
which is in them.Pantoffles vneasie to go in. For how should they
be easie, when as the héele hangeth an inch or
two ouer the slipper on the ground? Insomuch

                     •
                  as I haue knowen diuers mens legs
swel with the same.
               
                  And handsome how should they be, when as
with their flipping & flapping vp and down in
ye dirte they exaggerate a mountain of mire 
                     •
                  
gather a heape of clay & baggage together, loding
the wearer with importable burthen?
            
            
               Spud.
               Those kinde of pantoffles, can neither
be so handsome, nor yet so warme as other
vsuall commō shoes be, I think. Therfore
the weringe of them abrode rather importeth
a Nicenes (as you say) in them that
weare them, than bringeth any other commodytie
els, vnlesse I be deceiued?
            
            
               Philo.
               Their coates, and Ierkins, as they
be diuerse in colors,The varytie of coates and Ierkins. so be they diuerse in fashions,
for some be made with colors, some
without, some close to the bodie, some loose, couering
the whole body downe to the theighe,
like baggs, or sacks that weare drawen ouer
them, hidinge the dimensions, and proportiōs
of the body: some are buttened downe the
brest▪ some vnder the arme, & some downe the
back, some with flappes ouer the brest, some
without▪ some with great sleeues, some with
small, and some with non at all, some pleated
and crested behind, & curiouslye gathered,
some notso, & how many dayes (I might say
houres or minuts of houres in the yeare,) so
many sortes of apparell some one man will
haue, and thinketh it good prouision in 
                     •
                  aire
weather, to lay vp against a storme. But if

they would consider that their clothes (except
those that they weare vppon their backs) be
non of theirs, but the poores, they would not
heap vp their presses, and ward
                     •
                  obes as they
do. Do they think that it is lawfull for them
to haue millions of sundry sortes of apparell
lying rotting by them, when as the poore mē
                  bers
of Iesus Christe die at their doores for
wante of clothing?The poor
                        •
                      ought to be prouided for. God commaundeth in his
law, that there be no miserable poore man nor
begger amongest vs, but that euery one be
prouided for and maintained of that abundā
                  ce,
which God hath blessed vs withal:Our smal regard to the poore. But we
thinke it a great matter if we geue them an
old ragged coate, dublet, or a paire of hosen, or
els a penny or two, wheras not withstanding
we flow in abundance of all things. Than we
thinke we are halfe way to heauen, and we
need to do no more. If we geue them a peace
of brown bread, a messe of porredge (nay the
stocks & prison, with whipp
                     ••
                  ge cheare now
and than is the best portion of almes which
many Gentlemen geue:) at our dores, it is
counted meritorious, and a worke of supererogation
when we fare full delicatelye oure
selues feeding on many a danity dish. There
is a certen Citye in Ailgna called Munidnol,
where as the poore lye in ye streats,Cold charitie to the poore. vppon pallets
of stra
                     •
                  , and well if they haue that to, or
els in the mire and dirt, as commonlie it is

hauing neither house to put of their heads, couering
to kéep them from the cold, nor yet to
hide their shame withall, penny to buy them
sustenance, nor any thing els, but are permitted
to dye in the streats like dogges, or beasts
without anie mer
                     •
                  ie, or compassion shewed
to them at all. And if anye be sicke of the
plague (as they call it,) or any other disease,
their Maisters and Maistres are so impudent
(being, it should séeme at a league with Sathan,
a couenante with Hell, and as it were
obliged them selues by obligation to the deuil
neuer to haue to do with ye works of mercy) as
straight way, thei throw them out of their dores.
And so being caried foorth either in carts,
or otherwyse, and thrown in the streats, there
they end their dayes most miserably.The Turkish impietie of some towards the poore diseased. Truely
Brother if I had not séen it, I would scarsly
haue thought, that the like Turkish cruelty,
had bene vsed in all the World. But they say,
vnus testis occulatus plus valet, quàm mille
auriti: one eye witnesse, is better to be bely
                  
                     •
                  ed,
than a thousand eare witnesses besydes.
But to leaue these excursions, and to returne
from whence I haue digressed, I think it the
best: For I am perswaded they will as much
respect my words (or amend their maners)
as the wicked World did at the preaching of
our Sauiour Christe Iesus, that is, iust nothing
at all.
            
            
               
               Spud.
               Well then, séeing they are suche a
stifneckned People, leaue them to the Lord,
and procéed to your former tractation.
            
            
               Philo.
               They haue clokes there also in nothing
discrepante from the rest, of dyuerse and
sundry colors,The sundry fashions of cloks. white, red, tawnie, black, greene
yellowe, russet, purple, violet, and infynite other
colors: some of cloth, silk, veluet, taffetie,
and such like, wherof some be of the Spanish,
French, & Dutch fashion. Some short, scarsely
reachinge to the gyrdlestead, or wast▪ some to
the knée, and othersome traylinge vppon the
ground (almost) liker gownes, than clokes.
These clokes must be garded, laced, & thorowly
faced: and somtimes so lyned, as the inner
side stādeth almost in as much as the outside:
some haue sléeues, othersome haue none, some
haue hoodes to pull ouer the head, some haue
none, some are hanged with points & tassels of
gold, siluer, or silk, some without al this. But
how soeuer it be, the day hath bene, when one
might haue bought him two clokes for lesse,
thā now he can haue one of these clokes made
for, they haue such store of workmanship bestowed
vppon them.
            
            
               Spud.
               I am sure they neuer learned this at
the hands of our Proconsul and chief Prouost
Christ Iesus,The coūting house of all euill, is mans braine. nor of any other y• euer lyued
godly in the Lord: but rather out of the deceiptfull
forge of their own braines haue they

drawen this cursed Anatomy to their owne
destruction in the end, except the repente.
            
            
               Philo.
               They haue also bootehose, which are
to be wondered at, for they be 
                     •
                  f the fynest
cloth,The vain excesse of botehosen. that may be got, yea fine inough to make
any bād, ruffe, or shurt needful to be worn:
yet this is bad inough to were next their gresie
boots. And would God this weare all: but
(oh phy for shame) they must be wrought all
ouer, from the gartering place vpward, with
nedle worke, clogged with silk of all colors,
with birds, foules, beasts, and antiques purtrayed
all ouer in comlie sorte. So that I haue
knowen the very nedle work of some one
payre of these bootehose to stand, some in .iiij.
pound, vi. pound, and some in x. pound a péece.
Besides this, they are made so wyde to draw
ouer all, and so longe, to reach vp to the waste
that as litle or lesse cl
                     •
                  the would make one a
reasonable large shurte. But tush, this is nothing
in comparison of the reste.
            
            
               Spud.
               I would thinke that bootehosen of
grosser lynnen,The varitie of fashions conuince vs of follie. or els of wollen clothe, weare
both warmer to ride in, as cōly as the other,
though not so fine, and a great deal more durable.
And as for those gengawes wherwith
you say they be blaunched and trimmed, they
serue to no end, but to feade y• wanton eyes of
gazing fools, & planly argue ye vertiginie, & instability
of their more than fātastical brains.
            
            
               
               Phil.
               To these haue they their Rapiers,
Swoords and Daggers gilt, twise or thrise ouer
the hilts,Swords and daggers guilt & damasked. with scaberds and sheathes of
Ueluet or the like, for leather, though it be
more proffitable and as séemely, yet wil it not
carie such a porte or countenance like the other.
And wil not these golden swoords & daggers
almoste apale a man (though otherwise
neuer so stout a Martialist) to haue any deling
with them? for either to y• end they be worne
or els other swoords, daggers and rapiers of
bare yron and stéele were as hansom as they,
& much more conducible to that end, whereto
swoords and rapiers should serue, namely for
a mans lawful and godly defence, against his
aduersarie in time of necessitie. But wherfore
they be so clogged with gold and siluer I
know not, nor yet wherto this excesse serueth
I sée not, but certain I am, a great shewe of
pride it is, an infallible token of vain glorie,
and a
                     •
                  greeuous offence to God, so prodigallie,
and licentiouslie to lauish foorth his treasure,
for which we must rēder accoūts at the day of
Iudgement, when it shall be saide to euerie
one,Luce. 16. 
                  Redde rationem Vilicationis tuae, Come
giue accounts of thy Stewardship.
            
         
         
            
            A particulare Discription
of the Abuses of Womens apparell
in Ailgna.
            THus hauinge geuen thée a superficiall
viewe, or small tast, (but not discouered
the hūdreth part) of the guyses of Ailgna
in mēs apparel, & of the abuses cōtained in the
same, now wil I with like celeritie of matter
impart vnto thée, the guyse and seuerall Abuses
of the apparell of wemen there vsed also:
wherfore geue attentiue eare.
            
               Sp.
               My eares be prest to heare, begin when
you wil, and truely herin you shal pleasur me
much, for I haue greatly desired to know thorowly
the state of y• Lād, euen a crepundiis (as
they say (from my tender yeres, for the great
prayse I haue hard therof) Wherfore, I pray
you proceed to the same, & though I be vnable
 wt any benefit to coūteruail your great pains,
yet ye Lord I doubt not, wil supplie my want.
            
            
               Ph.
               The Lord our God is a mercifull God,
& a boūtiful Rewarder of euery one, that trusteth
in him, but yet (such is ye magnificency &
liberalitie of that gētle sexThe reward of the femall sex.) that I trust I shall
not be vnrewarded at their hands, if to be called
a thousād knaues be a sufficiēt guerdō for
my pains. But though it wilbe a corrosiue to
their hautie stomacks, & a nippitatū
                   to their
tender brests to heare their dirtie dregs ript
vp and cast in their diamond faces, yet hopeing

that they, séeing the horrour of their impieties,
and tragicall abuses laide open to
the world, (for now they sléep in the graue of
obliuion) wil at the last like good Conuertes
and Penitentiaries of Christe Iesus leaue of
their wickednes, call for mercie at the hands
of God, repent and amend. I will procéed to
my intended purpose.
               The Women of Ailgna vse to colour their
faces with certain oyles, liquors, vnguents
and watersColoring of faces with oyntments and waters. made to that end, whereby they
think their beautie is greatly decored: but
who séethe not that their soules are thereby
deformed, and they brought déeper into the
displeasure and indignation of the Almighty,
at whose voice the earth dooth tremble and at
whose presence the heauens shall liquifie, and
melt away. Doo they think thus to adulterate
the Lord his woorkmanship,Adulteration of the Lord his workmā
                     ship in his Creatures. and to be
without offence? Doo they not know that he
is Zelotipus a ielous God, and cannot abide
any alteration of his woorkes, otherwise then
he hath commaunded?
               Yf an Artificer, or Craftsman shoulde
make any thing belōging to his art or science
& a cobler should presume to correct the same:
would not ye other think him self abused, and
iudge him woorthy of reprehension?
               And thinkest thou (oh Woman) to escape the
Iudgement of God, who hath fashioned thée,

to his glory, when thy great and more then
presumptuous audacicitie dareth to alter, &
chaunge his woorkmanship in thée?
               Thinkest thou that thou canst make thy
self fairer then God who made vs all? These
must néedes be their inuentions, or els they
would neuer go about to coulour their faces,
with such sibbersawces. And these béeing
their inuentions what can derogate more frō
the maiestie of God in his creation? For in
this dooing they plainly conuince the Lord of
vntrueth in his word who saith he made man
glorious, after his owne likenes, and the fayrest
of all other terrestiall Creatures. If he be
thus faire then what néed they to make them
fayrer? Therfore this their colouring of their
faces importeth,They that colour their faces deny the Lord of glory to bee true God and so no God at all. (as by probable coniecture
may be presupposed) that they think them selues
not faire enough, and then must GOD
néeds he vntrue in his woord.
               And also they deny the Lord to be either
merciful or almightie or bothe, and so consequently
no God at all: for if h
                     •
                  e could not haue
made them faire, then is hée not almightie,
and if hée could and would not, then is hée not
a merciful God, and so euery way they fall in
to the finck of offence, béeing ashamed of the
good creation of the Lord in them, but it is to
be feared least at the day of Iudgement, the
Lord wil be ashamed of them, & in his wrath

denounce this heauie and ineuitable sentence
condemnatorie against them,Sentence condemnatory against those that coulour their faces. 
                  
                     Departe from
mee you cursed into euerlasting fire prepared
for the deuil, and his Angels, I knowe
you not: (I say) departe, for you were ashamed
of mee, and of my creation in you.
                  
               
            
            
               Spud.
               Wherof doo they make these waters,
and other vnctions wherwith they besmeare
their faces, can you tel?
            
            
               Philo.
               I am not so skilful in their matters
of pride, but I holde this for a Maxime, that
they are made of many mixtures, and sundry
compounded simples, bothe farre fetched and
déer bought, cunningly couched together, and
tempered with many goodly condiments and
holsome confections, I warrant you, els you
may be sure they woulde not applye them to
their amorous faces,Inuectiues of the Fathers against paynting and coulouring of faces. for feare of harming or
blemishing the same.
            
            
               Philo.
               
                  S. Ciprian amongst all the rest, saith,
a Woman thorow painting and dying of her
face, sheweth her self to be more then whorish.
For (saith hée) shée hath corrupted and
defaced (like a filthie strumpet or brothel) the
woorkmanship of GOD in her, what is this
els, but to turne trueth into falshood, with
painting and sibbersawces, wheras the Lord
saith, 
                     Thou canst not make one haire white
or black.
                   In an other place hee saith, 
                     Qui se
pinguunt in hoc seculo, aliter quám creauit

Deus, metuant ne cum dies resurrectionis venerit,
artifex creaturam suam, non recognoscat.
Those which paint or collour them
selues in this world otherwise then GOD
hath made them, let them feare least when
the day of iudgement commeth, the Lorde
wil not know them for his Creatures.
               
               Againe, 
                     Feminae crines suos inficiunt malo
praesagio, capillos enim sibi flammeos auspicari
non metuunt. Whosoeuer doo color
their faces or their haire with any vnnaturall
collour, they begin to prognosticate of
what colour they shalbe in hel.
               
               
                  S. Ambrose saith that from the coullouring
of faces spring the inticements to vices, and
that they which color their faces doo purchase
to them selues the blot and stain of chastitie.
               For what a dotage is it (saith hee) to chaūge
thy naturall face which God hath made thee,
for a painted 
                     •
                  ace, which thou hast made thy
self? If thou béest faire, why paintest thou thy
self to seeme fairer? and if thou be not faire,
why doost thou hippocrittically desire to séeme
faire,No painting can make any to seem fairer but 
                        •
                     owler. and art nothing lesse? Can those things
which besides that they be filthie▪ doo cary the
brand of God his cursse vpon their backs for
euer, make thée to seeme fayrer? I could show
you the sharp Inuections, and grounded reasons
of many 
                     〈◊〉
                  , as of Augstine, Hierome
Chrisostome, Gregorie, Caluin, Peter Martyr,
Gualter, and of an infinite number mo
                     •
                  :

yea of all generally since the beginning of the
world, against this whorish and brothellous
painting and coulouring of faces, but to auoid
prolixitie, I will omit them, deferring them
to further oportunitie, for pauca sapienti, To
a wiseman few woords are sufficient.
            
            
               Spud.
               It must needs be graunted, that the
dying and coulouring of faces with artificiall
colours,Colouring of 
                        •
                     aces, the deuils ne
                        •
                     
                   and vnnaturall Oyntments is
moste offensiue to God, and derogatorie to
his Maiestie: for doo they think that the God
of all glorie, and who only decketh and adorneth
the Sun, the Moon, the Starres and all
the hoast of heauen with vnspeakable glorie,
and incomparable beautie, cannot make the
beautiful and faire enough (if it please him)
without their sibbersawces? And what are
they els then the Deuils inuentions to intangle
poore 
                     •
                  oules in the nets of perdition?
            
            
               Philo.
               Then followeth the trimming and
tricking of their hedsTrimming of their heds. in laying out their hair
to the shewe, which of force must be curled,
frisled and crisped, laid out (a World to sée) on
wreathes & borders from one eare to an other.Simia erit simia etiam si aurea gesta
                        •
                      insignia.
And least it should fall down it is vnder propped
with forks, wyers & I cā not tel what, rather
like grime sterne monsters, then chaste
christian matrones. Then on y• edges of their
bo
                     •
                  stred heir (for it standeth crested roūd about
their frontiers,Laying out of their haire & hanging ouer their faces like

pēdices with glasse windowes an euery side)
there is layd great wreathes of gold, and siluer
curiouslie wrought, & cunninglie applied
to the temples of their heads.Gold wreathes circumgyring the temples of their heads. And for feare
of lacking any thing to set foorth their pride
withal, at their heyre thus wreathed and crested,
are hanged, bugles (I dare not say, bables)
ouches, rings, gold, siluer, glasses, & such
other gewgawes and trinckets besides, which
for that they be innumerable, and I vnskilfull
in wemens termes, I can not easily recount.
But God giue them grace,Gewgawes hāged about their Frontiers. to giue ouer these
vanities, and studie to adorn their heads with
the incorruptible ornaments of vertue, & true
Godlynesse.
            
            
               Spud.
               The Apostle Paul (as I remember)
commaundeth w
                     •
                  men to cherish their heyre,
saying, that it is an ornament to them, & therfor
me think, this abuse of curling and laying
it out (if eyther were lawfull) is muche more
tollerable than dying their faces.
            
            
               Philo.
               If curling,Curling and crisping, and laying out of heyre. & laying out of their own
naturall heyre weare all (which is impious,
and at no hand lawfull, notwithstanding, for
it is the ensigne of Pride, and the stern of
wantonnes to all that behould it) it were the
lesse matter, but they are not simply contente
with their owne haire,Bought heyre and colored, vsed to be wor
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                   but buy other heyre,
dying it of what color they list themselues: &
this they were in the same order as you haue

heard, as though it weare their owne natural
heir: and vppon ye other side, if any haue heyre,
which is not faire inough, than will they dye
it into dyuerse colors almost chaunginge the
substance into accidentes, by their dyuelish &
more than thrise cursed deuyses. So, wheras
their heire was geuen them, as a signe of subiection,
and therfore they were commaunded
to cherish the same, now haue they made (as
it were) a Metamorphosis of it, making it an
ornament of Pride, and destruction to them
selues for euer, except they repent.
            
            
               Spud.
               This is a styfnecked People, & a 
                     ••
                  
                  bellious,
I sée well, that thus dareth in euerie
respecte, to peruert the straight wayes of the
Lord, digginge vp to them selues cesterns of
iniquity, & pittes of aduersity, which in th, end
without the great mercy of God will be their
vtter confusion.
            
            
               Philo.
               Than on toppes of these stately turrets
(I meane their goodly heads,Capitall ornaments for the head. wherin is
more vanitie, than true Philosophie now and
than) stand their other capitall ornaments, as
french hood, hat, cappe, kercher, and suche like,
wherof some be of veluet, some of taffatie,
some (but few) of woll, some of this fashion,
some of that, and some of this color, some of
that, according to the variable fantasies of
their serpētine minds. And to such excesse is it
growen, as euery artificers wyse (almost) wil

not stick to goe in her hat of Ueluet euerye
day,Hartes of veluets, taffaty, worn in common. euery marchants wyfe, and meane Gentlewomen,
in her french-hood, and euerye
poore Cottagers Daughter, in her taffatie
hat, or els of woll at least, wel lined with silk,
veluet, or taffatie. But how they come by
this (so they haue it) they care not, who payeth
for it they regard not, nor yet what hurt booth
to them selues, and others it dooth bring they
feare not: But runne daylie a malo, ad
peius,
                  Trahit sua
                        •
                      quenque voluptas. (as they say) from one mischiefe t
                     •
                  
an other, vntill they haue filled vp the mesure
of their euill to their owne perdition at that
day.
               They haue also other ornaments besydes
these to furnish foorth their ingenious heads,
which they cal (as I remember) cawles, made
Netwyse,Cawles made Netwyse. to th'ende, as I thinke that the
clothe of gold, cloth of siluer, or els tinsell (for
that is the worst) wherwith their heads are
couered and attyred withall vnderneath their
cawles maye appeare, and shewe it selfe in
the brauest maner. Soe that a man that
séethe them (there heads glister and shine in
suche sorte) wold thinke them to haue golden
heads.
               Thus lauishe they foorth the goods of the
Lorde,Golden heads fraught with leaden wit. which are none of their owne (but lent
them for a tyme) vppon Pride and naughtinesse,
delighting (as it seemeth) in nothing so

muche, as in the stincking puddle of vanitie
and sinne, which will be their owne decay at
the last. Another sorte of dissolute minions,
& wantō 
                  Sempronians (for I can term thē no
better) are so far bewitched,Making of holes in their eares, to hang rings and Iewels by. as they are not
ashamed to make holes in their eares, wherat
they hang rings, and other Iewels of gold
and precious stones. But what this signifieth
in them, I will hould my peace, for
the thing it selfe speaketh sufficiently. There
is a certen kinde of People in the Orientall
parte of the World (as Writers affirme)
that are suche Philauto
                        •
                     
                   louers of them selues
and so prowde with all, that hauing plentie
of precious Stones, and Margarits amongest
them,A people who cut their skin to set precious stones in them selues. they cut and launce their skinnes,
and fleshe, setting therin these precious Stones,
to the end they maye glister and shine to
the eye.
               So, except these Women weare minded
to tread their pathes and folowe their direfull
wayes in this cursed kind of vnhard of
Pride, I wonder what they meane.
               But because this is not so muche frequented,
amongest Women as Men, I will say
noe more thereof, vntill further occasion be
offred.
            
            
               Spud.
               Except it weare a People wedde
                     •
                  
to the deuills eldest Daughter Pride, for I
thinke, chastitie amongest them maye dwell

a Uirgin for any that wil marry her) and giuen
ouer of God, I neuer heard the like.
               I am perswaded, neither the Libertines, the
Epicures nor yet the vile Atheists euer excéeded
this people in pride, nor the wickednes
of them might euer counterpease, with the
wickednes of these people. God be merciful
vnto them.
               
            
            
               Philo.
               You heare not the tenth parte, for no
pen is able so wel to discribe it, as the eye is
to discry it. The Women there vse great
ruffes,Great ruffes Neckerchers and partlets vsed of Women. & neckerchers of holland, lawne, camerick,
and such cloth, as the greatest thred shall
not be so bigge as the least haire that is, then
least they should fall down, they are smeared
and starched in the deuils liquore, I meane
Starch: after that dryed with great diligence,
streaked, patted and rubbed very nicely, and
so applyed to their goodly necks,Supportasses 
                        ••
                     he▪ pillers of 
                        •
                     ride. and withall,
vnderpropped with supportasses (as I tolde
you before) the statelie arches of pride: beyond
all this, they haue a further fetch nothing inferiour
to the rest, as namely thrée or foure
degrées of minor ruffes, placed gradatim, step
by step one beneath another, and all vnder y•
Maister deuil ruffe,
                     
                        •
                     inor ruffs▪
                   the skyrts then of these
great ruffes are long and side euery way pleted
and cre
                     •
                  ted ful curiously, God wot. Then
last of all, they are either clogged wt golde, siluer,
or silk lace of stately price, wrought all

ouer with néedle woork, speckled and sparkled
héer & there with the sonne, the moone, the
starres and many other antiquities straunge
to beholde.The great curiosity of rufs and neck
                     
                        •
                     rchers. Some are wrought with open
woork down to the midst of the ruffe and further,
some with purled lace so cloyd and other
gewgawes so pestred, as the ruffe is the least
parte of it self. Sometimes, they are pinned
vp to their eares, sometimes they are suffered
to hang ouer their shoulders, like windmil
sayles fluttering in the winde, and thus
euery one pleaseth her self with her foolish deuices,
for suus cuius
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      crepitus sibi bene olet,
as ye prouerb saith: euery one thīketh his own
wayes best, though they leade to distruction
of body and soule, which I wish them to take
héed of.
            
            
               Spud.
               As in a Camelion are said to be 
                     •
                  all
coulours, saue white, so I think, in these people
are all things els saue Uertue and christi
an sobrietie.Proteus 
                  Proteus that Monster could neuer
chaunge him self into so many fourmes &
shapes as these women doo, belike they haue
made an obligation with hel and are at agréement
with the deuil, els they would neuer
outrage thus, without either feare of God or
respect to their weak Bretheren, whom héerin
they offend.
            
            
               Philo.
               The Women also there haue dublets
& IerkinsWomen wering dublets and Ierkins. as men haue héer, buttoned vp the

brest, and made with wings, welts and pinions
on the shoulder points, as mans apparel
is, for all the world, & though this be a kinde
of attire appropriate onely to man, yet they
blush not to wear it, and if they could as wel
chaunge their sex, & put on the kinde of man,
as they can weare apparel assigned onely to
man, I think they would as verely become
men indéed as now they degenerat from godly
sober women,A curse to them that weare cōtrary apparell to their sex. in wearing this wanton
lewd kinde of attire, proper onely to man.
               It is writtē in the 22. of Deuteronomie, that
what man so euer weareth womans appare
                     ••
                  
is accursed, and what woman weareth mans
apparel is accursed also. Now, whether they
be within the hands and lymits of that cursse,
let them sée to it them selues. Our Apparell
was giuen vs as a signe distinctiue to discern
betwixt sex and sex, & therfore one to weare
the Apparel of another sex, is to participate
with the same, and to adulterate the veritie
of his owne kinde. Wherefore these
Women may not improperly be called Hermaphroditi,
                  Hermaphroditi.
that is, Monsters of bothe
kindes, half women, half men.
            
            
               Spud.
               I neuer read nor heard of any people
except drunkē with Cyrces cups, or poysoned
with the exorcisins of Medea that famous
and renoumed Sorceresse, that euer woulde
weare suche kinde of attire as is not onely

stinking before the face of God, offensiue to
mā, but also painteth out to the whole world,
the venereous inclination of their corrupt conuersation.The diuersity of Go
                        ••
                     es.
               
            
            
               Philo.
               There Gownes be no lesse famous
also, for some are of silk, some of veluet, some
of grogran, some of taffetie,Simiae in purpuris. some of scarlet,
and some of fine cloth, of ten, twentie or fortie
shillings a yard. But if the whole gowne
be not silke or veluet, then the same shall be
layed with lace, two or thrée fingers broade,
all ouer the gowne of els the moste parte.
               Or if not so, (as lace is not fine enough
sometimes) then it must be garded with great
gardes of veluet,Costly gownes, foure or six fingers broad at
the least, and edged with costly lace, and as
these gownes be of diuers and sundrie colors
so are they of diuers fashions changing with
the Moon, for sōe be of the new fashion, some
of the olde, some of this fashion, and some of
that,Diuers fashions of Gounes. some with sléeues hanging down to their
skirts trayling on the ground, and cast ouer
their shoulders, like Cow-tayles.
               Some haue sléeues much shorter, cut vp the
arme and pointed with silk-ribons very gallantly,
tyed with true-looues knottes, (for so
they call them.)
               Some haue Capes reaching downe to the
middest of their backs, faced with Ueluet
or els with some fine wrought silk Taffatie,

at the least, fringed about very brauely▪
& (to shut vp all in a word) some are pleated, &
ryueled down the back wōderfully, with mor
                     •
                  
knacks, than I can declare. Than haue they
PetticotsPotticots. of the best cloth that can be bought
and of the fairest dye that can be made. And
sometimes they are not of cloth neither, for
that is thought to base, but of scarlet, grograin
taffatie, silk, and suche like, fringed about the
skirts with silk fringe, of chaungable coloure.
But which is more vayn, of whatsoeuer their
petticots be, yet must they haue kyrtlesKyrtles. (for
so they call them) eyther of silk, veluet, grogra
                     •
                  ,
taffatie, saten, or scarlet, bordered with
gards, lace, fringe, and I cannot tell what besydes.
So that when they haue all these goodly
robes vppon them, women séeme to be the
smallest part of themselues, not naturall women,
but artificiall Women,Women the least part of themselues. not Women of
flesh, & blod, but rather puppits, or mawmets
of rags & clowtes compact together. So farre
hath this cancker of pride eaten into the body
of the common welth, that euery poore Yeomā
his Daughter, euery Husband mā his daughter,Poore Mens Daughters excesse.
& euery Cottager his Daughter will not
spare to flaunt it out, in suche gownes, petticots,
& kirtles, as these. And not withstanding
that their Parents owe a brase of hūndred
pounds more than they are worth, yet will
they haue it quo iure quauè iniuria, eyther

by hooke, or crooke, by right or wrong as they
say, whereby it commeth to passe, that one can
scarsly know, who is a noble woman, who is
an honorable, or worpshipull Woman▪ from
them of the meaner sorte.
            
            
               Spud.
               Their parents & Freinds are muche
to be blamed,Parents 
                        〈◊〉
                      blame. for suffering them to go in suche
wanton attyre. They should not allowe them
such large pittāce, nor suffer them to measure
their apparell, after their own licentious yardes
of selfe will, and wicked desires.
            
            
               Philo.
               Than shall they be sure, neuer to haue
good day with them. For they are so impudent,The impudēcy of proud harlots.
that all be it, their poore Parents haue
but one cow, horse, or shéep, they wil neuer let
them rest, til they be sould, to maintain them
in their braueries, past all tongue can tell.
               And to say the truth, some Parents (worthie
to be inaugured with the lawrell Crowne of
triple follie) are so buxome to their shamelesse
desires, and so exorable to their prostitute requests,Our remisse leuitie of Parents 
                        •
                     o their Children.
y• they graūt to their too too nice daughters
more than they can desire themselues, taking
a singular felicity & surmoūting pleasure
in sing them to go plumed and decked in the
Feathers of dece
                     •
                  ptfull vanity.
            
            
               Sp.
               This ouer great lenitie, & remisse libertie
in the educatiō of youthe, in respect of the
euent, and successe in the end, maye rather be
counted an extrem cruelty, than a Fatherly

pitie of them towards their children: For
what maketh them so soone whores, strumpets,
and bawdes, as that cockering of them
doth?
               What maketh them apt & prone to all kind
of naughtynesse,What maketh Whores, and strumpets. but this? Nothing in th
                     •
                  
World soe muche. For giue a wild horse
the libertie of the head neuer so litle, and he
will runne headlonge to thyne and his owne
destruction also.
               So long as a sprigge twist or braunche, is
yong, it is flexible and bowable to any thing
a man can desire, but if we tarie till it be a
great trée, it is inflexible and vnbowable:
If wax be taken whylest it is hote, anye
character maye be easily imprinted, but tarying
till it be hard, it receiueth no printe at
all.
               So, correct Children in their tender yeres,
and you may bow them to what good lore you
will your selfe, but tarie till they be old,
than is it to late, as experience teacheth
daylie.
            
            
               Philo.
               Their neitherstockesNetherstocks of gernsey or silk. in like maner
are either of silke gearn
                     •
                  ey, worsted, crewell,
or at least of as fyne yarn, thread, or cloth as
is possible to be had cunningly knit, and curiously
indented, in euery point, wherto they
haue korked shooes, pinsnets, pantoffles,Corked shoes pinsnets, pā
                     toffles, & such like for wo
                     
                        ••
                     
                     ▪
                   and

                  
                     ••
                  ippers: some of black veluet, some of white,
some of gréene, and some of yellowe: some
of spanish leather, and some of English lether,

                     ••
                  itched with silk and imbrodered with Gold,

                     •
                  nd siluer all ouer the foote, with other gewgawes
innumerable: All which if I should
endeuoure my selfe to expresse, I might with
more facilitye number the sands of the Sea,
the Starres in the skye, or the grasse vppon
the Earth so infinit, and innumerableThe innumerable fashions of womens attire. be
their abuses.
               For weare I neuer soe expre
                     •
                  e an Arithmetrician,
or Mathematician, I weare neuer
capable of the halfe of them, the deuill brocheth
soe many new fashions euery day.
               Wherfore to their Author I leaue them,
not omittinge to tell you by the way (as an
interim) of a certen kynde of swéete Pride
vsed amongest the Gentlemen and Gentlewomen
in Ailgna.
               
            
            
               Spud.
               I haue learned out of the Booke of
God, that all Pride is stincking before the
face of GOD,Pride stinking before the face of God. wherfore I greatlye desyre
to knowe what abortyue Miscreant this is,
for it is some portenteous mishapen monster,
I am perswaded.
            
            
               Philo.
               Is not this a cert
                     •
                  n sweete Pride,The hauing of ciuet, musk and other perfumes a sweet kind of Pride.
to haue cyuet, muske, swéete powders,

fragrant Pomanders, odorous perfumes &
such like, wherof the smel may be felt and
perceiued not only all ouer the house or place
where they be present, but also a stones cast
of, almost, yea the bed wherin they haue layed
their delicate bodies, the places where they
haue sa
                     •
                  e, the clothes and thinges which they
haue touched shall smell a wéeke, a moneth,
and more after they be gon. But the Prophet
Esaias
                  Esai. Cap. 3. telleth them, instead of their Pomaunders,
musks ciuets, balmes, swéet odours
and perfumes, they shall haue stench and
horrour in the nethermost hel. Let them take
héed to it and amend their wicked liues.
               And in the Sommer-time whilst floures 
                     〈◊〉
                  
gréene and fragrant, yee shall not haue any
Gentlewoman almost, no nor yet any droye
or pussle in the Cuntrey, but they will carye
in their hands, nosegayes and posies of flouresNosegayes, & posies of flowers, worn and caried abrod.
to smell at, and which is more, two or thrée
Nosegayes sticked in their brests before, for
what cause I cannot tel,Beware the Spanish pip. except it be to allure
their Paramours to catch at them, wherby
I doubt not but they get many a slabbering
kisse, and paradeuenture more fréendship besides,
they know best, what I mean.
            
            
               Spud.
               You wil be thought very straight la
                  
                     •
                  ed
to speak against these thinges, for I haue
heard it said, that these swéet smels are bothe
corroboratiue to the sences and confortatiue

to the spirits, and which doo viui
                     ••
                  e and recreate
aswel the body as the minde.
            
            
               Philo.
               They are so far from comforting the
braines, or lightning the spirits of men, that
as mystes and exhalations which euaporate
from these earthly bodyes, and are drawen
vp by the attractiue power of the Sun,These eurious smelles obnub
                        •
                     lat the spirits & darken the sences. Moon,
and starres doo rather obnubilate and darken
the beames of the Sun, not suffering his radiatiōs
to disparcle abrode. So these (in a maner)
palpable odors, fumes, vapours, smells
of these musks,Sweet smells of musks cyuet, and such like, do anoy the spirits. cyuets, pomanders, perfumes
balmes & suche like ascending to the braine, do
rather denigrate, darken and obscure ye spirit
and sences, then either lighten them, or comfort
them any manner of way. But howsoeuer
it falleth out, sure I am, they are ensignes
of pride, allurements to sinne and prouocations
to vice. After all this, when they haue
attired thē selues in the midst of their pride,
it is a world to cōsider their coynesse in gestures,The vain gestures & coynes of women in the middest of their pecok fethers. Fingers clogged with rings.
their minsednes in woords and speaches,
their gingerlynes in trippinge on toes like
yong goats, their demure 
                     •
                  icitie and babishnes
and withall their hawtie stomackes and
more than Cyclopicall countenāces: their fingers
are decked with gold, siluer, and precious
stones,Womens trincke
                        •
                     s. Sweeted gloues. their wristes with bracelets, and
armlets of gold, and other preciouse Iewels,
their hands are couered with their swéet washed

gloues imbrodered with gold, siluer, and
what not, & to such abhominatiō is it grown,
as they must haue their looking glasses caryed
with thē whersoeuer they go:Loking glasses, the deuills spectacles. And good reason,
for els how cold they see the deuil in them? for
no doubt, they are the deuils spectacles to allure
vs to pride, & cōsequently to distructiō for
euer: and aboue al things they must haue their
silk scarffesSilk skarfes. cast about their faces & fluttering
in the winde with great tassels at euery end,
either of gold, siluer or silk. But I know wher
for, they wil say they weare these scarfes, namely,
to kéep them from Sun-burning. But I
wold aske these Nice lings one question, wher
in if they cā resolue mée, thē I will say as they
say, y• scarffes are necessary, and not flags of
pride.A question to skar
                        •
                     e werers. Can that thing which is moste glorious
& fair of it self, make any thing foule or ilfauored?
the sun is a most glorious & fair creature,
& therfor cānot make thē fowler, then they are
of their own nature. Frō whence then is it, y•
the Sun burneth them & altereth their orient
colour into woorser hue? The cause therof procéedeth
from their own genuine corruptiō and
natural imperfectiō, for no more is their fowlenes
to be ascribed to the stelliferous beames
of y• glistering sun, then ye stench of a dead carcasse,
may be said to come of y• Sun, & not rather
of it own corruptiō & filthines. They busie
thēselues in preseruing the beautie of their
bodyes, which lasteth but for a time, & in time

is cause of his own corruptiō, & which in effect
is nothing els then putrifactiō it self, & a dunghil
couered with white & red, but for y• beautie
of ye soule they care nothing at all. When they
vse to ride abrod they haue inuisories or visors
made of veluet,Visors, or inuisories of veluet, to ride abrode in. wherwith they couer all their
faces, hauing holes made in thē against their
eyes, whereout they look. So that if a man
that knew not their guise before, should chaunce
to méet one of them hée would think hée
met a monster or a deuil, for face hée can sée
none, but two brode holes against her eyes,
with glasses in them.Sues volutabris versantur. Thus they prophane ye
name of God & liue in al kinde of voluptuousnes,
& pleasure wursse thē euer did the hethen.
            
            
               Sp.
               What think you, are not the inuētors, &
first finders out of these new toyes & dyuelish
deuices in great daunger, and partakers with
them of the euill committed.
            
            
               Philo.
               It cannot be,The first finders, and inu
                        •
                     ntors of new fashions, are culpable of all the euil that cōmeth by them. but the Inuentors of
these new toyes, are in great daunger before
God, as they who shall render accoūts to god
not only for the inuentiō of them, but also for
the euil cōmitted by them. For whosoeuer, is
author of any euil must néeds answer for the
euil. And surely y• authors of these newfāgles,
are not vnworthy to be canonized saints whē
the yéere of Iubilie cōmeth (I meane saincts of
sathan) for there is no déed so flagicious, no fact
so dangerous, nor any thing so hainous, which
with alacritie is not plausibly cōmitted for the

maintenance of these Diuelish toyes and deuices:
And albeit that the Persons themselues
who offend this way shal dye in their sinnes,
their owne bloud being powred vppon
their owne heads, yet the Authors of these
new toyes, wherthorow they offended, shalbe
giltie of their deathes and surely answear for
their destruction in the day of the Lord.
            
            
               Spud.
               But say they, if I make them not, an
other wil,A vaine excuse. & it is as good for me to make them,
as an other, & it is my lyuing, wherfore I am
discharged of blame, if I make them (being
cōmaunded) with sweat of my face, and with
trauaile and paine to get my lyuing?
            
            
               Philo.
               We are commaunned indéed to get
our lyuing with the sweate of our face,We are boūd to get our lyuing in well doing, not in euill doing. but
how? Not in doing those things, which are
euill of themselues, and also drawe and intice
others to euill, but in things lawful and good,
& which induce to goodnesse. And to say, others
will make them if I do not, no more excuseth
them of offence, thā for a Murtherer or Thief
to say, if I had not robbed, or killed this man
another wold, dischargeth him from the penaltie
of the iudiciall lawe to be inflicted against
him. Is it lawfull for vs to do euill,
because others do it? Or dooth the wickednes
of an other,A 
                        〈◊〉
                      to Artificers that inuent new fashions. delyuer me from blame, if I commit
the same offence? no, nothing lesse. Wherfore,
let Taylers and Artificers beware, how

they eyther inuente or make these new deuyces
and Dyuelish fashions euery day: And
being requested to make them, if they perceiue
them tende to vice, and allure to sinne, let
them refuse them in the name of God, more
tendering the saluation of many, than the priuat
commodytie of themselues alone: which
thing, if euery one wold do, he should delyuer
his own soule, & support an infinit number frō
falling into the gulphe of sinne, and so in short
tyme these new toyes, fond deuyces and childish
babelries, (new fashions I should say,)
wold soone vanish away, and come to naught▪
which God graunt may once be séene.
            
            
               Spud.
               Did the women of the former world
attire themselues in suche sorte, as these women
do?
            
            
               Philo.
               The Women of the former age you
may be sure neuer appareled themselues like
one of these: But least you should thinke, that
ye Godly onelie lyued thus austerly, you shal
heare how litle the very hethē and barbarian
Women haue, and do at this present estéeme
of apparell, as Stuperius witnesseth, whose
words are these speking of the Egiptian w
                     •
                  
                  men:
Vestimenta sciunt nec noua pristini
                        •
                     
mutare, verum semper his in cultibus gaudent
perpetuo tempore congredi, quascunque gentes
hunc per orbem visitent, Which may be
thus turned into English verse.
               
                  The Egiptian Matrones neuer vse
               Their fashion of attyre to change,
               But euer keep one forme to chuse
               Although they visite Nations strange.
               AND as all Writers doo affirme, all the
Women there, indifferētly to with their
haire hanging downe, with a broade hat
vppon their heads, and other attyre as playne
as the rest, soo farre are these People from
Pride, and hunting after strange fashions as
our Women doo.
               The Women of Affrica are witnessed
by the fame Stuperius, and others, to be so
farre from affecting strange fashions, or curiosity
in aparel, that they cloth themselues in
a manner al ouer, ferinis pellibus, with beasts
skinnes, furres, and such like. And this they
think so riche attire, as they vse it altogether,
when they celebrat their festiual solēne daies,
or when they go abrode to be séene.
               The Brasilian Women estéeme so litle of
apparell also as they rather chose to go naked
(their secret partes onely being couered) then
they wold be thought to be proud, or desirouse
of such vanities.
               The Cantabrian Women likewyse with
many others do the same. In High Germany
the Women vse in effect one kind of apparel,
or habite, without any differēce at all, nothing
like other Natiōs delighting in new fangles:

yea the wiues there, are so far from pride, that
they will not disdaine to carie all their househould
stuffe and other trinckets about with
them vppō their backs in tyme of extremitie.
These Mayds & Uirgins go very plain, with
kerchers only on their heads, their haire hanging
down behinde, in token of Uirginitie.
               Thus you see, euery Natiō, how barbarous
soeuer, are much inferiour to ye people of Ailgna
in pride & excesse of apparell: and yet these
examples I alledge not to th'end I wold wish
all others to vse ye same, or ye very like brutish
kind of auster habite, but to shew how farre
they be from Pride, & how much the other be
wedded to ye same. And as for the vertuous &
godly christian women from the beginning of
the world, they haue so litle cared for the vain
glory of apparell, & so litle (or rather nothing
at al) were they a quainted therwith, as they
hunted for nothing els so much as for the ornaments
of the mind, as wisdom, continency,
chastitie, & true godlynesse, thinking the same
bewtie sufficient. They coūted it great shame
to cloth their bodies with sumpteous apparel,
& their minds to be naked, & voide of true vertue.
So, if these womē wold seek after ye bewtie
of ye mind, they wold not affect apparell so
much, for if they be faire in body alredy, than
néed they not gorgeous apparel to make them
fairer: & if they be deforme in body, it is not y•
                  
that can make them fairer. And either their
bewtie consisteth in them, or in their apparel:
If in them, than not in the Apparell, & so it is
meere foolery to were them. And if in apparel,
than not in them, and so cannot the garments
make them fayre, whome God, & nature hath
made otherwise: wherfor, look in what shape,
forme, or condition euerye one is created by
God, let him content himselfe with the same,
without any alteratiō or chaunge, with praise
to his Creator.
            
            
               Spud.
               They hold (notwithstanding) that it
is the pride of the heart, which God so muche
hateth, and detesteth.
            
            
               Philo.
               It is verye true that GOD punisheth
the pride of the heartPride of the heart. with eternal damnation
(if they repent not) for he will be serued,
and obyed either with the whole man, or
els with none. Than if he punish the pride of
heart with euerlasting damnatiō, he must
néeds (in iustice) punish the pride of Apparell
with the like,Pride of apparel equiualēt with Pride of the heart. being booth ioyned in one predicamēt
of sinne, and the pride of apparell much
more hurting before the world, thā the other.
               Also, it is manifest, that the pride of apparel,
riseth first from the corruptiō of the heart,
as the effects from the cause, the fruite from
the roote of the trée▪ than if the pride of ye heart,
which, notwithstanding, it hurteth not outwardly,
but is secret betwixt God, and himselfe,

be damnable in it owne nature before
God, than must it néeds be, that the Pride of
apparell, (which sheweth it selfe to the world,
both offensiue to GOD, and hurtfull to mā,
and which also is the fruite of the pride of the
heart, and throweth almost as many as behold
it, at least, as many as followe it, into the
déep dungion of hell) is much more pernicious
and damnable than the other.
            
            
               Spud.
               Hath the Lord plagued this sinne of
pride, with any notable torture or punishmēt,
euer from the beginning of the World vnto
this day, or hath he omitted the reuenge therof
as a thing of small force, or importance?
            
            
               Philo.
               Most fearfull plagues, and dreadfull
iudgements of GOD haue in all ages béene
powred vppon them that offended herein, as
all Histories both holy, and prophane do beare
record. For proofe wherof, I wil geue you a
taste but of a few, wherby may appeare how
wonderfully the Lord in all ages, tymes, kinreds
& peoples hath punished those that thorow
pride (like wicked recusants, and backslyders
from God) haue rebelled against his
maiestie.Examples of God his punishmēts executed vppon them that offended in Pride, in all ages. The deuill, who before was an Angell
in Heauē, arrogating to himselfe the imperial
throane of the maiesty of God, was cast
downe into the déepth of Hell burning with
fire and sulphur for euer.
               
                  Adam, desiring to be a God (for the serpent

tould him he should be as God, knowing both
good & euill) was for the sin of Pride throwne
downe to the bottome of Hell, & not onely he,
but all his posteritie to the end of the World.
The hoast of Core, Dathan, and Abiram for
their exceding pride, in stirring vp mutenie,
rebelling against their lawfull Magistrate
were swallowed vp quick into hell, the earth
opening her mouth, & deuouring them, withall
their complices whatsoeuer. The People
of Babylon intēding to builde a tower, whose
top should tutche the Skye, thinking that if
God should drown ye world againe with water,
they would be sure inough on the toppe of
their high turr
                     •
                  ts, yea they intending to sit
with God himselfe (if néed weare) weare all
confounded, and a diuerse language put into
euery mans mouth, that none knew what an
other spake. And thus were they forced to leaue
there building, and dispersed themselues abroad
vppō the face of the earth, wherof sprāg
the first diuersitie of languages in the world.
Wherfore when we heare any language spoken
we know not, it may be a memorandum
                  A memorandum.
to vs to put vs in minde of our Pride, which
was the cause therof.
               
                  Goliah, the great Gyant, the huge Cyclops,
and swor
                     •
                  e enemy to the Children of Israell,
for his pride against the Lord, was slaine by
Dauid, the faitfull Seruaunt of the Lord.
               
                  
                  Antiochus
                  Antioch
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                   intending to ouerthrowe, and
sacke Ierusalem, to spoile the Sanctuarie and
Temple of the Lord, and to kill the people of
God, was for his pride ouerturned in his charet
ryding thetherward, his belly brust and fil
thy wormes crawled out, moste lothsomly, and
in sine, beganne so to stinke and swell, as neither
his Seruants nor he himselfe cold abide
his owne sauoure, and thus ended his lyfe in
great miserie, and wretchednesse.
               
                  Nabuchodonosor,
                  Nabuchodonosor. was for his pride cast out
of his Kingdom and forced to eat grasse with
wild beasts in the wildernesse.Daniel.
               
               King Saule,
                  K. for his pride and disobedience,
was deposed of his principallitie and Kingly
regimente, and in the end slewe him self on

                     〈◊〉
                   
                  Gelboe most desperately.
               
                  Sodoma and Gomorra, were both destroyed
with fire & brimstone frō heauen for their sin
of pride, & contempt of the Lord. All the world
in the daies of Noah was drowned with vniuersall
deluge for pride & contumacy of heart.
               King Hezekiahs for his pride in shewing
to the Ambassadors of the king of Babylon,
                  2. Reg. Cap. 20. all
his treasure (for he sent Messengers vnto him
 wt gifte & lettres congratulatorie, for ye recouerie
of his helth) lost al his iewels, tresures & riches,
 wt his owne sones also, being transported
captiues into Babilon: K. Dauid▪
                   for his pride
in numbring ye people contrary the wil of god

was greuouslie punished, and thréescore and
ten thousand of his People slaine with a gréenous
pestilence for the same.2. Samuel. 1. c. 24. Vers. 15.
               
               King Pharao for his pride against the Lord,
(for he thought him selfe a GOD vppon the
Earth, and therfore asked he Moyses in derision,
who is the Lord) was drowned in the
read Sea with all his hoast. The proude Pharisey
                  The proude Pharisey.
iustifying himselfe, for his pride was reproued
of the Lord, and reiected.
               King Herode
                  K. Herode. for attiring himselfe in sumpteous
aray, & not ascribing glory to the Lord,
was strucken dead, by an Angel, and wormes
consumed his flesh immediatly. Al these, with
infinit millions moe in al ages, haue perished
thorow pride, and therfore let not this people
think that they shall escape vnpunished, who
drinke vp pride as it weare swéet wyne, féede
vppon it, as vppon delicious meats, and wallowe
in it, as a filthie swyne doth in the dirtie
myr
                     •
                  : will the Lord punish his peculiare people,
and elect vessels, and let them goo frée?
               Wherfore I wold wyshe them to be warned,
for it is a terrible thing to fall into ye hands of
GOD,God his Plagues are prepared, if we repent not. who is a consuming fire, & a fearfull
God. His bowe is bente, his arrowes of iudgements
are drawen to the head, his fire is
kyndled, his wrath is gone out, & ready to be
powred vppon the contemners of his lawes.
Tempt not the Lord any longer, prouoke not

his wrath, exasperate not his iudgements towards
thée: for as mercy procéedeth frō him,
so doth iustice also: And be sure of it, he payeth
home at the last. For as in mercie he suffreth
no good deed to be vnrewarded, so in his iust
iudgmente there is no wickednes, which he
leaueth vnpunished. And yet notwithstāding
their wickednesse and pride is such, as stincketh
before the face of God, and maketh the
Enemies to blaspheme and speake euill of the
wayes of the Lord: For say they, the men
of Ailgna are wicked, & licentious in all their
wayes, which easily appeareth by their apparell,
& new fangled fashions euery day inuented.
The beastly Epicures, the Drunkards,
& swilbowles vppon their ale benches, when
their heads are intoxicat with new wine, wil
not stick to belch foorth,Our new fangles and toi
                        •
                     s, are occasions, why all nations mocke, and flo
                        •
                     te vs. and say, that the inhabitantes
of Ailgna go brauelye in Apparell,
chaunging fashions euerie daye, for no cause
so much as to delight the eyes of their harlots
withall, and to inamoure the mindes of their
fleshly paramours. Thus be this People a
laughing stock to all the world for their pride,Our lyuing a slaunder to the truth.
a slaunder to the word of God & to their profession,
scandalles to their brethren, a dishonor
and reproch to the Lord, and very caterpillers
to themselues, in wasting and cōsuming their
goods and treasures vppon vanyties & trifles.
            
            
               Spud.
               Séeing that by diuyne assistance, you

haue now finished your 
                     •
                  ractation of the Apparell
of Ailgna, shew me (I pray you) what
other abuses be there vsed, for I am perswaded,
that pride the Mother of all sinne, is not
without her Daughters of sinne semblable to
her selfe?
            
         
         
            The horryble vice
of Whordome in Ailgna.
            
               Philo.
               THE horryble vice of Whordome also
is ther too too much frequēted,Whordome in Ailgna too too ri
                        •
                     e. to ye great
dishonor of God, the prouoking of his
iudgements against them, the staine and blemish
of their profession, the euill example of
all the world, any finally to their owne damnation
for 
                     •
                  uer, except they repente.
            
            
               Spud.
               I haue heard them reason, that mutuall
coition betwixt man and woman, is not
so offensiue before God.Vain and vngodly reasons p
                        •
                     etending that whordome is no 
                        ••
                     nne. For do not all Creatures
(
                     •
                  ay they) as wel reptilia terrae, as volati
                        •
                     a
Coeli, the creping things vpon the earth,
as the flying Creatures in the aire, and all other
Creatures in generall both small & great
ingender together? hath not nature and kynd
ordained them so? & geuen them mēbers incidēt
to that vse? & doth not ye Lord (say they) (as
it were wt a stimule, or prick by his mandat,
saing crescite & multiplicamini, & replete terrā,
increase, multiplie, & fill the earth,) stirre thē
                  
vp to the same? Otherwyse the World wold
become barren, and soone fall to decay: wherfore
they conclude,Oh wicked Lybertynes. that whordome is a badge
of loue, a cognizāce of amitie, a tutch of 
                     •
                  ustie
youth, a frendlie daliance, a redintegration of
loue, and an ensigne of vertue, rather meritorious
than dānable: these with the like be y• exceptiōs
which I haue hard them many times
to obiect, in defence of their carnal pollutions.
            
            
               Philo.
               Cursed be those mouths, that thus
blaspheme the mightie God of Israell, and his
sacred word▪ making the same clokes, to couer
their sinne withall, worse are they than Lybertines
who thinke all things lawfull, or Atheistes,
who denie there is any God. The deuills
themselues neuer sinned so horribly, nor
erred so grossely, as these, (not Christians, but
dogges) do, that make whordom a vertue, and
meritorious: but because you shal sée their deceptiōs
displayed & their dānable abuses, more
plainly discouered, I will reduce you to ye first
institutiō of this Godly ordenāce of matrimony.
The Lord our God hauing created all
things in Heauen,The first institution of matrimonie. earth, or Hell whatsoeuer,
created of euery sex, two, male & female of both
kindes, and last of al other creatures, he made
man after his own likenesse, & similitude, geuing
him a womā,Gen. 2. Mat. 19 made of a ribbe of his own
body,Marc. Luc. 16. to be his companion,1. Cor. 6. & comforter, & lincking
them together in the honorable state ofEphe.5.
                  
venerable wedlocke, he blessed them both, saying,
crescite, multiplicamini, & replete terrā.
Increase, multiplie, & replenish ye earth: wherby
it is more than apparent, that the Lorde,
whose name is Iehouah, the mightie GOD
of Israell,
                  Mariage insti
                        •
                     uded for. 4 ca
                        •
                     ses. is the Author of Godly matrimony,
instituting it in the tyme of mans inconcency
in Paradice, and that as mée séemeth for foure
 causes. First, for the auoydaūce of whordom:
 Secondly, for the mutuall comforte, & consolatiō,
that the one might haue of the other in all
 aduersities & calamities whatsoeuer: Thridly,
for the procreation,All mutuall copulation, except mariage, is vnlawfull. and Godly propagation
of Children in the feare of the Lord, that both
the world might be increased therby, and the
 Lord also in them glorified. And fourthlie, to
be a figure or type of our spirituall wedlocke
betwixt Christ and his church both militant,
and triumphante. This congression, and mutuall
copulation of those that be thus ioyned
together in the Godlye state of blessed matrimony▪
is pure virginitie, and allowable before
God and man, as an action wherto the Lorde
hath promised his blessing thorow his mercy,
not
                     •
                   by our merite, ex opere operato, as some
shame not to say. All other goinges together
and coitions are damnable, pestiferous, and
execrable▪ So, now you sée, that wheras the
Lord saith, increase, multiplie, & fill the earth,
he alludeth to those that are cheyned together

in the Godly state of matrimonie and wedlock,
and not otherwyse: For to those that
go together after any other sorte, he hath denounced
his curse and wrath for euermore▪
as his alsauing word beareth record. And
wheras they say that all cr
                     •
                  atures vppon the
Earth do ingender together,
                     
                        •
                     ow all creatures do goe togither in their kind
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                   I graunte it is
true. But how? in suo genere, in their owne
kinde. There is no creature créeping, on the
earth, or flying in the aire, how irrationable
soeuer that dooth degenerate as man dooth, but
kéepethe the same state and order wherein
they were made at the first, and so if man did,
he should not commit abhominable whordom
and filthie sinne as hée dooth. It is said of those
that write de natura animalium, that (almost)
all vnreasonable beasts and flying fowles after
they haue once linked and vnited them selues
togither to any one of the same kinde▪ and
after they haue once espoused them selues the
one to the other,The fidelitie of vnreasonable creatures in mariage one towards an other. wil neuer after ioyne them
selues we any other, til the one be dissolued frō
the other by death. And thus they kéepe the
knot of matrimonie inuiolable to the end. And
if any one chaunce to reuolte and go togither
with any other during ye life of his first mate,
at the rest of the same kind, assemble togither,
as it were in a councel or parliament, and either
kil or gréeuously punish the adulterer or
adulteresse whether euer it be, which lawe I

would God were amongst Christians established.
By all which it may appéer how horrible
a sinne whordome is in nature, that the
very vnreasonable creatures doo abhorre it.
               The Heathen people who know not God, so
much lothe this sti
                     •
                  king sinne of whordome,
that some burne them quick, some hang them
on gibbets, some cut off their heds, some their
armes,How much the Heathen haue detested whordome. legs and hands, some put out their
eyes, some burne them in the face, some cut
of their noses, some one parte of their bodye,
some another, and some with one kind of torture,
and some with another: but none leaueth
them vnpunished:Sundery punishments of whordome amongst the Heathen. so that we are set to schoole
to learn our first rudiments (like yung Nouices
or Children scarce crept out of the shel,)
how to punish whordome, euen by the vnreasonable
creatures and by the heathen people
who are ignorant of the deuine goodnes.
            
            God be merciful vnto vs.
            
               Spud.
               I pray you rehearse some places out
of the woord of God, wherin this cursed vice
of whordome is forbidden, for my better instruction.
            
            
               Philo.
               Our Sauiour Christe in the eight of
Iohn speaking to the woman,Testimonies out of the woord of god wherin whordome is forbid, whom the malicion
                     ••
                  
                  Iewes had apprehended in adulterie,
bad her go her way and sin no more. If it had
not béen a moste greeuous sin, he would neuer
haue bid her to sin therin no more.
               
                  In the fift of Mathew he saith, who so lusteth
after a woman in his hart, hath committed
the fact alredy, and therfore is guiltie of
death for the same.Mat. 5. To the Pharises, asking
him whether a man might not put away his
wife for any occasion? Christe answered, for
no cause, saue for whordome onely, inferring
that whordome is so hainous a sinne, as for
the perpetration therof it shalbe lawful for a
man to sequester him self from his owne wife
and the wife from her owne husband.Mat. 19. The Apostle
Paul sayth,Mat. 10. know you not that your bodyes
are the members of Christe,
                  Luc. 16. shall I then
take the members of Christe (saith he) and
make them the members of an whore?1. Cor. 
                        •
                     . 
                  God
forbid, knowe yée not that he who coupleth
him self with a harlot is become one body wt
her? flée fornication (saith he) therfore, for euery
sinne that a man committeth is without
the body, but who committeth fornication sinneth
against his owne body. And in an
                     •
                  other
place: knowe you not, that your Bodyes
are the temples of the holy ghost, which dwelleth
within you? And who so destroyeth the
Temple of God, him shall God destory.
               In an other place, he saith: be not deceiued,
for neither Whoremonger, Adulterer, Fornicator,
incestuous person nor such like shall
euer enter into the kingdome of heauen. Again,
Coni
                        •
                     gium honorabile est inter omnes.
                  
Mariage is honorable amongst all men, and
the bed vndefiled, but whooremongers and adulterers
God shall iudge. In the Reuelation
of Saint Iohn it is said, that they who were
not defiled with women, doo waite vpon the
Lamb, whether soeuer he goeth. The Apostle
Paul willeth vs to be so far from fornication,
that it be not once named amongst vs, as becommeth
Saints, with infinit such places,
which for bréefnes I omit, re
                     •
                  erring you in
the olde Testament to these and such like places,
namely, the 20. of Exodus. 20. of Leuiticus.
De
                        •
                     tronomie 22. Deutro. 27. 2. Reg. 11.
Leuit. 18. Exodus. 22. Num 5. Eccle. 9. Pro.
33. Pro. 7. verse. 24.
            
            
               Spud.
               As you haue now prooued by inuincible
testimonies of holy Scripture, that whordome
is forbidden by the Lord: so I pray you
shew mée the gréeuousnes thereof by some seuere
& rare examples of Gods iust iudgement
executed vppon the same from the begining.Genesis 7. 8.
               
            
            
               Philo.
               The whole world was destroyed wt
water,Punishments of whordom in all Ages. not any liuing thing left vpon the erth,
(saue in ye Ark of Noath) for the sin of whordō
incest & brothelry vsed in those daies. Sodoma
and Gomorra two famous Cities were consumed
with fire and brimstone from heauen
for the like sin of whordom adulterie and fornication.Genesis. 19.
The citie of ye 
                  Sichemits,
                  Genesis. 24. man, woman
and childe weare put to the edge of the

swoord, for the rauishing of Dina the daughter
of Iacob. The Lord also tolde Abimelech,
that if he did not let go vntouched Sara, Abraham
his wife,Genesis. 20. bothe he and all his housholde
should dye the death, notwithstanding he did
it ignorauntly.Ge. 26. The very same hapned to Isaac
also.Ge. 18. 
                  Iudas vnderstanding that his daughter
in law was impregnate and great with
childe, and not knowing by whom, comm
                     •
                  nded
that she should be burned without any further
delay.2. Reg. 16. Was not Absalon, king Dauid
his sonne plagued all his life for going into
his Fathers Concubines? And did not Achitophel
who gaue councel so to do hang himself?
Was not Ruben the first borne sonne of
Iacob,
                  Ge. 29. accursed for going vp to his Fathers
bed, and lost he not his birth-right, his dignitie
and primacie ouer his Bretheren for the
same? Were there not abooue thréescore and
fiue thousand men slain for the adulterie doon
with one Leuits wife?Iudi. 20. Was not king Dauid
punished all y• daies of his life for his adultery
doon with Bersabe, Vrias his wife?2. Reg 13. 12. Was not
his sōne Amon, for lying with Thamar, slain?
Was not Salomon béeing peruerted with hethen
women cast out of the fauour of GOD,1. Reg. 1
                        •
                     .
notwithstanding, being otherwise, the wisest
Prince in all the world? Did not Achab at
the perswasions of Iesabel,
                  3. Reg. 2
                        •
                     . his cursed wife, falling
to Idolatrie and woorshiping of Idolles

and deuils, suffer moste cruel punishment in
this life all his dayes, besides what he suffereth
now God onely knoweth. Were not the
Israelite,
                  Nume. 25. and Madianitish woman both slain
by that woorthy man Phinees, who ran them
both thorow the priuy members with his Iauelin
or swoord?Iud. 16. Was not Sampson brought
to a miserable end, his eyes beeing bothe put
out, and he made to be a laughing stock to all
men, thorow his too much fauouring of wantō
women?
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . 22. Was not king Pharao wunderfully
plagued for but intending euil in his hart towards
Sara Abraham his wife? Did not the
Lord slay (with a moste gréeuous mortalitie)
foure & twentie thousand of ye 
                  Israelites in one
day, for whordome and adulterie with the
women of the Moabites and Madianits?
               
               By these and such like fearful Examples of
the iustice of God powred vpon these whoremongers
& adultrers, we may learn to know
the gréeuousnes of the same, and the punishment
due to all whoremongers and fornicatours
either in this life, or in the World to
come, or els in both: for if the Lord deferre the
punishment of whordome in this life, hée reseruet
                     •
                  
it for the world to come, suffering the
wicked to wallow in their sinne, and to fil vp
the measure of iniquitie, that their damnation
may be iust. And if the Lord l
                     •
                  ft not sin
vnpunished, no, not in his most déer Saints,

what he wil doo in them who dayly crucifie
him a new, let the world iudge?
            
            
               Spud.
               Now am I fully perswaded by your
inuincible reasons, that there is no sin greater
before the face of God, then whordome,
wherfore, God graūt that all his may auoid it.
               
            
            
               Philo.
               You haue said true, for there is no
sinne (almost) comparable vnto it, for besides
that, it bringeth euerlasting damnation to all
that liue therin to the end, without repentāce,
it also bringethWhat 
                        •
                     ui whordome bringeth to mans body in th
                        •
                     s life. these inconueniences, with
many mo, vidilicet, it dimmeth the sight, it
impaireth the hearing, it infirmeth ye sinewes,
it weakneth the ioynts, it exhausteth the marow,
consumeth the moisture and supplemēt
of the body, it riueleth the face, appalleth the
coūtenance, it dulleth ye spirits, it hurteth the
memorie, it weakneth y• whole body, it bringeth
it into a consūption, it bringeth vlcerations,
scab, scurf, blain, botch, pocks & biles, it
maketh hoare haires, & bald pates: it induceth
olde age, & in fin
                     •
                  , bringeth death before nature
vrge it, malady enforce it, or age require it.
            
            
               Sp.
               Séeing y• whordome bringeth such soure
sauce with it, namely, death euerlasting after
this life, and so many discōmodities besides in
this life, I wunder that men▪ dare cōmit the
same so securely as they doo now a dayes?
            
            
               Philo.
               It is so little feared in Ailgna,
that vntill euery one hath two or thrée Bastardes
a péece, they estéeme him no man,

(for that, they call a mans déede) insomuch as
euery s
                     •
                  uruie boy of twelue,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     . sixtéen or twenty
yéeres of age wil make no conscience of it, to
haue two or thrée, peraduenture half a dosen
seuerall women with childe at once, and this
exploite béeing doon, he showes them a faire
pair of héeles, and away goeth he, Euro volociu
                        •
                     ,
as quick as a B
                     •
                  e (as they say) into some
strange place where he is not knowen where,
how he liueth, let the wise iudge, for coelum
non animum mut 
                        〈◊〉
                      qui trans mare currunt,
though they ch
                     •
                  u
                     •
                  ge their place of abode,Whormongers 
                        •
                     unagates. yet
their naughtie dispositions they retaine stil.
               Then hauing estraunged them selues thus
for a small space, they returne againe, not to
their pristine cursed life I dare say, but vnto
their cuntrey, and then no man may say, black
is their eye, but all is wel, & they as good christians
as those that suffer them vnpunished.
            
            
               Spud.
               The state and condition of that Cuntrey
is most miserable if it be true you report,
it weare much better that euerye one had his
lawful wife, and euery woman her lawful
husband, as the Apostle commaundeth, then
thus to bedrowned in the filthie sin of whordome.
            
            
               Philo.
               That is the only salue and soueraine
remedy, which the lord ordained against whordome,M
                        •
                     riage, an antidotarie against Whordome.
that those who haue not the gift of continencis
might mary, and so kéep their vessels

vndefiled to the Lord. But notwithstāding, in
Ailgna there is ouer great libertye permitted
therin: for litle infants,Maring of infants in swadling cloths. in swadling clowts,
are often maried by their ambicious Parents
and frends, when they know neither good nor

                     •
                  uill, and this is the origene of much wickednesse,
& directlie against the word of God, and
examples of the primityue age. And besydes
this, you shall haue euery sawcy boy,Euery Boy snatcheth vp a Woman to wyfe.. of x.xiiij.
xvi. or xx. yeres of age, to catch vp a woman &
marie her, without any feare of God at all, or
respect had, either to her religion, wisdom, integritie
of lyfe, or any other vertue, or which
is more, without any respecte how they maye
lyue together with sufficient maintenance for
their callings and estat. No no, it maketh no
matter for these things, so he haue his pretie
pussie to huggle withall, it forceth not, for that
is the only thing he desireth. Than build they
vp a cotage, though but of elder poals, in euery
lane end, almost, wher they lyue as beggers al
their life. This filleth the land with such store
of poore people, that in short tyme (except some
caution be prouided to preuent the same) it is
like to growe to great pouertie and scarsnes,
which GOD forbid.
            
            
               Sp.
               I cānot sée how this geare shold be holpē?A restraint of mariage.
               
            
            
               Ph.
               What if a restraint were made, y• none
(except vppon speciall and vrgente causes)
should marie before they come to xx. or xxiiij.

yéeres, or at ye least, before they be .xiiij. or xviij
yeeres old, would not this make fewer beggers,
than now there are?
            
            
               Sp.
               But if this were established, thā should
we haue moe Bastards, and of the two, I had
rather we had many legittimats, than many
illegittimates.
            
            
               Philo.
               The occasion of begetting of many
                     •
                  
Bastards were soone cut of,How whordome may be suppressed. if the punishment
which either God his lawe doth allowe, or els
which good pollicy doth constitute, were aggrauated,
and executed vppon the Offenders.
               For the punishment appointed for whordom now
is so light,The punishment for whordome ouer remisse. that they estéeme not of it, thei
feare it not, they make but a iest of it. For
what great thing is it, to go ij. or thrée dayes
in a white shéete before the congregation, and
that somtymes not past an howre or two in a
day, hauing their vsnall garmēts vnderneth,
as commonly they haue? This impunitie
(i
                     •
                   respecte of condigne punishement, which
that vice requireth) doth rather animate and
imbolden them to the acte, than feare them
from it. In so much, as I haue heard so
                     •
                  e
miscreants impudently say, that he is but a

                     •
                  east, that for such white lyuered punishment
would abstaine from suche gallant pastyme:
but certen it is, that they who thinke it suche
sweet meate here, shall find the sawce sowre

and stiptick enough in Hell.
            
            
               Spud.
               What punishment would you haue
inflicted vppon such as commit this horrible
kinde of sinne?
            
            
               Philo.
               I would wish that the Man or
Woman who are certenlye knowen without
all scruple or doubte,What kind of punishmēt whordome ought to haue. to haue committed
the horryble fact of whordome, adulterie,
incest, or fornication, eyther should drinke a
full draught of Moyses cuppe, that is, 
                     •
                  ast
of present death▪ or els, if y• be thought too seuere
(for in euill, men will be more mercifull,
than the Author of mercie him selfe,
but in goodnesse, fare well mercy,) than
wold GOD they might be cauterized, and
seared with a hote yron on the chéeke, forehead,
or some other parte of their bodye that
might be séene, to the end the honest and chast
Christians might be discerned from the adulterous
Children of Sathan: But (alas)
this vice (with the rest) wanteth such due
punishement, as GOD his Word doth
commaunde to be executed ther vppon.
               The Magistrates wincke at it, or els as
looking thorowe their fingers, they see it,
and will not sée it.
               And therfore, the Lorde is forced too take
the sword into his owne hands, and to execute
punishment him selfe, because the Magistrates
will not.
               
                  For better proof wherof marke this strange &
fearful iudgment of god shewed vpon two adulterous
persōs there, euen ye last day in effect,
y• remēbrāce wherof is yet gréen in their heds.
               There was a man whose name was W.
Ratsurb, being certenly knowen to be a notorious
vserer (and yet pretending alway a singular
zeale to religion, so that he wold seldom
tymes go without a byble about him, but sée
the iudgements of God vpon them that will
take his word in their mouthes, and yet lyue
cleane contrarie, making the word of God a
cloke to couer their sinne and naughtynesse
withall) who vppon occasion of busines visiting
Lewedirb a place appointed for the correctiō
of such that be wicked lyuers, saw there
a famous whore, but a very proper Woman,
whō (as is said) he knew not, but whether he
did, or not, certē it is, that he procured her delyuery
from thence, bayled her, & hauing put
away his owne wife before, kept her in his
chamber, vsing her at his pleasure. Whylest
these two mēbers of ye deuil were playing the
vile Sodomits together in his chamber, & hauing
a litle pan of coles before them wherin
was a very litle fire, it pleased GOD euen
in his wrath, to strike these two persons dead
in a moment. The Woman falling ouer the
pan of coles, was burned that all her bowels
gushed out, the man was founde lying by, his

cloths in some partes being scorched and burned,
& some partes of his body also. But which
is most wonderfull, his arme was burned to
the very boone, his shirte sleeue, and dublet, not
once perished, nor tutched with the fire. Wherby
may be thought & not without great probabilitie
of truth, that it was euē the fire of God
his wrath from Heauen, and not any natural
fire from the earth. And in this wonderfull, &
fearfull maner weare these cupple founde:
which God graunt may be a documēt to all ye
heare or read the same, to avoyde the like offence,
and to all Magistrates, an Example to
see the same punished with more seueritie, to
the glorie of God, and their owne discharge.
               But so farre are some, from suffering condigne
punishment for this horrible sinne, that
they get good maintenance with practising the
same. For shall you not haue some, yea many
thousands, that liue vppō nothing els, and yet
go clothed Gentlewomenlike, both in their
silks and otherwyse, with their fingers clogged
with rings, their wrists with bracelets, &
Iewels, and their purses full of gold and siluer?
And here of they make no conscience, so
their Husbands know it not. Or if they doo,
some are such peasants, and such maycocks,
that either they will not, or (which is truer)
they dare not reproue them for it. But & if the
Husband once reproue them for their misdemeanour,

than they cōspire his death, by some
meane or other. And all this commeth to
passe, because the punishment therof is no extremer,
as it ought to be. And some both Gentlemen
and others (wherof some I know)
are so nusled herein, that hauing put awaye
their owne wyues, do kéepe whores openly,
without any great punishment for it, and hauing
be
                     •
                  ne conuented before the magistery,
and there béene deposed vppon a booke to put
away their whores, haue put them foorth
at one doore, and taken them in at the other.
               And thus they dally in their othes with the
Lord, and stoppe the course of the lawe, with
rubrum argentum, wherof they haue store to
bestowe vppō such wickednesse, but haue not
a mite to giue towards any good purpose.
               Wherfore, in the name of GOD, let all
men that haue put away their honest wyues
be forced to take them again, and abandon all
whores, or els to taste of the law. And let all
whores, be cut of with the sword of right iudgement.
For, as long as this immunitie and
impunitie is permitted amongest vs, let vs
neuer looke to please GOD, but rather pro
                  
                     •
                  oke
his heuie iudgements against vs. And
the reason is, for that there is not sinne in all
the World, but these whores, and whoremaisters
will willingly attempt, and atcheiue,
for the inioying of their whordome?
               
                  And Hell, destruction, and death euerlasting
is the guerdon therof, and yet men cannot be
aware of it. The Lord remooue it from all his
Children, and present them blameles before
his tribunall seate, without spotte, or wrincle
at that great day of the Lord.
            
            
               Spud.
               What memorable thing els haue you
séen there frequented▪ For séeing you haue begun,
in parte, I pray you describe the whole?
            
         
         
            Gluttonie and
drunkennesse in Ailg.
            
               Philo.
               I Haue séene that which gréeueth mée to report.
The People there are marueilously
giuen to daintie fare, gluttonye, bellichéer,
& many also to drunkennesse, & gourmandice.Daintie fare, gluttony and gourmandice vsed in Ailg.
               
            
            
               Sp.
               That is a manifest argumēt of good hospitality,
which both is cōmended in y• word of
God, & which▪ I know you wil not reprehēde.
            
            
               Ph.
               Godly hospitalitieGodly hospitalitie to be commended. is a thing in no wis
                     •
                  
worthy of reprehensiō, but rather of great cō
                  mendatiō,
for many haue receiued Angels into
their houses, at vnawar
                     •
                  s, by vsing y• same,
as Abraham, Lot, Tobras, & many others. Yet
if hospitality flow ouer into superfluitie & riotous
excesse, it is not tolerable: for now adaies
if ye table be not couered frō the one end to y• other
as thick as one dish can stād by another,

with delicat meats of sundry sorts, one cleane
different from an other,Varietie of dishes, and meats, with their curious sawces. and to euery dish a
s
                     •
                  uerall sawce appropriat to his kinde, it is
thought there vnworthye y• name of a dinner.
Yea so many dishes shal you haue posteruing
the table at once, as the insaciablest Helluo,
the deuouringest glutton, or the gréediest cormorant
that is, can scarse eat of euery one
a litle. And these many shall you haue at the
first course,Excesse of meats. as many at the second, and perad
                  
                     •
                  entu
                     •
                  e,
moe at the third, besydes other swéet

                     〈◊〉
                  , and delicat 
                     〈◊〉
                  , of spiceries,
and I cannot tell what. And to these
dainties, all kind of wynes are not wanting,
you may be sure. Oh what nisitie is this?
what vanitie▪ excesse, ryot, and superfluitie is
heare? Oh▪ farewell former world? For I
haue heard my Father say,The austerity and Godly simplicity of the former World in meats, and drinke
                        •
                     . y• in his dayes, one
dish, or two of good wholsome meate was
thought sufficient, for a man of great worship
to dyne withall, and if they had thrée or four
kinds, it was reputed a sumptuous feast. A
good péece of beef was thought thā, good meat,
and able for the best, but 
                     •
                  ow, it is thought too
grosse: for their tender stomacks are not able
to disgest such crude and harsh meats: For if
they shold (their stomacks being so que
                     •
                  sie as
they be,Nice, tender stomacks. and not able to concoct it) they should
but euacuat the same againe, as other filthie
excrements, their bodies receiuing no noorishment

therby, or els they should lye stincking
in their stomacks, as dirte in a filthie sinck or
pryuie. If this be so, I marueile how oure
fore-Fathers lyued,The faraginie or rough fare of our Fore-fathers. who eat litle els, but cold
meats, grosse and hard of disgesture? Yea, the
most of them fead vppon graine, corne, roots,
pulse, herbes, wé
                     •
                  ds, and such other baggage,
and yet liued longer then wée, helthfuller then
we, were of better complection then we, and
much stronger then we in euerie respect: wherfore
I cannot perswade my self otherwise,
but that our nicenes and curiousnes in dyet,
hath altered our nature, distempered our bodies,Our nice fare hath altered our bodies and chaunged our nature.
and made vs more subiect to millions of
discrasies and diseases, then euer weare our
Forefathers subiect vnto, and consequently
of shorter life then they.
            
            
               Spud.
               They wil aske you again, wherfore
god made such varietie of meats, but to be eaten
of men, what answere giue you to that?
            
            
               Philo.
               The Lord our God ordained indéede,
the vse of meat and drinks for man to sustain
the fraile, caduke and brittle estate of his mortall
body withall for a time.Medietie to be obserued in meats. But he gaue it
him not to delight and wallow therin continually,
for as the olde Adage saith, Non viuendum
vt edamus, sed edendum vt viuamus.
Wée must not liue to eat, but wée must eat to
liue, wée must not swill and ingurgitate our
stomacks so ful, as no more can be crammed

in. The Lord willed that they should be ordinarie
meanes to preserue the state of our bodyes
a time whilste we liue, and soiourne in
this vaste wildernes of the worlde, but not
that they should be instruments of destuction
to vs bothe of body and soule.When meats and drinks are Instruments of destruction vnto vs. And truely they
are no lesse, when they are takē immoderatly
without the feare of God. And dooth not the
impletion and sacietie of meates and drinks
prouoke lust, as, Hiero saith, Venter Mero estuans,
spumat in libidinem, the belly enflamed
with wine, bursteth foorth into lust. Doth
not lust bring foorth sinne,Ge. 24. and sin bring foorth
death? The Childre
                     •
                   of Isr
                        •
                     el, giuing them
selues to delicat 
                     〈◊〉
                   & gluttony, fel to Idolatrie,

                     〈◊〉
                   & 
                     〈◊〉
                  , worshipping stocks
stones and deuils in-sted of the liuing God.
               The 
                     •
                  onnes of 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   the Priest, giuing themselues
to daintie 
                     〈◊〉
                   & belly-chéere,1. Reg. 2. fell into
such 
                     〈◊〉
                  , as the Lord sl
                     •
                  w them all, & their father
also, for that he chastised them not for the
same▪ The Children of blessed Iob in midst
of all their banquetings & ryot, were slain by
the lord, the whole house falling vpon them,
and destroying them most piti
                     •
                  ully. Bal
                        •
                     hasar,
king of the Chaldeans,
                  Daniel. 5. in midst of all his
good chéer,Verse. 5. saw a hand, writing vpon the wall
these woords, mene techel upha
                        •
                     sin: signifiing
y• his kingdōe should be taken from him, and
so it was, and he slain the same night by the

hand of y• lord. The rich glutton in the Gospel,
for his riotous feastings & proposterous liuing
was cōdemned to ye fire of hel.Luc. 16. Our Father
Adam with all his of-spring (to the end
or ye world) was cōdemned to hel-fire, for taking
one apple to satisfie his glotonus desire
withall.Mat. 4. Gluttony was one of the chiefest canons,
wherwith the deuil assa
                     •
                  led Christe,
thinking therby to batter his kingdome & to
win the féeld for euer, yet not withstanding,
ye greeuousnes héerof, the same is thought to be
a coutenāce, & a great credit to a mā in Ailg.
But true hospitality consisteth not in many
dishes nor in sundry sorts of meats (the substance
wherof is chaunged almoste into accidents
thorow their curious cookries, & which
doo help to rot y• bodies & shorten their daies.
but rather in giuing liberally to the poor,Wherin hospitalitie consisteth. and
indigent members of Iesus Christe, helping
them to meat, drink, lodging, clothing & such
other necessaries wherof they stand in néed.
               But such is their hospitality y• the poor haue ye
least part of it: you shal haue 20. 40. 60, yea, a
C.li. spent in some one house in bāqueting &
festing, yet y• poor shall haue litle or nothing,The small leef of the poore. if
they haue any thing, it is but ye refuge meat,
scraps & patrings, such as a dog would scarse
eat sōtimes, & wel if they can get y• too: insted
wherof, not a few haue whipping chéerto feed
thē withall: it is coūted but a smal matter for

a man that can scarslie dispend fortie pound
by the yéer, to bestow against one time, ten or
twentie pound therof in spices. And truely so
long & so gréeuously hath this excesse of gluttonie
and daintie fare su
                     •
                  ffeted in Ailgna,
as I feare mée, it will sp
                     •
                  e out many of his
Maisters ou
                     •
                   of dores before it be long. But
as some be ouer largeous, so other some are
spare enough, for when any meat is stirringLocking vp of Gates whemeat is stirring.
then lock they vp their gates, that no man
may come in. An-other sorte haue so many
houses, that they visit them once in vij. yeer,
many Chimnies, but little smoke, faire houses,
but small hospitalitie. And to be plaine,
there are three cankers which in proc
                     •
                  sse of
time wil eat vp the whole common Welth,
if spéedy reformatiō be not had, namely,Three deuouring Cankers daintie
Fare, gorgious Buildings, and sumptuous
Apparel, which thrée Abuses, especially,
yet not without their cosin germanes doo florish
there. God remooue them thence for his
Christes sake.
               
            
            
               Spud.
               I had thought that dainty fare & good
chéer had both noorished ye body perfectly, and
also prolōged life, & dooth it not so think you?
            
            
               Philo.
               Experience,Who more subiect to infirmit
                        •
                     es then they that fare best. as my former intimations
you may gather, teacheth clean contrary:
for who is sicklier thē they, that fare deliciously
euery day? who is corrupter? who bel
                     •
                  heth
more, who looketh wursse, who is weaker,

and féebler then they? who hath more filthie
colour, flegme and putrifaction (repleat with
grosse humors) then they? and to be bréef,
who dyeth sooner then they? Doo wée not see
the poor man that eateth brown bread (wherof
some is made of Rye, barlie, peason, beans
oates and such other grosse graines) & drinketh
small drink, yea sometimes water, feedeth
vpon milk, butter and chéese, (I say) doo wee
not see such a one, helthfuller, stronger and
longer liuing then the other, that fare daintily
euery day? And how should it be otherwise?
for wil not the eating of diuers and sundry
kindes of meats of diuers operations and
qualities (at one meale) engender distemperance
in the body? And the body distempered,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
wil it not fall into sundry deseases? one meat
is of hard disgesture, another of light, & whilst
the meate of hard disgesture is in concocti
                     •
                  g
the other meat of light disgesture dooth putrifie
and stink, & this is the very mother of all
diseases: one is of this qualitie, another of y•,
one of this operatiō, another of that, one kind
of meat is good for this thing, another is naught
for that. Then how can all these contrarieties
& discripancies agrée togither in one
body at one & the same time? wil not one c
                     •
                  ntrary
impugne his contrary? one enemy resist
an other; Then what wiseman is he that wil
receiue allthese enemies into the castle of his

body at one time? Doo we not se by experiēc
                     •
                  
that they y• giue thēselues to dainty fare,The spedy 
                        •
                     ecay of those 
                        •
                     hat geue thē 
                     
                        •
                     elues to 
                        •
                     aintie fare. and
swéet meats, are neuer in helth? dooth not their
sight wax dim, their eares hard of hering, their
teeth rot & fall out? dooth not their breth stink,
their stomack belch foorth filthy humors, and
their memory decay? doo not their spirits and
sences becōe heuie & dul by reason of exhalations
& impure vapors which rise vp in their
gingered brests & spiced stomacks: & sumyng
vp to ye hed they mortifie ye vitall spirits & intellectiue
powers? dooth not ye whole body become
pursie & corpulent, yea somtimes decrepit
therwith & ful of all filthy corruptiō. The
Lord keep his chosen from the tasting therof.
               
            
            
               Sp.
               You spake of dr
                     •
                  kēnes, what say you of y•?
            
            
               Phi.
               I say, ye it is a horrible vice & too too much
vsed in Ail. Euery cūtrey, citie, towne, villaged
& other, hath abundāce of alehouses, taue
                     •
                  ns
& I
                     •
                  nes, which are so fraughted with
mault-wormes night & day, that you would
wunder to se them. You shal
                     •
                  haue them there
sitting at ye wine, and goodale all the day long,
yea all the night too, peraduenture a whole
wéek togither,The beastly vice of drunknees requen
                     
                        •
                     ed in Ailg so long as any money is left,
swilling, gulling & carowsing from one to an
other, til neuer a one can speak a redy woord.
Then when wt the spirit of the buttery they
are thus possess
                     •
                  d, a world it is to consider
t
                     •
                  eir gestures & dem
                     •
                  nors, how they stut and
stāmer, stagger & réele too & fro, like madmen,

some vomiting spewing & disgorging their filthie
stomacks, other some (Honor sit auribus)
piss
                     •
                  ng vnder the boord as they sit, & which is
most horrible, some fall to swering, cursing &

                     •
                  āning,The spirite of the buttery, is drunknes, and excesse. interlacing their spéeches we curious
tearms of blasphemie to ye great dishonour of
God and offence of the godly eares present.
            
            
               Sp.
               But they wil say y• god ordained wines &
strong drinks to chéer y• hart, & to sustain the
body therfore it is lawful to vse thē to ye end.The Iothsome qualities of those that be drunke.
               
            
            
               Phi.
               Meats (moderatly taken) corroborate ye
body, re
                     •
                  resh ye arteries, & reuiue the spirits,
making them apier euery member to doo his
office as god hath appointed: but being immoderatly
takē (as cōmonly they be) they are instrumēts
to damnatiō to ye abusers of ye same,
& noorish not ye body but corrupt it rather, & casteth
it into a world of deseases: And a man
once drunk with wine or strong drink, rather
resembleth a brute beaste,The transsiguration of those that 
                        〈◊〉
                      drunke. then a christian
man: for doo not his eies begin to stare & to
be red, fiery & blered, blubbering 
                     •
                  oorth seas of
teares? dooth he not frothe & fome at the mouth
like a bore? dooth not his tung faulter & stāmer
in his mouth? dooth not his hed séeme as heuie
as a milstone, he not being able to bear it vp?
Are not his wits & spirits as it were drowued?
Is not his vnderstanding altogher decayed?
doo not his hands & all his body quiuer
& shake as it were with a quotidiā
                   feuer? Besides
these, it cast
                     •
                  th him into adropsie or pluresie

nothing so soon, it inféebleth the sinewes,
it weakneth y• natural strength, it corrupteth
the blood,The discommodities of drunkennes. it dissolueth ye whole man at ye lēgth,
and finally maketh him forgetful of him self
altogither, so that what be dooth being drunk
he remembreth not being sober. The Drunkard
in his drunkennes killeth his fréend, reuileth
his louer, discloseth secrets and regardeth
no man: he either expelleth all feare of
god out of his minde, all looue of his fréends &
kinsfolkes, all remembrance of honestie, ciuilitie
& humanitie: so that I will not feare to
call drunkerds beasts, and no men, and much
wursse then beasts,Drunkerds wursse then Beasts. for beasts neuer excéed in
such kind of excesse, or superfluitie, but alway
modum adhibent appetitum, they measure
their appetites by the rule of necessitie, which
would God wee would doo.
               
            
            
               Spud.
               Séeing it is so great an offence before
God, I pray you show me some testimonies
of the holy Scripture against it, for whatsoeuer
is euil, ye woord of God I doubt not reproueth
the same.
            
            
               Philo.
               It séemeth you haue not read ye holy
fcripture very much, for if you had, you should
haue found it not only spoke against, but all
                     •
                  
throwē down euen to hel, for proof whereof of
infinit places, I wil recite a few. The Prophet
Esaias thundereth out against it,Esais. 5. saying,
ve qui consurgitis mane ad ebrietatē sectandā
                  
               
               
                  Wo be to them that ryse earlie to followe
drunkennesse,Testimonies against drunkennesse, out of the word of GOD. wallowing therein, from morning
to night, vntill they be set on fire with
wyne & strong drinke. Therfore gapeth heil, &

                     •
                  peneth her mouth wyde, that the glory, multitude,
and welth of them that delight therin,
may go downe into it, saith the Prophet.
               The Prophet Hoseas
                  Hoseas. c. 4. saith, fornicatio, vinū,
& mustum auferunt animum, Whordome,
wyne & strong drinke infatuat ye heart of mā.
               The Prophet Ioel,
                  Ioel. 1. biddeth all Drunkards
awake, saying, wéepe and howle you winebi
                     •
                  
                  bers,
for the wickednesse of destruction that
shall fall vppon you.
               The Prophet Habacuck,
                  Habacuck. 2. soundeth a most
dreadfull alarme, not only to all Drunkards,
but also to all that make them drunken saying:
wo be to him that geueth his Neighbour
drinke, till he be drunke, that thou mayst sée
his priuities. Salomon saith,Prouerb. c. 
                        ••
                     . wyne maketh
a Man to be scornfull, and strong drinke maketh
a Man vnquiet, who so taketh pleasure
in it, shall not be wise. In an other place, kéep
not companie with wynebibbers, and riotous
Persons, for such as be Drunkards shal come
to beggerie. In the xxiij. of his ProuerbesProuerb. 23. he
saith. To whome is woo? To whome is sorow?
to whome is strife? to whome is murmuring?
to whome are woūds without cause?
and to whome are red eyes? Euen to thē that

tarie longe at the wyne, to them that go, and
séek mixt wyne. And againe: Looke not thou
vppon the wyne when it is red, and when it
sheweth his colour in the cup or gooth downe
pleasantlie, for in the end, it will bite like a
serpent, and hurt like a Cockatrise,Prouerb. 31. or Basilicock,
which slay or kill men with the poison of
their sighte. Again, it is not for Kings to drinke
wyne, nor for Princes to drinke strong
drinke.Luc. 21. Our Sauiour Christ in the gospell of
of S. Luke biddeth vs take héed that we be not
ouercome with surffeting and drunknes and
cares of this lyfe, least the day of the Lorde
come vppon vs vnawares.
               
                  Paule to the Ephesians
                  Ephe. 5. biddeth beware that
we be not drūk with wine, wherin is excesse,
but to be filled with ye spirit. The same apostle
in an other place, saith, y• neither whoremōger
adulterer, Drunkard, glutton, ryotous person,
nor such like, shal euer enter into ye kingdome
of Heauen. By these few places out of many,
you may sée the inormitie of this vice, which
is so much euery where frequented.
            
            
               Spud.
               Let me intreate you to shew me some
examples withall, wherby I may see, what
euill it hath done in al ages?
            
            
               Philo.
               
                  Gene. 19. Drunknes caused Lot to commit
most shamefull incest with his owne two
Daughters, who got them both with Child,

he not perceuing it, neither when they lay
downe, nor when they rose vp. See how
drunkennesseExamples against drunkennesse. assotteth a man, depriuing him
of all sence, reason and vnderstanding.
               Drunkennesse caused Noah to lye with his
priuities bare in his Tabernacle, in suche
beastlie sorte, as his wicked Sonne Cham iested
and 
                     •
                  coffed at the same.
               Thorow drunkennesse, Holophernes, that
great and inuincible Monarche of the Assyrians,
was ouercome by a Woman, hauing
his head cut from his shoulders with a fauchone.
Thorow drunkennesse,Luc. 16. King Herode
was brought to suche ydiocie, and foolishe
dotage, that he caused the head of good Ihon
Baptist, to be cut of, to satis
                     •
                  ie the request of a
dauncing strumpet.Luc. 16. That riche Epulo of
whom Luke maketh mention, was for his
drunkennesse, and ryotous excesse condemned
to the fire of Hel for euer, with many moe examples,
which for shortnes I omit. Now seeing
than that drunkēnesse is both offensiue to
GOD, and bringeth such euil
                     •
                  s in this lyfe
present, let vs in the name of GOD auoyde
it, as a most wicked thing, and prenicious
euill. For euery Dr
                     •
                  nkard is so farre estranged
from himselfe,How farre Drunkards are estranged from themselues. that as one in an extasie
of mind, or rather in a playne Phrensie,
he maye not be said to be, sui animi compos,
or a man of sounde wit, but rather a

very Bedlem, or muche worse, no Christian,
but an Antichristian, no mēber of Christ Iesus,
but an impe of Sathā, and a lymme of the
Deuill. Wherfore, in the name of God, let
vs auoyd al excesse, imbrace temperancie, and
sobrietie, & receiue so much meats and drinks
as may satisfie nature, not the insaciat appetits
of our fleshly desires. Knowing that except
the Lord blesse our meats and drinks within
our bodyes, and giue them power & strength
to nourish and féede the same,Wh
                        •
                     t if God blesse not our meats. and our bodyes
their naturall powers, euery mēber to doo his
office, and dutie, our meates shall lye in our
stomacks stincking, smelling, and rotting like
filthie carion in a lothsom sinck. So farre of
ought we to be from abusing the good creaturs
of God, by ryot, drunknesse, or excesse, that we
ought neuer to take morsell of bread, nor sope
of drinke, without humble thankes to ye Lord
for the same. For we neuer read, that our Sauiour
Christ euer eat,Geuing of thanks befor meat, & after. or dranke, but he gaue
thankes (or as we call it, said grace) both before
the receipt therof, and after. This néeded
he not to haue done in respect of himselfe, but
for our erudition & learning, according to this
saying. omnis Christi actio, nostrà est instructio.
Euery action of our Sauiour Christe is
our example and instructiō, to follow as néere
as we are able. And thus much of drūkenesse,
which god graūt may euery wher be auoided.
            
            
               
               Spud.
               Shew mée I pray you ye state of that
Cuntrey a
                     •
                  litle further: is it a welthie Countrey
with in it selfe, or otherwyse poore and
bare?
            
            
               Philo.
               It is a most famous Yland, a fertile
Cuntrey,Ailgra a famous Yland. & abounding with all maner of store
both of riches, treasure, & all things els whatsoeuer,
but as it is a welthie and riche Countrey,
so are the inhabitaunts from the highest,
to the lowest, from the priest, to the populare
sorte, euen all in generall, wonderfully inclyned
to couetousnes, and ambitiō, which thing,
whilest they follow, they cā neuer be satisfied:
for, erescit amor nummi, quantū ipsa pecunia
crescit. The loue of mony, doth by so much the
more increase, by how much more ye monie it
selfe doth increase: and ye nature of a couetous
man is such,The nature of a couetou
                        •
                      man. that tam deest quod habet, quàm
quod non habet: as well that thing which he
hath, as y• which he hath not, is wanting vnto
him. A couetouse man may wel be compared
to Hell, which euer gapeth and yawneth for
more, and is neuer content with inough. For
right as Hell euer hunteth af
                     •
                  er more, so a couetous
mā drowned in the quagmire,The insaciable desi
                        •
                     e of a couetouse man. or plash
of auarice and ambition, hauing his summam
voluptatem reposed in momentaine riches, is
neuer content with inough, but still thirsteth
for more, much like to a mā sicke of the ague,
who the more he drinketh, the more he thurteth:

the more he thursteth, the more he drinketh:
the more he drinketh, y• mor
                     •
                   his disease
increaseth: Therfore I hould it true, which is
writ, bursa auari os est diaboli the powch of a
rich couetous Man,The purse of a riche Man. is the mouth of the deuill,
which euer is open to receiue, but alway shut
to giue.
            
            
               Spud.
               But they will easily wipe away this
blot, namely in saying, are we not boūd to prouyde
for our selues, our wyues, our children &
famelie▪ Doth not the Apostle hold him for an
infidell and a deneger of the faith, who prouydeth
not for his Wyfe and Family? Is it not
good to lay vpsomthing against a stormie day?
wherfore, they wil rather déeme thēselues good
husbāds, than couetous or ambicious persons.
            
            
               Philo.
               Euery Christen Mā is bound in cō
                  science
before God,How farre euery Man is boūd to prouyde for his Familie. to prouide for their houshould
& Family, but yet so as his immoderat
care surpasse not the bands, nor yet transcend
the limits of true Godlynes His chiefest trust
& care is to rest onely in the Lord, who giueth
liberally to euery one y• asketh of him in verity
& truth, & reprocheth no mā, & withall he is
to vse such ordinarie meanes, as God hath appointed▪
to y• performaunce of ye same. But so
farre frō couetousnes & frō immoderate care
wold ye Lord haue vs,Immoderate care for riches reproued. y• we ought not this day
to care for to morow, for (saith he) sufficient to
ye day, is the trauail of the same. After all these

things (with a distrustfull, & inordinat care) do
the heathen séek, who know not God, saith our
Sauiour christ, but be you not like to thē. And
yet I say, as we are not to distrust the prouidence
of God, or despaire for any thing, so are
we not to presume, nor yet to tempt the Lord
our God, but to vse such secundary and instrumental
meanes, as he hath commaunded and
appointed to y• end & purpose, to get our owne
lyuing & maintenance withall. But this people
leauing these Godly meanes, do all runne
headlōg to couetousnes & ambition, attēpting
all waies, & assaying al meanes possible to exaggerat
& heap vp riches, ye thick clay of damnatiō
to thēselues for euer. So (likwise) Lād-lords
make marchandise of their pore tenāts,Land-Lords racke their tenantes.
racking their rents, raising their fines & incō
                  mes,
& setting thē so straitely vppō ye tēter hookes,
as no man cā lyue on them. Besides y•, as
though this pillage & pollage, were not rapacious
enough, they take in,Inclosing of common
                        •
                      from the Poore. and inclose commons,
moores, heaths, and other common pastures,
wher out the poore commonaltie were
wont to haue all their forrage and féeding for
their cattell, & (which is more) corne for them
selues to lyue vppon: all which are now in
most places taken from them, by these greedye
Puttockes, to the great impouerishing
and vtter beggering of whole townes and
parishes, whose tragicall cries and incessant

clamors haue long since, pearced the Skyes,
and presented them selues before the Maiesty
of God, saying: how long Lord, how long wilt
thou deferre, to reuenge this villanie of thy
poore Sainctts, and vnworthie members vppon
the earth? Take héed therfore you riche
men, that poll and pill the poore, for the bloud
of as manye as miscarie any maner of way,
thorow your iniurious exactions, sinister oppressions,
and indirect dealings shall be powred
vppon your heads at the great daye of the
Lord, Cursed is he (saith our Sauiour Christ)
that offendeth one of these litle ones, it were
better that a milstone were hāged about his
neck,Iniurie to Christ his members, is iniury to Ch
                        ••
                     st. & he cast into ye middest of the sea. Christ
so entierely loueth his poore members vppon
earth, that he imputeth the contumely which
is done to anie one of them, to be done to himselfe,
and will reuenge it, as done to himselfe:
wherfor, GOD giue them grace to lay open
their inclosures againe, to let fall their rents,
fines, incommes and other impositions, wherby
GOD is offended, their poore Brethren
beggered, & I feare mée, ye whole realme will
be brought to vtter ruine & decay, if this mischiefe
be not met withall,Inclos
                        •
                     res. and inco
                     •
                  
                  ̄tred with
verie shortlie. For these inclosures be the causes,
why rich men, eat vp poore men, as beasts
doo eat grasse. These I say are the Caterpillers,
and deuouring locustes that massacre the

poore, & eat vp ye whole realme to ye destruction
of the same: The Lord remooue them.
               
               Upon the other side, the Lawyers they goe
rufling in their silks, veluets and chaines of
Gold, they build gorgeous howses,Lawyers rufling io poore Mens riches. sumptuous
edefices, and stately turrets: they kéep a
port like mightie potētates, they haue bands
and retinewes of men attendant vppon them
daylie, they purchase castels & towers, Lands
and Lordships, and what not? And all vppon
the polling and pilling of the poore commons.
               They haue so good consciences, that all is
fish, that comes to the net, thei refuse nothing
that is offred, and what they do for it in preferring
their Poore clients cause, the Lorde
knoweth, and one day they shall finde it: If
you haue argent, or rather rubrum vnguentum,
I dare not say Gold, but red oyntment,
to grease them in the fist withall,Oyntment to greese lawiers in the fist withall. than your
sute shall want no furtherance, but if this be
wanting, thā farewel clyent, he may go shooe
the goose for any good successe he is like to
haue of his matter: without this, sheriffes &
Officers wil returne writs with a tarde venit,
or with a non est inuentus, smally to the
poore mās profit. So long as any of this ointmēt
is dropping, they wil beare him in hand,
his matter is good and iust, & all to kéep him
in vre, till all be gon, and than will they tell
him his matter is naught: and if one aske thē
                  
why they tould not their cliēts so in y• beginning:
they will answere, I knew not so much
at the first,The pretēsed excuse of L
                        •
                     wers, when their cliants haue loost their plees. ye fault is in himselfe, he tould me ye
best, but not the worst: he shewed mee not this
euidence & that euidente, this president, and y•
presi
                     •
                  ent, turning al the fault vpō ye suggester
wheras ye whole fault indeed is in himselfe,
as his own conscience cā beare him witnesse:
In presence of their clients, they will be so
earnest one with another,The slaightie practises of lawers. as one (that knew
not their slaightes, wold thinke they would
go together by the eares) this is to draw on
their cliēts withal (but immediatly after their
clients being gon, they la
                     •
                  gh in their sléeues,
to see how pretily they fetch in such 
                     〈◊〉
                  
of money, and y• vnder the pretence of equitie,
and iustice. But though thei cā for at
                     ••
                  e (prestigiatorum
insta
                        •
                     ) like cūning deceiuers, cast
a mist before ye blind world, yet the Lord who
séeth (suborned by none) y• secrets of all harts
shall make them manifest to al the world,The fraudulent dealing of marchant Men. and
reward them according to their 
                     〈◊〉
                  . The
marchāt mē by their marting, chaffering and
changing, by their counterfait balances & vntrue
waights, and by their surprising of their
wares, heap vp infinit treasures. The ArtificerArtificers.
& Occupyers, euen all in generall, will not

                     •
                  ell their wares for no reasonable price, but
will sweare & teare pittifully, y• such a thing
cost thē so much, & such a thing so much, wheras

they swear as false, as the lyuing Lord is
true: But one day let them be sure y• the Lord
(who saith, thou shalt not sweare at all,
nor deceiue thy Brother in bargaining) will
reuenge this villanie done to his Maiestie.Great dearth in plenty of all things.
               
               Into such a ruinous estat hath couetousnes
now brought that Land, that in plentie of all
things, there is great scarsitie and dearth of
all thinges. So, that, that which might
haue been bought heretofor within this twentie,
or fourtie Yéers, for twentie shillings, is
now worth twentie nobles, or xx. pound. That
which thā was worth twentie pound, is now
worth a .C. pound, and more: Wherby the
rich Men haue so balaunced their chests with
Gold and siluer, as they cra
                     •
                  ke againe. And,
to such excesse is this couetousnes growne, as
euery one y• hath money will not stick to take
his neighbors house,Taking of howses ouer Mens head
                        •
                     . ouer his head, long before
his yéers be expired: Wherthorow many a
poore man, with his wyfe, childrē, & whole famelie,
are forced to begge their bread all their
dayes after. Another sorte who flow in welth,
if a poore mā haue eyther house or Land, they
will neuer rest vntill they haue purchased it,
giuing him not the thirde parte, of that it is
worth. Besides all this, so desperately giuen
are many,The desperat desire of Men to get money that for the acquiring of siluer
and Gold, they will not sicke to imbrew their
hands, and both their armes in y• blood of their

owne Patents and Fréends most vnnaturally.
Other some will not make any conscience,
to sweare and forsweare themselues
for euer to lye, dissemble and deceiue the déerest
frends they haue in the world. Therfore
the heathen Poët Virgill said very well: O
sacra auri fames, quid non, mortalia pectora
cogis: Oh cursed desire of gold, what mischief
is it, but thou forcest Man to attempt it, for
y• loue of thée? This immoderat thirst of Gold
& monie,Many brought to rufull end thorow meanes of Gold and siluer. bringeth an infinit nūber to shameful
end: some, as homicides, for murthering &
killing: some as latrones, for robbing & stealing:
some for one thing, some for another: So
that surely I think, 
                     maior est numerus Ho
                        
                           •
                        minum,
quos dira auaritiae pestis absorpsit,
quam quos gladius vel ensis per
                           •
                        orauit:
                   the
number of those whom the pestilence of auarice
hath swallowed vp, is greatter, than the
nūber of those whom the sword hath destroid:
the Lord asswage the heat hereof with ye oyle
of his grace, if it be his good pleasure and wil.
            
            
               Spud.
               If I might be so bold, I wold request
you to shew me out of the word of god, where
this so detestable a vice is reproued?
            
            
               Philo.
               Our Sauiour Christ Iesus,Math. 6. the Archdoctor
of all truth in his Euangely,Testimonies out of the word of God against couetousnes. the sixt of
Mathew, saith: Be not carefull for to morow
day, for the morow shall care for it selfe.
               Againe, be not carfull for Apparell, what

you shall put on, nor for meat what you shall
eat, but séeke you the Kingdome of Heauen, &
the righteousnes therof, and all these things
shal be giuen vnto you. He charged his Disciples
to be so farre from couetousnes,Luc. 6. as not to
cary two coates with them in their iorneys,Math. ix.
nor yet any money in their purses. He tould
his Disciples another time, stryuing which of
them should be y• greattest, that he who wold
be the greattest, must condescend to be seruāt
of all. When the people wold haue aduaūced
him to haue béene King, he refused it, and hid
him self: He telleth vs, we cannot serue two
Maisters, God & Mammon: he biddeth vs not
to set our minds vppō couetousnes, inferring
that wher our riches be, there will our harts
be also. He saith, it is harder for a rich Man
(that is, for a Man, whose trust is in riches) to
enter into the Kingdome of God, than for a
Camell to go thorow the eye of a néedle. The
Apostle biddeth vs if we haue meat & drinke
and clothing, to be centent,1. Timo. v
                        •
                     . for they that will
be rich (saith he) fall into diuerse temptations
and snares of the Deuill, which drowne Men
in perditiō.Psalm. 39. 
                  Dauid saith, Man disquieteth him
selfe in vaine, heaping vp riches, & cannot tell
who shall possesse them:Prouerb. 
                        •
                     . 
                  Salom. cōpareth a couetous
man, to him ye murthereth & sheadeth
innocent bloud.Proue. xxvii. Againe, Hell and destruction
are neuer ful, so the eyes of Men can neuer be

satisfied. The Apostle S. Paule, saith, neither
Whormōgers, Adulterers, nor couetous persons,
nor Extortioners shal euer enter into the
Kingdom of Heauen. And saith further, y• the
loue of monie is ye root of al euil.Mat. 5. Christ, biddeth
vs be liberal,Luc. 6. & lend to them that haue néed, not
looking for any restitutiō again, & neuer to turn
our face away frō any poore mā, & thā ye face of
the Lord shall not be turned away frō vs. By
these few places it is manifest how farre frō al
couetousnes ye lord wold haue al cristiās to be.
            
            
               Spud.
               Be their any examples in scriptures
to shew foorth the punishmentes of the same,
inflicted vpon the Offenders therin?
            
            
               Philo.
               The Scripture is full of such fearful
examples,The punishmen of couetousnes shewed by examples. of the iust iudgements of God powred
vpon thē that haue offended herein. Wherof
I will recite three or four, for the satisfying
of your Godly mind. Adam, was cast out of
Paradice for coueting that fruit, which was
inhibited him to eat. Giese, the Seruant of Elizeus
ye Prophet,4. Reg. 5. was smitten with an incurable
leprosie, for y• he to satisfie his couetous
desire, exacted gold, siluer, & riche garments of
Naamā
                   ye K. of Siria his seruant. Balaam was
reproued of his asse,Num. 22. for his couetousnes in going
to curse ye Children of Israel, at the request
of K. Balac, who promised him aboundance of
gold & siluer so to doo. Achab y• K. for couetousnes
to haue pore Naboth his viniard slew him

and dyed after himselfe, with all his progeny,
a shameful death. The Sōnes of Samuel were
for their infaciable couetousnes,Sa. viii. deteined frō
euer inioying their Fathers kingdome. Iudas
for couetousnes of mony sould the Sauiour of
the world, and betrayed him to the Iewes, but
afterward dyed a miserable death, his bellye
bursting & his bowels gushing out. Ananias &
Saphira his wi
                     •
                  e,Act. v. for couetousnes, in cōcealing
part of y• price of ther lāds frō y• apostles, were
both slain, & died a fearful death. Achā
                   was stoned
to death by y• lord his cōmandemēt for his
couetousnes in stealing gold, siluer, & Iewels,
at the sacking of Iericho, & al his goods were
burned presently. Thus you sée how for couetousnes
of mony, in all ages, Men haue made
shipwrack of their consciences, and in the end
by the iust iudgemēt of God haue dyed fearful
deaths whose iudgmente I leaue to the Lord.
            
            
               Spud.
               S
                     •
                  eing that couetousnes, is so wicked
a sin, & so offensiue both to God & Man, & pernicious
to the soule, I marueile what moueth
Men to followe the same, as they doo?
            
            
               Ph.
               Two things moue mē to affect mony so
so much as they do:What make Men to affect money. y• one, for feare least they
shold fal into pouertie & beggery (oh ridiculous
infidelitie) ye other, to be aduanced, & promoted
to high dignities & honors vpō earth. And thei
see, ye world is such, ye he who hath moni enough
shalbe rabbied & maistered at euery word, and

the vaine title of worshipfull, and right worshipfull,
though notwithstanding he be a dunghill
Gentleman, or a Gentleman of the first
head, as they vse to terme them. And to such
outrage is it growne that now adayes euery
Butcher,Euery Begger almost is called Maister at euery word. Shooemaker, Tailer, Cobler, Husband-man,
and other, yea euery Tinker, pedler
and swinherd, euery Artificer and other,
gregarii ordinis, of the vilest sorte of Men that
be, must be called by ye vain name of Maisters
at euery word. But it is certen, that no wyse
Man, will intitle them, with any of these names,
worshipfull and maister (for they are names
and titles of dignitie, proper to ye Godly
wyse, for some speciall vertue inherent, either
els in respect of their birth, or calling due vnto
thē,) but such Titiuillers, flattering Parasits,
and glosing Gnatoes, as flatter them, expecting
some pleasure or benefit at their hāds,
which thing if they were not blowen vp with
the bellowes of pride, and puffed vp with the
wind of vainglori they might easily perceiue.
For certen it is, they do but mocke and flatter
them with these titles,Refusing of 
                        •
                     aine Titles. knowing that they deserue
nothing lesse. Wherfore, like good Recusants
of that thing which is euill, they should
refuse those vainglorious Names, remembring
the words of our sauiour Christ, saying:
be not called Maister, in token there is but
one onely true Maister and Lord in Heauen:

which only true Maister & Lord: God graunt
all other may followe bothe in life and name,
vntil they cōe to perfect men in Iesus Christ.
               
            
            
               Spud.
               The people béeing so let vpon couetousnes,
as I gather by your speeches they be,
is it possible that they wil lend mo
                     •
                  ey without
vsurie, or without some hostage, guage or
pawn? for vsurie followeth couetousnes, as
the shadowe dooth the bodie.
            
         
         
            Great Vsurie
in Ailgna.
            
               Philo.
               IT is as impossible for any to borrowe
money there (for the most part) without
vsurieVsury. & loane, or with out some good hostage,
guage or pledge, as it is for a dead man to
speak with audible voice.
            
            
               Spud.
               I haue heard say, that the positiue,
and statute lawes there,The possitiue Lawes. doo permit them to
take vsurye, limitting them how much to
take for euery pound.
            
            
               Philo.
               Although the ciuile lawes (for the auoiding
of further inconueniences) doo permit
certain sommes of money, to be giuen ouerplus
beyond or abooue the principall, for the
loane of mony lent, yet are y• vsurers no more

discharged from the gilt of vsurie before God
therby: then the adulterous Iewes were from
whordome, because Moyses gaue them a permissiue
law for euery man to put away their
wiues, that would, for euery light trifle. And
yet the lawes there giue no libertie to commit
vsurie,The lawes of Ailgna permit no vsurie. but seeing how much it rageth,
lest it should excéed, rage further and ouer
flowe the banks of all reason and godlynes.
As couetousnes is a raging sea and a bottō
                  lesse
pit, and neuer satified nor cōtented, they
haue limited them within certain méeres, and
banks (to bridle the insatiable desires of couetous
men) beyond the which, it is not lawful
for any to go: but this permissiō of ye lawes
argueth not, that it is lawful to take vsury, no
more (I say) then y• permission of Moyses argued
that whordome & adulterie is lawfull &
good, because Moyses permitted them to put a
way their wiues, for ye auo
                     •
                  ding of greater euil:
for as christ said to y• 
                  Iewes frō ye begīning
it was not so, so sa
                     •
                  
                  ▪ I to these vsurers frō the
begīning it was not so, nor yet ought so to be.
            
            
               Spud.
               If no interest were permitted, then
no man would lend, & then how should ye poor
doo? wherfore the lawes y• permit some small
ouer-plus therin doo very wel.
            
            
               Philo.
               
                  Non faciendum est malum, vt inde veniat
bonum, we must not doo euil, that good
may come of it: yet the lawes in permitting

certain reasonable gain to be receiued for the
loane of money lent, lest otherwise the poore
should quaile (for without some commoditie
the rich would not lend) haue not doone much
amisse,The lawes permit some ouerplus, but commaund it but if they had quite cut it of, and not
yéelded at all to any such permission, they had
doon better. But héerin the intent of the lawe
is to be perpēded: which was to impale with
in the Forrest, or park of reasonable and conscionable
gain, men who cared not howmuch
they could extorte out of poore-mens hands,
for the loane of their money lent, and not to
authorise any man to cōmit vsurie, as though
it were lawful because it is permitted.
               Therfore, those that say that the lawes there
doo allow of vsury, & licence men to commit it
fréely, doo slaunder y• lawes, & are woorthy of
reprehension: for though the lawes say, thou
shalt not take abooue ij.s. in y• pound, x.li. in
a hundred, and so so foorth. Dooth this prooue
y• it is lawful to take so much, or rather y• thou
shalt not take more then y•? if I say to a man,
thou shalt not giue him abooue one or two
blowes, dooth this prooue y• I licence him to
giue him one or two blowes,Forbidding to outrage in mircheef, is not permission to comit mischeef. or rather that he
shal not giue any at al, or if he doo, he shal
not excéed or passe ye bāds of resonable mesure:
so this law dooth but mitigate ye penalty: for
it saith y• the party y• taketh but x.li. for y• vse
of an C.li. loseth but y• x.li. not his principal.
            
            
               
               Spud.
               Then I perceiue, if Usurie be not
lawful by the lawes of the Realm, then is it
not lawful by the lawes of God.
            
            
               Philo.
               You may be sure of that. For our
Sauiour Christe willeth vs to be so far from
couetousnes and vsury, as he saith: giue to
him that asketh thée,Math. 5. 6. and from him that
would borrow,Luc. 6. turn not thy face away.
               
               Againe, Lend of thy goods to them who are
not able to pay thée again, and thy reward
shalbe great in heauen. If wée must lend
our goods then to them,The word of God against vsurie. who are not able to
pay vs again, no not so much as the bare
thing lent, where is the interest, the vsurie,
the gaine and ouer-plus, which we fish for so
much? Therfore our Sauiour Christe saith,
beatius est dare, potius quam accipere. It is
more blessed to giue, then to receiue. In y• 22.
of Exodus,
                  Exodus. 20. 
                  Deut. 24. 23.Deut. 24. 23. 
                  Leuit. 25.Leuit. 25. 
                  Nehe. 5.Nehe. 5.
                  Eze. 22. 18.Ezech. 22. 18. & many other places, we are forbidden
to vse any kinde of vsury or interest,
or to receiue again any ouer-pluss, besides the
principall, either in money, corne, wine, oyle
beasts, cattel, meat, drink, cloth, or any
thing els what soeuer. Dauid asketh a question
of the Lord saying,Psalm. 15. 
                  Lord who shall dwell
in thy Tabernacle, and who shall rest in thy
holy hil? wherto he giueth the solution him
self saying: euen he that leadeth an incorrupt
life, & hath not giuen his mony vnto vsurie,

nor taken reward against the innocent, who
so dooth these things shall neuer fall. In the

                     •
                  5. of Deut. the Lord willeth vs not to craue
again the thing we haue lent to our neighbor,
for it is the Lords frée yéer.When it is not lawfull to
                        •
                      aske again our goods lent. If it be no lawful
(then) to aske again y• which is lent, (for it is
not the law of good conscience for thée to exact
it, if thou be abler to beare it, then the other
to pay it) much lesse is it lawful to demaund
any vsury or ouer-plus. And for this cause
the Lord saith, let there be no begger amōgst
you, nor poore person amongst the Tribes of
Israel. Thus you sée the woord of God abandō
                  neth
vsurie euen to hel, and all writers bothe
diuine and prophane, yea the very heathen
people, moued onely by the instinct of nature
and rules of reason, haue alwaies abhord it.
               Therfore Cato,
                  Hethen men against vsury and inte
                        •
                     est. béeing demaunded what vsurie
was, asked againe, what it was to kill a
man? making vsurie equiualent with murther:
And good reason, for he that killeth a
a man, riddeth him out of his paines at once,
but he that taketh vsury is long in butchering
his pacient▪ suffering him by little & little to
languish, and sucking out his hart blood, neuer
leaueth him so long as he féeleth any vitall
blood, (that is lu
                     •
                  re and gaine) comming
foorth of him.vsury equall with murther. The Usurer killeth not one,
but many, bothe Husband, Wife, Children,
seruants, famelie and all, not sparing any.
               
                  And if the poore man haue not wherewith to
pay▪ aswel the interest, as the principall,
when soeuer this gréedy cormorant dooth demaund
it, then sute shalbe cōmenced against
him, out go butter-flies and writs, as thick
as haile, so the poore man is apprehended, and
brought coram nobis,
                  Sute cōmenced against him that is not able to pay aswel the Vsury as the Principall. and béeing once conuented,
iudgement condemnatorie and diffinitiue
sentence procéedeth against him, compelling
him to pay, aswel the vsury and ye loane
of the money▪ as the money lent. But if he
haue not to satisfie aswel the one as th'other,
then to Bocardo goeth he as round as a ball,
where he shalbe sure to lye vntil he rotte one
péece from an other, without satisfaction bée
made.To prison with him that cannot pay the vsury. Oh cursed Caitiue, no man but a deuil,
no Christian but a cruel Tartarian, and
mercilesse Turck: darest thou look vp toward
heauen, or canst thou hope to be saued by the
death of Christe, that sufferest thine owne
flesh and blood, thine owne bretheren & sisters
in the Lord, and which is more, the flesh and
blood of Christ Iesus, vessels of saluation, coheirs
with him of his superiall kingdom, adoptiue
sonnes of his grace, & finally, saints
in heauen,No mercy in imprisoning o
                        •
                      poor-men for vsury. to lye and 
                     •
                  ot in prison for want
of paym
                     •
                  nt of a little drosse, which at the day
of dome, shall beare witnesse against thée,
g
                     •
                  aw thy flesh like a canker, and condemn
thée for euer: The very s
                     •
                  ones of the prison

walles shall rise vp against thée, and condemne
thée for thy crueltie, Is this looue? Is
this charitie? is this to doo to others as thou
wouldest wish others to doe to thée? or rather
as thou wo
                     •
                  ldest wish the Lord to doe vnto
thée? Art thou a good member of the bodie,
which not onely cuttest of thy selfe from the
vine,No crueltie to be shewed, but mercy and compasion ought to be extended. as a rotten brau
                     •
                  ch and void lop, but
also he west off other members f
                     •
                  om the same
true vine, Christe Iesus? No, no, thou art
a member of the Deuil, a limme of Sathan,
and a Childe of perdition.
               W
                     •
                  e ought not to handle our bretheren in
such sorte, for any worldly matter whatsoeuer.
Wée ought to shew mercie and not crueltie
to our bretheren, to remit trespasses and
offences, rather then to exact punishment, re
                  
                     •
                  erring
all reuenge to him, who saith:
               
                  Mihi vindictam, et ego retribuam. Uengeance
is mine, and I wil rewarde (saith the
LORD.)
               Beléeue mée, it gréeueth mée to heare (walking
in the streats) the pitiful cryes, and miserable
complaints of poore prisoners in durāce
for debt,The petiefull crying of Prisoners in prison for dept. and like so to continue all their life,
destitute of libertie, meat, drink, (though of
the meanest sorte) and clothing to their
backs, lying in filthie strawe, and lothsome

                     ••
                  ng, wursse then anie Dogge, voide of all
charitable consolation, and brotherly comfort

in this World, wishing and thyrsting after
death, to set them 
                     ••••
                  ibertie, and loose them
from their shackles, giues and yron bands:
               Notwithstanding, some mercilesse tygers are
growe
                     •
                   to such barbarous crueltie, that they
blush not to say,A tygerlicke 
                        •
                     yrannicall saying. tush, 
                     •
                  e shall either paye mée
the whole, or els lye the
                     ••
                   till his héels 
                     •
                  ot frō
his butt
                     •••
                  s, and before I will release him,
I will make d
                     •
                  ce of his bones. But take héed
thou Deuill (for I dare not call thée a Man)
le
                     •
                  t the Lord say to thée, as he said to that wicked
Seruant (who hauing great sommes forgiuen
him,Math xviii. Marc. xi. wold not forgiue his Brother his
small debte, but catching him by the throte,
said: pay that thou owest) 
                     •
                  ind him hands and
feet, and 
                     •
                  ast him into vtter Darknes, wher
shall be weeping, and gnashing of téeth.
               An Usurer is worse thā a Thief, for the one
stealeth,An Vsurer worse than a Thief. but for need, the other for coueitousnes
and excesse: the one stealeth, but in the
night commonly, the other daylie and hourely,
night and daye at all times indifferently.
               An Usurer is worse than a Iew,An Vsurer worser than a Iew. for they 
                     •
                  o
this daye, will not take anye vsurie of their
Brethren, according to the lawe of GOD.
               They are worse than Iudas, for he betraied
Christ,An Vsurer worser than Iudas. but once, made restitution, and repented
for it (though his repentance sprang not
of faith, but of despaire) but these Usurers betray
Christ in his mēbers daylie and hourly

without any remorse or restitution at all.
               They are wursse then hel it self,vsurers wurss
                        •
                      then 
                        •
                     el. for it punisheth
but only the wicked and reprobate, but
the Usurer maketh no difference of any, but
punisheth all alike. They are crueller then
death,An Vsurer wursse then Death. for it destroyeth but the body, and goeth
no further, but the vsurer destroyeth both
body and soule for euer. And to be bréef, the
Usurer is wursse then the Deuil himself,An vsurer wurse then the Deuil. for
the Deuill plagueth but onely those that are
in his hands, or els those whome God permitteth
him, the Usurer plagueth not onely
those that are within his iurisdiction alredy,
but euen all other without permission of any.
Therfore saith Ambrose, if any man commit
vsurie,The sayings of Godly Fathers and Writers against vsury. it is extortion, rauin & pillage,
and he ought to dye. Alphonsus called vsury
nothing els then a life of death. Lycurgus banished
all kind of vsury out of his lands. Cato
did the same. Agessilaus, Generall of the Lacedemonians,
burned the Usurers bookes in
the open market places. Claudius Vaspatiannus,
and after him Alexander Seuerus,
made sharpe lawes against vsury,Vsurers punished with sundry tortures. and vtterly
extirped the same. Aristotle, Plato, Pythagoras,
and generally, all writers bothe holy
and prophane, haue sharply inueighed against
this deuouring canker of vsury, & yet
cannot we, that fain would be called christians
auoid it. And if it be true, that I heare

say, the
                     •
                  e be no men so great doers in this noble
facultie and famous science,Scriuiners the Diuels agents to set forward Vserie. as the Scriueners
be: For it is sayd (and I feare mee too
true) that there are some, to whome is committed
a hundred or two of poundes, of some
more, of some lesse, they puttinge in good
sureties to the owners for the repayment of
the same againe, with certaine allowance for
the loane thereof, then come there poore men
to them, desiring them to lende them suche a
som of money, and they wil recompence them
at their owne desires, who making refusall at
the firste, as though they had it not (to acuat
                     •
                  
the minds of the poore petitioners withall) at
last they lend them how much they desire, receiuing
of the poore men what interest & assurāce
they lust themselues, and binding them,
their lands, Goodes, and all, with forfaiture
thereof, if they fayle of paym
                     •
                  nt: where note
by the way, the Scriuener is the Instrument
wherby the Diue
                     •
                  l worketh the frame of this
wicked woorke of Usurie, hee beeing rewarded
with a good fleece for his labour:The Scriuiners fleece, or pittaunce for his paynes. F
                     •
                  r, firste
he hath a certaine allowance of the Archdiuel
who owes the money, for helping him to such
vent for his coyne: Secondly, he hath a greate
deale more vsurie to himselfe, of him who boroweth
the money, than he alloweth y• owner
of the mony: And thirdly, 
                     •
                  e hath not the least
part for making the writings betwene them.

And thus the poore man is so implicate and
wrapped in on euerie side, as it is impossible
for him euer to get out of the briers, without
losse of all that euer hee hath to the very skin.
Thus the riche are inriched, the poore beggered,
and Christ Iesus dishonored euerie way,
God be mercifull vnto vs. De his hactenus.
               
            
            
               Spud.
               Hauing (by the grace of Christe) hytherto
spoken of sundrie Abuses of that countrie,
let vs procéed a little further, howe doe
they sancti
                     •
                  ie and kéepe the Sabbaoth day? In
godly Christian exercises, or els in prophan
                     •
                  
pastimes and pleasures?
            
         
         
            The Maner of sanctifiyng
the Sabaoth in Ailgna.
            
               Philo.
               THE Sabaoth day, of some is well santified,
namely in hearing the Word of
GOD read, preached and interpreted,
in priuat and publique Prayers, in singing
of Godly Psalmes, in celebrating the sacramēts,
& in collecting for y• poore & indigent,

which are the true vses and ends wherto the
Sabaoth was ordained. But other some spend
the Sabaoth day (for the most part) in frequenting
of baudie Stage-playes and enterludes,
in maintaining Lords of mis-rule (for so they
call a certaine kinde of play which they vse)
May-games, Church-ales, feasts and wakeesses:
in pyping, dauncing, dicing, carding,
bowling, tennisse playing: in Beare-bayting,
cock-fighting,Prophane exercises vpon the Sabaoth day. hawking, hunting, and
such like. In kéeping of Faires, and markets
on the sabaoth. In kéeping Courts and Léets:
In foot-ball playing, and such other deuilish
pastimes: reading of laciuious and wanton
bookes, and an infinit number of such like
practises and prophane exercises vsed vppon
that day, wherby the Lord God is dishonoured,
his Sabaoth violated, his woord neglected,
his sacraments contemned and his People
meruelously corrupted, and caryed away
from true vertue and godlynes. Lord remooue
these exercises from thy Sabaoth.
               
            
            
               Spud.
               You wil be déemed too too Stoicall, if
you should restrain men from these exercises
vpon the Sabaoth, for they suppose, that, that
day was ordained and consecrate to that end
and purpose, only to vse what kinde of exercises
they think good thēselues, & was it not so?
            
            
               Phi.
               After that the Lord our God had created
the world, and all things therin contained, in

six dayes, in the seuenth day he rested from
all his woorks, (that is from creating them,
not from gouerning them) and therefore hée
commaunded y• the seuenth day should be kept
holy in all ages to the end of the world:When the Sabaoth wa
                        •
                      ordained. then
after that in effect 2000. yéeres, he iterated
this Commandement, when he gaue the law
i
                     •
                   mount Horeb to Moyses, & in him to all
the Children of Israel, saying, remember (forget
it not) that thou kéep holy the seuenth day
&c. If we must kéep it holy, then must we not
spend it in such vain exercises, as please our
selues, but in such godly exercises as he in his
holy woord hath commaunded. And (in my
iudgement) the Lord our God ordained the
seuenth day to be kept holy, for foure causes
especially. First to put vs in minde of his
wunderful woorkmanship, & creation of the
world and creatures besides. Secondly, y• his
woord (the Church assēbling togither) might
be preached,Wherfore th
                        •
                      Sabaoth wa
                        •
                      instituted. interpreted & expounded, his sacraments
ministred sincéerly according to the
prescript of his woord, & that suffrages & praiers
bothe priuat & publique might be offered
to his excellent Maiestie. Thirdly, for that euery
christiā man might repose himself from
corporall labour, to the end they might y• better
sustain the trauailes of the wéek to ensue,
and also to ye and, y• all beasts & cattel, which
the Lord hath made for mans vse, as helps &

adiuments vnto him in 
                     •
                  his daylie affaires &
businesse, might rest and refresh them selues,
the better to go thorow in their traueiles afterward.
For, as the hethen Man knew very
wel, sine alterna requie, non est durabile quicquàm.
Without some rest or repose, there is
not any thing durable, or able to cōtinue lōg.
Fourthly, to th'end it might be a typical figure,
or signitor to point (as it were) with the
finger, and to cypher foorth and shadowe vnto
vs that blessed rest & thryse happie ioye▪ which
the faithfull shall possesse after the day of iudgement
in the Kingdome of Heauen. Wherfor
                     •
                  ,
séeing the Sabaoth was instituted for
these causes, it is manifest, that it was not
appointed for the maintenance of wicked and
vngodly pastymes and vaine pleasures of the
flesh, which GOD abhorreth, and all good
men from their hartes do loth and deteste.
               The Man of whome we read in the law,Punishme
                        •
                     t for violating the sabaoth. for
gathering of a few small stickes vpō the Sabaoth,
was stoned to death, by the commaundement
of God from the Theator of Heauen.
               Than if he were stoned for gathering a few
sticks vppon the Sabaoth day, which in some
cases might be, for necessities sake, and did it,
but once,Violaters of the saboth. what shall they be, who all the Sabaoth
dayes of their lyfe giue them selues to
nothing els, but to wallow in all kind of wickednesse
and sinne▪ to the great contempt both

of y• Lord, and his Sabaoth? And though they
haue played the lazie lurdens al the weke before,
yet that day of set purpose, they wil toile
and labour, in contempt of the Lord and his
Sabaoth. But let them be sure, as he that gathered
stickes vpon the Sabaoth, was stoned
for his contempt of the same, so shall they be
stoned, yea grinded to peeces for their contēpt
of the Lord in his Sabaoth.
               The Iewes, are verye strict in kéeping their
Sabaoths,The Iewes very precise in keeping sabaoth. in so muche, as they will not
dresse ther meats and drinks vppon the same
day, but set it on the tables ye day befor. They
go not aboue ij. miles vpō y• sabaoth day, they
suffer not the body of any Malefactor to hang
vppon the gallowes vppon the Sabaoth day,
with legions of such like supersticiōs. Wherin,
as I do acknowledge they are but too scrupelous,
and ouershoot the marke, so we are
therin plaine contempteous, and negligent,
shooting short of the marke altogether.No work to be done vpon the sabaoth, except necessite inforce it. Yet I
am not so strait laced, that I would haue no
kinde of worke done vppon that daye, if present
necessitie of the thing require it (for
Christe hath taught vs, the Sabaoth was
made for Man, not Man for the Sabaoth) but
not for euery light trifle which may as well
be done other dayes as vpon that day. And although
ye day it self in respect of ye very nature
and originall therof be no better thā another

day, for there is no difference of dayes except
we become temporizers, all béeing alike good
                     •
                  
yet because the Lord our God hath commaunded
it to be sanctified & kept holy to him self,
let vs (like obedient & obsequious Children)
submit our selues to so loouing a Father, for
els we spit against heauen, we striue against
the stream, and we contemn him in his ordinances.
But (perchance) you wil aske me,
whither the true vse of the Sabaoth consist
in outward abstaining from bodilye labour
and trauaile? I answere no: the true vse of
the Sabaoth (for Christians are not bound
onely to the Ceremonie of the day) consisteth
as I haue said,Wherin the true vse of the Sabaoth consisteth. in hearing the woord of God
truely preached, therby to learn and to doo his
wil, in receiuing the sacraments (as seales
of his grace towards vs) rightly administred,
in vsing publique and priuate prayer, in
thanksgiuing to God for all his benefits, in
singing of godly Psalmes and other spirituall
exercises and meditations, in collecting
for the poore, in dooing of good woorkes: and
bréefly in the true obedience of the inward
man. And yet notwithstanding, wée
must abstain from the one, to attend vpon the
other: that is, wée must refrain all bodily labours,
to the end that wée may the better be
restant at these spirituall exercises vppon the
Sabaoth day.
               
                  This is the true vse and end of the Lord his
Saboth, who graūt that we may rest in him
for euer.
            
            
               Spud.
               Hauing shewed the true vse of the
Saboth, let vs go forward to speke of those
Abuses particularlye, wherby the Saboth of
the Lord is prophaned. And first to begin
with stage playes and enterluds: What is
your opinion of them? Are they not good examples
to youth to fray them from sinne?
            
         
         
            Of Stage-playes and
Enterluds, with their wickednes.
            
               Philo.
               ALL Stage-playes, Enterluds and Commedies,
are either of diuyne, or prophane
matter: If they be of diuine matter, than
are they most intollerable, or rather Sacrilegious,
for that the blessed word of GOD, is
to be handled, reuerently, grauely, and sagely,
with veneration to the glorious Maiestie of
God, which shineth therin, and not scoffingly,
flowtingly, & iybingly, as it is vpon stages in
Playes & Enterluds, without any reuerence,
worship, or veneration to ye same: the word of
our Saluation, the price of Christ his bloud, &
the merits of his passion, were not giuen, to

be derided, and iested at as they be in these
filthie playes and enterluds on stages & scaffolds,The deriding of the word of God in stage playes.
or to be mixt and interlaced with bawdry,
wanton shewes & vncomely gestures, as
is vsed (euery Man knoweth) in these playes
and enterludes. In the first of Ihon we are
taught, that the word is GOD, and God is
the word. Wherfore, who so euer abuseth this
word of our God on stages in playes and enterluds,
abuseth the Maiesty of GOD in the
same, maketh a mocking stock of him, & purchaseth
to himselfe, eternal dānation. And no
marueil, for the sacred word of GOD, and
God himselfe,Reuerence to the maiestie of God du
                        •
                     . is neuer to be thought of, or
once named, but with great feare, reuerence
and obedience to the same. All the holy companie
of Heauen, Angels, Archangels, Cherubins,
Seraphins, and all other powers whatsoeuer,
yea the Deuills themselues (as Iames
saith) doo tremble & quake, at the naming of
God, and at the presence of his wrath, and doo
these Mockers and Flowters of his Maiesty,
these dissembling Hipocrites, and flattering
Gnatoes, think to escape vnpunished? beware
therfore you masking Players, you painted
sepulchres, you doble dealing ambodexters,
be warned betymes,A warming to Players. and lik good computi
                     •
                  tes
cast your accompts before what wil be the reward
therof in the end, least God destroy you
in his wrath: abuse God no more, corrupt his

people no longer with your dregges, and intermingle
not his blessed word with such prophane
vanities. For, at no hand, it is not lawfull,
to mixt scurrilitie with diuinitie,Not lawfull to intermixt diuynitie, with scurrilitie nor diuinitie
with scurrilitie.
               
                  Theopompus, mingled Moyses law with
his writinges, and therfore the LORD
stroke him madd. Theodictes began the
same practise, but the Lorde stroke him blind
for it. With many others who attempting
the like deuyses, were al ouerthrowne, and
died miserably: besids, what is their iudgemēt
in the other World the Lord onely knoweth.
Upon the other side, if their playes be of prophane
matters, thā tend they to y• dishonor of
God and norishing of vice,What if playes be of prophane matter. both which are dā
                  nable.
So that whither they be the one or the
other, they are quite contrarie to the Word of
grace, and sucked out of the Deuills teates, to
nourish vs in ydolatrie hethenrie, and sinne.
               And therfore, they cariyng the note, or brand
of GOD his curse vppon thei
                     •
                   backs, which
way soeuer they goe, are to be hissed out of all
Christian Kingdomes, if they wil haue Christ
to dwell amongst them.
            
            
               Spud.
               Are you able to shewe, that euer any
good Men from the beginning, haue resisted
Playes and Enterluds?
            
            
               Philo.
               Not onely the word of GOD doth
ouerthrow thē, addiudging them, & the maintainers

of them, to Hell, but also all holie coū
                  sels,
and sinodes, both generall, nationall and
prouinciall,The word of God, al Writers, counsels and Fathers haue writ against playes, and e
                        •
                     terluds. together, with all Writers both
diuyne and prophane, euer since y• beginning
haue disalowed them, and writ (almost) whole
volumes against them.
               The learned Father Tertullian in his booke
de Speculo, saith, that playes, were consecrat
to that false ydoll Becchus, for that he is said
to haue found out, and inuented strōg drinke.
               
                  Augustinus de ciuit. Dei, saith,Wherfo
                        •
                     e playes 
                        〈◊〉
                      ordeined. that plaies
were ordeined by the Deuill, and consecrat
to heathen Gods, to draw vs from Christianitie
to ydolatrie, and gentilisme. And in an
other place: Pecunias Histrionibus dare, vitium
est innane, non virtus. To giue money
to Players, is a gréeuous sin.
               
                  Chrisostome, calleth those playes, festa
Sathani, feasts of the Deuill. Lactantius, an
ancient learned Father, saith, 
                     Histrionum
impudissimi gestus, nihil aliud nisi Libidinem
mouent:
                   The shamelesse gestures of
Plaiers, serue to nothing so much, as to moue
the flesh to lust,Concilium. 3. and vnclennesse. And
therfore, in the .30.Carth
                        •
                     . Cap▪ 11 Counsell of Carthage,
& Synode of Laodicea,
                  Synode▪ Laodicea. it was decréed, that no
Christen Man,Cap. 54. or Woman, should resorte to
playes and enterludes, where is nothing but
blasphemie, scurrilitie and whordome maintained.
Scipio, seeing the Romaines bente

to erect Theaters, & places for plaies, dehorted
them from it,Write
                        •
                     s both diuyne and prophane against playe
                        •
                      and Enterluds. with most prudent reasons and
forcible arguments. Valerius Maximus
saith, playes were neuer brought vp, sine regni
rubore, without shame to the Cuntrey.
            
            
               Arist.
               debarreth youth accesse to Playes
& Enterluds, least they séeking to quench the
thirst of Venus, doo quench it with a potle of
fire. Augustus, banished Ouid, for making
Bookes of loue, Enterluds and such other amorous
trumperie.
               
                  Constantius, ordeined that no Player shold
be admitted to the table of the Lord. Than
séeing, that Playes were first inuented by the
Deuil,The ends of playes and Enterluds. practised by the heathen gentiles, and
dedicat to their false ydols, Goddes and Goddesse
                     •
                  :
as the howse, stage and apparell, to Venus:
the musicke, to Appollo: the penning, to
Minerua, and the Muses: the action and pronuntiation
to Mercurie and ye rest, it is more
than manifest, that they are no fit exercyses
for a Christen Man to follow. But if there
were no euill in them, saue this, namely, that
the arguments of tragedies,The arguments of tragedies. is anger, wrath,
immunitie, crueltie, iniurie, incest, murther &
such like: the Persons or Actors, are Goddes,
Goddesses, Furies, Fyends, Hagges, Kings,
Quéenes, or Potentates. Of Commedies,
the matter and ground is loue,The ground of Commedies. bawdrie, cosenage,
flattery, whordome, adulterie: the Persons

or agēts, whores, queanes, bawdes, scul
                     •
                  lions,
Knaues, Curtezans, lecherous old men
                     •
                  
amorous yong men, with such like of infinit
varietie: If I say there were nothing els, but
this, it were sufficiēt to withdraw a good christian
from the vsing of them. For so often, as
they goe to those howses where Players frequēt▪
thei go to Venus pallace & sathās synagogue
to worship deuils, & betray Christ Iesus.
            
            
               Spud.
               But notwithstanding,Theaters and curtaines Venus pallaces. I haue hard
some hold opinion that they be as good as sermons,
and that many a good Example may be
learned out of them?
            
            
               Philo.
               Oh blasphemie intollerable:No playes cō
                     parable to the word of God Are filthie
playes & bawdy enterluds comparable to
the word of God, y• foode of life, and life it selfe?
It is all one, as if they had said, bawdrie, hethenrie,
pagārie, scurrilitie, and diuelrie it self,
is equall with the word of God. Or that the
Deuill, is equipolent with the Lord.
               The Lord our God hath ordeined his blessed
word, and made it the ordenarie mean of
our Saluation, the Deui
                     •
                  l hath inferred the
other, as, the ordenarie meane of our destruction,
and will they yet compare the one with
y• other? If he be accursed,He is cursed that saith playes and enterluds are comparable to sermons. y• calleth light darknes,
& darknes light, truth, falsehood, & falshood
truth, swéet, sowre, and sowr sweete, than a
fortiori is he accur
                     ••
                  d that saith that playes &
enterluds be equiualent with Sermons, Be
                  
                     •
                  ids

this, there is no mischief which these plaies,
maintain not. For, do they not norish ydlenes?
and otia dant vitia, ydlenes is the Mother
of vice. Doo they not draw the people frō
hering the word of God, from godly Lectures,
and sermons? for you shall haue them flocke
thither thick & thréefould, whē ye church of God
shalbe bare & emptie. And those y• will neuer
come at sermons wil flow thither apace. The
reason is,Wherfore so many 
                        •
                     flock to see playe
                        •
                      and enterluds. for that the nūber of Christ his elect
is but few, and the number of the reprobat is
many, the way y• leadeth to life is narow, and
few tread y• path, y• way that leadeth to death,
is brod, & many find it. This sheweth, they are
not of God, who refuse to here his word (for he
that is of God, hereth God his word saith our
Sauiour Christ) but of the deuill, whose exercyses
they go to visite. Do they not maintaine
bawdrie,The fruits o
                        •
                      theathers, & playes. insinuat folery, & renue ye remēbrance
of hethen ydolatrie? Do they not induce whordome
& vnclennes? nay, are they not rather
plaine deuourers of maydenly virginitie and
chastitie? For proofe wherof, but marke the
flocking and rūning to Theaters & curtens,
daylie and hourely, night and daye, tyme and
tyde to see Playes and Enterludes,The Godly demeanoures vsed at playes and enterluds where
such wanton gestures, such bawdie speaches:
such laughing and fléering: such kissing and
bussing: such clipping and culling: Suche
winckinge and glancinge of wanton eyes,

and the like is vsed, as is wonderfull to behold.
Than these goodly pageants being done,
euery mate sorts to his mate, euery one bringes
another homeward of their way verye
fréendly, and in their secret conclaues (couertly)
they play ye 
                  Sodomits, or worse. And these
be the fruits of Playes and Enterluds, for
the most part. And wheras, you say, there
are good Examples to be learned in them:
               Trulie,The goodly examples of Playes and Enterluds. so there are: if you will learne falshood,
if you will learn cosenage: if you will
learn to deceiue: if you will learn to play the
Hipocrit: to cogge, lye and falsifie: if you will
learn to iest, laugh and fléer, to grin, to nodd,
and mow: if you will learn to playe the vice,
to swear, teare, and blaspleme, both Heauen
and Earth:What things are to be lerned at playes. If you will learn to become abawde,
vncleane, and to deuerginat Mayds,
to deflour honest Wyues: if you will learne
to murther, s
                     •
                  aie, kill, picke, steal, robbe and
roue: If you will learn to rebel against Princes,
to cōmit treasons, to comsume treasurs,
to practise ydlenes, to sing and talke of bawdie
loue and venery: if you will lerne to deride,
scoffe, mock & flowt, to flatter & smooth:
If you will learn to play the whore-maister,
the glutton, Drunkard, or incestuous person:
if you will learn to become proude, hawtie &
arrogant: and finally, if you will learne to
comtemne GOD and al his lawes, to 
                     •
                  are

neither for heauen nor hel, and to commit al
kinde of sinne and mischéef you néed to goe to
no other schoole,Theater
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      Seminaries of pseudo christianit for all these good Examples,
may you sée painted before your eyes in enterludes
and playes: wherfore, that man who
giueth money for the maintenance of them,
must néeds incurre the damage of premunire,
that is, eternall damnation except they repēt.
For the Apostle biddeth vs beware,A dyuine premunire. least wée
communica
                     •
                   with other mens sinnes, & this
their dooing, is not only to communicat with
other mens sinnes, & maintain euil, to the distruction
of thē selues & many others, but also
a maintaining of a great sorte of idle lubbers
and buzzing dronets to suck vp and deuoure
the good honie,What it is to communicate with other mens sinnes. wherupon the poor bées should
liue.
               Therfore I beséech all players & Founders of
plaies and enterludes, in the bowels of Iesus
Christe, as they tender the saluation of their
soules, and others, to leaue of that cursed kind
of life,An Exhotation to plaiers. and gi
                     •
                  e them selues to such honest exercises,
and godly misteries, as God hath cō
                  maunded
them in his woord to get their liuings
wtall: for who wil call him a wiseman
that plaieth the part of a foole and a vice? who
can call him a Christian, who playeth ye part
of a deuil,The 
                        〈◊〉
                      due to Play
                        •
                     ers. the sworne enemie of Christe? who
can call him a iust man, that playeth the part
of a dissembling hipocrite? And to be breef,

who can call him a straight deling man, who
playeth a Cosoners trick? And so of all ye rest.
Away therfore with this so infamous an art,
for goe they neuer so braue,Players liue vpon begging. yet are they coū
                  ted
and taken but for beggers. And is it not
true? liue they not vpon begging of euery one
that comes? Are they not taken by the lawes
of the Realm,Players counted Rogues by the lawes of the Realm for roagues and vacabounds? I
speak of such as trauaile the Cuntries, with
playes & enterludes, making an occupation
of it, and ought so to be punished, if they had
their deserts. But hoping that they will be
warned now at the last, I wil say no more of
them, beséeching them to consider what a fearful
thing it is to fall into the hands of God, &
to prouoke his wrath and heauie displeasure
against them selues and others, which the
Lord of his mercie turn from vs.
               
            
            
               Spud.
               Of that sorte he the other kinde of
playes, which you call Lords of Mis-rule? for
mée thinke, the very name it self caryeth a
taste of some notorious euil.
            
         
         
            Lords of Mis-rule
in Ailgna.
            
               Philo.
               THE name indéed is odious both to God
and good men,Lords of Mis-rule in Ailgna. & such as the very heathen
people would haue blushed at, once to

haue named amongst them. And if the name
importeth some e
                     •
                  il, then what may ye thing
it self be, iudge you. But because you desire to
know the manner of them, I wil showe you
as I haue séen them practised my self. First,
all the wilde-heds of the Parish, conuenting
togither, chuse them a Graund-Captain (of
all mischéefe) whome they innoble with the
title of my Lord of Mis-rule,The manner how Lords o
                        •
                      Mis-rule are vsed to be played. and him they
crowne with great solemnitie, and adopt for
their king. This king anointed, chuseth forth
twentie, fortie, thréescore or a hundred lustie
Guttes like to him self to waighte vppon his
lordly Maiestie, and to guarde his noble person.
Then euerie one of these his men, he inuesteth
with his liueries, of gréen, yellow or
some other light wanton colour. And as
though that were not (baudie) gaudie enough
I should say, they bedecke them selues with
scarfs, ribons & laces hanged all ouer wt golde
rings, precious stones & other iewels: this
doon,The monsterous attyring of my Lord of Misrules Men. they tye about either leg xx. or xl. bels,
with rich handkercheifs in their hands, and
sometimes laid a crosse ouer their shoulders
& necks, borrowed for the most parte of their
pretie Mopsies & loouing Besses, for bussing
them in ye dark. Thus all things set in order,
then haue they their Hobby-horses, dragons
& other Antiques,The rablee
                        ••
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      deuils guard
                        •
                     
                   togither with their baudie
Pipers and thundering Drummers to strike

vp the deuils daunce withall, then marche
these heathen company towards the Church
and Church-yard, their pipers pipeing, their
drummers thundring, their stumps daūcing,
their bels iyngling,The beha
                     
                        •
                     iour of the Deuills band in the temple of God. their handkerche
                     •
                  s swinging
about their heds like madmen, their hobbie
horses and other monsters skirmishing amongst
the route: & in this sorte they go to the
Church (I say) & into the Church (though the
Minister be at praier or preaching) dancing &
swinging heir hādkercheifs ouer their heds,
in the Church, like deuils incarnate wt such a
cōfuse noise, y• no man can hear his own voice.
Then the foolish people, they looke, they stare,
they laugh, they fleer, & mount vpon 
                     •
                  ourmes
and pewes to sée these goodly pageants solemzed
in this sort.Receptacles. in the Cemiteries or church yards for the deuils agents Then after this, about the
Church they goe againe and again, & so foorth
into ye church-yard, where they haue cōmonly
their Sōmer-haules, their bowers, arbors, &
banqueting houses set vp, wherin they feast,
bāquet & daunce al that day, & (peraduenture)
all the night too. And thus these terrestriall
furies spend the Sabaoth day.
               They haue also certain papers, wherin is
painted some babblerie or other, of Imagery
woork, & these they call my Lord of mis
                     •
                  rules
badges,My Lord of mis-rules cognizances. these they giue to euery one, that wil
giue money for them, to maintaine them in
their hethenrie, diuelrie, whordome, drunkennes,

pride, and what not. And who will not
be buxo
                     •
                   to them, and giue them money for
these their deuilsh cognizances, they are mocked,
& flouted at,Wearing m
                        •
                      Lord of mis-rules badges not a little. And so assoted are
some, that they not only giue them monie, to
maintain their abhomination withall, but also
weare their badges & cognizances in their
hats or caps openly. But let them take héede,
for these are badges, seales, brands & cognizances
of the deuil, whereby he knoweth his
Seruants and Clyents, from the Children
of God. And so long as they weare them:
               
                  Sub vexillo diaboli militant contra Dominum
et legem suam. They fight vnder ye bāner
and standerd of ye deuil against Christ Iesus,
and all his lawes, Another sorte of fantasticall
fooles bring to these hel-hounds (the Lord
of mis-rule and his complices) some bread,
some good-ale, some new-chéese, some olde,
some custards & fine cakes, some one thing,
some another:Sacrifice brought to this filthie Ydol, my L. of mis-rule. but if they knew that as often
as they bring any thing to the maintenance
of these execrable pastimes, they offer sacrifice
to the deuil and sathanas, they would repent
and withdraw their hands, which God
graunt they may.
               
            
            
               Spud.
               This is a horrible prophanation of
the sabaoth (the Lord knoweth) & more pestilent
then pestilence it self, but what? be there
any abuses in their May-gāes like vnto these.
            
            
               
               Philo.
               As many as in the other. The order
of them is thus, Against May, Whitsonday
or other time, all the yung men and maides,
olde men and wiues run godding ouer night
to the woods▪
                  The order of their May-games. groues▪ hils & mountains, where
they spend all the night in plesant pastimes, &
in the morning they return bringing wt them
birch & branches of trées, to deck their assemblies
withall, and no meruaile, for there is a
great Lord present amongst them, as superintendent
and Lord ouer their pastimes and
sportes, namely, Sathan prince of hel: But
the cheifest iewel they bring from thence is
their May-pole,A great Lord presēt in May games, as superintendent therof. which they bring home with
great veneration, as thus. They haue twentie
or fortie yoke of Oxen, euery Oxe hauing
a swéet nose-gay of floures placed on the tip
of his hornes, and these Oxen drawe home
this May-pole (this stinking Ydol rather)
which is couered all ouer with floures, and
hearbs bound round about with strings from
the top to the bottome, and sometime painted
with variable colours, with two or thrée hū
                  dred
men,The manner of bringing home their May-poles. women and children following it
with great deuotion. And thus béeing rea
                     •
                  ed
vp, with handkerchéefs and flags houering on
the top, they straw the ground rounde about,
binde green boughes about it, set vp sommer
haules, bowers and arbors hard by it. And
then fall they to 
                     •
                  aunce▪ about it like as the

heathen people did at the dedication of the Idols,
wherof this is a perfect pattern, or rather
the thing it self.May-poles a pattern of the hethen▪ Ydols I haue heard it credibly
reported (and that, viua voce) by men of
great grauitie and reputation, that of fortie,
thréescore, or a hundred maides going to the
wood ouer night, there haue scaresly the third
part of them returned home againe vndefiled
               These be the frutes which these cursed pastimes
bring foorth.The frute of May-games. Neither the Iewes, the
Turcks, Sarasins, nor Pagans, nor any other
natiōs how wicked, orbarbarous soeuer, haue
euer vsed such deuilish exercises as these, nay
they would haue béen ashamed once to haue
named them, much lesse, haue vsed them. Yet
wée that would
                     ••
                   Christians, think them not
amisse. The Lord forgiue vs, and remooue
them from vs.
               
            
            
               Spud,
               What is the manner of their church ales,
which you say they vse, for they séem vncouth
and straunge to mine eares?
            
         
         
            The Manner of
Church-ales in Ailgna.
            
               
               Philoponus.
               THE manner of them is thus,The manner of Church-
                        •
                     les in Ailg. In certaine
Townes where drunken Bachus
beares all the sway, against a Christmas,
an Easter, Whitsonday, or some other
time, the Church-wardens (for so they call
them) of euery parish, with the consent of the
whole Parish, prouide half a score or twenty
quarters of mault, wherof some they buy of
the Church-stock, and some is giuen them of
the Parishioners them selues, euery one conferring
somewhat, according to his abilitie,
which mault béeing made into very strongale
or béere, it is set to sale, either in the Church
or some other place assigned to that purpose.
               Then when the Nippitatum, this Huf-cap
(as they call it) and this Nectar of lyfe, is set
abroche, wel is he that can get the soonest to
it, and spend the most at it, for he that sitteth
the closest to it, and spends the moste at it, he
is coun
                     •
                  ed the godliest man of all the rest,The filthiest beast, the godlyest man. but
who, either cannot for pinching pouertie, or
otherwise wil not stick to it, he is coūted one
destitute bothe of vertue and godlynes. In so much,
as you shall haue many poormen make
hard shift for money to spend therat, for it, béeing
put into this Corban, they are perswaded
it is meritorious & a good seruice to God. In
this kinde of practise, they cōtinue six wéeks, a
quarter of a yéer, yea half a yéer togither, swilling

and gulling, night and day, till they be
as drunke as Apes, and as blockish as beasts.
            
            
               Spud.
               Séeing they haue so good vtterance,
it should seeme they haue good gaines. But I
pray you how doe they bestowe that money,
which is got therby?
            
            
               Philo.
               Oh, well I warent you, if all be true
which they say: For they repaire their Churches
and Chappels with it,How the mony is spent which is got by Churchales. they buy bookes
for seruice, cuppes for the celebration of the
Sacrament, surplesses for Sir Ihon, and such
other necessaries: And they maintaine other
extraordinarie charges in the parishes besydes.
These be their exceptions, these be their
excuses, and these be their pretensed allegations,
wherby they blind the world, and conueigh
themselues away inuisibly in a clowd.
But if they daunce thus in a net, no doubt
they will be espied.
               For if it wer so, y• they bestowed it as they
say,Wil the Lord haue his house build with maintenance of euill. do they think that the Lord will haue his
howse build with drunkennesse, gluttony and
such like abhominatiō? Must we do euill, that
good may come of it? must we build this house
of lyme and stone, with the desolation, and vtter
ouerthrow of his spirituall howse, clensed
and washed in the preciouse blood of our Sauiour
Iesus Christ? But, who séeth not that
they bestow this money vpon nothing lesse,
than▪ in building and repayring of Churches

and Oratories? For, in most places, lye they
not like swyn coates? their windowes rent,
their dores broken,The decay of Churches, which are lacerat, rent and torn. their walles fall downe,
the roofe all bare, and what not, out of order?
Who séeth not the booke of GOD, rent ragged
and all betorn, couered in dust, so as this
Epitaphe may be writ with ones finger vppon
it, ecce nunc in puluere dormio: (Alas)
behold I sleep in dust, and oblyuion, not once
scarse looked vppon, which lesse red vpon, and
the least of all preached vppon. And on the other
side, who séeth not, (for this I speak but
in way of parenthesis) in ye meane tyme, their
owne howses and mansion places,Sūpteousnes of their owne mansions. are curiously
build, and sumpteously adorned: which
plainly argueth, that they rather bestow this
drunken got-money, vppon prophane vses
and their own priuat affaires, than vpon the
howse of prayer, or the temple of God: And
yet this their doing is wel liked of, and no mā
may say, black is their eye. For why? Thei do
all things well, and according to good order,
as the say. And when time commeth, like good
accoumptantes they make ther accoumptes,
as please themselues.
            
            
               Sp.
               Were it not better, & more consonant to
y• truth, that euery one contributed somewhat
according to his abilitie to y• maintenance of
templaries & oratories, thā thus to maintaine
thē, by drunkē churchales? as you say, thei do?
            
            
               
               Philo.
               It weare muche better: And so we
read, the Fathers of the old Testament,Churges are to be maintained by mutuall contribution of euery one after his power. euery
one after his abilitie did impart some what,
to the building and restauration of the Tabernacle,
which Moyses erected to the Lord.
So, as in the end, there was such aboundance
of all things, as y• Artificers, consulting with
Moyses were glad to request the People, to
stay their liberalitie, for they had more, than
they knew what to do withall. These People
made no drunken Church-ales to build their
edefice withal: notwithstanding, their importable
charges and intollerable costes. But as
their zeel was feruēt, and very commendable
in bringing to the Church, so our zeal is more
than frosen & blame worthie in detracting frō
the Church: and bestowing it vpon whordom
drunkennesse,Our zeal waxen cold and frosen, in respect of the zeal of the former world gluttony, pride, and such like
abhominations: God amend it▪
                  
               
            
            
               Spud.
               How do they solemnise their feastes
and wakesses there, and what order do they
obserue in them?
            
         
         
            The maner of keeping
of Wakesses, and feasts in Ailgna.
            
               Philoponus.
               THis is their order therein: euery towne,
parishe and Uillage, some at one tyme
of the Yéere, some at another (but

so that euery towne, parish & village kéep his
proper day assigned and appropriat to it self,
(which they call their Wak day) vse to make
great preparation, and ordenaunce for good
chéer. To the which all their Fréends and
kyns-folks farre and néer are inuited, wher is
such gluttony: such drunkennesse: such saturitie
and impletion vsed, as the like was neuer
séen. In so muche, as the poore men that
beare y• charges of these feasts and wakesses,Saturitie in feasts and wakesses. are the poorer, and kéep the Worser howses
a long tyme after. And no marueil, for manie
spend more at one of these wakesses, than in
all the whole yéer besides.The great charges of Wakesses. This makes many
a one to thripple & pinch, to runne into debte
and daunger, and finallie, brings many a one
to vtter ruine and decay.
            
            
               Spud.
               Wold you not haue one fréend to visite
another at certen tymes of the yéer?
            
            
               Philo.
               I disalowe it not, but much commēd
it. But why at one determinat day, more
than at another (except busines vrged it) why
should one and ye same day continue for euer,Against wakes & feasts.
or be distinct from other dayes, by the name
of a wake day? why should there be more excesse
of meats and drinks at that day, than at
another? why should they abstaine from bodely
labor. ij. or thrée dayes after, peraduenture,
the whole week, spending it in drunkennesse,
whordome, gluttony, and other filthie Sodomiticall

exercyses.
            
            
               Spud.
               Séeing you allowe of one Fréend to

                     •
                  isite another, would you not haue thē to congratulat
their comming with some good chéer?
            
            
               Philo.
               Yes truely, but I allowe not of such
excesse of ryot & superfluitie as is there vsed.
I thinke, it conuenient for one Fréend to visite
another (at sometimes) as oportunitie &
occasion shall offer it selfe,Wherto wakesses and feasts do very aptly tend. but wherfore shuld
the whole towne, parish, village and cuntrey,
kéepe one and the same day, and make such
gluttonous feasts as they doo? And therfore,
to conclude, they are to no end, except it be to
draw a great frequencie of whores, drabbes,
theiues and verlets together, to maintai
                     •
                  e
whordome, bawdrie, gluttony, drunkennesse,
thiefte, murther, swearing and all kind of mischief
and abhomination. For, these be the
ends wherto these feastes, and wakesses doo
tende.
            
            
               Spud.
               From whence sprang these feasts and
wakesses first of all, can you tell?
            
            
               Philo.
               I cannot tell,From whence these annuall feasts and stacionarie wakesses had their beginning. except from the Paganes
and heathen People, who whan they
were assembled together, and had offred Sacrifices
to their wodden Goddes and blokish
ydols, made feasts and banquets together before
them, in honour and reuerence of them,
so appointed the same yéerly to be obscrued in
memoriall of the same, for euer: But whence

soeuer they had their exordium, certē it is, the
deuill was ye Father of them, of drown vs in
perdition and destruction of body and soule:
which GOD forefend.
            
            
               Sp.
               As I remember, you spoke of dauncing
before, inferring y• the 
                     •
                  abaoth is greatly prophaned
therby: whereof I pray you shew mée
your iudgement.
            
         
         
            The horrible Vice of
pestiferous dauncing, vsed in Ailgna.
            
               Philoponus.
               DAuncing, as it is vsed (or rather abused)
in these daies, is an introductiō to whordom,
a preparatiue to wantonnes, a prouocatiue
to vncleanes, & an introite to al kind
of lewdenes, rather than a pleasant exercyse
to y• mind, or a holsome practise for ye body: yet
notwithstanding, in Ailg. both men, wemen
& childrē, are so skilful in this laudable sciēce,
as they maye be thought nothing inferiour to
Cynoedus, y• prostitut ribauld, nor yet to Sardanapalus
that effeminat varlet. Yea thei are
not ashamed to erect scholes of daūcing,
                     
                        •
                     choles of d
                        •
                     uncing e
                        •
                     ected. thinking
it an ornament to their childrē, to be expert
in this noble science of heathen diuelrie:
and yet this people glory of their christianitie
& integritie of life: Indead, 
                     verbo tenus Christiani
boni vocitentur: But vita & moribus
Ethnicis, & paganis peiores reperiētur.
                   Frō
                  
y• mouth outward, they may be said to be good
Christians, but in life & maners, farre worser
than the heathen, or Paganes: Wherof, if they
repent not, & amend, it shalbe easier for that
Land of Sodoma and Gomorra at the day of
iudgement then for them.
            
            
               Sp.
               I haue heard it said, y• dauncing is both
a recreation for the minde, & also an exercyse
for the body, very holsome, and not only that,
but also, a meane wherby loue is acquired.
            
            
               Ph.
               I will not much denie,Dauncing a pleasure to them that delight in vanities. but being vsed
in a meane, in tyme and place conueniente,
it is a certē solace to the minds of such as take
pleasure in such vanities, but it is not good
reason to say, some mē take pleasur in a thing
ergo, it is good, but the cōtrarie is true rather:
For this is (basis veritatis) a ground of truth,
y• whatsoeuer a carnall man with vncircumcised
heart, either desireth, or taketh pleasure
in, is most abhominable & wicked before god:
As on the other side, what the spirituall man
regenerat, & borne anew in Christ, by the direction
of God his spirit desireth or taketh delight
in, is good, and according to the will of
God. And seeing mās nature is too procli
                     •
                  e of
it selfe to sinne, it hath no need of alluremēts
& allections to sin (as dauncing is) but rather
of restraints & inhibitiōs frō the same▪
                  What a 
                        •
                     urements to sin, be in dauncing. which
are not there to be found. For what clipping,
what culling, what kissing and bussing, what

smouching & s
                     •
                  abbering one of another, what
filthie groping and vncleane handling is not
practised euery wher in these dauncings? yea
the very deed and action it selfe, which I will
not name for offending chast eares, shall be
purtrayed and shewed foorth in their bawdye
gestures of one to another. All which, whither
they blow vp Venus cole, or not, who is
so blind that séeth not? wherfore, let them not
think that it is any recreation (which word
is abusiuely vsed to expresse the ioyes, or delightes
of y• mind,Dauncing no recreation, but a corrosiue to a good Christian. which signifieth a making
againe of that, which before was made) to
the mind of a good Christian, but rather a corrosiue
most sharp and nipping. For seing that
it is euill in it self, it is not a thing wherin a
Christiā Mans heart may take any comfort.
               The 
                     •
                  nely,The onely thing, wherin a good christian doth delight. 
                  summum bonum, wherin a true
Christians heart is recreated and comforted,
is the meditatiō of y• passion of Iesus Christ,
the effusion of his blood, the remission of sins,
and the contemplation of the ineffable ioyes
and beatituds after this life, prepared for the
faithfull, in the blood of Iesus Christ. This is
the only thing, wherin a Christian mā ought
to reioyse, and take delight in, all other pleasures
& delights of this lyfe set a parte, as amarulent
and bitter, bringing foorth fruit to
eternall destruction, but the other, to eternall
lyfe: And wheras they conclude, it is a holesome

exercise for the bodie, the contrary is
moste true, for I haue knowen diuers by the
immoderate vse therof, haue in short time become
decrepit and lame, so remaining to their
dying day. Some haue broke their legs with
skipping,Dancing no holsom exercise for the Bodie. leaping, turning and vawting, and
some haue come by one hurt, some by another
but neuer any came from thence without sōe
parte of his minde broken and lame, such a
wholsome exercise it is. But say they it induceth
looue, so I say also, but what looue?
               Truely a lustful loue, a venereous looue, a concupiscencious,
baudie & beastiall looue, such as
procéedeth from the stinking pump and lothsome
sink of carnall affection, and fleshly appetite,What looue dancing procureth.
and not such as distilleth from the bowels
of the hart ingenerat by the spirit of God.
               Wherfore, I exhort them in the bowels of
Iesus Christ to eschue not only from euil, but
also from all apperance of euil, as the Apostle
willeth them, proceeding from one vertue to
another, vntil they growe to perfect men in
Christe Iesus, knowing that we must giue
accoūts at y• day of iudgment of euery minut
and iote of time, from the day of our birth to
the time of our death: for there is nothing
more precious,We must render accounts for time heer lent vs. then time, which is giuen
vs to glorifie God in good-woorks, and not to
spend in luxurious exercises after our owne
fantasies and delights.
            
            
               
               Spud.
               But I haue heard then: affirme that
daūcing is prouable by the woord of God: for
(say they) did not the women come foorth of
all the Cities of Israel to méet king Saule?
                  1 Sa. 18. and
Dauid returning from the slaughter of Goliath,
with psalteries, flutes, tabrets, Cymbals
and other musicall Instruments, dauncing &
leaping before them?Exo. 15. Did not the Israelites
hauing passed ouer the red sea bring foorth
their Instruments and danced for ioy of their
deliuerance?Exo. 32.
               
               Againe
                     •
                  , did they not daunce before th
                     •
                  
golden Calf, which they had made, in Horeb
or Sinai? Did not king Dauid daunce before
the Ark of the Lord?2. Sa. 6. Did not the Daughter
of Iephtah daunce with tabret and harp
at the return of her Father from the Féeld?Iudic, 11.
Did not the women of the Israelits dance comming
to visit
                     •
                   good Iudith?
                  Iudic. 15, Did not the Damsel
dance before King Herod?
                  Mat. 14, Did not Christ
blame ye people for their not dancing, when he
said,Luc. 7. wee haue pyped vnto you, but you haue
Eccle. 3. not daunced?
               Saith not Salomon, 
                  there is a tune to wéep
and a time to laughe, a time to mourne
and a time to daunce?
               
               And dooth not the Prophet Dauid in many
places of his Psalmes commend and commaund
dauncing and playing vpon Instruments
of Musick.
               
                  Wherfore (for thus they conclude) séeing these
holy Fathers (wherof some were guided by
the instinction of God his Spirit) haue not
only taught it in doctrine, but also expressed it
by their Examples of life,No mā wit
                        •
                     
                     out errors both in lyfe
                        •
                      and doctrin
                        •
                     
                   who may open his
mouth once to speake against it.
            
            
               Philo.
               The Fathers as they were men
had their errors and erred as men, for Hominis
est errare, decipi et labi: it is naturall
for man to erre, to be deceiued & to slide from
the trueth. Therfore the Apostle saith: follow
mée in all things as I follow Christ: but to ye
intent that they who perpend the Examples
of the Fathers, and Scripture falsly wrested,
to maintaine their
                     •
                   deuilish dauncings withall,
may sée their owne impietie & grosse ignorance
discouered, I wil cōpendiously set down
the true sence and meaning of euery place, as
they haue cyted them perticulerly. For the
first: wheras they say that the Women came
foorth in daunces with timbrels and Instruments
of Ioy to méet Dauid and Saule,
                  1. Sa. 18. I
aske them for what cause they did so?The first pillare of dauncing ouerthrowen.
               
               Was it for wantonnes or for very ioye of
hart, for their Uictorie gotten ouer the Philistines
their sworne Enemies? Was it
in prayse of GOD? or to stirre vp filthie lust
in them selues, or for nicenes onely, as our
daunces bée?
               
                  Did men and women daunce togither, as is
now vsed to be doon: or rather was it not doon
amongst women only? for so saith the text,
the women came foorth &c. But admit it
were neither so,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      good cō
                     
                     
                        •
                     uent to say 
                        •
                     ers did so, 
                        •
                     o it is 
                        •
                     od, or wee 
                        •
                     y doo the 
                        •
                     e. nor so, wil they conclude a
generall rule, of a particuler example? it is
no good reason to say such and such did so, therfore
it is good, or we may doo so, but all things
are to be poysed in ye balance of holy scripture
and therby to be allowed or disalowed, according
to the meaning of the holy Ghost, who is
only to be heard and obeyed in his woord.
               The Israelitish women hearing of the fame
of Dauid, and how he had killed their deadly
enemie Goliath, came foorth to méet him playing
vpon instrumēts, dancing & singing songs
of ioye and thanks-giuing to the Lord who
had giuen them victorie and deliuered them,
from the deadly hostilitie of him, who sought
their distruction euery way. Now what maketh
this, for our le
                     •
                  d, wanton, nice and vbiquitarie
dauncings, for so, I may call them
because they be vsed euery where, let the godly
iudge:
                     
                        •
                     he differēce 
                        •
                     etween the 
                        •
                     ances of our 
                        •
                     orefathers, 
                        •
                     nd ours. who seeth not rather y• this example,
(let Cerberus the dog of hel alatrate what he
list to the cōtrary) clean ouerthroweth them.
Theirs was a godly kind of dācing in praise
of God: ours a lustful, baudie kinde of deame
                     •
                  our,
in praise of our selues: the
                     •
                  rs to shew
their inward ioy of minde for the blessings of

God bestowed vpon them, ours to show our
actiuitie, agilitie and curious nicitie and to
procure lustful looue and such like wickednes
infinit: But to their second allegation:Their s
                        •
                     co
                        •
                      Pillar shak
                        •
                     
                   ye Children
(say they) of Israel danced being deliuered
out of the seruitude of Pharo and hauing passed
ouer the red sea: I graunt they did so, and
good cause they had so to doo: For were they
not emancipate and set frée from thrée great
calamities and extreame miseries? First frō
the serui
                     •
                  e bondage of Egipt, from the swoord
of Pharo, who pursued the rereward of their
hoste, and from the danger of the red sea, their
enemies béeing ouerwhelmed in the same.
               For these great and inestimable benefits and
blessings receiued at the hands of God, they
played vpon Instruments of musick, leaped,
daunced, and sung godly songs vnto ye Lord,
shewing by these outward gestures ye inward
ioy of their harts and mindes. Now what
conduceth this, for the allowance of our luxurious
dauncings?How the Isr
                        •••
                     lits danced
                        •
                     
                   Is it not directly against
them? They danced for ioy in thanks to god,
wée for vainglorie
                     •
                  : they for looue to God, wée
for looue of our selues: they to shew the interior
ioy of the minde for God his blessing, heaped
vpon them: we to shew our concinitie, dexteritie,
and vain curiositie in the same: they
to stir vp and to make them selues the apter
to praise God, we to stir vp carnall appetites

and fleshlie motions: they to shewe their humilitie
before God, and we to shew our pride
both before God and ye world. But how so euer
it be, sure I am, their dauncing was not
like 
                     •
                  ures, cōsisting in measures, capers, quauers,
& I cannot tel what, for thei had no such
leas
                     •
                  re in Egigt to learne such vaine curiosity
in that lustfull bawdie schoole, for making
of brick and tyles.The daūcing of our Forfa
                     
                        •
                     hers mai not 
                        •
                     e called a 
                        〈◊〉
                     , but 
                        〈…〉
                      Godly 
                        〈…〉
                     . for ioy And notwithstanding, it is
ambiguous whether this may be called a daū
                  cing
or not, at lest not like oures, but rather a
cer
                     ••
                  
                  ̄ kind of modest leaping, skipping, or moouing
of the body to expresse the ioye of ye mind
in prayse of God, as the Man did, who being

                     〈◊〉
                   by the power of our S
                     •
                  uiour Christe,

                     ••
                  alked in the Temple, leapping, skipping, &
praising God.
               We neuer read, that they euer daunced,
but at some wonderfull por
                     •
                  ent, or straunge
iudgment of God, and therfore, made not a
common practise of it, or a daylie occupation
as it were, much lesse set vp schools of it, and
frequenting nothing els night and day, Sabaoth
day,Their .3. Reason▪ 
                     
                        •
                     examined. and other, as we do. But to
their third Reason: The Israelits daūced before
the Calf in Horeb. And what than?
They made a Golden Calf, and adored it,
maye we therfore do the like? They committed
ydolatrie there, therfore is ydolatrie
good, because they committed it?
               
                  
                  Adam, disobyed GOD, and obeyed the
deuil: is obedience therfore to the deuil good,
because hee did so?
               Therfore wée must not take héede what
man hath doon héertofore, but what God hath
commaunded in his woord to be doon, and that
followe, euen to the death. But to be short,
as it is a friuilous thing to say, because they
committed Idolatrie, therfore may wée doo
the like, so it is no lesse ridiculous, to say, because
they daunced, therfore wée may doo the
same: for as it is not lawful to commit Idolatrie,
because they did so, so is it not lawfull
to daunce, because they daun
                     •
                  ed.
               So that if this place inferre any thing for
dauncing, it inferreth that wee must neuer
daunce but before a golden Calf, as they did:
but I think by this time, they are ashamed of
their dances: therfore, of this place I néed to
sayn
                     •
                   more, giuing thē to note, that this their
dauncing in respect of the end therof, was
farre dissonant from ours: for they daunced
in honour of their Idol, wee clean contrary
though neither the one nor the other be at any
hand tollerable.
               Their fourth reason,Their .4. Reason. Did not Dauid
daunce before the Ark, say they? very true:
and this place (as the rest before) refelleth
their customarie dauncings of men and women
togither moste excellentlie. For

                  Dauid danced him selfe alone, without either
woman, or musicall Instrument to effeminate
the minde. And this dauncing of Dauid
was no vsuall thing, nor frequēted euery day
but that one time, and that in prayse of God,
for the deliuerie of the Ark of God his testament
out of the hands of the Infidels and hethen
people: the ioy of this holy Prophet was
so vehement, for this great blessing of GOD
(such a feruēt zeale he bore to the trueth) that
it burst foorth into exterior action, y• more to induce
others to prayse God also. Would God
we would dance as Dauid daunced héer, for
the deliuerie of his alsauing woord out of the
hands of that Italian Philistin & archenemy of
all trueth, the Pope of Roome, for in this respect
I would make one to daunce, to leap, to
skip, to triumph, and reioyce as Dauid did
before the Ark.Why Dauid d
                        •
                     unced before the Ark. By this I trust any indifferent
man séeth, that by this place, they gain
as much for the maintenance of their▪ leude
dancings, and baudie chorusses, as they did
by citing the former places, that is iust nothing
at all, which they may put in their eies
and see neuer the w
                     •
                  rsse?
               Their fift reason.Their fift Reson examined. Did not Ieptath his daughter
méet her Father when he came from war
dancing before him, and playing vppon Instruments
of Ioy. Ieptath going foorth
to warre against the Amonites promised the

Lord (making a rashe vowe) that if it would
please his Maiestie to giue him victorie ouer
his Ennemies, he wold sacrifice the first lyuing
thing that shuld meet him frō his house:
It pleased GOD that his sole daughter and
heire hearing of her Fathers prosperous return
(as the maner of the Cuntrey was) ran
foorth to meete her Father playing vppon instruments,
in praise of GOD, and dauncing
before him for ioye. Now what prooueth this
for their daunces? Truely, it ouerthroweth
them if it be well considered: for first, we read
that she did this but once, we daylie: She in
prayse of God, we in prayses▪ of our selues:Wherfore & how the Daughters of Iepthath daū
                     ced.
she for ioy of her Fathers good successe, we to
stere vp filthie and vncleane motions: She
with a virginall grauitie, we with a babish
leuitie: she in comly maner, we in bawdie gesture.
And moreouer, this sheweth, that women
are to daunce by themselues (if they wil
néeds daunce▪) and men by themselues, for so
importeth the Tert, making no mention of
any other her collegues,Ther. 6. Reason. Iudith. Ca. 15. or Companions dancing
with her.
               Their .vi. Reason: Did not y• 
                  Israelitish wemen
daunce before Iudith, comming to visit
her? I graunt they did s
                     •
                  : the storie is thus.
               
                  Holofernes, opposing himselfe, against the
Israelits, the chosen people of GOD, and intending
to ouerthrowe them, and to blot out▪
                  
their remembrance for euer from vnder heauen,
assembled a huge power, and besieged
them on euery side.
               The Israelits, séeing themselues circumvalled
and in great daunger on eachside, suborned
good Iudith,
                  Iudith cutteth of the head of holofernes. a vertous Godlye Woman
(for without some stratagem, or pollicie
wrought, it was vnpossible for them in
the eyes of ye world, to haue escaped) to repaire
to Holofernes, & by some meanes or other
to work his destruction: who guided by the
hand of God, attempted the thing & brought
it happely to passe. For she cut of his head
with his owne fauchine, wrapping his body
in the canopie, wherin he lay sléepingly possest
as he was with ye spirit of drunkennesse: this
done, the Women of Israell came together,
and went to visit this worthie Woman, and
to cōgratulat her prosperous successe, with instruments
of musick, singing of Godly songs,
and dauncing for ioye, in h
                     •
                  nor and prayse to
God, for this great victorie obtained. Now
who s
                     •
                  eth not, that these women sang, daūced,
and played vppon instrumentes in prayse of
God,The vnlawfullnes of dauncing of men and women together & not for any other lewdnes, or wantonnes,
as cōmonly the world doth now adaies?
This also ouerthroweth the dauncinges of
Men and Women together in one companie:
for though there was an infinite number of
People by, yet the Text saith, there daunced

none, but onely Women, which plainly argueth
the vnlawfulnesse of it in respecte of
Man. And this being but a particular fact
of a sort of imprudent Women, shall we
draw it into example of lyfe, and thinke it
lawfull, or good, because they did practife it?
               It was a custome in those dayes, when God
had powred foorth and notable blessing vpon
his People from his Heauenly Pallace,A customet daunce in prayse of God. the
People in honour, praise and thankesgiuing
to God for them▪ would, play vppon their instruments,
sing Godly Songs, daunce, leape,
skip and triumphe, shewing foorth the ioye of
their mindes, with their thankefulnesse to
GOD, by all exteriour gestures, that they
could deuyse. Which kinde of thankefull
dauncing, or spirituall reioycing, wold God,
we did follow, leauing all other wanton dancing
to their Father the Deuill.
               Their .vij. Reason:Ther. 7. Reason. Did not (quothe
they) the Damosell daunce before Kinge
Herode, when the head of Iohn Baptist was
cut of? She daunced indeed: And herein
they maye sée the fruite of dauncing, what
goodnesse it bringeth: For, was not this
the cause of the beheading of Iohn the Baptist?
Sée whether dauncing,Dauncing styrreth vp lust. styreth not vp
lust and inflameth the mind.
               For, if Herode with séeing her daunce, was
so inflamed in her loue, and rauished in her

behauiour, that he promised her, to giue her
whatsoeuer she wold desire, though it were
half of his Emperie, or Kingdome: what wold
he haue béene, if he had daunced with her?
and what are those that daunce with them,
hand in hand, chéek by chéek, with bussing
and kissing, slabbering and smearing, most
beastly to behold? in so much, as I haue heard
many impudently say, that they haue chosen
their Wyues, and wyues their Husbands by
dauncing: Which plainely proueth the wickednesse
of it. Their .viij. reason:Their. 8. Reason. Luc. 7. Did not
Christ rebuke the People, for not dauncing,
saying: we haue pyped vnto you, but you haue
not daunced. They may as well conclude
that Christ in this place, was a Pyper, or a
Minstrell, as that he alowed of dauncing, or
reproued them, for not excercysing the same.
               This is a Metaphoricall, or Allegoricall
kinde of speach, wherin our Sauiour Christ,
goeth about to reprooue and checke the styfneckednes,
the rebellion and pertinacious cō
                  tumacy
of y• 
                  Scribes and Phariseis, who were
neither mooued to receiue the glad tydings
of the Gospell by the austeritie of Iohn the
Baptiste,
                  The more than obdu
                        •
                     at hardnes of the Iewes. who came preaching vnto them the
doctrine of repētaunce, in mourning sort: neither
yet at the preaching of our Sauiour him
selfe, breaking vnto them the pure Ambrosia,
the Coelestial Manna, the word of life in ioyfull,

and gladsome maner.
               
                  Ihon the Baptist he piped vnto them, that
is, he preached vnto them, austeritie of life, to
mourn for their sinnes, to repent, to fast, pray
and such like. Our Sauiour Christ he pyped
(that is) preached vnto them, the glad &
comfortable tidyngs of ye Gospell, yet at neither
of these kinde of concions, they were any
whit mooued, either to imbrace Christ, or his
gospell: Wherfore he, sharply rebuketh them,
by a similitude of foolishe Children sitting in
the market place, and piping vnto them that
wold not daunce. This is the true vndoubted
sence of this place, which, whether it ouerthrow
not all kinde of lewd dauncing (at lest
maketh nothing for them) allowing a certen
king of spirituall dauncing, and reioysing of
the heart vnto God (that I may suspend my
owne iudgement) let wyse men determine.Eccle. 3. Their. 9. Reason.
               
               Their .ix. Reason: Saith not Salomon, there
is a time to wéep, & a time to laugh, a time to
mourn, and a time to daunce? This place is
directly against their vsuall kinde of dauncing.
For, saith not the Text, there is a time,
meaning, somtime, now and than, as the Israelites
did in prayse to GOD, when anie
notable thing happened vnto them, and not
euery daye and howre as we do, making an
occupatiō of it, neuer leauing it, vntil it leaue
vs. But what, and if Salomon
                  Salomō meaneth a certen kind of a spituall daūcing or reioying of the heart. speaketh here

of a certen kind of spiritual dauncing, and reioysing
of ye heart in praise to GOD? This
is easily gathered by the circumstances of the
place, but specially by the sentence precedent
(vz. there is a time to mourn, & a time to dā
                  ce
&c.) that is, a time to mourn for our sinnes,
& a tyme to daūce or reioyse, for the vnspeakable
treasures purchased vnto vs by ye death
& passion of Iesus christ. How much this place
maketh for defence of their nocturnall, diuturnall,
wanton, lewde and lascivious dauncings
(if it be censured in the imparciall ballance
of true iudgement) all ye world may sée
aud iudge. And now to draw to an end, I will
come vnto their vltimum refugium.
                  Their vltimū refugium. That is:
Doth not Dauid both commend, and also cō
                  maunde
dauncing and playing vpon instruments
in diuerse of his Psal. In all those places,
ye Prophet speaketh of a certē kind of spirituall
dauncing and reioysing of the heart to
y• Lord for his graces & benefits in mercie bestowed
vpon vs. This is the true kinde of
dauncing, which the word of God doth allow
of in any place, and not that we should trippe
like rammes,Why our feet were giuē vs. skip like goats, & leap like mad
men. For, to y• end our féet were not giuē vs,
but rather to represent yeimage of God in vs,
to keep Companie with the Angels, & to glorifie
our heuenly Father thorow good works.
            
            
               Spud.
               Do you condemne al kinde of dauncing,

as wicked and prophane?
            
            
               Ph.
               All lewde, wanton, & lasciuious dauncing
in publique assemblies & conuenticles,
without respect either of sex, kind, time, place,
Person, or any thing els, I by the warrant of
the word of God, do vtterly condemne: But
that kind of dauncing which is vsed to praise
and laud the name of God withall (as weareWhat dauncing is condemned by the word of God.
the daūces of the people of the former world)
either priuatly or publiquely is at no hand to
be dysallowed, but rather to be greatly commended.
Or if it be vsed for mans comfort,
recreation, and Godly pleasure▪ priuatly (euery
sex distincted by themselues) whether with
musick, or otherwyse, it cannot be but a very
tollerable exercise, being vsed moderatly, and
in ye feare of God. And thus, though, I condē
                  ne
all filthie, luxurious and vncleane dauncing,
yet I condemne not al kind of dauncing
generally. For certen it is, the exercyse it self,
in it own nature, qualitie & proprietie, though
to some it is lawfull, to othersome vnlawfull
in dyuerse respects, is both ancient & general,
hauing been vsed euer in all ages, as wel of ye
Godly, as of ye wicked, almost from the beginning.
Wherfore, when I cōdemne the same
in some, my meaning is, in respecte of the
manifold abuses therof. And in my iudgement
as it is vsed now a dayes, an occupatiō
being made of it, and a continuall exercyse,

without any difference or respect had either to
time, Person, sex or place in publique assemblies
and frequencies of People, with suche
beastlie slabberings, bussings & smouchings
and other filthie gestures & misdeameanors
therein accustomed, it is as vnpossible to be
vsed without doing of inf
                     •
                  nit hurt, as it is for
a naked Man to lye in the middest of a hote
burning fire, and not to consume. But these
abuses with other y• like (as there be legions
moe in it) being cut of from the ex
                     •
                  ercyse it
selfe, the thing remayneth very commendable
in some respectes. Or els, if our daunces
tended, as I haue said, to the setting foorth of
GOD his glorie (as the daunces vsed in preter
time did) to draw others to pietie and sanctitie
of life, and to praise and reioyce in God,
to recreat y• minde oppressed with some great
toyle, or labor taken in true virtue and godlynes,
I would not (being don in the feare of
GOD, men by them selues, and Wemen by
thē selues, for els it is not possible to be without
sinne) much gainstand it. But I see the
contrarie is euery where vsed to ye great dishonor
of God,Why men 
                        ••
                     old daunce 
                        •
                     y themselfes and women by themselfs. and corruption of good maners,
which God amend.
            
            
               Spud.
               And wherfore, would you haue Men
to daunce by them selues, and Women by
them selues?
            
            
               Philo.
               Because it is without all doubte▪ a

prouocation to lust and venery, and the fire
of lust once conceiued,Why men should dance by thē selues and Women by thē selues. (by some irruption
or other) bursteth foorthe into open action
of whoredome and fornication. And therfore
a certain godly Father saidwel, Omnis saltus
in chorea, est saltus in profundum inferni,
Euery leap or skip in dance, is a leap toward
hel. Yet notwithstanding in Ailgna it is coū
                  ted
a vertue, and an ornament to a man, yea,
and the onely way to attaine to promotion &
aduancement, as experience teacheth.
            
            
               Spud,
               Notwithstanding, for my further instruction,
I pray you showe mée what Fathers
and Councels haue iudged of it, and
what they haue writ and decréed against it.
            
            
               Philo.
               If I should goe foorth to shew all the
inuectiues of Fathers, all the decrées of councels,
and all the places of holy Scripture against
the same,Testimonies of Fathers councels, and Writers against dauncing. I should neuer make an end:
wherfore, of many I wil select a few, hoping
that they wil suffice any reasonable man.
               
                  Syrach saith, frequent not the company of a
woman, that is a singer or a dauncer, neither
heare her,Eccle. 131 least thou be intrapped in her craftines.
Chrisostome, dylating vpon Mathew
saith: In euery dance, the deuil daunceth by,
for companie, though not visible to ye eye, yet
palpable to ye minde.Mat. 
                        ••
                     . 
                  Theophilus, writing vpon
Mark y• sixt Chapter saith, Mira collusio
saltat per puellam Diabolus This is a wunderful

deceit, for the deuil danceth amōgst thē
for company. Augustine
                  Augustine. writing vpon the
32. Psalme, saith,Erasmus. it is better to digge all the
Sabaoth day, then to dance. Erasmus, in his
Booke, de contemptu Mundi, saith, Whose
minde is so well disposed, so stable, or
wel setled, which these wanton dances, with
swinging of armes, kicking of legs, playing
vpon instruments, and such like would not ouercome
and corrupt: Wherfore saith hée, as
thou desirest thine owne credit, and welfare,
Lodouicus viues. eschew these scabbed and scuruy companie of
dauncers.
               
                  Ludouicus Viues saith, amongst all pleasures,
dauncing and voluptuousnes is the
kingdome of Venus, and the empire of Cupid:
wherfore, saith hée, it were better for thée
to stay at home, and to break either a leg, or
an arme of thy body, then to break the legges
and armes of thy minde & soule, as thou doost
in filthie scuruy dauncings. And as in all
Feasts and pastimes, dauncing is the last, so
it is the extream of all other vice:Dauncers thought to be mad-men. And again,
there were (saith he) from far cuntries, certain
men brought into our parts of ye world,
who when they saw men daunce, ran away,
meruelously affraid: crying out and thinking
thē to haue béen mad. And no meruaile, for
who seing them leap, skip & trip like Goates &
and hindes, if hee neuer saw thē before, would

not think them either mad, or els possest with
some furie? Bullinger,
                  Bullinger. paraphrasting vpō 
                  Mathew,
14. saith, After feasting swilling and
gulling commeth dancing, the root of all filthynes
and vncleannes.
               Maister Caluin,
                  Caluin. writing vpon Iob, Ser. 8.
Cap. 12. calleth dauncing the chéefe mischéef
of all mischéefs, saying there be such vnchast
gestures in it, as are nothing els, but inticements
to whordome.
               
                  Marlorate, vpon Mathew saith, whosoeuer
hath any care either of honestie, sobrietie or
grauitie, haue long since bad adieu to all filthie
dauncing.
               No man (saith a certaine heathen Writer)
if hée be sober daunceth, except hée be mad.
               
                  Salustius,
                  Salust. commending Sempronia that
renowmed whore, for many goodly gifts, condemneth
her for her ouer great skil in dauncing:
concluding, that dauncing is the Instrument
of lecherie.
               
                  Cicero, saith,Cicero. a good man would not dance
in open assembles, though hee might by it
get infinite treasure.
               The Councel of Laodecea decréed that it
should not be lawful for any Christiā to dance
at mariages or at any sollemne feast.
               It an other Councel it was enacted, that
no man should daunce at any marriage, nor
yet at any other time.
               
                  The Emperour Iustinian decréed, that for
no respect in feasts or assemblies, there should
be any dauncing, for feare of corrupting the
Beholders, and inticing men to sinne.
               Thus you may see, bothe Scripture, councels
and Fathers, holy and prophane,All Writers bothe holy and prophane against dauncing. heathen
and other, euen all ingenerall, haue detested
and abhorred this 
                     •
                  ilthie dauncing, as the
quauemire or plash of all abhomination: and
therfore, it is no exercise for any Christians
to followe: for it stirreth vp the motions of ye
flesh, it induceth lust, it inferreth 
                     •
                  a
                     •
                  drie, affoordeth
ribaldrie, maintaineth wantonnes, &
ministreth oile to y• stinking lamp of deceitful
pride: and in summa, nourisheth a world of
wickednes and sinne.Dauncing a World of sin
               
            
            
               Spud
               Now that the wickednes of it, is so
manifestly shewed, that no man can denie it,
I pray you who inuented this noble science,
or from whence sprang it?
            
            
               Philo.
               Héereof,Who inuented dauncing and from whome it sprang, there be sundry and diuers
opinions: for some holde and opinion (and very
likely) that it sprang from the heathen idolatrous
Pagans 
                  
                     •
                  nd Infidels, who hauing offred
vp their sacrifices victimats and holocaustes
to their false Gods, in reuerence of
them, and for ioy of their so dooing, vsed to
daunce, leape, and skip before them.
               And this may be prooued by the Israelits thē
                  selues,
who hauing seen and learned the same

practise in Egipt, feared not to imitate the like
in the wildernes of Horeb: some again, suppose
that Pyrrhus one of Sibils Preists deuise
                     •
                  
it in Creet. Others holde that the Priests
of Mars, who in Roome were had in great
estimation for their dexteritie in daūcing, inuented
it:A Supposall who inuēted dauncing. Others think y• one Hiero a truculent
and bloody Tirant in Sicilia, who to set
vp his tyrannie the more, inhibited the people
to speake one to an other, for feare of insurrections
and commotions in his kingdome
was the occasiō of y• inuenting therof: for whē
the Sicilians, sawe that they might not vnder
pain of death one speak to another, they inuē
                  ted
dauncing to expresse the inward meaning
and intentiōs of the minde by outward 
                     •
                  ecks
and exteriour gestures of the body, which vse
afterward grew into custome, and now into
nature. But what so
                     •
                  uer men say of it, or
from whence soeuer it sprang, S. Chrisostom
saith plainly (to whom I willingly subscribe)Vnpossible that dancing should be good.
that it sprang from the t
                     •
                  ates of the Deuils
brest, from whence all mischeef els dooth flow:
Therfore to conclude, if of the egges of a Cokatrice,
may be made good meat for man to
eat, and if of the web of a spider, can be made
good cloth for mans body, then may it be prooued
that dancing is good and an exercise fitte
for a christian man to followe, but not before:
               Wherfore God of his mercy take it away

from vs.
            
            
               Spud,
               What say you of Musick, is it not
a laudable science?
            
         
         
            Of Musick in
Ailgna, and how it allureth
to vanitie.
            
               Philo.
               
                  I Say of Musick, as Plato, Aristotle, Galen
and many others haue said of it, that
it is very il for yung heds, for a certaine
kinde of nice, smoothe swéetnes in alluring
the auditorie to nicenes, effeminacie, pusilla
                     •
                  mitie,
A comparison betwixt hony and dancing. & lothsōnes of life, so as it may not
improperly be compared to a swéet electuarie
of honie, or rather to honie it self, for as honie
and such like swéet things receiued into y•
stomack, dooth delight at the first, but afterward
they make the stomack so quasie, nice
and weake, that it is not able to admit meat
of hard digesture. So swéet Musick, at the
first delighteth the eares, but afterward corrupteth
and depraueth the minde, making it
weake, and quasie, and inclined to all licenciousnes
of lyfe whatsoeuer.Wits dulled by Musick.
               
               And right as good edges are not sharpned,

(but obtused) by béeing whetted vpon softe
stones, so good wits by hearing of soft musick
are rather dulled then sharpned, and made
apt to all wantonnes and sinne. And therfore
Writers affirme Sappho to haue béen expert
in musick,Authors of the bringing in of musick. and therfore whorish.
               
                  Tyrus Maximius saith, the bringing in of
musick, was a cup of poyson to all the world.
               
                  Clytomachus, if hee euer heard any talking
of looue, or playing vpon musicall Instruments,
would run his way and bidde them
farwel.
               
                  Plutarchus, complaineth of Musick, and
saith, that it dooth rather femenine the minde
as pricks vnto vice, then conduce to godlines
as spurres vnto Uertue.
               
                  Pythagoras, condemnes them for fooles,
and bequeathes them a cloke-bag, that measure
Musick by sound and eare. Thus you
heare the iudgement of the wise, concerning
Musick, now iudge therof as y
                     •
                  u list your
self.
            
            
               Spud.
               I haue heard it said, (and I thought
it very true) that Musick dooth delight bothe
man and beast, reuiueth the spirits, comforteth
the hart, and maketh it apter to the seruice
of GOD.
            
            
               Philo.
               I graunt Musick is a good gift of
GOD,Musick the good gift of God. and that it delighteth bothe man

and beast, reuiueth the spirits, comforteth y•
hart, and maketh it redyer to serue GOD,
and therfore did Dauid bothe vse musick him
self, & also commend the vse of it to his posteritie
(and béeing vsed to that end, for mans priuat
recreation musick is very laudable.)
               But béeing vsed in publique assemblies
and priuate conuenticlesOf musick in publique assemblies, and conuenticles. as directories to filthie
dauncing, thorow the swéet harmonie &
smoothe melodie therof, it estraungeth ye mind
stireth vp filthie lust, womannisheth ye minde
rauisheth the hart, enflameth concupisence,
and bringeth in vncleannes. But if musick
openly were vsed (as I haue said) to ye prasie
and glory of God as our Fathers vsed it,How musicke were tollerable & good. and
as was intended by it at the first, or priuatly
in a mans secret Chamber or house for his
owne solace or comfort to driue away the fantasies
of idle thoughts, solicitude, care, sorrowe
and such other perturbations and molestations
of the minde, the only ends wherto
true Musick tends, it were very commendable
and tollerable. If Musick were thus vsed
it would comfort man wunderfully, and
mooue his hart to serue God the better, but
beeing vsed as it is, it corrupteth good minds,
maketh them womannish and inclined to all
kinde of whordome and mischéef.
            
            
               Spud,
               What say you then of Musitions,
& Minstrels who liue only vpon the same art?
            
            
               
               Philo.
               I thinke that all good minstrelles,The scarsity of good musitions and minstrelles.
sober and chast musicions (speking of suche
drunken sockets, and bawdye parasits as rā
                  ge
the Cuntreyes, ryming and singing of vncleane,
corrupt, and filthie songs in Tauernes,
Ale-houses, Innes, and other publique
assemblies) may daūce ye wild Moris thorow
a néedles eye. For how should thei bere chaste
minds, séeing that their exercyse is the pathway
to all vncleanes. Their is no ship,The marchā
                     dise of minstrelles, and musi
                        •
                     ions. so
balanced with massie matter, as their heads

                     •
                  re fraught with all kind of bawdie songs, filthie
ballads, and scuruie rymes, seruing for euery
purpose, and for euery Cumpanie.
               Who be more bawdie than they? who vncleaner
than they, who more licentious, and
loose minded? who more incontinent thā they?
and briefely, who more inclyned to all kind
of insolencie and lewdnes than they?The wickednes of musitions and minstrels. wherfore,
if you wold haue your sonne, softe, womannish,
vncleane, smoth mouthed, affected
to bawdrie, scurrilitie, filthie rimes, and vnsemely
talking: brifly, if you wold haue him, as
it weare transnatured into a womā, or worse,
and inclyned to all kind of whordome and
abhomination, set him to dauncing school, and
to learn musicke, and than shall you not faile
of your purpose.How to haue Children le
                        •
                     
                     ned in all wickedne
                        •
                     . And if you would haue your
daughter whoorish, bawdie, and vncleane, and
a filthie speaker, and such like, bring her vp in

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
musick and dauncing, and my life for youres,
you haue wun the goale.
               And yet notwithstanding it weare better
(in respecte of acceptation) to be a Pyper,The scarcytie of dyuines. or
bawdye minstrell, than a deuyne, for the
one is looued for his ribauldrie, the other hated
for his grauitie, wisdome, and sobrietie.
               Euery towne, Citie and Countrey is full
of these minstrelles to pype vp a dance to the
Deuill, but of dyuines, so few there be as
they maye hardly be séene.
               But some of them will reply and say, what
Sir? we haue lycenses from iustices of peace
to pype, & vse our minstralsie to our best commoditie?
Cursed be those licences, which lycense
any man to get his lyuing, with the destruction
of many thousands.
               But haue you a lycence from the Arch-iustice
of peace Christe Iesus? If you haue
so, you may be glad,Licences graunted to musitions & minstrels to exercyse their mistery or facultie of mischief. if you haue not (for the
Worde of GOD is against your vngodly
exercyses, and condemneth them to Hell)
than may you as rogues, extrauagantes, and
straglers from the Heauenlye Country be
arrested of the high iustice of peace Christ Iesus,
and be punished with eternall death, notwithstanding
your presented licēces of earthly
men. Who shall stand betwixt you, and
the Iustice of GOD at the daye of Iudgement?
Who shall excuse you, for drawing

so manye thousandes to Hell? shall the
Iustices of peace? shall their licenses? Oh no:
For neither ought they to graunt anye licencens
to anie to doo hurt withall,No lycences to do hurte withall are to be graunted. neither (if
they would) ought any to take them.
               Giue ouer therfore your Occupations, you
Pypers, you Fidlers, you minstrelles, and
you musitions, you Drummers, you Tabretters,
you Fluters, and all other of that wicked
broode, for the blood of all those, whome
you drawe to destruction thorow your prouocations,
A Cauet to musitions, minstrelles & all others of twat stampe. and intysing allurementes shalbe
powred vppon your heads, at the day of Iudgement,
but hereof enough, and perchaunce
more than will like their humour.
            
            
               Spud.
               Is it not lawfull vppon the Sabaoth
daye to playe at Dice, Cardes, Tables,
Bowles, Tennisse, and suche other pleasaunt
exercyses, wherein Man taketh pleasure
and delight?
            
         
         
            Cards, Dice, Tables,
Tennisse, Bowles, and other exercyses,
vsed vnlawfully
in Ailgna.
            
               
               Philoponus.
               THese be no Sabaothlike exercyses for
any Christian man to follow any day at
all,Exercises vnlawfull vpon the Sabaoth day. much lesse vppon the Sabaoth daye,
which the Lord wold haue to be consecrat to
himselfe, and to be spent in holy and Godly
exercyses according to his will. As for cards,
dice, tables, bowls, tennisse, and such like, thei
are furta officiosa, a certē kind of smooth deceiptfull,Furta officiosa.
and sleightie thefte, wherby many a
one is spoiled of all that euer he hath, sometimes
of his life withall, yea of body and soul
for euer: And yet (more is the pitie) these be ye
onely exercyses vsed in euery mans howse, al
the yeer thorow. But specially in Christimas
tyme there is nothing els vsed but cards, dice
tables masking, mumming, bowling▪ & such
like fooleries: And the reason is, they think
they haue a commission and prerogatiue that
time,All wicked games vsed in Christmas tym
                        •
                     . to do what they lust, and to folow what
vanitie they will. But (alas) do they thinke
that they are priuiledged at that tyme, to doo
euill? the holier the time is (if one time were
holier than another, as it is not) the holier
ought their workes to be. Can anie time dispense
with them or giue them libertie to sin.
No, no:No tyme priuiledged a man to sinne. the soule which sinneth shall dye, at
what time so euer it offēdeth. But what will
thei say? Is it not Christmas? must we not be
mery? truth it is: we ought both than, and at

all tymes besides to be merie in the Lord, but
not otherwyse, not to swil and gull more that
time thā at any other time, not to lauish foorth
more at that time, than at another times.
               But the true celebratiō of the Feast of christmas
is,The true keeping of Christmas. to meditat (and as it were to ruminat)
vppon the incarnation and byrthe of Iesus
Christ, not onely that time, but all the tymes
and daies of our life, and to shewe our
selues thankeful to his Maiestie for the same:
Notwithstanding, who is ignorant, that more
mischiefe is that time comm
                     ••
                  ted than in all
the yéere besides? what masking and 
                     •
                  umming,
wherby robberie, whordome, murther,
and what no, tis committed: what dicing &
carding, what eating and drinking, what bā
                  queting
and feasting is than vsed more than
in all the yéere besydes?Wickednes in Christmas. to the great dishonor
of GOD, and impouerishing of the realme.
            
            
               Spud.
               Is it not lawfull for one Christian
to play with another at anye kinde of game,
or to winne his monie, if he can?
            
            
               Philo.
               To play at tables, cards, dice, bowls
or the like (though a good Christian man will
not so ydlely,Vnlawful for one Christian to play with another to win his money. and vainely spend his golden
dayes) one Christian with another, for their
priuat recreations, after some oppression of
studie, to druie awaye fantasies, and suche
like, I doubt not, but they may, vsing it moderatly,
with interm
                     •
                  ssion, and in the feare of

GOD? But to play for lucre of gaine, and
for desire onely of his Brothers substaunce
(rather than for any other cause) it is at no
hand lawfull, or to be suffered.
               For as it is not lawful to robbe, steale and
purloine by deceit, or slaight, so is it not lawfull
to get thy Brothers goods from him, by

                     •
                  arding, dicing, tabling, bowling, or any other
kynd of thefte, for these playes are no better,
nay worser than opē theft, for opē theft euery
Man can be ware of, but this being a craftie
pollitick theft, and cōmōly don vnder pretēce
of Fréendship, few, or none at all can beware
of it. The commaundement saith, thou shalt
not couet, nor desire any thing that belongeth
to thy Neighbour. Now, it is manifest, that
those that playe for monie, not onelye couet
their Brothers monie, but also vse craft falshood
and deceit to wyne the same.
               The Apostle, forbiddeth vs to vse deceipt
in bargaining, in buying, or selling, much lesse
than ought we to vse deceipt in gaming.
               Our Sauiour Christ biddeth euery man, do
to an other, as he would another should do vnto
him.A rule to restraine vnlawfull
gameuing. Which rule if it weare dulie obserued,
weare sufficient to withraw men both
from all kynd of gameing, and also from all
kynd of indyrect, and vniust dealing.
               For as thou woldest not that another man
should winne thy money, so thou oughtest not

to desire the winning of his, for thou must do
as thou wouldest be done by.
            
            
               Spud.
               If gameing for money be so vnlawfull,
wherfore are there howses, and places
appointed for maintenance of the same?
            
            
               Philo.
               That excuseth not the fault, but aggrauateth
it rather. And truely great pitie
it is, that these brothel howses (for so I call all
gaming howsesGamiug houses with their wickednes) are suffred as they be.
               For, are they not the very seminaries, and
nurseries of all kynd of abhomination, whatsoeuer
heart can thinke, or tongue expresse.
               And therfore I marueile y• those who keep
and maintaine these gaming howses, can euer
haue light hearts, or once to looke vp towards
Heauen, y• not onely suffer this manifest theft
in their howses (for gaming is no better) but
also maintaine and nourish the same.
               The Apostle saith, not onely they that doo
euill, digni sunt morte, are worthie of death,
but also, qui consentiunt facientibus, those
who consent to them that do it.
               Call to mind, than what euills come of this
wicked excercyse I beseeche you.
               For doth not swearing, tearing, and blaspheminge
of the Name of GOD, doth
not stinkinge Whordome, Thefte, Robberie,
Deceipt, Fraude, Cosenage, fighting
Quareling, and sometymes Murder,

doth not pride rapine, drunkns, beggerye, and
in fine, a shamefull end followe it, as the shadowe
doth follow the body? Wherfore I will
not doubte to call these gaming howses, the
slaughter howses the shambles or blockhowses
of the Deuill, wherin he butchereth Christen
mēs soules infinit waies, God knoweth,
the Lord suppresse them.
            
            
               Spud.
               Weare there euer anie lawes made
against the inordinat abuse hereof,Lawes and sanctions di
                     
                        ••
                     lgat against gaming. or haue
the Godly in any age misliked it?
            
            
               Philo.
               In all ages and times, both the godly
sober Christians haue detested it, and holsome
lawes haue been promulgat against it.
               
                  Octauius Augustus, was greatly reproched
of the Writers of his time, for his great delight
in gaming, notwithstanding, his manifold
vertues besides.
               
                  Cicero, obiected to Marcus Antonius, his
often gaming, as a note of infamie vnto him.
               The noble Lacedemonians sent their Ambassadours
to Corinth,
                  The infamy purchased by gaming. to cōclud a peace, who
coming thither, and finding the People playing
at dice, and cards, and vnthriftie games,
returned back again (infecta pace) their peace
vnconcluded, saying, it should neuer be reported,
that they wold ioyne in league with
Dice-players and gamesters.
               The same Lacedemonians, sent to Demetrius
in decision of his diceplaying, a paire of

dice of gold. Sir, Thomas Eliot (that worthie
Knight) in his Book of go
                     •
                  ernance, asketh,
who will not think him a light man of small
credit, dissolut, remise and vaine, that is a
Dici-player, or gamester.
               
                  Publius saith. Quantò peritior est aleator
in sua arte, tanto nequior est, & vita & moribus.
How much cōninger a mā is in gaming
and diceplaying, so much corrupter he is both
in life and maners. Iustinian made a lawe,
that none should play at dice,Laws against gaming. nor cards for no
cause, neither priuately, nor openly.
               
                  Alexander Seuerus, banished all gamesters
out of his dominions. And if anie were found
playing, their goods were confiscat and they
counted as mad men euer after, neuer trusted,
nor estéemed of anie.
               
                  Ludouicus, ordeined y• al gamesters shold depart
his lād, for feare of corrupting of others.
               
                  K. Richard the second, forbad all kynd of
gaming, and namely dice-playing.Punishment for gaming.
               
               
                  K. Henrie the fourth, ordeined y• euery Dice-player
should be imprisoned six daies for euery
seuerall time he offended in gaming.
               K. Edward the fourth, ordeined who so kept
gaming howses, should suffer imprisonment
three yéeres,The penalty for those that keep gaming howses. and forfait .xx.li. & the Players to
be imprisoned▪ two yéers, & forfait x. pound.
               K. Henri that seuenth, ordeined y• euery Dice-player
should be imprisoned all a day, and the

Kéeper of the dicing howse to forfait for euery
offence vi. shil. viij.d. and to be boūd by recognizance
to good behauiour.
               
                  K. Henrie the eight, ordeined that euery
one that kept di
                     •
                  ing houses, should forfa
                     •
                  t .xl.
shil. and the Players to forfait vi. shil. viij.d.
with many good lawes and sanctiōs set foorth
against this raging Abuse of gaming, which
to auoid tediousnes I omit, beseching y• Lord
to root vp, and supplant these, and all other
stumbling blocks in his church what so euer.
            
            
               Sp.
               As I remēber in the Catalogue of abuses
before, you said, ye sabaoth day was prophaned,
by bearbaiting, cockfighting, hau
                     •
                  ing,
hunting, kéeping of faires, courts, & markets
vpō ye said day. Is it not lawful thā to follow
these exercises vpon the sabaoth day, neither?
            
         
         
            Beare baiting and other
exercyses, vsed vnlawfully
in AILGNA.
            
               Philoponus.
               THese Hethnicall exercyses vpon the Sabaoth
day, which ye Lord hath cōsecrat to
holy vses, for the glory of his Name, and our
spirituall comfort, are not in any respect tollerable,
or to be suffered. For, is not the baiting
of a Bear, besides that it is a 
                     •••
                  thie, stinking▪
                  
and lothsome game, a daungerous, & perilous
exercyse? wherein a man is in daunger of his
life euery minut of an houre: which thing
though it weare not so, yet what exercyse is
this meet for any Christiā? what christē heart
cā take pleasure to sée one poore beast to rent,
teare, and kill another, and all for his foolish
pleasure? And although they be bloody beasts
to mankind, & seeke his destructiō,No Creature to be abused. yet we are
not to abuse them, for his sake who made thē,
& whose creatures they are. For notwithstanding
that they be euill to vs, & thirst after our
blood, yet are thei good creatures in their own
nature & kind, & made to set foorth the glorie &
magnificence of the great God, & for our vse, &
therfore for his sake not to be abused. It is a
mon saying amongst all men, borowed frō y•
frēch: Qui aime Iean, aime son chiē, loue me,
loue my dog, so loue God, loue his creatures.
               If any should abuse, but the dog of another
mans, wold not 
                     •
                  e who oweth the dog, think
y• the abuse therof resulteth to himselfe?God is abused when his Creatures are misused. And
shall we abuse y• creatures of God, yea take
pleasure in abusing thē, & yet think y• the contumely
don to thē, redoūdeth not to him who
made them? but admit it weare graūted that
it weare lawfull to abuse the good Creatures
of God, yet is it not lawfull for vs to spend
our golden yéers in such ydle and vaine exercyses
daylie and hourelie, as we do.
               
                  And some who take themselues for no small
fooles are so farre assotted,Keeping of mastyues & bandog
                        •
                     . that they will not
stick to keep a dosen, or a score of great mastiues
and bādogs, to their no small charges, for
the maintenance of this goodly game (forsooth)
and will not make anie bones of .xx.xl.
C. pound. at once to hazard at a bait: with
feight dog, feight beare (say they) the deuill
part all. And to be plaine, I thinke the
Deuill is the Maister of the game, beareward
and all. A goodly pastyme, forsoth, worthie
of commendation, and wel sitting these Gentlemen
of such reputation. But how muche
the Lord is offended for the prophanation of
his Sabaoth by such vnsauorie exercyses, his
Heauenly Maiestie of late hath reueiled, pouring
foorth his heauie wrath, his fearfull iudgements,
and dreadfull vengeance vppon the
Beholders of these vanities.
            
         
         
            A Fearfull Example
of GOD his Iudgement vpon the
prophaners of his
Sabaoth.
            VPon the 13. day of Ianuarie last, being
the Sabaoth day. Anno. 1583. the People,
Men, Wemen and Children, both
yonge and old, an infinit number, 
                  ••
               ocking to

those infamous places, where these wicked
exercyses are vsuallie practised (for they haue
their courts, gardens & yards for y• same purpose:)
when they were all come together, and
mounted aloft vpon their scaffolds, and galleries,
and in middest of al their iolytie & pastime,
all the whole building (not one stick standing)
fell down with a most wonderfull and
fearefull confusiō. So, that either two or thrée
hundred, men, wemē and childrē (by estimatiō)
wherof seuē were killed dead, some were
wounded, some lamed, and othersome brused
and crushed, almost to the death. Some
had their braines dasht out, some their heads
all to squasht, some their legges broken, some
their arms, some their backs, some their shoulders,
some one hurt, some another.A wofull crie. So, that
you should haue hard a woful crie, euen pearcing
the skyes, parents bewayling their children,
Children their louing Parents: wyues
their Husbands, and Husbands their wyues,
marueilous to behould. This wofull spectacle
and heauie indgement, pitifull to heare of, but
most ruefull to behold, did y• Lord send down
from Heauen to shew vnto the whole World
how gréeuously he is offended with those that
spend his Sabaoth in such wicked exercises:
In y• meane tyme leauing his temple desolat
and emptie. God graunt all men, may take
warning hereby to shun the same, for feare of

like or worser Iudgement, to come.
         
         
            A fearfull Iudgement
of GOD, shewed at the Theaters.
            THE like Iudgement (almost) did the
Lord shew vnto them a litle befor, being
assembled at their Theaters, to sée their
bawdie enterluds, and other trumperies practised.
For, he caused ye earth mightely to shak
and quauer, as though all would haue fallen
down,A wofull spectacle. wherat the People sore amazed, some
leapt down (frō the top of ye turrets, pinacles,
and towres, wher they stood) to the ground,
wherof some had their legs broke, some their
arms, some their backs, some hurt one where,
some another, & many sore crusht and brused:
but not any, but they wēt away store affraid,
& wounded in cōscience. And yet cā neither ye
one, nor y• other, fray them frō these diuelish
exercyses, vntill the Lorde consume them all
in his wrath: which God forbid. The Lord
of his mercie, opē the eyes of the maiestrats,
to pluck down these places of abuse, that god
may be honored, and their consciēces disburthe
                  •
               ed.Cockfeighting vpon the Sabaoth.
            
            Besids these exercises, thei flock thick & thrée
fold to y• cockf
                  •
               ights an exercyse nothing inferiour
to y• rest, wher nothing is vsed, but swering,
forswering, deceit fraude, collusion, co
                  •
               enage,

scoulding, railing, conuitious talking,
feighting, brawling, quarreling, drinking,
whooring, & which is worst of all, robbing of
one an other of their goods, & y• not by direct,
but indirect means & attēpts: & yet to blaūch
& set out these mischiefs wtall (as though they
were vertues) thei haue their appointed daies
& set howrs,Appointed times for exercise of dyuelries. when these d
                  •
               uelries must be exercised.
They haue houses erected to y• purpose,
flags & ensignes hanged out
                  •
                to giue notice
of it to others, and proclamation goes out to
proclaim ye same, to th
                  •
               end y• many may come
to the dedication of this solemne feast of mischief:
the Lord supplant them. And as for
hawking & hunting vpō the sabaoth day,Hawking & hunting vppō the sabaoth. it is
an exercyse vpon y• day, no lesse vnlawful thā
the other. For, no mā ought to spend any day
of his life, much lesse euery day in his life, as
many do, in such vaine & ydle pastimes: wherfore,
let Gentlemen take 
                  •
               eed, for be sure accounts
must be giuen at the day of iudgemēt
for euery minut of time, 
                  •
               oth how they haue
spent it & in what exercyses. And let them be
sure no more libertie is giuen thē,No more libertie giuen to one than another for mispēding of their goods. to mispend
an howre, or one iote of the Lord his goods,
than is giuen to the poorest, and meanest person
y• liueth vpō the face of the earth. I neuer
read of any in y• volume of y• sacred scripture
that was a good man, and a Hunter.
            
               Esau, was a great hun
                  •
               er, but a reprobat: Ismaell
               
a great hunter, but a miscreant: Nemrode
a great hunter,No good hunters, scriptur
                     •
                  . but yet a reprobat, and a
vessell of wrath. Thus I speake not to condemne
hawking and hunting altogether, being
vsed for recreation, now and than, but against
the continuall vse therof daylie, hourly,
wéekly, yéerly, yea all the time of their life,
without intermissiō. And such a felicitie haue
some in it, as they make it all their ioye, bestowing
more vpō hawkes and hounds, and
a sort of idle lubbers to followe them in one
yéer, than they will impart to the poore members
of Christ Iesus in vij. yéers,Cost bestowed in hauks and dogges. peraduenture
in all the dayes of their life. So long as mā
in Paradice persisted in innocency, all beasts
what so euer, we are obediēt to him, and came
and prostrated themselues before him. But
euer since his 
                  •
               all,When all beasts weare obedient to man & wherfore they 
                     •
                  ebell. they haue fled from him, &
disobeyed him, because of his sin: that séeing he
disobeyed the Lord, they again disobeied him.
For, so long as man obeied God, so long they
obeied him: but so soone as mā disobeyed God,
they disobeyed him, & becam enemies to him,
as it were seeking to reuēge ye iniurie which
mā had don vnto GOD, in disobeying his
lawes. Wherfore, the cause why all beasts do
fly from vs, and are become Enemies to vs,
is our disobedience to the LORD, which
we are rather to sorow for, than to hunt after
their deaths by the sheading of their blood.
            
               
               
                  •
               If necessitie or want of other meats inforceth
vs to séek after their liues, it is lawfull
to vse them in the feare of God, wt thanks to
his name: but for our pastimes and vain
pleasures sake, wée are not in any wise to
spoyle or hurt them.For pleasure sake only no man ought to abuse any of the cretures of God. Is he a christian man
or rather a pseudo-christian, that delighteth
in blood? Is he a Christian that spendeth all
his life in wanton pleasures and plesaunt delights?
Is hée a Christian that buieth vp the
corne of y• poor, turning it into bread (as many
doo) to féed dogs for his pleasure? Is hée a christian
that liueth to the hurt of his Neighbour
in treading and breaking down his hedges,
in casting open his gates in trampling of his
corne & otherwise,H
                     •
                  rt by hunting to poore Men. in preiudicing him as hunters
doo? wherfore God giue them grace to see
to it, and to mend it betimes ere it be to late,
for they know mora trahit periculum, delay
bringeth danger. Let vs not deferre to leaue
the euil and to doo good, least the wrath of the
Lord be kindled against vs, and consume vs
from of the vpper face of the Earth?
            
               Spud,
               What say you to kéeping of Markets,
of Fayres, Courtes and Léetes vpon y•
Sabaoth day?Not lawfull to keep cou
                        •
                     es, Leets Markets and Fayres vppon the Sabaoth day, Think you it is not lawful to
vse the same vpon any day?
            
            
               Philo.
               No truely, for can you serue God &
the deuil togither, can wée carrie to God and
ferrie to the deuil, can we serue two Maisters

and neither offend the one nor the other? can
wée serue God and Mammon? can wée please
God and the world bothe at one time? The
Lord wil not be serued by péecemeale, for either
he wil haue the wholeman, or els none.
For saith he, Thou shalt looue the Lord thy
God with all thy soule, withall thy minde,
witha
                        •
                     l thy power, withall thy strength, and
so foorth, orels with none at all. Then séeing
that we are to giue ouer our selues so wholely
and totally to the seruice of God, al ye daies
of our life, but especially vppon the Sabaoth
day,Abuse of the Sabaoth by Fayres, maske
                        •
                     s. being consecrate to that end, we may not
intermedle with these prophane exercised vpon
that day. For it is more then manifest y•
these faires, markets, courtes and léetes vpon
the Sabaoth day, are not only a hinderāce
vnto vs in the true seruice of God, and an abuse
of y• Sabaoth, but also lead vs the path
way to hel.The euil in Fayres and Markets. For what cosonage is not there
practised? what falshod, deceit & fraude is not
there exercised? what dissimulation in bargaining?
what setting foorth of fucate & deceiuable
wares, is not there frequēted? what lying
swering,The euils in Courtes and Leets practised. forswering, drunkennes, whordom,
theft, & sōetimes murther, either there or by ye
way thither, is not euery where vsed? In
courtes & 
                     〈◊〉
                   what enuie malice & hatred is
noo
                     •
                  rshed? what expostulation, railing, scoulding,
periuring & reperiuring is maintained?

what opression of y• poore, what fauouring the
rich, what iniustice & indirect dealing? what
bribing, deceiuing, what poling & pilling is
there practised? it would make a christiā hart
to bléed in beholding it. And yet notwithstanding
we must haue these goodly pageāts played
vpon y• sabaoth day (in a wanion) because
there are no mo daies in y• wéek. And heerby
y• sabaoth is cōtaminat, Gods woord contemned,
his cōmandemēts disanulled, his sacramēts
cōculcate, his ordināces neglected, & in
sūma, his blood trod vnder féet and all mischéef
maintained. The Lord cut of these with all other
sin, both from their soules and thy Sabaoth,
that thy name may be glorified, & thy
Church truely edified.
               
            
            
               Spud.
               Is y• playing at football, reding of mery
bookes & such like delectations, a violation
or prophanation of the Sabaoth day?
            
            
               Ph.
               Any exercise which wtdraweth vs from
godlines, either vpon ye sabaoth,Playing at Foot-ball. or any other
day els, is wicked & to be forbiden. Now who
is so grosly blinde, yt seeth not, yt these aforesaid
exercises not only wtdraw vs from godlines &
vertue, but also haile & allure vs to wickednes
and sin: for as cōcerning football playing:
I protest vnto you, it may rather be called a
fréendly kinde of fight,Foot-ball a freendly kind of fight. then a play or recreation.
A bloody and murthering practise, then a
felowly sporte or pastime.
               
                  For: dooth not euery one lye in waight for
his Aduersarie, séeking to ouerthrowe him &
to picke him on his nose, though it be vppon
hard stones, in ditch or dale, in valley or hil,
or what place soeuer it be, hée careth not so he
haue him down. And he that can serue ye most
of this fashion, he is counted the only felow,
and who but he? so that by this meanes, somtimes
their necks are broken, sōetimes their
backs, sometime their legs,Hurt by football playing. sometime their
armes, sometime one part thurst out of ioynt,
sometime an other, sometime the noses gush
out with blood, sometime their eyes start out:
and sometimes hurt in one place, sometimes
in another. But whosoeuer scapeth away the
best goeth not scotfrée, but is either sore woū
                  ded,
craised and bruseed, so as he dyeth of it,
or els scapeth very hardly: and no meruaile,
for they haue the sleights to méet one betwixt
two, to dashe him against the hart with their
elbowes, to hit him vnder the short ribber
with their griped fists, and with their k
                     •
                  ées
to catch him vpon the hip, and to pick him on
his neck, with a hundered such murdering deuices:
and hereof,Foot-Ball playing a murthering Play. groweth enuie, malice, rā
                  cour,
cholor, hatred, displeasure, enmitie and
what not els? and sometimes fighting, brawling,
contention, quarrel picking, murther,
homicide and great effusion of blood, as experience
dayly teacheth.
               
                  Is this murthering play now an exercise
for the Sabaoth day? is this a christian dealing
for one brother to mayme and hurt another,
and that vpon prepensed malice, or set
purpose? is this to do to another, as we would
wish another to doo to vs, God make vs more
careful ouer the bodyes of our Bretheren.
               
               And as for the reading of wicked Bookes,
they are vtterly vnlawfull, not onely to bee
read, but once to be named, & that not (onely)
vpon the Sabaoth day,Reading of wicked bookes but also uppon any other
day: as which tende to the dishonour of
God, deprauation of good manners and corruption
of christian soules. For as corrupt
meates doo annoy the stomack, and infect the
body, so the reading of wicked and vngodly
Bookes (which are to the minde, as meat is
to the body) infect the soule,The euil comming by reading euil Bookes▪
                   & corrupt ye minde,
hailing it to distruction: if the great mercy of
God be not present.
               And yet notwithstanding, whosoeuer wil
set pen to paper now a dayes, how vnhonest
soeuer, or vnséemly of christian eares his argument
be, is permitted to goe 
                     •
                  orward, and
his woork plausibly admitted and fréendly licensed,
and gladly imprinted without any prohibition
or contradiction at all: wherby it is
growen to this issue, that bookes & pamphlets
of scurrilitie and baudrie, are better esteemed
and more vendible then the godlyest and sagest

bookes that be: for if it be a godly treatise,
reproouing vice, and teaching vertue, away
with it, for no man (almost) though they
make a floorish of vertue, and godlynes, will
buy it, nor (which is lesse) so much as once
touch it. This maketh the Bible, the blessed
Book of God, to be so little estéemed. That
woorthie Booke of Martyrs made by that famous
Father & excellent Instrument in God
his Church, Maister Iohn Fox, so little to be
accepted and all other good books little or nothing
to be reuerenced: whilst other toyes,
fantasies and bableries wherof the world is
ful, are suffered to be printed. These prophāe
schedules, sacraligious libels, and hethnical
pamphlets of toyes & bableries (the Authors
wherof may vendicate to them selues no smal
commendations, at the hands of the deuil for
inuenting the same) corrupt mens mindes,
peruert good wits, allure to baudrie, induce
to whordome, suppresse vertue & erect vice:
which thing how should it be otherwise? for
are they not inuēted & excogitat by Belzebub
writtē by Lucifer, licēsed by Pluto, printed by
Cerberus & set a broche to sale by the infernal
furies themselues to ye poysning of the whole
world: But let the Inuētors, the licēsors, the
printers & the sellers of these vaine toyes and
more then Hethnicall impieties take heed for
the blood of all those which perish or take hurt

thorow these wicked bookes, shalbe powred vpon
their heads at the day of iudgement, and
be required at their hands.
            
            
               Spud.
               I pray you how might al these inormities,
and Abuses be reformed? For, it is
to small purpose to shew ye abuses, except you
shewe withall how they might be reformed.
            
            
               Philo.
               By putting in practise and executing
those good lawes, wholsome sanctions, and
Goldy statutes, which haue béene heretofore,
and daily are set foorth and established, as
GOD be thanked, they are manie.
               The want of the due execution wherof, is
ye cause of all these mischiefs, which both rage
and raigne amongst vs.
            
            
               Spud.
               What is the cause why these lawes
are not executed, as they ought to be?
            
            
               Philo.
               Truely I cannot tell, excepte it be
thorow the nigligence, and contempt of the
inferiour Magistrates. Or els, perhaps
(which thing happeneth now and than) for
money they are bought out, diffranchised and
dispensed withall, for as the saying is, quid
non pecunia potest? what is it, but money
will bring to passe? And yet notwithstanding
shall it be don inuisibly in a clowde (vnder
benedicite I speake it) the Prince being
borne in hand, that the same are dali
                     •
                   executed.
This fault is the corruption of those that
are put in trust to sée thē executed, as I ha
                     •
                  e

tould you, and (notwithstanding) do not.
            
            
               Spud.
               This is a great corruption & Abuse,
doubtles, and worthie of great punishment.
            
            
               Ph.
               It is so truely, for if they be good lawes tending
to the glorie of GOD, the publique
weale of the Cuntrey, and correctiō of vices,
it is great pytie that money should buy them
out. For what is that els, but to sell vertue,
for lucre: Godlynes, for drosse, yea mens souls
for corruptible money? Therfore those that
sell them, are not onely Traitors to GOD,
to their Prince and Countrey: but are also
the Deuils Marchants, and ferrie the bodies,
and soules of Christians, as it were in Charons
boate to the Stigian flood of Hell, burning
with fire and brimstone for euer.
               And those that buy them are Traitors to
GOD, their Prince and Countrey also.
               For if the lawes were at the first good (as
GOD he praised al the lawes in Ailgna be)
why shuld they be suppressed for money, and
if they were euill, why were they diuulged,
but had rather béene buried in the wombe of
their Mother before thy had euer séene ye light.
               And why were lawes instituted, but to be
executed? Els it were as good to haue no
lawes at all (the People lyuing orderly) as
to haue good lawes, and thē not executed.
               The Prince ordeining a law, may lawfully
repeale & adnull the same againe, v
                     •
                  ō speciall

causes & considerations, but no inferiour maiestrat
or subiecte what so euer, may stop the
course of any lawe made by the Prince with
out daunger of damnation to his owne soule,
as the Word of GOD beareth witnesse.
               And therfore, w
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  e to those men, that will
not execut the sentence of the lawe (being so
Godly, and so Christian as thei be in Ailgna)
vppon Malefactors and Offenders.
               Uerely they are as guiltie of their blood before
GOD, as euer was Iudas of the death
of Christe Iesus.
            
            
               Spud.
               Séeing it is so, that al flesh hath corrupted
his way before the face of God, and
that there is such abhomination amongest
them, I am perswaded the daye of Iudgement
is not farre of. For when iniquity shall
haue filled vp his measure, than shall the end
of all appeare, as Christ witnesseth in his
Euangelie.
               
            
            
               Philo.
               The day of the Lord cannot be farre
of, that is most certen▪ For what wonderfull
portents, strang miracles, fearful signes, and
dreadfull Iudgements hath he sente of late
daies, as Preachers & fortellers of his wrath
due vnto vs, for our impenitēce & wickednes
of life. Hath he not caused the earth to trēble
and quake? the same Earth to remooue from
place to place? the seas and waters to roare,
swell & brust out, and euerflow their bankes

to the destruction of many thousands? hath he
not caused the Elements and Skyes, to send
foorth flashing fire? to raine downe wheat, a
wonderfull thing as euer was heard, and the
like? hath he not caused wonderfull Eclypses
in the Sunne and Moon, with most dreadfull
coniunctions of Starres and Planets, as the
like this thousand yeeres, haue not béen heard
of? haue not the clowdes distilled downe aboundance
of rayne and showres, with all
kinde of vnseasonable wether, to the destroying
(almost) of al thinges vppon the Earth?
haue we not séene Commets, blasing starres,
firie Drakes, men, feighting in the ayre, most
fearfully to behold? Hath not dame Nature
her selfe denied vnto vs her operation, in sending
foorth abortiues, vntimely births, vgglesome
monsters and fearfull mishapen Creatures
both in man & beast. So, that it séemeth
all the Creatures of God are angrie with vs
and threaten vs with destruction, and yet we
are nothing at all amēded (alas) that shal become
of vs? Remēber we not there is a God
that shal iudge vs righteously? that there is a
Deuill, who shall torment vs after this lyfe
vnspeakably, if we repent not? At that day,
the wicked shall find that there is a Material
Hell, a place of all kinds of tortures, wherein
they shal be punished in fire and brimstone amongest
the terrible Company of vgglesome

Deuils world without end, how light so euer
they make account of it in this World.
               For some such there be, that when thei heare
mention of Hell, or of the paines therof in the
other World, they make a mocke at it, thinking
they be but metaphoricall speaches, onely
spoke to terrifie vs withall, not otherwyse.
But certen it is, as there is a God, that will
reward his Children, so there is a Deuill
that will remunerat his Seruaunts: And
as there is a Heauen, a Materiall place of
perfect ioye prepared for the Godly, so there is
a Hell, a Materiall place of punishmēt for the
wicked and reprobat, prepared for the Deuil
& his Angels, or els the word of God is in no
wyse to be credited, which blasphemie, once to
think, God kéep all his Children from.
            
            
               Spud.
               But they will easily auoid this, for
they say▪ it is writ, at what time so euer a sinner
doth repent him of his sinne, I wil put all
his sin out of my remembrance saith ye Lord.
               So that, if they maye haue thrée words at
the last, they will wish no more. What think
you of these felowes?
            
            
               Philo.
               I think them no men, but Deuills,
no Christians, but worse thā 
                  Tartarians, and
more to be auoided than ye poison of a serpent:
for the one slayeth but the body, but the other,
both body & soul for euer. Wherfore, let euery
good Christen Man take heed of them, and

auoid them. For, it is truely said, cum bonis
bonus eris, & cum peruersis, peruerseris:
with the good, thou shall learne good, but
with the wicked, thou shall be peruerted.
            
            
               Spud.
               Do you think than, that that cannot
be a true repentance, which is deferred to the
last gaspe.
            
            
               Ph.
               No truely: For true repentance must
spring out of a lyuelie faith▪ with an inward
lothing, hating and detesting of sinn
                     •
                  . But
this deferred repentāce springeth not of faith,
but rather of the feare of death which he 
                     •
                  éeth
imminent before his eyes▪ of the grief and tediousnes
of paine, of the Horror of Hell, and
feare of God his ineuitable iudgement, which
he knoweth now he must néeds abyde: And
therfore, this can be no true repentance. For
there is two maner of repētāces, ye one a true
repentāce to life, the other a false repentance
to death: As we maye sée by Iudas, who is
said, to haue repented, and which is more, to
haue confessed his faulte, and which is most
of all, to haue made restitution, and yet was
it a false repentance. And why? because
it sprang not out of true faith, but as before.
               
                  Peter repented, and wéept bitterly, and
was saued therby, though he neither made cō
                  fession,
nor satisfaction: and why? Because it
sprang of a true and lyuely faith. So these felowes
may say they repent, but except it be a

true repētance springing of faith, it can serue
thē no more to life than the pretensed repentance
of Iudas did serue him to saluation. Let
them beware, for Cain repented, yet is he
condemned.
               
                  Esau, did repent, yet is he condemned.
               
                  Antiochus, did repent, yet is he condemned:
Iudas did repent, yet is he condemned,
with infinite moe: And why so? Because
their prolonged repentaunce sprange not of
faith, &c.
               Thus they may sée, that euerye light affection,
is no true repentance: And that it is not
ynough to say at the last, I repent, I repent.
For, vnles it be a true repentāce indeed, it is
worth nothing. But indeed, if it weare so, that
man had, liberū arbitrium, free wil of himself,
to repent truely when he wold, and that God
promised in his word to accept of that repentance,
it weare another matter. But repentance
is, donum Dei, the gifte of God, de sursum
veniens a patre luminum, comming from
aboue frō the Father of light, & therfore it is
not in our powers to repent when we will.
It is the Lord yt giueth the gift, when, where
& to whom it pleaseth him: & of him are we to
craue it incessantly by faithfull prayer, & not
otherwise to presume of our owne repentāce,
when indeed we haue nothing lesse, than a
true repentance.
            
            
               
               Spud.
               Than thus much I gather by your
words, that as true repentance (which is a
certen inward grief, and sorrow of the heart,
cōceiued for our sinnes, with a hatred and lothing
of thesame) erueth to saluation thorow
the mercie of GOD in Christ, so fained repentance
saueth not from perdition.
               And therfore, we must repent dayly and
howrely, and not to deferre our repentaunce
to the last gaspe as many doo, than which, nothing
is more perilous.
            
            
               Philo.
               True it is, for maye not he be called
a great Foole, that by deferring and prolonging
of repentance to the last cast (as they
say) will hazard his body and soule to eternall
damnation for euer? Wheras by daily
repentaunce he maye assure him selfe both of
the fauour of GOD, and of life euerlasting
(by faith) in the mercy of GOD, thorow the
most precious blood of his deare Sonne, Iesus
Christ, our alone Sauiour and Redemer,
to whome be praise for euer.
            
            
               Spud.
               Now must I néeds say as the Wyse
King Salomon said, all things are vaine and
transitorie,All things are vaine and vanitie it selfe. and nothing is permanent vnder
the Sonne, the workes of men are vnperfect
and lead to destruction, their exercyses are
vaine, and wicked altogether.
               Wherfore, I setting apart all the vanities
of this lyfe, will from hencefoorth consecrate

my selfe to the seruice of my GOD, and to
follow him in his Woord, which onely is permanent
and leadeth vnto life.
               And I most hartelie thanke the Lord God
for your good Company this day, and for your
graue instructions, promising by the assistance
of God his grace, to followe and obey them
to my possible power all the daies of my life.
            
            
               Philo.
               God giue you grace so to do, and euery
Christen man els,The ioyes of this life tread the path to death. and to auoid all the vanities,
and deceiuable pleasures of this life: for
certenly they tread the path to eternal destruction,
both of body and soule for euer, to as
many as obey them.
               For, it is vnpossible to wallowe in the
delights and pleasures of this World, and to
lyue in ioy for euer in ye Kingdom of Heauen.
And thus we hauing spent the daye, and also
cōsummate our iorney, we must now depart,
beseaching GOD that we may both meete
againe in the Kingdome of Heauen, there to
raigne and lyue with him for euer, through
Iesus Christe our Lorde, to whome with
the Father, and the holy Spirit be
all honour & glorie for
euer more
Amen.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            
               
            
            
         
      
   