
      
         
            
            
            THE Abridgement of the Engliſh Chronicle, Firſt collected by M. Iohn Stow, and after him augmented with very many memorable Antiquities, and continued with matters forreine and domeſticall, vnto the beginning of the yeare, 1618.
            By E.H. Gentleman. There is a briefe Table at the end of the Booke.
            Imprinted at London for the Company of Stationers, 1618.
            Dextera Domini me exalt abit.
         
         
            
            
            To the Right Honorable Sir George Bolles Knight, Lord Maior of the Citie of London, and to the Right worſhipfull the Aldermen his brethren: And to Sir Anthony Benn Knight, Recorder of the ſame Citie. Edmond Howes, Gentleman, wiſheth all health and felicitie.
            
               RIght Honourable and graue Senators, the bleſſed and peaceful entrance into this land, and ioyfull poſſeſſion of our Leige Lord, of his immediate right of the Imperiall crowne of England, and the vtter baniſhment of all doubt in the Regall ſucceſſion, with the vniuerſall hearts applauſe of all his Highneſſe Engliſh ſubiects, who with one conſent acknowledged their loue and dutie vnto his lawfull right in Soueraigntie, all which in the ſpeedy effecting and eſtabliſhing of peace in this kingdome was much more then either our neighbour Nations held poſſible to bee ſo eaſily performed,

A appeared by their great admiration vpon the certaine knowledge thereof, or was rightly vnderſtood of the multitude that wholly enioyes the benefite, as too plainely appeareth by their wilful ingratitude & forgetfulnes, ſeeing their long continued feare ſo quickely ſuppreſt, and beyond all expectation conuerted into as great freedome and tranquilitie, as either their hearts could wiſh, or is enioyed by any other nation. All theſe, and many other high bleſſings of Almightie God ſtill ſucceeded one another, & no man would once hold vp his finger to make preſent acknowledgement or publicke vnderſtanding vnto poſterities, of the boundleſſe and wondrous workes of God in theſe our daies, as alſo of the manifold remarkable accidents which haue happened of late yeares.
            Theſe motiues, I ſay, with the earneſt perſwaſions of diuers graue and honourable perſonages, who neuer ceaſed to accite mee vnto this preſent Act of Chronologie, haue directly cauſed mee to performe this generall buſineſſe, in which my tedious labours I haue been intollerably abuſed and ſcandalized by Thraſo, Momus, Zoylus, and other backebiters, & detractors: concerning whom, ſith it is the leaſt of offences to offend offenders, I will neither vexe my ſelfe, nor trouble your patience in ſeeking to pleaſe the enuious and inſatiate. But foraſmuch as I highly prize the good content of the honeſt, wiſe, and vertuous, thus was the courſe and manner of my proceeding herein.
            After I had well obſerued, that no man would

lend a helping hand vnto the late aged painefull chronicler: neither in many moneths after his death, that any would expoſe or ſhewe themſelues to proſecute ſo good a worke: and albeit that in this interim, & before, there were many named to haue already entred into this Labyrinth, yet not one appeared: whereupon I remembred the ſaying of the Philoſopher: That the naming of many friends, is a maine impediment vnto friendſhip. And as in that, ſo in this; then for my own cleare ſatisfaction, & full aſſurance, that I would neither preiudice nor preuent any others better proceeding, I entered into particular conference with euery man whoſe names had beene diuulged. Some of them of honourable rancke and reuerent qualitie: all of them learned, & of good ſufficiency, ſome whereof anſwered me, they thought that the giuing out of their names in this ſort, was rather done by their ſecret enemies, of purpoſe to draw them into capitall diſpleaſure, and to bring their names & liues into a generall queſtion, then for any other intent of good: other ſaide, who doth this worke, muſt flatter, which I cannot, neither will I wilfully leaue a ſcandall vnto my poſteritie. Another ſaid, I cannot ſee how in any ciuil action a man ſhould ſpend his trauell, time & mony worſe, then in that which acquires no regard, nor reward, except backebiting & detraction. And one amongſt the reſt after he had ſworne an oath, ſaide: I thanke God that I am not yet madde, to waſt my time, ſpend two hundred pound a yeare, trouble my ſelfe, & all my friends, onely to gaine aſſurance of endleſſe reproch,

loſſe of libertie, and bring all my dayes in queſtion: & like as theſe ſpake, ſo did many others. And in concluſion, I ſawe it vtterly refuſed of all. And by this time it was generally obſerued, that this worke was wholly neglected. Then many of my friends began againe to animate me, and very ſeriouſly required me to make ſupplement: whoſe kinde perſwaſions preuailed ſo farre, that I promiſed them to doe my indeuour, onely for one yeares ſpace, wherein my good will exceeded my beſt experience, as I found afterwards, for that it is not a yeare or two wherein a man may obtaine the particularities of truth, neither accompliſh any thing to the effect in this ſolide and variable imploiment. Then forthwith I repaired to the moſt honourable ſuperiours, vnto whom I humbly ſignified my zealous loue, dutie, and diligence in this generall ſeruice of my Prince and Country. Of whom I receiued very gracious incouragement, & honorable inſtructions. And after that, vpon conference with diuers graue Elders, louers of vertue, and fauourers of the Cities honour, by whoſe direction, with all meekeneſſe I manifeſted my willingneſſe vnto the Lord Maior, and Court of Aldermen, being then reſolued, neither to breake my former promiſe, nor to neglect ſo great and generall a good for any deprauing ſpeeches, or maleuolent aſpects, with all integritie; ſince which time I haue ſpent in this buſines ſixteene yeares without any great cauſe of encouragement. May it therefore pleaſe your wiſedomes rightly to vnderſtand that in all my proceedings I haue neither preſumed

too farre of my ſelfe, nor done ought that might diſcourage, or preuent any other. And thus much for the cauſe and maner of my proceeding.
            Now right honourable, and moſt worthy Elders, whoſe ſtate and gouernment is renowned through the world: what is hee that hath any vnderſtanding, and knowes not London to bee the moſt flouriſhing and peacefull Cittie of Europe? of greateſt antiquitie, happieſt in countinuance, moſt increaſed, chiefe in proſperitie, and moſt ſtored with plentie? and here I might alleadge many ancient preſidents of pleaſures, profits, time, and ſtate, whereof neuer any ſubordinate Magiſtrates could equall yours. But ſeeing few wordes to the wiſe ſuffice, I will onely ſpeake a word or two by the way. The promiſed bleſſing vnto the ancient Iſraelites to poſſeſſe a land that flowed with milke and hony, is with ſeuen fold meaſure heaped on your heads, your citty filled more aboundantly with all ſorts of ſilkes, fine linnen, oyles, wines, and ſpices, perfection of Arts, & all coſtly ornaments, and curious workemanſhip, then any other Prouince: ſo as London well deſerues to beare the name of the choiceſt ſtorehouſe in the world, and to keepe ranke with any royall Cittie in Europe: her Cittizens rich and bounteous, witneſſe their franke-giuing of more then twice ſeuen fifteens in one yeare, and their long continued charges and expence, as well vpon all occaſions by ſea and land for defence of their Prince and Country, as in ayding and relieuing their diſtreſſed neighbour Nations, and in performing many other worthy

matters for their owne honour, the delight of ſtrangers, and the reliefe of the poore, as otherwiſe: ſo as without offence it may truely be ſaid, that the liberalitie of the Londoners, is but halfe knowne to their common friends. Peace and plenty in the higheſt degree poſſeſſeth now your gates and pallaces: all nations repaire with willingneſſe to bee partakers of your happineſſe: many other glorious Cities haue many waies wanted theſe inceſſant bleſſings: witneſſe the famous Citie Rome, which hath beene often ſpoiled and ſacked: the City Moſco, which not long ſince was twice ſpoiled with fire, the firſt by her enemies, the laſt was a priuate politicke practiſe of her owne Emperour. The like misfortune hath befallen vnto the great Cittie Conſtantinople. Stately Antwerpe hath felt the ſmart of diuers changes within mans memory. Populous Paris of late yeares was glad to beat downe her owne Suburbs, and cut her skirts ſhorter, leaſt other ſhould ſit vpon them: Cracouia, Liſhbon, and many other royall Citties were glad and faine to ſeeke and ſue for that which is freely giuen vnto her. Theſe laſt haue I cited to bee as a looking-glaſſe to London; ſith it is as impoſſible for any to know their proper face & feature without an obiect, as it is for any people to bee truely ſenſible of their owne felicirie, that haue not ſeene nor taſted others miſery.
            And thus (right Honourable and graue Fathers) although it was my meaning to haue vſed breuity, yet being inforced to the contrary, I craue your pardon, leaſt I haue offended by prolixitie. And

becauſe I will for euer be exempt, and free from all danger of all precurrant vipers, lurking Adders, and venemous tongues, I here conclude, with tender of my loue, and the continuance of a double prentiſhip, not onely of theſe my free offered labours in this Abridgement, but alſo my larger Booke, the which I likewiſe recōmend vnto your kind acceptation, hauing as well formerly as at this preſent proclaimed a ceſſation from any further ſupplement or continuance of the generall Engliſh Chronicle, to the end they might and ſhall for euer be truely vnderſtood, that I haue no coherence with the enuious who neuer did good themſelues nor ſpeake well of others, being euer deſirous to doe my beſt to auoide all impediments that may any way impeach others better proceedings, wiſhing you all encreaſe of your hearts deſire, and euerlaſting happineſſe.
         
         
            
            TO THE HONEST AND friendly Reader.
            
               FOr thy ſake with the reſt of my louing Countrimen, and for the modeſt delight of other Nations, of what qualitie ſoeuer, through the earneſt perſwaſion of many my good friends, fauourers of knowledge, I was the rather induced to performe this buſineſſe, and to arme my ſelfe with my beſt patience againſt the daily iniuries and diſcurteſies which in theſe affaires I haue indured both in Court and Countrey, without the leaſt part of pride or preſumption on my behalfe. A time may come, to their diſgrace, wherein I may retort their vndeſerued malice. But as concerning the ignorant, proud and enuious, it will be hard for me to eſcape their braine-ſicke imputation. For my owne part I acknowledge others excellency, and my owne inſufficiency. What I haue done, was in a kinde of voluntary neceſſitie; as is euident: for that euery man (ſo far as I could perceiue) though they thought it a very good worke, yet they held it no wiſedome to run headlong into iudgement, and for the pleaſure of others to waſte their time, ſpend their money, diſpleaſe ſuperiors, and endure the cruell cenſure of the multitude, onely vpon hope of Maſter Stowes reward. All which, notwithſtanding, for the generall good of all men, & without intent of offence

to any, ſeeing ſo many memorable accidents like to be buried in obliuion, I haue vndertaken ſixteene yeares ſupplement, and enlarged it with very many memorable antiquities.
            And according to my promiſe I haue publiſhed my larger worke three yeares paſt. The manifold abuſes which haue beene offered me by the ſhape of man, and the ſmall reſpect by thoſe of good ſpirit, and ſolide ſubſtance, haue ſo checkt my forwardneſſe, that I ſtand amazed, hauing already beene condemned, and i
                  •
               dged before I was tried, or heard to ſpeake. What I haue written, is free from leazing: Be thou therefore of what Religion or condition ſoeuer, expect nothing here
               
                  ••
                contained, to be written for any purpoſe of flattery, time ſeruice, or offence: truth I ſought, and truth is here ſet downe. Peace and good thoughts poſſeſſe thee. Farewell.
            
               
                  Thy very louing friend, Edmond Howes.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
               A DESCRIPTION OF ENGLAND SCOTLAND, WALES, and Cornwall.
               
                  
                     BRitaine, is an Iſland in the Ocean Sea, ſituate right ouer againſt France, one part of which Iſle Engliſhmen doe inhabite, another part Scots, the third part Welſhmen, and the fourth part Corniſhmen. All they either in language, conditions, or lawes, doe differ among themſelues. England is the greateſt part, which is diuided into 40. Counties, which we call ſhires: whereof ten (that is to ſay) Kent, Suſſex, Surrey, South-hampton, Barkeſhire, Wilſhire, Dorſetſhire, Somerſetſhire, Deuonſhire, and Cornwall, doe containe the firſt part of that Iſland, which part bounding towards the South, ſtandeth betweene the thames and the Sea.
               From thence to the Riuer of Trent, which paſſeth through the midſt of England bee 16. ſhires, whereof the firſt ſixe (ſtanding Eaſtward) are Eſſex, Middleſex, Hartfordſhire, Suffolke, Northfolke,

and Cambridgeſhire. The other ten, which ſtand more in the middle of the country, are theſe: Bedford, Huntington, Buckingham, Oxford, Northampton, Rutland, Leiceſter, Notingham, Warwicke, and Lincolne. After theſe there be 6, which border Weſtward vpon Wales, as Gloceſter, Hereford, Worceſter, Shropſhire, Stafford, and Cheſter. About the middle of the Region, Darbiſhire, Yorkeſhire, Lancaſhire, & Cumberland. On the left hand toward the Weſt, is Weſtmerland: againſt the ſame is the Biſhopricke of Durham, and Northumberland, which boundeth vpon the North, in the Marches of Scotland. Theſe ſhires be diuided into xxii. Biſhoprickes, Canterbury, Rocheſter, London, Chicheſter, Wincheſter, Saliſbury, Exceſter, Bath and Welles, Worceſter, Gloceſter, Hereford, Couentry and Lichfield, Lincolne, Ely, Norwich, Oxford, Peterborow, Briſtow. And this is the prouince of the Archbiſhop of Canterbury, which is the Primate of England, with Wales. Yorke, Durham, Cheſter, and Carlile, is the other prouince of the Arch-biſhop of Yorke, which is another Primate of England. The Ocean ſea doth bound England: the firſt part of Britaine Eaſt and South Wales, and Cornwall Weſt. The riuer of Twéede diuideth England and Scotland North. The length of the Iſland beginneth at Portſmouth in the South part, and endeth at Twéed in the North,Scotland another part of Britaine. containing 320. Miles.
               Scotland, after the ouerthrow of the Picts, began at the riuer Twéed, & ſo méeting at the riuer

Tine. Therefore ye length of Scotland, frō Twéed to the furtheſt coaſt, is eſtéemed to be 480. myles: But as Scotland is longer than England, ſo is it narrower. The ſaid riuer of Twéed ſeparateth the marches from Northumberland, the fartheſt country of England: the chiefe towne whereof is Barwicke, now in poſſeſſion of the Engliſh. The weſterne limite of Scotland, whilome was Cumberland, which the riuer of Selue diuideth from Annandall. Betwéene theſe two Regions, the Cheuiot hilles appeare. Next to the marches, Pictland bordereth, bounding vpon the Eaſt. The moſt famous townes, be Dunber, Haddington, Leigh, Northbarwicke, and Edenbrough the Kings ſeat. The ſame Cittie, the riuer called the Frith, doth water and paſſe by: the ſame riuer againe diuideth from Loughdean, a country adioyning called the Fife, in which country are many townes, as Donfermile, Cupre: but the notable towne of S. Andrew, ſpecially famous for the Vniuerſitie, and Sea of the Arch-biſhop. On the other ſide toward the Iriſh ſide Northward, is Nidiſdalia, ſo called of the riuer that paſſeth thereby, where be the townes of Douglaſſe, and Doufrie. Vpon the South adioyneth Galloway, where is the towne called Coſwel, and the ancient Temple of S. Ninian. By that ſtandeth the countrey of Haricta once renowned with the towne Haricton, whereof perchance it tooke the name. About Haricta, towards the weſt, is Elgonia bordering vpon the Ocean, whereon is the Lake Lomunde, which is very broad & large, containing many Iſlands,

ſituate at the foote of the mountaine Grantſhayn, eight miles from the Caſtle of Doubriton. A good ſpace on this ſide Grampius riſeth ye riuer Taus, the greateſt of all Scotland, taking his name of Atholl and Calidonia, a lake from whence it ſpringeth, which falling by many places, but chiefly by S. Iohns towne, and laſtly by Dunde, and there breaketh into the Germaine ſea. Againſt Taus is Anguiſe, and is diuided from Fife. To the ſame vpon the North, adioyneth Atheles. On the other ſide Argile ſheweth it ſelfe, being full of Lakes, whoſe vttermoſt bounds ſtretch ſo farre as Ireland, about which the promontary of foteland, called Lands-head ſtandeth.
               Betwéene Argatele and Olgouia weſtward, lyeth the countrey of Sterling. Héere the Forreſt of Calidonia beganne on the left ſide, there likewiſe is the Caſtle of Calidone ſituate by Taus, called Doucheldin. From a little hill of the Forreſt, riſeth Cluid.
               Of that riuer the Dale was called Glotenale: which country that riuer runneth by, and in the ſame is the Citty of Glaſco, a goodly Vniuerſity. Againe, towards the Eaſt is ioyned the country of Anguis and Merne, vpon the ſea coaſt, wherein Fordunne by ſituation is very ſtrong. Of the ſame ſide of Scotland is the countrey of Marre, garniſhed with a citty called Aberdon, ſtanding betweene the two riuers of Dona and Dea. Then followeth Morry, which the two notable riuers doe compaſſe about, called Nea and Spea. At the mouth of the laſt riuer, ſtandeth the towne of

Elgis: But in the middle part ſtandeth the broad country of Roſſia. The breadth of the Iſland is ſcarſe xxx. miles ouer, which defended with thrée promontories like Towers, repelleth the great waues and ſurges of the ſea: and inuironed with two gulfes, which thoſe promentories do incloſe, the entries be quiet and calme, & the water peaceable. The ſtrait of the land is at this day called Cathanes, coaſting vpon the ſea Deucalidon.
               About Scotland in the Iriſh ſeas are xl. Ilands: many of theſe in length at leaſt are 30. miles, but in breadth not aboue 12. Amongſt them is Iona, beautified with the tombs of the Scottiſh Kings. Beyond Scotland towards the North be the Iles of Orcades, the which are 30. in number the principall of which Ilands is Panonia.
               Beyond the Orcades ſtandeth Thule, in the frozen ſea now called Iſland.
               The other part Northerne, and full of Mountaines, a very rude & homely kinde of people doth inhabite, which are called the Redſhankes, or wild Scots, and thus much of Scotland.
               Wales lieth on the left hand:Wales the third part of Britain. which like a promontary or foreland on euery ſide is compaſſed with the maine ſea: except it be on the Southeaſt part with the Riuer of Seuerne, which diuideth Wales from England. Therefore Wales is extended from the towne of Chepſtow, where it beginneth by a ſtraight line, a little aboue Shrewſbury, euen to Weſtcheſter Northward. Into that part ſo many of the Britaines as remained aliue after the ſlaughter & loſſe of their country, at the

length did repaire, where partly through refuge of the mountaines, and partly of the woods and marſhes, they remained in ſafety: which part they enioy to this day.4 Biſhops in Wales. There bee many townes and ſtrong Caſtles, and foure Biſhoprickes. The firſt is S. Dauids, another Landaffe, the third Bangor, and the fourth S. Aſaph, which be vnder the Arch-biſhop of Canterbury. The Welſhmen haue a language from the Engliſhmen, which as they ſay, doth partly ſound of the Troian antiquitie, and partly of the Gréeke. And thus much of Wales.
               
                  Cornwall.Cornwall beginneth on that ſide which ſtandeth towards Spaine weſtward: toward the Eaſt, it is of length foureſcore and ten miles, reaching a little beyond S. Germaines, ſituate on the right hand vpon the ſea coaſt, where the greateſt breadth of that countrey is but twenty miles. It bordereth vpon England, Weſt, South & North: The maine ſea is round about it: it is a very barren ſoyle, but there is great plenty of Lead and Tin: their tongue is farre diſſonant from Engliſh, but it is much like to the Welſh tongue: becauſe they haue many wordes common to both tongues. Cornwall is in the Dioceſſe of Exeſter, which was once worthy to bée counted the fourth part of the Iſland, for the contrarietie of the language.
               Thus much of the particular deſcription of Britaine. The forme of the Iſland is Triquetra, hauing thrée corners, or thrée ſides: two whereof, that is to ſay, the corner toward the Eaſt, and the

other toward the Weſt (both extending Northwards) are the longeſt. The third, which is the South ſide, is farre ſhorter then the other: for the Iſland is greater of length then of breadth. The right corner of which Iſland Eaſtward, is in Kent at Douer and Sandwich. From whence, to the third angle, which is in the North of Scotland, is ſeuen hundred miles. Againe, the length from this corner of Douer in Kent to the vttermoſt part of Cornwall, being S. Michaels mount, is ſuppoſed to be three hundred miles. From this left angle, being the Weſt part of Cornwall, which hath a proſpect towards Spaine, to the North angle in the further part of Scotland, the length is eight hundred miles.
            
            
               THE RACE OF THE Kings of Britaine: and in the Margent are placed the yeares before Chriſts birth, when euery King began their raigne, till Cunobilinus, in whoſe time Chriſt was borne, and then the yeares from his birth are placed.
               
                  BRute the ſonne of Siluius (following,1108. as heretofore, the common receiued opinion) after a long and weary iourney with his Troians, ariued in this Iſland, at a place now called Totnes in Deuonſhire, the yeare of the world, 2155. the yeare before Chriſts natiuitie, 1108. wherein he

firſt beganne to raigne, and named it after his owne name Britan: he builded the Citty of new Troy, now called London: he diuided the whole Iſland among his thrée ſonnes. Vnto Locrine his eldeſt ſonne, hée gaue the middle part, called Loegria: to Camber, Cambria, to Albanact, Albania: he deceaſed when he had raigned 24. yeares.
               
                  1084
                  LOcrine raigned 20. yeares. he chaſed the Hunnes which inuad
                     ••
                   this realme, & purſued them ſo ſharpely, that many of them with their King, were drowned in a riuer named Humber. Locrine had to wife Guendoline,
                  How Humber tooke that name. daughter to Corineus, Duke of Cornwall, by whom hee had a ſonne named Madan: hée alſo kept Eſtrild, by whom hee had a daughter named Sabrine: but Guendoline gathering a great power, fought with King Locrine, and ſtewe him. Shée drowned Eſtrild with her daughter Sabrine,
                  Seuerne. in a Riuer called Seuerne.
               
                  1604 Guendoline a Queene. The King deuoured by woules.
                  GVendoline diſcréetly ruled 15. yeares, and left the ſame to her ſonne Madan.
               
               
                  MAdan was deuoured by wild woules, when he had raigned 11. yeares.
               
                  1009 A traitor to his brother deuoured of wild beaſts.
                  MEmpricius ſlewe his brother Manlius, taking the wiues & daughters of his ſubiects: but was deſtroyed of wolues, when he had raigned 20. yeares.
               
                  EBranke founded Alclud in Scotland: he made the Caſtle of Edenbrough,919 and Bambrought: hee builded Rayrbranke,929 now called Yorke, hée raigned 40.
                  917 yeares.
               
                  Cheſter.
                  Brutus, ſurnamed Greeneſhield, raigned

twelue yeares.
               
                  LEil builded Carlill, now called Ceſtria:892 hée raigned 25. yeares.
               
                  RVdhudribras builded Canterbury, Wincheſter, and Shaftſbury. He raigned: twentynine yeares.
               
                  BLadud, who had long ſtudied at Athens,863 Bath. The King attempted to flye. broght Philoſophers to kéepe ſchooles in Britaine: hée builded Bath, and preſumed to flie: but brake his necke when he had raigned 20. yeares.
               
                  LEile, builded Caer Lair, now called Leiceſter. Hée had thrée daughters, Gonorell, Ragan, and Cordelle: which Cordelle ſuccéeded him in the Kingdome, when he had raigned fourtie yeares.
               
                  COrdelle was ſore vexed by her two Nephews,844 Cordila Queene. 
                  Morgan of Albanie, and Conedagus of Camber, who caſt her into priſon: where ſhée flew her ſelfe, when ſhe had raigned 5. yeares.
               
                  MOrgan warred on his Nephewe Conedagus,
                  800 but Conedagus ſlue Morgan, and then was King of all Britaine: He raigned thrée and thirty yeares.
               
                  RIuallo, in whoſe time it rained bloud three dayes:766 Bloud rained. And then a great mortalitie cauſed almoſt deſolation. He raigned 46. yeares.
               
                  GVrguſtus, a common drunkard, whereof followed other vices, raigned 37. yeares.721
               
               
                  SIcilius the brother of Gurguſtus raigned fortie nine yeares.664
               
               
                  IAgo, Couſin to Gurguſtus,
                  636 raigned fiue and twenty yeares.
               
                  
                  612
                  Kimmacus raigned 53. yeares.
               
                  
                     
                        •
                     59
                  Gorbodug raigned 43. yeares.
               
                  396 The brother ſlue the brother.
                  FErrex with his brother Porrex, ruled Britain
                     •
                   fiue yeares, they fell at ciuill diſcord for the ſoueraigne dominion, in which Ferrex was ſlaine, and Porrex afterward was killed.
               
                  441 Mulmutius lawes.
                  MVlmutius Dunwallo conſtituted good lawes, which long after were called Mulmutius lawes, he gaue priuiledges vnto Temples, and ploughes, and began to make the foure notable wayes in Britaine, he raigned 40. yeares.
               
                  BElinus & Brennus diuided this Iſle of Britaine. Vnto Belme was appointed, England, Wales and Cornwall. Vnto the other, the part beyond Humber. This Brennus raiſed warre againſt B
                        •
                     
                     line: but in concluſion, Brennus went amongſt the Gaules, where for his excellent qualities, hée was their ſoueraigne Captaine, with whom he paſſed into Italy, ſacked Rome. Belinus raigned xxvi. yeares.
               
                  Gurguſtus ſubdued Denmarke, and in his returne met with a fléete comming from the parts of Spaine, which were ſéeking for habitations,375 Ireland inhabited. to whom he granted the Iſle of Ireland to inhabite. He raigned xix. yeares.
               
                  356 Merciā law the third.
                  GVinthelinus had to wife a notable womā named Mercia: Shee diuiſed certaine lawes, named Mercians lawes. He raigned xxvi. yeares.
               
                  33
                        •
                      The Picts inhabited the marches
                  CEcilius raigned ſeuen yeares: a people called Picts, arriued here in Britaine, and poſſeſſed thoſe parts, which now be the Marches of both Realmes, England and Scotland.
               
                  
                  KImarus raigned 3. yeares,323 and was ſlaine as he was hunting.
               
                  Elanius was King of Britaine 9. yeares.321
               
               
                  MOrindus,
                  311 The King deuoured. in whoſe time out of the Iriſh ſeas came a wonderfull monſter, which deſtroyed much people, whereof the King hearing, would needes fight with it, by which hee was deuoured, when he had raigned 8. yeares.
               
                  GOrbomannus raigned 11. yeares.393 Grantham builded. He builded Grantham.
               
                  ARchigallo extorted from men their goods,192 The King depriued. to enrich his treaſure: for which cauſe he was depriued when he had raigned 5. yeares.
               
                  Elidurus raigned 5. yeares.296
               
               
                  ARchigallo reſtored, ruled the people quietly ten yeares.
               
                  ELidurus, after the death of his brother,272 raigned not paſſing two yeares, but that his younger brother Vigenius tooke and caſt him into priſon.
               
                  VIgenius raigned ſeuen yeares, and Pereduries,
                  370 The towne of Pickering built. raigned after 2. yeares, He builded the town of Pickering.
               
                  Elidurus the third time raigned foure yeares.261
               
               
                  Gorbonian raigned ten yeares.258
               
               
                  Morgan guided the Realme 14. yeares.248
               
               
                  EMerianus, when he had tyrannouſly raigned 7. yeares, was depoſed.234 
                  227
               
               
                  Iuall gouerned peaceably 20. yeares.207
               
               
                  Rimo gouerned this Realme 16. yeares.191
               
               
                  Gernuntius raigned 20. yeares.171
               
               
                  CAtillus raigned ten yeares:A good example. he hung vp all oppreſſors of the poore.
               
                  
                  161
                  Coilus quietly raigned 20. yeares.
               
                  141
                  Porrex, a vertuous Prince, raigned 5. yeares.
               
                  116
                  CHierennus, through his darkeneſſe, raigned but one yeare.
               
                  135
                  Fulgen his ſonne raigned but two yeares.
               
                  133
                  Eldred raigned but one yeare.
               
                  132
                  Androgius likewiſe raigned one yeare.
               
                  131
                  Varianus raigned thrée yeares.
               
                  136
                  Eliud, a great Aſtronomer, raigned 5. yeares.
               
                  124
                  Dedantius raigned fiue yeares.
               
                  120
                  Detonus raigned in the land two yeares.
               
                  118
                  Gurginus raigned thrée yeares.
               
                  115
                  Merianus was King two yeares.
               
                  111
                  Blandumus gouerned two yeares.
               
                  180
                  Capenus raigned thrée yeares.
               
                  106
                  Quinus ruled this land two yeares.
               
                  104
                  Silius raigned two yeares.
               
                  94
                  Bledgabredus raigned ten yeares.
               
                  91
                  Archemalus was King two yeares.
               
                  88
                  Eldelus raigned foure yeares.
               
                  86
                  Rodianus was King two yeares.
               
                  83
                  Redargius raigned thrée yeares.
               
                  81
                  Samulius raigned two yeares.
               
                  78
                  Peniſellus was King thrée yeares.
               
                  76
                  Pyrhus ruled this land two yeares.
               
                  74
                  Caporus was King two yeares.
               
                  70
                  Diuellus gouerned foure yeares.
               
                  66
                  Helius raigned not full one yeare.
               
                  Lud repaired London
                  LVd repaired the city of new Troy, & builded on the weſt part thereof, Ludgate, leauing after him two ſons, Androgius, and Theomancius: who being not of age to gouerne, their Vncle Caſſibelan
                  
obtained the crown. London tooke the name of Lud, and was called Ludſtowne. Thus farre Ieffery Munmouth.
               
               
                  CAſſibelanus ruled 19. yeares. In the 8. yeare of his raigne Iulius Caeſar ſailed into Britain,51 Caeſar his firſt voiage into England. whereat the firſt, being wearied with an hard & ſharpe battaile, & after with ſudden tempeſt, and his nauy almoſt deſtroied, he returned againe into France: the next ſpring (which was the yeare before Chriſt 51.
                  The ſecond voyage of Caeſar.) hée paſſed the ſeas againe with a great army. But whiles he went towards his armies 
                     •
                  nland, his ſhippes lying at anker, with force of tempeſt were deſtroyed, ſo that 40. were loſt. Vpon land alſo his horſemen at the firſt encounter were vanquiſhed. At the ſecond conflict, hee put the Britaines to flight. From thence hée went vnto the riuer of thames, on the further ſide whereof, Caſſibelanus with a great multitude of people, was kéeping the bankes: but not being able to reſiſt the force of the Romanes,England tributary to the Romanes. London ſubmitted it ſelfe to Caeſar, deliuering vnto him hoſtages: which example alſo the other citties followed: whereby Caſſibelanus was conſtrained to agrée that Britaine ſhould become tributary to the Romanes. Then Caeſar like a conqueror with a great number of priſoners, ſailed into France, and ſo to Rome.
               
                  Theomantius raigned quietly 23. yeares.37
               
               
                  CVnobilinus. the ſonne of Theomantius, raigned 35. yeares. In the 14. yeare of his raigne,14 Chriſt our Sauiour was horne.
            
            
               
               From this place following, the yeares from Chriſt his birth, are placed in the Margent.
               
                  An Chriſt. 1
                  IESVS Chriſt very God and man, was borne in the 42. yeare of the raigne of Auguſtus: hee beganne to preach the 15. yeare of Tiberius, and ſuffered his paſſion in the 18. yeare of the ſame Tiberius.
               
               
                  21
                  GƲiderius, for that hee thought the Romanes had their tribute wrongfully, he denied to pay the ſame: he raigned 23. yeares.
               
                  Aruiragus rained 28. yeares.
               
                  44
                  Claudius the Emperour ſailed into Britaine: he ſubdued vnto the Empire, the Iſles of Orcades, and thoſe that lye in the Ocean Sea beyond Britaine.
               
                  
                     Firſt Chriſtians in England.
                  The yeare after Chriſts birth 63. came into Britaine Ioſeph of Arimathie, & 11. other Chriſtians, who builded them a Chappell in the Iſle of Anaion, and after he was there buried; which place being ſince increaſed and newly builded, was named Glaſſenbury.
               
                  73
                  MArius was ordained King: the Picts, accompanied with the Scots, inuaded Britaine,

vnto whom Marius gaue inhabitance in the further part of Scotland: He raigned 53. yeares.
               
                  COilus, brought vp among the Romanes,124 Colcheſter built. paied the tribute truly, he builded the towne of Colcheſter, and raigned 55. yeares.
               At this time 133.
                  Galen. the famous Phyſitian Galen flouriſhed in Rome vnder Helius Adrianus the Emperour.
               
                  LVcius ſent his Embaſſadors to Eleutherius Biſhop of Rome,England receiued the Faith. deſiring him to ſend ſome deuout and learned men, by whoſe inſtruction both he and his people might be taught the Faith and Religion of Chriſt: whereof Eleutherius being very glad, ſent with them Faganus, and Deruuianus, by whoſe diligence Lucius and his people were baptized and inſtructed in the faith of Chriſt. Lucius raigned 12. yeares.
               
                  SEuerus Emperour in Britaine, cauſed a trench to be caſt from ſea to ſea, the length of 22. miles.194 He deceaſed at Yorke.
               
                  ANtonius Baſſianus died in the vi.212 yeare of his raigne.
               
                  CArauſius tooke vpon him in Britaine, and 7.
                  290 Carauſius vſurpeth in Britaine. yeares after Carauſius was ſlaine by Alectus. Saint Alban, ſuffered martyrdom vnder Diocleſian and Maximilian, in the yeare of our Lord 23.
               
               
                  ALectus then kept Britaine by the ſpace of thrée yeares, and was ſubdued by Aſclopiodatus.
                  292 The firſt imperiall Crowne of gold.
               
               At this time the Emperour of Rome ordained for himſelfe & his ſucceſſors, and imperiall Crowne or diadem of gold, adorned with precious ſtones.

Reade my larger booke.
               
                  299
                  ASelepiodatus ſlew Gallus, the Romane Captaine in the citty of London, Coil tooke on him the Kingdome of Britaine.
               
                  305
                  Conſtantius began to raigne, poſſeſſed Africa, Italy, France, Britaine.
               
                  306
                  COnſtantine the great, ſonne of Codſtantius, and Helen was created Emperour in Britaine: he eſtabliſhed the Goſpell in his Empire, and after him all Emperours were Chriſtians: He left behind him thrée ſonnes, to wit, Conſtantinus, Constans. and Conſtantius.
               
               
                  337
                  COnſtantinus attempted warre againſt his brother and was ſlaine.
               
                  340
                  COnſtans then ruled Britaine, which he had adminiſtred with great iuſtice: but was ſlaine.
               
                  353
                  COnſtantius then had the regiment of Britaine himſelfe alone, enioyed the Roman
                     •
                   Empire.
               
                  S. George.About this time liued the famous Preacher S. George in Antioch.
               
                  372 Iulian the Apoſtata.
                  IVlianus (called the Apoſtata) beganne his raigne ouer the Empire, an earneſt aduerſary to Chriſtian Religion. After him ſuccéeded in the Empire, Iouinion.
                  Iouinian.
               
               
                  365
                  VAlentinian was Emperour: he by his Deputy here in Britaine, made ſharpe warre vpon the Picts and Scots.
               
                  Hillary Tearme.This yeare 369. dyed S. Hillary, Biſhope Poytiers, of whom Hillary Tearme taketh the name: or as ſome thinke, of Pope Hillary, who was Pope in the yeare 464.
               
               
                  
                  GRatian was then created Emperour:375 Maximus. 
                  Maximus heere in Brittaine vſurped the title of the Empire, whereupon aſſembling all the men of warre, and youth of the Realme, he paſſed into France, expelled the Frenchmen out of Armorica, and placed therein Britaines, vnder Conon,
                  Lītle Britan in France. of whom euer ſince it hath béene called Britaine the leſſe.
               
                  VRſula, with the eleuen thouſand Virgins, ſent into little Britaine to be maried, were ſlaine.
               At this time 386.
                  The originall of the Patriarchy of Conſtantinople. in a generall Councell at Conſtantinople, among other things it was ordained, that the Biſhops of Conſtantinople ſhould for euer be called Patriarches. Reade my larger booke.
               
                  HOnorius the ſonne of Theodoſius,
                  395 ſucéeded after his father in the Empire: but Gratian, a Britaine, taking vpon him to gouerne Britaine: was immediately ſlaine, and Conſtantine was elected Gouernour.
               THe laſt of September 425.
                  408 The death of S. Hieroſme. died the moſt reuerend Father S. Hieroſme, in his hermitage in Bethelem at 91. yeares of age.
               
                  THeodoſius ſuccéeded in the Empire, and made Valentinian his couſin, fellow therein, At this time Britaine, with the foreſaid warres, was ſo impoueriſhed of able men, that it could not withſtand the inuaſions of the Pictes and Scots: whereupon they required aide of Aetius, the Captaine of the Romaine Army, hée ſent them certaine men of warre out of Fraunce, who manfully chaſed away the Picts and Scots, and

raiſing a wall betwéene the Prouince and the enemy, returned. After their departure, the Picts and Scots inuaded the Britaines againe, forraged their countrey, and deſtroied the inhabitants: wherupon there was ſent new aid out of France, and a wall was made of ſtones. But ſhortly after the Scots and Picts made greater Roades into Britaine, then euer heretofore. For the Romans being troubled with wars in France and Italy, neglected the defence of Britaine. This happened about the 16. yeare of Theodoſius the yonger, the yeare of Chriſt, 443.
               
               
                  S. Patrique ſent to conuert Ireland.About this time, being the 14. yeare of Honorius the Emperour, there was a generall Councell held at Epheſus, by Celeſtinus the firſt, who by conſent of the Emperour, ſent S. Patrique the ſonne of Gothes, ſiſter to S. Martin of Towers, to conuert the Iriſh Nation. And in the yeare 413. which was the 2.
                  The Gothes ſpole Rome. yeare of this Honorius, the Gothes deſtroyed Rome: but Alarcus their King, being a Chriſtian, ſhewed mercy to ſuch as fled into the Churches of St. Peter and St. Paul.
               
               
                  Ricus Geyſe, alias Genſeric, King of Alaynes and Vandals, after hée had ſubdued Carthage, came from Spaine into Libia, at the requeſt of Boniface, gouernor of Affrica, to aide him againſt Sygiſuldus, King of Barbary, who not onely made hauocke of the Countrey of Affrica, with fire and ſword in all extremitie with his diuelliſh people, but alſo greatly infected the world with the Arrian hereſie. And in the yeare 431. hee with like malice to diſturbe the Chriſtian Church,

beſieged the Citty,The death of S. Auguſtine. wherein was the moſt holy and reuerend Father, Saint Auguſtine, who died within thrée moneths after the ſiege, at 76. yeares of age, hauing béene 40. yeares Biſhop: of whom it is written: that God ſhewed him a ſpeciall grace, that hee liued not to ſee the deſolation of that Citty, whereof he was then Biſhop, viz. Hyppo.
            
            
               The end of the Romanes gouernment in Britaine, which had continued 483. yeares.
               AFter this, the Britaines continuing a while in doubtfull war with the Picts and Scots, elected Vortiger.
               
               
                  VOrtiger being king,447 ſuch a plenty of corne and fruit happened, as the like had not ben ſéene in many yeares; which plentie cauſed idleneſſe, gluttony and letchery.Peſtilence. There followed ſuch a great peſtilence, that the liuing ſcantly ſufficed to bury the dead. Alſo the Scots and Picts in moſt cruell wiſe ſpoiled the land: where through Vortiger was forced to ſend for aide of forraine lands. And in thrée large ſhippes,Saxons ſent for. there came out of Germany, thrée ſorts of people, Engliſhmen, Saxons, and Getes: Hengiſt and Horſus,
                  Saxons entered this land. two brethren being their Captaines, vnto whom was giuen the Iſle of Thanet to inhabite. By their manhood in many battailes, Vortiger vanquiſhed and droue

backe the Pictes and other enemies: whereby Hengiſt came in ſuch fauour,Vortiger diuorced. that Vortig
                        •
                     
                   married his daughter Rowan, a maide of wonderfull beauty▪ for whoſe ſake the King was diuorced from his lawfull wife: after which time the Saxons daily increaſed, and the Chriſtian faith decaied.
               The Britaines conſidering the daily repaire of the Saxons, ſhewed to their King the ie
                     •
                  pardy that might thereof inſue, but all was in vaine: wherfore they depriued him when he had raigned 7.
                  Vortiger depriued. yeares: and ordained to their King, his eldeſt ſonne Vortimer.
               
               
                  454 The King poyſoned.
                  VOrtimer purſued the Saxons, and vanquiſhed them. Vntill at length hée was poyſoned by his Step mother, after hée had raigned ſixe yeares.
               
                  460 Barone ſlaine at Aubreſbury
                  VOrtiger obtained againe the Kingdome, and ſhortly after, Hengiſtus entred the land, with a number of Saxons: but when hée heard of the great aſſembly that the Britaines made againſt him, he treated for peace: ſhortly after the Saxons traiterouſly ſlew on the plaine of Sariſbury, CCCClx.Firſt kingdome of the Saxons. Barons and Earles, and tooke the King priſoner, conſtrained him to grant vnto them Kent, Suſſex, Suffolke, and Norfolke. Then Hengiſt began his dominion ouer Kent: and ſending fore moe Saxons, made warre vpon the Britaines.
               
                  Aurelius Ambroſe and Viher, made warre vpon Vortiger,
                  Vortiger burned. and burned him in his Caſtle, when he had ſecondly raigned 6. yeares.
               
                  
                  AVrolius Ambroſe, ſecond ſonne to Conſtantine,
                  466 haſted him with an army towards Yorke againſt Occa ſonne of Hengiſt, where hee diſcomfited, and tooke priſoner the ſaide Occa. He cauſed the great ſtones to be ſet vpon the plaine of Sariſbury,Stonehing. in remembrance of the Britaines that were ſlaine there.
               A Saxon ſubdued the countries of Southery, Somerſet, Deuonſhire, and Cornwall,The ſecond kingdom of the Saxons. which after was called the Kingdome of South Saxons.
               The kingdome of the eaſt Saxons began vnder Duke Vffa,
                  The third kingdom of the Saxons. which contained Norfolke and S
                     •
                  ffolke. Aurelius, died of poyſon, when he had raigned 32. yeares.
               
                  VTher Pendragon was crowned King.498 He was enamored vpon Igreene the Dukes wife of Cornwall, and on her hée begate Arthur. Hee raigned eightéene yeares, and was buried at Stonehing.
               
                  ARthur, the ſonne of Vther Pendragon,
                  516 was crowned King of Britaine. He fought twelue battailes againſt the Saxons,Round Table. he conſtituted the order of the round Table, to which order he onely receiued ſuch of the nobilitie, as were moſt renowned for vertue and chiualry.
               While Arthur was ocupied in his warres beyond the ſeas, Mordred, to whom he had committed the gouernment of Britaine, confederating himſelfe with Cerdicus, King of the Weſt Saxons, traiterouſly vſurped the Kingdome: of which treaſon, when relation came to Arthur,
                  
he ſpéedily returned,Mordred ſlaine. purſuing him into Cornewall, gaue him battaile, where Mordred was ſlaine, and Arthur being deadly wounded, was conueied to Glaſſenbury, where he died, and is buried, after he had raigned 16. yeares.
               
                  542
                  COnſtantine, kinſman to Arthur, was ordained King.
               
                  AVrelius a Britaine, raiſing mortall warre againſt Constantine, ſlue him when he had raigned 3. yeares. He was buried at Stonehing.
               This yeare 544. there was an vniuerſall earthquake.
               
                  545
                  AVrelius Gonaxus, King of Britaine, impriſoned his vncle, which was right heire to the crown. He raigned 33. yeares.
               
                  The 5. & 6. kingdomes of the Saxons.The kingdome of Northumberland began vnder a Saxon, named Ida. This prouince was firſt diuided into two kingdomes: the one was called Deyra, the which contained the land from Humber to Tine: the other Brenicia, which included the countrey from Tine to the Scottiſh ſea.
               
                  VOrtiporus the ſonne of Conanus, was ordained King of Britaine, a victorious King, and cruell tyrant,578 who put from him his wife, and kept her daughter for his concubine: in diuers battailes he diſcomfited the Saxons: He raigned 4. yeares.
               
                  MAlgo Conanus gouerned the Britaines, ſlue his firſt wife, and tooke his brothers daughter.The firſt warre betweene the Saxons in this realme.
               
               
                  EThelbert, King of the Saxons in Kent, gaue battell to Ceanlinus, King of the weſt Saxons: in which fight were ſlaine two Dukes of Ethelberts,
                  
and himſelfe with his people chaſed.
               
                  CAreticus ruled the Britaines,58
                        •
                     
                   his ſubiects moued the Saxons (with Gurmundus King of Ireland) to make warre vpon Careticus, in ſuch wiſe, that he was faine to take the towne of Ciceſter, where they aſſaulted him ſo ſore, that he with his men fled from thence into Wales.Gurmundcheſter builded. When he had raigned 3. yeares, Gurmund builded Gurmondcheſter.
               
                  EThelridus gouerned Northumberland,588 who made ſuch continual war vpon the Britaines, that it is thought he ſlue more of them then all the other Saxons. By this cruelty the faith of Chriſt was almoſt vtterly extinguiſhed in Britaine, many were chaſed out of the Iland,The Saxons had the whole poſſeſſion of this realme. the reſt remained in Wales, and the Saxons obtained the whole dominion of the Iſland: ſauing a part of Scotland, and was ſubiect to the Picts and Scots.
               This yeare 616. being the fourth yeare of Hyraclius the Emperour of the Romanes, in the moneth of Auguſt, in France and other places,A ſtrange and terrible peſtilence. there happened a great earthquake, and preſently followed a great peſtilence, with ſuch hideous ſcabs and botches, as they could not diſcerne nor know one man from another. This peſtlience was very fierce and infectious.
               
                  596. S. Gregory ſent Auguſtine, Melitus Iuſtus,
                  Auſtē came into England, S. Auſtens at Canterbury, S. Pauls Church in London. and Iohn, to preach the Chriſtian faith to the Angles, which were firſt receiued of Ethelbert, King of England, whom they conuerted to the faith, with diuers of his people. This Ethelbert began to build Saint Auguſtines in Canterbury, Pauls
                  
Church in London,S. Andrews in Rocheſter, S. Peters at Weſtminſter builded The life & death of the falſe Prophet Mahomet. and S. Adrewes in Rocheſter. Sibertus, King of the eaſt Saxons, builded Weſtminſter.
               
                  MAhomet, of the ſtocke of Iſmael, an Orphan, of poore parentage, of an excellent wit, and great ſtrength, borne in Arabia, in his youth taken and ſold to a rich Marchant, who imployed him in his affaires: his maiſter died, then he married Cadiga his Miſtreſſe, of 50. yeares of age, by whom hee had much wealth, which hee in few yeares increaſed mightily, as well in Treaſure, Camels, Munition, as other commodities: hee gaue great entertainment in his houſe, and was liberall vnto the poore, hée was very ſkilfull in Magicke, and learned many deceits of the Egyptians, for the which hee was held in admiration of the ignorant Sarazens, and diſtracted Arabians. And albeit he was of ſmall reading, by reaſon of his education & otherwiſe, yet he hearkened vnto ſuch as were learned, eſpecially, if they were any way malcontented, either with any eſtabliſhed religion, ſtate or gouernment. Amongſt which number, hee inclined earneſtly vnto the cenſured Hereticke Sergius, a Monke of Conſtantinople, which ſhould haue béene puniſhed for maintaining the Neſtorian hereſie: hée attributed great Diuinitie to himſelfe: And hauing the falling ſickneſſe, he denied it, ſaying, hée was onely in a trance, being rauiſhed with the viſion of the Angell Gabriel, who deliuered him ſecret inſtructions, and new commaundements from God: hee taught a Doue to pecke foode out of

his eares, which hee made the people beléeue was the holy ghoſt, that came to inſpire him: by means whereof, and other his illuſions, which his confederates vſed in his behalfe, ſtrongly poſſeſt the multitude with a moſt holy and reuerent opinion of him, as alſo that hee was the great Prophet of the Iſmaelites, or as they call themſelues,As deſcended of Sara wife to Abraham. the Sarazens: and then by the helpe of Sergius and the reſt, in contempt of the old and new Teſtament, hée made his Antichriſtian Alcaron, wherein hée forbade the vſe of holy Scriptures, commanding them to continue circumciſion, and vtterly to aboliſh baptiſme, for to them belonged the diuide promiſe: in contempt of Iewe and Chriſtian: hée commanded euery Friday for euer, to bée held his holy Sabbaoth: hée commanded them not to eate ſwines fleſh, nor drinke wine by day: hée allowed euery man to haue many wiues, and conſtituted a voluptuous Paradiſe, like to the Manichées: hée abſolutely denied the Trinitie, and the doctrine of our Sauiour Chriſt, and his Apoſtles, except onely ſuch places of text, as hée wreſted to ſerue his ſathanicall purpoſe, ſaying Chriſt was a holy Prophet, and his fore-runner, and had foretold much of him, and of his comming: hée ſaid the holy Ghoſt was a Creature, like to the Nicholaytans, with many other abhominations and blaſphemies, not fit to be ſpoken by a Chriſtian: all which hee began publickely to preach in the yeare of Chriſt 620. in the twelfth yeare of the raigne of Hyraclius the Emperour: and by degrées it was ſo followed and

beléeued, that hée grew mighty in fauour with all ſorts of people, chiefely the Sarazens: then he entred into armes, and with a great hoaſt waſted Aſyria,The Scenits did Mahomet great ſeruice. tooke Damaſco, ouerthrew the Perſians, hée inueigled the warlike Scenits, who reuolted from Hyraclius for want of pay, & hauing ſubdued many Nations, cauſed himſelfe to be crowned King of Perſia: then hée proclaimed himſelfe a great Prophet, and by force eſtabliſhed his blaſphemous Alcaron, conſiſting of the dregges of all Religions then in vſe: which diuelliſh and Antichriſtian Doctrine, through the remiſneſſe and negligence of the Emperours, and ciuill diſſention of the reſt of the Chriſtian Princes, hath ouer ſpread all Aſia, Affrica, and the beſt part of Europe, and is in many places of India. He dyed in the yeare 632. being poyſoned by his alyes, vpon hope to ſuccéede him in his gouernment: ſome write hee dyed at thirty yeares of age, and others write at forty yeares, and they put him in an Iron cheſt, and placed it vpon loftie Treſſels in the Citty of Mecha in Perſia, whereunto the Turkes goe in pilgrimage from all places. Reade Egnatius 2.
                   Booke, Blondas 9.
                   Booke, Charles Fountagne 2.
                   Booke of Medals, and Polydor, Virgil, 7.
                   Booke.
               
                  606This yeare 606. Clocks and Dials were commaunded to be ſet vp in Churches.
               
                  613
                  CAdmine Duke of North Wales, was made Soueraigne of the Britaines, who gaue ſtrong battell to Ethelfride, King of Northumberland, and forced him to intreate for peace: hée

raigned 42. yeares.
               The Kingdome of Mercia beganne vnder the Saxon Penda:
                  The 7 kingdoms of the Saxons. Lincolne Miniſter. S. Peters at Yorke. which Lordſhip contained Huntingtonſhire, Herefordſhire, and Gloceſterſhire. At that time raigned in diuers parts of the land, 7. Kings. Paulinus builded the great Church at Lincolne. He beganne the Cathedrall Church at Yorke, named S. Peters.
               
               
                  CAdwallaine the ſonne of Cadwane,
                  635 began his raigne ouer the Briaines, He warred ſtrongly vpon the Saxons, & made Penda King of Mercia tributary to him: he raigned 48. yeares, and was buried at London.
               
                  Sigibert King of the Eaſt Angles, ſent for Felix out of Burgondy to preach the faith:
                     Dunwich. The prouince of Canterbury diuided into pariſhes.
                     Ely. O
                           •
                        waldfire The biſhops ſea of Wincheſter. Glazing brought firſt into England. The Abbeyes of Abingdon. Chertſey. & Barking builded.
                   he made this Felix Biſhop of Dunwich, and by his counſell, he erected diuers ſchooles.
               
                  Honorius, Arch-biſhop of Canterbury, diuided his prouince into Pariſhes.
               
                  Atheldrith the Quéene, began the Monaſtery at Ely.
               
                  Medulfe builded the Abbey of Malmeſbury.
               
                  Penda, King of Mercia, warred vpon Oſwald, King of Northumberland, and ſlue him in battell.
               
                  Kenewalcus King of the weſt Saxons, builded the Biſhops ſea of Wincheſter.
               
                  Benet the Monke, and maiſter of the reuerend Beda, brought firſt the craft of Painting, Glaſing, and Maſons worke into this land.
               
                  Ciſſa began to build the Abbey of Abingdon, &

Erkenwald Biſhop of London, builded the Abbeyes of Chertſey, and of Barking.
               
                  Oſtrike, Duke of Gloceſter, founded the Monaſtery of Gloceſter.
               
                  Peda, The ſonne of Penda, and Selruphus of Mereia, were the firſt founders of Peterborow.
               
                  685
                  CAdwalladar was ordained King of Britaine, (ſaith-Ieffery) and ruled onely three yeares. He was the laſt King of Britaine. And this land after his time called Anglia,
                  This Iland called vniuerſally England. and the inhabitants there of Angles; or Angliſh Saxons, who vſed to call all men Welſhmen that bee ſtrangers vnto them. This happened after the entring of the Saxons, vnder their leaders Hengiſt and Horſus, in the time of Vortiger, 236.
                   yeares.
               
                  Iuſtinian the Emperour.
                  IVſtinian the ſecond, which ſome ſaid was Iuſtinian the fourth, ſonne to Conſtantine the fourth, was the laſt of the race of Hyraclius, and began his raigne in the yeare 686. hée cut the noſes of his yonger brothers, to the end they ſhould not aſpire to the Empire. This wicked Emperor cauſed a headſtrong Councell to bee made againſt the ſixt generall Councell held by his father: he made warres vpon the Arabians, and Bulgarians, contrary to the appointment of his father, and proſpered accordingly, for he was put to the worſt: Amurath King of Sarazens, made peace with him, and reſtored backe Affrica. This Iuſtinian, for his crueltie, and wilfull behauiour, was generally hated of all his ſubiects, and in the tenth yeare of his raigne was chaſed out of his gouernment,

by Leonicus, who poſſeſt the Emperiall Crowne thrée yeares: with the ſpeciall helpe of Callymycus, and then the men of warre choſe Hyſmarus, Alias Tyberius the third, who cut his noſe likewiſe; and repreſſed the Arabians: he baniſhed the moſt noble Phillippicus, becauſe an Eagle was ſéene to light vpon him as bée ſlept, then hée ſailed from Affrica, to Conſtantinople, and tooke Leonicus, and cut his noſe, as he had done to Iuſtinian, and ſéered it: in the ſeuenth yeare of his raigne, Iuſtinian by helpe of the Bulgarians, recoured his Empire, and preſently practiſed all maner of reuenge vpon thoſe hée hated: he baniſhed Tiberius, pulled out the eyes of Callymycus, and in his daily exerciſe of crueltie, as oft as he blew his noſe, hée cauſed ſome of the fauourers of Leonicus to bée put to death: ſixe yeares after his reeſtabliſhment, he ſought to ruinate Cherſena, he was banquiſhed in warre by Phyllippicus, whom hee baniſhed with his ſonne Tiberius, and loſt his life and Empire: after him ſuccéeded Phyllippicus, ſurnamed Bardanes. Read Egnatius 2.
                   Booke.
            
            
               
               I will not ſpeake chiefely of the Weſt-Saxons, becauſe (in the proceſſe of time) they ſubdued other Kings, and brought this land againe to one Monarchy.
               
                  687
                  KEnwalcus, ſurnamed Iew, raigning among the weſt Saxons maintained ſuch warre againſt the Kentiſh Saxons, that he conſtrained them to ſéeke meanes of peace.
               
                  Wels and Glaſſenbury. Kingdome forſaken.This man builded the Colledge of Wels, and the Abbey of Glaſſenbury, hee alſo paide the Peter. pence firſt to Rome. When hee had gouerned the weſt Saxons by the ſpace of 7. yeares: he gaue vp his royall power, and went to Rome. Anno 101. Ethelredus King of Mercia, obtained a Biſhops ſea to bée in the Citty of Worceſter, Anno 711. Edilwach King of the ſouth Saxons, gaue to the Biſhop Wilfride,
                  Selſee. the Iſle of Selſee, wherein the ſaide Wilfride builded a Monaſtery, and became the firſt Biſhop of the Prouince.
               
                  Germany conuerted.And in the yeare 715. the Germanes were generally conuerted to the Chriſtian faith.
               
                  726
                  EThelard was King of the Weſt Saxons, in whoſe time the reuerend Beda was famous.
                     Beda
                   
                  Beda for his learning and good life was renowned

in all the world: he compiled 78. bookes. Ethelrald raigned 14. yeares. He died at 70. yeares of age. Beda died the laſt of May, 732. of age 72.
               
               
                  CVthred was King of the weſt Saxons:740 he raigned 16. yeares.
               
                  Slgibert being cruell towards his ſubiects,757 Cruelty. was depriued of his kingly authoritie, and wandring in a wood, was ſlaine of a ſwineheard: he raigned not one yeare.
               About this time the Sarazens ouer-ran and ſpoiled all France.
               
                  KEnulphus appeaſed certaine murmurs that were among the people,757 The King ſlaine. for the depoſing of his predeceſſor Sigibert. Hee founded the Cathedrall Church of Wels, in Anno 766.
                  
               
               As he haunted a woman,Wels. which he kept at Merton, he was ſlaine by a kinſman of Sigibert.
                  Kenulphus ſlaine. When he had raigned 29. yeares, he was buried at Wincheſter.
               About this time Charlemaine had forced the Saxons to become Chriſtians.Saxons become Chriſtians.
               
               
                  BRithricus, of the blood of Cerdicus, was made King of the weſt Saxons, and ruled 17. yeares.It rained blood. In his time it rained blood, which falling on mens cloathes, appeared like croſſes.
               This yeare 793.
                  The original of Flanders. soleme muſicke in Churches in France. the weſt country of Flanders began to bee an Earledome. And 16. yeares before that Charlemaine of France ſent choiſe ſchollers to Rome, to learne to ſing according to ſkill and Art. The firſt Church that receiued and preferred ſkilfull melody was Mets in Lorrayne. Till this time the Frenchmen had but ſmall ſkill

in Muſicke: but there were no Organs knowne in France, vntill the yeare 826.
               
               
                  Offa, King of Mercia, builded the Abbey of S. Albones:S. Albones. Offa-dike. hée chaſed the Britaines into Wales, and the vtter bounds of Mercia, which is now called Offa-dike.
               
                  The Danes firſt entred this land. The King poyſoned.The Danes ariued in the Iſle called Portland, but by the puiſſance of Bithricus, and other Kings of the Saxons: they were compelled to auoide the land. Bithricus was poyſoned by his wife Ethelbura: for which deede the Nobles ordained that from thenceforth the Kings wiues ſhould not bée called Quéenes, nor ſuffered to ſit with them in places of eſtate.
               
                  Winchcombe.
                  Kenulph King of Mercia, builded the Abbey of Winchcombe.
               
                  802
                  EGbricus the Saxon, obtained the gouernment of the weſt Saxons, he tamed the Welſhmen, and vanquiſhed Bertulphus, King of middle England: hée raigned 37. yeares, and was buried at Wincheſter.
               
                  The Biſhopricke of Hambro & Breame founded.This yeare 812. being the 11. yeare of the Emperiall raigne of Charlemaigne, hée founded an Arch-biſhopricke in Hambro, and ordained that the Arch-biſhop and his ſucceſſor ſhould bée Metropolitan of Sclauonia, Denmarke, and other great Prouinces of the North, Vpon enuy thereat, the Danes and others being mighty in armes after the death of Charlemaigne, aſſaulted Hambro, and deſtroyed it cruelly. Then within a while after was ye Biſhopricke of Breme founded. The Archbiſhop of Hābro ſought to cōuert the Danes.
               
                  
                  A Delnulphus, the ſonne of Egbricus,
                  839 began his raigne ouer the moſt part of England: there came a great Army of the Pagan Danes, with 550. ſhippes into the mouth of the Thames, and ſo to London, and ſpoled it.London ſpoiled. 
                  Adelnulphus came againſt the foreſaide Danes, and had of them an honourable victory.
               
                  Adelnulphus ſent his ſonne Alfreed to Rome: at which time Leo the fourth conſecrated him King.
               
                  Adelnulphus did make the tenth part of his kingdome frée from all tribute and ſeruice to the King: he raigned 18. yeares, and was buried at Stonehing.
               
                  ADhelbalde raigned two yeares and a halfe:857 he preſumed to his fathers mariage bed, and was buried at Shireburne.
               
                  AThelbrict, brother to Adhelbald, tooke vnder his dominian, Kent, Southery,860 and Southſex.Wincheſter ſpoiled. In his time the Pagans ſpoiled the Citty of Wincheſter: hee raigned 5. yeares, and lyeth at Shireburne.
               
                  ETheldred brother to Atheldrict,
                  866 was ſlaine by the Danes, when hee had raigned 5. yeares and was buried at Winborne.
               About this time a furious heathen people came from Sweathland, Denmarke, and Norway, and moſt deſpitefully poſſeſt that part of France, which euer ſince hath béene called Normandy,The original of Normandy. of whom it tooke the name: William the Conqueror is deſcended of them.
               
                  Hinguar and Hubba ouercame the Prouince

of the Northumbers.Edmond martyred. 
                  Hinguar ſailed into the eaſt part of England, tooke Edmond, the King of that Prouince, being conſtant in the faith of Chriſt, who firſt beaten with bats, then ſcourged with whips, yet ſtill called on the name of Ieſus Chriſt, his aduerſaries ſhot his body full of ſhafts, and ſtroke off his head.
               
                  Chaſtity before beauty preferred.
                  Ebbe, Abbeſſe of Coldingham, cut off her noſe and vpper lip, and perſwaded all her ſiſters to doe the like, that they being odible to the Danes, might the better kéepe their virgnitie: in deſpite whereof the Danes burned the Abbey and Nunnes.
               
                  872
                  ALfreede the fourth ſonne of Aethelwolph, receiued the gouernment of the whole Realme, and fought many ſharpe battailes againſt the Pagans. Hee reſtored, and honourably repaired the Citty of London (after it had béene amongſt other Citties deſtroyed with fire, and the people killed vp.) he made it habitable againe. The twenty ninth yeare and fifth month of his raigne, departed this life, and is buried at Wincheſter in the Monaſtery of his foundation. Hee founded a Monaſtery of Monkes at Ethelingſey, and another for Nunnes at Shaftſbury: hee ordained the hundreds, and tenths: hee ordained common Schooles of diuers Sciences in Oxford, and turned the Saxons lawes into Engliſh,Vniuerſitie in Oxford. with diuers other bookes. Hee diuided the twenty foure houres of the day and night into thrée parts: he ſpent eight houres in writing, reading, and praying, eight in prouiſion for his body, and eight

in hearing and diſpatching the matters of his ſubiects.
               This yeare 930. the King of Norway was baptized, and became a deuout Chriſtian,900 The Danes and Norweies conuerted. and his ſonne Otto was Emperour, his eldeſt daughter married Lewis, the fourth of that name, King of France. And about the yeare 962. the people of Denmarke were conuerted to the Chriſtian faith by Popynus the Popes Chaplaine: and ſhortly after that, the ſaid Otto made fierce wars vpon Denmarke, and tooke their King Aleadus priſoner, and cauſed him and all his children to bee baptized.
               
                  EDward, ſurnamed Senior, the ſonne of Alfreed, was annointed King: hee builded. Hertford, another towne at Wittham in Eſſex: hee builded a new Towne againſt the old Towne of Nottingham on the ſouth ſide of the Riuer of Trent, and made a bridge ouer the ſaid Riuer betweene two townes.Thilwall built. Mancheſter repaired. Hee ſubdued the King of Scotland and Wales: he alſo builded Thilwall, and repaired Mancheſter: hee was buried at Wincheſter when hee had raigned foure & twenty yeares.
               
                  ADelſtane, after Edward his father was crowned at Kingſtone: hee brought this land into one Monarchy, for hee expelled the Danes, and quieted the Welſhmen. Hee cauſed them to pay to him yearly for a tribute, twenty pound of gold, 300. pound of ſiluer. 2500. head of neate, with hounds and hawkes to a certaine number. Hee conquered Scotland: Hee raigned 15. yeares,

and lyeth at Malmeſbury.Guy of Warweike 
                  Guy Earle of Warwicke ſide the Daniſh Giant in Hide meade, nigh vnto Wincheſter.
               
                  940
                  EDmund, brother to Adelſtane, tooke on him the gouernance of this realme, who was ſlaine when he had raigned 5 yeares, and was buried at Glaſtenbury.
               About this time the Empire of Gréece was tranſlated from Conſtantinople into Germany,The Tranſlation of the Empire of Greece. The King of Denmarke conuerted. in the time of Otto the Emperour. And at this time began the Princes Electors. And the Citty Magdeburge in Germany was alſo founded, read my larger booke.
               
                  ELdred ſuccéeded Edmund his brother: he tooke on him but a protectour, but afterward hée was crowned at Kingſtone: he quieted and kept in due obeiſance the Northumbers and Scots, and exiled the Danes. He raigned 9. yeares, and was buried at Wincheſter.
               
                  946
                  EDwine ſuccéeded his vncle Eldred, he was crowned at Kingſtone. In the ſelfe ſame day of his coronation, he rauiſhed his owne kinſwoman,959 The King depriued. the wife of a noble man: and afterward ſlew her huſband. Which act, and for baniſhing Dunſtan, who rebuked him, he became odible to his ſubiects, and was depriued when hee had raigned 4. yeares.
               
                  EDgar, brother to Edwine, was crowned at Bathe: Hée was excellent in iuſtice, and ſharpe in correction of vices,King crowned at Bath that neuer before his dayes was vſed leſſe Fellonie by Robbers, or Extortion by falſe Officers. Hee chaſtiſed the

great negligence, and vicious liuing of the Cleargy: he prepared a great Nauy of ſhips, which he diſpoſed in thrée parts of this Realme, and had Souldiers alwaies ready preſt, and ready againſt the incurſions of forraine enemies. King Edgar hauing reſtored, and new founded eight and fourtie Monaſteries, which before had béene deſtroyed,Worceſter and confirmed the Monaſterie of Worceſter, which Oſnalde then Biſhoppe of Worceſter, by the Kings conſent had inlarged, and made the Cathedrall Church of that ſhire.
               
                  Alwinus Alderman, Earle of Eaſtangle,Ramſey founded. founded the Abbey of Ramſey.
               
               King Edgar raigned 16. yeares, and was buried at Glaſtenbury.
               
                  EDward the ſonne of Edgar,
                  975 The King murdred. was crowned at Kingſtone, by the counſell of his Stepmother Elfreed: hee was traiterouſly murdered when he had raigned 3. yeares. Buried at Shaftſbury.
               At this time died S. Dunſtan.
               
               
                  Etheldred the ſonne of Edgar was crowned at Kingſtone: but becauſe he came to the kingdome by killing his brother, he could neuer get the good will of his people. A great part of the city of London was burnt.
               At this time (ſaith Sigibert the Hiſtorian) flouriſhed Guydo Aretine: he was the firſt that taught the Gamuth for prick-ſong.
               King Etheldred erected the Biſhopricke of Exeter: he cauſed all the Danes in England to bee

ſlaine. In reuenge whereof, Swaxe King of Denmarke inuaded England with fire & ſword. Etheldred died when hee had raigned eight and thirty yeares, and was buried in Paules Church in London.
               
                  1016 Edmond Ironſide.
                  EDmund the ſonne of Etheldred, ſuccéeded in the kingdome, who was ſurnamed Ieronſide: and whiles betwéene him and Canutus, ſtriuing for the Empire, many bloody battailes were fought, the Kings themſelues attempted to fight hand to hand for the title of the kingdome, in which combate, after long and doubtfull fight, they both being weari
                     •
                  d,England diuided, Edricus a traitour. Treaſon rewarded. fell to a couenant to diuide the ſame. Edmund not long after was ſlaine by the treaſon of one Ederick of Staton. Edrick making vaunt thereof to Canutus, Canutus anſwered, ſaying: and thou ſhall die, as well thou art worthy: & ſtraight wayes the traitor was tormented to death, and caſt into a ditch.
               About this time ended the race of Charlemaigne, and then began the line of Hugh Caper in France.
               
                  1018 The Danes poſſeſſed all England. Marriage made vpon condition. Canutus King of 4. Kingdomes.
                  Canutus the Dane challenging all England to himſelfe, ſlew his brother Edmond; he procured to haue giuen him in mariage Emma the Widdow of King Etheldred, who at that time was with Edward, and allured her ſons to exile with Duke Richard in Normandie. She did beare Canutus a ſonne of his owne name: by his affinitie and alliance, the Danes became of the more ſtrength and power. His ſubdued the Scots, whereby he was King of England, Scotland, Denmarke, & Norway.

Hee founded the Monaſtery of Saint Edmondes-Burie:
                     S Edmonde bury builded. when hee had raigned twenty yeares, hée deceaſed, and was buried at Wincheſter.
               
                  HArold Harefoot,
                  1038 vſing the force of the Danes that dwelt in England, inuaded the Realme, while his brother Hardicanutus gouerned in Denmarke.
               And not being vnmindfull by whoſe aide hee came to the kingdome,Harald a tyrant. Emma & her childrē baniſhed. rewarded the Danes with great dignitie, in this Realme: he conſtrained his mother in law Emma to flye and prouide for her ſelfe: hee tormented to death Alured the ſonne of Emma, which ſhe had by King Etheldred, who then was come out of Normandy to viſit his mother, He raigned 3. yeares, died at Oxford, and was buried at Weſtminſter.
               
                  HArdicanutus ſonne of Canutus and Emma,
                  1041 as ſoone as hee had gotten his fathers kingdome, fetched his mother out of exile. And in reuenge of diſpleaſure that was done to her, and of the murder of his brother Alured, hée commanded the carkas of Harold to bee digged out of the earth, and to be thrown into the riuer of Thames, where,S. Clements Church without Templebarre. by a fiſher it was taken vp, & brought to the Danes, who buried it in a Churchyard which they had at London. In the midſt of his cups he departed this life, the 3. yeare of his riagne, and was buried at Wincheſter.
               
                  EDward the ſonne of Etheldred, was crowned at Weſtcheſter: hee releaſed the tribute of 4000. pounds, called Dane-gelt,Dane-gele. which the Engliſh

people from the beginning of the raigne of the Danes, was compelled to pay their King euery yeare:Edgitha was barren. he tooke to wife Edgitha, the daughter of Earle Goodwine: hee ſent for home into England his Nephew Edward, the ſonne of King Edmond his brother, who brought with him Agatha his wife, Edgar, Margaret, and Chriſtian his children, borne in Pannonia, where hee liued but a while. Thus Edward being diſappointed, both of his Nephew and his heire, pronounced Edgar the Outlawes ſonne, to be heire to the Kingdome: but becauſe this Edgar was within age, by his teſtament hee made Herold the ſonne of Goodwine Regent, vntill the young Edgar ſhould be of age to receiue the kingdome: notwithſtanding, he immediatly after the death of Edward, pronounced himſelfe King, which thing ſhortly after brought deſtruction both to himſelfe and all England. This Edward raigned 23. yeares 6. moneths and odde dayes:Lubecke founded. he was buried at Weſtminſter, which hée had newly builded.
               
                  1066 This yeare of our Lord beginneth here at Chriſtmas William Conqueror couſin to K. Edward by the mothers ſide.This yeare 1055. Henry
                   the 4. Emperor of that name, and 90. in number began his raigne, and in the 43. yeare of his raigne, the city of Lubeck was founded by a Pagan. Read my larger booke.
               
                  HErold gaue to young Edgar the Earledome of Oxford: but Harold the King of Norway aſſaulted England both by ſea and land. Whoſe attempt whiles Herold of England prepared to withſtand, William Duke of Normandy, came into England with a well appointed Army, alleaging, that by right it was due to him by the gift

of King Edward his kinſman, and alſo by oath eſtabliſhed betwixt Harald and him. He landed at Pemſey, the 28. of September.Harald ſlaine. 
                  Harald notwithſtanding he was bare of men by reaſon of the battaile that hée had fought againſt the men of Norway; yet hearing of Williams comming, went ſtraight wayes againſt him. Both armies being brought into array, the battel was fought, wherein great ſlaughter of Engliſhmen was made. And the Normanes got the victory on the 14. of October. King Harold was ſhot through the braines with an arrow, when he had raigned 9. Moneths, and was buried at Waltham in Eſſex, where hee had founded a faire Colledge.
               
                  THus endeth the raigne of the Saxons, who had now continued ſometimes in warres with the Britaines, then with the Danes, and now with the Normanes the ſpace of ſixe hundred yeares.
               
               
                  VERSES.
                  A thouſand ſixe and ſixty yeare,
                  it was, as we doe read:
                  When that a Comet did appeare,
                  and Engliſhmen lay dead.
                  Of Normandy, Duke William then,
                  to England-ward did ſaile:
                  Who conquered Harald with his men,
                  and brought this land to bale.
               
            
            
               
               WILLIAM CONQVEROVR.
               
                  Anno reg. 1
                  
                     WIlliam, Duke of Normandy, ſurnamed Conquerour, baſtard ſonn
                     •
                   of Robert the 6. Duke of the Du
                     •
                  chy, and couſin germaine to King Edward, after the battell at H
                     •
                  ſtings, came to London, when with great ioy he was receiued, both of the Cleargy and people, and crowned on Chriſtmas day, which day by the Hiſtoriographers of that time, was accounted the firſt of the yeare following, and ſo named 1067.
                  1067 But after the account of England now obſerued, the yeare beginneth not vntil the 25. of March.
               This yeare, through the great ſuite and labour of William the Biſhop of London, King VVlliam granted the Charter and liberties to the ſame VVilliam Biſhop,Wherefore the Mayor & Citizens of London repaire to Paules. and Godfry of Portgrine, and all the Burges of the ſame Citty of London 
                     〈◊〉
                   as large forme as they enioyed the ſame in the time of Saint Edward, before the Conqueſt: 
                     〈◊〉
                   reward whereof, the Citizens haue fixed 
                     〈◊〉
                   his graue, being in the midſt of the great Iſle of Saint Paules Church in London, this Epitaph following.
               
                  
                  TO William, a man famous in wiſdome and holines of life, who firſt with Saint Edward the King and Confeſſour, being familiar, of late preferred to be Biſhop of London, and not long after, for his prudency and ſincere fidelitie, admitted to be of Councell with the moſt victorious Prince VVilliam, King of England, of that name the firſt, who obtained of the ſame, great and large priuiledges to this famous Citty: the Senate and Citizens of London, to him hauing wel deſerued, haue made this.
               
               KIng William beſieged Exeter,Exeter beſieged. which the Citizens and other Engliſh men held againſt him.
               King William gaue to Robert Cummin,
                  An, reg, 2. 1068 Earle of Northumberland ſlaine. the Earledome of Northumberland, againſt whom the men of the country did ariſe, & ſlew him with nine hundred of his men, and King William came afterward vpon them, and ſlew them euery one.
               
                  AG
                        •
                     lricus Biſhop of Durham,An, reg, 3. 1069 being accuſed of treaſon, was impriſoned at Weſtminſter. The Engliſhmen that were fled out of England, hauing Edgar to be their captaine, returned out of Scotland, and ſuddenly ſet vpon the Garriſons that King William had ſet at Yorke, put them to 
                     ••
                  ight, ſlewe them, poſſeſſed the Citty, and pronounced Edgar to bee King; but not long after, King William came with a great army and recouered the Cittie, conſtraining Edgar to returne againe into Scotland.
               Such a dearth was in England,Ann, reg. 4. that men did

eate horſes, cats, dogs, and mans fleſh.
               
                  1070 Monaſteries rifled. Ann, reg. 5.King William bereued all the Monaſteries and Abbeyes of England of their gold and ſiluer, ſp
                     •
                  
                  ring neither Chalice nor Shrine.
               
                  1071 Ann. reg. 6. Caſtle of Ledes and of Oxford.The caſtle of Ledes in Kent was builded by Creueceur, and the Caſtle of Oxford by Robert O
                        ••
                     ley, two noble men that came into England with William the Conquerour.
               
                  1072 Yorke ſubiect to Canterbury. Ann. reg. 7.In a Counſell holden at Windſore, 
                     〈◊〉
                   Prouince of the Church of Canterbury 
                     〈◊〉
                   the Church of Yorke, was examined, and approued.
               
                  1073 Ann. reg. 8.King William with a great power inuad
                     •
                   Scotland, and forced Malcolme to do him homa
                     •
                   and fealty.
               
                  1074 Married Prieſt remoued.
                  Gregory the ſeaueth Pope, excommunicated all committers of Simony, and remoued married Prieſtes from executing of diui
                     •
                   Seruice, whereof aroſe great troubles in E
                     •••
                  land.
               
                  1075King William cauſed a Caſtle to be builded a Durham, and Earle Waltheothus of Northu
                     ••
                  berland to be beheaded at Wincheſter: hée ſaith into Britaine, and beſieged the Caſtle of Dole
                     •
                  , but preuailed not.
               
                  Biſhop murdered. An. reg. 10
                  Walter Biſhop of Durham, bought of King VVilliam the Earledome of Northumberland, wherein he vſed ſuch cruelty, that the inhabitants ſlew him.
               
                  1076 An. reg. 11The earth was hard frozen from the kalende
                     •
                   of Nouember, to the middeſt of Aprill.
               
                  1077Vpon Palme Sunday about noone, appeare
                     •
                  
                  
a blaſhīg Starre neare vnto the Sunne.An, reg, 12.
               
               
                  Malcolme King of Scots, waffed Northumberland, flew many and tooke a great prey.1068 An, reg, 13 This yeare King William builded the Tower of London.
               
                  Thurſtone Abbot of Glaſſenbury,1079 Murther. in his Church cauſed thrée Monks to be ſlaine, & eightéene men to be wounded, that their blood ran from the Altar 
                     •
                  awne the ſteps.
               This yeare was a great winde on Chrſtmas day, a great earthquake and roaring out of the earth the 6. of Aprill.An, reg, 15 1081
               
               
                  Henry Earle Ferrers founded a Church within his Caſtle of Tutſbury. An, reg, 16 Tutsbury.
               
               
                  Alwine Childe, a Citizen of London,1082 Bermondſey. founded the Monaſtery of Saint Sauiours at Bermondſey in Surrey.
               King William cauſed enquiry to bee made,An, reg, 17 1083 Acres of land numbred, An, reg, 18 how many Acres of land were ſufficient for one plough by the yeare: how many beaſtes to tilling of one hide, how many Citties, Caſtles, Farmes, Granges, Townes, Riuers, Marſhes, and Woods, what rent they were by yeare, and how many Knights or Souldiers were in euery ſhire: all which was put in writing, and remained at Weſtminſter.
               King William tooke homage and oath of allegeance of all England,1084 A greatter & tooke of euery hide of land ſixe ſhillings, and ſailed into Normandy.
               When the Normanes had accompliſhed their pleaſure vpon the Engliſhmen,An, reg, 19 1085 ſo that there was no Noble man of that Nation left to beare any

rule ouer them: it was brought to paſſe, th
                     •
                   for the ſpace of more then thirty miles, good pro
                     •
                  fitable corne ground was turned into a chaſe 
                     〈◊〉
                   wilde beaſtes.New foreſt Biſhop at Lincolne. 
                  Remingus Biſhop of Dorcheſte
                     •
                   remoued his ſea to Lincolne, where hee builded new Church.
               
                  An, reg. 10. 1086 water flood Battail Abbey, & Selby Abbey. S. Martine be grand.There was a great water flood, ſo that hils we
                     ••
                   made ſoft and conſumed, and with their fall ouer
                     •
                  whelmed many villages.
               King William builded Battell Abbey in S
                     •
                  
                  ſex, another at Selby in Yorkeſhire, the th
                     ••
                   at Caen in Normandy, in which hee was buri
                     •
                  ed. He gaue great priuiledges to Saint Marth
                     ••
                  le graund in London. Pauls Church in London burnt.
               
                  An, reg. 21. 1086 bo
                        ••
                     s foūdIn a prouince of Wales called Roſe, 
                     〈◊〉
                   found the Sepulchre of Gawen, vpon the Se
                     ••
                  ſhore, who was ſiſters ſonne of Arthur the great King of Britaine, being in length fourtéene ſo King William being at Roan in Normand
                     •
                   went with a great Army into France, ſpoyli
                     •
                   all things as he paſſed. Laſt of all hée burned 
                     〈◊〉
                   Citty of Meaur, with our Lady Church, a
                     •
                   two Anchorits that was incloſed there. The Ki
                     ••
                   cheared his men to féede the fire, and came hi
                     •
                   ſelfe ſo neare, that with the heate of his harne
                     •
                   he got a diſeaſe. Alſo the Kings horſe leaping o
                     •
                  uer a ditch, did burſt the inner parts of the King with the paine whereof hee was ſore afflict
                     ••
                   and returned to Roan, where ſhortly after 
                     〈◊〉
                   ended his life,King William died, the ninth day of September, 
                     〈◊〉
                   the yeare of our Lord 1087. When hee had raig
                     •
                  ned

twenty yeares, eight moneths, and ſixtéene dayes. Hee was buried at Caen in Normandy, and had iſſue by Matild his wife, daughter to Baldwin Earle of Flanders, Robert Curthoſe, vnto whom hee gaue Normandy, Richard that died young, William Rufus to whom he gaue England,King Will
                        ••
                     am had 4: ſonnes, and 5. daughters. and Henry, to whom hee gaue his wiues inheritance and treaſure: Daughters, Cicely Abbeſſe of Caen, Conſtance wife to Stephen Earle of Bloys, Margaret promiſed to Harold King of England, and Elienor betrothed to Alfonſo King of Galicia.
            
            
               WILLIAM Rufus.
               
                  
                     WIlliam Rufus,
                  An, reg. 1. the third ſonne of William Conquerour, beganne his raigne the ninth day of September, in the yeare of our Lord 1087. He was variable, inconſtant, couetous, and cruell: he burdened his people with vnreaſonable taxes, and what he thus got, he prodigally ſpent in great banquetting, and ſumptuous apparrell.
               
                  Otho Biſhop of Bayon, and Earle of Kent, with his brother Robert, Earle of Mortaine and Hereford, and almoſt all the Nobles of England,The nobles rebell. raiſed warre againſt King William, & would haue had Robert his eldeſt brother to be King: but William by faire wordes pacifying ſome of the principall

conſpirators, beſieged the reſidue in the Ca
                     •
                  ſtell of Rocheſter, And laſtly ouercame them.
               
                  An, reg, 2. 1089 Hoſpitall of S. Iohn & Harbaldowne. An, reg, 3.
                  Lanfranke Archbiſhop of Canterbury decea
                     •
                  ſed, hee renewed the great Church of Canterbury, hee repaired the walles of that Citty, bui
                     ••
                  ded two Hoſpitals, the one of Saint Iohn, th
                     •
                   other at Harbaldowne. He reſtored the Churc
                     •
                   of Rocheſter.
               
                  1090 K. William made war againſt his brother.King William Making warre againſt his bro
                     •
                  ther Robert Duke of Normandy, at length agré
                     ••
                  ment was made betwéene them, that if one 
                     〈◊〉
                   them died without iſſue, the other ſhould ſucce
                     ••
                   in the inheritance.
               
                  Scots did homage.
                  Malcolme King of Scots, did homage to King William.
               
               A great tempeſt fell on Saint Lukes day, ſpecially in Winchcombe, where a great part of the Stéeple was ouerthrowne. And in London, the winde ouerturned 606.
                  606. houſes ouerturned An, reg, 4. houſes, and the roofe
                     •
                   Bow Church in Cheape, wherwith ſome perſons were ſlaine.
               
                  1091 Newcaſtle. Sarisbury.King William builded the new Caſtle vpon Tine. Oſmond Biſhop of Sariſbury, founded the Cathedrall Church of Sariſbury.
               In England fell a wonderfull aboundance 
                     〈◊〉
                   raine,An, reg, 5. 1092 great froſt. and after inſued ſo great froſt, that Horſes and Carts paſſed commonly ouer great Riuers, which when it thawed, the Ice brake downe many great bridges.
               
                  King of Scots ſlaine Biſhoprike at Bath.
                  Malcolme the King of Scots cōming into England, was ſodainely ſlaine with his ſonne and heire, by Robert Mowbrey, Earle of Northumberland.

                  Iohn Biſhop of Welles, by nointing the Kings hands, tranſpoſed the Biſhops ſea to Bath.
               King William builded againe the cittie of Carlile, which was deſtroyed by the Danes 200.
                  An, reg. 6. 1093 Carlile repaired and the caſtle builded. Famine. yeares before: he alſo builded a caſtle there, and out of the South parts of England, ſent men to inhabite there. This yeare was a great famine, and ſo great a mortality that the quick were ſcant able to bury the dead.
               The Welſhmen ſpoiled the citty of Gloceſter,Welſhmen won Angleſey. Ann, reg. 7: with a part of Shreweſbury, and won the Iſle of Angleſey.
               The Biſhopricke of Thetford was tranſlated to Norwich.
               King William with a great power entred Wales,1094 Biſhoprick
                        •
                      at Norwich K. Willam inuaded Wales. not being able to follow the Welchmen amongſt the hils, hee builded two Caſtles in the borders, and returned.
               Great preparation was made by the Chriſtians to goe againſt the infidels at Ieruſalem,An, reg, 8.1095 Going to Ieruſalem. 1096 
                  Peter the Hermite being their firſt leader, and after Godfrey of Bullen.
               
                  Robert Duke of Normandy,An, reg. 9. Normandy pawned. An, reg. 10. 1097 tooke his iourney towards Ieruſalem, and laide Normandy to gage to his brother King William for 6666. pound of ſiluer.
               All the land that ſometime belonged to Earle Goodwin, by breaking in of the ſea, Goodwin ſands. An, reg. 11. 1099 was couered with ſandes, and there is yet called Goodwin ſands.
               King William in Normandy gaue himſelfe

to warres, ſo that with exactions and tributes, he did not onely ſhaue, but flea the people of England.
               
                  Ieruſalem wonne.The Chriſtians tooke the Cittie of Ieruſalem, placing there a King and a Patriarch.
               
                  The Conqueſt of Ieruſalem by Godfrey of Bollen.THe fiftéenth of Iuly, 1098. after thirty ſixe dayes ſiege, the Cittie of Ieruſalem was yéelded vnto Godfrey of Bollen, Duke of Lorane, chiefe leader of the Chriſtian Army againſt the Sarazens, to recouer the Holy land: hee was accompanied with thrée Kings, and diuers other Chriſtian Princes: namely, Robert Duke of Normandy, eldeſt ſonne vnto William the Conquerour: hee had an hundred thouſand Souldiers, all of them marked with the ſigne of the Croſſe.
               This renowned and victorious Prince, before hee entred into Armes, morgaged his Dukedome vnto the Biſhop of Liege, for great ſummes of money, wherewith hee furniſhed himſelfe in this expedition: he was choſen King of Ieruſalem, but would not bee crowned with a Crowne of gold, becauſe our Sauiour Chriſt was crowned with a crowne of thornes. This Chriſtian Conqueſt was performed about fiue hundreth yeares after the Perſians had got poſſeſſion of Ieruſalem and the Holy land: Peter the Hermite, who had ſeene and felt the Turkiſh outrages, tooke great paines in going to all Chriſtian Princes, to contract them vnto this ſeruice. Pope Vrban the ſecond, in the Councell of Cleremount,
                  
was alſo very forward in this buſineſſe. King Godfrey dyed of a feuer, hauing raigned one yeare, and was buried neare vnto the holy Sepulchre: after him ſuccéeded his brother Baldwine, and raigned eighteene yeares: hee made great wars vpon the enemies of our faith. After the death of King Godfrey. Ieruſalem continued foureſcore and eight yeares vnder Chriſtian obedience, and then became ſubiect vnto Turkiſh tyranny.
               After King William was come out of Normandy, he kept his Court at Weſtminſter, in the new Hall, and hearing men ſay it was too bigge,Words of William Rufus. he anſwered, This Hall is not bigge enough by one halfe.
               King William being a hunting, word was brought him that his people were beſieged in Maine: he forthwith tooke ſhipping, though hee were vehemently pet
                     •
                  waded to the contrary, for that there was at that time a great tempeſt, to whom hee anſwered, hee neuer heard that any King was drowned. At this time hee got more honour then euer hee did in all his life: for hee chaſed his enemies, and returned with victory.
               In the Summer,An, reg, 1
                        •
                     . 1100 K. William ſlaine. blood ſprang out of the earth at 
                     •
                  inchamſteed in Barkeſhire.
               King William on the morrowe after Lammas day-hunting in the new forreſt, Sir Walter Tirel ſhooting at a Deare vnawares hit the King in the breaſt, that hee fell downe dead, and neuer ſpake word: his men, and eſpecially that Knight, gat

them away: but ſome came backe againe, & laide his body vpon a Colyars cart, which one ſilly l
                     ••
                  ne beaſt did draw to the Citty of Wincheſter, where he was buried. He raigned twelue yeares, 11. monethes lacking eight dayes. Hee gaue vnto the Monkes called de Caritate in Southwarke, the great new Church of Saint Sauiour of Barmondes eye, and alſo Barmondes eye it ſelfe. He alſo founded a good Hoſpitall in the city of Yorke, called Saint Leonards, for the ſuſtentation of the poore.
            
            
               Henry Bewclarke.
               
                  An, reg, 1.
                  
                     HEnry brother to William Rufus, and the firſt of that name, for his learning called Bewclarke, borne at Salby beganne his raigne the 5. of Auguſt, the yeare of our Lord 1100. He reſtored the ſtate of the Cleargy,Meaſures reformed. Vlna, now called a yard. aſſwaged the grieuous paiments, reduced againe S. Edwards lawes, reformed the olde vntrue meaſures, & made a meaſure by the length of his arme, which was called Vlna.
               
               
                  
                     S. Iohns by Smithfield. Clarkenwell.
                  Iordan Briſe: Baron, founded the houſe of St, Iohn of Ieruſalem, neare vnto London in Smithfield. The ſame Iordan gaue 14. acres of ground lying in the field next adioyning to Clarkenwell, to build thereon a houſe for Nunnes.
               
                  1101. An reg, 2.
                  Robert, Duke of Normandy, the Kings eldeſt

brother, which was now returned from Ieruſalem, made warre for the crowne of England: but by meditation, peace was made, on condition that Henry ſhould pay 3000. markes yearely to Duke Robert, and if the one died without iſſue,Wincheſter and Gloceſter burnt. the longer liuer ſhould inherit: Wincheſter and Gloceſter was burnt.
               The Cathedrall Church of Norwich was founded by Robert Biſhop of Norwich.1102 Norwich. An, reg, 3. Hoſpitall of S. Bartholomew. The priory and Hoſpitall of Saint Bartholomew in Smithfield was founded by a Minſtrell named Reior.
               
               
                  Robert Duke of Normandy comming into England,1103 An, reg, 4. Younger brother beguileth the elder. through the ſubtilty of King Henry his yonger brother releaſed to him the tribute of 3000. markes of ſiluer.
               Great malice was kindled betwéene the two brethren, Robert and Henry,
                  1104 An, reg, 5.whereupon deadly warre in ſued. There appeared about the Sunne, foure circles, and a blazing ſtarre.
               
                  Endo, ſewer to King Henry,
                  1105 An, reg, 6. S. Iohns in Colcheſter founded the Monaſtery of S. Iohn in Colcheſter.
               
                  Robert, Duke of Normandy, came to his brother, and friendly deſired him to beare brotherly loue towards him:1106 Elder brother ſeeketh fauor of the younger. But King Henry feeling his conſcience accuſing him for obtaining the kingdome by defrauding of his eldeſt brother, and fearing men more then God, firſt he reconciled the Nobles of the Realme with faire promiſes, and then purſued his brother into Normandy, where betweene them were many ſore battailes fought, but at the laſt, the valiant man

                  Robert was taken. The firſt Canons entred into the Church of our Lady in Southwarke, called Saint Mary Ouery,
                  Saint Mary Oueries. founded by William Pountlarge Knight, and William Dancis, Normans.
               
                  1107 Ann. reg. 8.King Henry returning into England, brought with him his brother Robert, and William of Morion, and put them in perpetuall priſon, from whence ſhortly after Duke Robert deceiuing his kéepers, ſought to eſcape, but he was taken, and by his brothers commandement, hée had his eyes put out, and then kept ſtraighter till his dying day.
               
                  The Priory of the Trinitie in London builded.The Church of the holy Trinitie without Algate in London, was founded by Mathild the Quéene.
               A great part of Flaunders was drowned by breaking in of the ſea,1108 Flemings ſent into Wales. Ann. reg. 9. which cauſed many Flemings to come into Englād, at length by the kings appointment, they tooke vpon them the poſſeſſion of Roſſe, a prouince in Wales.
               
                  1109 An reg. 10 Taxe. Ely a Biſhoprike.
                  Henry Emperour of Rome, required to haue Maude the Kings daughter in marriage, which was graunted, and the King tooke thrée ſhillings of euery hide of land through England. This King tranſlated the Abbey of Ely into a Biſhopricke.
               
                  1110 An. reg. 11 Caſtles as Briſtow & Cardife. S. Iames at Briſtow.King Henry made Robert his baſtard ſonne, the firſt Earle of Gloceſter, who after builded the Caſtles of Briſtow and Cardife, with the Priory of S. Iames in Briſtow.
               King Henry went into Normandy to make

warre againſt the Earle of Angion,1111 An. reg. 12. and ſpoyled the whole countrey.
               This yeare was a great mortalitie of men,1112 An, reg, 13and murren of beaſts.
               The citty of Worceſter was burnt.1113 An, reg, 14. The tenth of October the riuer of Medway, by no ſmal number of miles,1114 An, reg, 15 Medway & Thames dried vp. did ſo faile of water that in the middeſt of the channell the ſmalleſt veſſels and boats could not paſſe. The ſelfe ſame day the Thames did ſuffer the like lacke of water, for betwéene the Tower of London and the bridge, not onely with horſe, but alſo a great number of men and children, did wade ouer on foote.
                     1115 Chicheſter burnt.
                     A blazing ſtarre.
                  
               
               Chicheſter was burnt, many ſtormes, and a blazing ſtarre.
               In March was excéeding lightning, and in December thunder and haile,1116 and the Moone at both times ſéemed to be turned into blood.1117
               
               
                  Maude the Quéene of England dyed,An, reg, 18 1118 Matildes hoſpitall. An, reg, 19 Knights of the temple. and was buried at Weſtminſter, ſhee builded an Hoſpitall neare vnto London, without Holborn, which now is the parriſh Church of Saint Giles in the field.
               The order of the Templars Knights began. Many ſore battailes were fought in France and Normandy, betwéene Henry King of England,1119 An, reg, 20. and Lodowicke the French King.1112 An, reg, 21 The Kings children drowned.
               
               King Henry hauing tamed the Frenchmen, and pacified Normandy, returned into England, in which voyage William Duke of Normandy, and Richard his ſonne, and Mary his daughter,An, reg, 22. 1121 
                  Richard Earle of Cheſter, and his wife,1122 with many

noble men, and to the number of 160. perſons were drowned.
               
                  Lybuſſa Queene of Bohemia.
                  Lybuſſa daughter of Cracus the ſecond King of Bohemia: for a certaine ſpace raigned as Queene ouer them: and albeit ſhee miniſtred iuſtice indifferently, yet there grewe a great diſdaine & malecontentment amongſt all ſortes of people, that men ſhould bee gouerned and directed by women: and thereupon was ſpread a generall voyce, that foorthwith they would haue a King. And to appeaſe the peoples diſcontent, or as ſome thinke, for her owne pleaſure, ſhee married a Peaſant, called Primiſlaus, who gouerned the Bohemians, and was the firſt that builded walles and rampiers about the Citty of Prague, in the yeare 995. After the death of the ſaid Lybuſſa, there preſently ſtart vp one of her handmaids, called Valaſque, a luſty Lady, of wondrous Amazonian boldneſſe,Valaſque with her army of Ladies. who very cunningly cauſed an aſſembly of all the chiefe Ladies, and others of note, vnto whom ſhee made an eloquent Oration, and amongſt other things, ſhee ſpake as followeth: My moſt noble and worthy Ladies, wee haue loſt our Quéene and Miſtreſſe, whoſe high ſpirit could neuer admit, that either wée or our Sexe, ſhould in any ſort be ſubiect vnto men: if therefore for the euer fréeing of our ſelues and our heires, you now pleaſe to lend me your ſtrong hand, I héere promiſe and aſſure you, that we will haue the ſupremacy and gouerntment.
               This ſpeach preuailed ſo farre, that inſtantly the women tooke oath, and ioyned their hearts

and hands to effect their willes againſt men, and in that fury flew all the men they met: then they entred into Armes, and for ſeauen yeares ſpace, maintained warres very ſtoutly, and like valiant Amazones: all which notwithſtanding in the end they were ſuppreſſed by Prym
                        •
                     ſlaus, partly by force, partly by policy, gifts and faire wordes. Reade Naucler.
               
               King Henry married Adeliſia,
                  An. reg, 23. Gloceſter burnt. the Duke of Louans daughter.
               The Citty of Gloceſter was burnt.
               
                  Henry Earle of Warwicke,An, reg, 24 Warwicke with the Colledge. and Margaret his wife, founded the Colledge of Saint Mary in the towne of warwicke.
               
                  Waleran Earle of Mellent was taken in Normandy by King Henry,
                  1124 and hee with many others were impriſoned at Roan.An, reg, 25 Coiners puniſhed.
               
               The King cauſed all the Coiners of England to haue their priuy members cut off,1126 An, reg, 26 The Empres returned into England. and alſo their right hand, becauſe they had corrupted the Coine.
               
                  Henry the Emperour being dead, Maude the Empreſſe returned into England.
               
                  Richard Biſhop of London,1127 An, reg, 28. S. Oſeth. An. reg, 29. founded the Monaſtery of S. Oſeth in Eſſex.
               At this time men had ſuch a pride in their haire, that they contended with women in length of haire.1128 Men ware haire like women.
               
               King Henry held a Councell at London, wherein it was granted him correction of the Cleargie: ſo the King tooke infinite ſums of money of Prieſts,1129 An, reg, 30. and ſuffered them to doe what they would.
               
                  
                  1130 An, reg, 31.King Henry gaue his daughter the Empreſit, vnto Geffrey Plantagenet Earle of Angiou.
               
                  1131 An, reg, 32 Rocheſter burnt.The Citty of Rocheſter was ſore defaced with fire.
               The King made a Biſhopricke at Carlile.
               
                  1132 An, reg, 33 Carlile a Biſhoprike. London burnt.
                  Maude the Empreſſe did beare vnto Ieffery Plantagenet Earle of Angiou, a ſonne, and named him Henry.
               
               A great fire beginning at Gilbert Beckets houſe in weſt Cheape, conſumed a great part of London from thence to Algate.
               
                  Henry Bloys Biſhop of Wincheſter, builded the Hoſpitall of S.1133 An, reg, 34. Worceſter burnt. 
                  Croſſe neare vnto Wincheſter.
               Worceſter was ſore defaced with fire.
               
                  Maude the Empreſſe brought forth a ſonne named Ieffery.
                  1134 An, reg. 35. Short thigh died. 
                  Robert Cortoiſe or Short-thigh King Henries brother died in the Caſtle of Cardife, and was buried at Gloceſter.
               King Henry remaining in Normandy, deceaſed the firſt day of December,1135 An, reg, 36. Death of K Henry. 
                  Anno 1135.
                   when he had raigned 35. yeares, 4. moneths: his bowels, braines and dies were buried at Roan, the reſt of his body being powdred with ſalt, and wrapped in Buls hides, was buried at Reading, an Abbey of his owne foundation. Hee founded a Priory at Dunſtable, and builded the Caſtle of Windſort, with a Colledge there.
            
            
               
               KING STEPHEN.
               
                  
                     STephen Earle of Beloine, ſonne of the Earle of Blois, and Adala,
                  An, reg, 1. 
                  William Conquerours daughter, Nephew to King Henry the firſt, claimed the kingdome the ſecond day of December, Anno 1135.
                   and was conſecrated at Weſtminſter on the 26. of December. This was a noble man and hardy, of paſſing comely of fauour & perſonage: he excelled in martiall policy, gentlenes, & liberality towards all men: although he had continuall warre, yet he did neuer burden his commons with exactions.
               Fire which began at London Stone,Fire at London. conſumed eaſtward to Algate, and weſtward to S. Paules Church.
               King Stephen beſieged the caſtle of Exceter a long time,1136 Exceter beſieged. which Balwine de Riuers held againſt him: but at length when they within the Caſtle, wanted neceſſary things to liue by,An, reg, 2. they compounded.
               King Stephen paſſed the ſea,1137 to ſubdue Normandy, where hee tooke many citties and ſtrong Caſtles.
               Rocheſter was burnt with all the citty.Rocheſter S. Peters in Yorke.
               
               The Archbiſhops ſea in Yorke, S. Martins without the walles, & the Hoſpitall with 39. Churches were burnt.

Saint Peters Church at Bath,The city of Bath burnt An, reg, 3. and all the citty was burnt.
               
                  1138 An, reg, 4. Battel of the ſtādardThe Nobles ſent for Maude the Empreſſe, promiſing her the poſſeſſion of the Realme, according to their oath made to her. Dauid King of Scots, purpoſing to recouer the Crowne of England for the Empreſſe, inuaded Northumberland, when by Thurſtane Archbiſhop of Yorke, the Scots had an ouerthrowe, and were ſlaine aboue ten tho
                     ••
                  ſand.
               
                  1139 The Empreſſe returned into England. An, reg, 5.
                  Robert Earle of Gloceſter returned into England with his ſiſter the Empreſſe, and a great A
                     •
                  
                  my, which arriued at Portſmouth.
               
                  Robert Earle of Gloceſter, with a great power, inuaded the towne of Nottingham, and ſpoiled it the Townſmen were taken,1140 Nottingham ſpoiled. ſlaine, or burnt in th
                     •
                   Churches whereunto they fled.
               This yeare 1140. died Iohannes de temporibus, he was Page to Charlemaigne.
               
               
                  An, reg, 6. 1141 Lincolne be ſieged. K. Stephen taken. An, reg, 7. The Empres obtained the Crowne. Earle of Gloceſter taken. K. Stephen reſtored.King Stephen beſieged Lincolne againſt Rainulph Earle of Cheſter, but Rainulph Eare of G
                     •••
                  ceſter, came with a great power and reſcued the ſame, chaſed the Kings Army, and tooke him priſoner, hée was had to Gloceſter, and after to Briſtow. The Empreſſe reioycing at this he
                     •
                   good hap, departed from Gloceſter, and came to Ciceſter, from thence to Wincheſter, where the Crowne of the Realme was deliuered into her hands.
               Earle Robert being purſued, was taken a Sobbrige with Earle Warren, and many other: at length through meditation, peace was concluded,

that the King ſhould be deliuered to his kingdome, and the Earle to his liberty.
               
                  Gaufride de Mandeuil, Earle of Eſſex,Abbies of Walden & Stratford. founded the Abbey of Walden, and Sir William de Mountfitchet, founded the Abbey of Stratford Langthorne.
               King Stephen hearing the Empreſſe to lye at Oxford,1142 with a great power came and beſieged her a two moneths ſpace. Earle Robert, with Henry Sonne to the Empreſſe, landed at Warham, where hee beſieged the Caſtle,Warham Caſtle beſieged. which was defended by Hubert de Lucie, who at length yeelded the ſame.
               In the meane time the Empreſſe ſéeing that ſhee was voyde of helpe,The Empres flieth. cloathing her ſelfe and her companie all in white, vpon a night went ouer the Thames a foote, which was then hard frozen: ſhe went to Wallingford, and the Caſtle of Oxford was yéelded to the King.An, reg, 8. 1143
               
               
                  William of Ypre founded Boxley Abbey in Kent.An, reg, 9. Boxley.
               
               King Stephen tooke Ieffery Maundeuile, Earle of Eſſex at Saint Albones,1144 An, reg, 10 which Ieffery could not be at libertie, till he had deliuered the Tower of London, with the Earles of Waldon and Plecy. When the Earle was thus ſpoiled of his holds, hee tooke the Church of Ramſey, and fortified it.1145 Wallingford beſieged. An, reg, 11
               
               King Stephen beſieged Wallingford, but could not preuaile. The Earle of Cheſter was reconciled to the King, and was at the ſiege with

him,1146 An, reg, 12. but ſhortly after when he came to the Court, the King being at Northampton, hee was taken and kept priſoner till he had rendred the Caſtle of Lincolne, and other fortreſſes.
               
                  1147 An, reg, 13. The Empreſſe went into Normandy.Earle Robert deceaſed, and was buried at Briſtow.
               The Empreſſe being wearied with the diſcord of the Engliſh nation, went ouer into Normandy.
               
                  1148 An, reg. 14. S. Katerins.Quéene Matild builded the hoſpitall of S. Katherine by the Tower of London for poore brethre
                     •
                   and ſiſters.
               
                  Henry the Empreſſe ſonne, went to Dauid King of Scots, of whom he was ioyfully receiued, and made Knight.
               
                  1150 An, reg, 16.England was full of trouble and warre, ſet foorth to fire and rapine, through the diſcord betwixt Stephen,
                  1151 and certaine Earles that tooke part with Henry.
               
               
                  Ieffery Plantagenet Earle of Angiou, and Duke of Normandy deceaſed, and left his ſonne Hen
                        ••
                     
                   his heire.
               About this time died Gratianus: hee compoſ
                     ••
                   the great Decretals.
               
                  Henry Duke of Normandy married Elion
                        ••
                     
                   whom Lewis King of France had diuorced from him,An, reg, 17 1152 and had by her a ſonne named William.
               
               Quéene Maude deceaſed, and was buried
                     •
                   Feuerſham.
               The King commanded the Nobles to méete a
                     •
                   Wincheſter, where the Duke being receiue
                     •
                   with great ioy the King in ſight of all men adopted

him his ſonne,An, reg, 18. Norwich increaſed. 1153 and confirmed to him the principalitie of England.
               The Duke receiued him in place of a father, granting to him all the dayes of his life to enioy the name and ſeate of the King.
               Duke Henry came with the King to Oxford,An, reg, 19. K. Stephen adopted K. Henry. where the Earles and Barons, by the Kings commandement ſware fealty to Duke Henry, ſauing the Kings honour ſo long as he liued.
               King Stephen died the 25. of October,1154 K Stephen died. when he had raigned eighteene yeares, ten moneths, and odde daies. He founded the Abbeies of Cogſhall in Eſſex, of Furnes in Lancaſterſhire, and Feuerſham in Kent, where his body was buried.
            
            
               Henry the ſecond.
               
                  
                     HEnry the ſonne of Ieffery Plantagenet, and Maude the Empreſſe,An, reg, 1. began his raigne ouer this Realme of England, the 17. day of December, and was crowned the the ſame day, in the yeare of our Lord 1154. he was ſomewhat red of face, ſhort of body, and therewith fat, well learned, noble in chiualry, wiſe in counſell, ſtedfaſt of promiſe, and a wedlocke breaker.
               
                  William of Ipres,1155 and all the Flemings that had flocked into England, fearing the indignation

of the new king, departed the land, and the caſtles that had béene builded to pill the rich, and ſpoile the poore, were by the Kings Commandement throwne downe.
               Quéene Elianor did beare a ſonne, called Henry after his father.
               
                  Line of the Saxons repaired.King Henry went into Normandy, where with long ſiege he tooke diuers Caſtles.
               King Henry with an Army went againſt the Welſhmen,An, reg, 2. 1156 where he felled their woods, fortified the Caſtle of Rutland, and reedified the Caſtle 
                     〈◊〉
                   Baſingwirke.An, reg, 3. 1157
               
               
                  An, reg, 4: K. Henry reedified Caſtles. 1158Quéene Elianor brought foorth a ſonne named Ieffery. A new coine was made in England.
               King Henry tooke eſcuage of the Engliſhmen, the ſum whereof grewe to 124. thouſand pounds of ſiluer.
               
                  An, reg, 5. 1159
                  Henry the Kings ſonne, not ſeuen yeares olde, married Margar
                        •
                     t the French Kings daughter, not two yeares old.An, reg, 6. 1160
               
               
                  An, reg, 7.
                  Thomas the Kings Chancellour, was elect
                     •
                   Archbiſhop of Canterbury.
               
                  1161 An, reg, 8. Publicanes whipped. An, reg, 9. 1162There came into England thirty Germanes as well men as women, who called themſelu
                     ••
                   Publicanes, they denied Matrimony, Baptiſm and the Lords Supper. Being apprehended, th
                     •
                   King cauſed they ſhould bee marked with an ho
                     ••
                   Iron in the forehead, and whipped them, an
                     •
                   that no man ſhould ſuccour them. Thus being whipped, and thruſt out in the winter, they di
                     •
                   for cold.An, reg, 10. 1163
               
               London bridge was new made of timber, 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
                  Peter, a Prieſt of Colchurch.London bridge made of timber. 
                  Malcolme the Scottiſh King, and Kefus Prince of Southwales, did homage to King Henry, and his ſonne Henry.
               
               A Councell was holden at Claringdon in preſence of the King and the Archbiſhops, Biſhops,1164 An. reg. 11 Lords, Barons, &c. wherein was by their oathes confirmed many ordinances. Thomas, Archbiſhop of Canterbury, being ſworne to the ſame, ſhortly after ſore repented, and fled the Realme.
               A great earthquake in Ely, Norfolke,1165 An. reg. 12. Earthquake and Suffolke, ſo that it ouerthrew them that ſtood vpon their féete, and cauſed the bels to ring.
               Quéene Elianor brought foorth a ſonne named Iohn.
               
               The warre was receiued betwixt the King of England,1166 An. reg, 13. and the French King for the Citty of Tholouſe.
               
                  Conan Earle of little Britaine died,1167 An, reg. 14. and left his heire, a daughter named Conſtance,
                  1168 An, reg, 15 which hee had by the King of Scots ſiſter: which Conſtance King Henry married to his ſonne Geffery.
               
               
                  Robert de Boſcue, Earle of Leiceſter, founded the Monaſteries of Gerendon of Monkes,Gerendon. Leiceſter, and Eaton. An, reg, 16. Henry the Kings ſon crowned. 1169 of Leiceiſter of Canons regular, and Eaton of Nunnes, was founded by Amicia his wife.
               King Henry cauſed his ſonne Henry to be crowned, as hee thought to the quietneſſe of himſelfe and his realme: but it proued otherwiſe.
               
                  Thomas Becket, Archbiſhop of Canterbury, the eightéenth day of December was ſlaine by William Tracie, Reignold Fitzs Vrſe, Hugh Moruil, and Richard Briton Knights: Nicholas Bree
                        •
                     eſpeare
                  
an Engliſhman,K. Henry Lord of Ireland. An reg, 18. 1172 who was choſen Pope by the name of Adrian the 4. He graunted the Regiment of Ireland to the King of England, whereupon King Henry tooke ſhip at Pembroke, and ſailed thither.
               
                  An reg, 19. 1173King Henry the ſon, with his wife the French Kings daughter, were both together crowned at Wincheſter.
               King Henry the elder was aſſoiled of the death of Thomas the Archbiſhop, vpon his oath made that he was not priuy to it.
               King Henry married the eldeſt daughter of He
                        •
                     
                     bert Earle Morton vnto his ſonne Iohn.
               
               
                  An, reg, 20. 1174 Leiceſter burnt. King of Scots taken. Canterbury burnt.King Henry the elder returning into England, in ſhort time ſubdued his rebels. The citie of Leiceſter by his commandement was burnt, the wals and caſtle raſed, and the inhabitants diſperſed into other cities. The King of Scots was taken by King Henry, led into Normandy, where he compounded for his ranſome. Chriſts Church in Canterbury was burned.
               
                  An, reg, 21. 1175King Henry the ſonne, with his brethren, and others, were reconciled to King Henry the Father.
               
                  An, reg, 22 1176The Kings of England both father and ſonne went together to viſite the tombe of Thomas late Archbiſhop of Canterbury. An, reg, 23. 1177 The ſtone bridge ouer the Thames at London was began to be foū
                  ded. A Cardinall and the Archbiſhop of Canterbury, gaue 1000. Marks towards the ſame foundation. There chanced ſome diſcord betwixt the Kings of England and France, about the marriage

of Richard Earle of Poitow,An, reg, 24 1178with the French Kings daughter.
               
                  Richard Lucie, the Kings Iuſticiar,Leſnes. An, reg, 25 1179 layed the foundation of the conuentuall Church in a place which is called Leſnes, in the Territorie of Rocheſter.
               The Citie of Yorke was burned.
               The Church of St. Andrew in Rocheſter,An, reg. 26. was conſumed with fire.
               The Vſurers of England grieuouſly puniſhed.1180 An, reg, 27. Vſurers puniſhed.
               
               
                  Geffery the Kings baſtard ſonne, reſigned the Biſhopricke of Lincolne, & was made the Kings Chancellour.1181 An, reg, 28.
               
               
                  Robert Harding, a Burges of Briſtow, to whom king Henry gaue the Barony of Barkeley,1182 builded the Monaſterie of Saint Auguſtines in Briſtow.
               They of Aquitane hated their Duke Richard for his crueltie, and were minded to driue him out of his Earledome of Poitow, and Dukedome of Aquitane,An, reg, 29. 1183 An, reg, 30 K. Henry the yonger deceaſed. and tranſpoſe thoſe eſtates to his brother King Henry the younger: but all men looking for victory to the young King, hee fell miſerably ſicke, and died, and was buried at Roan.
               King Henry ſent many men of warre into Wales:1184 for the Welſhmen emboldened by the Kings abſence, had ſlaine Many Engliſhmen.
               The Abbey of Glaſtenbury burnt.Glaſtenbury burnt. An, reg, 31.
               
               
                  Heraclius Patriarch of Ieruſalem came to king

                  Henry,
                  Heraclius the patriark deſiring him of aide againſt the Turke: but the King becauſe of the cruelty of his ſonnes, was counſelled not to leaue his dominion in hazard, and to goe farre off. This Patriarch dedicated the new Temple, then builded in the weſt part of London.
               This yeare 1186. The citty of Paris was paued, whoſe ſtréetes vntill this time, lay as rudely as London ſtréetes, which were not all paued in foure hundred yeares after:Paris paued London paued. Lubecke deſtroyed. The cities take warning. Tile or ſlate generally vſed in the Citties. and the north Churchyard of Paules, otherwiſe called the Cloſe, and diuers other ſtréetes in London were not paued vntill the raigne of Quéene Elizabeth.
               
               In the yeare 1246. the Citty of Luberke was quite conſumed with fire, whoſe miſfortune made Paris, London, and other Citties to couer their houſes with tile or ſlate, eſpecially if they ſtood cloſe together, and not to vſe any thatch, which vntill then was vſuall.
               
                  The Empres deceaſed.
                  Maude the Empreſſe, mother to King Henry the ſecond deceaſed, ſhee founded the Abbey of Bordeſley.
               
                  An, reg, 32 1180 Geffery earle of Britaine dieth.
                  Geffery Earle of Britaine the Kings ſon died, and was buried at Paris, he left iſſue two daughters, which he had by Conſtance (daughter of Conan Earle of Britaine) who alſo at this time of his death was great with child, and after brought a ſonne named Arthur.
               
               A great earthquake threwe downe many buildings: among the which the Cathedrall Church at Lincolne was rent in pieces,Chicheſter burne. Chicheſter Cittie was burnt.
               
                  Neare vnto Orford in Suffolke,An, reg, 33. 1151 A fiſh like a man. certaine Fiſhers tooke in their nets a fiſh hauing the ſhape of a man: which fiſh was kept by Barthelmew de Glanuile, Cuſtos of the Caſtell of Orford, in the ſame Caſtell by the ſpace of ſixe moneths, and more for a wonder: he ſpake not a word: all maner of meats he gladly did eate, but moſt greedily raw fiſh. At length he ſtole away to the ſea.
               The towne of Beuerly with the Church of St.An, reg, 34. 1189 Beuerly burnt. 
                  Iohn there was burnt.
               
                  Phillip the French King required that his ſiſter which had ben kept in England 22.
                  An, reg, 35. 1190 yeares might be reſtored vnto Earle Richard as his wife, and Earle Richard deſired the ſame: but King Henry denied this requeſt, and ſo they got them to armour. The French King and Earle Richard purſued the King of England ſo hard,Death of Henry the ſecond. that he was forced to yéeld all the requeſts, as well of the French King, as of his ſonne Richard. This was done at Giſors, and ſo departing came to Zafe, where he fell ſicke, and departed this life, the ſixth day of Iuly, in the yeare of our Lord 1189. when hee had raigned 24. yeares, 7. moneths, lacking 11. dayes, and was buried at Fonteuerald, in the Monaſtery of Nunnes by him founded.
            
            
               
               Richard Coeurdelyon.
               
                  
                     RIchard the firſt, for his valiantneſſe, ſurnamed Coeurdelion, ſecond ſonne to Henry the ſecond, began his raigne and was crowned the third of September 1186. He was bigge of ſtature, with a merry countenance: he commanded that no Iewes nor women ſhould be at his Coronation, for feare of inchantments. For breaking of which commandement many were ſlaine. Elianor the old, who at the commandement of her huſband, had béene long kept cloſe priſoner, was now ſet at libertie.
               King Richard gaue ouer the caſtles of Berwick and Rokeſburgh to the Scottiſh King, for the ſum of ten thouſand pound: he alſo ſold to the Biſhop of Durham his owne Prouince for a great péece of money, and created him Earle of the ſame. He alſo faigned to haue loſt his ſignet, & then cauſed to be proclaimed, that whoſoeuer would ſafely enioy thoſe things which before time they had inrolled, ſhould come to the new ſeale. He gaue his brother Iohn the Prouinces of Nottingham, Deuonſhire and Cornewall.
               
                  Outlaws in England.In this time were many Robbers and Outlawes, among whom Robert Hood and little Iohn remained in the woods, deſpoiling and robbing the goods of the rich.
               The ſaide Robert entertained an hundred tall men and good Archers with ſuch ſpoiles as he got: vpon whō foure hundred men were they neuer ſo

ſtrong, durſt not giue the onſet. Poore mens goods hée ſpared, aboundantly relieuing them with that which hee got from Abbies, and houſes of rich Earles.
               This yeare the Cittizens of London obtained to be gouerned by two Bayliffes or Shriues, and a Maior.
               
                  
                     Henry Cornhill, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Richard Reynery. Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Henry Fitz Alwin, Fitz Leostane Maior.
                  
               
               King Richard betooke the guiding of this land to William Longſhanke, Biſhop of Ely,1190 Chancellour of England, and tranſported ouer into Normandy.
               The two Kings of England and of France met at Towers,Voyage to Ieruſalem. and from thence ſet forward on their iourney towards Ieruſalem.
               The Iewes of Norwich, Saint Edmonſbury, Lincolne, Stamford, and Linne, were robbed. And at Yorke to the number of fiue hundred, beſide women and children, entred a tower of the caſtle, which the people aſſailing, the Iewes cut the throats of their wiues and children, and caſt them ouer the walles on the Chriſtians heads, the reſidue they locked vp, and burnt both the houſe and themſelues.
               
                  William Biſhop of Ely,Ditch about the Tower of London. builded the outer wall about the Tower of London, and cauſed a déepe ditch to be made.
               
                  
                     Iohn Herlion, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Roger Duke. Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Henry Fitz Alwin Fitz Leoſtane Maior.
                  
               
               
                  King Richard ſubdued the Iſle of Cipres, and then ioyned his power with Phillip ye French king in Aſia, conquered Acon, where there grewe betwéene the two Kings, a grieuous diſpleaſure: for which cauſe Phillip ſhortly departed thence, and comming into France, inuaded Normandy.
               
                  Iohn, brother to king Richard, tooke on him the kingdome of England.
               King Richard reſtored to the Chriſtians, the citty of Ioppa.
               The bones of king Arthur were found at Glaſtenbury.
               
                  
                     William Hauerall. Shirues.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Bucknot. Shirues.
                  
                  
                     1191
                     Henry Fitz, Alwine fitz Leoſtane. Maior.
                  
               
               
                  Ann. reg. 3. Iohn the Kings brother rebelled. 1192
                  William, Biſhop of Ely, withſtood the kings brother, who ſaid, he wiſt not if his brother were aliue or not. To whom the Biſhop anſwered: If King Richard be yet liuing, it were vniuſt to take from him the crowne. If he be dead, Arthur the elder brothers ſonne muſt enioy the ſame.
               
                  
                     Nicholas Duke. Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Peter Newlay. Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Henry Fitz Alwine fitz Leoſtane. Maior.
                  
               
               
                  An, reg. 4. K. Richard was taken priſoner. 1193 An, reg, 5King Richard hauing knowledge that Phillip of France inuaded Normandy, and that Iohn his brother had made himſelfe King ouer England, made peace with the Saladine for thrée yeares, & with a ſmall company returning homeward, he was taken by Leopold, Duke of Auſtria, who kept him in ſtraight priſon, a yeare and fiue moneths.
               
                  
                  
                     Roger Duke. Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Richard Fitz Alwine. Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Henry Fitz Alwine fitz Leoſtane Maior.
                  
               
               The Kings friends intreating for his deliuerance, his ranſome was ſet at 100000. l.Kings ranſome. wherevpon cōmandement was directed from the Kings Iuſtices, that all Biſhops, Prelates, Earles, Barons, Abbots, and Priors, ſhould bring in the 4. part of their reuenewes, towards the Kings ranſome, and beſides this, the Cleargy brought in their golden and ſiluer Chalices, and fléeced their Shriues, all which was coined in mony.
               
                  Iohn the kings brother, when he heard of the impriſonment of his brother, made great war within the realme, and tooke by ſtrength the caſtles of Windſor, Nottingham, and others.
               The king was deliuered, & landed at Sandwich:1194 K. R. the ſecond time crowned. An, reg, 6. on the 12. of March he was againe ſolemnly crowned. After this hee called into his hands all ſuch things as he had either giuen or ſold by patents, or otherwiſe: by which meanes he got a great ſum of mony, and ſailed into Normandy, where ſhortly after, peace was taken betwéene the two kings. Alſo by meanes of Elionar the old Quéene, Earle Iohn was reconciled to his brother.
               
                  
                     William fitz Iſable, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     William fitz Arnold. Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Henry fitz Alwine. Maior.
                  
               
               K. Richard ſent meſſengers to the Pope,1195 An, reg, 6. complaining vpon the Duke of Auſtrich, for miſuſing of him & his, as they came by diſtreſſe of weather through his country, whereupon the Pope excommunicated

the Duke, & inioined him to releaſe the couenants that be conſtrained the King to make.
               
                  
                     Robert Beaſaunt Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iokt Ieiouſe. Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Henry Fitz Alwin Fitz Leoſtane Maior.
                  
               
               
                  William with the heard.
                  William with the beard mooued the common people to ſéeke their libertie, & not to be ſubiect to the rich and mightie: by which meanes he drew to him many great companies. The King being warned of this tumult, commanded him to ceaſe from thoſe attempts, but the people ſtill followed him. He was taken in Bow Church in Cheape, but not without ſhedding of blood: for he was forced by fire and ſmoake to forſake the Church. Hée with nine of his adherents had ſentence of death, and were hanged.
               
                  A falſe accuſer of his elder brother in the end was hanged. God amend or ſhortly ſend ſuch an end to ſuch falſe brethren. 1197 An, reg. 9.This counterfeit friend to the poore, ſlew one man with his own hands, polluted Bow Church with his Concubine, and amongſt other his deteſtable facts, one was, hee falſely accuſed his elder brother of treaſon: which elder brother had in his youth brought him vp in learning, and done many things for his preferment.
               
                  
                     Gerard de Antiloch Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Robert Durant. Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Henry Fitz Alwin Maior.
                  
               
               King Richard, and the Earle of Flaunders confederated together.
               
                  
                     Roger Blunt. Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Nicholas Duket. Shriue.
                  
                  
                     An, reg. 10. 1198
                     Henry Fitz Alwin Maior.
                  
               
               King Richard 
                  
                     •
                  ooke of euery hide of land through

England 5. s. The French King was intercepted by the army of King Richard, ſo that with much a doe he eſcaped into Cipres.
               
                  
                     Conſtantine Fitz Arnold Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Robert de Beaw. Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Henry Fitz Alwin Maior.
                  
               
               King Richard turned his armes againſt the Barons of Poictow that rebelled againſt him,1199 he ſet their Cities & Townes on fire, ſpoiled their country, & ſlew many of his aduerſaries cruelly: at the laſt came to the Dukedome of Aquitane: and beſieged the Caſtle of Chalne, where one Bertraine de Gordon, ſmote him with a venowmed dart,K. Richard wounded to death. which ſtripe the king litle regarded, but inuading the Caſtle, wan it, and put the ſouldiers in priſon: of this wound aforeſaide hee died the 6. day of Aprill, in the yeare of our Lord 1199. when he had raigned 9. yeares 7. moneths, and was buried at Founteuerard: his heart was buried at Roan, and his bowels at the aforeſaid Chalne.
            
            
               King Iohn.
               
                  
                     IOhn brother to Richard,
                  An, reg, 1. began his raigne the 26. day of May, in the yeare of our Lord 1199. Of perſon he was indifferent, but of melancholy complexion. Phillip king of France in a quarrell of Arthur the ſonne of Ieffery, Iohns eldeſt brother, Duke of Britaine, made warre vpon King Iohn in Normandy, and tooke from him diuers Caſtles and Townes.
               
                  
                  Shriuewick of London put to farm 1200K. Iohn granted the Shrifewick of London and Middleſex to the Citizens thereof for 300. pound yearely to be paide, as of ancient time.
               
                  
                     Arnold Fitz Arnold, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Richard Fitz Barthelmew. Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Henry Fitz Alwin Maior.
                  
               
               
                  An, reg, 2 Tax.King Iohn required of euery Plow land 3. s. The king being diuorced from his wife Iſabel, the Earle of Gloceſters daughter, he paſſed ouer the ſea, paied forty thouſand markes to the French King, and returned into England with Iſabel his wife, daughter to the Earle of Angoleſme.
               
                  
                     Roger Dormer, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iames Bartilmew. Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Henry Fitz Alwin Maior.
                  
               
               
                  K. of Scots did homage 1201 An, reg, 3K. Iohn wēt to Lincolne, where he met with William king of Scots, Rotlond Lord of Gallowy, and many other noble men, which did to him homage.
               
                  
                     Walter Fitz Alis, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Simon de Aldermanbury. Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Henry Fitz Alwin Maior.
                  
               
               
                  1202 An, reg, 4.
                  Arthur Earle of Britaine being made Knight by the French King, whoſe yonger daughter he had fianced▪ beſieged the Caſtle of Mirable, in which Quéene Elianor was incloſed, but King Iohn came with a power, and deliuered his mother from danger:Arthur earl of Britaine 
                        ••
                     ken. he tooke there his Nephew Arthur, William de Brawſa, Hugh Brune, and many others.
               Haile as bigge as hens egges, &c.
               
                  
                     Normand Brundel, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn de Ely. Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Henry Fitz Alwin Maior.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Arthur Earle of Britaine,1203 An, reg, 5. Earle of Britaine murdered. from Falaiſe was brought to Roan, and put in the Tower vnder the cuſtody of Robert de Veypont, where ſhortly after he was diſpatched of his life
               The King of France tooke Liſie, Dandely, with the caſtle and vale de Ruell, in which were Robert Fitz Water, Sayer de Quincie, and many others: hée tooke the ſtrong Caſtle vpon Seyne, builded by King Richard.
               
               
                  
                     Water Browne, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     William Chamberlaine. Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Henry Fitz Alwin Maior.
                  
               
               Normandy, Angiou, Britaine, Maine,1204 An, reg, 6. Poitow, and Touraine, were within a ſhort time deliuered to King Phillip.
               
               King Iohn married Iane his baſtard daughter to Lewelin Prince of Wales, and gaue with her the caſtle and Lordſhip of Elinſmore, in the Marches of South Wales.
               
                  
                     Thomas Hauarell, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Hamond Brond. Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Henry Fitz Alwin Maior.
                  
               
               The 14.
                  Great froſt. Dearth of corne. An. reg. 7 of Ianuary began a froſt which continued till the 22. day of March: ſo that the ground could not be tilled, whereof it came to paſſe, that in Summer following, a quarter of wheat was ſold for a Marke, which in the dayes of Henry the ſecond, was ſold for twelue pence.
               
                  
                     Iohn Walgraue Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Richard Wincheſter. Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Henry Fitz Alwin Maior.
                  
               
               Great thunders and lightnings were ſéene, ſo

that many men and women were deſtroied,1206 An, reg, 8. be
                     •
                  ſides cattell and houſes ouerthrowne and burne
                     •
                   corne in the fieldes was beaten downe with hai
                     ••
                   ſtones as bigge as gooſe egges.
               
                  
                     Iohn Holland, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Edmond Fitz Garrard Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Henry Fitz Alwin Maior.
                  
               
               
                  1207King Iohn tooke the 13. part of all mouable goods, both of Lay & Religious throughout England.
               
                  An, reg, 
                        •
                     .The Monkes of Canterbury elected Stephen Langton to be their Archbiſhop. The Pope ſent letters to King Iohn, humbly exhorting him to receiue the ſaide Stephen, being thereunto canonically elected, the rather becauſe he was an Engliſhman borne, and a Doctor of Diuinitie, &c. but king Iohn being greatly offended with the prom
                     •
                  
                  ting of the ſaid Stephen, ſent men in armour to expell the Monkes of Canterbury, and condemned them of treaſon.
               
                  The originall of the Kings of Tartary.At this time began the kingdome of Tartars, in Tartaria.
               Quéene Iſabel was deliuered of her firſt ſonne named Henry.
               
               
                  
                     Roger Wincheſter, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Edmond Hardwell. Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Henry Fitz Alwin Maior.
                  
               
               
                  1208 England interdicted.
                  W. B. of London. and E B. of Ely, and M. B. of Wincheſter, by the Popes commaundement, executed the interdiction vpon the whole realme, and they ceaſed through all England to miniſtring of Eccleſiaſticall Sacraments, ſauing of

them that were in perill of death,An, reg, 10 and Baptiſme to children. The King ſet all the Biſhoprickes and Abbies in the Realme into the cuſtodie of Laymen, and commanded all Eccleſiaſtical reuenewes to be confiſcated.
               This yeare was granted to the citizens of London, by the kings letters patents,Maior of London yearely choſen. that they ſhould yearely chooſe to them a Maior.
               
                  
                     Peter Duke, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Thomas Neale. Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Hen Fitz Alwin Maior.
                  
               
               The Exchequer was remoued to Northampton by the Kings commandement:Exchequer at Northhampton. hee alſo gathered a great Army, and went towards Scotland, as farre as the caſtle at Northampton, where the King of Scots came to them, and treated peace, for which he gaue 11000. Markes of ſiluer, and deliuered his two daughters for a pledge. After this he tooke homage of all fréeholders,Homage of freeholders An, reg. 11. and ſwore all men to his allegiance.
               The Arches and Stone bridge ouer the Thames at London, was this yeare finiſhed by Serle Mercer, and William Alman,
                  London bridge builded of ſtone then Procurators, or Maiſters of the Bridgeworkes.
               
                  
                     Peter le Loſne, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     William Blund. Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Henry Fitz Alwin Maior.
                  
               
               The King commanded all the Iewes both men and women to bee impriſoned becauſe hee would haue their money.Iewes ranſome.
               
               The king brought Ireland vnder his ſubiection:

hee cauſed the lawes of England to bee execu
                     •••
                   there,An, reg, 12 A mint in Ireland. Taxe. and money to be coined, he raiſed a gr
                     ••
                   tax vpon all the Religious in England, whom 
                     〈◊〉
                   cauſed to pay ſuch a ranſome, that the ſum ca
                     ••
                   to 100000. pound, beſides 40000. pounds of th
                     •
                   white Monkes.
               
                  William de Brawſe was chaſed out of England, and his wife and children murdered at Win
                     •••
                  
                  ▪
               
               
                  
                     Adam Wetley, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Stephen la Grace. Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Henry Fitz Alwin Maior.
                  
               
               
                  1211 Army into Wales.The King went into Wales with a great for
                     ••
                   ſubdued all the Princes & Nobles, tooke 28. plages for their ſubiection, and returned. There 
                     〈◊〉
                   him meſſengers from the Pope,Legate frō Rome. which came 
                     〈◊〉
                   make an vnitie betwixt the King & the Biſhope Canterbury, with the Monkes which were bani
                     •
                  ſhed: but the Ambaſſadors returned without 
                     〈◊〉
                   end concluded.
               
                  A great tax.After this the king tooke of euery knight whi
                     ••
                   was not with him in Wales, two markes of 
                     •
                  
                  uer of euery ſhield.
               
                  
                     Iohn Fitz Peter, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Garland. Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Henry Fitz Alwin. Maior.
                  
               
               
                  Welſh inuaded England.The Welſhmen tooke diuers Caſtles of the King of England, cut off the heads of all the ſouldiers, burned many Townes, and with a great prey returned.
               
                  1211 Pledges hanged.The King cauſed the 28. pledges that th
                     •
                   Welſhmen deliuered him to be hanged.
               An Hermit in Yorkſhire named Peter, propheſie
                     •
                  
                  
openly to King Iohn, and ſaid,Peter of Pomfret. An, reg. 14. that vpon Aſcention day next comming, he ſhould bee no King, but the Crowne ſhould bee tranſpoſed to another. This Peter was apprehended and put in priſon.
               The 10. of Iuly at night the cittie of London vpon the South ſide of the riuer of Thames,London bridge periſhed with fire. with the Church of our Lady of the Canons in Southwarke being a fire, and an excéeding great multitude of the people paſſing the bridge, ſodainly the North part by blowing of the South winde, was alſo ſet on fire, and the people which were euen now paſſing the bridg, perceiuing the ſame, would haue returned, but were ſtopped with fire, and it came to paſſe, that as they protracted time, the South end was fired, ſo that people thronging themſelues betwixt the two fires, there came to aide them many Shippes and veſſels, into the which the multitude ſo vndiſcreetely preſſed, that the Shippes being drowned, it was ſaide, that there were deſtroyed about thrée thouſand perſons.
               
                  
                     Randolph Eland, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Conſtantine Ioſue, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Henry Fitz Alwin Maior.
                  
               
               
                  Pandulph the Legate admoniſhed the King to reſtore Stephen Langton to his Sea of Canterbury, and the Monkes vnto their Abbey:1213 The King calling to minde the manifold dangers hee was in, made promiſe by oath to bee obedient to the Court of Rome.
               
                  Pandulph with the nobles of the realme, came

together at Douer vpon Aſcention euen,K. Iohn reſigned the Crowne. Peter of Pomfret. An, reg, 15. Stephen Langton returned. The King abſolued. where the king did reſigne his Crowne with the realme of England and Ireland into the Popes hands.
               When the Aſcention day was paſt, Peter the Hermite bound to a horſe taile, was drawne through the ſtréetes of Warham, and there both he and his ſonne were hanged. Stephen Langton Archbiſhop of Canterbury, and the other that were baniſhed arriued at Douer, and went to Wincheſter to the King, and abſolued him. Richard Pri
                     •••
                   of Bermonſey, builded an houſe (againſt the wall of the ſaid houſe of Bermonſey) called the Almor
                     •
                   of Hoſpitall of Conuerts of S.S. Thomas hoſpitall. Maior of London. 24. yeares. 
                  Thomas.
               
               
                  Henry Fitz Alwin Maior of London deceaſed, who had continued Maior of London foure and twentie yeares.
               
                  
                     Martin Fitz Alis, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Peter Bate. Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Roger Fitz Alwine Maior.
                  
               
               
                  A ditch about London.The ditch without the walles of London, 200. foot broad was begun.
               
                  1214 An, reg, 16.Pope Innocent ſent Nicholas Biſhop of Tuſ
                     •••
                  lane to releaſe the interdiction which had continued 6. yeares, 3. moneths, and 14. dayes.
               
                  
                     Salomon Baſing, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Saint Edmondsbury burnt. An reg, 17.
                     Hugh Baſing. Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Searle Mercer Maior.
                  
               
               S. Edmondſbury was conſumed with fire.
               
                  1215 The King meeteth the Barons.The King met with the Barons in a medow betwixt Stanes and Windſor, and there granted the liberties of England without any difficultie, the Charter whereof is dated, giuen by our hand

in Rimming mead betwixt Stanes & Windſore, the 16. day of Iune, the 17. yeare of our raigne, vnto which all the whole realme was ſworne.
               The King ſent vnto the realmes next adioyning, to procure him Souldiers, promiſing them large poſſeſſions. By meanes of Pandulph, the Pope diſanulled the aforeſaid charter & liberties granted, and alſo excommunicated the Barons.The Barons excommunicated. By the other meſſengers were procured a great number of men of war, which landing at Douer, the King forthwith beſieged Rocheſter, and tooke it.
               
                  
                     Iohn Trauers, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Andrew Newland, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     William Hardel Maior.
                  
               
               The Pope excōmunicated the Barons by their peculiar names: but they notwithſtanding ſent to Phillip King of France, requiring him to ſend his ſon Lewis into this realme promiſing to make him King, which the French King refuſed to doe, till the Barons had ſent him 24. pledges.
               
                  Gwall
                        •
                     
                   a Legate was ſent from the Pope into France, to forbid the going of Lewis into Englād:1216 The Barons ſent for Lodowick. b
                     •
                  t his perſwaſions nothing preuailed: he charged them vpon paine of excommunication. This notwithſtanding, Lewis with a great army arriued in the Iſle of Thanet:An reg. 18. Lewis arriued in England. King Iohn being then at Douer, fled towards Gilford. Lewis ſubdued all the Caſtles in Kent, Douer onely excepted: then came he to London, where he was honourably receiued of the Nobles & Citizens: The King marched through Norfolke & Suffolke, till he came to Linne, and appointing Sauarice de Manlion to bée

Captaine there, began to fortifie the towne, but here filling his belly too much, he got a ſurfet and therewith fell into a laſke, and when the meſſengers of them that were beſieged in Douer were come, and had declared their caſe, the diſeaſe, with griefe conceiued thereat, increaſed.
               
                  The Kings treaſure drowned.Moreouer great ſorrow oppreſſed him, for that in his iourney hee had loſt the ornaments of his chappel with other treaſure & carriages at the paſſage of Welſtreame, where many of his houſhold ſeruants were drowned in ye water & quickſands: he died in the caſtle of Newarke on the 19.
                  King Iohn died. of October 1216. where the Captaine of the caſtle cauſing his body to be bowelled, the ſame was conueied to Worceſter, and there honourably buried, when he had raigned 17. yeares, & 5. moneths, lacking 8. daies.Iſſue of K. Iohn. Farendon. Hales, Godſtow, and Knariſbrough. He had iſſue two ſons, Henry and Richard, and thrée daughters: Iſabel, Elianor, and Iane. He founded the Abbey of Bowley in a new forreſt of Southampton. He builded the Monaſteries of Farendon and Hales Owen, he reedified the caſtle of Godſtow, and Wroxal, and encreaſed the chappell of Knariſbrough.
            
            
               Henry of Wincheſter.
               
                  An, reg, 1.
                  
                     HEnry the eldeſt ſon of Iohn, of the age of 9. yeares, began his raigne the 19. of October, in the yeare 1216. hee was crowned at Gloceſter, in the preſence of Wallow the Legate. He remained in the cuſtody of William Marſhall, Earle of Pembrooke.
               
                  
                  
                     Bennet Seinturer, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     William Bluntiuers. Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iames Alderman Maior.
                  
               
               When Lewis heard this,1217 An, reg, 2 hee wiſt not what to doe, whereupon compelled by neceſſitie, he ſued for peace, and returned into France.
               
                  
                     Thomas Boxerell, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Raph Eiland Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Serle Mercer Maior.
                  
               
               
                  Ranulph Earle of Cheſter, Saer de Quincie.
                  1218 An, reg, 3 Earle of Wincheſter, with others, tooke their iourney towards Ieruſalem.
               
                  
                     Iohn de Viel, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn le Spicer. Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Serle Mercer. Maior.
                  
               
               
                  W. Marſhall died,Earle Marſhall died. An, reg, 4. and was buried at London in the new Temple, after whoſe death the King was gouerned by Peter Biſhop of Wincheſter.
               
                  
                     Richard Wimbleton, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Viel. Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Serle Mercer Maior.
                  
               
               King Henry was crowned at Weſtminſter,1220 K. Henry crowned at Weſtminſter. Caſtles of Chartley. Beſton, Delacreſſe. An, reg, 5. by Stephen Langton, Archbiſhop of Canterbury. The new worke of our Lady Chappell at Weſtminſter, was begun by King Henry.
               
               
                  Ranulph Earle of Cheſter, builded the Caſtles of Chartley, Beſtone, and the Abbey of Delacreſſe.
               
                  
                     Richard Renger, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Viel. Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Serle Mercer Maior.
                  
               
               
                  
                  1221 Welſhmen ſubdued. An, reg, 6.K. Henry ſubdued the Welſhmen which rebelled. The Nobles granted to the king two markes of euery hide of land. William Earle of Arundell died, buried at Wimondham, a Priory of his foundation.
               
                  
                     Richard Renger, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Thomas Lambert, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Serle Mercer Maior.
                  
               
               
                  1222 Counterfeit Mary and Chriſt.A young man was brought before the Archbiſhop of Canterbury, who willed himſelfe to bee crucified, and to be called Ieſus. And the old woman that had bewitched the young man to ſuch madneſſe, and procured herſelfe to be called Mary the mother of Chriſt. They were both cloſed vp betwéene two walles of ſtone, where they ended their liues in miſery. The citizens of London falling out with the Bailiſe of Weſtminſter, and the men of the ſuburbs at a game of wraſtling,Feete and hands cut off. An, reg, 7. 1223 made a great tumult againſt the Abbot of Weſtminſter: for the which their Captaine Constantine with other were hanged: the other that were culpable had their féete and hands cut off.
               
                  
                     Richard Renger, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Thomas Lambert, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Serle Mercer Maior.
                  
               
               
                  King of Ieruſalem. An, reg, 8. 1224
                  Iohn de Brennes, King of Ieruſalem and chiefe maiſter of the Hoſpitall there, came into England and required aid to win Ieruſalem, but returned with ſmall comfort.
               
                  
                     Iohn Trauers, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Andrew Bokerel, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Richard Renger Maior.
                  
               
               
                  Gray friers.The Friars minours firſt ariued at Douer 9. in

number 5. of them remained at Canterbury, & did there build the firſt couent of friars minours, that euer was in England: the other 4. came to London, and hired an houſe in Cornehill, of Iohn Trenars: they were by the Citizens remoued to a place in St. Nicholas ſhambles, which Iohn Iwyn Cittizen and Mercer of London, appropriated vnto the Communaltie of the Citie, to the vſe of the ſaide Friars. The whole Church was builded at that time by diuers Citizens.
               The King granted to the Commonaltie of the Citty of London to haue a common ſeale.
               
                  
                     Iohn Trauers, ſhriues.
                     An, reg, 9.
                  
                  
                     Andrew Bokerel, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Richard Renger Maior.
                  
               
               The 15.
                  1225 A fifteene. Great charter confirmed. part of all mens goods moueable within the realme, as well of the Clergy, as of the Laitie, was granted to the King, and the King granted to the Barons and people, the libertie, which they long time had ſued for.
               
                  
                     Roger Duke, ſhriues.
                     An, reg, 10.
                  
                  
                     Martin Fitz William, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Richard Renger Maior.
                  
               
               The King granted to the Citizens of London,Free warrē An, reg. 11. Free tole. frée warren, that is to ſay, frée libertie to hunt a certaine circuite about the city. And alſo that the Citizens of London ſhould paſſe tol-frée throughout all England, and that all weares in Thames ſhould be deſtroyed for euer.
               
                  
                     Roger Duke, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Martin Fitz William, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Richard Renger Maior.
                  
               
               
                  The king made all the Charters of the liberties and forreſts to be fruſtrate,1227 Cancelled. An, reg, 12 alleadging that they were granted whiles he was vnder ward of other: ſo it followed, that who ſo would enioy the liberties afore granted, muſt renew their Charters of the Kings new ſeale.
               
                  
                     Stephen Boxerell, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     1228 An. reg, 13.
                     Henry Cocham. Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Roger Duke Maior.
                  
               
               The king corrected the meaſures and weights. Great thunder and lightning burnt many houſes and ſlew both men add beaſts.
               
                  
                     William Wincheſter, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Robert Fitz Iohn Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Roger Duke Maior.
                  
               
               
                  1229 An. reg. 14.
                  Robert Bingham Biſhop of Sariſbury by the kings helpe, proſecuted the building of the new Church at Sariſbury, which his predeceſſor Richard did tranſlate.

                     
                        Stephen Bokerell, Shirues.
                     
                     
                        Henry Cocham. Shirues.
                     
                     
                        Roger Duke Maior.
                     
                  
               
               
                  1230 Darkneſſe in Pauls Church.Vpon the day of Saint Paul. when Roger Niger Biſhop of London was at Maſſe in the Cathedral Church of St. Paul, ſuddenly the weather waxed darke, and an horrible thunder-clay lighted on the Church, the ſame was ſhaken, as though it would haue fallen, & out of a darke cloud came ſuch lightning, that all the Church ſéemed to be on fire: all men thought they ſhould haue died: thouſands of men and women ran out of the Church,An, reg, 15 and being aſtoniſhed, fell vpon the ground void of all vnderſtanding: none of all the multitude tarried in the

Church, ſaue the Biſhop and one Deacon, which ſtood ſtill at the high Altar.
               
                  
                     Richard Walter Shrieues.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Woborne Shrieues.
                  
                  
                     Roger Duke Maior.
                  
               
               
                  Richard the kings brother married Iſabel Counteſſe of Gloceſter,1231 An, reg, 16. late wife to Gilbert Earle of Gloceſter, late wife to William Marſhall Earle of Pembrooke, and the marriage being ſcantly finiſhed, the ſaid William dyed, and was buried in the new Temple in London.
               
                  
                     Michael of S. Helen Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Walter de Ruſſel, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Andrew Bokerel, Pepperer, Maior
                  
               
               The morrow after S.1232 An. reg. 17 Martins day began thunders very horrible, which laſted 15. daies.
               
                  
                     Henry Edmonton, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Gerard Bar, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Andrew Bokerell, Pepperer, Maior.
                     1233 Likenes of fiue Suns.
                  
               
               The 7. of Aprill there appeared as it were foure Suns beſide the naturall Sun, of a red colour, and a great circle of Chriſtall colour.
               The king builded a faire Church,Houſes of Conuerts. & many houſes adioyning therunto in the city of London, not farre from the new Temple. In which houſe all the Iewes and Infidels that did conuert to the faith of Chriſt, might haue vnder an honeſt rule of life ſufficient liuing, whereby it came to paſſe, that in ſhort time there was gathered a great number of Conuerts,Hoſpitall at Oxford. An, reg, 18 which were baptized and inſtructed in the lawes of Chriſt. He alſo builded the hoſpitall of S. Iohn without the Eaſt gate of

Oxford, for ſicke and ſtrangers to be receiued in.
               
                  
                     Simon Fitz Mary, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Roger Blunt, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Andrew Bokerel Pepperer Maior.
                  
               
               
                  1234 Salisbury burnt.
                  Richard Marſhall, and Leolyne Prince of Northwales, with a great force inuaded the kings lande, and deſtroyed the ſame with fire and ſword, from the coaſts of Wales to Saliſbury, which tow
                     •
                   alſo they ſet on fire.
               This yeare was a great dearth and peſtilence, ſo that many poore folks died for want of victuals.
               
                  
                     An, reg, 19.
                     Ralph Aſhy, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Norman, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Andrew Bokerell Pepperer Maior.
                  
               
               
                  1235The Iewes at Norwich ſtole a boy, and circumciſed him, meaning to haue crucified him at Eaſter: for which fact they were conuicted.
               
                  S. Mary Spittle. An, reg, 20
                  Walter Brune a Citizen of London, and Roſia his wife, founded the Hoſpitall of our Lady without Biſhops-gate of London.
               
                  
                     Gerard Bate, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Robert Hardell, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Andrew Bakerell Pepperer Maior.
                  
               
               
                  1236 High waters. Statutes of Marton. An reg, 21.K. Henry tooke to wife Elianor, daughter to Raymond, Earle of Prouince. The Thames ouerflowed the banks, ſo that in the great Palace of Weſtminſter men did rowe with wherries in the midſt of the Hall. A Parliament at Marton wherein was made the ſtatutes of Marton.
               
                  
                     Henry Cocham, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iordan of Couentry, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Andrew Bokerell Pepperer Maior.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Octobon a Cardinall came into England as a Legate from the Pope.1237 This yeare paſſed ſtormy and troubleſome weather, and very vnhealthfull.
               
                  
                     Iohn Toloſon, Shriues.
                     1238
                  
                  
                     Geruas the Cordwaiuer. Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Andrew Bokerell Pepperer Maior.
                  
               
               
                  Octobon being lodged in the Abbey of Oſney,Legate put to his ſhift
                        •
                     
                   the ſcollers of Oxford ſlew his maſter Cooke, & the Legate for feare got him into the ſtéeple of the church, where he held him till the kings Officers cōming from Abingdon, conueied him to Wallingford, where hee accurſed the miſdoers. Otho de Kilkeuney, a ſtandard bearer to the ſchollers, was taken with 12. other, & caſt into priſon,Schollers did penance & long after went from S. Pauls Church in London to the Legates houſe, bare footed & bare headed, where they aſked him forgiuenes.King in danger. An, reg, 23 1239 A Scholer of Oxford enterpriſed to haue ſlaine the King in his chamber at Woodſtocke, was taken and pulled in péeces with horſes

                     
                        Iohn Coders, Shriue.
                     
                     
                        Iohn de Wilchale, Shriue.
                     
                     
                        Richard Renger Maior.
                     
                  
The K.Tower of London. An, reg, 24 1240 gaue the Earledome of Leceſter to Simon Mountford. The Tower of London was fortified, which the citizens feared leſt it were done to their detriment.

                     
                        Roger Bongry, ſhriue.
                     
                     
                        Ralph Aſhy, ſhriue.
                     
                     
                        William Ioyner Maior.
                     
                  
The ſtone gate & bulwarke which the king cauſed to be builded by the tower of London was ſhaken with an earthquake, & fel down:Bulwarke by the Tower. but the king commaunded the ſame to bee builded againe. Many

ſtrange fiſhes came a ſhore,Monſtrous fiſhes. wherof 40. were Seabuls, and one of a huge bignes paſſed through the bridge of London vnhurt, til he came as farre as kings houſe at Mortlacke, where he was killed.
               
                  Aldermen An, reg, 125Aldermen of London, which had the rule of the wards of the Citty, were euery yeare changed.
               
                  
                     Iohn Giſers, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Michael Tony. Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Gerard Bat, Maior.
                  
               
               The Iewes were conſtrained to pay 2000. markes at two tearmes in the yeare,1241 Bulwarke by the Tower. An, reg, 26. or elſe to be kept in perpetuall priſon. The walles and bulwarkes that were newly builded about the tower of London, were againe throwne downe as it were with an earthquake.
               
                  
                     Iohn Viel, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Thomas Dureſme. Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Reginald Bongey. Maior.
                  
               
               
                  An. reg. 27. 1242K. Henry with a great army ſailed into Normandy, purpoſing to recouer Poiters, Guien, and other countries, but after many bickerings, to the loſſe of Engliſhmen, he treated peace.
               
                  
                     Iohn Fitz Iohn Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Ralph Aſſwaie. Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Reginald Bongey Maior.
                  
               
               
                  1263 Great flouds.The Thames ouerflowed the bankes about Lambeth, & drowned houſes and fields the ſpa
                     •
                   of 6. miles, and in the great hall at Weſtminſter, men tooke their horſes backes.
               
                  
                     Hugh Blunt Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Adam Baſing, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Ralph Aſhwie, Pepperer Maior.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Griffin the eldeſt ſon of Leoline prince of Northwales,1244 Miſerable death of Griffin. which was kept priſoner in the Tower of London, made of ye hangings, ſhéets, towels, &c. a long line, & put himſelfe downe from the top of the tower: but being a very big man, the rope brake, and he fell on his necke.Robert Grofted. An, reg, 29. 
                  Robert Groſted Biſhop of Lincolne, with other Prelates, complained to the king of the waſte made of the Church goods, by alian Biſhops and Clearkes.
               
                  
                     Ralph Foſter, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Nicholas Bat, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Michiael Tony. Maior.
                  
               
               The King enlarged the Church of S. Peters in Weſtminſter, pulling downe the old walles,1245 An, reg, 30 1246 and ſtéeple, and cauſed them to be made more comely.
               
                  
                     Robert of Cornehill, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Adam of Bentley, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Giſers, Pepperer Maior.
                  
               
               The Church of S. Mildred in Canterbury,Canterbury burnt. An, reg, 31 and a great part of the Citie was burnt.
               
                  
                     Simon Fitz Marie, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Laurence Froike, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Giſers, Pepperer, Maior.
                  
               
               King Henry let to f
                     •
                  rme the Quéene-hiue in London to Iohn Giſors then Maior,1247 Queene hiue.and his ſucceſſors, and cōminalty of London for euer, for the ſumme of 50. pounds the yeare.
               A great plague was in England.
               
                  
                     Iohn Viell, ſhriues.
                     Peſtilence. An, reg, 32. 1248
                  
                  
                     Nicholas Bat, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Peter Fitz Alwin Maior.
                  
               
               By reaſon of the embaſing of the coine, a great

penury followed.
               The towne of Newcaſtle vpon Tine, was burned, bridge and all.
               
                  Earthquake An, reg. 33By a ſtrange earthquake the toppes of houſes were throwne downe, wals did cleaue, the heade of chimneyes and towers were ſhaken.
               
                  
                     Nicholas Fitz Ioſey, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Geffery Wincheſter ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Michael Toney Maior.
                  
               
               
                  1249 A Mart at Weſtminſter. An, reg, 34.The King made a Mart at Weſtminſter to la
                     ••
                   
                  15. daies, which the citizens were faine to redéeme with 1000. pounds.
               
                  
                     Richard Hardell, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Tolaſon, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Roger Fitz Roger Maior.
                  
               
               In October the ſea flowing twiſe without ebbe, made ſo horrible a noiſe, that it was heard a great way into England,1250 Tempeſts. beſide this in a darke night, the ſea ſéemed to be on a light fire, and the wa
                     •
                  s to fight one with another, ſo that the Marriners were not able to ſaue their ſhips. And at Winche
                     ••
                  ſea,Winchelſea drowned. beſides cottages for ſalt, & fiſhermens houſes, bridges & mils, aboue 300. houſes in that towne, with certaine Churches, through the violent riſing of the ſea were drowned.
               
                  
                     An, reg, 35.
                     Humfrey Beas, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     William Fitz Richard, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Norman Maior.
                  
               
               
                  1251 Maior of London ſworne. An, reg. 36.K. Henry granted, that where before the citizens of London did preſēt their Maior before the king, whereſoeuer he were, and ſo to be admitted, now ſhould come only before ye Barons of ye Exchequer.
               
                  
                  
                     Lawrence Froicke, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Nicholas Bat, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Adam Baſing Maior.
                  
               
               A great drought from Eaſter to Michaelmas.1252 Shepheards aſſembled. An, reg, 37.
               
               The ſhepheards of France & England took their iourney towards the holy land, to the number of 30000. but their number vaniſhed in ſhort time.
               
                  
                     William Durham, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Thomas Wimborn, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Toloſon Draper Maior.
                  
               
               The liberties of London were ſeized by ye means of Richard Earle of Cornwall,1253 Liberties of London ſeized. An, reg, 38. who charged the Maior that hee looked not to the Bakers for their 
                     •
                  ſes of bread: ſo that the citty was forced to pleaſe the Earle with 600. Markes, and were reſtored.
               
                  
                     Iohn Northampton, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Richard Pickard, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Richard Hardell Draper, Maior.
                  
               
               
                  Edward the kings ſon, wedded Elianor the kings daughter of Spaine, his father gaue him ye Earledome of Cheſter,1254 An, reg, 39. & the gouernance of Gwien and Ireland.

                     
                        Ralph Aſhy, ſhriue.
                     
                     
                        Robert of Limon. ſhriue.
                     
                     
                        Richard Hardell Druper Maior.
                     
                  
               
               
                  142. Iewes were brought to Weſtminſter, which were accuſed of crucifying a child at Lincolne, 18. of them were hanged,1255 An, reg, 40. Iewes hanged. the reſt remained long priſoners.
               
                  
                     Stephen Do, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Henry Walmond. ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Richard Hardell Draper Maior.
                     1256 An, reg, 41
                  
               
               The Maior and diuers Aldermen of London, and

the Sherifes were depriued of their offices, & the gouernance of the Cittie committed to other.
               
                  
                     1257
                     Michael, Bokerell Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn the Minor, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Richard Hardel Draper Maior.
                  
               
               
                  King of Almaine.
                  Hugh Bigot, chiefe Iuſtice of England, & Rog
                        •
                      Turkleby, kept their Courts in the Guild hall 
                     〈◊〉
                   London, and puniſhed the bakers vpon the Tu
                     ••
                  berell, and did many other things contrary to th
                     •
                   lawes of the Cittie.
               
                  Walles of London repaired. An, reg, 42. 1258The King cauſed the walles of the Cittie 
                     〈◊〉
                   London to be repaired.
               
                  
                     Richard Owell ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     William Skwie ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Richard Hardel Draper Maior.
                  
               
               The Lords held a Parliament at Oxford, whe
                     •
                   were choſen 12. Péeres, which had authoritie
                     •
                   correct the breakers of theſe ordinances: the King his brethren the Noble men and Barons, taking their oath to ſée the ſame obſerued.Mad Parliament. Twelue Peeres. A Iew drowned. An. reg. 43. A Iewe 
                     〈◊〉
                   Tukeſbury fell into a priuy vpon the Saturd
                     ••
                  
                  ▪ and would not for reuerence of his Sabboath 
                     〈◊〉
                   plucked out: wherefore Richard of Clare Earle 
                     〈◊〉
                   Gloceſter kept him there till Munday, at whi
                     ••
                   time he was dead.
               
                  
                     Robert Cornehill Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Adrian. Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Richard Hardel Draper Maior.
                  
               
               
                  1259 Oath to the King. An, reg, 44.The king cōmanded the Maior that he ſhuld ca
                     •
                   to be ſworne euery ſtripling of 12. yeares of a
                     ••
                   or vpward, to be true to ye king & his heires, & th
                     ••
                   the gates of ye city ſhould be kept wt harneſſed 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     Iohn Adrian, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Robert Cornhill, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Giſors Pepperer Maior.
                  
               
               The Barons & nobles of the realme held a Parliament at London, in the new Temple,Parliament An, reg, 45 and the King held himſelfe in the Tower of London.
               
                  
                     Adam Browning, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Henry Couentry, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     William Fitz Richard Maior.
                  
               
               K. Henry publiſhed at Pauls croſſe,1261 K Henry abſolued. An, reg, 46 the Popes abſolution for him & all his that were ſworne to maintain ye articles made in the parliament at Oxford.
               
                  
                     Iohn Northampton, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Richard Pickard, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     William Fitz Richard Maior.
                  
               
               The Barons armed men againſt the King,Barons in armour. 1262 and all this yeare houered about London, without any notable of act rebellion.
               This yeare 1263.
                  An reg. 47 1263 Sarazens attempt to conquer Chriſtendome. all Chriſtian nations on the other ſide the ſea, ſuſtained great dangers & outrages by the miſcreant Sarazens: ſo as the Chriſtians was conſtrained to vſe their beſt meanes to ſuppreſſe them. And in Paris there was a great Councell held of Prelates and Barons, to deuiſe means for their countries ſafety. In the 10. yeare of the raigne of Richard the Emperour there was a blazing ſtar ſéene 3. moneths.A blazing ſtarre. Earle of Cornwall choſen Emperour. At this time there was a Schiſme amongſt the Princes Electors in Germany, and they elected Richard Earle of Cornwall, brother to K. Henry of England: he was choſen in the yeare 1257. or as ſome ſay, in the yeare 1255. & with him was likewiſe choſen A
                        •
                     phonſo,
                  
King of Caſtile:Thomas Aquinas. he raigned 18. yeares: in his time flouriſhed the great Clarke S. Thomas Aquinas.
               
               
                  
                     I
                           •
                        hn Taylor, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Richard Walbroke, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Thomas Fitz Thomas, Maior.
                  
               
               There was ſlaine of Iewes in London to the number of 700.
                  1263 Iewes ſlain for vſury. An reg, 48. the reſt were ſpoiled, & their Synagogues defaced, becauſe one Iewe would haue forced a Chriſtian man to haue paid more then 2. d. for the vſury of 20. s. the wéeke.
               
                  
                     Robert Monpilet, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Osbert Suffolke, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Thomas Fitz Thomas Maior.
                  
               
               
                  1264 Battell at Lewes. The King taken. An, reg, 49.A battell at Lewis betwéene K. Henry & the Barons, in which battell the King with his ſon Edward & Richard Earle of Cornwall, with many other Lords, were taken by Simon of Mountford, Earle of Leiceſter and the Barons.
               
                  
                     Gregory Rokeſley, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Thomas of Lafford, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Thomas Fits Thomas Maior.
                  
               
               
                  1265 Battell at Eu
                        •
                     ſham.
                  Edward being now at libertie, allied him with the Earle of Gloceſter & gathering to him a great power, warred ſo freſhly vpon Simon of Leiceſter, that at the end, he with many other of the nobles, were ſlaine in the battell at Euiſham.
               A parliament was holden at Wincheſter, when all the ſtatutes made at Oxford,Parliament at wincheſter. An, reg, 50 were diſanulled. London was in great danger to haue bin deſtroyed by the K. for diſpleaſure he had conceiued, but the Citizens wholly ſubmitted both liues & goods in
                     ••
                   the kings hands. The King gaue vnto his ſon

                  Edward, the Maior and 4. Aldermen: many other were committed to ſeuerall priſons.
               
                  
                     Edward Blund, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Peter Anger, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Thomas Fitz Thomas Fitz Richard Maior.
                  
               
               The king gaue to diuers of his houſhold ſeruants about the number of 60. houſes & houſholds within the Cittie: ſo that the owners were compelled to redéeme their houſes and goods,1266 Battell of Cheſterfild. An, reg, 51. or elſe to auoid them. The 11. of May was the battell of Cheſterfield againſt them that were diſherited, where many were ſlaine.
               
                  
                     Iohn hinde, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Walrauen, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     William Richard Maior.
                  
               
               
                  Gilbert de Clare Earle of Gloceſter,1267 An, reg, 52. allying himſelfe with the exiled Gentlemen, roſe againſt the K. & the 8. of April with an army entred the city of London, & therein builded bulwarkes, & caſt trenches in diuers places: the King gathered an army, came towards London, pitched his tents at Stafford, and taried there the ſpace of one moneth.
               The ſixt of Iune the Earle of Gloceſter in peaceable manner rendred the Citie vnto the King.
               
                  
                     Iohn Adrian, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Lucas Ba
                           •
                        ecourt, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Alin Souch Maior.
                  
               
               Variance fell betweene the fellowſhip of Goldſmiths and Taylers of London,1268 An, reg, 53 cauſing great rufflings in the City, and many men to be ſlaine. For which riot, twelue of the chiefe Captaines were hanges.
               
                  
                  
                     Walter Haruie, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     William Dureſme, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Sir Stephen de Edward Maior.
                  
               
               
                  Great froſt 1269 An. reg. 54.The riuer of Thames was ſo hard frozen from S. Adrewes tide to Candlemas, that men & beaſts paſſed on foote from Lambeth to Weſtminſter, the marchandiſe was carried from Sandwich and other hauens to London by land.
               
                  
                     Thomas Baſing Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Robert Cornehill, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Hugh Fitz Otonis Maior.
                  
               
               
                  1270 An, reg, 55.The Nobles of England aſſembled at London to entreate of diuers matters, whereof there aroſe diſcord betwixt Iohn Warren Earle of Surrey, and Alin de la Souch Lord Iuſtice of Ireland, before the Iuſtice of the Bench, where the ſaide Alin Souch was wounded to death.
               
                  
                     Walter Potter, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Taylor. Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Adrian Vintner Maior.
                  
               
               
                  1271 An, reg, 56.The ſtéeple of Bow in Cheape fell downe, and ſlew many people, men and women.
               
                  Richard King of Almaine, and Earle of Cornwall, brother to K. Henry, deceaſed, and was buried at Hailes.
               
                  
                     Gregory Rokeſly, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Henry Walis, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Adrian Vintner Maior.
                  
               
               
                  1272 Riot at Norwich. An, reg, 57.In Iune began a great riot in the City of Norwich, through the which the monaſtery of the Trinity was burned, wherupon the King rod downe, and making inquirie for the chiefe doers thereof,

cauſed 30. of them to be condemned, drawne, hanged and burnt.
               
                  
                     Richard Paris, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Bedell, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Sir Walter Haruie Maior.
                  
               
               K. Henry died in the 16. of Nouember, in the yeare 1272. whē he had raigned 56. yeares, & 28. daies: he was buried at Weſtminſter: he builded a great part of the ſame Church: he left for his heire, his eldeſt ſon Edward, Edmond Crowchbacke Earle of Leiceſter, and Lancaſter, and two daughters, Beatrice and Margaret.
               
            
            
               King Edward, ſurnamed Longſhankes.
               
                  
                     EDward the firſt after the Conqueſt,An, reg, 1. 1273 ſonne to Henry the third, ſurnamed Longſhanke, began his raigne the 16. of Nouember, in the yeare 1272. being then beyond the ſea.
               
                  
                     Iohn Horne, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Walter Potter, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Sir Walter Haruie Knight Maior.
                  
               
               This yeare fell a great variance at Oxford,An, reg, 2 1274 betwéene the Northerne and Iriſhmen, wherein many Iriſhmen were ſlaine.
               
                  
                     Nicholas Wincheſter, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Henry Couentry, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Henry Walles Maior.
                  
               
               On St. Nicholas euen were great earthquakes,An, reg, 3
                  
lightnings & thunder with a huge dragon, and a blazing ſtarre which made many men ſore afraid.
               Vſury was forbidden to the Iewes, and that they might bee knowen,Vſury forbidden. the King commaunded them to weare a Tablet the bredth of a palme vpon their outmoſt garmēts. A Frenchman brought into Northumberland a Spaniſh Ewe, as big as a Calfe of two yeares,1275 Firſt rot of ſheepe. which Ewe being rotten, infected ſo the country, that it was ſpread ouer all the Realme.
               
                  
                     Lucas Batecourt, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Henry Frowicke, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Caſtle of Flint. An, reg, 4. 1276
                     Gregory Rokeſley, maiſter of the Kings Mints, and therefore a Goldſmith I thinke. Maior.
                  
               
               King Edward builded the Caſtle of Flint, ſtrengthened the Caſtle of Rutland, & other againſt the Welſhmen. There was a generall earthquake, by force whereof the Church of Saint Michael of the mount without Glaſtenbury,Blacke Friers in London. fell to the ground.
               The blacke Friers Church at London, was builded by Robert Kilworby, Archbiſhop of Canterbury.
               
                  
                     Iohn Horne, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Ralph Blunt, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Gregory Rokeſly Maior.
                  
               
               
                  An, reg, 5. 1277The ſtatute of Mortmaine was enacted, Michael Tony was hanged, drawen, and quartered for treaſon.
               
                  
                     Robert de Aria. ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Ralph le Feuere, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Gregory Rokeſley, Maior.
                  
               
               King Edward gaue vnto Dauid, brother to Leoline
                  
Prince of Wales, the Lordſhip of Frodiſham.An, reg. 6. 1278
               
               
                  
                     Iohn Adrian, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Walter Langley, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Gregory Rokeſley, Maior.
                  
               
               Michaelmas Tearme was kept at Shrewſbury.An, reg, 7. 1279 Iewes executed. Reformation was made for clipping of the Kings coine: for which offence 267. Iewes were put to execution.
               
                  
                     Robert Baſing ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     William Mazaliuer, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Gregory Rokeſley Maior.
                  
               
               Whereas before this time the penny was wont to haue a double croſſe with a creaſt,Firſt halfepence and farthings round. 1280 in ſuch ſort yt the ſame might be eaſily broken in the midſt, or in 4. quarters, & ſo to be made into halfpenies or farthings, it was now ordained, that pence, halfepence, & farthings ſhould be made round. At this time twenty pence weighed an ounce of Troy weight.
               
                  
                     Thomas Boxe, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Ralph le Lamere, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Gregory Rokeſley Maior.
                  
               
               
                  Dauid brother to Leoline Prince of Wales,An, reg, 9. 1281 moued all Wales almoſt to riſe againſt the King.
               
                  
                     William Farrendo Goldſmith, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Nicholas Wincheſter, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Gregory Rokeſley Maior.
                  
               
               There was ſuch a froſt that 5.
                  Bridges broken downe. arches of London bridge, and all Rocheſter bridge was borne down and carried away, with many bridges more.
               
                  
                     William Mazaliue
                           •
                        , Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Richard Chigwell, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Henry de VVales Maior.
                  
               
               
                  
                  An, reg, 11 1282 Corne ſold by waight. The tonne in Cornhill.The Bakers of London were firſt drawne vpon Herdels by Henry Walleis Maior, and corne was then firſt ſold by waight.
               This Henry Walleis cauſed to bee erected the Tonne vpon Cornhill to be a priſon for night walkers, and other ſuſpitious perſons.
               
                  The ſtocks market. 1283He alſo cauſed to be builded an houſe called the Stockes, to bee a market for fleſh and fiſh in the midſt of the Citie.
               
                  The Iewes ſinagogues deſtroied.
                  Iohn Pecham Archbiſhop of Canterbury, ſendeth commandement to the Biſhop of London to deſtroy all the Synagoues of the Iewes, within his Dioceſſe.
               
                  
                     Ralph Blond, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Anktein de Beteuil, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Henry de Walleis, Maior.
                  
               
               
                  An, reg, 12 1284
                  Leoline Prince of Wales was ſlaine, and his head was ſet vpon the Tower of London. Alſo Dauid the brother of Leoline Prince of Wales, was taken and beheaded.
               
                  
                     Iordan Godcheape, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Martin Boxe, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     An, reg, 13. 1283
                     Henry Walleis Maior.
                  
               
               
                  Edward the Kings firſt ſon, was borne at Carnaruan in Wales.
               
                  Phillip of France, ſurnamed the Faire, began his raigne in the yeare 1285. he builded the ſtately Palace for the Parliament in Paris▪ he tooke Guy the Earle of Flanders, and carried him & his two ſons priſoners to Paris. In his time Pope Clement the 5. was conſecrated at Lyons. And the Cathedrall Papall was transferred from Rome

vnto Auignon in France, and there remained 70.
                  Knights Templars ſuppreſt, & Knights of the Rhods ordained. yeares during which tranſmigration, there were 3. Cardinals appointed to gouerne Italy. In this Kings raigne the Hoſpitelars of St. Iohn tooke Rhodes, and draue out the Turkes, and were afterwards called Knights of the Rhodes. This Phillip bare great hatred vnto the Kinghts Templars, which at this time flouriſhed throughout Chriſtendome, whoſe name & order of Templars, began preſently after the conqueſt of the holy land by Godfrey of Bullen, as well for their religious reſolute defending the Temple, ſuppreſſing all manner of thieues and robbers, that offended the Chriſtians in Iudea, as their continuing warlike ſeruice vpon the common enemies of Chriſts religion, viz: the Turkes and Sarazens, who by their oath were bound not to turn their face from their enemies. This honorable order by degrées became moſt famous, & was by this time dignified and receiued in euery Chriſtian nation: which Knights for the moſt part conſiſted of yonger brothers of noble birth and haughty courage, & were poſſeſt of faire pallaces, endowed with great priuiledges & reuenews for their maintenance. Theſe men preſuming vpon their proper merits, kindred, ally
                  
                     •
                  nce, and large poſſeſſions, became very proud and inſolent, but whether their great pride, or aboundance of wealth, cauſed their ſudden ſuppreſſion, 
                     •
                  s not directly ſet downe in any hiſtory, therefore I ſubmit my opinion vnto the ſaying of the holy Scripture, to wit, Pride goeth before deſtruci
                  
                     •
                  n. The Kings diſpleaſure towards them preuailed

ſo far that hee procured the Pope to ſuppreſſe them with confiſcation of their lands & goods, & in their places for the Chriſtian ſeruice againſt the forenamed common enemies of our faith, they ordained the order of the Knights of the Rhodes. This King raigned 28. yeares, and was buried at S. Denys, read Gaguin 7.
                   booke, 
                     •
                   
                  Emilius 8.
                   booke. In the yeare 1522. the Iſle of Rhodes was yéelded vnto Sultan Solyman vpon Chriſtmas day, after it had béene beſieged 6. moneths with great ſtrength and fury: and then that name and title of Knights of the Rhodes ceaſed: but for as much as the maintenance of ſuch a ſpeciall order was as propicious to the Chriſtian ſeruice, as odious vnto Turkiſh infidelitie, the Emperour Charles the 5. in the yeare 1529. gaue vnto the late Knights of the Rhodes, the Iſle of Malta, ſince which time they haue ben called the knights of Malta, hauing vpon all occaſions & extremitie whatſoeuer, right worthily performed their oath, maintained their order and reputation: for which cauſe the inue
                     ••
                  rate malice of the Mahometiſts continued as great towards them, as to any former ordered Chriſtian ſeruitors: whereupon, as well in ha
                     ••
                   to ſuppreſſe them, as to encreaſe further oppreſſion vpon Chriſtendom, the forenamed Solyman, t
                     ••
                   
                  10. of May 1565. ſent Mustapha Baſha with 
                     •
                   mighty hoſt againſt them who won certaine hol
                     ••
                   and forts within the Iſland. And with all violen
                     ••
                   they beſieged their chiefe citie called Bourg by 
                     〈◊〉
                   and land, whom the forenamed Knights and the
                     •
                   friends as religious & valliantly reſiſted, as w
                     •
                  
                  
inſallying foorth vpon the ſtrongeſt part of their enemies campe, as maintaining their wals, waterworkes, & rampiers. Albeit of themſelues it was not poſſible for them to make long reſiſtance againſt ſo ſtrong & cruell enemies, hauing already endured 4. moneths terrible ſiege, by which time the K. of Spaine ſent freſh ſupplies vnto them, and 
                     •
                  ing conioined, ſo ſtoutly repulſed Muſtapha, that in gladly raiſed his ſiege, and departed with loſſe of 25000. of his men, and of Chriſtians there were ſlaine 5000. beſides 240. Knights of the order.
               
                  Laurence Ducket Goldſmith,Ducket hanged vp in Bow Church. grieuouſly wounded one Ralph Crepin in Weſt Cheape: and then ſled into Bow Church: after that, certaine euill diſpoſed perſons, friends to the ſaid Ralph, entred the Church in the night time, and ſlewe the ſaide Laurence lying in the ſtéeple, and then hanged him vp, placing him as though he had hanged himſelfe. But ſhortly after, by relation of a boy, the truth of the matter was known: for the which a woman and ſixtéene men were put in priſon, and afterward more, who all were drawn and hanged, ſaue the woman who was burnt.
               The great Conduit in Cheape was begun to be builded.
               
                  
                     Stephen Cornehill, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Robert Rokeſley, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Gregory Rokeſley Maior.
                  
               
               A Iuſtes was proclaimed at Boſton in the faire time, whereof one part came in ye habit of Monks, another in the ſute of Canons, who had couenanted

after the Iuſts to ſpoile the faire,An, reg. 14. 1286 for the atchiuing of their purpoſes▪ they fired the towne in 3. places.Faire at Boſton ſpoiled. An, reg, 15 Yarmouth D
                        •
                     nwich & Ipſwich periſhed. 1287
                  
                     
                        Walter Blunt, Shriue.
                     
                     
                        Iohn Wade, Shriue.
                     
                     
                        Ralph Sandwich Maior.
                     
                  
               
               On New yeares day at night, as well through vehemencie of the winde, as violence of the ſe
                     •
                  , many Churches were ouerthrowne and deſtroied, not onely at Yarmouth, Dunwich, and Ipſwich, but alſo in diuers other places of England.
               
                  
                     Thomas Croſh, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Walter Hautaine, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Ralph Sandwich Maior.
                  
               
               
                  An, reg, 16. 1288The Summer was ſo excéeding hot, that many men died through the extremitie thereof: and yet wheate was ſold at London for 3. s. 4. d. the quarter, and ſuch cheapnes of beanes and peaſe, as the like had not béene heard of.
               
                  
                     William Hereford, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Thomas Stanes, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Ralph Sandwich Cuſtos.
                  
               
               
                  An reg. 17. 1289Great haile fell in England, & after inſued great raine, that the yeare following wheate was raiſed from 5. d. the buſhell to 16. d. & ſo increaſed yearely, till it was laſtly ſold for 20. s. the quarter.
               
                  
                     William Betaine, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn of Canterbury, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Ralph Sandwich Maior.
                  
               
               
                  An, reg, 18 1290
                  Rice ap Meredith, was by the Earle of Cornwall taken, drawen, hanged and quartered.
               
                  
                     Falke of S. Edmond, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Salomon le Stotell, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Sir Iohn Briton Cuſtes.
                  
               
               
                  The tranſgreſſions of diuers Iuſtices was tried out, & puniſhed accordingly: ſome loſt their goods,An, reg, 19 1291 and then were baniſhed: ſome as wel of the Bench as of the Aſſiſes were ſent to the Tower.
               The King baniſhed all ye Iews out of England, giuing them to beare their charges till they were out of the realme:Iewes baniſhed. the number of Iewes then expulſed, were 15. M. 9. perſons.
               
                  
                     Thomas Romain Shriue.
                  
                  
                     William de Lier. Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn de Breton. Cuſtos.
                  
               
               The wool ſtaple was ordained to be at Sandwich.

                     
                        Ralph Blunt, Shriues.
                        An, reg, 20 1292
                     
                     
                        Hamond Boxe Shriue.
                     
                     
                        Ralph Sandwich Cuſtos.
                     
                  
               
               King Edward adiudged Iohn Ballioll to bee true heire of Scotland.An, reg, 21: Iohn Ballioll did homage for Scotland.
               
               Quéene Elianor died at Herdby, a towne neare to Lincolne, ſhe was brought to Weſtminſter, and there buried.1293 Queene deceaſed. The king made at euery place where ſhe ſtaied a coſtly croſſe, with the Queenes image vpon it. Charing Croſſe, and the Croſſe in Weſt Cheape of London, were two of them.
               The Minoreſſe,The Minoreſſe. a Nunnery without Algate of London, was founded by Edmond Earle of Leiceſter, brother to King Edward.
               
               
                  
                     Henry Bole, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Elias Ruſſel, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Ralph Sandwich Cuſtos.
                  
               
               Thrée men had their right hands cut off in weſt Cheape for reſcuing a priſoner reſted by an Officer in the Cittie of London.An, reg, 22 1294
               
               
                  
                  
                     Robert Rokeſly, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Martin Aunsbresby, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Ralph Sandwich, Maior.
                  
               
               
                  An, reg, 23 1295The water of Thames ouerflowed the bankes, and made a breach at Rotherheth beſide London the low ground about Bermondſey and Toth
                     •
                  , was ouerflowed.
               
                  
                     Henry Boxe, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Richard Gloceſter, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Sir Ralph Sandwich Maior.
                  
               
               
                  An, reg, 24 Caſtle of Beawmariſh.The King paſſing with an armie againſt the Welſhmen, builded the Caſtle of Beawmariſh in the Iſle of Angleſey. The Welſhmen were conſumed by famine, their woods were felled, and many caſtles fortified▪ 
                  Rice ap Meredith was brought to London.
               The Frenchmen arriued at Douer, and ſpoiled the towne.1296
               
               
                  
                     Iohn of Dunſtable, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Adam de Halingbery, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Sir Iohn Breton Maior.
                  
               
               
                  An reg, 25. 1297 K. Edward won Barwicke.
                  Iohn Baliol King of Scots, contrary to his allegiance rebelled: King Edward won the Caſtles 
                     〈◊〉
                   Barwicke and Dunbarre: hee ſlew of Scots 25. thouſand: he conquered Edenborough, where he found the regall enſignes of Scotland.
               
                  
                     Thomas Suffolke, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Adam Fulham, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Sir Iohn Breton Maior.
                  
               
               
                  An, reg, 2
                        •
                     .The King increaſed the tribute of the woolles taſking for euery ſacke 40. s. where before th
                     •
                   time they paid but halfe a marke.
               
                  The Scots by inſtigation of W. Wale
                        •
                     s 
                  
                     •
                  ebelled,1298 and put the Engliſhmen to much trouble.
               
                  
                     Iohn de Stortford, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     W. de Stortford, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Sir Iohn Breton, Maior.
                  
               
               Fire being kindled in the leſſer hall of ye pallace at Weſtminſter,An, reg 27. 1299 The King
                        •
                      p
                        •
                     llace burnt. S Martins in the Vintry. the flame therof being driuen with winde, fired the building of the Monaſtery next adioyning, which with the pallace were both conſumed.
               S. Martins Church in the Vintry at London, was now builded by the Executors of Mathew de Calumbaris.
                  
                     
                        Richard Rotham, Shriue.
                     
                     
                        Thomas S
                              •
                           ly, Shriue.
                     
                     
                        Henry Waleis Maior.
                     
                  
               
               This realme was troubled with falſe money,An, reg, 2
                        •
                     . Falle mony. 1300 called Crockden and Pollard, coined in parts beyond the ſeas, and vttered for ſterling.
               K. Edward tooke to wife Margaret ſiſter to Philliple Beaw then King of France.
               
                  
                     Iohn de A
                           •
                        mentiers, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Henry de Fingrie, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Henry Waleis Maior.
                  
               
               K, Edward made his voiage againſt the Scots,An, reg, 29. 1301 wherein he ſubdued a great part of the land, tooke the caſtle of Eſtreueliue with other, and made the Lords ſweare to him fealty.
               
                  
                     Lucas Hauering, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Richard Campes, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Elias Ruſſell Maior.
                  
               
               The K.An, reg, 30 1302 gaue to Edward his ſon the Princedome of Wales, and ioyned there unto the Dukedome

of Cornewall, and the Earledome of Cheſter.
               
                  
                     Robert Colleuer, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Peter de Boſcube, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Elias Ruſſel Maior.
                  
               
               
                  An, reg, 31 1303The Scots rebelling, made William Waleis their leader, wherefore the king hauing his army ready, paſſed ouer ye whole land, none offring him battel.
               
                  
                     Hugh Port, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Simon Paris, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Sir Iohn Blunt Maior.
                  
               
               
                  An, reg, 32. 1304
                  Richard Graueſend Biſhop of London deceaſed, who is reported to haue purchaſed the Charters & liberties of the Cittie of London, in the yeare of our Lord 1392. in the 16. of Richard the ſecond. The vntruth whereof I haue thought good thus much to note.
               
                  The Kings bench and exchequer returned.The K. returning out of Scotland, cōmanded the courts of the Kings bench and the Exchequer, which had now remained at Yorke ſeuen yeares, to be remoued to their old places at London.
               
                  
                     W. de Combematin, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     I. de Bereford, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Sir Iohn Blunt. Maior.
                  
               
               
                  An, reg, 33 Draw the ſtaffe. 1305K. Edw. ordained Iuſtices of Tirelebaſtō, againſt intruders into other mens lands, truce breakers, extortioners, murtherers, and ſuch like offenders.
               
                  W. Waleis, which had oftentimes ſet Scotland in great trouble, was taken & brought to London where he was hanged, headed, and quartered.
               
                  
                     Roger Paris, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Lincolne, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Sir Iohn Blunt Maior.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Robert Bruce cauſed himſelfe to bee crowned King of Scots, wherof when King Edward heard,An, reg, 34 1306 he went with haſt into Scotland, where he chaſed the ſaid Robert Bruce, and tooke many of the Noble men priſoners, and brought Scotland into ſuch obedience, as he gaue of the lands, therof to his ſubiects of England, with Markets, Faires, & Warrens. Among other, I haue ſéene vnder the broade ſeale of the ſaid King Edward, a Mannour called Retnes, in the County of Forfaire in Scotland, & neare the furtheſt part of the ſame nation, Northward, giuen to Iohn Ewer, and his heires,Iohn Ewer. aunceſtors to the Lord Ewer that now is, for the ſeruice done in thoſe parts, with market euery munday, Faire for 3. dayes euery yeare at Michaelmas, and free warren for the ſame, dated at Lauereoſt the xx. day of October, Anno Reg. 34.
                  
               
               
                  
                     William Coſer, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Reginald Thunderle, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Sir Iohn Blunt Maior.
                  
               
               This yeare 1306.
                  An, reg, 35. Sea-coale forbidden to be burned neare London. vpon ſundry complaints of many of the Cleargy & Nobilitie reſorting to the city of London, touching the great anoiance & danger of contagion growing by reaſon of the french of burning ſea-coale, which diuers fire makers in Southwarke, Wapping, & Eaſt Smithfield, now vſed to make their common fires becauſe of cheapnes hereof, & to forbeare the burning of bauin and fire coale, the King expreſly commanded the Maior and Shriues of London for with to make proclamation that all thoſe fire-makers ſhould ceaſe their burning of ſea-coale, and make their fires of

ſuch fuell of wood and coale as had béene formerly vſed. Reade the Record.
               The great new Church of the gray Friers in London was begunne to bee builded by the Lady Margaret Quéene,1307 ſecond wife to Edward the firſt. Iohn of Briton, Earle of Richmond, builded the body of the church, the reſidue was finiſhed by the Lady Mary Counteſſe of Pembroke, Gilbert de Clare Earle of Gloceſter, Margaret Counteſſe of Gloceſter, Elianor Spencer, Elizabeth Bourgh, ſiſters to Gilbert de Clare.
               
               King Edward ſent meſſengers into England, & commanded that all that ought him ſeruice, ſhould be ready at Carlile within 3. wéekes after the feaſt of S. Iohn Baptiſt, But himſelfe being vexed with a bloody flixe, the 7. of Iuly departed this life at Burgh vpon the ſands, in the yeare of our Lord 1307. when he had raigned 34. yeares, ſeuen moneths, and odde daies: his body was buried at Weſtminſter, vnto the which Church hee had giuen landes to the value of an hundred pound by yeare: 20. pound thereof yearely to be diſtributed to the poore.
            
            
               Edward of Carnaruan.
               
                  An, reg. 1.
                  
                     EDward the ſecond, ſonne to the firſt Edward, borne at Carnaruan, began his raigne the 7. of Iuly, in the yeare 1307. he was faire of body, but vnſtedfaſt of maners, not regarding to gouerne his commonweale by diſcretion & iuſtice, which cauſed great variance betwéene him and the Lords.
               
                  
                  
                     Nicholas Pigot, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Nigellus Drurie, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Sir Iohn Blunt Maior.
                  
               
               The King married Iſabel the French Kings daughter.1308
               
               The Lords enuying Pierce of Gaueſtone,Pierce of Gaueſton exiled. An, reg, 2. Earle of Cornwall, a ſtranger borne, baniſhed him the land.
               
                  
                     William Baſing, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Iames Borener, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Nicholas Faringdon Goldſmith, Maior.
                  
               
               The King ſent for Pierce of Gaueſton out of Ireland,1309 An, reg, 3 and gaue him the Earle of Gloceſters ſiſter in marriage, which cauſed him againe to riſe in pride, ſcorning the Nobles of the realme. The Barons therefore declared to the King, that except he would expell the ſaide Pierce from his company, they would riſe againſt him, as againſt a periured Prince: whereupon once againe hee cauſed Pierce to abiure.
               
                  
                     Iames of S. Edmond, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Roger Palmer, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Thomas Romane Maior.
                  
               
               
                  Pierce of Gaueſtone returned into England,1310 An, reg, 4. and came to ye kings preſence, who forgetting al oaths and promiſes, receiued him as a heauenly gift.
               The Church of Middleton in Dorſetſhire, was conſumed with lightning, the Monkes being at mattens.
               
                  
                     Simon de Corpe, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Peter Blackney, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Richard Reffam Mercer Maior.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Templars. condemnedTemplars in England, vpon hereſie and other filthy Articles, whereof they were accuſed, were condemned to perpetuall penance in ſeuerall Monaſteries.
               
                  1311 Pierce of Gaueſtone beheaded.The Barons of England being confederated againſt Pierce of Gaueſtone, beſieged him at the caſtle of Scarborough, where they tooke him, and brought him to Warwicke caſtle, and cauſed his head to be ſtricken off.
               
                  
                     Simon Mermood ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Richard Gilford, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Sir Iohn Giſors Pepperer Maior.
                  
               
               
                  1312Quéene Iſabel was deliuered of her firſt ſonne named Edward, at Windſor.
               
                  The Rhods won by the Chriſtians. An, reg, 6.The Knights of the order of S. Iohn Baptiſt, called S. Iohn of Ieruſalem, put the Turkes out of the Iſle of Rhodes, and after that, wan vpon the ſaide Turkes daily for a long time.
               
                  
                     Iohn Lambyn, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Richard Gilford, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Sir Iohn Giſors Pepperer Maior.
                  
               
               
                  1313 Battaile at Streueling. An, reg, 7.King Edward gathering a great power, marched towards Scotland to breake the ſiege of the Caſtle of Streuelin, where hee and his power encountred with Robert Bruce and the Scots: in the end whereof the Engliſh men were diſcomfited, and ſo eagerly purſued by the Scots, that many of the Noble men were ſlaine.
               This yeare 1313. according to the Chronicles of Germany,The French King burneth all his diſeaſed. 
                  Phillip king of France, ſurnamed the Faire, hauing his body full of venemous ſcabs & mangineſſe, cauſed all ſuch of his ſubiects, as well

women as men, both in France and Flaunders, as had either the leaproſie, or meazelrie, to be burned. The cauſe of this his tyrannous rigour was becauſe he had beene informed, that the ſaide lazar or pockey people had wilfully poyſoned all the chiefe wels and ſtanding waters. Some ſay, that this viſitation was the diuine iuſtice of God vpon the King for ſuppreſſing the Knights Templars.All the Iewes in Germany burned. And in the yeare 1403. all the Iewes in Germany were burned, becauſe they had poiſoned all the wels and ſtanding waters. It appeareth by forraine Chronicles, that the Iewes had a generall purpoſe to poiſon the Chriſtians: for the Iewes in France did poyſon the waters likewiſe, and were ſeuerely puniſhed.
               
                  
                     Robert Gurdome, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Hugh Garton, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Nicholas Farendon Goldſmith Maior.
                  
               
               The King cauſed his writs to be publiſhed for victuals,1314 Victuals priſed. An, reg, 8. that no Oxe ſtalled or corne fed bee ſolde for more then 24. s. no graſſe fed oxe for more then 16. s. a fat ſtalled cow at 12. s. another cow at 10. ſhillings. A fat mutton corne fed, or whoſe wooll is well growne, at 20. pence, another fat mutton ſhorne at 14. d. A fat hog of 2. yeares olde, at 3. s. 4. d. A fat gooſe at 2. d. halfe peny in the city at 3 d. A fat Capon at 2. d. in the citty at 2. d. halfe peny, A fat hen at one peny, in the citty at one peny halfe peny. Two chickins a peny, in the citie on peny halfe peny. Foure pigeons for one peny, in the citty three pigeons for one peny, 24. egges a peny, in the citty 20. egges a peny, &c.
               
                  
                  
                     Stephen Abingdon, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Hamond Chigwell, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Sir Iohn Giſors pepp
                           •
                        rer, Maior.
                  
               
               
                  1315 A Tanners ſon claimed to be King. An, reg, 9. Mortalitie of men, Dogs fleſh good meat. Children were eaten.A Tanners ſon of Exceter named himſelfe the ſonne of Edward the firſt, for the which hee was hanged at Northampton.
               The dea
                     •
                  th increaſed through the abundance of raine that fell in harueſt: ſo yt a quarter of wheat or ſalt was ſold for xl. s. There followed this famine a grieuous mortalitie of people, ſo that the quicke might vnneth bury the dead. The beaſts & cattel alſo by the corruptneſſe of the graſſe whereof they fed, died: horſe-fleſh was counted great delicates, the poore ſtole fat dogs to eate: ſome in hid places, did eate the fleſh of their owne children. The Théeues that were in priſon,Theeues deuoured one another. did plucke in péeces thoſe that were newly brought amongſt them, and gréedily deuoured them halfe aliue.
               
                  
                     Hamond Goodcheape, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     William Bodele, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Stephen Abingdon Maior.
                  
               
               There arriued in England two Cardinals, to make peace betwéene England & Scotland, and to reconcile vnto the K.1316 Two Cardinals robbed. 
                  Thomas Earle of Lancaſter. When they came neare vnto the towne of Derlington, certaine robbers, Gilbert Middleton and Walter Selbie being their Captaines, ſuddenly ſet vpon the family of the Cardinals, & robbed them of their treaſure: but the Cardinals came to Dirham, where they tarried a few daies for anſwere of the Scots, and ſo returned to Yorke. Gilbert Middleton was taken,An, reg, 10. carried to London, and

there drawne and hanged.
               Sir Ioſſeline Denuile & his brother Robert, with 220. in the habite of Friers, did many notable robberies, they ſpoyled the Biſhop of Dirhams pallaces, leauing in them nothing but bare wals,Thieues like Friers. for the which they were hanged at Yorke.
               
                  
                     William Cauſton, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Ralph Ballancers, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Wengraue Maior.
                  
               
               The new worke of the Chappell,New work of Paules. on the South ſide of the Church of S. Paul in London being begunne, there were found in the foundation, more then 100. heades of Oxen and Kine, which then confirmed greatly the opinion of thoſe, who haue reported, that of olde time it had béene the Temple of Iupiter, and that there was the ſacrifice of beaſts.
               
                  Edward de Bruſe, the king of Scots brother,1317 Edward Bruce beheaded. An, reg, 11. who by the ſpace of 3. yeares, had aſſaulted Ireland, and had crowned himſelfe King, was taken by Engliſh men, and beheaded at Dundalke.
               
                  
                     Iohn Brior ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     William Furneis, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Wengraue Maior.
                  
               
               The towne of Barwicke was betraied to the Scots, through the treaſon of Peter Spalding.
                  Barwicke betraied. 1318 A murren of Kine.
               
               A great murrain of kine happened, dogs & rauens eating of the kine were poyſoned, and did ſwell to death, ſo that no man durſt eate any béefe.
               
                  
                     Iohn Pounting, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Dalling, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Wengraue Maior.
                  
               
               
                  The king being at Yorke,Suburbs of Yorke burnt. the Scots entred England, came to Yorke, and burnt the ſuburbs of the citty, & tooke ſir Iohn of Britaine, Earle of Richmond, priſoner, with many other.
               Many herdſmen, & certaine women of England, would goe ſéeke the holy land to kill the enemies of Chriſt,1319 Herdſmen and women went towards Ieruſalem. An, reg, 13. as they ſaide: but becauſe they ſhould not paſſe ouer the great ſea, they ſlew many Iewes in the parts of Toloſe, and Gaſcoine: wherefore many of them were taken and put to death.
               
                  
                     Simon Abingdon, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Preſton. ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Hamond Chickwell pepperer Maior.
                  
               
               
                  Thomas Earle of Lancaſter, with many Earles and Barons, came to Sherborn, and from thence with baners diſplaied to S.1320 The Barons in armour, An, reg, 14. Spencer baniſhed. 
                  Albones, from thence they ſent to the King being at London, requiring him to baniſh the two Hugh Spencers. At length the King granted to their petition, ſo that Hugh Spencer the elder was baniſhed, but the yonger Hugh could not be taken.
               
                  
                     Reginald at Conduit, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     William Prodom, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Nicholas Farendon Goldſmith Maior.
                  
               
               
                  Iewes and leapers. Poyſoned waters.Certaine leapers who had couenanted with the Iewes to poiſon all the Chriſtians in Europe, laid poyſon in Iewels, ſprings and pits: for the which many were burnt.
               
                  1321 Mortimer ſent to the Tower.
                  Roger Mortimer, the Earles of Richmond and Arundell, ſubmitting themſelues to the King, were ſent to the Tower of London. After this, when the Kings Army, and the Army of the

Barons met neare vnto Burton vpon Trent,Thomas Earle of Lancaſter beheaded. An, reg, 15 the Earle of Lancaſter fled, and the King purſuing them to Burbrige, Thomas Earle of Lancaſter was taken and beheaded at Pomfret.
               
                  
                     Richard Conſtantine, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Richard Harkeny, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Hamond Chickwell pepperer Maior.
                  
               
               
                  Andrew Harkeley Earle of Carleil was charged with treaſon for making peace with the Scots,1322 An, reg, 16. for which he was ſent to Yorke, hanged, headed, and quartered.

                     
                        Iohn Grantham, Shriue.
                     
                     
                        Richard of Ely, Shriue.
                     
                     
                        Hamond Chickewell pepperer Maior.
                        1323 An. reg. 17.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Roger Mortimer Lord of Wigmore gaue his kéepers a ſléepy drinke, eſcaped through all the watches of the Tower, and paſſed into France.
               
                  
                     Adam of Sarisbury, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn of Oxford, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Nicholas Farendon Goldſmith Maior.
                     1324 An, reg, 18 The Queen ſent into 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                  
               
               King Edward ſent the Quéene his wife vnto her brother the French King to eſtabliſh the peace, who went ouer with a ſmall company▪ by her mediation a peace was fully finiſhed, whereupon Edward the Kings ſonne went ouer.
               
                  
                     Bennet of Fulſham, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Cawſon, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Hamond Chickwell pepperer Maior.
                  
               
               Whiles the Quéene with her ſonne remained in France longer then the Kings pleaſure was,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . reg, 19 & would not come againe without Roger Mortimer and other Noble men that were fled out of England: the King baniſhed them both, and all o
                     •••
                  r

that tooke their parts.
               
                  
                     Gilbert Morden, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Cotten, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     1326 An, reg. 20. Qu. Iſabell returned.
                     Richard Britaine Goldſmith Maior.
                  
               
               
                  Iſabell the Queene, with her ſonne Edward, Edmond of Woodſtooke the Kings brother, Roger Mortimer, and many other Noble men that were fled out of England, arriued at Orwell beſides Harwich in Eſſex: immediately the Earle Marſhall, the Earle of Leiceſter, the Biſhops of Lincolne, Hereford, Diuelin, and Ely, being ioyned to the Quéene, made a great army.
               The Cittizens of London beheaded ſuch as they tooke to be the Quéenes enemies, they tooke alſo Walter Stapleton Biſhop of Exceter, and beheaded him and two of his ſeruants,Biſhop of Exceſter beheaded. becauſe hee gathered a great army to withſtand the Quéene.
               
                  
                     Richard Rothing, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Roger Chanticle, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Richard Britaine Goldſmith Maior.
                  
               
               This Richard Rothing Sheriffe, builded 
                     〈◊〉
                   Parriſh Church of Saint Iames at Garlick 
                     〈◊〉
                   in London,S. Iames. The Queen beſieged Briſtow. Spencer the elder executed. The King taken. The Quéene beſieged Briſtow, wh
                     ••
                   was ſeene rendred, and the morrow after her c
                     ••
                  ming, Hugh Spencer the elder was drawne 
                     〈◊〉
                   hanged. The King, Hugh Spencer the younger and Robert Baldocke, determined to flye into 
                     〈◊〉
                   Iſle of Lombardy, but being in great danger 
                     〈◊〉
                   the ſea, at laſt arriued in Wales, where they 
                     〈◊〉
                   taken, the King was committed to Henry 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   of Lancaſter his kinſman.
               
                  Spencer the yonger executed.
                  Hugh Spencer was condemned at Herefor
                     •
                  
                  
where he was drawne, hanged, headed, and quartered.
               
                  Simon Reading was drawne and hanged.
               
                  Robert Baldocke died in Newgate.
               The Quéene with her ſonne Edward,
                  K. Edward the ſecond depoſed. 
                  Roger Mortimer and other, went to Wallingford Caſtle, and before the twelfth day came to London, where they were ioyfully receiued. On the morrow after they held a Parliament, where by common decrée, they depoſed the King, and elected Edward his eldeſt ſonne. He was thus depoſed, when he had raigned ninetéene yeares ſixe moneths and odde dayes.
            
            
               Edward the third.
               
                  
                     EDward the third, about the age of fourtéene yeares,An, reg, 1. beganne his raigne the twenty fiue of Ianuary, in the yeare of our Lord. 1326. In feates of Armes, he was very expert. At the beginning of his raigne hee was chiefely ordered by his Mother Iſabell.
               
               The inhabitants of the Towne of Bury beſieged the Abbey, burnt the gates,The Abbey of Bury ſpoiled. 1327 wounded the Monkes, bare out all the gold and ſiluer, ornaments, bookes, charters, the aſſay to their coine, ſtamps, and all other things, appertaining to their mint, &c.
               
                  
                  Liberties confirmed.The King confirmed the liberties of the Citty of London.
               The 22. of September at night King Edward the ſecond was cruelly murthered in the Caſtle o
                     •
                   Barkeley, by the practiſe of the Quéene his wife the Lord Mortimer, and the Biſhop of Herefor
                     •
                   He was buried at Gloceſter.
               
                  
                     Henry Darcy, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Hauten, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Hamond Chickwell Grocer Maior.
                  
               
               
                  An, reg. 2 1328Peace was made betwixt the Engliſhmen and Scots,Peace with the Scots. 1329 ſo that Dauid the ſonne of Robert Brce married Ioane of the Tower King Edwards ſiſter▪
               
               By procurement of the old Quéene, and Roge
                        •
                      Mortimer, Edmond of Woodſtocke, Earle of Kent the Kings Vncle, was beheaded at Wincheſter.
               
                  
                     Richard Laz
                           •
                        r. Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Henry Giſors, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     An, reg, 3 R. Mortimer executed. An, reg, 4
                     Iohn Stanland Maior.
                  
               
               
                  Roger Mortimer was taken by William M
                        ••
                     tacute, and ſent to London, where he was condem
                     •
                  ned and hanged.
               
                  1330 Blacke Prince borne.The 15. day of Iune was borne Edward 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   blacke Prince.
               
                  
                     Robert of Ely, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Thomas Whoorwood, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Sir Iohn Pultney Draper Maior.
                  
               
               
                  S. Laurence Poultney. An, reg, 5. 1331This Sir Iohn Pultney builded the Colledge 
                     〈◊〉
                   London, called Saint Laurence Pultney, and 
                     ••
                  tle Alhalowes a Pariſh Church in Tha
                     ••
                   ſtréete, and alſo the Carmelite Fryars Church 
                     〈◊〉
                   Couentry.
               
                  
                  
                     Iohn Motking, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Andrew Aubury, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Sir Iohn Pultney Draper Maior.
                  
               
               
                  Henry Earle of Lancaſter, and of Leiceſter,Hoſpitall of Leiceſter. An, reg, 6. 1332 founded the new Hoſpitall by the Caſtle of Leiceſter, wherein were an hundred poore impotent perſons.
               The King of England with force came before Berwicke, where they that kept the Caſtle and Towne vſed many deceitfull treaties.
               
                  
                     Nicholas Pike, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Husband, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Preſton Draper Maior.
                  
               
               The Scots came with great multitudes,An, reg, 7. 1333 Battell at Holidowne minding to diſſolue the ſiege of Berwicke, whom the King couragiouſly met, and ſlewe of them eight Earles, 1300. horſemen, and of the common ſouldiers, 35000. neare vnto Halidon.
               The townſemen of Berwicke yéelded to the King of England, both the caſtle & the towne,King Edward won Berwicke. who placing gariſons there, he ſent Edward Baliol and other Nobles to kéepe the Realme of Scotland.
               
                  
                     Iohn Haman, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     William Hanſard, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Sir Iohn Pultney Draper Maior.
                  
               
               
                  Edward Baliol king of Scots did homage to king Edward at 
                     •
                  ew Caſtle vpon Tyne,An. reg. 8. 1334 K. of Scots did homage and ſhortly after he receiued homage of the Duke of Britaine or his Earledome of Richmond.
               
                  
                     Iohn Kingſtone, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Walter Turke, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Reginald at Conduit Vintner, Maior.
                  
               
               
                  
                  An, reg, 6. 1335Part of the Vniuerſitie of Oxford went t
                     •
                   Stamford, becauſe of a variance that fell be wée
                     •
                   the Northerne and Southerne Schollers.
               
                  Great waters.The Sea bankes brake in through all England▪ but ſpecially in the Thames, ſo that all the caſ
                     •
                   and beaſts neare thereunto were drowned.
               
                  
                     Walter Morden, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Richard Vpton, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Richard Wotton Maior.
                  
               
               King Edward made his eldeſt ſonne Ed
                        ••
                     
                   Earle of Cheſter,An, reg, 10 1336 A Duke & ſixe Earles created. and Duke of Cornewall.
               It was enacted that no wool ſhould be conuai
                     •
                   out of the Realme.
               
                  
                     Iohn Clarke, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     William Curtis, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Sir Iohn Pultney Draper Maior.
                  
               
               
                  1337The Towne of Southampton was burnt 
                     〈◊〉
                   the French Kings Galleys.
               
                  Priuiledge to Cloath-makers.It was enacted that whatſoeuer Clothwor
                     •
                   of Flanders, or of other countries would d
                     ••
                   and inhabite in England, ſhould come quietly 
                     〈◊〉
                   the moſt conuenient places ſhould bee aſigned 
                     〈◊〉
                   them with great liberties and priuiledges.
               
                  Admirable peſtilence at Auignon in France. A warning to all cities & nations. Sheepeheards and heards-men died in the fields, ſo as there was none to ſay theſe ſheep or kine are mine.This yeare 1338. as ſaith the French Chro
                     •••
                  cle, there happened in Auignon ſo ſtrange & te
                     •
                  ble mortalitie, that brooks & riuers were red 
                     〈◊〉
                   bloud. And that from the graues and ſepulch
                     ••
                   of the dead there iſſued ſtreames of bloud. 
                     〈◊〉
                   vnheard of mortalitie, was foretold the Fren
                     •
                   by father Robert a Iacobin Frier, who hear
                     •
                   bewailed the ſinnes and wickedneſſe of this C
                     ••
                  ty and other places, for the which hee often pr
                     •
                  thed

vnto them that God would ſurely viſite them vnleſſe they ſpeedily repented: but they obeyed not his doctrine. This ſickeneſſe continued a long time, and diſperſed into Germany, and other nations many a yeare after.
               Alſo it was enacted that none ſhould weare any cloth made without the realme, the K. the Quéen, and their children onely excepted.
               The king cauſed to confiſcate all the goods of the Lumbards,Goods of Monks confiſcate. and alſo all the Monks of the order of Clume and Citiaux, through the whole Realme.
               
                  
                     Walter Beale, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Nicholas Craine, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Henry Darcy Maior.
                  
               
               King Edward with Quéene Phillip his wife,An, reg, 1
                        •
                      1338 Armes of England & Farnce ioyned. and a great army, paſſed the Seas into Flanders and ſo to Colleine, where he made friendſhip with the Emperour, and was made his vicegerent. Hee quartered the armes of England and France.
               
                  
                     William of Pomfret, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Hugh Marberell, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Henry Darcy Maior.
                  
               
               A ſudden inundation of water at New Caſtle 
                     •
                  pon Tine,An, reg, 13 1339 New Caſtle drowned. bare downe a péece of the Towne 
                     •
                  all, where an hundred and twenty men and wo
                  
                     •
                  en were drowned.
               The King appointed himſelfe to be called King of England and of France.
               
                  
                     William Thorney, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Roger Freſham, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Andrew Aubery Grocer Maior.
                  
               
               The King gathered a Nauy of two hundred,An, reg, 14.
                  
and ſailed towards Flanders,1340 Battell on the ſea. where hee fought with the enemies a moſt cruell battell by ſea, in the which the Frenchmen were ouercome, and ſlaine of them 30000. men. There was ta
                     •
                  en 200 ſhips and the reſt fled.
               By the aſſiſtance of the Duke of Brabant and the Earle of Hainalt, with them of Gaunt and Cypres, he entred the North parts of France, and beſieged the Citty of Turney. In the meane ſeaſon the Earle of Henalt. Sir Walter Manny and Reignold Cobham, burnt 300. Townes great and ſmall, taking preyes.
               
                  
                     Adam Lucas, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Bartholomew Maris, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     An, reg. 15. 1341
                     Andrew Aubury Grocer, Maior.
                  
               
               Two Cardinals were ſent from the Pope, who demanded a truce for thrée yeares betwixt the two Kings, in which ſpace the title that the King of England pretended, might be diſcuſſed.
               
                  
                     Richard of Barking, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn of Rokeſley, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn of Oxford Vintener Maior.
                  
               
               
                  An, reg, 16. 2342King Edward ſailed ouer into Britaine, when he tooke diuers caſtles and other ſtrong holds that reſiſted him. After this he beſieged Vannes, and though Phillip de Valois came downe with a great multitude of people, yet a truce was taken and Vannes remained to the King of England.
               
                  
                     An, reg, 17. 1343 Florences of gold.
                     Iohn Loukin, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Richard Keſlinbury, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Simon Frances Mercer, Maior.
                  
               
               King Edward commanded florences of Gold to

be made the penny of the value of vi. s. viii. pence, the halpeny and farthing after the rate.
               
                  William Mountacute Earle of Salisbury conquered the Iſle of Man from the Scots,K. of Man which Iſle Edward the third gaue the ſame Earle, and cauſed him to be crowned King of Man.
               
                  
                     Iohn Steward, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Aliſham, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Hamond Maior.
                  
               
               King Edward held a ſolemne feaſt at his Caſtle at Windſor,Order of the Garter. 1344 Chappell at windſor 24 poore Knights. where he eſtabliſhed the moſt honourable order of the Garter, to the number of 26. Knights, which were choſen of the moſt noble and valiant perſons of this Realme. He alſo augmented the Cappell, which his progenitors Kings of England had before erected, with 8. Canons in the Caſtle of Windſor, adding a Deane and 15. Canons more, & 24. poore knights, with other Miniſters.

                     
                        Geffery Wickingham, ſhriue.
                     
                     
                        Thomas Legge, ſhriue.
                     
                     
                        Iohn Hamond Maior.
                     
                  
               
               The Scots to the number of 30000.
                  An, reg, 19 1345 Scots inuaded Weſtmerland. 
                  William Dowglas being their leader, entred into Weſtmerland, and burnt Carlile and Penreth, with many other townes, wherefore the Biſhop of Carlile, with Thomas Lucy, Robert Ogle, and a great number compaſſed them in the night ſeaſon, and with lights and noiſes ſo diſquieted them, that they neither durſt goe out for victuals, nor giue their bodies to ſléepe, but at the laſt Alexander Stragon ſtoutly prepared to goe out for victuals,Scots ouercome. whom the Biſhop and Robert Ogle met, and with a ſpeare

thruſt him through the body, ſo that the Scots were ouercome and ſlaine.
               
                  
                     Edmond Hemenball, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn of Gloceſter, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Richard Leger Maior.
                  
               
               
                  An, reg, 16 1346 K. Edward ſailed into France. K. Edward beſieged Callice, Scots inuaded Northumberland.King Edward tooke ſhipping, and arriued at Hogges in Normandy, from thence hee went to Caen, in which iourney he burned the ſhips, in all the hauens round about, hee ſpoiled Caen to the bare wals, and tooke many priſoners. Hee beſieged Calice. Dauid le Bruce with all his power entred the borders of Northumberlād, came to Bere Parke by Neuels croſſe nigh Durham, ſpoyling and killing all that met them: then William Souch Archbiſhop of Yorke, the Lords Percy, M
                        •
                     nbray, Ralph Neuell, gaue them a ſharpe battell wherein the Engliſhmen had the victory, the Scots put to ſlight.The King of Scots taken. In the chaſe were taken Dauid le Bruce the Earles of Meney, of Stradermes, of Fife, with others.
               
                  
                     Iohn Croyden, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     William Clopton, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Geffery Witchingham, Maior.
                  
               
               
                  An, reg, 11. 1347 Calice wonWhen King Edward had long time beſieged Calice, the French King came to breake the ſeege: but when he ſaw he could not fulfill his deſire, hee ſet fire in the tents, and went his way: which whē the men of Calice perceiued, they yéelded the town and Caſtle.
               
                  The miſfortune of one Emperor & foure Kings with other things worthy memory.This yeare 1347. Lewis
                   the fourth Emperour of that name fell from his horſe and died thereof. And in the yeare 1390. Iohn
                   King of Spaine, as

he was hunting a hart, fell from his horſe & brake his neck. In the yeare 1395. in diuers parts were ſeene one great ſtarre, and fiue little ſtarres which ſéemed to fight with the great ſtarre, and to purſue it by the ſpace of an hower, and after that there were diuers voyces heard in the aire like cryes, and after that a man was ſéene in the aire like copper, holding a launce in his hand, and hee threw fire after the ſtarre, and ſuddenly all theſe ſights vaniſhed: In ſome places there were heard loud voices and great ſounds of men fighting, and ratling of Armour, wherewith the people were much aſtoniſhed. Theſe prodigies came before a great battell which was fought this yeare in Hungary, where the Hungarians at this time had the victory, & ſlew of their enemies the Sarazens almoſt an hundred thouſand: but the next yeare following, the Turkes & Sarazens had a mighty victory vpon Sigiſmond King of Hungary, and vpon the reſt of the Chriſtian army. Which diſcomfiture of the Chriſtians, the French Chronicles very honeſtly records to be long of the proud diſordered Princes and Gentry of France, who obſtinately inclined more to their ſeuerall loſſes and riotous deſires, then to their obedience in this ſpeciall ſeruice of God. It happned this yeare alſo, being the yeare 1396. that the King of Arragon riding after a Hart, fel from his horſe & brake his necke, and not long after this King Richard came to vntimely death. And in the 400. the Duke of Brunſwicke was murthered by a Knight. And this yeare in france there were haileſtones

as big as gooſe egs.Strange haile. The Vniuerſitie of Iypſicke founded. K. Edward choſen Emperour. About this time was that Vniuerſitie of Lypſicke founded.
               K. Edward was by the Princes Electors choſen Emperour: but he refuſing it, attended the wars in France.

                     
                        Adam Broſon, Shriue.
                     
                     
                        Richard Bas, Shriue.
                     
                     
                        Thomas Leggy skinner Maior.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Gualter Many founded the Charterhouſe beſides London neare to Smithfield, and was there buried.An, reg, 22. 1348 An, reg, 22 Charterhouſe Churchyard. Great peſtilence. The peſtilence beganne in England about Lammas, ſo that very many that were whole in the morning, died before noone. In one day there was 20.40.60. and many times more dead bodies buried in one pit. About the feaſt of all Saints it came to London, and increaſed ſo much, that from Candlemas vntill Eaſter, in the Charterhouſe Churchyard neare vnto Smithfield, more then 200. dead corps (beſides the bodies that were buried in other Churchyards) where there euery day buried.

                     
                        Henry Pichard, Shriue.
                     
                     
                        Simon Dolſeby, Shriue.
                     
                     
                        Iohn Loukin Fiſhmonger, Maior.
                     
                  
               
               
                  An, reg. 23. 1349 A bloody proceſſion.More then 120. perſons of Zealand and Holland, comming out of Flanders to London, ſometime in the Church of S. Paul, ſometime in oth
                     ••
                   places of the Cittie, twiſe in the day, in the ſight of the people, from the loines to the héeles couered with linnen cloath, euery one in their hand a whip with thrée cordes, beat themſelues on their bodies going in proceſſion, 4. of them ſinging in their own language, all the other anſwering them.
               
                  
                     Adam of Bury, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Ralph of Linne, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     
                     Walter Turke Fiſhmonger, Maior.
                  
               
               In Oxfordſhire neare to Chippingnorton,An, reg, 24 A ſerpent with two heads. 1350 Battell on the ſea. was found a Serpent hauing two heads and two faces like women, one face attired of the new faſhion of womens attire, the other face like the old array and had wings like a bat. King Edward met the Spaniards vpon the Sea by Winchelſea & Romney, and ſlew them, and tooke 26. great ſhippes.
               
                  
                     Iohn Notte, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     William Worceſter, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Richard Killingbury Maior.
                     An, reg, 25. Groats and halfe groats
                  
               
               A new coine called a groate, and halfe groate, were coyned, but theſe were of leſſe waight then the Eaſterlings, by reaſon whereof victuals and marchandiſe became the dearer.
               
                  
                     Iohn Wroth, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Gilbert Stineſthorpe, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Andrew Aubery Grocer Maior.
                     An, reg, 26. 1351
                  
               
               The Caſtle of Guines was yéelded to the Engliſhmen dwelling in Callis.
               
                  
                     Iohn Peach, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Stotley, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Adam Frances Maior.
                  
               
               King Edward altered the Chappell,An. reg. 27. S. Stephens at Weſtminſter. 1353 Dry ſōmer. which his progenitours before time had founded, of S. Stephens at Weſtminſter, into a Colledge of xii. ſecular Canons, xii. vicars, & other miniſters accordingly. This ſommer was called the dry ſommer.
               
                  
                     William Wolde, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Little, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Adam Frances Mercer, Maior.
                     An, reg, 28 1354
                  
               
               The ſtaple of wooll was remoued from Flanders,

and eſtabliſhed ſundry places of England:Wool-ſtaple. Weſtminſter. to wit, at Weſtminſter, Canterbury, Chicheſter, Briſtow, Lincolne, and Hull.
               
                  
                     William Totingham, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Richard Smelt, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Thomas Leggy Skinner Maior.
                  
               
               
                  An, reg, 29. 1355 Diſſenſion at Oxford.A great diſſenſion fell in Oxford betwéene a ſcholler & a vintner for a quart of wine, ſo that the ſcholler powred the wine vpon the vintners head, and brake his head with the pot, by reaſon wherof a great conflict was made betwéene the ſchollers and the Lay people of the Towne.
               
                  
                     Walter Froſt, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Thomas Brandon, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Simon Frances Mercer Maior.
                  
               
               
                  An, reg, 30. 1356
                  Edward Prince of Wales, nigh to the Citty of Poytiers, ioyned battell with K. Iohn of France, of whom the Prince by his martiall policy won a noble victory.French king taken, In this conflict King Iohn was taken, with his young ſon and many of his Nobles.
               
                  
                     Richard Notingham, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Thomas Dolſel, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Henry Pichard Vintner Maior.
                  
               
               This Henry Pichard Vintner, Maior of London in one day ſumptuouſly feaſted Edward King of England, Iohn king of France, the King of Cipres, then arriued in England, Dauid King of Scots, Edward Prince of Wales, with many other Noble men,An, reg, 31 1357 &c.
               The King taking his iourney towards Scotland, beſieged Barwicke, which was ſhortly rendred vnto him. Edward Prince of Wales returned

into England with Iohn King of France,Iuſts in Smithfield. and Phillip his ſon. Roial Iuſts were holden in Smithfield before the Kings of England, France and Scotland.

                     
                        Stephen Candiſh, Shriue.
                     
                     
                        Bartholomew Froſtling, Shriue.
                     
                     
                        Sir Iohn Stodie Vintner Maior.
                     
                  
               
               This Sir Iohn Stody gaue vnto the Vintners of London,Almes houſes. all the quadrant wherein the Vintners hal now ſtādeth, with the tenements round about, where he founded 13. houſes for 13. poore people, which are there kept of charitie rent-free.
               
                  Dauid le Bruce King of Scots was deliuered from the long impriſonment he had béene in,K. of Scots releaſed. An, reg, 32 1358 his ranſome being ſet at 100000. markes to be paaid the next 10. yeares following.
               
                  
                     Iohn Barnes, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Buris, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Loukin Stock fiſhmonger Maior.
                  
               
               King Edward with a Nauy of ſhips paſſed the ſea to Calice, & ſo into Burgundy.An, reg, 33 K. Edward inuaded Burgundy. 1359 In the meane ſeaſon the Normans with a ſmal Nauy arriued at Winchelſea, & partly burnt the town, & ſlewe ſuch as did withſtand them, wherefore the Prelates of England aſſembled in armor:Frenchmen arriued at Winchelſea. An, reg, 34 1360 but the french were gone.

                     
                        Simond of Benington, ſhriue.
                     
                     
                        Iohn Chicheſter, ſhriue.
                     
                     
                        Simon Dolfeby Grocer Maior.
                     
                  
               
               A finall peace was concluded,Peace with France Frenchking releaſed. King Edward came into England, and ſtraight to the Tower to ſée the French King, where hee appointed his ranſome to be thrée millions of Florences, and ſo deliuered him out of all impriſonment.
               
                  
                  
                     Iohn Penis, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Walter Berney, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Wroth Fiſhmonger Maior.
                  
               
               
                  An, reg. 35. 1362Men and beaſts periſhed in England in diuers places with thunder and lightning. Friends were ſéene, and ſpake vnto men as they trauelled.
               
                  
                     William Holbech, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Iames Tame, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Peach Fiſhmonger Maior.
                  
               
               
                  Second mort
                        •
                     lity, An, reg, 36. Subſidy of wooll.A great death & peſtilence in England in which died Henry Duke of Lancaſter, who was buried at Leiceſter.
               King Edward commanded all Pleas to be made in Engliſh, and not in French.
               
                  1363 An, reg, 37.This time was granted to the K. for 3. yeares 26. ſhillings 8. pence of euery ſacke of wooll.
               
                  
                     Iohn of S. Albons, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iames Andrew, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Stephen Candiſh Draper Maior.
                  
               
               
                  Great windA great winde in England ouerturned many ſtéeples and townes.
               The French King, the King of Cypres, and the king of Scotland came all into England, to ſpeake with King Edward, who receiued them with great honour, and gaue them great gifts.
               
                  
                     
                        •
                     reat froſt. An, reg, 38 1364A froſt in England laſted from the mids of September to the moneth of Aprill.
               
                  
                     Richard Croydon, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Hiltofte, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Notte Pepperer Maior.
                  
               
               
                  The French King dieth.The ix. day of Aprill, died Iohn King of France at the Sauoy beſide Weſtminſter, his corps was honourably conueyed to Saint Denis in France.

                     
                     
                        Iohn de Mitford, Shriue.
                     
                     
                        Simon de Mordon, Shriue.
                     
                     
                        Adam of Bury Skinner, Maior.
                     
                  
                  Ingram Lord of Cowſey,An, reg, 39 1365 married Lady Iſabell the Kings daughter.

                     
                        Iohn Buckleworth Shriue.
                     
                     
                        Thomas Ireland. Shriue.
                     
                     
                        Iohn Loukin Fiſhmonger, Maior.
                     
                  
               
               The King commaunded that peter-pence ſhould no more be paide to Rome.An, reg, 40. Peter pence forbid. 1366
               
               The 3. day of Aprill was borne at Burdeaux, Richard ſon to Edward the blacke Prince, who was after King of England.
               
                  
                     Iohn Ward, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Thomas Attalie, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Loukin Fiſhmonger, Maior.
                  
               
               This Iohn Loukin ſtockfiſhmonger, foure times Maior of London, builded a chappell called Magdalenes at Kingſton vpon Thames,An hoſpital at Kingſton to the which he ioyned an hoſpitall, wherein was a maſter, two Prieſts, and certaine poore men: he builded the pariſh Church of S. Michael in crooked lane.
               
                  Edward Prince of Wales taking compaſſion vpon Peter K. of Spaine,An, reg, 41. The baſtard brother diſheriteth the lawfull. 1367 who was driuen out of his Kingdome by Henry his baſtard brother, entered Spaine with a great puiſſance, and in a battell at Nazers, put to flight the foreſaid baſtard, he reſtored the foreſaide Peter to his former dignity: but not long after, Henry the baſtard, whiles K. Peter ſate at a table, ſuddenly thruſt him through with a ſpeare.

                     
                        Robert Girdler, Shriue.
                     
                     
                        Adam Wimondhom, Shriue.
                     
                     
                        Simon Mordin ſtock fiſhmonger, Maior.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  An, reg, 43. Third peſtilence. Dearth of torne. 1396The third peſtilence was this yeare, a buſhell of wheat at London ſold for 2. s. 6. d.
               
                  
                     Iohn Piel, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Hugh Holditch, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Chicheſter Goldſmith Maior.
                  
               
               A great part of Gaſcoine fell from the Prince becauſe of ye exactions he laid vpon them: alſo ſicknes increaſing vpon him, he returned into England.
               
                  
                     William Walworth, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Robert Gayron, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     A cheſt with three lockes, and money to bee lent. An, reg, 45. Great ſubſidie.
                     Iohn Barnes Mercer Maior.
                  
               
               This Iohn Barnes gaue a cheſt with 3. lockes, & 1000. Markes to be lent to yong men vpon ſufficient gage. The King demanded of the Cleargie and cōmonaltie a ſubſidie of 10000 pounds. The Biſhops were remoued from the Chancelor, treaſurer, & priuy ſcale, & Lay men put in their ſtead.
               
                  
                     Robert Hatfield, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Adam Staple, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Barnes Mercer Maior.
                  
               
               
                  An, reg, 46 1372The Frenchmen beſieged Rochell, to the remouing whereof was ſent the Earle of Pembroke, with a number of men of armes: vpon whom fell the Spaniſh Nauy, who ſlew and tooke the Engliſhmen, and burnt their Nauy: the Earle and many Noble men were carried into Spaine.
               
                  
                     Iohn Philpots, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Nicholas Brember, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Piel Mercer Maior.
                  
               
               
                  An, reg, 17. 1374
                  Iohn Duke of Lancaſter, entred France with a ſtrong power, & paſſed through ye realme without battell: but in the deſerts and mountaines of Aluerne,

for lack of victuals, many of his army died.

                     
                        Iohn Awbry, ſhriue.
                     
                     
                        Iohn Fished, ſhriue.
                     
                     
                        Adam of Bury Skinner, Maior.
                        An. reg. 48. 1374
                     
                  
This yeare 1374. died the moſt famous & learned Poet Francis Petrarch, borne in Tuſcany: he was of ſingular iudgement in al acts & ſciences, a great Philoſopher, and an excellent Poet & Orator: hee was very religious and vertuous: he deſpiſed the worlds vain-glory:Petrarch & Boccace. he died in his hermitage neare Pauia. And about the ſame time died the renowned Iohn Boccace. This Boccace was a famous Poet borne in Florence: he wrote many excellent eloquent hiſtories in diuers languages.
               
                  Iohn Duke of Lancaſter, with Simon de Sudbury, and other, aſſembled at Brudges to treate of peace, betwéene the realms of England & France. This treaty continued almoſt two yeares, and ended without concluſion of peace.
               
                  
                     Richard Lyons, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     William Woodhouſe, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     William Walworth Fiſhmonger Maior.
                     An, reg, 49. 1375
                  
               
               
                  Iohn haſtings Earle of Pembroke comming into England, after hee had ranſomed himſelfe for a great maſſe of mony which he neuer paied, died.
               
                  
                     Iohn Hadle, Shriues.
                     An, reg, 50 1376 Adam Bury late Maior, Richard Lions late ſhriue goldſmith.
                  
                  
                     William Newport, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Ware Grocer Maior.
                  
               
               
                  Richard Lions, & Adam of Bury citizens of London, were accuſed by the Commoners, of diuers frauds & deceits which they had done to the King. Richard Lions for mony did wiſely compound and

eſcaped, the other conueied himſelfe into Flanders
               Prince Edward departed out of this life, & was buried at Canterbury,Blacke Prince deceaſed. and then king Edward created Richard ſonne of Prince Edward Earle of Cheſter, Duke of Cornwall, & Prince of Wales, and becauſe the King waxed féeble and ſickly, hee betooke the rule of the land to Iohn of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaſter.
               
                  
                     Iohn Northampton, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Robert Laund, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Adam Staple Mercer, Maior.
                  
               
               
                  An, reg, 51 1377 K. Edward deceaſed, New AbbyKing Edward ended his life at his manour of Shene, the 21. day of Iune, in ye yeare 1377. when he had raigned 50. yeares, 4. moneths, & od daies, whoſe body was buried at Weſtminſter. He builded the Abby of our Lady of Grace by the Tower of London. Hee newly builded Saint Stephens Chappel at Weſtminſter, the Caſtle of Windſor, and the Nunnery of Detford.
            
            
               King Richard of Burdeaux.
               
                  An, reg, 1.
                  
                     RIchard the ſecond, the ſon of Prince Edward, being but 11. yeares old, began his raigne the 21. of Iune, in the yeare of our Lord 1377. In bounty and liberalitie he farre paſſed all his progenitors: but for that he was young, was moſt ruled by young counſell, and regarded nothing the counſels of the ſage and wiſe men of the Realme, which thing turned this land to great trouble, and himſelfe to extreame miſery.
               
                  The Frenchmen arriued at Rye,The towne of Rye ſpoiled. ſpoiled the towne, and burnt it.
               Not long after they aſſailed Winchelſea, & were expulſed: but they burnt the towne of Haſtings.
               
                  
                     Andrew Pickman, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Nicholas Twyford, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Sir Nicholas Brember Grocer Maior.
                  
               
               The Frenchmen arriued at Southſex,1378 The Prior of Lewis taken by Frenchmen neare the towne of Rothington, where the Prior of Lewes with a ſmall company met them, who with two knights, and an Eſquire were taken priſoners by them.

                     
                        Iohn Boſehame, Shriue.
                     
                     
                        Thomas Cornwalis, Shriue.
                     
                     
                        Iir Iohn Philpot Grocer Maior.
                     
                  
               
               This Iohn Philpot gaue to the ſame Citty,Iohn Philpot his charitie. certaine tenements, for the which the Chamberlaine paieth yearely to xiii. poore people, euery one of them xii.d. the wéeke for euer, and as any of thoſe xiii. perſons dieth, the Maior appointeth one, and the Recorder another.1379
               
               
                  
                     Iohn Halyſdon, Shriues.
                     2380 An, reg, 4 Winchelſea taken.
                  
                  
                     William Barret, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Hodſey Grocer Maior.
                  
               
               The French Kings Gallies tooke the towne of Winchelſea, put the Abbot of Battaile to flight, and tooke one of his Monkes.
               
                  
                     Walter Ducket, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     William Knighthood, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     William Walworth Fiſhmonger, Maior.
                  
               
               This William Walworth increaſed the Parriſh Church of S. Michael in Crooked lane Eaſtward, with a new Quire, and ſide Chappels, &c.

About this time the making of guns was found by a certain Almaine.1318 Great tax, Commons rebelled, Rebels entred London, Sauoy, S Iohns, Highbury burnt. Archbiſhop of Canterbury, the Prior of S. Iohns and a Friar beheaded. Flemings beheaded. Eſſex men pacified. The King ſen
                        •
                      to Wat Tiler. An excéeding great tax was demanded, euery perſon 4. d. by meanes whereof the Commons in Kent & Eſſex rebelled, drue together, & went to Maidſton: from thence to blacke Heath, & ſo to London, and entred the citty, where they deſtroied many goodly places, as the Sauoy, S. Iohns by Smithfield, the mannor of Highbury. They ſet out of the Tower of London Simon Sudbury, Robert Halles Prior of S. Iohns. William Appleton a friar Minor, and beheaded them on Towerhill. They beheaded all men of Law, and Flemings, they ſpoiled all bookes of Law, records, & monuments they could méet with, and ſet all priſoners at libertie.
               The king offered them peace, on condition they would ceaſe from burning of houſes, & ſlaughter of men, which ye Eſſex men tooke, & returned home: but the Kentiſh men remained burning, as afore. Whereupon the K. ſent Sir Iohn Newton Knight, to Wat Tiler their Captaine, to intreate him to come and talke with him. The Knight doing his meſſage Wat Tiler anſwered, that he would come at his owne pleaſure, neuertheleſſe hee followed ſoftly, and when he came neare Smithfield, where the K. abode his comming, the K. commanded W. Walworth Maior of London, to arreſt the rebell, which Maior, being a man of great boldneſſe, ſtraight way arreſted him on the head, in ſuch ſort that he aſtoniſhed him, & forthwith they which attended on the King, thruſt him in diuers places of his body: which when the commons perceiued,

they cried out,Wat Tiler areſted and ſlaine. that their captaine was traiterouſly ſlaine: but the King rode vnto them, and ſaide: What meane you? I will be your Captaine, follow me to haue what you wil require. In ye meane time the Maior rode into the city, raiſed the Citizens, and ſhortly returned with a thouſand well armed men, ſir Robert Knoles a Citizen of London being their leader.The Citizens of London deliuered the King. The king reioicing for this vnlooked for aide, ſuddenly compaſſed the commons with fighting men, which commons foorthwith throwing downe their weapons, humbly craued pardon: which was granted, & charters to be deliuered to the captaines of euery ſhire, who then departed home. The rude multitude being thus diſperſed, the king made the Maior and fiue Aldermen of London Knights for their good ſeruice.The Kentiſh men pacified.
               
               
                  Iack Straw being taken, confeſſed all the conſpiracy, and loſt his head at London.
               
                  
                     Iohn Moore, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Hinde, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Northampton Draper, Maior.
                  
               
               King Richard married Anne, daughter of Veſelaus King of Bohem.
               In her daies began the vſe of piked ſhooes,1388 Picked ſhoes, high heades, and long tailed gownes, which women riding aſide vſed in England by cuſtoms tied in their knées with chaines of ſiluer and gilt. Alſo noble women vſed hi
                     •
                  h attires on their heads, piked like bornes, with long trained gownes and ſide ſaddles, after the example of the ſaide Quéene, who firſt brought that faſhion into this land, for before women rode aſtride like men.
               The Marchants of England granted to the King a cuſtome of wools, for foure yeares.

                  EarthquakeA generall earthquake the 21. of May, & a water ſhaking, that made the ſhips in the hauē to totter.
               
                  Iohn Bal. Iohn wraw An, reg, 6.
                  Iohn Bal was brought to S. Albones, and there drawne and quartered.
               
                  Iohn Wraw Captaine of the rebels in Suffolke, he was taken, drawne and hanged.
               
                  
                     Adam Bawne, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Selyt, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Northampton Draper Maior.
                  
               
               
                  A counterfeit phiſitiā puniſhed.A crafty deceiuer that tooke vpon him to be ſkilfull in Phyſicke & Aſtronomy, when his preſumptuous lyings could no longer bee faced out, was taken, ſet on horſeback, with his face towards the horſe taile, and ſo led about the citty, with a coller of iordans, and a whetſtone about his necke, and rung out with baſons.
               
                  Sturre againſt fiſhmongers. An, reg, 7. 1383The Fiſhmongers in London, through the councell of Iohn Northampton, then Maior, William Eſſex, Iohn Moore, and Richard Northbury, were greatly troubled, hindered of their liberties, and almoſt deſtroyed.
               
                  
                     Simon Winchcome, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Moore, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Sir Nicholas Brember Grocer, Maior.
                  
               
               
                  Iohn Northampton late Maior of London, with Iohn Moore,
                  1384 Iohn Northampton cōdemned. An. reg. 8. 
                  Richard Norbury, and other, were conuict at Reading, condemned to perpetuall priſon, and their goods confiſcate, for certaine congregations by them made among the Fiſhmongers.
               
                  
                     Nicholas Exton, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn French, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Sir Nicholas Brember Grocer Maior.
                  
               
               
                  King Richard with an army entred Scotland,1385 The King entred. An, reg, 9. Earthquake burnt the country, and returned.
               The 18. of Iuly was an Earthquake.
               
                  
                     Iohn Organ, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Churchman, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Sir Nicholas Brember Grocer, Maior.
                  
               
               This Nicholas Brember cauſed a paire of ſtocks to be placed in euery ward of London, and a common Are to bee made therewith to behead ſuch as offended.
               The Duke of Lancaſter went with a great army into Spaine,1386 An, reg, 10. to claime the Kingdome of Caſtile which was due to him in the right of his wife Conſtance, daughter to Peter King of Caſtile.
               
                  
                     William Stondon, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     William Moore, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Nicholas Exton Fiſhmonger, Maior.
                  
               
               
                  Richard Earle of Arundell,1387 Rochell wine taken An, reg, 11. and Thomas Earle of Nottingham, encountred with a mightie fléete of Flemings, laden with Rochell wine, & tooke 100. ſhips & more, the which contained 19000. tuns of wine, which they brought to diuers parts of England, whereby wine was then ſold for 13. s. foure pence the tun.
               
                  
                     William Venour, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Hugh Forſtalfe, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Nicholas Exton Fiſhmonger Maior.
                     The nobles riſe againſt the King.
                  
               
               
                  Thomas Duke of Gloceſter the Earles of Arundel, Warwick Darby, & Nottingham, conſidering how this land was miſgouerned by a few perſons about the K. intending reformation of the ſame, aſſembled at Radcote Bridge with a power of

forty thouſand, came to London, and pitched in the fields neare to the tower, where the King kept his Chriſtmas.1388 Shortly after they cauſed the King to call a parliament, whereof hearing Alexander Neuell, Archbiſhop of Yorke, Robert Ver Duke of Ireland, and Michael de la Poole Earle of Suffolke, fled the land, & died in ſtrange countries. The king by the counſell of the aboue named Lords, cauſed to be taken, Sir Robert Treſilian chiefe Iuſtice of England, ſir Nicholas Brember, late Maior of London, ſir Iohn Salisbury knight, ſir Iohn Beauchamp, ſir Simon Burghley, ſir Iames Barnes knight, & Iohn Vske, a Serieant at Armes, which by the authoritie of the ſaid Parliament, were conuict of treaſon, and put to death, Robert Belknap, Iohn holt, Iohn Locton, Richard Gray, William Burgh, and Robert Fulthrope Iuſtices, with the Lords which before had voided the land, were baniſhed for euer.
               
                  
                     Thomas Auſten ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Adam Carlohul, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Nicholas Twyford Goldſmith Maior.
                  
               
               
                  1389Statutes made of the Staple to bee brought from Middleborow to Calice.
               
                  
                     Iohn Walcot, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Louely, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     William Venour Grocer Maior.
                  
               
               
                  1390 Variance at Oxford. An, reg, 14In Oxford the Welſh and Southerne ſchollers aſſailed the Northerne, whereby many murders were done on each ſide.
               
                  
                     Iohn Francis, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Thomas Viuent, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Adam Bawne Goldſmith Maior.
                  
               
               
                  This Adam Bawne, prouided that from parts beyond the ſeas, was corne brought to London plentifully: to the furtherance of which good work, the Maior and Citizens tooke out of the Orphans cheſt in their Guild-hall, 2000. markes to buy corne, and the Aldermen laid out each of them 20. pound to the like purpoſe.
               The good man of the Cock in Cheape at the litle conduit,1391 An, reg, 14 A Brewer at the cocke in Cheape murthered. was murdered in ye night time by a thiefe that came in at a gutter window, as it was known long after by the ſame thiefe, when he was at the Gallowes to be hanged for fellony: but his wife was burnt therefore, and thrée of his men drawne to Tyborne, and there hanged wrongfully.
               
                  
                     Iohn Chadworth, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Henry Venor, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Hinde Draper, Maior.
                  
               
               Vpon Chriſtmas day a Dolphin came vp the riuer of Thames to London bridge foreſhewing the tempeſts that followed ſhortly after,A Dolphin came vp to London. or elſe the diſturbance of the Citizens, which through ye Kings diſpleaſure they came into: becauſe the Londoners had denied the lending of 1000.
                  1392 Liberties of London ſeiſed. An, reg, 16 pound which the king demanded of them. Hee cauſed the Maior, Shriues, & Aldermen to be ſummoned to a Counſell at Nottingham, & there impriſoned them, diſanulling all their liberties, and made ſir Edward Dalengrige Warden of London.
               
                  
                     Gilbert Maghfield, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Thomas Newington, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     William Stondon Grocer Maior.
                  
               
               When the King ſaw the Londoners ſore repent

their treſpaſſes,The King came to London. he came to London, where the citizens receiued him with ſo great glory, as might haue ſéemed to receiue an Emperour in his triumph, & with ſuch gifts did honour him, that the worth thereof could not bee eſtéemed. By this meanes the King became more tractable to grant them their liberties, and then the Kings Bench from Yorke,1363 An. reg. 17. and the Chancery from Nottingh
                     ••
                   were returned to London.
               
                  
                     Drew Barentine, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Richard Whiting
                           •
                        on, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Hatley Grocer Maior.
                  
               
               
                  1394 An, reg, 18Qéene Anne died at Shene in Southery, and was buried at Weſtminſter.
               
                  
                     William Brumſtone, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Thomas Knowles, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Froſhie Mercer Maior.
                  
               
               
                  1395 An, reg, 19·King Richard made a chargeable voyage into Ireland, which came to ſmall effect.
               
                  
                     Roger Ellis, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     William Skirrington, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     William Moore Vintner Maior.
                  
               
               
                  1396 An, reg, 20.The Kings of England and of France met beſides Calice, and there concluded a peace.
               King Richard tooke to his wife Iſabell daughter to the French King.
               
                  
                     Thomas Wilford, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Tamberlaine taketh Baiazeth, & reſcueth Conſtantinople.
                     William Parker, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Adam Bawne Goldſmith, and Richard Whittington Mercer, Maiors.
                  
               
               This yeare 1397. Tamberlaine
                   being Lord of a a certaine waſt countrey, and rude people in the

Eaſt, who not long before had aſſembled great numbers of ſtrangers vnto his aid, & ouerthrown the Perſians, vnderſtanding that Baiazeth the Turkiſh Emperour had won diuers kingdomes and many ſtrong Citties from the Chriſtians, as alſo diſcomfited the Chriſtian Emperiall army which conſiſted of Gréekes, Italians, Germanes, Hungarions, Seruians, Myſſians, Frenchmen, and others: and that he ſtill perſiſted in extreame pride of his inuincible ſtrength & fortune, with a mightie hoaſt had beſieged Conſtantinople eight yeares, being fully perſwaded that there was no power vpon earth, that could redéeme the Cittie out of his hands, becauſe he knew the Princes of Chriſtendome to bee at diſſention among themſelues. And therupon ſecured himſelfe, yt if Europ could not preuaile againſt him, there was no other power that durſt encounter him. And whileſt hée thus thought, the ſaide Tamberlaine the yeare alone written, came vpon him with a very mighty hoaſt, & in a ſet battell vpon Mount Stella, where Pompey fought with Mithridates, hee ouercame this Baiazeth, being the fourth of that name, flew two hundred thouſand Turkes, tooke him priſoner, put him in an iron cage, and ſo carried him in triumph from place to place. This Baiazeth was crowned in the yeare 1373. Amurah
                   the ſecond was crowned 1414. he was the firſt that ordained the Emperiall Band or guarde of renegate Chriſtians commonly called Ianezaries. And in the yeare 1447. Conſtantine
                   the 7. was crowned

Emperour of Conſtantinople,The City of Conſtantinople receiued that name of the Emperour Conſtantine the Great, hee was crowned in the yeare of the world 4271 and in the yeare of our redemption 309 he raigned Emperour 31. yeares, and died at 66. yeares of age, but the Citty of Conſtantinople was of old time called Byzantium & beareth for Armes in their Scutchion, a croſſe betweene 4. letters of B. ſignifying Bizantium the ancient name of that City. being before that, K. of Morea: he was ſurnamed the Dragon for his cruelty which he exerciſed vpon the Turkes, for reuenge whereof, & other ancient grudges, Mahomet ſonne of Amurat the 2. in the yeare 1452. after hee had done great ſpoiles and damage vpon Gréece, hee alſo conquered their chiefe Citie Conſtantinople, & tooke Conſtantine the Chriſtian Emperour priſoner, then cōmanded his head to be cut-off, and with great deriſion cauſed his head to bee ſhowne throughout all the Turkiſh campe. And among other things of worthy note and obſeruation you ſhall vnderſtand: that whereas the famous Citie Conſtantinople was at firſt dignified, reedified, enriched & aduanced by a Conſtantine, whoſe mothers name was S. Helen, the ſame Citie was loſt, & ſubiugated vnto Turkiſh ſlauery by a Conſtantine, whoſe mothers name was likewiſe Helen. This Mahomet was the ſecond of that name, and the eight in ranke of Turkiſh Emperours, & was the firſt that arrogated to his title the name of Great, whoſe ſucceſſors euer ſince haue béene called the great Turke, or grand Signor: Therefore Baiazeth the fourth, by reaſon of ſundry his victories againſt the Chriſtians, and cruell murthers which he had performed on his kindred & friendes, was ſurnamed the whirlwinde, or thunderbolt of heauen. And Tamberlaine after his conqueſt calling to minde all his fortunes, & conſidering how many mighty Princes he had ſubdued, ſurnamed himſelfe the ſcourge of God.
               
                  Thomas Duke of Gloceſter, King Richards
                  
Vncle was murdered at Calice.1397 Duke of Gloceſter murdered. An, reg, 21.
               
               The Earle of Arundell and many other, were put to death for that they rebuked the King in certaine matters ſomewhat liberally.
               
                  
                     Richard Askam, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Woodcocke, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Richard Whittington Mereer Maior.
                  
               
               
                  Thomas Arundell Archbiſhop of Canterbury,Weſtminſter hall repaired. was baniſhed the Realme.
               The King cauſed the great hall at Weſtminſter to be repaired with a maruellous coſtly worke.1398 An, reg, 22. The Duke of Hereford accuſed the Duke of Norfolke. The two Dukes baniſhed.
               
               
                  Henry Duke of Hereford accuſed Thomas Duke of Norfolke of certaine words by him ſpoken, tending to the reproach of the kings perſon, which the Duke of Norfolke vtterly denied: whereupon a combat was granted them, but the king taking vp the quarrell, baniſhed the Duke of Hereford for 10. yeares, and the Duke of Norfolke for euer.
               
                  
                     Iohn Wade, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Warnar, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Drew Barentine Goldſmith Maior.
                  
               
               
                  Ihon of Gaunt, D. of Lancaſter, deceaſed,Duke of Lancaſter deceaſed. & was honourably buried in S. Pauls Church at London
               The King exacted great ſums of money of xvii.1399 Great exactions. ſhires of the realme, and laid to their charges that they had béene againſt him with the Duke of Gloceſter, the Earles of Arundell and Warwicke, wherefore he ſent to induce the Lords both ſpirituall and temporall, to make a ſubmiſſion by writing, acknowledging themſelues to be traitors to the King, though they neuer offended him.Blanke Charters.
               
               Moreouer he compelled them to ſet their hands

to blankes, to the ende that ſo often as it pleaſed him, he might oppreſſe them.
               
                  K. Richard ſailed into Ireland: An, reg, 23.About Whitſontide King Richard ſailed towards Ireland. In the meane ſeaſon Henry Duke of Hereford & of Lancaſter, arriued in Yorkeſhire, demanding the inheritance due to him by the death of his Father. There came to him, Henry Percie, Earle of Northumberland, Ralph Neuill Earle of Weſtmerland, and many other Lords with their powers, and went to Briſtow, and beſieged the Caſtle, where they tooke W. Scrope, Iohn Buſhy, and Thomas Greene, and beheaded them. King Richard hearing of the Dukes arriuall, forthwith tooke ſhipping, and arriued at Milford hauen: but when hee vnderſtood what preparation the Duke had made, he placed himſelfe in the caſtle of Conway, deſiring to talke with T. Arundell Archbiſhop of Canterbury, and the Earle of Northumberland, which being granted, he came to the caſtle of flint, where hee had a briefe communication with the Duke of Lancaſter. They tooke horſe, & that night came to ye caſtle of Cheſter, from thence to Weſtminſter and from thence the King was ſent to the tower of London, where he remained till the next Parliament, which was begun the morrow after Michaelmas day, at which time hee reſigned to Henry Duke of Hereford and Lancaſter, all his power & knightly title to the Crowne of England, and France,K. Richard depoſed. when hee had raigned 22. yeares, 3. moneths, and odde daies.
               
                  
                  
                     HEnry the fourth,An, reg. 
                        •
                     
                   ſon to Iohn of Gaunt Duke of Lancaſter was ordained king of England more by force then by lawful ſucceſſion or election. He began his raigne the 29. of September, in the yeare 1399.
               
               
                  
                     William Walden, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     William Hide, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Thomas Knowles Grocer Maior.
                  
               
               The King cauſed the blancke charters made to King Richard to be burnt.The blanck Charters burnt. Conſpiracy diſcloſed.
               
               
                  Iohn Holland late Duke of Exceter, Thomas Holland Duke of Surrey, Edward Duke of Awmarle, Iohn Montacute Earle of Salisbury, Thomas Spencer, Sir Ralph Lumley, Sir Thomas Blunt, Sir Benedict Cely, Knights, with others, conſpired againſt King Henry, and appointed priuily to murder him: but their treaſon being diſcloſed, they were all put to death.
               King Richard being in Pomfret caſtle, died the 14. day of February, his body was brought to London, & ſo through the Citie to Pauls C. bare faced, where he ſtood 3. daies for all beholders, frō thence he was carried to Langley, & there buried.
               The Welſhmen rebell by the ſetting on of Owen Glendouerdew,
                  1400 Owē Glendouerdew. An, reg, 2. whereof the King being certified, went into Wales, but the Welſhmen fled.
               
                  
                     Iohn Wakell, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     William Ebot, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Frances Goldſmith Maior.
                  
               
               This time was vſed exceeding pride in garments1401
                  
gownes with déepe and broad ſléeues,Sleeues of garments monſtrous. An, reg, 3 commonly called peake ſléeues, whereof ſome hung downe to the féete, and at leaſt to the knées, ful of cuts and iagges.
               
                  
                     William Venor, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Eremingham, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Chadworth Mercer Maior.
                  
               
               The Conduit vpon Gornehill in London was made.
               
                  1402 Cōnſpiracy againſt king Henry. A ſtout fryar executed Friars hanged.Certaine men affirmed King Richard to be aliue, for the which a Prieſt was taken at Warwicke, who was drawne, hanged, and quartered.
               
                  Walter Waldocke Prior of Land, was likewiſe hanged, and headed. Certaine grey Friars were taken, of the which one Richard Fresby Doctour of Diuinitie was drawne and hanged.
               Sir Roger Clarindon Knight, a Squire and a Yeoman were beheaded, & eight gray friars hanged and beheaded at London, and two at Leiceſter, all which had publiſhed King Richard to be aliue.
               
                  Owen Glē
                     douerdew. K. Henry went into Wales. The firſt Duke of Millaine.
                  Owen Glendouerdew inuaded all the ſhires that bordered neare vnto him.
               The K. went with a great power into Wales where he profited nothing.
               This yeare 1402. died Iohn Galias of Galiaſo the firſt Duke of Millaine, being at firſt but viſcount of Millaine, as his aunceſtors had béene before him: he was created Duke by Wenceſſaus the Emperour, for ayding him with a great army againſt Robert of Bauiere otherwiſe called Rupert Duke of Bauaria. Compotior vnto the Emperiall dignitie, Wenceſſaus was deſpiſed of many, and his

loſe gouernment generally miſliked euen of his own brother Sigiſmond, with whom he had ſharpe warres, and was by him taken and kept priſoner vntill he died of an Apoplexie. After his death. Robert became ſole Emperour in the yeare 1400. who with all expedition & fury as well in reſpect of his owne particular malice, as in pretence of a ſpeciall fauour towards his olde tryed friends the Florentines, he came into Italy with a very ſtrōg army, with full purpoſe to vanquiſh and be auenged of Galeaſo the new Duke of Millaine, but the Duke ſo ſtoutly reſiſted the Emperour and all his adherents, as hée cauſed him to retire into Germany: Notwithſtanding the importunate ſute of the Florentines vnto the Emperor that he ſhould not depart out of Italy and leaue them in all apparence of extreame daunger of their enemies whom they had ſo many wayes vexed: in reuenge whereof the ſaid Iohn Galeazo entred into armes, but firſt ſlewe his Vncle Barnabas, then poſieſt himſelfe of his vncles wealth and authority, and conquered Verona, Vincentia, Padua, Parma, & many other Italian Cities & territories, he made a large Parke for all ſorts of beaſtes, and in the middle thereof he builded a ſtately Monaſtery. He was very faire, learned, & eloquent, but how long he raigned is vncertaine, becauſe the Archbiſhop of Florence, and the ſupplement of Chronicles and Paulus Iouius differ about the beginning of his raigne, the Archbiſhop ſaith hee began in the yeare 1385. the Supplement ſaith in the yeare 1382. and Iouius ſaith in the yeare 1378. He raigned

                  24. yeares, & died at 55. yeares of age, his ſon Iohn Maria being very yong, ſuccéeded him in the yeare 1402. and was in his minority brought vp by his mother: after that he became tyrannous, he put to death many honeſt & vertuous people, and cauſed many of his enemies to bee eaten by dogs, he impriſoned his kind mother, where he conſtrained her to end her daies with great miſery: he was ſlaine by his owne ſeruants as he was at Church hauing raigned ten yeares. Reade the ſupplement of Chronicles.
               
                  Ferrara.The Dukedome of Ferrara, for want of heires male, returned to the Church againe, about the yeare 1596. and Pope Clement the 8. tooke poſſeſſion thereof, and conuerted it to a commonwealth, retaining the regall power thereof vnto himſelfe and his ſucceſſors.
               
                  Scots at Halidon hill.The Scots were ouerthrowne at Hallidon Hill.
               Earle Dowglas was taken, & many other: there were drowned in the riuer of Twéed about 500.
               
               
                  
                     Richard Marlew, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Robert Chicheley, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Walcot Draper Maior.
                  
               
               
                  An. reg. 4. 1403 Battell at Shrewsbury.A great battell was fought neare vnto Shreweſbury betwéene King Henry and Henry Percy the yonger, vnto whom was ioyned ſir Thomas Percy Earle of Worceſter, vncle to the ſaid Henry, & almoſt all the Gentlemen of Cheſ-ſhire, Sir Henry Percy was ſlaine, ſir Thomas Percy taken and beheaded, and of the commons on both ſides about 5000. ſlaine.
               
                  Plimouth ſpoiled.The town of Plimouth was burnt by ye Britons

                     
                     
                        Thomas Falconer, ſhriue.
                     
                     
                        Thomas Poole, ſhriue.
                     
                     
                        William Askam Fiſhmonger Maior.
                     
                  
               
               The Frenchmen came to the Iſle of Wight,An, reg. 5. 1404 Frenchmen inuaded the Iſle of Wight. Dartmouth inuaded by the Frenchmen. but thoſe of the Iſle riſing againſt them, they were glad to depart.
               The Lord of Caſſels in Britain arriued at Black poole, 2. mile out of Dartmouth with a great Nauy. Where (of the ruſticall people) hee was ſlaine, and xvii. ſhips were taken fraught with wines.
               
                  
                     William Louth, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Stephen Spilman, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Hinde Draper Maior.
                  
               
               The ſonne of Owen Glendouerdew was taken,Owens for taken. and 150. with him were taken and ſlaine.
               
                  Richard Scrope Archbiſhop of Yorke,1405 Archbiſhop of Yorke againſt King Henry. An, reg, 7. and Thomas Monbray Earle Marſhall, imagined diuers articles againſt the King, becauſe he had put downe King Richard, offering themſelues for thoſe articles to liue and die, which cauſed great numbers of people to reſort to them: but they were taken and preſented to the King at Yorke, where they were both beheaded.
               
                  
                     Henry Berton, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     William Cromer, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Woodſtocke Mercer Maior.
                  
               
               
                  Iames the ſonne of Robert King of Scots,1406 The King of Scots ſon taken. An, reg, 8. being nine yeares old, ſayling towards France, was by tempeſt of weather driuen vpon the coaſt of England, where being taken, he was preſented to the King, and remained priſoner till the ſecond yeare of Henry the ſixth.
               
                  
                  
                     Nicholas Wotton, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Geffery Brooke, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Richard Whittington Maior.
                  
               
               
                  1407 Great peſtilence. Rocheſter bridge new builded. An, reg, 9.A peſtilence conſumed in the Citty of London, about 30000.
               
               Sir Robert Knowles Knight deceaſed, he builded anew the bridge of Rocheſter: hee reedified the Church of the white Friars at London, where hée was buried: he founded a colledge at Pomfret, &c.
               
                  
                     Henry Pomfret, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     William Hallon, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     William Stonden Grocer Maior.
                  
               
               
                  A great froſt.A froſt laſted 15. wéekes.
               
                  1408 Earle of Northumberland, & the Lord Bardolph.
                  Henry Earle of Northumberland, and the Lord Bardolph came into England with a great company, pretending by proclaimation to deliuer the people from the great ſuppreſſion that they well burdned with: but by ſir Thomas Rokeby Shriue of Yorkeſhire, he was encounted at Bramhaunnor, & there ſlaine: the Lord Bardolph was wounded to death.

                     
                        Thomas Dacke, Shriue.
                     
                     
                        William Norton, Shriue.
                     
                     
                        Drew Barentine Goldſmith Maior.
                     
                  
               
               
                  An, reg, 10 1409 Play at Skinners well. An, reg, 12.This yeare was a great play at Skinners well neare vnto Clarken well beſides London, & was of matter from ye creation of the world: there were to behold the ſame the moſt part of Nobles and Gentiles in England, and forthwith after began a royall Iouſting in Smithfield betwéene the H
                     •
                  
                  nowayes and our Engliſh Lords.
               
                  
                     Iohn Law, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     William Chichely, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     
                     Richard Marlow Irenmonger, Maior.
                     1410 The Kings ſon beaten. An, reg, 12.
                  
               
               Vpon the euen of S. Iohn Baptiſt, Iohn the Kings ſon being in Eaſt Cheape after midnight, a great debate happened betwéene his men, & men of the Court, till the Maior with other Citizens, ceaſed the ſame. K. Henry founded a Colledge at Battlefield in Shropſhire, where he ouercame Sir Henry Percy and other.
               
                  
                     Iohn Penne, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Thomas Pike, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Thomas Knowles Grocer Maior.
                     Guild Hall in London builded. 1411 An, reg, 13
                  
               
               The guild Hall in London was began to be made newly by the foreſaid Maior & Aldermē. A ſquier of Wales, named Rice ap Dee, which had long time rebelled againſt the King, was brought to London, and there drawne hanged and quartered.
               
                  
                     Iohn Rainewill, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     William Cotton, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Robert Chichely Grocer Maior.
                  
               
               The K. cauſed a new coine of nobles to be made,1412 Fodringhai An, reg, 14. which were of leſſe value then the old by 4. d. in a Noble. King Henry founded the Colledge of Fadringhey in Northamptonſhire.
               
                  
                     Ralph Leuenhinde, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     William Seuenoke, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     William Waldren Mercer Maior
                           •
                        
                     
                  
               
               After the fortunate chances happened to K. Henry, being deliuered of all ciuill diuiſion, he was taken with ſickneſſe, & yéelded to God his ſpirit the 10. of March, Anno 1412.
                   when he had raigned 13 yeares, 6. moneths, and odde daies: he was buried at Canterbury.
               
                  
                  
                     H
                     
                        ••
                     ry the fifth began his raigne the 20.
                  An, reg, 1 of March, in the yeare 1412. This Prince excéeded the meane ſtature of men: he was beautious of viſage, his neck long, body ſlender, and leane, and his bones ſmal: neuertheles he was of maruellous great ſtrength, and paſſing ſwift in running.
               
                  1413 Sir Iohn Old-caſtle.Sir Iohn Old Caſtle, for diuers points touching the Sacrament, before the Archbiſhop of Canterbury, the Biſhop of London, Wincheſter, and other, was conuict and committed to the Tower of London, out of the which he brake.
               
                  
                     Iohn Stotton, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Michael, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     William Cromer Draper Maior.
                  
               
               
                  1414 An, reg, 2Certaine adherents of Sir Iohn Olde Caſtle, aſſembled them in Thickets field neare vnto the citie of London: but the King being warned, tooke the field afore them, and ſo took of them ſuch numbers that all the priſoners about London were 
                     •••
                  
                  led, diuers of them were after executed, Iohn N
                        •
                     
                     anſet Eſquire,Men forſweare the land. with 9. of his men ſlew Iohn Tibbey Clarke, Chancellour to the Quéene, for the which déed the ſaid Eſquier, and foure of his men fled to S. Anns Church within Alderſgate, and after for ſwore the land.
               
                  
                     Iohn Michael, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Thomas Allin, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Thomas Fawconer Mercer Maior.
                  
               
               This Thomas Fawconer cauſed to breake the wall

of London neare vnto Colman ſtréet,Mooregate firſt bu
                        •
                     ced An reg, 3 1415 Conſpiracy and there to make a gate vpon the moore ſide, where was none before: He alſo cauſed the ditch to be cleanſed.
               The King rode to Southhampton, where was diſcouered a great conſpiracy againſt him by Richard Earle of Cambridge, ſir Thomas Gray
                  ▪ and Henry Scrope, with other, who were executed at Southhampton.
               The King entred the ſea with 1000. ſaile,K Henry ſailed into Normandy B
                        •
                     ttell of Agincourt. and the third night after arriued in Normandy. He laid ſiege to Hartflew, which was yéelded to him. Hee ſought the battell at Agincourt, where hee had a maruellous victory.
               About this time Philip the French King began to ſet a cuſtome or impoſt vpon Salt,The firſt impoſt vpon ſalt in France. which was neuer before.
               
                  
                     William Cambridge, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Allen Euerard, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Nicholas Wotton Draper Maior.
                  
               
               K. Henry arriued at Douer.K. Henry returned. An. reg. 4. 1416 The Maior of London with the Aldermen and crafts, riding in red, with hoods red and white, met with the King on blacke.

                     
                        Richard Whittington, Shriue.
                     
                     
                        Iohn Couentry, Shriue.
                     
                     
                        Henry Barton Skinner Maior.
                     
                  
               
               This yeare it was decréed by a court of common counſaile,An, reg, 5. 1417 that a lantherne & candle light ſhould be hanged out at euery doore in the city in the winter.
               On Eaſter day at a Sermon in S.A fray in S. Dunſtons Church. Dunſtons in the Eaſt of London, a great fray happened, wherethrough many people were ſore wounded, & Thomas Petwarden Fiſhmonger, ſlaine out of hand.

The beginners of the fray, which was the Lord Strange, & ſir Iohn Ruſſel knight, through the quarrell of their two wiues, were brought to the counter in the Poultry, & excōmunicated at P. Croſſe.
               King Henry ſailed into Normandy, and tooke the Caſtle of Tonke, and ſhortly after get Caen, Beyonx, and many other Townes and Caſtles.
               
                  
                     Henry Read, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Gedney, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Richard Marlow, Ironmonger Maior.
                  
               
               
                  An, reg, 6. 1418Sir Iohn Oldcaſtle was ſent vnto London by the Lord Powes out of Wales: which ſir Iohn was conuict by Parliament drawne to S. Giles field, hanged, and conſumed with fire.
               The Parſon of Wrotham in Norfolke, which had haunted New-Market-heath, and there robbed and ſpoiled many, was with his concubine brought to Newgate of London, where he died.
               
                  
                     Iohn Brian. Ralph Barton. Brian deceaſed, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Perneſſe ſucceeded. Shriue.
                  
                  
                     William Seuenoke Grocer Maior.
                  
               
               
                  W. Seuenoke. Almes houſes and free ſchole at Seuenoke. An, reg, 7. 1419 This William Seuenoke founded in the towne of Seuenocke in Kent, where hee had béene nouriſhed, a frée ſchoole, and xii. almes houſes.
               King Henry beſieged the Citty of Roan halfe a yeare and more, which was yéelded to him.
               
                  
                     Richard Whitingham, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Butler, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Richard Whittington Mercer Maior.
                  
               
               
                  Whittington colledg An, reg, 8. 1420This Richard Whittington builded the library in the Gray Friars Church in London: his Excecutors of his goods builded Whittington Colledge,

they repaired S. Bartholomews Hoſpitall in Smithfield, they bare ſome charges to the pauing and glazing of the Guildhall, and alſo of the library there, they new builded the Weſt gate of London, of old time called Newgate.
               K. Henry was made Regent of France,K. Henry made regent of France. & wedded Lady Katherine the Kings daughter of France at Troys in Champaine: the feaſt being finiſhed, the King beſieged and won many townes in France.
               
                  
                     Iohn Burler, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Welles, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     William Cambrige Grocer Maior.
                  
               
               The King ſuppreſſed the French houſes of religious Monks & Friars, and ſuch like in England.An, reg. 9. 1421 Religious houſes 
                        •
                     uppreſſed. A charitable Biſhop.
               
               A Subſidie was demaunded, but the Biſhop of Wincheſter lent the King 20000. pound to 
                     ••
                  ay the matter. The King ſailed into France.
               
                  
                     Richard Goſlin, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     William Weſton, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Robert Chichely Grocer Maior.
                  
               
               This Robert Chichely w
                     •
                  lled in his teſtament,Robert Chichely his charity. that vpon his mind day, a competent dinner ſhuld be ordained for 2420. poore men, houſholders of the Citty, and 20. pound in money to diſtribute amongſt them, which was to euery man two pence
               At this time ſuch was the generall & capital command & ſway of the King of England in France,The King of Englande ſe
                        •
                     le vſed 
                        •
                     n the Court of Chancery in Paris. (as her own Chronicles teſtifie) that in the Court of Chancery in Paris, all things were ſealed with the ſeale of King Henry of England, and the great ſeale of England was there new made and vſed: wherein was the Armes of France & England: and as the King ſate in his chaire of ſtate, he held

two Scepters in his hands: that is to ſay, in his right hand was a ſcepter ſmooth & plaine, only the proportion of the French coine, commonly called a French crowne: & in his left hand he held a ſcepter full of curious arts, carued and wrought with the armes of England,All this & much more is very authentically recorded in the French Chronicles. as is vſed in the Engliſh mony, and on the top thereof a Croſſe. Preſently vpon this, the french were ſo vexed with the engliſh gouernmēt that they practiſed al meanes to extirp the Engliſh, as well by praiers as otherwiſe, and neuer ceaſed vntill they had obtained their deſire: Calice onely excepted, which was Engliſh many yeares after. Henry the Kings ſonne was borne at Windſor on the 6.
                  An, reg, 10 1422 day of December.
               K. Henry being at Boys S. Vincent, waxed ſicke & died the laſt of Auguſt in the yeare 1422. when he had raigned 9. yeares, 5. moneths, & odde daies: hee founded two Monaſteries vpon the Thames, the one of the Religion of the Carthuſians,Shine and Sion. which he named Bethlem, the other of religious men & women of S. Briget, which he named Sion. Hee founded Garter principall King of Armes. He lieth buried at Weſtminſter.
            
            
               Henry of Windſor.
               
                  An, reg. 1.
                  
                     HEnry the 6. being an infant of 8. moneths olde, began his raigne the laſt of Auguſt in the yeare 1422. the gouernance of the Realme was committed to the Duke of Gloceſter, and the guard of his perſon to the Duke of Exceter, & to the Duke of Bedford was giuen the the regiment of France.
               
                  
                  
                     William Eaſtfield, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Robert Tatarſall, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     William Walderne Mercer Maior.
                  
               
               The xxi. of October died Charles King of France,The French King died. by reaſon whereof the kingdome of France ſhould come to King Henry, and the Nobles of France, (except a few that held with the Dolphine) deliuered the poſſeſſion thereof to the Duke of Bedford, to the vſe of King Henry.
               
               A ſubſidy was granted for thrée yeares,1423 Subſidy of woole. Newgate at London. fiue nobles for euery ſacke of woolle that ſhould paſſe out of the land.
               This yeare the Weſt gate of London, called Newgate, was new builded by the Excecutors of Richard Whittington,
                  
                     
                        Nicholas Iames, Shriue.
                     
                     
                        Thomas VVadford, Shriue.
                     
                     
                        VVilliam Cromer Draper Maior.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Iames the yong King of Scots,An. reg. 2. K. of Scots releaſed. who was taken by the Engliſhmen in the 8. yeare of Henry the 4. and had remained in England priſoner till this time, was now deliuered, and maried in S. Mary Oueries in Southwarke to the Lady Iane, daughter the Earle of Somerſet.
               The battell at Vernoill in Perch, betwéene the Duke of Bedford Regent of France,1424 Battell as Vernell. An, reg, 3. and the Arminakes, but the Engliſh party preuailed.
               
                  
                     Simon Seman, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Bywater, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Michael Stockefiſhmonger Maior.
                  
               
               By a Parliament was granted to the King for 3. yeares to helpe him in his warres, a ſubſidie of 12. d. the pound of all Marchandiſe brought in

or carried out of the Realme, and 3. s. of euery tun of wine, which was called tonage or poundage but ſince it hath béene renewed at ſundry Parliaments, and now called cuſtome.
               
                  Strangers to be lodged with Engliſh hoſts.It was enacted that all the Marchant ſtrangers ſhould be lodged with Engliſh hoſts, and within 40. dayes to make ſale of all they brought, or elſe what remained to be forfeit to the King.
               
                  
                     William M
                           •
                        ldred, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Brok
                           ••
                        ll ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Couentry Mercer Maior.
                  
               
               
                  An reg, 4. Debate betweene the Duke of Gloceſter, and the Biſhop of WincheſterThe morrow after Simon & Iudes day the Maior cauſed a great watch to be kept with moſt part of the citizens in armor to ſtand by the duke of Gloceſter againſt the Biſhop of Wincheſter, who lay in Southwark with a great power of Lancaſhire and Cheſhire men: but the matter was appeaſed by the Archbiſhop of Canterbury.
               The 28. of September was an earthquake, which continued the ſpace of two houres.
               
                  
                     Iohn Arnold, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Higham, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Rainwell Fiſhmonger Maior.
                  
               
               
                  An, reg, 5 W
                        •
                     rd, diſch
                        •
                     rged for fifteenes.This Iohn Rainwell gaue certaine tenements to the citie of London, for the which the ſame citie is bound to pay foreuer, ſuch Fifteenes as well bee granted to the K. for Downgate, Bill
                     •
                  ngſgate, and Algate ward, &c.
               This yeare the tower of the drawbridge of London,1427 An, reg, 7. was begun by the ſame Maior.
               
                  
                     Henry Frowicke, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Robert Otley, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Godney Draper Maior.
                  
               
               From the beginning of Aprill vnto Hallontide,

was ſo great aboundance of raine, that not onely hay, but corne alſo was deſtroyed.
               
                  
                     Thomas Duthouſe, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Abbot, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Henry Barton Skinner Maior.
                  
               
               The Duke of Norfolke paſſing through London bridge, his barge ouerwhelmed, ſo that 30.
                  Duke of Norfolke eſcaped. perſons were drowned, and the Duke with other that eſcaped were drawne vp with ropes.
               A Britaine murthered a widow in white chappel pariſh without Algate of London, & bare away her goods, but being purſued, he took ſuccour of the Church of S. George in Southwark,Murder quit with murder. from whence he was taken, & forſwore the land. But as he happened to come by the place where hee had done the murder, ye women of the pariſh withſtones, ſhéeps hornes, and kennell dung, made an end of him.
               
                  
                     William Ruſſo, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Ralph Holland, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     William Eaſtfield Maior.
                  
               
               Before the towne of Champaine was taken a woman armed,1430 La Pucelle de Dieu. An, reg, 9. the Frenchmen called her La Pucella de Dieu, through whom the Dolphin truſted to haue conquered all France.
               
                  
                     Walter Chartſey, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Robert Large, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Nicholas Wotton Draper Maior.
                  
               
               
                  Francis Sforce ſon to Sforce of Cutygnola,Francis Sforce made Duke of Milaine. was by his father Viſcount Philip Maria, adopted for his heire, & cauſed him to beare the ſerpent in his Scutchion, which was the ancient Armes of the ſaid Viſcount. And in the yeare 1430 died Phillip Maria, & the yeare following, ye forenamed Francis

Sforce, by reaſon of his ſingular vertue & valour, was made Duke of Millaine: he was called Sforce becauſe his father was ſo called, who was ſo ſurnamed for his valour & Noble acts of chiualry: for albeit at the firſt hee was but of meane and lowe place▪ yet by his owne merit he attained by degrées the higheſt place in Campe, making all men to obey & ſerue him by force, and was thereupon ſurnamed Sforce, which name hath deſcended vnto his heires euer ſince. This Francis had many victories againſt Pope Eugenius, and againſt the Florentines, Venetians, and Mylaneſeys: he had almoſt extirped the Gwelphes, and Ghibelines: he was feared and honoured of all Italy: he made peace with Venice & other cities: he reedified the great Caſtle of Millaine, and builded a faire hoſpitall within the Citie, and gaue thereunto large reuenewes onely for the vſe of the poore, hée was at great charges in building the Church of Saint Ambroſe
                  ▪ he raigned 16. yeares, his ſoune Galeaſe Maria ſuccéeded him, who baniſhed his owne mother, and abounded in all vices: he was ſlain in S. Stephens Church, hauing raigned 9. yeares, hée left behind him 4. children. Read the Supplement of Chronicles.
               
                  1431A commotion at Abington An, reg, 10.At Abington began an inſurrection of certaine lewde perſons ye intended to haue wrought much miſchiefe: but the chiefe authour being Balif
                     •
                  e of the towne, named VVilliam Mundeuile, a Weauor with others, were put to death.
               
                  
                     Iohn Adorley, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Stephen Browne, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn VVels Grocer Maior.
                  
               
               
                  This Iohn Welles cauſed the Conduit called the Standard in Cheape to be new builded.
               This yeare 1431.
                  The King of England crowned in Paris. King Henry of England being but 12. yeares of age, was triumphantly crowned King of France in our Lady Church in Paris, in the preſence of the Engliſh and French Cleargie and Nobilitie: and was with great honour generally receiued as King. The Frenchmen euer after called him little Harry, as appeareth by their Chronicles to this day.
               King Henry after he was crowned at Paris in France, ſhortly after returned into England,1432 An, reg. 11. and came to London, where hee was royally receiued of all the Crafts men riding in gownes of white, and red hoods imbrodered richly.
               
                  
                     Iohn Oluey, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Paddeſley, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Perney Fiſhmonger Maior.
                  
               
               Foure Souldiers of Calice beheaded,1433 An, reg, 12. and an hundred and ten baniſhed, and before that time was baniſhed an hundred and twenty.
               
                  
                     Thomas Chalton, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn King, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Brokeley Draper Maior.
                  
               
               The Earle of Huntington was ſent with a company of Souldiers into France, where hee atchieued many enterpriſes.
               
                  
                     Thomas Barnewell, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Simon Eyre Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Roger Otely Grocer Maior.
                  
               
               The Thames was frozen,1432 An, reg, 13. Great froſt that the Marchandiſe which came to the Thames mouth, was carried to London by land.
               
                  
                  
                     Thomas Catworth, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Robert Clopton, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Henry Frowicke Maior.
                  
               
               
                  An, reg, 14.
                  Charles of France recouered the citty of Paris, the towne of Hartflew, and S. Denis.
               
                  
                     Thomas Morſted, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     William Gregory, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Michael Fiſhmonger Maior.
                  
               
               
                  An, reg, 15. Part of London bridge fell.The gate on London bridge, with the tower vpon it next to Southwarke: fell downe, & the 2. furthe
                     •
                   arches of the ſaide bridge, and no man periſhed.
               
                  1437 An Alderman of London Warden of Norwich. An, reg, 16.King Henry put downe the Maior of Norwich, ſent the Aldermen ſome to Lyn, ſome to Canterbury, tooke their Franchiſes into his hand, and appointed Iohn Wels ſometime Maior of London to be Warden of Norwich.
               All the Lions in the Tower of London died.
               
                  
                     William Hales, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     William Chapman, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     VVilliam Eaſtfield Mercer Maior.
                  
               
               
                  1438 An, reg, 17This VVilliam Eaſtfield builded the water conduit in Fléetſtréete.
               
                  Owen Theodor fowly hurting his kéeper, brake out of Newgate, but was again taken afterward.
               This Owen (as was ſaide) had priuily married Quéene Katherne, late wife to Henry the fifth, and had foure children by her.
               
                  
                     Hugh Diker, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Nicholas Yoo, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Stephen Browne Grocer Maior.
                  
               
               
                  Great wind Three men ſlaine.A great minde in London almoſt blewe downe one ſide of the ſtréete called the old Change.
               A ſtack of wood fell downe at Bainards Caſtle, &

killed 3. men. By the fall of a ſtaire at Bedford,Eighteene men ſlaine. 1439 An, reg 18 Strumpets work ray hoods- where the ſhi
                     •
                  e day was kept 18. perſons were ſlain. Many ſtrumpets were ſet on the pillory and baniſhed the city, except they wore their ray hoods

                     
                        Philip Malpas, Shriue.
                     
                     
                        Roger Marſhall, Shriue.
                     
                     
                        Robert large Mercer Maior.
                     
                  
               
               It was ordained that all Marchant ſtrangers ſhould go to hoſt with Engliſhmen,Parliament at Reading & to make ſale of their Marchandiſes, and buy againe what they would within the ſpace of 6. months, giuing their hoſt for euery 20. s. worth 2. d. except the Eaſterlings. Alſo that euery houſholder that was an aliant ſhould pay to the King xvi. pence the yeare,Orders for ſtrangers. and euery ſeruant aliant vi. pence.
               Sir Rich VVich, Vicar of Hermetſworth in Eſſex, was burnt on Tower-hill the 17 of Iune.1440 The poſtern of London ſanke. An, reg, 19 The 18. of Iuly the poſterne of London by Eaſtſmithfield, againſt the Tower of London, ſanke by night.

                     
                        Iohn Sutton, Shriue.
                     
                     
                        William Wettinhall, Shriue.
                     
                     
                        Iohn Paddeſley Goldſmith Maior.
                     
                  
               
               A combate was fought at Tote hill betwéene two theeues,1441 A combate betweene 2 theeues. Roger Bolingbrooke for necromancy. Elianor Cobham apprehended. the appealer had the field of the defendant
               
                  Roger Bolingbrooke with Thomas Southwell, were taken as conſpirators of the kings death, for it was ſaid, that the ſame Roger ſhould labour to conſume the Kings perſon by way of necremancy.
               
                  Elianor Cobham Dutcheſſe of Gloceſter was cited to appeare before Henry Chichely Archbiſhop of Canterbury, to anſwer certaine matters of necromancy, witchcraft, ſorcery, hereſie, and treaſon, where (when ſhe appeared) the foreſaid Roger was

brought forth to witnes againſt her, and ſaid, that ſhe was the cauſe, & firſt ſtirred him to labour in that art. Then ſhe was committed to the ward of Sir Iohn Steward Knight.An, reg, 29. A Witch burnt. Then was taken alſo Margerie Gurdmain, a witch of Ely, whoſe ſorcery and witchcraft the ſaid Elianor had long time vſed, wherefore the ſame witch was burnt in Smithfield.

                     
                        William Combis, ſhriue.
                     
                     
                        Richard Rich, ſhriue.
                     
                     
                        Robert Clopton Draper Maior.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Elianor Cobham did penanceThe ninth of Nouember, dame Elianor appeared before the Arch-biſhop and others, and receiued penance, which ſhe performed. On the xvii. of Nouember ſhe came from the temple bridge, with a taper of waxe of two pound in her hand through Fléetſtréete to Paules, where ſhe offered her Taper at the Altar. On the wedneſday next ſhe went through Bridge-ſtréete, Grace-Church ſtréete to Leaden-hall, and ſo to Chriſt-Church by Algate. On friday ſhe went through Cheape to S. Michaels in Cornehill, in forme aforeſaid.
               
                  Roger Bolinbrooke executed.The 18. of Nouember, Roger Bolinbrooke was araigned, drawne from the Tower to Tiburne, and there hanged and quartered.
               
                  
                     Thomas Beaumont, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Richard Norden, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Athile Ironmonger Maior.
                  
               
               
                  An, reg, 21. 1443 Citizens of Norwich againſt the Prior. An, reg, 22.The Citizens of Norwich roſe againſt the Prior of Chriſts Church within the ſame City, & would haue flered the Priory: they kept the Towne by ſtrength againſt the Duke of Norffolke, & all his power, wherefore the King ſent thither the chiefe Iudge Iohn Forteſcue, with the Earles of Stafford

and of Huntington, who indited many Cittizens, and the Prior alſo.
               
                  
                     Nicholas Wyfford, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Norman, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Thomas Catworth Grocer Maior.
                  
               
               King Henry ſent into France Embaſſadours,1444 An, reg, 25 
                  W. de la poole Marques of Suffolke. Adam Molens, Robert Roes and others, to treate of a marriage betwéene King Henry, & Margaret the kings daughter of Cicill, and was concluded.
               
                  
                     Stephen Foſter, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Hugh Wich, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Henry Frowicke Mercer Maior.
                  
               
               On Candlemas eue in diuers places of England, was heard terrible thunders with lightning, wherby the Church of Baldeoke in Hartfordſhire the Church of Walden in Eſſex, & diuers others were ſore ſhaken. And the ſtéeple of S.Pauls ſteeple fired. 1445 Queene Margaret. An, reg, 24 Pauls in London, about 3. of the clock in the afternoone was ſet on fire in the midſt of the ſhaft, but by the labor of well diſpoſed people, the ſame was quenched.
               Lady Margaret landing at Porcheſter, went from thence by water to Hampton, from thence to the Abbey of Tich-field, and was there wedded to king Henry: ſhe was receiued at the Black-heath by the Citizens of London, riding on horſebacke, in blew gownes and red hoods.
               
                  
                     Iohn Derby, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Godfrey Filding, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Simon Eyre Draper Maior.
                  
               
               This Simon Eyre builded the leaden Hall in London,Leaden hall in London builded. to be a ſtorehouſe for graine & fewell (for poore of the Cittie) and alſo a beautifull Chappell

in the Eaſt end of the ſame.1436 An, reg, 25.
               
               
                  
                     Robert Horne, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Godfrey Boleine, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Olrey Mercer Maior.
                  
               
               In a Parliament at Bury in Suffolke,The Duke of Gloceſter areſted. 1447 An, reg, 26. 
                  Humphrey Duke of Gloceſter was areſted, where ſoone after he died: he was buried at S. Albones.
               
                  
                     William Abraham, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Thomas Scot, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Gedney Draper Maior.
                  
               
               
                  George Scanderbag alias Caſtriot.This yeare 1447. George Caſtriot, whom the Turkes in ſcorne called Scanderbeg, by fine policy, & warlike proweſſe recouered from Amurath his kingdomes left by his father, viz. the kingdoms of Epyris and Albania, auntiently called Macedon: he won by force alſo from the Turkes, many prouinces, cities, and ſtrong holds.
               
                  2448 An, reg, 27.An Engliſh Knight named ſir Francis de Aragonis tooke a towne of Normandy named Fogiers, againſt the truce: and this was the occaſion that after the Frenchmen gate all Normandy.
               
                  
                     Will
                           •
                        am Cantlow Shriue.
                  
                  
                     William Marow Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Stephen Browne Grocer Maior.
                  
               
               Roan was yéelded to the French King.
               
                  
                     William Hulin,
                  
                  
                     Thomas C
                           •
                        nings,
                  
                  
                     Thomas Chalton Mercer Maior.
                  
               
               
                  Biſhop of Chicheſter murdered. Blewheard hanged. 1450
                  Adam Molins Biſhop of Chicheſter kéeper of the kings priuy ſeale, was by ſhipmen ſlaine at portſmouth. Blewbeard a Fuller, taken beſide Canterbury, for raiſing a rebellion was hanged and quartered.
               
                  The Duke of Suffolke was baniſhed the land,Duke of Suffolke murthered. Iack Cade rebelled. who ſailing toward France, was met on the ſea by a ſhip of war, & beheaded: his corps was caſt vp at Douer. The commons of Kent in great numbers aſſembled on blacke Heath, hauing to their Captaine Iacke Cade, againſt whom the King ſent a great array, but by the ſaid captaine and rebels, they were diſcomfited, & ſir Humphrey Stafford, & William his brother, with many other ſlaine. After this victory the rebell came to London, entred the city, & ſtrake his ſword vpon London Stone, ſaying: Now is Mortimer Lord of this city. Vpon the 3. of Iuly hee cauſed the Lord Say to be arrained, and at the ſtandard in Cheape ſmot off his head: he alſo beheaded Sir Iames Cromer at the miles end: After this ſuccéeded open robbery within the city. But the Maior & others ſent to the Lord Scales, kéeper of the Tower, who promiſed his aide with ſhooting of Ordinance, & Matthew Gough was appointed to aſſiſt the Maior: ſo that the captaines of the Citie tooke vpon them in the night to kéepe the bridge, where betwéene them and the rebels was a fiery encounter. In concluſion the rebels got the draw-bridge, and drowned & ſpoiled many. This conflict endured till 9. of the clocke in the morning, in doubtfull chance: ſo that both parties agréed to deſiſt from fight till the next day, vpon condition, that neither Londoner ſhould paſſe into Southwarke, nor the kentiſhmen into London. Then the Archbiſhop of Canterbury & other paſſed to ſouthwarke, where they ſhewed a generall pardon for all offenders: whereupon the multitude retired home. The captaine fled through ye wild of Suffex,

and there was ſlaine.Iacke Cade ſlaine. Biſhop of Salisbury murdered. After this the King rode into Kent, where many were drawn and quartered. The 29. of Iune, William Biſhop of Salisbury, was by his owne Tenants ſhamefully murdered.
               
                  
                     Iohn Middleton, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     William Deere, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Nicholas Wyfford Grocer Maior.
                  
               
               
                  1451Souldiars made a fray againſt the Maior of London the ſame day that hee tooke his charge at Weſtminſter at night, comming from S. Thomas of Acres.
               
                  
                     Matthew Phillip, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Chriſtopher Warton, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     An, reg, 30. 1452
                     William Gregory Skinner Maior.
                  
               
               A commotion began by Richard Duke of Yorke and others, which was appeaſed for a time.
               
                  
                     Richard Lee, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Ralph Alley, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Godfrey Felding Mercer Maior.
                  
               
               
                  An, reg, 31. States created.King Henry made his two brethren on the mothers ſide, Edmond Earle of Richmond, and Iaſper Earle of Pembrooke.
               
                  1453 An, reg, 32The 12. of October, the Quéene was deliuered of a Prince named Edward.
               
               
                  
                     Iohn Waldren, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Thomas Cooke, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Norman Draper Maior.
                  
               
               
                  The Maior of London firſt rowed to Weſtminſter. 1454Before this time, the Maior, Aldermen, & commons were wont to ride to Weſtminſter, whe
                     •
                   the Maior ſhould take his charge, but this Maior was rowed thither by water.
               A great fire next without Ludgate, in a Cordwainers houſe, which Cordwainer, his wife, thrée

m
                     •
                  n and a maide, were all burnt.
               
                  
                     Iohn Field, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     William Taylor, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Stephen Foſter Fiſhmonger Maior.
                     An, reg, 33
                  
               
               This Stephen Foſter and Dame Agnes his wife builded the ſoutheaſt quadrant adioyning to Ludgate of the citty of London, & alſo conueied thereunto ſwéet water, ſufficient for the eaſe of the priſoners, he alſo gaue forty pounds to the preachers at Pauls Croſſe and Spittle.
               K. Henry came to S. Albons accompanied with the Dukes of Buckingham & Somerſet,1455 firſt battell in S. Albons ye Earles of Pembroke, Northūberland, Deuonſhire, Stafford, Dorſet & Wilſhire, with other to the number of 2000. The King pight his banner in S. Peters ſtréet, & the Lord Clifford kept his barriers of the town, ſo that the Duke of Yorke with his power, might in no wiſe enter: but the Earle of Warwick gathering his men together, brake in on the garden ſide in Holloway ſtréet, crying a Warwicke, & the duke of Yorke brake vp the barriers, & fought a fierce & cruell battell, in which was ſlaine on the Kings ſide, the Duke of Somerſet, the Earle of Northumberland, the Lord Clifford, and many other. This done, the Duke of Yorke, the Earles of Warwicke and Salisbury, brought the King to London, where by Parliament,An, reg, 34 the Duke was made protector of the realm, the Earle of Saliſbury Chancelor, & the Earle of Warwicke captaine of Calice.
               
                  
                     Iohn young, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Thomas Oldgraue, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     William Marrow Grocer Maior.
                     1456 An, reg, 35
                  
               
               The Duke of Yorke was diſcharged of the Protectorſhip.

A great ryot was committed is London againſt the Lumbards and Italians.
               
                  
                     Iohn Steward, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Ralph Verney, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Thomas Cancings Grocer, Maior.
                  
               
               
                  1457 Monſtroufiſhes.At Erith were taken 4. great fiſhes, whereof two were whales. Frenchmen landing at Sandwich, waſted the towne, & ſlew the inhabitants.
               
                  Priſoners of Newgate brake out. An, reg, 36.Sir Thomas Percy, Lord Egremount, & ſir Richard Percy his brother being priſoners in Newgate, brake out by night, & went to the King, other priſoners tooke the leads of the gate, & defended a long while againſt the Shriues, and all their officers.
               
                  
                     William Edward, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Thomas Reyner, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Godfrey Bolein Mercer, Maior.
                  
               
               A faigned agréement was made betwéene the King and the Duke of Yorke.1458 the Queens Atturney ſlaine. An, reg, 37.
               
               A fray in Fléetſtréet betwéene men of the Court, and the inhabitants of ye ſame ſtréet, in which fray the Quéenes Atturney was ſlaine: for this fact the K. committed the Gouernours of Furniuall, Clifford, and Barnards Inne to priſon, and William Taylour Alderman of that ward, with many other were ſent to Windſor Caſtle.
               
                  
                     Ralph Ioſſilin, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Richard Medtham, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Thomas Scot Draper, Maior.
                  
               
               
                  1459 Printing firſt inuented.The Science of Printing was found in Germany at Magunce. William Caxton of London, Mercer, brought it into England about the yeare 1471. and firſt practiſed the ſame in the Abbey of S. Peters at Weſtminſter.
               
                  The Duke of Yorke,Bloreheath field An, reg, 38 the Earles of Salisbury and Warwicke, with a great hoaſt met the K. and other Lords vpon Bloreheath, where becauſe Andrew Trolapa Captaine of Calice, the night before the battell ſhould haue béene fought, fled with the beſt ſouldiers to the King, the Duke of Yorke, the Earles of March, Salisbury, & Warwicke alſo fled without battell.
               
                  
                     Iohn Plummer, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Stocker, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     William Hulin Fiſhmonger, Maior.
                  
               
               The thrée Earles with a puiſſant armie met King Henry at Northampton,1460 Battell at Northampton. Duke of Yorke claimed the Crowne. & gaue him a ſtrong battell. In the end whereof the Kings hoaſt was diſperſed, chaſed & ſlaine, & the King taken in the field. The Duke of Yorke made ſuch claime to the Crowne, that by conſent of a Parliament, he was preclaimed heire apparant.
               
                  
                     Richard Fleming, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Lambard, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Richard Lee Grocer, Maior.
                  
               
               Quéene Margaret hauing gathered a company of Northren men neare to Wakefield, ſlewe Richard Duke of Yorke with his ſonne Edmond.
                  An, reg. 39 The Duke of Yorke ſlaine. The ſecond battell in S. Albons.
               
               On Shrouetweſday the Quéene with her retinue neare S. Albones, diſcomfited the Earle of Warwicke, and the Duke of Norfolke, and deliuered King Henry her huſband. In this battell were ſlaine 1926. perſons.Battell at Mortimers croſſe.
               
               
                  Edward Earle of March had a great battell againſt the Earles of Pembroke and Wilſhire at Mortimers croſſe, where hee put them to flight, and ſlew many of their people.
               
                  
                  The Earle of warwick fled from the King. The King & Queene fled to Yorke.The Earle of Warwicke fled from S. Albons to the Earle of March, & almoſt all the people of the South countries fell to him. King Henry with the Quéene, withdrew them towards Yorke.
               
                  Edward Earle of March came to London with a mighty power of March men, and accompanied with the Earle of Warwicke the 26. day of February, where he was ioyfully receiued. But many wealthy Cittizens not liking of theſe doings conueied themſelues out of the City, amongſt the which were Philip Malpas Alderman, Thomas Vaugham Eſquire, William Actlife with many other; who fearing the Quéenes comming to London, ſhipped towards Antwerpe: but by the way were taken by a French ſhip, and at length deliuered for great ranſome: it coſt Philip Malpas 4000.
                  
                  Edward Earle of March proclaimed King. pound. Edward being elected, was proclaimed by the name of Edward the fourth, on the 4. of March, and King Henry loſt his Kingdome when he had raigned 38. yeares, 6. moneths, and odde dayes.
            
            
               Edward Earle of March.
               
                  An, reg. 1.
                  
                     EDward Earle of March, began his raigne the 4. of March, by the name of Edward the 4. in the yeare 1460.
               
               
                  Walter Walker beheaded.The 12. of March Walter Walker, a Grocer that dwelt in Cheape, for words ſpoken touching K. Edward was beheaded. The 13. of March Edward tooke his iourney toward the North, where betwéene Shireburne and

Todcaſtle, all the North part met him,Battell on Palme Sunday. & on palme Sunday the 29. of March, fought a great battell, in which were ſlaine Henry Percie Earle of Northumberland, Iohn Lord Clifford, Iohn Lord Neuill, Leo Lord Welles, and many other of both parts, to the number of 357. and 11. perſons: but King Edward got the field. The Duke of Exceter, the Duke of Somerſet the Lord of Ros, the Lord Hungerford and many other fled to Yorke to K. Henry,
                  K. Henry fled into Scotland. and then they, with the King, Quéene and Prince, fled to Barwicke, and ſo to Edenbrough.
               
                  
                     George Ireland, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Locke, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Hugh Wich Mercer Maior.
                  
               
               
                  Faweonbridge Earle of Kent,1462 Conquer wonne. was appointed to kéepe the Seas with others, to the number of 10000. which landed in Britaine, & won the town of Conquer, with the Iſle of Keth, &c.
               
                  
                     William Hamton Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Bartholmew Iames, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Thomas Cooke Draper, Knight of the Bath. Maior.
                  
               
               Quéene Margaret landed in the North,An, reg, 3 1463 where hauing but ſmall ſuccour, was faine to take the ſea againe, and by tempeſt of weather was driuen to Barwicke, where ſhée landed, but loſt her ſhips and goods.
               
                  
                     Robert Baſſet, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Thomas Muſchampe, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Matthew Philip Goldſmith, Knight of the Bathe, Maior.
                  
               
               K. Henries power being at Hexham,An. reg. 4. 1464 Battell at Exham. the Lord Mountacute with a power encloſed them round about: there were taken & ſlaine many Lords that

were with King Henry, but he himſelfe was fled into Lancaſhire.
               
                  K. Edward married.King Edward tooke to wife Elizabeth daughter to Iaquite Dutches of Bedford, late wife to Sir Iohn Gray.
               
               
                  Coine enhaunced.The King changed the coine both gold and ſiluer, & ordained that the new groat wayed ſcantly 3. d. and that the noble of 6. s. 8. d. ſhould goe for 8. s. 4. d. &c.
               
                  Peſtilence, Seriants feaſt.A great peſtilence, and the Thames ouer frozen. In Michaelmas Tearme were made Serieants at Law, which held their feaſt in the Biſhop of Elies place in Oldburne, to the which feaſt, the Maior of London with the Aldermen being bidden, repaired, but when the Maior looked to be ſet to kéepe the ſtate in the hall, the Lord Gray of Ruthin, then Treaſurer of England was there placed, whereupon the Maior, Aldermen, and Commons departed home, and the Maior made all the Aldermen dine with him.
               
                  
                     Iohn Tate, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Stone, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Ralph Ioſſiline Draper, Knight of the Bathe Maior.
                  
               
               
                  New coine. An, reg, 5 1465A new coine was made, a Roſe-noble at 10. s. the halfe noble at 5. s. and the farthing 2. s. 6. d. an angelet 6. s. 8. d.
               
                  K. Henry the 6. takenKing Henry was taken beſide the Abbey of Sally in Yorkeſhire, from thence brough to Eſilton, and there areſted by the Earle of Warwick, Doctor Manning Deane of Windſor, Doctor Bedle, and young Elerton being in his company, were brought to the Tower of London. A licence was

granted to conuey certaine Coteſwoold ſhéepe into Spaine, which haue ſince greatly multiplied there.
               
                  
                     Sir Henry Wauer, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     William Conſtantine, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Ralph Verney Mercer, Maior.
                  
               
               Quéene Rlizabeth was deliuered of a daughter named Elizabeth.
                  An, reg, 7.
               
               
                  
                     Iohn Browne, Henry Brice, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Stocton, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Sir Iohn Young Grocer, Maior.
                  
               
               Many men were areſted, and treaſon ſurmiſed againſt them, many of them were put to death, & other eſcaped for great ſums of money. Amongſt the which ſir Thomas Cooke, ſir Iohn Plomar, Humphery Haward, and other Aldermen of London brought and charged with treaſon, and quit, notwithſtanding loſt of their goods to the King, the value of 40000. markes or more.
               
                  Anthony W
                        •
                     dnile, Lord Scales Iuſted in Smithfield with the baſtard Burgony, & had the victory.
               
                  
                     Thomas Stalkbroke, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Humphrey Hayford, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Thomas Olgraue Skinner Maior.
                  
               
               Sir Thomas Cooke Alderman of London,An, reg, 8. 1468 could not bee deliuered vntill hee had paied 8000. pound.
               
                  
                     Simon Smith, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     William Hariot, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     William Taylor Maior.
                     Cordwainer ſtreete diſcharged of fifteenes. An, reg, 9. 1469
                  
               
               This William Taylor gaue the Citty of London certain tenements, for the which the city is bound to pay for euer, at euery Fiftéene granted to the King, for all ſuch as ſhall dwell in Cord-waiuers

ſtréete ward, ſeaſed at 12. d. a péece, or vnder.
               The Earle of Warwicke adioyning himſelfe with the Duke of Clarence, the Kings brother, ſtirred the Northen men, that they diuers times rebelled, and turned the King and realme to great trouble, but in the end therebels were ſuppreſſed in a battell at Banbury.
               
                  
                     Richard Gardiner, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Robert Drope, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Richard Lee Grocer Maior.
                  
               
               
                  George Duke of Clarence, Iaſper Earle of Pembroke,An, reg, 10 1470 
                  Richard Earle of Warwicke, and the Earle of Oxford; ariued at Plimouth, and another ſort at Dartmouth, which all tooke their voyage toward Exceter, and then Northward.
               
                  K. Edward fled.King Edward fled from his hoaſt beſide Nottingham, and the third of October hee tooke ſhipping at Lin, & ſailed into Flanders. The 6. of October the Duke of Clarence, the Earle of Warwicke, the Archbiſhop of Yorke, the Lord of Saint Iohns, with others, entred the Tower of London, and King Henry being there priſoner,K Henry reſtored. they elected him to be their lawfull King, and forthwith rode with him through London to the Biſhops palace, where he reſted til ye 
                  14. of October, on which day he went a Proceſſion, crowned in Pauls Church.
               
                  
                     Iohn Crosby, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Ward, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Sir Iohn Crosby.
                     Sir Iohn Stocton Mercer Maior.
                  
               
               Sir Iohn Crosby late Shriue, builded Crosby place in London, hee gaue 300. Markes to the repairing his Parriſh Church of S. Helen, to poore houſeholders 30. pound, to the repairing of London

wall, and the Tower on London bridge, &c.Parliament at Pauls.
               
               A Parliament at Weſtminſter, from thence procéeded to Pauls, wherein King Edward was diſherited and all his children, and thereupon proclaimed Vſurper of the Crowne, and his Brother the Duke of Gloceſter traitors, and both attainted, during this Parliament.
               Sir Thomas Cooke then being one of the Knights of the Shire for London, being an excellent well ſpoken man, and of a profound wit, ſhewed the great wrongs and loſſes he had ſuſtained for his fidelitie to King Henry, and required reſtitution of 22000. Markes that hée had loſt by force of the ſaide wrongs, and alſo he caſting no perils, executed the vtmoſt of his wrongs againſt ſuch as hée knewe ba
                     •
                  e any fauour to King Edward, of which he repented full ſore afterward, and was faine to flie the land.
               King Edward landed at Rauenſport with a ſmall company of Souldiers,An, reg, 11. 1471 but by meanes of his brother the Duke of Clarence, who now returned to his part, he came to London, entred the Citty the 10. of Aprill, and tooke King Henry, and then went againſt the Earle of Warwicke, whom hee vanquiſhed and ſlew, with his brother Marques Montacute neare to Barnet, on Eaſter day. King Edward tooke his iourney Weſtward, where beſides Tewkeſbury, hee ouerthrew Quéene Margaret,
                  Barnetfield Battell at Tewksbury and tooke her priſoner, with Prince Edward her ſonne.
               
                  Thomas the baſtard of Fauconbridge with a riotous company of ſhipmen and others of Eſſex and Kent, came to London,Thomas the baſtard Knight. where being denied paſſage

through the Citty,Suburbs of Algate and Biſhops fired. he fired the gates, wann
                     •
                   the Bulwarkes at Algate, and entred the city, but the Citizens flewe ſuch as entred, cauſing the other to flie, purſued them as farre as Blackewall, ſlaying many.
               
                  King Henry the ſixth Murthered.King Henry was murthered in the Tower of London, and after buried at Chertſey, ſince remoued to Windſor.
               King Edward rode toward Kent, where he cauſed inquiry to be made of the foreſaid riotous perſons, hanged the rich by the purſe, and the other by the neckes. The Maior of Canterbury, with others, were beheaded there.
               
                  Thomas the baſtard of Fauconbridge was taken at Southampton, and beheaded.
               
                  
                     Iohn Allein, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Shelley, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     An, reg, 12. 1472 The Earle of Oxford & his Lady
                     William Edward Grocer, Maior.
                  
               
               The Earle of Oxford was ſent priſoner to Guines, where hee remained ſo long as the King raigned. In all which time the Lady his wife might neuer come to him, or had any thing, but what the people of charitie would giue her, 
                     〈◊〉
                   what ſhe gate with her néedle.
               
                  
                     Iohn Browne, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Thomas Bledlow, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Sir William Hampton Fiſhmonger Maior.
                  
               
               
                  An, reg, 13. 1473 Strumpets puniſhed.This Maior puniſhed many ſtrumpets, cauſ
                     ••
                   them to ride with gray hoods, & baniſhed them the city. He alſo cauſed ſtocks to be ſet in euery wa
                     ••
                  
                  ▪
                  
                     
                        William Stocker, Shriue.
                     
                     
                        Robert Billiſdon, Shriue.
                     
                     
                        Sir Iohn Tate Mercer, Maior.
                     
                  
                  
The Duke of Exceter was found dead in the ſea betweene Douer and Calice.An, reg, 14 1474
               
               
                  Iohn Gooſe was burnt on the Tower hill.
               
                  
                     Edmond Shaw, Shriue
                  
                  
                     Thomas Hill, Shriue
                  
                  
                     Robert Drope Draper, Maior.
                  
               
               This Robert Drope,
                  An, reg, 15. 1475 builded the Eaſt end of the conduit vpon Cornhill.
               King Edward ſailed into France with a great army to aide the Duke of Burgony, but by ſuit of the French King, a peace was concluded.
               
                  
                     Hugh Brice, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Robert Colwich, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Robert Baſſet Salter, Maior.
                  
               
               This Maior did ſharpe correction vpon Bakers for making light bread,An, reg, 16 Agnes Daintie ſet on the pillory. he cauſed diuers of them to be put on the pillory. Alſo one Agnes Daintie for ſelling of mingled butter.
               
                  
                     Richard Rawſon, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Willam Horne, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Ralph Ioſſilin Draper, Maior.
                  
               
               By the dilligence of this Maior,London wall repaired. the wall about London was newly repaired betwixt Creplegate and Algate.
               King Edward in his progreſſe hunted in Thomas Burdets Parke at a Bucke, and ſlewe many Déere, amongſt the which one was a white Bucke. Thomas Burdet, when hee vnderſtood thereof,An, reg, 17 1477 T. Burdet beheaded. wiſhed the Buckes head in his belly that moued the King to kill it. Burdet was apprehended, accuſed of treaſon, condemned, drawne from the tower of London to Tiburne, and there beheaded.
               
                  
                  
                     Henry Collet, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Stokes, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Humphrey Hayford Goldſmith Maior.
                  
               
               
                  An, reg, 18. 1478
                  George Duke of Clarence Edwards brother, in the Tower of London made his end in a But of Malmeſey.
               
                  
                     Robert Harding, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Robert Byfield, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Richard Gardiner Mercer Maior.
                  
               
               
                  An, reg, 19. 1479A great dearth, and alſo a great death was in London, and diuers other parts of this Realme.
               
                  
                     Thomas Ilam, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Ward, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Sir Bartholomew Iames Draper Maior.
                  
               
               
                  Great Conduit. Theeues hanged and burnt.This Thomas Ilam Shriue, newly builded the great Conduit in Cheape.
               Théeues for robbing Saint Martins le grand in London, three were drawne to the Tower hill▪ and there hanged and burnt, other two were preſſed to death.
               
                  
                     Thomas Daniel, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     William Bacon, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Browne Mercer Maior.
                  
               
               
                  An, reg, 21. 1481The Citizens of London lent the King 5000. Marks, which was repaired againe the next yeare following.
               
                  
                     Robert Tate, W. Wilking, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Richard Chawry, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     William Harriot Draper Maior.
                  
               
               
                  An, reg, 22. 1482The Scots began to ſtirre, againſt whom the King ſent the Duke of Gloceſter, & others, which returned without any notable battell.
               
                  
                  
                     William White, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Matthew, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Edmond Shawe Goldſmith Maior.
                  
               
               This Edmond Shawe newly builded Creplegate of London from the foundation,An, reg, 23. Creplegate builded. 1483 which gate in old time had béene a priſon, whereto the Citizens and others as were areſted for debt, and like treſpaſſes were committed.
               King Edward making great prouiſion for war into France, ended his life at Weſtminſter, the 9. of Aprill, Anno 1483.
                   when hee had raigned 22. yeares, one moneth, and odde daies, hee was buried at Windſor. He left iſſue, Edward the Prince,K. Edward deceaſed. and Richard Duke of Yorke, and 5. daughters, Elizabeth, that after was Quéene, Cicely Anne, Katherine, and Briget.
               
            
            
               Edward the fifth.
               
                  
                     EDward the 5. about the age of 13.
                  An, reg, 
                        •
                     . yeares began his raigne the 9. of Aprill, in the yeare 1483. which Prince raigned ſmal ſpace, either in pleaſure or libertie: for his vnnaturall Vncle, Richard Duke of Gloceſter within 3. moneths depriued him not onely of his Crowne, but alſo of his life (as was ſaid.) This Edward raigned two moneths and ten dayes.
            
            
               Richard the Duke of Gloceſter.
               
                  RIchard the 3. brother to Edward the 4.
                  An, reg, 1 L Riuers & others executed. was proclaimed K. the 22. of Iune in the yeare 1483. hee put to death Anthony Woduile
                  
Earle Riuers. Lord Richard Gray, the Quéenes brother, ſir Thomas Vaugham, & ſir Richard Hawes at Pomfret, and William Lord Haſtings in the Tower of London, all in one day.
               He was crowned at Weſtminſter on the 7. day of Iuly.
               After this were taken for Rebels againſt the King, Robert Rufe, Sergeant of London, Willia
                        •
                      Dauy Pardoner, Iohn Smith Groome of King Ed
                        •
                     wards ſtirop, and Stephen Ireland wardroper in 
                     〈◊〉
                   Tower, with many other, who were charged th
                     •
                   they had ſent writings into Britaine to the Earl
                     •
                   of Richmond, and of Pembroke, and alſo that they minded to haue ſtollen out of the Tower Prince Edward and his brother, for the which they we
                     ••
                   drawn from Weſtminſter to the Tower-hill, and there all foure beheaded.
               
                  
                     Thomas Norland, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     William Mattin, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Robert Byliſdon, Haberdaſher, Maior.
                  
               
               
                  Duke of Buckingham conſpired.Grudge began betwéene King Richard and 
                     •
                   Duke of Buckingham, inſomuch that the Du
                     ••
                   conſpired with diuers Noble men againſt hi
                     •
                   intending to bring into the land Henry Earle Richmond, as heire to the Crowne: for wh
                     •
                   conſpiracy the Duke of Buckingham was behe
                     ••
                  ded at Sariſbury.
               
                  Fire at leaden Hall. 1484 An, reg, 2.The 30. of December, was a great fire at l
                     •••
                  den Hall in London, where through was burn much houſing, and all the ſtockes for gunnes 
                     〈◊〉
                   other prouiſion belonging to the Citty.
               K. Richard began the high Tower at Weſtmin
                     •
                  ter.
               
                  
                  
                     Richard Cheſter, T. Britaine, Shriues.
                     Three Shriues & 3. Maiors in one yeare.
                  
                  
                     Ralph Auſtry, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Thomas Hill Grocer, William Stocker
                  
                  
                     Draper, Iohn Ward Grocer, Maiors.
                  
               
               This Thomas Hall builded the Conduite in Grace ſtréete.
               King Richard being lodged in the Citie of Lon
                  
                     •
                  on at the Wardrop, ſent for ſundry Aldermen, 
                     •
                  d head comoners of the Citty, & inſtanced them 
                     〈◊〉
                   lend him certaine ſums of money, vpon ſuffici
                  
                     •
                  t pledges, of the which perſons he had granted of 
                     •
                  me 100. li. ſome 100. ma. ſome 40. li. or 50. mar. 
                     〈◊〉
                   aſſigned a Chapplen named Chaterton, to deli
                  
                     •
                   the pledges, after the value of the ſums bor
                  
                     •
                  ned, whereof was parcell, an helment of King Edwards, with the garniſhing of gold, ſtone, and pearle, certaine cups of gold, alſo garniſhed with ſtone and pearle, and the twelue Apoſtles of ſiluer and guilt, garniſhing of his Chappell, &c. For the which kindneſſe ſhewed vnto him by the Cit
                  
                     •
                  ens, hee gaue vnto the Chamber of London a 
                     〈◊〉
                   cup with a couer of gold, garniſhed with cer
                  
                     •
                  ne Kalaxes, Diamonds and Pearle, the which 
                     •
                  s valued at an hundred marke, but the money 
                     〈◊〉
                   him thus borrowed, was neuer repaied by his 
                     •
                  yes, nor the pledges redéemed.
               
                  Colingborne Eſquier,Collingborne apprehended. was drawne from Weſt
                  
                     •
                  inſter to the Tower of London, and there on the 
                     〈◊〉
                   headed and quartered.
               Sir Roger Clifford Knight,1415 An, reg, 3 and one Forreſcue 
                  
                     •
                  re drawn through London, and at Saint Mar
                  
                     •
                  es le grand, Sir Roger would haue broke

from the Shriues and taken Sanctuary, but the Shriues tooke him againe: and had him to the Tower hill, where he was beheaded, and Forteſc
                        •
                     
                   had his pardon.
               
                  M. Earle of Richmond ariued.
                  Henry Earle of Richmond, Iaſper Earle of Pembrooke, his vncle, the Earle of Oxford, and many other Knights and Eſquires, with a ſmall company of Frenchmen, landed at Milford han
                     •
                   on the 6. of Auguſt, whoſe comming when it w
                     ••
                   heard of in Wales, diuers Noble men with the
                     •
                   retinue gathered to him in great number. And th
                     •
                   marching againſt King Richard at a village called Boſworth neare to Leiceſter,Battell at Boſworth. he met with his ene
                     •
                  mies the 22. of Auguſt, where betwéene them wa
                     •
                   foughten a ſharpe battell, in concluſion whereof, King Richard with diuers others were ſlaine and king Henry obtained a noble victory, and immedi
                     •
                  ately the Lord Stanley crowned him King of Eng
                     •
                  land in the field, with the crowne which was t
                     ••
                  ken of King Richards head. Richard was buried in the Gray Friars Church at Leiceſter, when he had held the crowne two yeares and two moneths.
            
            
               
               Henry Earle of Richmond.
               
                  
                     HEnry the ſeuenth borne in Pembrooke caſtle, began his raigne the 22.
                  An, reg, 1 of Auguſt, in the yeare 1485. Hee was a Prince of maruellous wiſedome, pollicie, iuſtice, temperance, and grauitie, and notwithſtanding many and great occaſions of trouble and warre, hee kept his Realme in right good order, for the which he was greatly reuerenced of forraine Princes.
               On the 22. of Auguſt,Parſon of S. Mildreds burnt. was a great fire in Bredſtréete of London, in the which fire was burnt the Parſon of S. Mildreds, and one other man in the Parſonage there.
               The ſweating ſickneſſe began the 21. of September, and continued to the end of October.Sweating ſickneſſe whereof died in London 2. Maiors and 4. Aldermen. Of the which ſickneſſe a wonderfull number died, and in London (beſides other) died Thomas Hill Maior, in whoſe place was choſen William Stocker, who likewiſe deceaſed about 7. dayes after, In which ſpace departed foure Aldermen. T, Ilam, R. Rowſon, T. Norland, and Iohn Stocker, and then was choſen Maior, Iohn Ward, who continued till the feaſt of Simon and Iude.
               
                  
                     Iohn Tate, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Swan, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Sir Hugh Brice Maior.
                  
               
               The 30. of October,Coronatiō Firſt Yeomen of the Guard. King Henry was crowned at Weſtminſter, he ordained a number of choſen archers to giue daily attendance on his perſon, whom he named Yeomen of the Guard.
               
                  
                  Ioue to the King. An, reg. 2.King Henry ſent vnto the Lord Maior of London, requiring him and his Citizens of a preſt of 6000. markes. Wherefore the Maior with his Brethren and Commons granted 2000. pound, which preſt was repaied againe the next yeare following.
               
                  Wheate & bay ſalt at a great price.Wheate was ſold for 3. s. the buſhell, and bay ſalt at the like price.
               The Croſſe in Cheape was new builded.
               
                  
                     Iohn Perciuall, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Hugh Clopton, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Henry Collet Mercer Maior.
                  
               
               
                  Iohn Perciuall being the Maiors Caruer, was by Hugh Brice late Maior, choſen Shriue of London for the yeare following.
               The king married Elizabeth the eldeſt daughter al Edward the fourth, by which meanes the two families of Yorke and Lancaſter were vnited.
               
                  K. Henry married. 1487 Stoke field by Francis Louel. An, reg. 3
                  Francis Louel and Humphrey Stafford rebelled in the North: which commotion was quieted by the Duke of Bedford: there was ſlaine Iohn Earle of Lincolne, the Lord Louell, Martine Swart, and other there aboue foure thouſand. This battel was ſought high to a village called Stoke.
               
                  Prince Arthur.On the twenty one of September Quéene Elizabeth brought foorth her firſt ſonne named Arthur.
               
               
                  
                     Iohn Fenkill, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     William Remington. Shriue.
                  
                  
                     William Horne Salter, Maior.
                  
               
               King Henry comming to London, made W. Horne Maior of London, and Iohn Perciuall Alderman,

Knights, betwixt Hornſey and Iſeldon.
               A preſt for the King, in the Citie of London of 4000. pound, and ſhortly after was another preſt of 2000. pound, which were both repaied againe the next yeare.
               
                  
                     William Iſaake, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Ralph Tinle
                           •
                        , Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Robert Ta
                           •
                        e Mercer Maior.
                  
               
               A taſke of the tenth peny of all mens goods and lands was granted to K.148
                        •
                      Earle o
                        •
                      North
                        •
                     mberland ſlane. An, reg, 5. 
                  Henry to aide the Duke of Britaine againſt the French King, through which taſke the commons of the North made all inſurrection, and ſlew the Earle of Northemberland, wherefore Iohn Achamber their Captaine, with other, were hanged at Yorke.
               
                  
                     William Capel, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Brooke, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     William White Draper Ma
                           •
                        or.
                  
               
               
                  Roger Shauelocke a Taylor within Ludgate of London, being a ma
                     •
                   of great wealth,1490 An, reg, 6. flew himſelfe, for whoſe goods was great buſines betwéene the Kings Alm
                     •
                  er, and the Shriues of London.
               
                  
                     H. Coote, 
                           •
                        . Reuil, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Hugh Pemberton, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Mathew Mercer Maior.
                  
               
               King Henry required a beneuolence,1491 Henry the Kings ſon borne. An, reg, 9. Conduit grace ſtreet. which was granted towards his iourney into France.
               
                  Henry the Kings ſecond ſonne, borne at Gréenwich the 22. of Iune.
               The Conduit in Grace ſtréet was begun to bee builded by the Excecutors of Thomas Hill, late

Maior.Dearth of corne. Wheate was ſold at London for twentie pence the buſhell.
               
                  
                     Thomas Wood, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     William Browne, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Hugh Clopton Mercer Maior.
                  
               
               This Hugh Clopton during his life a Batcheler, builded a ſtone bridge at Stratford vpon Anon.Stone bridge at Stratford vpon Anon. 1
                        •
                     92 An, reg 8.
               
               King Henry tooke his voyage into France with a great Army to aide the Britons againſt the French King.
               
                  
                     William Purchaſe▪ Shriue.
                  
                  
                     William Welbecke, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     William Martin Skinner Maior.
                  
               
               King Henry returned into England. Two Pardone 
                     •
                  s were ſet on the Pillory in Cornehill thrée market dayes, for forging of falſe pardons, and for that one of them had fained himſelfe to be a Prieſt, he was ſent to Newgate, where he died: the other was driuen out of London with ſhame enough.
               
                  1493 fray againſt the ſtilliard men.A riot made vpon the Eaſterlings or Stilliard men by Mercers ſeruants, and others of the City of London, for the which many of them were ſore puniſhed.
               
                  
                     Robert Fabian, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Winger, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Sir Ralph Auſtrie Fiſhmonger Maior.
                  
               
               This Ralph Auſtrie roofed with timber, & couered with lead the Pariſh Church of S. Martin in the Vintry, and alſo glazed the ſame Church, &c.
               
                  K. Henry feaſteth the Maior of London.King Henry holding his roial feaſt at Chriſtmas at Weſtminſter, on the twelfth day feaſted the Maior of London Ralph Auſtry and his brethren

the Aldermen & Commoners: after dinner he dubbed the Maior Knight, and cauſed him & his brethren to tary & behold the diſguiſings, & other diſports in the night following, ſhewed in the great hall, hanged with arras, & ſtaged all along on both ſides, which diſports being ended, the K. Quéene, and Ambaſſadors, and other States, being ſet at a Table of ſtone, 60. Knights & Eſquires ſerued 60 diſhes to the Kings meſſe, and as many to the Quéenes (neither fiſh nor fleſh) & the Maior with 24. diſhes to his meſſe of the ſame maner ſeruice, with ſundry wines in moſt plenteous wiſe: Finally, the King and Quéene being conueied into the Pallace, the Maior with his company, in barges returned, and came to London by the breake of the next day.
               Wheat was ſold at London at 6. d. the buſhell,1494 An, reg, 10 Salt and wheat at low price. Wine cheape. bay ſalt for 3. d. halfe peny. Nantwich ſalt for ſixe pence the buſhell, white herring for 6. s. the barrell, red herring at 3. s. the cade, red ſprats 6. d. the Cade, and Gaſcoine wine at 6. 
                  l. the tun.
               
                  
                     Nicholas Alwine, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Warner, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Richard Chaurie Salter Maior.
                  
               
               Sir William Stanley was beheaded on tower hill.
               White herring being good, were ſold for 3. s. 4. d. the barrell at London.
               
                  Perkin Warbecke arriued at Deale in Kent, where, when hee and his company, ſaw they could haue no comfort of the country,1495 Perkin Warbecke. they withdrewe to their ſhips againe, but the Maior of Sandwich with certaine commons of the countrey, vickered

with the reſidue that were vpon the land, and tooke aliue of them 169. perſons, who were hanged in Kent, Eſſex, Suſſex▪ and Norfolke.
               
                  
                     An, reg, 11.
                     Thomas Kneſworth, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Henry Somer, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Sir Henry Coliet Mercer Maior.
                  
               
               The 16. of Nouember was holden the Serieants feaſt at the Biſhops place of Ely in Holborne, where dined the King, Quéene, and all the chiefe Lords of England.
               
                  1496 Entercourſe An, reg, 12.In Aprill was concluded an amitie and entercourſe betwéene this land and the countrey of Flanders, &c. The Scots entred England, and by the ſetting on of Perkin Warbecke did much harme.
               
                  
                     Iohn Shaw, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Richard Haddon, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Sir Iohn Tate Mercer Maior.
                  
               
               
                  S. Anthonies in London.This Iohn Tate newly builded and enlarged S. Anthonies Church in London, a Colledge of a goodly foundation▪ with a frée Schoole, and certaine almes houſes for 
                     •
                  oore men.
               
                  Sir Reignald Bray, with others of the Kings Counſell, declared to the Maior of London, that the K. deſired to borrow of the Citizens 10000. li. The Maior deſired reſpite till the 5. day following, at which time was aſſembled at the Guildhall,A loane to the King. the common counſell, & thither came the forenamed ſir Reignald Bray with other of the Kings Councel, at which day with great ſubmiſſion and praier made vnto them to bee good meanes for the Citty vnto the Kings Grace: the commons laſtly

granted to lend vnto the King 4000. li. which of his Grace was well and thankfully accepted▪ and truly repaied.
               By meanes of a Parliament that was granted to the King,1497 Blackheath field. a commotion was made by the Commons of Cornewall, which vnder the leading of Iames Lord Audley, with Michel a Blackſmith, and other came to Blacke-heath, where the King met with them, diſcomfited and tooke their Captaines, there was ſlaine of the rebels about 300. and taken about 1500.
               
               The Lord Audley was beheaded on the Towerhill, the Blackſmith and Flamocke were hanged headed, and quartered at Tiborne.
               The King ſent an Army into Scotland vnder the Earle of Surrey, and the Lord Neuell, which made ſharpe warre vpon the Scots.Hailſtones 18. inches. An, reg, 13. Perkin beſieged Exceſter. In Bedfordſhire at the Towne of S. Néedes, fell hailſtones 18. inches about. Perkin Warbecke landed in Cornwall, went to Bodman, where being accompanied with thrée or foure thouſand men, hee proclaimed himſelfe King Richard the fourth, ſecond ſonne to Edward the fourth. From thence he went to Exceter and beſieged it, which Cittie was valiantly defended by the inhabitants, but many of the rebels being ſlaine, they withdrew them to Taunton, from thence Perkin fled to Bewdley, where he tooke ſanctuary, and was after taken and pardoned his life.
               
                  
                     Bartholmew Rede, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Thomas Windought, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     William Purchas Mercer Maior.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Perkin brought to London.
                  Perkin Warbecke was conueied vpon horſebacke through Cheap and Cornehill vnto the Tower of London, and from thence backe againe through Candlewick ſtréete to Weſtminſter with much wondring.
               
                  1498All the Gardens in Moore field, which had continued time out of minde, were deſtroyed, and of them was made a plaine field for archers to ſhoote in.

                     
                        Thomas Bradbury, Shriue.
                     
                     
                        Stephen Ienings, Shriue.
                     
                     
                        Sir Iohn Perciuaile Tailor Maior.
                     
                  
               
               
                  An, reg, 14. Faigned Earle of Warwicke.A Shoomakers ſonne was hanged at S. Thomas Watrings for naming himſelfe to be Edward Earle of Warwick ſonne to George Duke of Clarence, which Edward Earle of Warwicke, was then kept ſecret priſoner in the Tower of London.
               
                  1499 An, reg, 15 Wine, ſalt and wheate cheape.Gaſcoine Wine was ſold at London for 40. s. the tune.
               A Quarter of wheate 4. s. and bay ſalt 4. d. the buſhell.
               
                  
                     Iames wilford, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Richard Brond, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Nicholas Alwine Mercer Maior.
                  
               
               
                  Perkin Warbeck and Iohn a Water were executed at Tiborne.
               
                  The Earle of warwick beheaded.
                  Edward Plantagenet Earle of Warwicke ſonne to George Duke of Clarence, was beheaded at Tower hill. Shortly after Blewet & Aſtwood were hanged at Tiborne.
               
                  
                     Iohn Hawes, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     William Stede, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     William Remington Fiſhmonger, Maior.
                  
               
               
                  The King builded new his Manour at Shéene,1500 An, reg, 16. and named it Richmond. Hee alſo new builded Bainards Caſtle in London, and repaired Gréenwich.

                     
                        Laurence Ailmer, Shriue.
                     
                     
                        Henry Hede, Shriue.
                     
                     
                        Iohn Shaw Goldſmith Maior.
                     
                  
               
               The Maior cauſed his brethren the Aldermen to ride from the Guild-hall vnto the water ſide,An, reg, 17. when hee went to Weſtminſter to bee preſented in the Exchequer. He kept his feaſt in Guild-hall, whereas before the Maiors feaſt had béene kept in the Maiors houſe,Maiors feaſts in the Guilde hall. or in the Grocers or Tailors hall: He afterwards cauſed the Archhouſe, and other houſes of Office to be builded at the Guild-hall, where ſince the feaſts haue ben vſually kept. This Maior euery afternoone held a Court, and called before him matters, & redreſſed them without expence of money: hee was a man of ſharpe wit & bold ſpirit, by reaſon of the fauour he ſtood in with the King, Quéene, and other eſtates, inſomuch that hee was ſworne one of the Kings Counſell.
               The 14.
                  Prince Arthur married. 1502 of Nouember Prince Arthur was married in S. Pauls Church at London to Katherine daughter to Ferdinando King of Spaine, which Arthur the 2. of Aprill deceaſed at Ludlow, and was buried at Worceſter.
               The 25.
                  Iames King of Scots & Margaret the Kings daughter of England aſſured. of Ianuary at Pauls croſſe was publiſhed the aſſurance of Iames King of Scots, and of the Lady Margaret, eldeſt daughter to King Henry of England, in reioycing whereof Te Deum was ſung, bonefires made through the Citty,

and at 12. of the bonefires were ſet 12. hogſhead
                     •
                   of Gaſcoine to be drunke of all men freely.
               The dike called Turnmill brooke, and all the courſe of Fléete dike,Dikes of London cleanſed. An, reg, 18. and other, were ſo ſcou
                     ••
                   down to the Thaines, that boats and fiſh, & fewe
                     •
                   were rowed vp to Holborne bridge, as they had of olde time béene accuſtomed.
               
                  
                     Henry Kebel, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Nicholas Ninns, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Bartholmew Rede, Goldſmith Maior.
                  
               
               
                  Kings chappell at weſtminſter.The Chappell of our Lady at Weſtminſterd a Tauerne neare adioyning, were put downe, in which place a moſt beautifull Chappell is builded by King Henry the ſeuenth.
               
                  Queene Elizabeth died. Kings of England brethren to the Marchant Tailors.
                  Elizabeth Quéene of England died in childbed and was buried at Weſtminſter.
               King Henry the ſeuenth being himſelfe a bro
                     •
                  ther of the Tailors, and linnen Armorers in London, as diuers of his predeceſſors Kings before him had béene: (to wit) Richard the third, Ed
                        ••••
                     
                   the fourth, Henry the ſixth, Henry the fifth, H
                        •
                     
                   the fourth, and Richard the ſecond. Alſo Du
                     •
                   
                  11. Earles 28. and Lords 
                     
                        •
                     5. Hee now ga
                     •
                   them by this great Charter the Title of M
                     •••
                  chant Tailors, as a name of worſhip to end
                     •
                   for euer.
               The 8. of Auguſt, Iames the 4. King of Sco
                     •
                   married Margaret the eldeſt daughter to He
                        •
                     
                   the 7.
                  An, reg, 19 at Edenbrough.
               
                  
                     Chriſtopher Hawes, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Robert Wats, T. Granger, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Sir Willlam Capell, Draper, Maior.
                  
               
               
                  The 21. of Nouember at night, a perillous fire began vpon London bridge neare Saint Magnus Church, where 6. tenements were burnt. The 7. of Februry certaine houſes more conſumed with 
                     ••
                  e againſt S. Buttelphes Church in Thames ſtréet. The 29. of Ianuary began a Parliament at Weſtminſter. Edmond Dudley was ſpeaker for the Commons,An aide to the King. wherein was granted to the King of lands, 6. d. in the pound, and of goods valued ten marks 6. d. and ſo vpwards, which in all roſe to the quantitie of a Fiftéene.
               A new coine is ordained, that is to ſay, great 
                     •
                  nd halfe great, which bare but halfe faces,1504 An, reg, 20. A new coin & ſome greater of the value, 12. d. were coined.
               
                  
                     Robert Acheley, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     William Browne, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Winger Grocer Maior.
                  
               
               The priſoners of the Marſhalſey in Southwark 
                     ••
                  ake out,Priſoners brake out, 1505 An, reg, 11. and many of them being ſhortly after taken, were put to execution, eſpecially thoſe that 
                     ••
                  d laine for felony.
               
                  
                     Richard Shore, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Roger Groue, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Thomas Kneſworth Fiſhmonger Maior.
                  
               
               This Thomas Kneſworth builded the Conduit at Biſhopſgate,Conduit at Biſhopſgate he gaue to the Fiſhmongers certaine tenements, for the which they bee bound to finde foure ſchollers at Oxford, & at Cambridge, euery of them 4. pound the yeare. Alſo to giue to twentie aged poore people of their Company to euery of them a winter garment for euer. Alſo to giue the priſoners of Ludgate and Newgate,

euery yeare 40. s.
               
                  King of Caſtile landed. 1506 An, reg, 22.
                  Philip King of Caſtile, and his wife were w
                     ••
                  ther driuen into England as they were paſſing toward Spaine, who were honourably receiued 
                     〈◊〉
                   the Earle of Arundell.
               
                  
                     William Copinger, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Thomas Iohnſon, ſhriue.
                  
               
               Theſe Shriues being preſented before the 
                     ••
                  rons of the Exchequer, one William Copinger was admitted and ſworne, but Thomas Iohn
                        •
                     
                   was put backe, till they knew further of the Ki
                     ••
                   pleaſure. On the 10. of October, a commaun
                     ••
                  ment was brought from the King to the 
                     〈◊〉
                   Maior,Shriues & M
                        •
                     ior of London choſen by the Kings commandement. that he ſhould cauſe an election to be 
                     〈◊〉
                   for a new Shriue, at which day came into 
                     〈◊〉
                   Guild hall M. Edmond Dudley, the Kings P
                     ••
                  dent, and there ſhewed the Kings letters that 
                     〈◊〉
                   Commons ſhould name for the Kings pleaſ
                     •
                   
                  William Fitz William, Marchant Taylor, and 
                     ••
                  derman for the yeare enſuing, which with 
                     〈◊〉
                   difficultie was granted. This William fitz Wil
                        •
                     
                   for the Kings gracious fauour to bee Shriue 
                     〈◊〉
                   yeare, gaue to the King 100. pound in ready 
                     ••
                  ney, and hee was afterward of counſell to H
                        •
                     
                   the eight.
               Sir Richard Haddon Mercer, was alſo M
                     ••
                   by the Kings commandement.
               
                  Fire in Warwicke lane. 1507 An, reg, 23.
                  Sir Richard Haddon Mercer Maior.
               
               About Chriſtmas was a Bakers houſe in w
                     ••
                  wicke lane burnt, with the miſtreſſe of the ho
                     ••
                   and two women ſeruants.
               In Lent the King deliuered all priſoners

London, which lay for xl. s. or vnder.
               
                  
                     William Butler, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Kerkeby, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     William Browne Mercer Maior.
                  
               
               Who deceaſed the 22. of March,1508 An, reg, 24 and forthwith Laurence Ailmer Draper was elected and 
                     •
                  orne, he tooke his oath at the Tower, and kept 
                     〈◊〉
                   feaſt.
               This yeare Sir William Caple was commaun
                  
                     ••
                  d to ward by Empſon and Dudley,
                  Aldermen of London put in ſute. and put in 
                     •
                  it by the King for things by him done in his ma
                  
                     •
                  altie, for that (he was charged) that falſe mo
                  
                     •
                  y had come to his ſight, and had not done due 
                     •
                  uniſhment vpon the party that to him was ac
                  
                     •
                  uſed to be the coyner of it: but were this true or not, for that he would fall to no agréement, he was by Darby and Sympſon, and other of their compa
                  
                     ••
                  , whereof there was a Iury (bound to the 
                     ••
                  dles of Dudley and Empſon) indited, and af
                  
                     ••
                  r by Dudley put in priſon, ſome while in the 
                     ••
                  unter, ſome time in the Shriues houſe, while William Butler was Shriue, and then deliuered vnto Thomas Exmew, and foraſmuch as he would not agrée to pay the King 2000. li. was commanded to the Tower, where he lay, till at length hee was let goe free.
               Alſo Thomas Kneſworth that had béene Maior, and his Shriues Robert Shore, and Roger Groue, were ſent to the Kings Bench, vnder the cuſtodie 
                     〈◊〉
                   Sir Thomas Brandon, where they were put to their fine of 2000. pound.
               The Citty of Norwich was ſore periſhed, and

neare conſumed with fire,Norwich burned. for (as ſome haue wri
                     ••
                  ten) there was more then 160. houſes conſumed with moſt part of their goods.
               
                  Stephen Genings Maior, Marchant tailour by the Kings letters for his election.
               
               
                  
                     Thomas Exmew, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Richard Smith, Shriue.
                  
               
               This Stephen Genings founded a free Gra
                     ••
                  mer Schoole at Woluerhampton in Sta
                     ••
                  ſhire, &c.
               
                  1509 Hoſpitall of Sauoy.This yeare was finiſhed the goodly Hoſpitall of the Sauoy néere vnto Charing Croſſe, whi
                     ••
                   was a notable foundation for the poore, done by King Henry the ſeuenth, vnto the which bee pur
                     •
                  chaſed lands for the relieuing of 100. poore people. More by Indenture ſeptipartite, dated the 19. yeare of his raigne, he eſtabliſhed thrée Monkes▪ Doctors, or Batchelors of Diuinitie to ſing, and to preach in Weſtminſter Church diuers fea
                     ••
                   and euery Sonday for euer.Sermons founded. An anniuerſary yearly of 20. li. to be diſtributed to the poore by 2. 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   péece, to 13. poore men, and 3. poore women, founded by him in an almes houſe for the ſame poore men & women, prouided in the ſaide Monaſtery 12. d. a yeare. Alſo a wéekely obit, and each of th
                     ••
                   to giue to 140. poore people, each one a peny. Eig
                     ••
                   brethren conuerſes, to bee found meate, drink
                     •
                   cloathing & lodging for euer. Thrée ſchollers 
                     〈◊〉
                   kept at the Vniuerſitie, 10. li. the yeare to each 
                     〈◊〉
                   euer. The 13. poore men one to bee a Prieſt ag
                     ••
                   
                  45. yeares, a good Gramarian, the other 12. to 
                     〈◊〉
                   aged 50. yeares, euery Saturday the Prieſt 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
receiue of the Abbot or Prior, foure pence the day, and each other two pence halfe peny the day for euer, for their ſuſtenance, and euery yeare to each 
                     ••
                  e a gowne, and a hood ready made, and to 3. women to dreſſe their meate, and kéepe them in their 
                     〈◊〉
                  , each to haue euery Saturday 16. d. and 
                     •
                  uery yeare a gowne ready made: more to the 13. 
                  
                     ••
                  re men yearely 80. quarters of coales, & 1000. 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   good fagots to the vſe of their hall, and kitchin 
                     〈◊〉
                   their manſion. A diſcréete Monke to be ouerſéer to them, to haue 40. s. the yeare, &c. And to this 
                     〈◊〉
                   Abbot and Prior to be ſworne.
               King Henry died at Richmond the 22. of Aprill,Henry the ſeuenth deceaſed. 
                  
                     •
                  hen he had raigned 23. yeares, and 8. moneths, 
                     •
                  nd was buried at Weſtminſter, in the new chappell which he cauſed to be builded. Hee left iſſue Henry Prince of Wales, which ſuccéeded in the kingdome, Lady Margaret Quéene of Scots, and lady Mary, promiſed to Charles King of Caſtile.
            
            
               Henry the eight.
               
                  
                     HEnry the eight at the age of eightéene yeares began his raigne the two and twentieth of Aprill.An, reg. 1. The King married & crowned. 
                  Anno 1509.
                   Of perſonage hee was tall and mighty, in wit & memory excellent. The 3. of Iune he married la
                  
                     •
                  y Katherine his firſt wife: who had béene late wife 
                     〈◊〉
                   Prince Arthur deceaſed. On midſomer day the 
                     •
                  ing & Quéene were crowned at Weſtminſter.
               
                  
                  
                     George Monex, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Dogget, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Thomas Bradbury Mercer, the 18. of October.
                  
                  
                     Sir William Capell Draper, the 12. of Ianuarie, Maiors.
                  
               
               Sir Richard Emſon Knight, and Edmond Dudley Eſquire,1510 Emſon & Dudley executed. An. reg. 2. who had bene great Counſellors to Henry the ſeuenth, were beheaded on Tower hill, th
                     •
                   
                  18. of Auguſt. This Edmond Dudley in time of his impriſonment, compiled a Booke intituled the 
                     〈◊〉
                   of Common wealth.
               
                  
                     Iohn Milborne, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Reſt, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Henry Kebel Grocer Maior.
                  
               
               This Henry Kebel builded Aldermary Church in London, and did many other workes of chariti
                     •
                   in his life.
               
                  Henry the Kings firſt ſonne was borne on Ne
                     •
                   yeares day, but died on S. Matthewes day n
                     •
                   following.
               
                  
                     1511 An, reg, 3.
                     Nicholas Shelton, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Thomas Mirfyn, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     1512 An, reg. 4.
                     Roger Acheley Draper Maior.
                  
               
               The Nauies of England and France mée
                     •
                   at Britaine Bay, fought a cruell battell, in wh
                     •••
                   the Regent of England, and a Caricke of Fra
                     ••
                   being grappeled together were burned, and the Captaines with their men all drowned, the Eng
                     •
                  liſh Captaine was Sir Thomas Kneuet, who
                     •
                   with him 700. men. In the French Carike, 
                     〈◊〉
                   Sir Piers Morgan, with xi. hundred men.
               
                  Iohn Collet Deane of Paules, erected one 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
Schoole in Pauls Churchyard in the year
                     •
                   1512 for poore mens children to be taught frée, &c.Paules Schoole.
               
               
                  
                     Robert Holdernes, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Robert Fenrother, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     William Copinger, Fiſhmonger Maior.
                  
                  
                     Sir Richard Haddon Mercer Maior.
                  
               
               The ſtéeple and the lanterne on Bow Church in Cheape, was this yeare finiſhed.Bow ſteple builded.
               
               In Iune the King with a great army in perſon went into France,1513 An, reg, 5 Turwin & Turney won. Scots field at bramſton called Floden field. and there conquered Turwin the 22. of Auguſt, and tooke the Citie of Turney by appointment, the 29. of of September.
               In this time Iames king of Scots inuaded this land with a mighty army, but by the diligence of the Quéene, with the policy and manhood of the Earle of Surrey, the Kings Lieuetenant, he was himſelfe ſlaine at Bramſtone with 3. Biſhops, 3. Abbots, 12. Earles, 18. Lords, beſides Knights & Gentlemen, & eightéene thouſand Scots, and all the ordinance & ſtuffe taken the 9. of September.
               
                  
                     Iohn Dawes, Iohn Bridges, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Roger Basford, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     William Browne Mercer, Maior.
                  
                  
                     Sohn Tate Mercer. Maior.
                  
               
               The ſeuenth of Auguſt peace was proclaimed betwéene the King of England & France during their liues.1514 An, reg, 6.
               
               All the hedges within one mile of London euery way were pulled downe,All fields laid open about London. and the ditches filled vp in a morning by a number of yong men, Citizens of London, becauſe thoſe incloſers had béene hinderance to their ſhooting.
               
                  In October a marriage was made betwéene Lewis the 12. King of France, and Lady Mary the Kings ſiſter of England.
               
                  
                     Iames Yerford, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Munda
                           •
                        , Shriue.
                  
                  
                     George Monox Draper Maior.
                  
               
               This George Monox repaired the pariſh Church of Waltham-ſtowe in the County of Eſſex, and founded there an almes houſe for the poore men and women, and a frée ſchoole for children.
               
                  Richard Hunne a Marchant Tailor of S. Margarets pariſh in Brigeſtréete,Richard Hunne hanged. who had béene put in the Lollards Tower about the ende of October, was now the 5. of December, found hanged in the ſaid Tower, and after burned in Smithfield.
               
                  1515 An, reg, 7.On New yeares Euen died the French K. Lewis the 12. And the 9. of Aprill a n
                     •
                  w peace was concluded betwéene the King of England, and Frances the new King of France.
               In the moneth of May Charles Duke of Suffolke,Duke of Suff
                        •
                     lke m
                        •••
                     ed. Lady Mary the Kings daughter. 1516 An, reg, 8. 
                  
                     ••
                  dded the Lady Mary the kings ſiſter, late Quéene of France.
               
                  
                     Henry Worley, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Richard Gray, W. Baily, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     William Butler Grocer Maior.
                  
               
               Lady Mary King Henries daughter was borne at Gréenewich on the xi. of February.
               
                  Margaret Quéene of Scots, King Henries eldeſt ſiſter, who had after the death of her firſt huſband (Iames King of Scots ſlaine at Bramſton) married Archibald Douglas Earle of Anguiſh, fled into England,Queene of Scots fled. and lay at Harbottle, where ſhee was

deliuered of a child called Margaret.
               
               
                  
                     Thomas Seimer, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Th
                           ••
                        ſton, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Roſt Grocer Maior.
                  
               
               The Thames was frozen,Great froſt 1517 An, reg, 9. This was called the ill May day many years after. that men with horſe and carts might paſſe betwixt Weſtminſter and Lambeth.
               On May euen was an inſurrection of young perſons and apprentiſes of London againſt Aliens, of the which diuers were hanged, with their Captaine Iohn Lincolne a Broker, the reſidue to the number of 400. men, and 11. women tied in ropes all along, one after another in their ſhirts, came to Weſtminſter hall with halters about their neckes and were pardoned.
               
                  Margaret Quéene of Scots returned into Scotland, to the Earle of Anguiſh her huſband.Queene of Scots returned.
               
               
                  
                     Thomas Baldry, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Ralph Simon, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Sir Thomas Exmew Goldſmith Maior.
                  
               
               Many dyed in E
                     •
                  gland of the ſweating ſickneſſe, & eſpecially about London,1518 Sweating ſickneſſe. wherefore Trinitie tearme was one day at Oxford, and then adiourned to Weſtminſter.
               The Cittie of Turney was deliuered to the French King.An, reg, 10
               
               
                  
                     Iohn All
                           •
                        n, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Iames Spencer, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Thomas Mirſine Skinner Maior.
                  
               
               The Earle of Surrey was ſent into Ireland,1519 An, reg, 11. as 
                     〈◊〉
                   there, and the Earle of Kildare was 
                     〈…〉
                   of that office.
               
                  
                  Cardinall Campaius.In Iuly Cardinall Campaius came into England from the Pope, to exhort King Henry to make warres on the Turkes.
               
                  
                     Iohn Wilkinſon, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Nicolas Partridge, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Sir Iames Yarfords, Mercer, Maior.
                  
               
               
                  1520 An, reg, 12.As K. Henry was at Canterbury with the Quéene in readineſſe to haue paſſed the ſea, he heard of the Emperour Charles cōming, with whom he met at Douer, & accompanied him to Canterbury, where after the Emperour had ſaluted the Quéene his aunt,King Henry went to Calice. hee tooke ſhipping into Flanders. The laſt day of May King Henry paſſed ouer to Calice, and met with Francis the French King at the Campe betwéene Arde and Guines, where were many great triumphs and goodly ſights. Imediately after hee met with the Emperour, with whom hee went to Grauelin, and the Emperour returned with him to Calice, where he had great cheare.
               
                  
                     Iohn Skenington, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Kyeme ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Sir Iohn Burges Draper Maior.
                  
               
               The 27. of May was Edward Duke of Buckingham beheaded.
               
                  1521 An, reg, 13 The King made defender of the Faith. Alms houſes by the Crotchet Friars.King Henry wrote a booke againſt Luther, and therefore the Biſhop of Rome named him defender of the Faith.
               
                  
                     Iohn Britane, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Thomas Pergetter, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Sir Iohn Milborne Draper Maior.
                  
               
               This ſir Iohn Milborne builded certaine almes houſes adioyning to the Crotched friers church in

London, wherein he placed 14. aged poore people.
               The 6. of March the French King attached all Engliſhmens goods.Frenchmen attached. And all Frenchmens bodies and goods were attached at London.
               
                  Charles the 5. Emperour, came into England,1522 An, reg, 14 The Emperour came to London. & was honorably receiued into London by ye Maior Aldermen, & commons of the City the 6. of Iune, the King accompanying him: from thence he went to Windſor, and ſate in the Stall of the Garter. After great feaſts, iuſtes, and honourable entertainment, hee departed to Hampton, and ſailed from thence into Spaine.
               During this time the Earle of Surrey, Lord Admirall, burnt Morles in Britaine, not long after entred Picardy & burnt diuers towns & caſtles

                     
                        Iohn Rudſtone, Shriue.
                     
                     
                        Iohn Champneis, Shriue.
                     
                     
                        Sir Iohn Munday Goldſmith Maior.
                     
                  
               
               The Lord Roſſe, & the Lord Dacres of the North burned the towne of Kelſey in Scotland, with 80. villages, and ouerthrew 18. Towers of ſtone.
               The Emperour Charles, King Henry, & Ferdinando Duke of Auſtrich, the Pope, the Cittie of Venice, and diuers others in Italy, were confederate againſt the Frenchmen.
               The Turks beſieged the Ile of Rhodes,The Turks tooke the Rhodes. 1523 & on Chriſtmas day tooke it, to the rebuke of Chriſtendome, for their diſſention and negligence.
               The Earle of Surrey burned 37. villages in Scotland, diſpoiled the Countrey from the Eaſt Marches to the Weſt.Parliament at the black Friars.
               
               A Parliament at the Blacke Friars in London,

wherein was granted a great Subſidy.
               
                  Chriſt
                        •
                     en King of Denmarke and his Quéen
                     •
                   arriued at Douer, the 22. of Iune. came to London,An, reg, 15 The King of Denmark arriued. and were lodged in the Biſhop of Bathe
                     •
                   place. The Duke of Suffolke was ſent into France with an army of 10000. men, who paſſing the water of Some without battaile, tooke diuer Townes and Caſtles.
               
                  
                     Michael Engliſh, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Nicholas Ienings, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Sir Thomas Baldry Mercer Maior.
                  
               
               
                  Conſpiracy at Couentry 1524 An, reg, 16.In December at the Citty of Couentry, Fra
                        ••
                     cis Philip, Chriſtopher Pickering, and Anthon
                        •
                      Mainyle intended to haue taken the Kings trea
                     •
                  ſure of his ſubſidie, as the ſame came toward
                     •
                   London, therwith to haue raiſed men, and to haue taken the caſtle of Killingworth, and then to h
                     •••
                   made battell againſt the King, for the which they were drawen, hanged, and quartered at Tiborne, the other of their conſpiracy were executed at Couentry.
               
                  
                     Ralph Dodmer, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     William Roch, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Sir William Baoly Draper Maior.
                  
               
               
                  1525The 9. of March was great triumph made in England, for the taking of the French King before the Citty o
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  auie.
               
                  Priories ſuppreſſed. Greenwich to wer builded.Cardinall Wolſey obtained licence of the Pope to ſurpr
                     •
                  ſie certaine ſmall Priories, to the intent to erect two Colledges at Oxford and Ipſwich. The Tower of Greenwich was builded.
               A truce betweene England and France.
               
                  
                  
                  
                     Iohn Caunton, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Chriſtopher 
                           •
                        skew, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Sir Iohn Allen Mercer Maior.
                  
               
               The xi. of February foure Marchants of the Stilyard did penance at Paules, & Doctor Barnes bare a fagot.
               This yeare 1526. Charles
                   the ſonne of Gilb
                        •
                     rt Earle of Moun
                     •
                  penſier,1526 Rome taken and ſacked by the duke of Burbon. who not long before had married the Lady Iane, ſole heire to the Dutchy of Burbon, in whoſe right hee was Duke of Burbon, vpon priuate diſcontent reuolted from his King Charles the 8. and then ſerued vnder the Emperour, & the King of England, and after that the ſaid Duke the yeare aforeſaid beſieged Rome & ſackt it, did great ſpoiles & extremities vnto the Cleargy, forced the Pope to flie into Caſtle-Angelo, but himſelfe was there ſlaine by a Friar, with the ſhot of a Caliuer.
               The 6. of September was proclamation for gold, the French Crowne 4. s. 6. d. The Angell 7. s. 6. d. The Royall 11. s. 3. d. &c.
               
                  
                     Stephen Pecocke, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Nicholas Lambert, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Sir Thomas Seymer Mercer Maior.
                  
               
               In Nouember, December, & Ianuary,1527 An, reg, 19. Extreame raine and drought. fell ſuch raine, that thereof enſued great floods, which deſtroied corne fields, paſture, & beaſts. Then was it dry till the 12. of April, & from that nime it rained euery day and night till the 3. of Iune.
               Such ſcarſitie of bread was at London, and all England, that many died for default thereof.Great famine.
               
               The bread carts comming from Stratford towards London, were met at the Miles end by

the citizens, ſo that the Maior & Shriues were forced to goe & reſcue the ſame, & to ſée them brought to the markets appointed. Wheate was then at xv. s. the quarter. Shortly after the Marchants of the Stilyard, brought from Danſke ſuch ſtore of wheate & rye that it was better cheape at London, then in any other part of the Realme.
               
                  
                     Iohn Hardie, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     William Hollis. Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Sir Iames Spencer Vintner, Maior.
                  
               
               A French Craer of 30. tun, being manned with 38. Frenchmen, and a Flemiſh Craer of 27. tun, and 24.
                  1528 An, reg, 20. A ſhip chaſed to the Tower wharfe. Flemings, méeting at Margate, the one chaſed the other along the Riuer of Thames to the Tower-wharfe of London, where Sir Edmond Walſingham Lieutenant of the Tower ſtaied them, and tooke their Captaines and men.
               The xvii. of Iune, the terme was adiourned till Michaelmas,Sweating ſickneſſe. becauſe of the ſweating ſicknes that then reigned, & there was no ſuch watch in London at Midſomer, as before had béen accuſtomed.
               
                  
                     Ralph Warren, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Long. Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Sir Iohn Rudſtone Draper, Maior.
                  
               
               
                  1529 An, reg. 21. Cardinall Woolſey.In April, May, Iune, & Iuly, Cardinal Campaius, with Cardinal Woolſey, ſate at the Blacke friars in London, where before them was brought in queſtion the kings mariage with Quéene Katherine, as to be vnlawfull: but they long time protracted the concluſion of the matter, which delay King Henry tooke very diſpleaſantly.
               Cardinal Campaius departed towards Rome,

and ſhortly after Cardinall Woolſey was diſcharged of the Chancellorſhip, and the king ſeiſed all his goods, with his palace at Weſtminſter, called Yorke palace, into his hands.
               
                  Sir Thomas Moore was made Chancellor of England.
               
                  
                     Michael Dormer, Shriues.
                     Sir Thomas Moore made Chancellor. New teſtament printed.
                  
                  
                     Walter Champion, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Sir Ralph Dodmer, Mercer, Maior.
                  
               
               
                  William Tindall tranſlated the new Teſtament into Engliſh, & printed the ſame beyond the ſeas.
               A peace was agreed betwéene King Henry of England, the Emperour, the Frence King, the King of Boheme, and Hungary.
               In the moneth of October the King came to the blacke Friars, and began there a Parliament.Parliament at Blacke Friars.
               
               King Henry commanded the Biſhops to call in Tindals tranſlation of the new Teſtament,1530 An, reg, 23 Suit to the Court of Rome for bidden. and to ſée another truly tranſlated, to be ſet forth.
               King Henry vpon occaſion of delay made by the Pope in his controuerſie of diuorſment, cauſed proclamatiō to be made, forbidding all his ſubiects to purchaſe any thing from the Court of Rome.
               The plague of peſt, being hot in the Cittie of London, blew croſſes called Per ſignum Tau,
                  Peſt in London. were commanded to bee ſet ouer the doores of houſes infected.
               It was proclaimed, that no Gaſcoine wine ſhould be retailed aboue 8. d. the Galon. Alſo that taules calued betwixt the firſt of Ianury, and the firſt of May, ſhould not be killed, but reared vp.

                     
                        William Dancy, Shriue.
                     
                     
                        Richard Choping, Shriue.
                     
                     
                        
                        Sir Thomas Pargetor Salter Maior.
                     
                  
The Cardinall being conuict of a premunire was areſted by the Earle of Northumberland, deliuered to the Earle of Shrewſbury,Cardinall Wolley died. and brought to Leiceſter Abbey, where he deceaſed the 29. of Nouember, and was there buried.
               
                  Cleargy in the premunire K Henry ſupreame head.The whole Cleargy of England being iudged to be in the premunire, in their conuocation concluded a ſubmiſſion, wherein they called the King ſupreame head of the Church of England, and were contented to giue the King 100000. pound to pardon their offence.1531 A Cooke boyled. An, reg, 23.
               
               
                  Richard Riſe a Cooke was boiled in Smithfield for poyſoning diuers perſons at the Biſhop of Rocheſters place.
               The xi. of Aprill vii. men with their horſes, and a Ferriman,Thomas Bilney burned. were all drowned at Lambeth.
               
                  Thomas Bilney was burned at Norwich.
               
                  
                     Richard Greſſam, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Edward Altam, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Sir Nicholas Lambert Grocer Maior.
                  
               
               In the moneth of Nouember, a Serieants feaſt was held at Ely houſe in Holborne. Looke more in the Suruey of London.
               
                  1532 An, reg, 24. Monſtrous Fiſhes. The cleargy ſworne.The 25. of May was taken betwéene London and Gréenewich two great Fiſhes, called Hurl
                     •
                  
                  pooles.
               The oath which the Clergy had vſed to make to the Biſhop of Rome, was made voide by ſtatute, and a new oath confirmed, wherein they confeſſed the King to be ſupreame head.
               Sir Thomas Moore after ſuite made, was

diſcharged of the Chancellorſhip.Sir Thomas Moore diſcharged T. Audley Lord chancellor Coiners executed. The firſt Duke of Florence.
               
               
                  Thomas Audley Knight made Lord Chancellor. Fiue men were hanged, and quartered at Tower hill, for coyning and clipping.
               This yeare 1532. Alexander
                   ſonne of Lawrence of Medicis, Duke of Vrban, was by the ſpeciall ſauour of his vncle, Pope Clement the 7. made the firſt Duke of Florence. By the aduice of his vncle, he gouerned his countrey, and exerciſed great iuſtice vpon his people, ſate perſonally in the ſeate of iudgement, and gaue ſentence, whereby he gained high eſtimation: hee married the Emperours daughter, and had no iſſue, but in the end hee inclined to luſt, offered violence vnto modeſt Ladies. And for his reward his kinſman Lawrence ſlew him by treaſon. Anno. 1537.
                   After him ſuccéeded Goſmo de Medicis, who tooke wa
                     •
                  ning by the others folly, and gouerned his people very peaceably, and did many acts worthy of memory: he builded a colledge in Piſa, for the aduancement of poore mens children.
               The King ſuppreſſed the Priory of Chriſtchurch in London, and gaue their Church,Chriſt Church ſuppreſſed. place & lands to Sir Thomas Audley.
               
               The xix.Tower of London repaired. of Auguſt William Warham Archbiſhop of Canterbury deceaſed. The King repaired the Tower of London. Lady Anne Bullein was made Marchiones of Pembroke. King Henry went to Calice, and ſo to Bulletin, where hee met with the French King.
               
                  
                     R. Rainold, N. Pichon, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Martin, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     
                     Sir Stephen Pecocke Haberdaſher Maior.
                  
               
               The 12. of Aprill being Eaſter euen, the Lady Anne Bolein, who had béene priuily married to K. Henry,
                  1538 An reg, 25. Queene Annecrowned. Prince Arthurs widdow. Beefe and mutton ſold by waight. was proclaimed Quéene of England, and on Whitſonday with ſolemnitie crowned at weſtminſter. The 5. of Iuly Quéene Katherine was proclaimed Prince Arthurs widow.
               It was enacted that Butchers ſhould ſell their béefe and mutton by waight, béefe for an halfe peny the pound, and mutton thrée farthings: at that time fat oxen were ſold for 26. s. 8. d. the péece, fat weathers for 3 s. 4. d. the péece, fat Calues the like price, a fat lambe for twelue pence. The Butchers of London ſold peny péeces of béefe for the reliefe of the poore, euery péece two pound and a halfe, ſometime thrée pound for a peny, and 13. ſometime 14. of thoſe péeces for twelue pence, mutton 8. d. the quarter, and an hundred weight of béefe for 4. s. 8. d.
               
                  Lady Elizabeth borne.The 7. of September betwéene the houres of 3. & 4. of the clocke in the afternoone, was the Lady Elizabeth, daughter to K. Henry, borne at Gréenwich, and there chriſtened in the Fryars Church.
               
                  
                     William Forman, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Thomas Kitſon, ſhriue.
                  
                  
                     Sir Chriſtopher Asken Draper Maior.
                  
               
               A great fiſh was taken at Blacke wall, which was brought to Weſtminſter to the King.
               
                  The holy maide of Kent.The 20. of Aprill Elizabeth Barton a Nunne, profeſſed at S. Sepulchres in Canterbury, Edward Bocking, and Iohn Deering, two Monkes of Chriſts Church in Canterbury. Hugh-Rich,
                  
Warden of the Friars obſeruants in Canterbury, and Richard Risby of the ſame houſe, Richard Maiſter, Parſon of Aldington in Kent, and Henry Gold Prieſt, were drawne from the Tower of London to Tiborne, and there hanged and headed, &c. for ſundry conſpiracies in the matter of diuorſe betwéene the Kings Maieſtie, and Quéene Katherine.
               
               All the Prieſts through England,Oath to K. Henry & Queene Anne. called to bée ſworne to the King, and Quéene Anne, and their heires, before the Archbiſhop of Canterbury: and all men through England were ſworne in their ſhires and townes where they dwelled: for refuſall thereof, Iohn Fiſher, Biſhop of Rocheſter, Sir Thomas Moore late Lord Chancellour were ſent to the tower of London, diuers other Prieſts religious, and lay men were ſent to other priſons.
               The xv. of May was a great fire at Salters hall in Bredſtreet.
               The xi. of Iuly Lord Dacres of the North was arraigned at Weſtminſter of high treaſon,
                     An, reg, 26. Fire in Bredſtreet. Lord Dacres araigned.
                     Frier houſes ſuppreſſed.
                     Fire at Temple-barre. The Kings ſtables burnt.
                   where hee ſo wittily confuted his accuſers, that to their great ſhame he was not found guiltie.
               The ſecond of Auguſt was all the places of the obſeruant Fryars, as Greenewich, Canterbury, Richmount, Newarke, and Newcaſtle, put downe.
               The fouretéenth of Auguſt was a great fire at Temple barre: the ſixteenth of Auguſt was burned the Kings ſtable at Charing Croſſe, wherein were burned many great horſes, and great ſtore of hay.
               
                  
                  
                     Nicholas Lueſ
                           ••
                        , Shriue.
                  
                  
                     William Denham, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Sir Iohn Champneis Shinner Maior.
                  
               
               
                  The Popes authoritie abrogated.In a Parliament at Weſtminſter, the Pope with all his authoritie was baniſhed this realme, the King to be reputed and taken as ſupreme head of the Church of England, hauing full authoritie to reforme all errours, hereſies, and abuſes in the ſame. Alſo the firſt fruits and tenths of all ſpirituall dignities and promotions were granted the King,Firſt fruits and tenths. with a ſubſidie of the laity of twelue pence in the pound.
               
                  1537 An, reg, 27. Charterhouſe men.The Prior of the Charterhouſe at London, the Prior of Beuall, the Prior of Exham, Reinolds a brother of Simon, and Iohn haile Vicar of Thiſleworth, were all condemned, drawne, hanged, and quartered at Tiborne the fourth of May. The K. cōmanded all about his Court to poll their heads,Poled heads and cauſed his owne head to be polled.
               The 25. of May was in Saint Pauls Church at London examined 19. men and 6. women, borne in Holland,Hollanders heretikes. 
                  14. of them were condemned, a man and a woman of th
                     •
                  m were burnt in Smithfield, the other twelue ſent to other townes there to bee burnt.This was the laſt Duke of Millaine, ſince which time that Citty hath beene gouerned by ſtrangers
               
               This yeare 1537. died Francis Sforce the ſecond of that name: this Francis Sforce was the ninth and laſt Tuke of Millaine: he was the ſon of Lewis Sforce, called the Mo
                     •
                  re: hee obteined his Dukedome by meanes of Proſpero Colonno generall of the Campe of the league betwéene the Emperour Carolus Quintus, and Pope Leo the

tenth, but with great difficulty: he married Chriſtierna daughter to the King of Denmark: he was crowned Duke, Ann: 1523.
                   he raigned with great troubles and vexations, by reaſon the Emperour had the greater hold, and ſtronger faction in his country, and was forced to flie: for griefe whereof to ſée his ſubiects and friends become vaſſals to the Emperour, and his treaſure giuen to ſtrangers, he fell into a great ſickneſſe, with extreame paine in one of his eyes and thereof died, & being opened, his heart was found all drie, and yet notwithſtanding his heart was ſwolne.
               In his time the Mylaneſes expelled quite all the French gariſons, with their chiefe captaine Monſieur Lawtrec out of their territories, becauſe of ſundrie vile practiſes and miſdemeanours, wherewith the French grieued them. Preſently vpon the death of the Duke, his countrey became a pray to many gouernors, and his wife Chriſtians returned into Denmarke, and was afterward married vnto Anthony Duke of Lorraine: Shée was highly honoured of all Princes for her accompliſhed vertues, eſpeciall for her ſingular patience in her vnfortunate marriage with her firſt huſband, and her inceſſant paines and kindeneſſe which ſhee performed in his extreame miſeries, and long ſickneſſe.
               The 18. of Iune 3. Monkes of the Charter-houſe of London, Exmew, Middlemore,
                  Monkes executed. Biſhop of Rocheſter beheaded. and Ni
                     
                        •
                     igate, were drawn to Tiborne, and there hanged 
                     〈◊〉
                   quartered.
               The 22. of Iune Doctor Iohn Fiſher Biſhop

of Rocheſter, was beheaded on the tower hill.
               
                  Sir Thomas Moore beheaded. Abbies viſited.The 6. of Iuly Sir Thomas Moore was beheaded on the tower hill.
               The King ſent Doctor Lee to viſite the Abbeyes, Priories, and Nunneries in England, who put foorth all Religious perſons that would goe, and all that were vnder the age of 24. yeares.
               
                  
                     Humphrey Monmouth, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Cotes, Shriue.
                  
                  
                     Iir Iohn Allen Mercer Maior.
                  
               
               
                  Charitable deeds.This Sir Iohn Allen, gaue to the Citty of London, a rich collar of Gold to bee worne by the Maior.L. Katherine Dowager.
               
               The eight of Ianuary dyed Lady Katherine Dowager at Kimbalton, and was buried at Peterborow.
               
                  Houſes of Religion ſuppreſſed.In a Parliament was granted to the King and his heires, all religious houſes of the value of 200 pound, and vnder, with all lands & goods to them belonging.
               
                  1536 An, reg, 28On May day King Henry being at a Iu
                     •
                   at Gréenewich, ſodainely departed to We
                     •
                  
                  minſter.
               The next day Lady Anne Quéene, was had t
                     •
                   the Tower, & there for things laide to her char
                     ••
                   ſhortly after beheaded.L. Rochford executed. The 19. of May the Lord Rochford, brother to the ſaid Quéene, Henry N
                        •
                     
                     ris, Marke Smeton, William Brierton, and Franci
                        •
                      Weſton, all of the Kings priuy chamber, a
                     •
                  bout matters touching the Quéene, were put t
                     •
                   death.
               
                  The 20. of May the King married Lady Iane, daughter to Sir Iohn Seimer,
                  King Henry married Lady Iane. which at Whitſontide was openly ſhewed as Quéene, and on the Tueſday in the Whitſon wéeke, Sir Edward Seimer was created Vicount Beuchampe. The eight of Iune beganne a Parliament, and the Cleargy held a conuocation in Pauls Church,Articles by the King. Triumph at Weſtminſter. where they publiſhed a Booke intituled: Articles deuiſed by the Kings highneſſe. The nine and twentieth of Iune, the King held a great iuſting at Weſtminſter.
               
                  Thomas Cromwell Secretary to the King,Thomas Cromwell. Vicar generall. and maſter of the Rolles, was made L. Kéeper of the priuy ſeale, and Vicar generall ouer the ſpiritualitie vnder the King, and ſate diuers times in the conuocation among Biſhops, as head ouer them.
               The 22. of Iuly, Henry Duke of Richmond, and Somerſet Earle of Northampton, a baſtard ſonne of king Henry, died, and was buried at Thetford.
               
                  L. Cromwell Lord priuie Seale and vicegerent,Duke of Richmond. Pater noſter, Creede and commandements. ſent out vnder the Kings ſpirituall ſeale, certaine iniunctions to the Prelates and Cleargy of the Realme: charging Curates to teach their Pariſhioners the Pater Noſter, Aue, Creede, and commandements in Engliſh.
               In the beginning of October,Commotion in Lincolnſhire. at an aſſize for the Kings ſubſidie kept in Lincolnſhire, the people made an inſurrection, and gathered nine & twentie thouſand perſons. Againſt thoſe the King did ſend the Duke of Suffolke, the Earle of Shrewſbury, and the Earle of Rutland, with a ſtrong power, whereof, when the rebels heard they deſired

pardon brake vp their armie and departed home,Lincolneſhire commotion appeaſed. A 
                        •
                     rieſt and a butcher executed▪ Commotion in Yorkſhire. but their Captaines was apprehended and executed.
               The 9. of October a Prieſt and a Butcher were hanged at Windſor, for words ſpeaking in the behalfe of the Lincolne-ſhire-men.
               After beganne inſurrection in Yorkeſhire for the ſame cauſes, the people gathered to the number of forty thouſand. Againſt thoſe rebels the King ſent the duke of Northfolke, the Earle of Shrewſbury & the Marques of Exceter, with a great army, with whom a battaile was appointed to haue beene fought on the euen of S. Simon and Iude, but there fell ſuch raine the night before, that the two Armies could not méete, whereupon they deſired the Duke of Northfolke to ſue to the K. for their pardon, and that they might haue their liberties,Commotiō appeaſed. &c Which the Duke promiſed, and rid poſt to the King, then lying at Windſor, to know his pleaſure, and ſo appeaſed them. Aske, that was chiefe of this rebellion came to London, and was not onely pardoned but rewarded with gifts.
               
                  
                     Shriues.
                     Robert Paget, William Bowyer.
                  
                  
                     Maior.
                     Rir Ralph Warreire Mercer.
                  
               
               
                  The Earle of Kildare and his vncles executed.The 22. d. December, the Thames being frozen the King and Queene Iane rode through London to Greenewich. The third of February was Thomas Fitz Garet, ſonne and heire to the Earle of Kildare beheaded, and fiue of his vncles, drawen, hanged and quartered at Tiburne. In the ſame moneth Nicholas Muſgraue, Th. Gilby, and others, ſtirred a new rebellion and beſieged the

Cittie of Carlile, from whence they were driuen, and many of them taken and put to death. Alſo ſir Frances Bigot, Sir Robert Conſtable and others began a conſpicacy, and for the ſame were attainted.
               The 29. of March,Another conſpiracy. were twelue men of Lincolne drawne to Tiburne, and there hanged and quartered.
               In Aprill through certaine Commiſſions ſent into Somerſetſhire to take vp corne,1584 Lincolneſhire-men executed. An, reg, 29. A commotion in Somerſetſhire the people began to make an inſurrection, which was by maſter Pawlet & other allayed, the beginners to the number of 60. were condemned, whereof 14. were hanged and quartered, one of them was a woman.
               In Iune the Lord Darcy, the Lord Huſſey, Sir Robert Conſtable, Sir Thomas Percy, Sir Frances Bigot, Sir Stephen Hamelton, Sir Iohn Bulmer and his wife, George Lumley, Nicholas Tempell, Robert Aske, William Thrift, Abbat of Fountaines, Anthony Abbat of Geruaur, the Abbat of Riuers, William Prior of Birlington, were all put to death: Sir Robert Conſtable at Hull, ouer the gate called Beuerley gate. Aske hanged on a tower at Yorke, Lady Bulmer burned in Smithfield, Lord Darcy beheaded at tower hill, Lord Huſſey at Lincolne, and the other ſuffered at Tiburne.
               The 26. of Auguſt, the Lord Cromwell was made Knight of the Garter.
               The 12. of October,Prince Edward borne was borne at Hampton Court, Prince Edward, and Quéene Iane loſt her life the fourtéenth of October.
               
                  
                     Iohn Greſham, Thomas Lewine.
                     Shriues.
                  
                  
                     
                     Maior.
                     Sir Richard Greſham Mercer.
                  
               
               
                  Alwin a Prieſt, Harſam Cuſtomer of Plimmouth, and Thomas Euell were hanged and quartered at Tiburne.
               The 12. of May Fryer Forreſt was hanged and burnt in Smithfield, for denying the Kings ſupremacy,1585 An, reg, 30 with him was burnt the image of Daruar Gathering of Wales.
               The 17. of May was a great fire at S. Margaret Pattens in London, where many houſes and nine perſons were burned. Edmond Coningsby for counterfeiting the Kings ſigne Manuel, and Edward Clifford for the ſame cauſe executed at Tyburne.
               
                  Hangman hanged. Bible in euery Church & a Regiſter booke.The firſt of September was one Cartwell hangman of London, and two other hanged by Clerken well, for robbing a booth in Bartholmew faire. Thomas Cromwell Lord priuie Seale, Vicegerent to the K. ſent foorth iniunctions to all Biſhops, and Curates through the Realme, charging them to ſee that in euery pariſh Church the Bible of the largeſt volume, printed in Engliſh, were placed for all men to reade on: And that a booke of Regiſter were alſo kept in euery Pariſh Church, wherin ſhould be written euery wedding, Chriſtning and burying.
               
                  
                     Shriues.
                     William Wilkinſon, Nicholas Gibſon.
                  
                  
                     Maior.
                     Sir William Forman Haberdaſher.
                  
               
               
                  Free
                        •
                     chole and Almeſhouſes at Radcliffe.
                  Auis Gibſon, wife to Nicholas Gibſon Grocer, by his licence, founded a free Schoole at Radcliffe néere vnto London, ſhe alſo builded there certaine almeſhouſes for 14. poore and aged perſons.

                  Henry Marques of Exceſter,Marques of Deuonſhire executed. Earle of Deuonſhire, Henry Poole, Lord Mountacute and Sir Edward Neuill, the ninth of Ianuary were beheaded on Tower hill, two Prieſts, Crofts, Colens, and Holland a Mariner, were hanged and quartered at Tiburne.
               The 17. of Nouember, the blacke Fryars in London was ſuppreſſed, the next day the white Fryars, the Gray Fryars, and the Monks of the Charterhouſe.
               
                  Iohn Lambert was burnt in Smithfield.Blacks Friers ſuppreſſed. Execution in Pauls Churchyard On Aſhwedneſday Iohn Potter and William Mannering hanged in Pauls Churchyard, for killing of Roger Cholmeley Eſquire in the ſame place. The third of March, Sir Nicholas Carew Knight of the Garter, and maſter of the Kings horſe, was beheaded at the Tower hill.
               
                  Margaret Counteſſe of Sariſbury,1538 An, reg. 13. 
                  Gertrude wife to the Marques of Exceſter, Reignold Poole, ſir Adrian Forteſcue, and Thomas Dugley Knights of Saint Iohns, and diuers others were attained by Parliament. And all the religious houſes in England, ſuppreſſed, and not ſuppreſſed, were granted to the King for euer.
               The eight of May the Cittizens of London muſtred at the mile end all in bright harneſſe,Great muſter at London. with cotes of white ſilke, or cloth, and chaines of gold, in thrée great battels, the number was 15000, beſides whiflers and other walkers: who in goodly order paſſed through London to Weſtminſter, & ſo through the Sanctuaray, and round about the Parke of Saint Iames, and returned home thorough

Oldborne.
               
                  The Vicar of Wanſworth executed. Clarken well ſuppreſſed.The Vicar of Wanſworth with his Chaplaine, his ſeruant, and Friar Warre, were hanged and quartered at Saint Thomas Waterings.
               
               The Nunnery of Clarkenwell, the Nunnery of Haliwell, the Priorie of Saint Marioueries in Southwarke, and Saint Bartholmew in Smithfield, were ſuppreſſed.
               
                  
                     Shriues.
                     Iohn Faire, Thomas Huntlow.
                  
                  
                     Maior.
                     Sir William Holleys, Mercer.
                  
               
               This Sir William Holleys builded the beautifull Croſſe in the Citie of Couentry.Couentry Croſſe. The Regiſter booke of Pariſh Churches. Abbats of Reading and Glaſtenbury executed. Penſioners appointed King Henry married Lady Anne of Cleue.
               
               This yeare 1539. the King commanded great Engliſh bibles to be kept in euery Church, and alſo a generall Regiſter booke for Chriſtnings, weddings, and burials, Anno 1539.
                  
               
               The Abbat of Reading and two Prieſts were hanged and quartered at Reading. The ſame day was Richard Whitting Abbat of Glaſtenbury hanged and quartered on Tower hill, beſides his Monaſtery, according to an old prophecy.
               In December were appointed to waite on the King 50. penſioners, or Squires, vnto whom was appointed 50. 
                  l. the péece yearely. The third of Ianuary was the Lady Anne of Cleue receiued at Black-heath,1540 and brought to Greenewich, and the ſixth of the ſame moneth married to King Henry.
                  The Cromwell Earle of Eſſex. 4. fifteens & a ſubſidy. An, reg, 32.
               
               The thirtéenth of Aprill was Thomas Cromwell created Earle of Eſſex, and made great chamberlaine of England.
               In a Parliament was granted to the King a Subſidie of two ſhillings the pound of lands, and

twelue pence in goods, and foure Fiftéens.
               The Religious order of Knights of S. Iohns in England, named Knights of the Rhodes,Knights of Rhodes ſuppreſt. was diſſolued, whoſe reuenewes were wondrous great.
               In May was ſent to the Tower Doctor Wilſon, and Doctor Sampſon Biſhop of Chiceſter,Note. for relieuing certaine priſoners, which d
                     •
                  nied the kings ſupremacy. For the ſame offence Richard Farmer,
                  Richard Farmer in the premunire. Grocer of London, a wealthy man, was committed to the Marſhalſey, attainted in the premunire, and loſt all his goods.
               The 9. of Iuly Thomas Lord Cromwell Earle of Eſſex committed to the Tower of London,
                     L. Cromwell beheaded. K, Henry diuorced. Prieſts burnt and hanged, & others for denying the Kings ſupremacy. the 28. of Iuly hee was beheaded on the Tower hillwith the Lord Walter Hungerford. King Henry was diuorced from Lady Anne of Cleue.
               The 30. of Iuly Robert Barnes, Thomas Gerard, William Ierome Prieſtes, were burned in Smithfield The ſame day Thomas Abell, Edward Powell, and Richard Fetherſtone were hanged and quartered for denying the Kings ſupremacy. The fourth of Auguſt were drawne to Tiburne ſixe perſons, & one led. Laurence Cooke Prior of Doncaſter, William Horne a lay brother of the Charterhouſe, Giles Horne Gentleman, Clement Philpot, Edmond Bromham, Darby Kenham, Robert Birde, Geruace Carrow, all put to death for denying the ſupremacie.
               The eight of Auguſt Lady Katherine Howard was ſhewed openly as Queene at Hampton Court.K. Henry married againe.
               
               
                  
                  Dry ſommer. Note.Great drought and a great death of hote burning agues and flixes. The ſalt water flowed aboue London bridge.
               
                  
                     Shriues.
                     William Laxton, Martin Bowes.
                  
                  
                     Maior.
                     Sir William Roch, Draper.
                  
               
               
                  1541 An, reg. 33 Commotion in Yorkſhire.
                  Ralph Egerton, and Thomas Harman put to death for counterfaiting the Kings great ſcale. In Aprill certaine perſons began a new rebellion in Yorkeſhire, which were ſhortly taken and put to execution in diuers places, of which, Leigh, Taterſall, and Thronton, were put to death at London, Sir Iohn Neuell Knight, and ten perſons more were put to death at Yorke.
               
                  The miſery of Barbaroſſo K. of Argier, and how hee obtained the Crowne.
                  Barbaroſſa the King of Argier, his mother was a Chriſtian, and in his youth through extreame pouertie was conſtrained to wander like a pedler, carrying chéeſes and other like meane commodities into Spaine to get a poore liuing, and after that he gaue himſelfe to Piracy vpon the ſea, by which theft he enriched himſelfe, and then conſorted with other ſtrong théeues and robbers, by meanes whereof hee grew very ſtrong, and well furniſhed with many exiles and wicked perſons, and then hee aſſailed and ſurpriſed Argier which is in Mauritania, otherwiſe called Barbaria; then he ioyned with the great Turke, and made fierce warres by ſea, wherein hee was wondrous fortunate: he did very great damage vnto Spaine, and chaſed Foratine Muleaſem, the king of Tunis, out of his kingdome; but not being able to Maintaine his fortunes againſt the Emperour Carolus quintus, the King of Tunis and others, by reaſon

hée wanted money and ſkilfull warriours, the forenamed Muleaſem in the yeare 1535. was by Carolus quintus reeſtabliſhed in his Kingdome of Tunis:The Chriſtian religion preached in Tunis. for which kindneſſe Muleaſem permitted the preaching of the Chriſtian faith, and in the yeare 1541. Carolus
                   and Muleaſem made a ſtrong attempt, either to take or to extirpe the forenamed Barbaroſſo out of his Kingdome of Argier, but it tooke no effect: yet neuertheleſſe, foraſmuch as they had croſt the ſea to that intent, they meant to continue the ſiege which they had already planted before his chiefe city bordering vpon the Sea: but vpon the ſudden there aroſe a moſt great and terrible tempeſt, with fierce ſhowers of haile and raine, which did the aſſailants extreame annoyance; which the Argierians well perceiuing, iſſued forth with great courage, & made as great ſlaughter of their enemies, who were in a manner bea
                  
                     ••
                  , and almoſt ouercome with the fury of the tempeſt: this was done about the beginning of October the yeare laſt mentioned: the Emperour hereupon was conſtrained inſtantly to retire with mighty loſſe of men, ſhips and gallies. Read Gua
                     
                        ••
                     
                   and Paulus Iouius.
               
               The Counteſſe of Sariſbury was beheaded in the tower of London. Damport and Chapman,
                  Counteſſe of Sarisbury beheaded. Damport & Chapman hanged, L. Dacres of the South put to death two of the Kings guard, were hanged at Greenewich in robbery.
               The 28. of Iune, Lord Leonard Gray, Deputie 
                     〈◊〉
                   Ireland, was beheaded on the Tower hill. The 
                     ••
                  me day were hanged at Saint Thomas Wa
                     
                        ••
                     ings, Mantile, Royden, and Frowds, Gentlemen,

for ſpoile and murther they had done in Nicholas Pelhams Parke, the Lord of Dacres of the South being in company, and on St. Peters day the Lord Dacres led led from the Tower to Tiburne, and there hanged.
               
                  Progreſſe to Yorke.In Auguſt the King tooke his Progreſſe towards Yorke.
               
                  
                     Shriues.
                     Rowland Hill, Henry Sucley.
                  
                  
                     Maior.
                     Sir M
                           •
                        chaell Dormer, Mercer.
                  
               
               
                  Fire at Elſing ſpittle.On Chriſtmas euen at night began a great fire in the houſe called Elſing ſpittle nigh Cripplegate in London, which at that time was the houſe of Sir Iohn Williams. Maſter of the Kings Iewels, where many of thoſe Iewels were burnt, & more imbezeled. The Lady Katherine Howard whom the King had married, for her vnchaſt liuing committed with Thomas Culpeper and Francis De
                        ••
                     ham,
                  K. Henry King of Ireland. Qu Katha: beheaded. A maide boilded. was by Parliament attainted, C
                        •
                     lpeper and Derham were put to death at Tiburne. The 2
                        •
                     
                  
                  ▪ of Ianuary the King was proclaimed king of Ireland. The 13. of February were beheaded with
                     ••
                   the Tower, the Lady Howard, otherwiſe called Queene Katherine, and the Lady Rochford.
               
               
                  1542 An, reg, 4. The Earle of Deſmond the great Onele. Duke of Norffolke entred Scotland.The 17. of March, Margaret Dauie was boil
                     ••
                   in Smithfield, for poyſoning thrée houſholds th
                     •
                   ſhe had dwelled in.
               In the moneth of Auguſt, Iames Earle of Deſ
                        •
                     mond in Ireland, ſubmitted himſelfe to the King The firſt of October the great Onele of Ireland was created Earle of Tiron, and his baſe 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  Mathewe Onele Barron of Dongaman. 
                     〈◊〉
                   Duke of Northfolke entred Scotland the 21. 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
October, burning & waſting all the Marches, and there tarried till the midſt of Nouember.
               
                  
                     Sir Henry Hublethorne, Henry Amcots.
                     Shriues.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Coates, Salter.
                     Maior.
                  
               
               The King of Scots made a Roade into England, and did much harme, but at the laſt Sir Thomas Wharton, ſir William Muſgraue, with a few of the borderers met the Scots, where they being in number 15000. were ouerthrowne,Scots ouerthrowne. Maxwell. 1543 An, reg, 35. in which con
                  
                     ••
                  ict was taken the Lord Maxwell, the Earles of 
                     •
                  lencarne and Saſſilles, with all the Captaines of the Army, & on St. Thomas euen were brought into the Tower of London. At new-yeares-tide they were ſent home againe.
               The third of Iune the Obrine a Lord in Ireland, and diuers of the wild Iriſh ſubmitted them to King Henry,
                  K. Henry married. the ſaid Obrine was created Earle of Clawdicard.
               
               The 12.
                  K. Henry married againe. An Army into Landerſey. of Iuly King Henry married Lady Katherine Parre, late wife to the Lord Latimer.
               
               King Henry, ſent ouer 6000. men to Landerſey, 
                     •
                  hither alſo came the Emperour with a great army, and ſhortly after came downe the French K. with a great Army, and offered to giue battaile to the Emperour, by reaſon whereof the ſiege was raiſed.
               
                  Anthony Perſon, Robert Teſtwood, and Henry Fil
                     
                        •
                     er were burnt at Windſor.
               A great peſtilence was at London,Tearme at S, Albons. and there
                  
                     ••
                  re Michaelmas terme was adiourned to Saint Albons.
               
                  
                     Iohn Towles, Richard Dobs Shriues.
                  
                  
                     
                     Maiors.
                     Sir William Bowyer Draper, Sir Ra. Warren.
                  
               
               At Hallontide a roade was made into Scotland by the Garriſon there, who burned 60. villages, and tooke great preyes.
               This yeare chanced foure Eclipſes, one of the Sunne the 24.
                  4. Eclip. of Ianuary, & thrée of the Moone.
               
                  Edward Seymer Earle of Hertford was made Lieutenant of the North, and ſent thither with an army.
               
                  Germain Gardiner.
                  Germaine Gardiner and Larke Parſon of Chealſey, were executed at Tiburne for denying the Kings ſupremacy, with them was executed one Singleton, and ſhortly after Aſhby.
               
               
                  1544 Houſe blowen vp. Sir Iohn Dudley. An, reg, 36.The third of Aprill a Gunpowder houſe in eaſt Smithfield was blowne vp, and therein burned 5. men, a boy, and a woman.
               Sir Iohn Dudley, Vicount Liſle, high Admirall of England, arriued with his Fléet of 200. ſaile in the Frith of Scotland, where he landed diuers of his men, he landed the reſidue at Lieth, and from thence marched in three great battailes, whereof the ſaid Lord Admirall led the vaward, the Ear
                     ••
                   of Shrewſbury the rereward, and Edward Se
                        •
                     
                     mer Earle of Hertford, Lieutenant generall of the battaile. H
                     •
                  ere they found the Scots to the number of 6000. horſemen, beſides many footmen r
                     •••
                  dy to haue ſtopped their paſſage,Lieth taken and ſpoiled. Edenborough burnt. but after certaine ſhotte on both ſides, they ſuddenly leauing their artillerie fledde towards Edenbrough: then the Engliſhmen entred the town of Lieth, where th
                     •
                   found ſuch riches as they thought had not been in any towne of Scotland. The next day our ar
                     •
                  my

went towards Edenbrough, where they beat the Scots from their Ordinance, and ſo entred the Canigate, and there ſlew a great number of the Scots, and ſet fire on the towne.
               The Letany or Proceſſion was by the King commanded to be vſed in Engliſh in euery Pariſh Church.Proceſſion in Engliſh.
               
               Proclamation was made for the inhaunſing of gold to 48. ſhillings,Coines inhaunced. Baſe monie coined. and ſiluer to foure ſhillings the ounce. Alſo the King cauſed to be coined baſe monies.
               After Whitſontide the Duke of Norffolke and the Lord Priuie ſeale, with a great armie tooke their voyage toward France, and beſieged Mutterell. The Duke of Suffolke with many other Noble men paſſed the ſeas, and encamped before Boloin on the eaſt ſide.
               The 13. of Iuly,K H. went to Boloin. King Henry with a goodly company paſſed into France, and incamped on the North ſide of Boloine, after whoſe comming the towne was ſo ſore battered with Gunſhot, that after a moneths ſiege, the Captaine ſent word to the King that they would yéeld the Towne, vpon condition that all which were within, might depart with bagge and baggage, and the Bulloiners departed to the number of foure thouſand, foure hundred fifty and foure.
               The 25. of September the K. with his Nobilitie entred into high Boloine, & after turned from thence, landed at Douer the firſt of October.
               
                  
                     Iohn Wilford, Andrew Iudde.
                     Shriues.
                  
                  
                     Sir William Laxton, Grocer.
                     Maior.
                  
               
               
                  
                  free ſchools at Oundale.This William Laxton founded a frée Schoole at Dundale in Northampton-ſhire, he alſo builded there certaine almeſhouſes for ſeuen poore almes men.
               
                  Priſe taken.This yeare was taken by the Kings ſhips of the Engliſh coſt, the number of 300. French ſhips and more, ſo that the Gray Friars Church in London was laide full of wine, the Auſten Friars & blacke Friars were laid full of herring & other fiſh, that were taken going into France.
               
                  A beneuolence demanded.The king demanded a beneuolence towards his Wars in France and Scotland. The Lord Chancellour, the Duke of Suffolke & other of the kings Counſell ſate at Baynards Caſtle, where they firſt called before them the Maior and Aldermen,An Alderman ſent into Scotland. &c. And becauſe Richard Read Alderman would not agrée to pay as they ſet him, hée was commanded vpon paine of death forthwith to ſerue the K. in his warres of Scotland: who departed from London the 23.
                  S. W. Roch ſent to the Fleete. of Ianuary. Alſo ſir William Roche Alderman, for words of diſpleaſure taken by the Kings Counſell, was by them ſent to the Fléete where he remained till paſſion Sunday.
               
                  A fained miracle.A Prieſt did penance at Pauls Croſſe, & there confeſſed, that himſelfe ſaying Maſſe, pricke
                     •
                   his finger and be bled the Corporas and Altar cloth,A falſe accuſer ſet on the pillory, and well marked to be knowne. meaning to haue made the people belieue, that the miraculous hoſt had bled which hee had conſecrated.
               The 13. of February a Prieſt was ſet on the pillory in Cheape, and burnt in both cheekes with the letters F. and A. & a paper on his head, wherein

was written, For falſe Accuſing, which iudgement was giuen by the Lord Chancellour in the Starre Chamber. A notable example of Iuſtice.
               In the beginning of March a rode was made into Scotland by the Engliſh men, who went ſo far,A rode into Scotland that a great Army of Scots be ſet them with thrée battailes▪ where the Engliſh men for the moſt part were ſlaine and taken at Panyer hough, among whom, Sir Ralph Eure, Lord Warden of the Caſt Marches was ſlaine,Alderman of London taken priſoner. and Richard Reade Al
                  
                     •
                  oman of London with others taken priſoners by the Scots.
               Trinity Tearme was adiourned becauſe of the Warres.1545 An, reg. 37
               
               The French kings Nauy comming out of New 
                     ••
                  uen and Deepe, arriued in Suſſex afore bright H
                     ••
                  ſted, where they ſet certaine of their Souldiers a land, but the beacons were fired, and the men came downe ſo thicke, that the French men 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
               The 19.
                  Men burnt in the hedghogge. of Iuly by miſfortune of ſhooting off a 
                     ••
                  ne in one of the Hedgehogges a ſhippe before Weſtminſter, a firken of gunpowder fired, & ſlew 
                     ••
                  en men, and the eight was drowned.
               The 20. of Iuly the king being at Portſmouth,Mary Roſe was drowned. a goodly ſhippe called the Marie Roſe, with Sir George Carrow the Captaine and many other Gentlemen was drowned in the midſt of the ha
                  
                     •
                  en.
               The 21. of Iuly, the French Gallies came afore 
                     •
                  or
                     •
                  hmouth hauen, and landed certaine of their 
                     •••
                  y in the Iſle of Wight, and there burned and

incamped about two thouſād men, but they went ſoone driuen away with loſſe of their Captaine and many ſouldiers.
               
                  French men landed at new hauen in Suſſex.Within few dayes after, the whole fléete remoued from the Wight vnto a place in Suſſex, called New hauen, and there landed many captaines and ſouldiers, who by the valiantneſſe of the gentlemen and yeomen were ſlaine and drowned, and the reſt hardly recouered their Ships and Gallies.
               
                  Earle of Hertford ſent into Scotland. L. Admirall burnt Treyport.In Auguſt the Earle of Hertford was ſent into Scotland with an Army of 12000. men, when he deſtroied diuers townes.
               The 9. of September ſir Iohn Dudley Lord Admirall of England landed with ſixe thouſand men at Treyport in Normandy, and there burnt the towne and Abbie, and thirtie ſhips, with a bar
                     ••
                   that lay in the hauen.
               
                  S. Giles Church burnt. Shriues. Maior. Chantries. Colledges, and Hoſpitals giuen to the King.The 12. of September the Church of S. Gilen without Creplegate of London was burnt.
               
                  
                     George Barne, Ralph Alley.
                  
                  
                     Sir Martin Bowes Goldſmith.
                  
               
               A Subſidie of two ſhillings eight pence in the pound of goods, and foure ſhillings of land.
               All Colledges, frée Chappels, Chantries, a
                     •
                   hoſpitals, were committed to the Kings order.
               
                  1546 The ſtewes put downe.The Stewes in Southwarke was put dow
                     ••
                   The 27. of Aprill being Wedneſday in Ea
                     ••
                   wéeke, W. Foxley Pot-maker for the mint in th
                     •
                   Tower of London fell a ſléepe, who could not b
                     •
                   wakned with pricking,Note this ſleeper. cramping, or otherwiſ
                     •
                   till the firſt day of the next tearme, which was 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  14. daies, & 15. nights. The cauſe of his thus ſl
                     ••
                  ping

could not be knowne, though the ſame were diligently ſearched for by the Kings Phyſitians and other learned men, yea the King himſelfe examining the ſaid W. Foxley, and hée was in all points found as hee had ſlept but one night, and was liuing till the yéere of our Lord 1587.
               
               The 13. of Iune being Whitſunday, a peace was proclaimed betwéene the Kings of England and of France.
               The 16.
                  Anne Aſkew and others burnt. of Iuly were burned in Smithfield for the Sacrament, Anne Askewe, Iohn Laſſels, Nicholas Ouerden Prieſt, Iohn Adlam Tailor, and Doctor Shaxton ſometime Biſhop of Saliſburie preached at the ſame fire, and there recanted, perſwading them to doe the like, but they would not.
               The 21. of Auguſt came into England Flaud,
                  Admirall of France came to London. high Admirall of France, who brought with him the Sacre of Déepe, and 12. Gallies: he landed at the Tower wharſe, where he was honourably receiued, & brought to the Biſhop of Londons Pallace, where he lodged two nights, and then rode to Hampton Court where the king lay. By the way Prince Edward receiued him with a company of 500. coates of veluet with one ſléeue of cloath of gold, & halfe the coate imbrodered with gold, there was in all to the number of eight hundred horſes.
               In September the water of Finſburie was brought to the Conduits at London wall.Conduit in Lothbury. Saint Stephens in Colemanſtréete, and Saint Margarets in Lothburie.
               
                  
                     Richard Geruace, Thomas Corteſe.
                     Shrieues.
                  
                  
                     Henry Huberthorne, Marchant Tailor.
                     Maior.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Duke of Norfolke ſent to the Tower.The 12. of December, Thomas Duke of Norfolke, and Henry Earle of Surrey his ſonne was ſent to the Tower.
               The third of Ianuary the Church of the late Gray Friars in London was opened. And that day preached at Pauls Croſſe the Biſhop of Rocheſter, who declared the Kings gift to the Ci
                     ••
                  ie of London, for the relieuing of the poore people, to wit, S. Bartholmew Spittle, the Church of the Gray Friars, and two Pariſh Churches, the one of Saint Nicholas in the ſhambles, the other St. Edwine in Newgate market,K. Henry his gift to the Cittie of London. all to bee made one Pariſh Church of the Gray Friars Church, and in lands he gaue for the maintenance of the ſame, fiue hundred markes by the yeare for ouer, to maintaine a Quire of Singing-men, viz. eight in number.
               
                  Henry Howard Earle of Surrey, was beheaded on the Tower kill the 19. of Ianuary.
               
                  Earle of Surry beheaded. K. Henry deceaſed.The 28. of Ianuary King Henry deceaſed, appointed his firſt heirs to his ſon, Prince Edward: the ſecond, Lady Mary, his daughter by Quéene Katharine: and the third, Lady Elizabeth, by the Quéene Anne Bolein. Hee deceaſed when hee had raigned 37. yeares, nine moneths, and odde daies, and was buried at Windſor.
            
            
               
               Edward the ſixt.
               
                  
                     Edward the ſixt beganne his Raigne the 24. of Ianuary,An, reg, 1. 
                  1546. when hee was but nine yeares old. King Henry his father by his will had appointed for his Priuy Counſell, the Archbiſhop of Canterbury, the Chancellor, the Biſhop of Durham, with other to the number of ſixtéene.Earle of Hertford L. Protector. K E. made Knight. L. Maior of London made knight. The firſt of February the Earle of Hertford was elected to be Protector of the Kings perſon. The 6. of February the L. Protector in the tower of London, endued K. Edward with the order of Knighthood, and then Henry Hoblethorne, L. Maior of London knéeling downe, the King made him Knight. The 17. of February▪ ſir Edward Seimer Earle of Hertford, and L. Protector was created Duke of Somerſet, the L. Parre Earle of Eſſex, Marques of Northampton, Sir Iohn Dudley, Lord Liſle,
                  Duke and Lords created. Lord Admirall Earle of Warwicke, Sir Thomas Wriotheſley, Lord Chancellor, Earle of Southampton, ſir Thomas Seimer was made Lord of Sudley, and

high Admirall, Sir Richard Rich was made Lord Rich, Sir William Willowby, Lord Willowby, Sir Edmond Sheiffield, Lord Sheiffield.
               
               
                  K. Edward crowned, King Edward was Crowned at Weſtminſter on the 20. of Februarie.
               
                  1557 D. Smith recanted.The 15. of May Doctor Smith recanted at Pauls Croſſe.
               The Lord Protector and the reſt of the Counſell, ſent Commiſſioners into all parts of the Realme, willing them to take all Images out of their Churches,Images forbidden. Proceſsion forbidden. for the auoiding of Idolatry, with them were ſent diuers Preachers to perſwade the people from their beades, and at that time Proceſſion was forbidden.
               
                  Edward Duke of Somerſet, and Iohn Earle of Warwicke, with a Noble Armie were ſent into Scotland,Muskleborow field. and at a place called Muſkleborough, the Engliſh men and Scots met, where betwéene them the 10. of September▪ was fought a cruell battaile: the victorie whereof fell to the Engliſhmen, and of the Scots were ſlaine 1400, and taken priſoners 1500.
               
               
                  1. Rich L. Chanceller
                  Richard Lord Rich was made Lord Chancellour.
               
                  
                     Shrieues.
                     Thomas VVhite, Robert Cherſey,
                  
                  
                     Maior.
                     Sir Iohn Greſham Mercer.
                  
               
               This Sir Iohn Greſham gaue to euery ward in London, ten pound to the poore, and to ſixe ſcore poore men and women, euery of them thrée yards of cloth for a gowne, of eight or nine ſhillings the yard: he gaue alſo to maidens marriages, and to the Hoſpitals in London, about 200. pounds in

money. He founded a frée ſchoole at Holt, a market towne in Norfolke.
               All Colledges, Chauntries, frée Chappels, Hoſpitals, Fraternities, Brotherhoods, and Guildes were granted to the King, and an Act made for the receiuing of the Sacrament in both kinds.
               The Church ſeruice was ſung in Engliſh.1548 An, reg, 2. A goodly watch at Midſomer.
               
               The watch in London at Midſomer, was now againe vſed both on the Euen of Saint Iohn and Saint Peter, in as comely order as it had béene accuſtomed, which watch was greatly beautified by the number of more then thrée hundred dimilances and light horſemen,The ſiege of Haddington. that were prepared by the Citizens to bee ſent to the reſcue of the towne of Haddington in Scotland.
               On Saint Peters day Stephen Gardiner Biſhop of Wincheſter preached before the King,Biſhop of Wincheſter ſent to the Tower. A prieſt of Cornwall executed. for the which he was ſent to the Towre.
               The ſeuenth of Iuly a Prieſt was hanged and quartered in Smithfield, for that he had ſlaine M. Body, one of the Kings cōmiſſioners, others of his ſocietie were put to death in other places.
               A great peſtilence was in London,A great peſtilence at London. wherefore commandement was giuen to all Curates and other, that no corps ſhould be buried before ſixe of the clocke in the morning, nor after ſixe at night, and that there ſhould at the buriall of euery corps be rung one Bell at the leaſt, by the ſpace of thrée quarters of an houre.
               
                  
                     William Lock, Iohn Ailife Knights, Shriues.
                  
                  
                     Sir Henry Amcots Fiſhmonger, Maior.
                  
               
               The 16. of September▪ 
                  S. Annes Church within

in Alderſgate was burnt.
               
                  S. Annes Church burnt. An, reg, 3. Lord Thomas Seymer beheaded.The 16. of Ianuary, Thomas Seimer, Lord Admirall, & brother to the Lord Protector, was ſent to the tower of London. and the 20. of March beheaded on the Tower hill.
               The 23. of Aprill ſixe houſes at Broken wharfe were burnt.
               
                  1549 Fire at broken wharfe. Commotion in Somerſet ſhire.In May by meanes of a Proclamation for encloſures, the commons of Somerſetſhire and Lincolneſhire made a commotion, and brake vp certaine Parkes of ſir W. Harbardes, and Lord Sturtons, but ſir William Harbarde flewe and executed many of thoſe rebels. In Iuly the Commons of Eſſex and Kent, Suffolke and Norfolke, roſe againſt incloſures, and pulled downe diuers parks and hooſes.
               
                  Commotion in Cornwall.Alſo the Commons of Cornewall and Deuonſhire, required not onely that the incloſures might be diſparked, but alſo to haue their old Religion: theſe beſieged the Cittie of Exceſter, which was valiantly defended. Iohn Lord Ruſſell, Lord Priuie ſeale with a number of ſouldiers entred the Citie of Exceſter the fill of Auguſt▪ ſlew and tooke priſoners of the Rebels more then 4. thouſand, and after hanged diuers of them in the towne & country about. The L. Gray alſo with ſtrangers, horſemen,Rebels ſubdued. in diuers conflicts ſlewe many people, and ſpoiled the Country.
               The laſt of Iuly W. Lord Marques of Northhampton, entred the Citie of Norwich, and on the next morning the rebels alſo entred the towne, burned part thereof, put the Lord Marques to

flight, and flew the Lord Sheffield.
               
               Diuers perſons were apprehended as aiders of the foreſaid rebels,Martiall law. of the which one was hanged within Aldgate, and another at the Bridge foote toward Southwarke, both on Mary Magdalens day. In the beginning of Auguſt,The french Kings gullies inuaded Gernſey and Ierſea. the French king determined to take the Iſles of Gernſey and Ierſey, did ſet there ſuddenly vpon our ſhips with a great number of Gallies, but were ſo manfully encountred by the Kings Nauy, that with the loſſe of a thouſand men and great ſpoile of Gallies, they were forced to retire into France.
               The eight of Auguſt the French Ambaſſadors gaue a defiance to the Lord Protector, whereupon all Frenchmen with their goods,French men apprehended. being no Denizens, were apprehended.
               The rebels in Norfolke and Suffolke encamped themſelues at mount Surrey neare vnto Norwich,The Earle of Warwicke went againſt the rebels. againſt whom ſir Iohn Dudley Earle of Warwicke went with an Army, where meeting with the rebels, they had thought all to haue died in the place, but God brought it to paſſe, that as well there, as in all other places, they were partly by power conſtrained, partly by promiſe of their pardon perſwaded to ſubmit themſelues. The Earle of Warwicke entred the Citie of Norwich the 27. of Auguſt, when hee had flaine aboue fiue thouſand of rebels, and taken their chiefe Captaine Robert Ket of Windam Tanner.
               The 20.
                  Biſhop of London depriued. of September Edmond Bonner Biſhop of London, was ſent from Lambeth to the

Marſhalſey, for a ſermon, which hee preached at Pauls Croſſe on the firſt of December. On the firſt of October hee was depriued of his Biſhopricke, and ſent againe to the Marſhalſey for diſobeying the Kings order in religion.
               
                  Richard Yorke, Iohn Cheſter, Shriues.
               
               
                  L. protector brought to the Tower.The 24. of October, the Duke of Somerſet was brought from Windſor, riding through Oldborne in at Newgate, and ſo to the tower of London, accompanied with diuers Lords and Gentlemen, with thrée hundred horſes. The Lord Maior, Sir Ralph Warren, Sir Iohn Greſham, maſter Recorder, ſir William Locke, and both the Shriues, with other knights, ſitting on their horſes againſt Soper-lane, all the officers with halbarts, and from Oldborne bridge to the Tower, certaine Aldermen or their Deputies on horſebacke in euery ſtréete, with a number of houſeholders ſtanding with billes as hée paſſed. There was with him committed to the Tower, Sir Michael Stan
                     
                        •
                     op, Sir Thomas Smith, ſir Iohn Thin Knight, Wolfe and Gray of Reading.
               
                  K. E. rode through London.The 17. of October, King Edward came from Hampton Court to his place in Southwarke, and there dined, hee made maſter Yorke one of the Shriues, Knight, and then rode through the Citie to Weſtminſter.
               
                  Charitable deedes of ſir Rowland 
                        〈◊〉
                      gift to Chriſts Hoſpitall.
                  Sir Rowland Hill Mercer, the twentie eight of October, Maior.
               
               This ſir Rowland Hill cauſed to bee made diuers cauſeyes, bridges, and frée ſchooles. He gaue to the Hoſpitall of Chriſts Church in London,

fiue hundred pound in ready money, and one hundred pound at his deceaſe. The twentie nine of Nouember, Robert Kete and William Kete his brother, were deliuered out of the Tower of London, to ſir Edmond Windam, Shriue of Norffolke,R. Kete and W. Kete hanged. to bee conuaied to Norwich, where R. Kete was hanged in chaines on the top of Norwich Caſtle, and W. Kete likewiſe hanged on the top of Windam ſtéeple. In December the Scots tooke Burtierag in Scotland,Holds in Scotland loſt. and other holds then poſſeſſed by Engliſhmen, where they ſlew man, woman and child, except Sir Iohn Luteroll the Captaine, whom they tooke priſoner. The 19. of Ianuary were murdered by S. Sepulchers Church without Newgate in London, two Captaines that had ſerued the King at Boline and elſewhere, ſhe one was Sir Peter Gambo, the other Filicirga,
                  Peter Gambo murdered. which murders were committed by Charles Ganaro a Fleming, who came poſt from Barwicke to doe that acte: on the morrow he with three of his companions were taken in Smithfield, and ſent to Newgate, and the foure and twentieth of Ianuary, they were all foure, Charles Gauaro,
                  Gauaro & others hanged. 
                  Balthaſar Gauaro, Nicholas Diſalueron, & Francis Deualaſco hanged in Smithfield.
               The 27. of Ianuary,An, reg, 4. Rebels hanged. 
                  Humphry Arundell Eſquire Thomas Holmes, Winſlow and Burie, Captaines of the Rebels in Deuonſhire, were hanged and quartered at Tiburne.
               The ſixt of February the Duke of Somerſet was deliuered out of the Tower.
               The tenth of February one Bell was hanged

and quartered at Tiburne, foe mouing a new rebellion in Suffolke.
               
                  The houſe of Ferneſe made dukes of Parma.This yeare 1550. died Pope Paul the third, formerly called Alexander Ferneſe, hee was enſtalled Pope, Anno 1534.
                   in his youth, hee had two children, viz. Peter Lewes, and the Lady Conſtance: This Pope ordained the general councels at Mā
                  t
                     •
                  a, at Vicentia, and Trent: he gaue the Emperour fiue Gallies well furniſhed for his warres againſt Barbaroſſo, hée met the Emperour Carolus Quintus, and Francis the French King at Nice in Prouince, to make peace betwéene them for ten yeares, and concluded a marriage betwéene his Nephew Octauio, and the Emperours daughter, widowe to Alexander de medicis, late Duke of Florence, and after that with conſent of the Emperour, he made his forenamed ſonne Peter Lewes Duke of Parma and Placentia, he died at foureſcore and foure yeares of age.
               
                  Peace proclaimed. The liberties of ſouthwarke purchaſed.The laſt of March, a generall peace was proclaimed betwéene the King of England, France, the Emperour and the Scots. This time the Lord Maior of London & the Aldermen purchaſed all the liberties of South warke, which was in the Kings hands.
               The 12. of Aprill, D. Nicholas Ridley was enſtalled Biſhop of London.Boloine yeelded. Ioan Butcher burnt. Rebels executed.
               
               The 25. of Aprill, the towne of Boloine was yéelded to the French.
               The ſecond of May, Ioan Butcher was burnt in Smithfield for hereſie, that Chriſt tooke no fleſh of the Virgine Marie, Richard Lion, Goddard

Gorran and Richard Ireland were executed the 14. of May, for attempting a new rebellion in Kent.
               Trinitie Tearme was adiourned till Michaelmaſſe.Tearme adiourned.
               
               In the moneth of Auguſt, a Millar of Battlebridge was ſet on the Pillory in Cheape, and had both his eares cut off, for ſeditious words by him ſpoken againſt the Duke of Somerſet.
               Alſo Grig a Poulter that had béene taken for a cunning man in curing of diſeaſes among women, being proued to be a craftie deceiuer, was on the eight of ſeptember ſet on the Pillorie in ſouthwarke, and the Lord Maior and the Aldermen riding through the faire, hee aſked them and all the Citizens forgiueneſſe.
               
                  
                     Auguſtine Hide, Iohn Lion, Shriues.
                  
                  
                     Sir Andrew Iud, Skinner, Maior.
                  
               
               This Sir Andrew Iud erected one notable frée ſchools at Tonbridge in Kent, wherein he brought vp and nouriſhed in learning great ſtore of youth, as well bred in that ſhire, as brought from other countries adioyning. Hee alſo builded almeſhouſes for poore people nigh S. Helens
                  Almeſnouſes by Saint Helens in Biſhopſgate ſtreete. Church in London, & gaue lands to the Company of Skinners in the ſame Citie, amounting to the value of 60. 
                  l. 
                  3. s. 8 d. the yeare, for the which they be bound to pay 20. 
                  l. to the ſchoolemen, 8. 
                  l. to the Vſher of the free ſchoole at Tonbridge, yearely for euer, and 4. ſhillings the wéeke to 6. poore people at S. Helens, 8. d. the péece wéekely, and 25. ſhillings 4. d. the yeare in coles amongſt them for euer.
               More, Alice Smith of London widdow, late

wife to Thomas Smith of the ſame Citie Eſquire, and Cuſtomer of the Port of London, in her laſt teſtament bequeathed landes to the value of 15. pounds by yeare for euer, to the Skinners, for the augmenting of the penſions of the poore, inhabiting the eight almeſ-houſes, erected by the ſaide ſir Andrew Iud her father, in the ſaid St. Helenes in Biſhopſgate-ſtréete. She alſo hath giuen to the Hoſpitals, and to the poore of other parriſhes, and good Preachers, the ſumme of 300. pound. As alſo to poore Schollers in the Vniuerſities, the ſumme of 200. pound. Of which her laſt will and teſtament, ſhe made her ſonne Thomas Smith late ſhriue of London, and Richard and Robert Smith her Executors, who haue performed the ſame according to her godly and charitable mind.
               
                  Arden murdered.On Saint Valentines day at Feuerſham in Kent, one Arden a Gentleman was murdered by conſent of his wife, for the which fact ſhe was the 14. of March burnt at Canterbury. Michael, maſter Ardens man was hanged in chaines at Fenerſham, and a maiden burnt: Mosbie and his ſiſter were hanged in Smithfield at London: Greene which had fled, came againe certaine yéeres after, and was hanged in chaines in the high way againſt Feuerſham, and blacke Will the Ruffian that was hired to doe the act, burnt at Fluſhing in Zeland.
               
                  Biſhop of Wincheſter depriued. 1551The 14. of February, D. Stephen Gardiner Biſhop of Wincheſter was depriued of his Biſhoppricke, and ſo committed to the tower againe. Into his place was tranſlated Doctor Poinet.
               
               
                  The 24. of Aprill,An Arrian burnt. a Dutch man was burnt in Smithfield for an Arrian.
               The 25. of May an Earthquake at Blechingly,Earthquake Godſtone, Titſey, Rigate, Croidon, Benington, Albery, and diuers other places in Southery.
               The 9. of Iuly,Firſt fall of baſe money. the baſe monies coined in the time of King Henry the eight, and Edward the ſixt, was proclaimed, the ſhillings to goe for 9. pence, the groat for thrée pence, which tooke effect immediately.
               The ſweating ſickneſſe began in London the ninth of Iuly, which was ſo terrible,Sweating ſicknes. that people being in beſt health, were ſuddenly taken & dead in 24. houres, and twelue or leſſe. And it is to bée noted, that this mortalitie fell chiefely on men of the beſt age, as betwéene thirty and forty yeares. Alſo it followed Engliſhmen, as well within the Realme, as in ſtrange Countries, the firſt wéeke died in London 806. perſons.Second fall of baſe money. The ſeuentéenth of Auguſt, the ſhilling which of late was called downe to nine pence, was called to ſixe pence, the great to two pence, the halfe great to a peny, the peny to an halfe peny.
               
                  Iohn Lambert, Iohn Cowper, Shriues.
               
               The ſixtéenth of October, E. Seymer, Duke of Somerſet, the Lord Gray of Wilton, Sir Ralph Vane, Sir T. Palmer, Sir Miles Partridge, Sir Michael Stanhop, Sir T. Arundell Knights, and diuers other gentlemen were brought to the tower of London: the next morrow, the Dutches of Somerſet was alſo brought to the tower.Liberties of the Stilyard ſeaſed. The liberties of the ſtilyard were ſeaſed into ye kings hands
               
                  
                  
                     Maior.
                     Sir Robert Dabs Skinner the 28. of October.
                  
               
               
                  New coine.The 30. of October was proclaimed a new coine both of ſiluer and gold, ſouerains of 30. ſhillings, Angels of 10.
                  Muſter of horſemen. Duke of Somerſet beheaded. An, reg 6. Queene of Scots rode thorow London. Sir Ralph Vaine and other executed. 1552 ſhillings, &c. The 6. of Nouember the old Quéene of Scots rode through London toward Scotland, after ſhée had laine foure dayes in the Biſhop of Londons Pallace. The firſt of December the Duke of Somerſet was arraigned at Weſtminſter, and condemned of fellony. The ſeuenth of December was a muſter of horſemen before the King at S. Iames.
                   The 22. of Ianuary Edward duke of ſomerſet was beheaded on the tower hill. The 26. of February ſir R. Vine, and ſir M. Partridge were hanged on the tower hill. Sir M. Stanhope, with ſir Thomas A
                        •
                     undell, were beheaded there. The laſt of April a houſe neare to the tower of London, with thrée laſt of powder, was blowne vp, the gunpowder makers being 15. in number, were all ſlaine.
               The 16. of May was a muſter of horſemen before the King at Gréenewich.
               The 26. of Iuly began the preparing of the Gray Friars houſe in London, for the poore fatherleſſe children,Chriſts Hoſpitall. and that moneth began the repairing of S. Thomas
                   Hoſpitall in Southwarke, for poore impotent and lame perſons.
               
                  A monſter.The third of Auguſt at Middleton, 11. miles from Oxford, a woman brought foorth a childe which had two perfect bodies from the Nauill vpward, and were ſo ioyned together at the Nauill, that when they were laid in length, the one head and bodie was Eaſt, the other Weſt, the legges of

both the bodies grew to it at midſt, where the bodies ioyned, and had but one iſſue for the execrements: they liued 18. dayes, and were women children.
               The 8. of Auguſt were taken at Quéene brough 3. great fiſhes called Dolphins:Great fiſhes and the wéeke following, at Blacke wall were ſixe more taken and brought to London. This moneth of Auguſt began the great prouiſion for the poore in London, toward the which euery man was contributary, and gaue certaine money in hand, and couenanted to giue a certaine wéekely.
               The 7.
                  Great fiſhes of October were two great fiſhes called Whirlepooles, taken at Graueſend.
               
                  
                     William Garrard, Iohn Maynard. Shriues.
                  
                  
                     Sir George Barne, Haberdaſher, Maior.
                  
               
               This Sir George Barne gaue a Windmill in Flusbury fielde to the Haberdaſhors of London,Charitable deeds of ſix G. Barnes. the profits riſing thereof to bee diſtributed to the poore almes people at the ſame company.
               The ſeuenth of October were thrée great fiſhes called Whirepooles taken at Graueſend,Great fiſhes taken. which were drawne vppe to the Kings Bridge at Weſtminſter.
               In this moneth the King damanded of the marchants aduenturers, by way of proſt,Money borowed of the Merchants. of euery broad cloth then ſhipped to Borwins mart, twenty ſhillings ſterling, to be paid at Anwerpe for certaine debt there, and they to haue the Kings hand for the repaiment thereof, which did at that time mount to more then fortie and eight thouſand pound.
               
                  
                  The new ſeruice in Engliſh.The firſt of Nouember being the feaſt of all S. the new ſeruice Booke, called the Booke of common prayer, began in Pauls Church, and the like through the Citie, the Biſhop of London, Doctor Ridley executed the ſeruice in the forenoone, and preached at Pauls Croſſe in the afternoone.
               
                  Firſt children in Chriſts Hoſpitall.The 23. of Nouember the children were taken into the hoſpital of the gray Friars, called Chriſts Hoſpitall. And alſo ſicke and poore people into the Hoſpitall of Saint Thomas in Southwarke, in which two places the children and poore people ſhould haue meat, drinke, lodging, and cloth of the almes of the Citie.
               On Chriſtmas day in the afternoone, when the Lord Maior and Aldermen rode to Pauls, the children of Chriſts Hoſpitall ſtood from St.Firſt ſhew of children in Chriſts Hoſpitall. 
                  Laurence lane in Cheape towards Pauls, all in ruſſet cotton; the maſters of the hoſpitall formoſt, next the Phyſitians and Surgeons, which children were in number 340.
               
               King Edward kept his Chriſtmas with open houſhold at Gréenewich,Lord of merry diſports. 
                  George Ferrers Gentleman being Lord of merry diſports al the xii. daies, who ſo pleaſantly and wiſely behaued himſelfe, that the King had great delight in his paſtimes.
               On the fourth of Ianuary the ſaide Lord of merry diſports came by water to the Tower, where hee entred, and after rode through Tower ſtréete, where he was met and receiued by Sergeant Vaus, Lord of miſrule to maſter Iohn Mainard, one of the Shriues of London, & ſo conducted thorow the Cittie with a great company of young

Lords and Gentlemen, to the houſe of ſir George Barne Lord Maior, where he with the chiefe of his company dined, and at his departure the Lord Maior gaue him a ſtanding Cuppe with a couer, ſiluer and gilt, of the value of x. pound: the reſidue of his Gentlemen and ſeruants dined at other Aldermens houſes, and with the Shrieues.
               In the Moneth of Ianuary the King fell ſicke of a cough, which grieuouſly increaſed,An. reg. 7. and at the laſt ended in a conſumption of the lights.
               The firſt of March began a Parliament at Weſtminſter, and brake vp on the 31. of March,Parliament, 1553. Subſidie. then being Good-friday, a ſubſidie was granted of 4. ſhillings the pound lands, and two ſhillings eight pence goods.
               The third of Aprill, being Munday after Eaſter day, the children of Chriſts Hoſpitall in London, came from thence through the City to the ſermon at ſaint Mary ſpittle, all cloathed in pl
                     •
                  nket coats with red caps, and the mayden children in the ſame liuery with karchiefes, all which were there placed on the ſcaffold of eight ſtages, and there ſate the Sermon time.
               The tenth of Aprill the Lord Maior was ſent for to the Court, and at that time the King gaue to him for a workhouſe for the poore and idle perſons of the Citie of London,Bridewell giuen to the Citie of London. The Sauoy ſuppreſſed. Voiage to Muſcouie. his place of Bridewell, and ſeuen hundred marks lands of the Sauoy rents, with all the beds and bedding of the Hoſpitall of the Sauoy, toward the maintenance of the ſaid workehouſe.
               The 20. of May, by the encouragement of one

                  Sebaſtian Cabot, thrée great ſhips well furniſhed, were ſent forth for the aduenture of the vnknown voiage to Muſcouia and other eaſt parts of the North ſeas.
               
                  K. Edward deceaſed.King Edward being about the age of ſixtéene yeares ended his life at Gréenewich on the ſixt of Iuly, when he had raigned 6. yeares, 5. moneths, and odde daies, and was buried at Weſtminſter.
               The tenth of Iuly was proclamation made of the death of King Edward, and how he had ordained that the Lady Iane, daughter to Francis Dutcheſſe of Suffolke,Lady Iane proclamed Queene. (which Lady Iane was married to the Lord Gilford Dudley, fourth ſonne to the Duke of Northumberland) ſhould be heire to the Crowne of England.
               The 11. of Iuly Gilbert Pot, Drawer to Ninion Sanders Vintner,Gilbert Pot puniſhed in Cheape. dwelling at Saint Iohns head within Ludgate, was ſet on the pillory in Cheape, with both his eares nailed and cleane cut off, for words ſpeaking at the time of the Proclamation of the Lady Iane.
               
               
                  Lady Mary fled.Lady Mary eldeſt daughter to King Henry the eight, fled into Framingham Caſtle in Suffolke, where the people in the country almoſt wholly reſorted to her.
               In Oxford Sir Iohn Williams, in Buckinghamſhire, Sir Edmond Pecham, and in diuers other places, many men of worſhip offering themſelues as guides to the common people, gathered great powers, and with all ſpéede made toward Suffolke where Lady Mary was.
               Alſo the 13. of Iuly, by appointment of the

Counſell, the duke of Northumberland, the Earle of Huntington, the Lord Gray of Wilton, and diuers other, with a great number of men of armes ſet forward to fetch the Lady Marie by force, and were on their way as farre as Bury.
               The 19. of Iuly the Counſell aſſembled themſelues at Baynards Caſtle, where they commoned with the Earle of Pembrooke, and immediately with the Maior of London, certaine Aldermen, and the Shriues, Garter King of armes, and a Trumpet came into Cheape, where they proclaimed the Lady Mary (daughter to King Henry the eight, and Quéene Katherine) Quéene of England,Lady Mary proclaimed Queene. France and Ireland.
               The 20. of Iuly, Iohn Duke of Northumberland, being at Saint Edmonſbury, (and hauing ſure knowledge that the Lady Mary was at London proclaimed Quéene) returned backe againe to Cambridge, and about fiue of the Clocke in the euening, he came to the market croſſe, and cauſed the Lady Mary to be likewiſe proclaimed Quéene of England, but ſhortly after he was arreſted in the Kings Colledge. And the 25. of Iuly hee with other was brought vp to the Tower of London, vnder the conduct of Henry Earle of Arundell: Thus was the matter ended without bloodſhed, which men feared would haue brought the death of many thouſands.
            
            
               
               Queene Mary.
               
                  An, reg, 1
                  
                     MAry the eldeſt daughter to K. Henry the eight, beganne her raigne the ſixt of Iuly, in the yeare 1553. ſhe came to London. and was receiued with great ioy, & entred the tower the third of Auguſt, where Thomas Duke of Norffolke, Doctor Gardiner late Biſhop of Wincheſter, and Edward Courtney, ſonne and heire to Henry Marqueſſe of Exceſter, priſoners in the Tower diſcharged. The fifth of Auguſt,Biſhops reſtored. 
                  Edmond Bonner late Biſhop of London, priſoner in the Marſhalſey, and Cuthbert Tunſtall Biſhop of Durham priſoner in the Kings Bench, were reſtored to their Seas: ſhortly after all the Biſhops which had béene depriued in the time of King Edward the ſixt were reſtored to their Biſhoprickes, alſo all beneficed men that were married, or would not forſake their opinion, were put out of their liuings, others ſet in the ſame.
               
                  Men drowned at London bridge.The 11. of Auguſt, certaine Gentlemen minding to paſſe vnder London bridge in a whirrie,

were there ouerturned, and 6. of them drowned.
               The 13. of Auguſt, maiſter Bourne a Canon of Paules, preaching at Pauls Croſſe, ſo offended ſonne of the audience, that they breaking ſilence,Violence vnto a Preacher at Paules Croſſe. cried pull him out, and one threw a dagger at him whereupon maſter Bradford and Iohn Rogers two Preachers of King Edwards time, with much labour conuaied the ſaide maſter Bourne out of the audience into Paules Schoole.
               The 22. of Auguſt,The Duke of Northumberland beheaded. New coins. 
                  Iohn Duke of Northumberland. Sir Iohn Gates, & ſir Thomas Palmer knights, were beheaded on the Tower hill.
               The 4. of September was proclaimed certaine new coines, a ſoueraine of gold of 30. s. the halfe ſoueraine 15. s. an Angell x. s. the halfe angell 5. s. Of ſiluer the great, halfe groat, and peny: Alſo baſ
                     •
                   coines to be currant as before.Subſidy pardoned. At the ſame day by proclamation was pardoned the Subſidie of foure ſhillings the pound lands, and 2. s. 8. d. the pound of moueable goods, granted in the laſt Parliament of King Edward.
               
               
                  Thomas Ofley, William Hewet. Shriues.
               
               The laſt of September,Coronatiō. Quéene Mary rode through the Citie of London to Weſtminſter. A Dutchman ſtood on the wethercocke of Pauls ſtéeple, holding a ſtreamer in his hand of fiue yardes long, and bowing his knée when the Quéene rode by, vnder him were two ſcaffolds, one aboue the croſſe, and the other beneath the bowle of the croſſe, both ſet with ſtreamers wauing, and torches burning.
               On the morrow the Quéene was crowned at

Weſtminſter by Doctor Gardiner Biſhop of Wincheſter.
               
                  Graueſend barge ouerturned. Charitable deeds of ſir Thomas White.The 25. of October the Barge of Graueſend was ouerturned, and 14. perſons drowned.
               
                  Sir Thomas White, Merchant Tailor Maior.
               
               This Sir Thomas White, a worthy Patron and protector of poore ſchollers and learning, erected a Colledge in Oxford now called S. Iohns Colledge, before Bernards Colledge: he alſo erected S. Iohns hall, ſometime Gloceſter Colledge in Oxford, for one hundred of ſchollars or more, and adioyned it to his Colledge. Hee alſo erected ſchooles at Briſtow and Reading: moreouer this worſhipfull Cittizen in his life time gaue to the Cittie of Briſtow, two thouſand pounds of ready money to purchaſe landes to the yearely value of 120. pound, for the which it is agréed, that the Maior, Burgeſſes, and commonaltie of Briſtow, in Anno, 1567.
                   and ſo yearely during the tearme of ten yeares then next enſuing, ſhould cauſe to be paide at Briſtow an hundred pound of lawfull money. The 800. pound to be lent to ſixtéene poore young cloathiers, and frée men of the ſame towne, for the ſpace of ten yeares, fiftie pound the péece of them, putting ſufficient ſureties for the ſame, and at the end of tenne yeares, to be lent to other ſixtéene at the diſcretion of the Maior, Aldermen, and foure of the common counſell of the ſaide Cittie. The other 200. 
                  l. to be imploied to ye prouiſion of corne, for the reliefe of the poore of the ſame Citie, for their ready money without gaine to betaken. And after the end of 9. yeares on the feaſt of

Saint Bartholmew, which ſhall be in Ann. 1577.
                   at the Marchant-tailors hall in London, vnto the Maior and commonaltie of the Cittie of Yorke, or to their Attorney authoriſed, an hundred and foure pound, to be lent vnto foure young men of the ſaid Citie of Yorke, frée men and inhabitants, (clothiers alwaies to bee preferred) viz. to euery one 25. pound, to haue and occupy the ſame for the tearme of tenne yeares, without paying any thing for the loane of foure pound ouerplus of the 104 pound, at the pleaſure of the Maior and commonaltie for their paines to bee taken about the receits and paiments of the ſaid 100. 
                  l. The like order in all points is taken for the deliuery of 104 pound in the yeare, 1578. to the Cittie of Canterbury in the yeare, 1579. to Reding, 1580. to the company of the Marchant-tailors, 1581. to Gloceſter, 1582. to Worceſter, 1583. to Exceſter, 1584. to Saliſbury, 1585. to Worceſter, 1586. to Norwich, 1587. to Southhampton, 1588. to Lincolne, 1589. to Wincheſter, 1590. to Oxford, 1591. to Hereford Caſt, 1592. to Cambridge, 1593. to Shrewſbury, 1594. to Linne, 1595. to Bathe, 1596. to Darby, 1597. to Ipſwich, 1598. to Colcheſter, 1599. to Newcaſtle. And then to begin againe at briſtow 104. pound, the next yéere to the Citie of Yorke, and ſo forth to euery of the ſaid Cities and townes in the like order as afore, and thus to continue for euer. More, this Sir Thomas White gaue vnto the Maior and commonaltie of Couentry, the ſumme of 1400. pound, to purchaſe landes and tenements to the value of

ſeuentie pound by the yeere, which the ſaid Maior and Communaltie did purchaſe by the onely procurement and aid of the ſaid ſir Thomas White, for the reliefe and preferment of the Commonwealth of the ſaid Citie of Couentry, being then in great decay. The rents and profits whereof, he hath deuiſed to be yeerely conuerted as followeth. Firſt, that twelue poore men Inhabitants of the foreſaid Citie, ſhall haue paid vnto them in free almes, the ſumme of 24. pounds yeerely, the ſame to be paid vnto them vpon the xi. of March, yeerely, or within vi. daies after, viz. to euery of them xl. s. a peere for euer. Further, hee hath deuiſed, that for the ſpace of tenne yeeres within one yeere after his deceaſe, to foure poore young men of the ſaid City xl. pound yeerely, viz. ten pound to each of them for ix. yeeres following the receit thereof, in freelone. And after thoſe ix. yeeres be expired, to other iiii. poore young men of the ſaid Citie, likewiſe for ix. yeeres, & ſo from ix. yeeres to ix. yeeres for euer. And after thoſe ten yeeres be expired, he doth deuiſe that the ſaid Maior, or Communaltie, and Bailifes of Couentry for the ſpace of thirty yeeres, ſhall imploy the ſaid xl. l. yeerely to two yong men of the ſaid Citie for nine yeeres in free lone for euer, and ſo likewiſe after thoſe nine yeers, from nine yeeres to nine for euer. And after thoſe thirty yeeres bee expired, the ſaid ſumme of forty pound, yeerely to be deliuered in free lone to one young man of the ſaid Citie, for nine yeeres, and ſo likewiſe from nine yeeres to nine yeeres for euer.
               
                  And after that, he doth deuiſe the ſaid ſumme of fortie pound, to bee paid and deliuered to the Towne of Northampton, the ſame to be deliuered to one young man for nine yeeres in free lone, and ſo from nine yeeres to nine yeeres for euer. And then the next yeere after that, to the Towne of Leiceſter, as aforeſaid. And the next yeere after that, to the Towne of Nottingham, as aforeſaid. And the next yeere after that, to the Towne of Warwicke, as aforeſaid. And then againe to Couentry for one yeere, and ſo to the other townes aforeſaid, one after another for euer. And he doth deuiſe to the Maſter and Wardens of the Marchantaylors, to ſee the ſaid deuiſe truely executed and performed according to the couenants, twenty s. yeerely for euer. And to the Maior, Recorder, and tenne Aldermen of Couentry for their paines in putting foorth the ſaid money, ſixe ſhillings eight pence to each of them for euer, and to the Steward and towne Clerke for making of the Bonds continually without any charge to thoſe that receiue the ſaid mony, twentie ſhillings yeerely for euer, this is in the Records remayning in the Marchantaylors Hall. And furthermore, as I haue receiued from Saint Iohns Colledge in Oxford, the ſame Sir Thomas White inlarged the gift of 1400. pound aforeſaid, to be deliuered to the Citie of Couentry, to the ſumme of 2060. pound, or thereabout, towards the purchaſing of lands, within the City of Couentry or neere to the ſame, the rents whereof to bee imployed as is before rehearſed, with addition alſo

to pay yearely fortie pound to the ſaid Colledge of Saint Iohns in Oxford, for annuitie for euer.
               
                  Cardinall Poole recalled.Cardinall Poole was ſent for to returne to England.
               The 12. of Nouember, Doctor Cranmer Archbiſhop of Canterbury, Lady Iane that was before proclaimed Quéene, and the Lord Gilford her husband, were araigned at Guild hall of London, and condemned of Treaſon.
               
                  A treaty for marriage with the Queen.In the beginning of the month of Ianuary, the Emperour ſent a Noble man called Ecmondine, and certaine other Ambaſſadors into England, to conclude a mariage betweene King Phillip his ſon, and Quéene Mary.
               
               
                  Commotion in Kent by Sir Th. Wiat.The 21. of December, began the Church ſeruice to be done in Latine, as the ſame had béene left in the laſt yeare of King Henry the eight.
               The 25. of Ianuary, Sir Iohn Gage Chamberlaine, certified the Lord Maior of London, that Sir T. Wiat
                  Wiats inſurrection. with certaine other rebels were vp 
                     〈◊〉
                   Kent, whereupon great watch was kept, and that night the Lord Maior rode about to peruſe the ſame, and euery night after two Aldermen did the like, in the day time the gates of the Citie warded by ſubſtantiall Citizens.
               The 27. of Ianuary the Lord Treaſurer came to Guild-hall from the Counſell to requeſt the citizens to prepare 500. footemen well harniſhed, to goe againſt the ſaid Wiat, which was granted, and on the morrowe were ſent to Graueſend by water.
               The 29. of Ianuary the Duke of Norfolke

with the Captaine of the guard, & other ſouldiers,Duke of Norfolke ſent againſt Wiat. and the Captaine and ſouldiers that were ſent for London, minded to aſſault Rocheſter Caſtle where Wiat and his company lay, but the Captaines of the Cittie and their ſouldiers fled ouer Rocheſter bridge to Wiat, ſo that the Duke was faine to returne againe to London with great feare of his life.
               Thus Wiats number being ſtrengthned with the Quéenes ordinance and treaſure, the 30.
                  Wiat Strengthned with the queenes ordinance. of Ianuary, he remooued to Blacke heath.
               
                  Henry Duke of Suffolke father to Lady Iane, flying into Leiceſter-ſhire, and Warwicke-ſhire, made proclamation againſt the Quéenes Marriage with the Prince of Spaine, &c. But the people inclined not to him.
               The firſt of February the commons of the Citie aſſembled in their Liueries at the Guild hall whither the Quéene with her Lords came riding from Weſtminſter, and there after vehement wordes againſt Wiat, declared that ſhée ment not otherwiſe to marry, then the Counſell ſhould thinke both honourable and commodious to the Realme, and therefore willing them truely to aſſiſt her, in oppreſſing ſuch as contrary to their duties rebelled:Lord William Howard Lieutenant of the Citie of London. Shée appointed Lord William Howard Lieutenant of the Citie, and the Earle of Pembroke Generall of the field, which both prepared all things neceſſary. Wiat entred Southwarke the third of February, wherefore the draw-bridge was broken downe, Ordinance bent to that part, general pardon proclaimed to all that

would giue ouer, and forſake their rebels. After Wiat had laine thrée dayes in Southwarke, hée turned his iourney to Kingſtone on Shrouetueſday in the morning, being the ſixt of February, where he paſſed ouer the Thames▪ and purpoſed to haue come to London in the night▪ but by meanes that the carriage of his chiefe ordinance brake, he could not come before it was faire day. The ſame Shrouetneſday in the afternoone were two men hanged in Paules Church-yard,Two men hanged in Paules Church-yard. one late Shriue of Leiceſter, the other a Baker. On the morrow early in the morning, the Earle of Pembrooke and diuers other, were in St. Iames fields with a great power, and their Ordinance ſo bent, that Wiat was faine to leaue the common way, and with a ſmall company came vnder St. Iames wall from the danger of the Ordinance, and ſo went by Charing Croſſe vnto the Bel Sauage nigh vnto Ludgate, without reſiſtance, in at the which gate hée thought to haue béene receiued, but perceiuing that he was defeated of his purpoſe,Wiat taken. he fled backe againe, and at Temple b
                     •
                  t was taken and brought by water to the Tower of London.
               The tenth day of February the Duke of Suffolke which was taken in Leiceſterſhire,The Duke of Suffolke brought to the lower. Lady Iane beheaded. Wiats men hanged. was brought to the citty of London by the Earle of Huntington, and one of his brethren with him, and ſo had to the Tower.
               The 12. of February Lady Iane, and her huſband Lord Gilford were beheaded.
               The 14. and 15. of February about the number

of 50. of Wiats faction, were hanged on twentie pairs of Gallowes in diuers places about the Cittie.
               The 17. of February was proclamation made,Strangers baniſhed the realme. that all ſtrangers ſhould auoid the Realme within 14. daies next enſuing, vpon pain of their goods to be confiſcate (all frée Denizens, Marchants, and Embaſſadors excepted.)
               The 22. of February, certaine of Wiats faction to the number of 400. and more, were led to Weſtminſter, coupled together with halters about their neckes, and there in the Tiltyard, the Quéene (who looked foorth of her Gallery) pardoned them.
               The 24. of February H. Gray,
                  Duke of Suffolke beheaded. Duke of Suffolke was beheaded on the Tower hill.
               The 11. of Aprill, Sir Thomas Wiat was beheaded on the Tower hill, and after quartered,1554 Th. Wiat beheaded. his quarters were ſet vp in diuers places, and his head on the Gallowes at Hay hill neare Hide Parke, from whence it was after ſhortly ſtollen.
               The 27. of Aprill,W. Thom. quartered. Lord Thomas Gray was beheaded. William Thomas Gentleman for conſpiring Quéene Maries death, was drawne to Tiburne and there hanged and quartered the 18. of May.
               The tenth of Iune Doctor Pendleton Preached at Paules Croſſo, at whom a Gun was ſhot,A Gun ſho
                        •
                      at a Preacher. the pellet whereof lighted on the Church wall, but the ſhooter could not be found.
               The 22. of Iune was proclamation made, forbidding the ſhooting in hand Gunnes, and bearing

of weapons.An reg. 2. An impoſture. The 15. of Iuly, Edward Croft, about the age of 18. yeares ſtood on a ſcaffold at Paules Croſſe all the ſermon time, where ſhee confeſſed, that ſhee being moued by diuers lewde perſons thereunto, had vpon the 14. of March laſt before paſſed, counterfeited certaine ſpéeches in an houſe without Alderſgate of London, through the which, the people of the whole Cittie were wonderfully moleſted.
               The 19. of Iuly, the Prince of Spaine arriued at Southampton, after hee came to Wincheſter, and there going to Church was honourably receiued of the Biſhop,The mariage of K. Phillip & Q. Mary. and a great number of Nables. On St. Iames day the marriage was ſolemnized betwéene him and Quéene Mary. Shortly after they came to London, where with great prouiſion they were receiued of the Citizens the 18. of Auguſt.
               
                  Sh
                        •
                     s.
                  Dauid Woodrofe, William Cheſter.
               
               
                  A Spaniard hanged.The 26. of October, a Spaniard was hanged at Charing-croſſe, for killing of an Engliſhman in fight.
               
                  Maior. Cardinall Poole.
                  Sir Iohn Lion Grocer, the 28. of October.
               
               The 24. of Nouember, Cardinall Poole came into England, was by a Parliament reſtored to his old dignitie, and ſhortly after came into the Parliament houſe, where the King and Quéene and other States being preſent, hée exhorted them to returne to the communion of the Church. The next day the whole Court of Parliament deſired the King and Quéene, and cardinall, that by their meanes they might be reſtored to the ſea of Rome.

The 18. of Nouember,Q. Mary bruted to be with child. the Lord Maior of London with the Aldermen in Scarlet, and the commons in their beſt Liueries, aſſembled in Paules Church, where Doctor Chadſey one of the Prebends Preached: hée read them a letter ſent from the Counſell, the effect whereof was, that the Biſhop of London ſhould cauſe Te Deum to bée ſung in all the Churches of his Dioceſſe, with continuall prayer for the Quéene, which was conceiued and quicke with child as was thought: the letter being read, he began his Sermon with this theame: Ne timeas Maria, inueniſti enim gratiam apud Deum: which Sermon being ended, Te deum was ſung.
               The ſecond of December, Cardinall Poole came to Paules Church, where hée tarried till the King came from Weſtminſter,Cardinall Poole came to Paules. and then the Lord Chancellour entred Paules Croſſe, and preached a Sermon. In the which Sermon hée declared that the King and Quéene had reſtored the Pope to his ſupremacy, and thrée Eſtates aſſembled in the Parliament, ſubmitting themſelues to the ſame.
               The 27. of December,Prince of Peiemount. 
                  Emmanuel Prince of Piemount with other Lords were receiued at Graueſend, and ſo conueied to Weſtminſter.
               The 9. of Ianuary,Prince of Orenge. the Prince of Orenge landed at London.
               The 4: of February Iohn Rogers Vicar of Saint Sepulchres was burnt in Smithfield.Ioh. Rogers burnt.
               
               The 22. of February ninetie nine horſes and two Carriers laden with treaſure of gold, and

ſiluer brought out of Spaine,The King of Spaines treaſure. was conuayed thorow the City to the Tower of London, vnder the donduct of ſir Thomas Greſham, the Queenes Marchant and others.
               
                  1555. Earle of Deuonſhire deliuered. Vſe of Coaches firſt in England.Againſt Eaſter the Earle of Deuonſhire came to the Court, and about ten dayes after, the Lady Elizabeth came likewiſe to the Queene.
               This yeere Walter Ripon made a Coach for the Earle of Rutland, which was the firſt Coach (ſaith he) that euer was made in England, ſince to wit, in Anno 1564.
                   the ſaid Walter Ripon made the firſt hollow turning Coach, with pillars and arches for her Maieſtie, being then her ſeruant. Alſo in Anno 1584.
                   a chariot throne with foure pillars behind to beare a Canopy with a Crowne imperiall on the toppe, and before, two lower pillars, whereon ſtood a Lion and a Dragon, the ſupporters of the Armes of England.
               
                  W. Flower burnt at Weſtminſter.On Eaſter day a Prieſt named William Flower with a wood knife wounded another Prieſt as he was miniſtring the Sacrament to the people in S. Margarets Church at Weſtminſter, for the which fact the ſaid William the 24. of Aprill had his right hand ſmitten off, and for opinions in 
                     •
                  atters of Religion, was burned nigh vnto S. Margarets Churchyard.
               
                  A Millars ſonne fained to be King Edward the ſixth.The tenth of May, William Conſtable, who had named himſelfe to bee King Edward the ſixt, was ſent to the Marſhalſey, and the 22. of May, hee was carryed about Weſtminſter Hall before the Iudges, whipped about the Pallace, and then through Weſtminſter into Smithfield.
               
                  The firſt of Iuly Iohn Bradford was burned in Smithfield for Religion.Bradford burnt.
               
               In this moneth of Auguſt was brought to Lin a monſtrous fiſh of forty foote in length.An, reg, 3. Monſtrous fiſh.
               
               King Philip went to Bruſſels in Brabant to viſit the Emperour his father.
               
                  Thomas Leigh, Iohn Machill. Shriues.
               
               In October fell ſuch aboundance of raine,Great land waters. that for the ſpace of ſixe dayes, men might row with boats in Saint Georges fieldes, water came into Weſtminſter hall halfe a yard déepe.
               The 26. of October,Ridley and Latimer. Doctor Ridley and Doctor Latimer was burned at Oxford for Religion.
               
                  Sir William Garrard Haberdaſher, Maior.
               
               The Quéene yéelded vp to the ſpirituall men the firſt fruits and tenths of all Biſhopricks,Firſt fruits and tenths reſtored to the Clergy. Benefices, and Eccleſiaſticall liuings. In this Parliament was granted to the Quéene, a Subſidy of the Laity, from fiue pound to ten pound, 8. pence of the pound, from ten pound to twenty pound, 12 pence of the pound, and from twenty pound vpward, 16. pence of the pound, and all ſtrangers double, and the Cleargy granted 6. ſhillings of the pound.
               
                  St
                        ••••
                      Gardiner Biſhop of Wincheſter, chancellor of England, died the ninth of Nouember,D. Gardiner deceaſed. and was 
                     〈…〉
                   Wincheſter.
               
                  William Con
                        •
                     le,
                  The miller, ſonne faining to be King Edward, who had cauſed letters to be caſt abroad, th
                     ••
                   King Edward was aliue, and to ſome ſhewed himſelfe to be King Edward, the 13. of March was drawne, hanged, and quartered at Tiborne.
               
                  
                  D. Cranmer burnt.The 21. of March, Doctor Cranmer Archbiſhop of Canterbury, was burned at Oxford for Religion.
               Cardinall Poole on Sunday next, was conſecrated Archbiſhop of Canterbury.
               The 28. of March, a part of Newgate, called Mannings hall was burnt.1556 Newgate a fire. Conſpiracy
               
               Certaine perſons purpoſed to haue robbed the Quéenes Exchequer, to the intent they might bee able to maintaine warre againſt her. Vdall Throgmorton, Peeham, Daniel, and Stanton, were apprehended, and diuers others fle
                     •
                  .
               
                  Throgmorton and others executed.The 28. of Aprill, Throgmorton and Richard Vdall were drawne to Tiburne, and there hanged and quartered.
               The 12. of May a ſhip loaden with herneſhaws was brought out of Brabant to Billinſgate, and the herons were there ſold for xii. pence, or xiiii. the beſt.
               The ninetéenth of May, Stanton was likewiſe executed.
               The eight of Iune, Roſſey Detike, and Bedell, were executed at Tiborne.
               
                  Sands hanged.The 11, of Iune, Sandes, a younger ſonne of Lord Sandes, was hanged at Saint Thomas of Waterings for a robbery.
               
                  Thirteene burnt at Stradford. An, reg, 4.The 27. of Iune, 13. perſons were burnt at Stratford the Bow.
               The eight of Iuly, Henry Peckam, and Thomas Daniel were hanged and headed on the tower hill for conſpiracy.
               This yeare in the moneth of Auguſt, ſir William

Garrard Maior of London (being inuited) dined with the reader in the middle Temple,The Maiors ſword put downe. from whence when the Maior departed, certaine Gentlemen of the yonger ſort, as well of that houſe as of the inner Temple, by force put and held downe the ſword, before the Maior, till hée came to the outer gate next the ſtréete, for the which fact, within foure daies after, the two Readers with all their Companies of both houſes, were ſent for to the Rolles in Chancerie lane, where ſate the Marqueſſe of Wincheſter, Lord Treaſurer, aſſiſted with xi. other of the Quéenes Priuy Counſell. Theſe commaunded the two Readers, to deliuer the names of the principall doers in the fore-expreſſed action, the which if they refuſed to doe, themſelues ſhould bée committed. Whereupon (conſulting a little) they preſented the names of twentie, whereof the Lord committed fourtéene to the Fléete, and tooke bonds of the reſt to appeare in the Starre-Chamber the firſt day of the next Tearme: at the which day appearance being made, as well by thoſe committed, as the other that were in bonds, through humble interceſſion of all the head and chiefe learned men of euery Bench and Barre in the foure Innes of Court, their puniſhment was referred to the diſcretions of the Benches of thoſe houſes, where the faults were committed, and ſo all was ended in that courſe, and the priſoners with the reſt diſcharged, which notwithſtanding were after for the moſt part expelled their houſes, till vpon great ſubmiſſion, and long ſuit, they were reſtored

by degrées and times.
               
                  Conſpirators executed. A great burning feauer, whereof 7. Aldermen died in London. Roſe pence ſuppreſt.
                  Cleba a Schoolemaſter, and thrée of Lincolnes Inne, being brethren in Norfolke, were hanged and quartered at Burie for conſpiracy.
               The laſt yeare began the hote burning feuers, whereof died many olde perſons, ſo that in London died ſeuen Aldermen, in the ſpace of tenne moneths.
               The 19. of September the Roſe pence being a baſe coine, made in the raigne of Henry the eight, and Edward the ſixt were forbidden, to be any longer currant in England, but to be onely currant in Ireland.
               
                  
                     William Harper, Iohn White, Shriues.
                  
                  
                     Sir Thomas Ofley Merchant-tailor, Maior.
                  
               
               
                  A falſe accuſer well marked.The 21. of Nouember, a man was brought from Weſtminſter with a paper on his head, riding, his face toward the horſe taile, to the ſtandard in Cheape, and there ſet on the Pillory, and after burned in both the chéekes with the letters F. and A. for falſely accuſing one of the Court of the Common Pleas in Weſtminſter of treaſon.
               
                  Note this example.The 16. of December, a ſtranger borne, was arraigned for making keies to Newgate, to haue murdered the Kéeper, and let foorth the priſoners, at which time at his arraignement, hée thruſt a knife into the ſide of his fellow priſoner, that had giuen witneſſe againſt him, ſo that he was in perill of death thereby, for the which fact he was immediately taken from the barre into the ſtréete before the Iuſtice hall, where his hand being firſt ſtricken off, he was then hanged on a gibit.
               
                  The kéeper of Newgate was arraigned and indited,A warning for Gaolers Gun ſhot into the Court. for that the ſaide priſoner had a weapon about him, and his hands looſe.
               The fourth of Ianuary a ſhip before Greenewich (the Court being there) ſhot off her Ordinance,The very like chanced in Qu. Eliz
                        •
                     be
                        •
                     hs time. one péece being charged with a bullet, which paſſed through the Court, and did no more hurt.
               The ſeuen and twentie of February, an Ambaſſadour came from the Emperour of Muſcouy,Ambaſſadour from Moſcouy. who was receiued at Totenham by the Merchants aduenturers of London, riding in veluet coates and chaines of gold, and by them conuaied through the Citie vnto Fanchu
                     •
                  ch ſtréete, where he lodged vntill the twelfth of May, and then returned.
               The Lord Sturton murthered this men,A preſident of ſpeciall Iuſtice. for the which he was conuaied from the tower of London to Saliſbury, and there hanged with foure of his ſeruants, the 6. of March.
               A blazing Starre was ſéene at all times of the night, the 6.7.8.9. and 10. of March.A blazing ſtarre.
               
               King Philip returned into England and the 12.
                  K. Phillip returned into England. of March paſſed through London, with the Quéen and the Nobles of the Realmes.
               The 23. of Aprill, Thomas Stafford and other ſo the number of 32. perſons, cōming out of France,1557 A practiſe of rebellion tooke the Caſtle of Scarborough, which they enioyed two dayes, and then were taken & brought to London.
               The 28. of May,T. Stafford beheaded. 
                  T. Stafford was beheaded on the tower hill, & on the morrow thrée of his companions

were drawne to tiborne, and there hanged and quartered.
               
                  Wars with France. Engliſhmen ſent to Saint Quintans.The 7. of Iune open warre was proclaimed againſt the French King.
               The ſixt of Iuly the King paſſed ouer to Calleis, and ſo into Flanders, where hée made great prouiſion of Warre againſt the French King: the Quéene ſent ouer an Army of one thouſand horſemen, foure thouſand footmen, and two thouſand Pioners, to aide King Phillip, whereof the Earle of Pembrooke was generall.
               
                  Anne of Cleaue dead An. reg. 5. S. Quintaines taken. Dearth and plentie.The fift of Iuly died the Lady Anne of Cleaue, and was buried at Weſtminſter.
               The 18. of Auguſt the Towne of Saint Quintaines was taken by King Phillip, with the helpe of Engliſhmen, which much vexed the French.
               This yeare before harueſt, wheate was ſold for foure marke the quarter, malt at 44. ſhillings the quarter, beanes and Rie at 40. ſhillings the quarter, and peaſe at 46. ſhillings 8. pence. But after harueſt, wheate was ſold for 5. ſhillings the quarter, malt 6. ſhillings eight pence. Rie at thrée ſhillings and 4. pence. In the Country wheate was ſold for 4. ſhillings the quarter, malt 4. ſhillings eight pence, and in the ſame places a Buſhell of Rie for a pound of Candles, which was foure pence.
               
                  
                     Richard Malerie, Iames Altham, Shriues.
                  
                  
                     Sir Thomas Curteis Fiſhmonger, Maior.
                  
               
               
                  Calice loſt by the Engliſhmen.The firſt of Ianuary the French men came to Calice with a great army, and within foure daies were maſters thereof, and ſhortly after won all

the péeces on that ſide of the ſea.
               The French King alſo inuaded Flanders, ſpoiled and burnt Dunkirke before King Phillip could come to the reſcue.
               The 7. of Iuly, within a mile of Nottingham,1558 An, reg, 6. A wondrous ſtrange tempeſt. a tempeſt of thunder, as it came through 2. townes, beat downe all the houſes and Churches, the bels were caſt to the out ſide of the Churchyards, and ſome webbes of lead, 400 foote in the field, writhen like a paire of gloues, the riuer of Trent running betwéene the two townes, the water with the mud was carried a quarter of a mile, and caſt againſt trées, the trees were pulled vp by the roots, and caſt twelue ſcore off. A child was taken forth of a mans hands, and carried a hundred foote, and then let fall, & ſo died, fiue or ſixe men were ſlaine, there fell ſome haileſtones that were fiftéene inches about, &c.
               The quartaine agues continued more vehemently then the laſt yeare paſſed,The laſt yeares violent feauers continued ſtill. whereof died many old people, eſpecially Prieſts, ſo that a great number of Pariſhes were vnſerued.
               
                  
                     Iohn Halſe, Richard Champion, Shriues.
                  
                  
                     Sir Thomas Leigh Mercer, Maior.
                  
               
               King Phillip being abſent out of the Realme, Quéene Marie ended her life the 17. of Nouember in the yeare 1558. when ſhe had raigned 5. yeares foure moneths, and odde daies. The ſame day deceaſed Cardinall Poole, and a little before two of her Phyſitians, beſide diuers Biſhops and Noble men. Quéene Mary was buried at Weſtminſter,Queene Mary dieth. and Cardinall Poole at Canterbury.
            
            
               
               Queene Elizabeth
               
                  An. reg, 1.
                  THe 17. of Nouember 1558 came certaine newes vnto the Parliament houſe of the death of Quéene Mary, wherat many reioyced, and many lamented, and forthwith her death being generally knowne,
                     Q. Elizabeth proclaimed. they proclaimed the Lady Elizabeth ſecond daughter to King Henry the eight. Quéene of England, France, and Ireland, defender of the faith, &c. In London & Weſtminſter: the Quéene was then at Biſhops hatfield, but not proclaimed there vntill two dayes after.
               
                  The Clergy attend the Queene at highgate.The Quéene came ſhortly after from Hatfield to the Charterhouſe at London, and all the Biſhops met her by the way at Highgate, and knéeling acknowledged their allegiance.
               The Quéene remained at Charterhouſe vntill the time of her Coronation,coronation and the 14. of Ianuary ſhe rode in triumph through London to the pallace of Weſtminſter, and the next day was crowned by Doctor Oglethrop Biſhop of Carleite
                  ▪
               
               
                  The 20. of Ianuary began a parliament,A Parliament. wherin the firſt fruits, tenths, and the ſupremacy were reſerued and connexed to the Crowne: in this parliament time the Quéene granted licence for a frée diſputation to bee held in Weſtminſter Church,A diſputatiō
                   concerning ſome different points in Religion, but it came to no effect.
               The 24.
                  The maſſe ſuppreſſed, and the ſeruice in Engliſh. of Iune the booke of common Prayer was eſtabliſhed, and the Maſſe cleane ſuppreſſed in all Churches.
               The 11. of Iuly the Citizens made a ſhew before the Quéene of armed men, of halberdiers, pikemen, and muſkatiers.
               In the foreſaide moneth,Supremacy Biſhops depoſed. All Monkes and monaſteries ſuppreſſed. the Quéene began to put in practiſe the oath of S
                     •
                  premacie vpon Biſhops and other chiefe officers, which diuers refuſed and were depriued, and by authority of this parliament, all ſuch Religious houſes as were erected by Quéene Mary, were now quite ſuppreſſed.
               In Auguſt following all auncient Church reliques and new made Images in Queene Maries raigne,All roods & images pulled downe. were beaten downe and burned in the open ſtreetes.
               The eight of September,Obſequies for the French King. a ſolemne obſequie was kept in Pauls Church for the French King, Henry the ſecond, who died of a wound which hee receiued in running at tilt in Paris.
               
                  
                     Thomas Lodge, Roger Martin, Shriues.
                     The Duke of Norffolk An, reg, 2. 1559
                  
                  
                     Sir William Hewet, Clothworker, Maior.
                  
               
               The Duke of Norffolke is ſent towards Scotland to encounter with the French faction, which

at this time was growne very ſtrong in diuers parts of Scotland.
               
                  The Lord Gray beſiegeth Leeth. Engliſh Commiſſioners betweene the French and Scots.In Aprill the Lord Gray entred Scotland with ten thouſand men, and beſieged Leeth, where betwéene the French and the Engliſh were many hot ſkirmiſhes, and many ſlaine on either part.
               In May a noble man of France vpon his earneſt ſute, obtained of the Quéene to ſend ſir William Cecill, her principall Secretary, and Doctor Wotton, to treat with the French men in Scotland, by whoſe wiſedome the Scottiſh faction preuailed, and the French agreed to depart.
               The 5. of Iuly through ſhooting of a Gun in a houſe in crooked lane, a barrell of powder was ſet on fire, which blew vp foure houſes, ſhattered diuers others, ſlew twenty perſons outright, and hurt as many, beſides great damage to houſes and goods.
               
                  All baſe mony ſuppreſſed.This yeare the Quéene by conſent of her councell, made Proclamation for the vtter aboliſhing and ſuppreſſion of all manner of baſe copper monies, which vntill this time had béene currant throughout the Realme in diuers Kings raignes, and after this publication there was not any baſe mettall coined in England.
               
                  
                     Chriſtopher Draper, Thomas Roo, Shriues.
                  
                  
                     Sir William Cheſter, Draper; Maior.
                  
               
               
                  An, reg. 3. 1561 Marchant-tailors ſchoole.The 21. of March the wardens and aſſiſtants of the Marchant-tailors in London, founded the famous frée ſchoole in the Parriſh of S. Laurence Pounteney, and M. Richard H
                        •
                     ls of the ſame company, gaue 500. 
                  l. towards the purchaſe, wherein

the ſaide Schoole is kept.
               The x. of Aprill W Geffery was whipped from the Marſhalſey vnto Bedlam,Falſe Prophe
                        •
                     s. for publiſhing that one Iohn Moore was Ieſus Chriſt, which ſaid Iohn Moore after he had béene well whipped, confeſſed himſelfe a coſening knaue.
               The 4. of Iune betwéene 4. and 5.
                  Paules ſteeple burned. a clock in the after noone, there chanced a terrible tempeſt of thunder and lightning, and chiefly about London, where amongſt many harmes, it fired the loftie ſpire of Pauls ſtéeple, and began about the toppe thereof, which was two hundred foote hie from the top of the ſtone battlemenes, the fire ceaſed not vntill it came down to the roofe of the Church, and conſumed all the bels, lead and timber worke.
               
                  
                     Alexander Auenon, Humfrey Baskeruile.
                     Shriues.
                  
                  
                     Sir william Harper, Marchant-tailor.
                     Maior.
                  
               
               This Sir William Harpes founded a frée Schoole in the towne of Bedford,Free ſchoole at Bedford. where he was borne.
               The 15.
                  An, reg. 4. of Nouember the Quéenes Maieſtie publiſhed a Proclamation, wherein the reſtored to the Realme diuers ſmall péeces of ſiluer money, as the péece of ſixe pence, foure pence, thrée pence, two pence, and a peny, thrée halfe pence, and thrée farthings, and alſo forbad all forraine coines.
               In March a Mare brought forth a foale with one body and two heads, and a long taile growing out betwéene the two heads. A Sow forrowed a Pigge with foure legges like to the armes of a man child, with hands and fingers, &c.Monſtrons births.
               
               In Aprill a Sow farrowed a Pigge with two

bodies, eight feete, and but one head, many calues and lambs were monſtrous, ſome with collers of ſkin about their neckes, like to the double cuffes of ſhirts and neckerchiefes then vſed.
               
                  1562 A monſtrous child birth.The 14. of May a man child was borne at Ch
                     •
                  
                  cheſter in Suſſex, the head, armes, and legs whereof, were like an Anatomie, the breſt and belly big, from the nauill a long ſtring hanging about the necke, a coller of fleſh like the ruffe of a nekerchiefe, comming vp about the eares.
               The Quéenes Maieſtie in September addreſſed a band of her ſubiects to the towne of Newhauen in Normandy,Going to Newhauen vpon whoſe arriual the towns men and inhabitants ioyfully ſurrendred themſelues and their townes, which was kept by Engliſhmen from September, 1562. to the twentie nine of Iuly, 1563. The gouernour of which band was the Earle of Warwicke, who with the Captaines ſeruing there, & ſouldiers trained by them to knowledge of ſeruice together, with part of the old approued garriſon of Barwicke, and at that time both manfully defend the place, and valiantly encountred by ſundry ſkirmiſhes with Countie Ringraue and his band, the moſt part wherof were atchieued to the great ouerthrows of the aduerſaries part, and ſingular commendations of ours.
               
                  
                     William Allin, Richard Chamberlaine, Shriues.
                  
                  
                     Sir Thomas Lodge, Grocer, Maior.
                  
               
               
                  An, reg. 5. Tempeſt at Leiceſter. 1563The 16. of Ianuary great tempeſt of wind and thunder happened in the towne of Leiceſter, which vncouered 411. baies of houſes, and ouerturned many.
               
                  When the Frenchmen with huge Armies aſſembled out of all parts of France, to recouer the place of paſſage, the ſtopping whereof by our power was the double woe of their common wealth, there bred through the ſeaſon of the yeare, and putrification of the aire, a miſerable plague among our men, which maruellouſly increaſed with the death of diuers of the beſt Captaines and Souldiers, wherewithall there followed a cruell & quicke ſiege, whereat was preſent the young King himſelfe, the Conſtable, and the beſt tried number of warlike Souldiers within the whole Country. The Cannons were placed, the Caſtle and walles were battered, and ſundry breaches made beyond expectation, howbeit they were rewarded by our Sunners, our Captaines and ſouldiers, in couragious order ſtanding at ſeuerall breaches ready to defend their aſſaults, which perceiued by the enemy, they cauſed their trumpeters to ſound the blaſt of emparle, that compoſition might be made, wherein both parties concluded, the towne was deliuered the 29. of Iuly.
               The plague of peſtilence being in the towne of Newhauen,Peſtilence in 108. Pariſhes in London, beſides 11. in the ſubburbs. through the number of ſouldiers that returned into England, the infection thereof ſpred into diuers parts of this realme, but eſpecially the Citie of London was ſo infected, that in the ſame whole yeare, that is to ſay, from the firſt of Ianuary, 1562. vntil the laſt of December, in An. 1563
                   the whole number of all that died of all diſeaſes, as well within the city & liberties as in all out pariſhes, was 23660▪
                   & of thē there died of the plague

twentie thouſand, one hundred thirty ſixe.
               
                  Tempeſt at London.The 8. of Iuly, happened a great tempeſt of lightning and thunder, where-through a woman and thrée kine were ſlaine in the Couent garden neare Charing Croſſe: in Eſſex, a man was torne in péeces, his barne borne downe, and his hay burnt.
               There was no tearme kept at Michaelmas.
               
                  EarthquakeAn Earthquake in the moneth of Seytember, ſpecially in Lincolne and Northampton ſhires.
               
                  
                     Edward Bankes, Rowland Hayward, Shriues.
                  
                  
                     Sir Iohn Whight Grocer, Maior.
                  
               
               
                  The Maior taketh his oath at the Tower. An, reg 6. Lightning and thunder.The new Maior kept his feaſt at Guildhall, and tooke his oath at the outermoſt gate of the Tower of London.
               From the firſt of December to the twelfth, was ſuch continuall lightning and thunder, that the like had not béene ſéene nor heard by any man liuing.
               In the moneth of December was driuen on the ſhore at Grunſby in Lincolneſhire a monſtrous fiſh in length xix. yards. his taile xv. foote broad, and vi. yards betwéene his eyes.
               
                  Tearme kept at Hertford. 1564Hillary Tearme kept at Hertford Caſtle.
               Peace proclaimed betwéene England & France.
               Through ſute of the Armorers there was on the vigile of Saint Peter a watch in the Citie of London, which did onely ſtand in the high ſtreete, in Cheape, Cornehill and ſo forth to A
                     •
                  dgate.
               
                  The Qu: progreſſe through Cambridg.The fift of Auguſt the Quéenes Maieſty in her progreſſe came to the Vniuerſity of Cambridge, & was of all the Students moſt honourably receiued

in the Kings Colledge. She made within S. Maries Church a notable Oration in Latine, in the preſence of the whole learned Vniuerſitie, to the Students great comfort. The next day ſhee went forward to Fincinbrooke.
               The 30.
                  A good deuice. day of Auguſt was enacted by a common Counſell of the City of London, that all ſuch Citizens as from thenceforth ſhould bee conſtrained to ſell houſehold ſtuffe, ſhould firſt cauſe the ſame to bée cried thorow the City by a man with a bell, and then to be ſold by the common outcrier appointed for that purpoſe.
               The 20.
                  Great floods in the thames. of September roſe great floods in the riuer of Thames, where through the Marſhes were ouerflowed, and many cattell drowned.
               
                  Edward Iackeman, Lionell Ducket, Shriues.
               
               The ſecond of October was an obſequie at Pauls for Faroinando late Emperour.Obſequio for Ferdinando Emperor. Fiery impreſsions.
               
               The ſeuenth of October at night all the North parts of the Element ſéemed to bée couered with flames of fire, procéeding from the Northeaſt and Northweſt toward the midſt of the firmament, and diſcended Weſt.
               
                  Sir Richard Mallorie Mercer, Maior.
               
               The 21.
                  An, reg, 7. The thames frozen ouer. of December began a froſt which continued ſo extreamely, that on Newyeares euen people went ouer and along the thames on the yee, from London bridge to Weſtminſter, ſome plaied at the footeball, diuers of the Court being then at Weſtminſter, ſhot at pricks ſet vpon the thames. And people both men and women went on the thames, in greater number then in any

ſtréete of the Citty. On the third day of Ianuary at night it began to thaw, & on the fift day was no yee to be ſeene betwéene London bridge and Lambeth, which ſudden thaw cauſed great floods and high waters that bare downe bridges and houſes, and drowned many people in England, eſpecially in Yorkſhire, Owes bridge was born away. The third day of February,Ows bridge born down H Stuart married the Queene of Scots. 1565 
                  Henry Steuart Lord Darly eldeſt ſonne to Matthew Earle of Linneaux, tooke his iourney toward Scotland, and in ſommer following married Mary Quéene of Scotland.
               The 22. of Aprill, the Lady Margaret Counteſſe of Linneaux, was commanded to kéepe her chamber at the White hall, where ſhe remained till the two and twentieth of Iune, and then by ſir Frances Knowles and the guard conuaied her to the Tower of London by water.
               
                  Tempeſts at Chelſford.The 16. of Iuly about nine of the clocke at night began a tempeſt of lightning and thunder, with ſhowres of haile, which continued till thrée of the clocke in the next morning ſo terrible, that at Chelmiſford in Eſſex, 500. acres of corne was deſtroied, the glaſſe windowes on the Eaſt ſide of the towne, and on the Weſt and South ſides of the Church were beaten downe, with all the tiles of their houſes, beſides diuers barnes, chimnies, and the battlements of the Church which were ouerthrowne. The like harme was done in many other places, as at Léedes, Crainebrooke, Douer, &c.Margraue & Marques of Baden. 
                  Chriſtopher Prince, and Margraue of Baden, with Cicely his wife, ſiſter to the King of Swethland, in September landed at Douer, and the xi.

day of the ſame they came to London and were lodged at the Earle of Bedfoords place, where within foure dayes after ſhée trauelled, and was deliuered of a man childe, which child was chriſtened in the Quéenes Chappell of White Hall, the Quéenes Maieſtie being Godmother, gaue the child to name Edward Fortunatus.
               
               This yeare,Muſter of horſemen. by commaundement of the Counſell diuers muſters of light horſemen in ſundry dayes, and in ſeuerall places about the Citie of London were taken by the Maior and other commiſſioners for that purpoſe, by which meanes it happened on the eight of October (that Sir Richard Mallorie) riding through Tower ſtréet toward the tower hill there to haue taken muſter, as was appointed,The Maior of London his ſword ſeiſed. he was met by Sir Francis Iobſon then Lieutenant of the Tower, and by him forbidden to enter the hill with the ſword before him, whereunto no anſwers by the Maior could be heard, but the ſword was violently ſeaſed on by the Lieutenant and his men, and defended by the officers of the Maior, ſo that the Lieutenant called for more aſſiſtance out of the Tower, and the Maiors Officers were minded to haue raiſed tower ſtréet, and ſo more of the Citie, whereof was like to haue bin a great tumult, but the Lord Maior cauſed Proclamation to be made, that no man ſhould draw weapon, or ſtrike any ſtroke, but euery man to depart, horſemen and all, till they were againe warned to appeare, which was on the ſame day ſeuen night, being likewiſe monday, and the xv. of October, that they did there muſter before the

Maior in that very place on the tower hill before appointed, where, by the Counſels appointment, the Maior had the ſword peaceably borne before him, as he had béene accuſtomed.
               
                  
                     Iohn Riuers, Iames Hawes, Shriues.
                  
                  
                     Sir Richard Champion, Draper, Maior.
                  
               
               
                  An. reg, 8. The 17. of Nouember. Pauls gate blowen open.The 24. of December there roſe a great ſtorme of wind, by whoſe rage the Thames and Seas ouerwhelmed many perſons, and the great gates at the Weſt end of Saint Pauls Church in London, were through the force of the winde then in the weſterne part of the world blowne open.
               
                  1596 The Marques of Baden returneth. The 
                        •
                     urſe in Cornehill.The Marques of Caden, and the Lady Cicely his wife, ſiſter to the King of Swethen, now in the moneth of Aprill departed the land.
               Certaine houſes in Cornehill being firſt purchaſed by the Citizens of London, and coſt them more then 3532. pound, were afterward ſold to ſuch as ſhould carry them from thence, and then the ground being made plaine, poſſeſſion thereof was giuen to Sir Thom. Greſham Knight, there to build a place for Marchants to aſſemble in, at his owne proper charges, who on the 7. of Iune, laide the firſt ſtone of the foundation, and forthwith the workemen followed with ſuch diligence, that by the moneth of Nouember, in Ann. 1567.
                   the ſame was couered with ſlate.
               
                  The Queen progreſſe to Oxford.The 31. of Auguſt the Quéenes Maieſty in her Progreſſe came to the Vniuerſity of Oxford, and was of all the Students honourably receiued.
               
                  An. reg. 9.The 5. of September after diſputations, the Quéene at the humble ſuit of certaine of her Nobilitie,

made a briefe Oration in Latine to the Vniuerſitie, and the 6. her Maieſtie bade them farewell and rode to Ricote.
               
                  
                     Richard Lambart, Ambroſe Nicholas.
                     Shriues.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Langley, The 4. of Aprill.
                     Maior.
                  
                  
                     Sir Chriſtopher Draper Ironmonger.
                  
               
               
                  Charles Iames, the ſixt of that name,King Iames borne. ſonne to Henry Stuart Lord Darly and Marie, King and Quéene of Scots, was borne in Edenborough Caſtle the ninetéenth of Iune laſt paſt, and the eightéenth of December ſolemnely chriſtened at Sterling, whoſe Godfathers at the Chriſtning were Charles King of France, and Philibert Duke of Sauoy, and the Quéenes Maieſtie of England was the Godmother, who gaue a fount of gold curiouſly wrought and inameled, waighing 333. ounces.
               The 10. of February in the morning, H,
                  King of Scots murdered. 
                  Stuart Lord of Darly, before named King of Scots, by Scots in Scotland was traiterouſly murdered, the reuenge whereof remaineth in the mightie hands of God.
               The 22. of February the Lady Margaret Dowglas Counteſſe of Linoux, mother to the ſaid King of Scots, was diſcharged out of the Tower of London.
               Within the ſpace of ten moneths laſt paſt,7. Aldermē deceaſed in London. Oſſeſtry burnt. died ſeuen Aldermen of London.
               The 22. of Aprill by great miſfortune of fire in the towne of Oſſeſtry in Wales, to the number of two hundred houſes beſides cloth, corne, cattel, &c. were conſumed.
               
                  
                  Milnall in Suffolke burnt.The 17. of May in the towne of Milnall in Suffolke, 37. houſes beſides barnes, ſtables, and ſuch like, were conſumed with fire in the ſpace of two houres.
               
                  Shan Onele diſcomfited.
                  Shan Onele who had rebelled againſt the Quéens Maieſty in Ireland, was this yéere with his great loſſe, manfully repelled from the ſiege of Dundalke, by the Garriſon thereof, and afterward through the valiancy of Sir Henry Sidney, Lord Deputie of Ireland, he was ſo diſcomfited in ſundry conflicts, that now hee determined to put a collar about his necke, and penitently to require his pardon. But Neile Mackener his Secretary perſwaded him, firſt to trie the friendſhip of certaine wild Scots that then lay encamped in Clan Iboy under the conducting of Alexander Oge, and Mac Gilliam Buske, whoſe father and vncle Shan Onele had lately killed; neuertheleſſe hée went to the ſaide Campe the ſecond of Iune, where after a diſſembled entertainment, Gilliam Busk miniſtred qua
                     •
                  relling talke,Shan Onele ſlaine. and made a fray vpon Oneiles men, and then gathering together his Scots, hewed in péeces Shan Onele, his Secretary, and all his company.
               
                  Watch at Midſomer.On Saint Iohns Euen at night, was the like ſtanding watch in London, as had béene on Saint Peters Euen two yeares before paſſed: this order of watch is ſtill continued.
               The 29. of Iuly Charles Iames the yong Prince of Scotland,Coronation in Scotland after a Sermon made by Iohn Knokes, was crowned King of Scots at Sterling Church, and at that time the Quéene of Scots was priſoner

at Loughleuen.
               Sir Nicholas Throgmorton hauing talked with the Quéene of Scots at Loughleuen, returned out of Scotland in the moneth of Auguſt.
               
                  
                     Thomas Ramſey, William Bond, Shriues.
                  
                  
                     Sir Roger Martin, Mercer, Maior.
                  
               
               After a dry Sommer there followed a ſharpe winter with ſuch a ſcarcity of fodder and hay,An, reg, 10 Hay ſold by waight. that in diuers places the ſame was ſold by the waight, for fiue pence the ſtone, there followed alſo a great death of Cattell.
               In the moneth of Ianuary the Quéenes Maieſtie ſent into the narrow ſeas, thrée of her Ships,Ships ſent to the ſea againſt the ſubiects of K. Phillip. named the Antilope, the Swallow, and the Aid, and one Barke, named the Phenix, the which were manned with 500. men: her Highneſſe appointed the charge of thoſe Ships and men to William Holſtocke Eſquire, Controwler of her Ships, who had commaundement to ſtay the ſubiects of King Phillip: and according to his charge, he vſed ſuch diligence, that on the eleuenth of March next following, hee was with eleuen ſaile of Flemiſh Hoies vpon Boloine, which came from Roan, and in them foure hundred and odde Tunnes of Gaſcoine and French wines, which they intended to haue conuaied into Flanders, but William Holſtock ſtaied all the ſaid Hoyes, and ſent them to London, where they made their diſcharge.
               More, on the 28. of March the ſaide W. Holſtocke ſeruing in the Antilope, as Admirall in his Company, W. Winter the younger being Viceadmirall, ſeruing in the Aide, and Iohn Baſing
                  
Captaine of the Swallow, and Thomas Gauerley Captaine of the Phenix, met in the narrow Seas 14. ſaile of great Hulkes, which were come out of Portingale, and bound to Flanders, their chiefe lading being Portingale ſalt, and they had good ſtore of Spaniſh Rials of plate, & alſo great ſtore of ſpices, the which 14. Hulkes did maintain their fight for the ſpace of two houres, but the ſaid William Holſtocke and his company tooke the ſame Hulkes, whereof ſixe were ſent into the riuer of Thames, and the Admirall, and Viceadmirall of the ſaid Hulkes, being two great ſhips, which William Holſtocke himſelfe did take, were conuaied to Harwich, and there diſcharged.
               
                  1568 Great windes.The 28. of March, through vehement rage and tempeſt of winds, many veſſels on the Thames, with two Tiltboates before Graueſend were drowned.
               
                  Queene of Shots arriued in England.The 16. of May, Mary Q. of Scots after her eſcape made out of Loughleuen, where ſhee had béene long impriſoned, arriued at Werkington in England, hauing in her company to the number of 16. perſons, beſides 4. water-men, where ſhe was ſtaied, and conuaied to Carlile, and from thence to Bolton caſtle belonging to the L. Scrope, who with ſir Ralph Sadler ſent downe for that purpoſe, had the cuſtody of her, till ſhe was committed to the Earle of Shrewſbury.
               
                  Archbiſhop of Yorke deceaſed.The 26. of Iune, deceaſed Thomas Young, Archbiſhop of Yorke at Shefield, and was buried at Yorke.
               The great hall, and Pallace whereof, hee had

pulled downe and deſtroied.
               
                  Iohn Aleph, Richard Harding Salter, Iames Bacon, Shriues.
               
               The eleuenth of October were taken in Suffolke at Downam Bridge, 17. monſtrous fiſhes,Monſtrous fiſhes. ſome of them 27. foote in length, 2. miles from Ipſwich. Sir Thomas Roe Marchant tailor, Maior.
               
               At the coſt and charges of the Citizens of London,New Conduit at walbrooke. An, reg, 11 The Burſe for meeting of Marchants. a new Conduit was builded at Walbrooke corner, neare to Dowgate, the water whereof is conuaied out of the Thames.
               The 22. of December was the firſt day that the Marchants left their méeting in Lombard ſtréete, and came into the Burſe in Cornhill, builded for that purpoſe.
               The 27. of Ianuary a Frenchman & two Engliſhmen were drawne from Newgate to tiburne, and there hanged, the French man quartered, who had coined gold counterfaite, the Engliſhmen, the one had clipped ſiluer, the other caſt to
                  
                     ••
                  ons of Tin.
               
                  William Herbert Earle of Pembrooke, deceaſed the 17. of March, buried in Paules Church.
               The 28. of March the Pentioners were appointed in armour on horſebacke,1569 Muſter of Pentioners. A Lottery at London. muſtered before the Quéene in Hide Parke beſide Weſtminſter.
               A great Lottery of 400000. lots, euery lot 10. s. being holden at London in Paules Churchyard at the Weſt doore, was begun to bee drawne the 11. of Ianuary, and continued day and night till the ſixt of May.
               The 17. of Auguſt, an Ambaſſador from Muſconie,

landed at Tower-wharfe,Embaſſador from Muſcouy. and was there receiued by the Lord Maior of London, Aldermen 
                     ••
                  d Shriues in Scarlet, with the Marchants aduenturers in coates of blacke veluet, all on horſebacke.
               
                  Terme adiourned.The plague of peſtilence ſomewhat raigning, Michaelmas Tearme was adiourned vnto Hillary Tearme.
               
                  Henry Bechar, William Dane. Shriues.
               
               This William Dane by his Teſtament, and alſo Margaret Dane his wife gaue great Legacies to the poore.
               The 11. of October, Thomas Duke of Norffolke was brought to the Tower priſoner.
               
                  Sir Alexander Anenon Ironmonger, Maior.
               
               
                  No Maiors feaſt.This Maior went by water to Weſtminſter, and there tooke his oath, but kept no feaſt at Guild-hall, leſt through comming together of a multitude, infection of the peſtilence might haue encreaſed.
               
                  An, reg. 12. The Earles of Northū
                     berland & Weſtmerland proclaimed traitors. Earle of Suſſex Lieutenant generall againſt the Earles.The 24. of Nouember the Quéenes Maieſtie cauſed the Earles of Northumberland and Weſtmerland, who rebelled in the north, to be proclaimed traitors, and forthwith prepared an Army for their ſuppreſſion.
               The Earle of Suſſex the Quéenes Lieutenant generall in the North, had on the 17. of Nouember there publiſhed the like proclamation againſt the ſaid rebels, and alſo ſent out to all ſuch Gentlemen as he knew to be of her Maieſties louing ſubiects vnder his rule, which came vnto him with ſuch a number, as he was able to make aboue fiue

thouſand horſemen and footemen, and ſo being accompanied with the Earle of Rutland his Lieutenant, the Lord Hunſden Generall of his Horſemen, William Lord Eure, who had the leading of the rereward of the footmen, and Sir Ralph Sadler treaſurer, who all came to Yorke the 11. of December, they marched from Yorke toward Topcliffe the 12. ſir G. Bowes comming from Bernards Caſtle met him, and was made Marſhall of the Army: then they went to Northalerton, to Smoeton, to Crofebridge, and ſo to Aclay, on the which day the Rebels fled from Durham to Exham.
               The Earle of Suſſex went from Aclay to Durham: then to Newcaſtle, and the 20. of December to Exham, from whence the rebels were gone the night before to Naworth,Earle of Warwicke ſent againſt the rebels. where counſelling with Edward Dakers concerning their owne weakenes, as alſo how they were purſued by the Earle of Suſſex and his power of 7. thouſand. And moreouer that the Earle of Warwicke, the Lord Clinton, Lord Admirall of England, and Lord Vicount Hereford, with an Army of 12. thouſand out of the South, whereof the ſaid Earle of Warwicke was generall, not farre behind them at Browne bridge.
               The next night the two Earles of Northumberland and Weſtmerland,The Earle of Northū
                     berland and Weſtmerland. with ſundry of the principall Gentlemen, fled to Hetlaw in Scotland. The other rebels were ſhortly after taken by the Earle of Suſſex.
               The fourth and fifth of Ianuary did ſuffer at Durham to the number of ſixtie ſixe Conſtables1570 A caueat for Conſtables
                  
and other, amongſt whom an Alderman of the towne, and a Prieſt called Parſon Plomtree, were the moſt notable. Then George Bowes Marſhall finding many to be factors in the aforeſaide rebellion,Rebels ex
                     
                        ••
                     uted. did ſée them executed in euery market to 
                     〈◊〉
                   and other places, betwixt Newcaſtle and W
                     •
                  
                  therby, about 60. miles in length, and 40. mile
                     •
                   in breadth.
               The 22. of February, Leonard Dacre hauing raiſed a number of people, the L. Hunſd
                        •
                     n and other ſetting on him with a company of valiant ſouldiers, ſlue many of his people, and forced him to flye into Scotland.
               On Goodfriday the twentie ſeuen of March, Simon Digby, Iohn Fulthroppe Eſquire, Robert P
                        •••
                     
                     man,
                  Traitors executed. 
                  Thomas Biſhop the yonger Gentleman, w
                     •
                  re drawne from the Caſtle of Yorke to Knaueſmire, without the Cittie of Yorke, and there hanged, headed and quartered.
               
                  The Earle of Suſſex made iourney into Scotland.The 17. of Aprill the Earle of Suſſex with the Lord Hunſdon, maſter William Drewry high Marſhall of Barwicke, with all the garriſon & power of the ſame, began a iourney into Scotland, and entred into Tiuidale, burnt, ouerthrew, and ſpoiled all the Caſtles, townes and villages before them, till they came to Craling.
               
                  Sir I. Foſter with a gariſon entred Scotland.The ſame day ſir Iohn Foſter Warden of the Middle Marches with the Garriſon of the ſame, entred into Tiuidale vpon Expas gate ſixtéen
                     •
                   miles from Warke, where in like order they burnt, razed and ſpoiled their country before them till they came to Caſtle Craling, which likewiſe

they ouerthrew, razed and burnt.
               There both the Armies met, and ſo marched by the Riuer of Tiwit, razing, burning and ſpoiling Caſtles and piles along the Riuer, till they came to Godworth.
               The Lieutenant returned to Barwicke the 22 of Aprill.
               The Lord Scrope Warden of the Weſt Marches, entred Scotland the 18. of Aprill,The Lord Scrope entred Scotland. burnt and ſpoiled almoſt the Doinfrées, tooke many priſoners, and returned ſafely. The Marches of England were ſo guarded by the Lord Eure, ſir George Bowes, and other of the Biſhopricke, that not one houſe was burned, nor one cowe taken out of England. There were razed and ouerthrown, and burnt in this iourney, aboue fiftie ſtrong Caſtles and piles, and aboue 3. thouſand townes and villages.
               The 26. the Lieutenant, accompanied with the Lord Gouernour, the Marſhall, and diuers luſty Gentlemen, Captaines, and ſouldiers, to the number of thrée thouſand, ſet forward to Yorke, and ſo to Hewme Caſtle, which Caſtle was yéelded, the Lord Gouernour, the Lord Marſhall,Rebels executed at Barwicke. and other expelled the Scots, to the number of 160. perſons, among whom were two Engliſhmen, which were carried to Barwicke, and there executed. The L. Lieutenant placed in the Caſtle Captaine Wood, and Captaine Pikeman with two hundred ſouldiers, and ſo returned to Barwicke. The fourth of May, hee ſent maſter Drewry Marſhall, with the number of 2000. to take Fauſt caſtle,

which at the firſt comming was deliuered to the Marſhall, who expelled the Scots, and ſo returned to Barwicke.
               Sir William Drewry ſet forward toward Edenborough with diuers Scottiſh bands to ioine with the Earles of Lineaur, Morton, Glencarne and Marre, with other of the Kings power of Scotland, in purſuing of the Engliſh rebels, and ſuch as ſupported them. They came to Edenborough the 14. of May, and from thence to Lithcoe, where the Regent was ſlaine.
               The 17. the footemen marched to Fankirke, and Sir William Drewry with the horſemen marched to Sterling, to ſée the King. The 18. they departed to the foote bands, and ſo together Marched by Glaſco, where the Lord Hambleto
                        •
                     
                   ad beſieged a houſe of the Lungs, but hearing of their comming they fled.
               The 23. our Generall with the whole Army, marched towards the Caſtles of Hamleton, and there had parley with Arthur Hamleton, but hée would not deliuer the Caſtle: from thence accompanied with the Earle of Lenox and Mortaine with the horſemen, marched to a faire houſe of the Abbots of Kelwing, which houſe they burned with 17. houſes more, whereof one was the Lord Lanhaps.
               
               The 27. of May, Thomas Norton and Chriſtopher Norton of Yorkeſhire,The Nortons executed. were drawne from the Tower of London to Tiburne, and there hanged, headed, and quartered.
               The 28. of May, the Caſtle of Hamleton was

yéelded to ſir William Drewry,
                  Hamleton in Scotland yeelde. Conſpiracy in Norfolke and by him preſently ſpoiled and burnt.
               A conſpiracy was made by certaine Gentlemen and other in the country of Norffolke, whoſe purpoſe was on Midſomer day at Harleſtone faire with ſound of Trumpet, to haue raiſed a number, and then to proclaime their pretence againſt ſtrangers and others. This matter was vttered by T. Kete vnto I. Kenſey, who forthwith ſent the ſame Kete to the next Iuſtice, before whom hee opened the whole matter, whereupon Maſter D. Drewry immediately apprehended Iohn Throgmorton, and after him many Gentlemen of the Citty of Norwich, and the Country of Norffolke, and at the next Seſſions of goale deliuery, at the Caſtle of Norwich, ten of them were endifed of high treaſon, thrée of them were hanged, bowelled & quartered, which were I. Throgmorton, Thomas Brooke, and George Dedman.
               
               The 4.
                  Duke of Norffolke remoued. of Auguſt the Duke of Norffolke was remoued to the Charterhouſe neare vnto Smithfield.
               The ſame day was arraigned I. Felton for hanging a Bull at the gate of the Biſhop of Londons Pallace,Felton executed. and alſo two young men for coyning and clipping, who all were found guiltie of high treaſon.
               The 8. of Auguſt, I. Felton was drawne from Newgate into Pauls Churchyard, & there hanged before the Biſhops Pallace gate, and being cut downe aliue, was bowelled and quartered. The Shriues returned to tiburne with two yong men,

which were there executed for coyning and clipping.
               The 22. of Auguſt the Earle of Suſſex and the Lord Scrope marched from Carlile with the Quée
                     •
                   Army,A iourney into Scotland. and force of the North into Scotland, paſſing ouer the Riuer of Eſke, Leuin, and Sarke, ſo to Dornocke wood, and then to Annonna, a ſtrong houſe of the L. Harris, which they razed & ouerthrew with others thereabouts, from thence to Hodhim, which they blewe vp, from thence to Kennell, which they burnt, from thence to Domfrées, which they ſacke
                     •
                  , and ouerthrew a ſumptuous houſe belonging to the Quéene of Scots, then paſſing the riuer of Longher, they burnt and ſpoiled Cowhilles and Powtracke, and returned to Domfrées, and ſo to the towne of Bankende, which they burnt, with another houſe pertaining to William Maxwell, and ſo to the Caſtle of Calauoracke, which caſtle they blew vp and returned.
               The 28. of Auguſt they marched towards Carlile, where by the way they burnt two houſes the one being Arthur Greames, the other Rich George.
               
               
                  Francis Barnam, William Box, Shriues.
               
               The fift of October happned a terrible tempeſt of wind and raine, by meanes wherof many ſhips and other veſſels were drowned:High waters. the waters ouerflowing drowned many townes, villages, cattell, houſes and goods, beſide many men, women, and children drowned in their beds.
               
                  Sir Rowland Hayward Clothworker. Maior.
               
               
                  In the moneth of December the money ſent out of Spaine to the Duke of Alua,An, reg, 13. then Gouernour in the Low Countries, therewith to haue paied his Souldiers, was taken by the Quéene of Englands ſhips on the weſt vaſts, brought a land there▪ and ſo to the Tower of London. Alſo a proclamation was publiſhed of the cauſes why the ſame money was ſo ſtaied here.
               The 23.
                  Royall Exchange. of Ianuary the Quéenes Maieſty accompanied with her Nobilitie, came to ſir Thomas Greſham in Biſhops gate ſtréete of London, where 
                     •
                  he dined, and after returning through Cornehill, entred the Burſe, which place ſhee cauſed by an Heralde to bee proclaimed the Royall Exchange.
               The 17. of February, at Kingſtone,A ſtrange kinde of earth remoued. neare Marclech, in the County of Hereford, was ſéene the ground to open, and certaine rockes with a péece of ground remooued, and went forward the ſpace of foure daies. It remooued it ſelfe betwéene ſixe of the clocke in the euening and ſeuen the next morrow, fortie paces, carrying great trées & ſhéep-coates, ſome with thréeſcore ſhéepe in them. The depth of the hole where it firſt brake out, is thirty foot, the breadth of the breach is eightſcore yards, and in length aboue twentie ſcore yards, it ouerthrew Rinnaſtone Chappell. Alſo two high waies b
                     •
                   remoued nigh an hundred yards, with the trées of the hedgerowes. The ground in all is 26. acres, and where tillage ground was, there is paſture left in place, and where was paſture, there is tillage ground gone vpon it.
               
                  
                  1571 Parliament.The ſecond of Aprill a Parliament beganne at Weſtminſter, wherein was granted by the Clergy a ſubſidy of ſixe ſhillings in the pound, and by the temporalitie two Fiftéenes, with a Subſidy of 20. s. 8. d. in the pound.
               
                  Doctor story executed.The firſt of Iune Iohn Story a Doctor of the Canon law, who before had béene condemned of high treaſon, was drawne from the tower of London to Tiburne, and there hanged, and quartered.
               
                  A combat appointed at Tuthill.The 18. of Iune there was a combat appointed to haue béene fought for a certaine Manour and demaine lands in the Iſle of Harty in Kent; Simon Low, and Iohn Ryme plaintifes, had brought a writ of right againſt Thomas Paramour, who offered to defend his right by bataile, and the plaintifes aforeſaid accepted to anſwere his challenge. Hereupon the ſaid Paramour brought before the Iudges of the cōmon Pleas at Weſtminſter one George Thorne, and the plaintifes brought Henry Naylor Maſter of defence. Thorne caſt downe a gauntlet, which Naylor tooke vp: vpon the ſunday before the battaile ſhould be tried, on the next morrow the matter was ſtaied, and the parties agréed, that Paramour being in poſſeſſion ſhould haue the land.
               
                  Tee quarrell of combat ſtaied.It was thought good that for Paramours aſſurance, the order ſhould be kept touching the combat, and that the Plaintifes ſhould make default of appearance, and that the Court ſhould fit in Tuthill fieldes, where was prepared one plot of ground one and twenty yards ſquare, double railed

for the combat, without the Weſt ſquare a ſtage being ſet for the Iudges, repreſenting the Court of common pleas.
               About ten of the clocke the Court of common pleas came to the place prepared: when the Lord chiefe Iuſtice with two other his aſſociats were ſet, then Low was called to come in, or elſe looſe his writ of right.
               Then the ſureties of Henry Naylor were called to bring in the ſayd Naylor, champion of Simon Low, and ſhortly thereupon Sir Ierome Bowes leading Naylor entred the liſts, bringing him downe till he came againſt the Iudges, and there making curteſie, Naylor put off his nether ſtocks, and ſo bare footed and bare legged, and his dublet ſléeues tied vp to the elbow bare headed, came in as aforeſaid.
               Then were called the ſureties of George Thorn, and immediately ſir Henry Cheiney entring vſed the like order as Naylor had. After all this, the Lord chiefe Iuſtice rehearſing the manner of bringing ye Writ of right by Simon Low, of the anſwere made by Paramour, and how Paramour had challenged to defend his right by his champion, and of the accepting the triall by law with his champion, then for default of appearance in Low, he iudged the Land to Paramour, and diſmiſſed the Champions.
               The 16 of Iuly Rebecca Chamber of Herietteſham, for poyſoning T. Chambers
                  A woman burnt. her huſband, was burnt at Maidſtone in Kent.
               The 7 of September the Duke of Norffolke

was remoued from the Charter houſe to the Tower of London.Duke of Norffolke ſent to the Tower. B. of Saliſbury deceaſed.
               
               The twenty two of September deceaſed Iohn Iewell Biſhop of Saliſbury, in his life a moſt eloquent and diligent preacher, but a farre more painefull and ſtudious writer, as his workes remaining witneſſe.
               
                  
                     Shrieues.
                     Henry Milles, Iohn Branch.
                  
                  
                     Maior.
                     Sir William Allen Mercer.
                  
               
               
                  The chriſtiā victory againſt the Turks. The battel of Lepāto Anno reg. 14.The 9 of Nouember great reioycing was made at London, for the late come newes of a maruellous victorie obtained by the Chriſtian army by ſea, againſt the Turkes the ſixt of October laſt paſſed, wherein was taken and ſunke of the Turkes Gallies and Brigantines 230, there were ſlaine of the Turkes more then thirty thouſand, beſide a great number of priſoners taken, and about 12000 Chriſtians that had béene ſlaues with the Turkes, were ſet at liberty. The 13 of Ianuary deceaſed ſir William Peter knight,S.W. Peters deceaſed. who had béene Secretary and of the priuy Councell to foure Kings and Quéens in this Realm, and ſeuen times L. Ambaſſadour abroad in forraine lands: he augmented Exceſter Colledge in Oxford, with lands, to the value of one hundred pounds by yeare.
               The 16 of Ianuary, Thomas Duke of Norffolke was arraigned in Weſtminſter Hall,Duke of Norffolke araigned. and there by his Péeres found guilty of high Treaſon.
               
                  The 11 of February Kenelme Barne and Edmond Mather, were drawne from the Tower of London, and Henry Rolfe from the Marſhalſée in Southwarke, all thrée to Tiburne, and there hanged, bowelled and quartered, Barncy and Mather for conſpiracy, and Rolfe for counterfeiting the Quéenes hand.
               The 12 of February was proclamation made for the ſharpe puniſhment of ſuch as conuaied bels, lead,A proclamation. and other Church goods out of the Pariſh Churches or Chappels.
               The tenth of March deceaſed ſir William Pawlet knight, Lord Saint Iohn Earle of Wilſhire, Marques of Wincheſter, knight of the Garter, one of the Quéenes Maieſties priuie Counſell, and Lord high Treaſurer of England. He was borne in the yeare of our Lord 1483, he ſerued Henry the 7, Henry the 8, Edward the 6,
                  1572. Quéene Mary, and Quéene Elizabeth. Himſelfe did ſée the children of his childrens children, growing to the number of 103.
               
               The 25 of March by the commandement of the Counſel, the Citizens of London aſſembling at their ſeuerall halles, the maſter collected the moſt actiue perſons of euery their companies, to the number of 3 thouſand, whom they appointed to be pikemen and ſhotte, the pikemen were forthwith armed in faire corſlets,Souldiers trained. the gunners had euery of them his Callieuer, with the furniture. To theſe were appointed diuers captaines, who to traine them vp in warlike feats, muſtered them thrice euery wéeke, ſometime in

the artillery yard, teaching the gunners to handle their péeces, ſometime at the miles end, & in Saint Georges field teaching them to ſkirmiſh.
               On May day they muſtred at Gréenewich before the Quéenes maieſtie, where they ſhowed many warlike feats,A ſhew at Greenwich. but were much hindred by the weather, all day ſhowring.
               It was enacted that all perſons aboue the age of fouretéene yeares, being taken, vagrant, and wandring miſorderly, ſhould be apprehended, whipped, and burnt through the right eare with a hot iron for the firſt time ſo taken, the ſecond time to be hanged.
               
                  The maſſacre in France Duke of Norf. beheaded. French Embaſſadour.This yeare 1572, was the Maſſacar in Paris.
               The 2 of Iune Thomas Duke of Norffolk was beheaded on tower hill.
               
                  Francis Duke of Memorency, and Betraude de Saligners, Knights of the order of Saint Michaell, Ambaſſadours for Charles king of France arriued at Douer.
               The 15 of Iune they repaired to the White hall, and there in her Graces chappell about one of the clocke in the after noone, the Articles of treaty, league or confederacy, and ſure friendſhip concluded at Bloys the ninetéenth of Aprill, betwéen the Quéenes maieſty and the French King, being read, the ſame was by her maieſty and his Ambaſſadours confirmes to be obſerued and kept.
               
                  Earle of Northumberland beheaded.The 22 of Auguſt Thomas Percie Earle of Northumberland, now brought out of Scotland whither he had fled, was beheaded at York.
               
                  In the moneth of Auguſt ſir Thomas Smith,
                  Enliſhmē ſent to Ireland. one of the Quéens Maieſties priuie Counſell, ſent his ſonne Thomas Smith Eſquire, into Ireland with a Colony or habitation of Engliſh men to inhabite the Ardes in Vlſter.
               
                  Richard Pype, Nicholas Woodroffe.
                  Shriues.
               
               
                  Sir Lionell Ducket, mercer.
                  Maior.
               
               The 18 of Nouember was ſéene a ſtar Northward,An. reg. 15▪ A ſtrange ſtarre. very bright and cleare in the conteſtation of Caſſiopeia, which with thrée chiefe fixed ſtars of the ſaid conſtellation made a Geometicall figure lozengewiſe, of the learned men called Rombus: this ſtarre in bigneſſe at the flrſt appearing, ſéemed bigger then Iupiter, and much leſſe then Venus when ſhe ſéemed greateſt, alſo the ſaid ſtar neuer changing his place, was carried about with the daily motion of heauen, as all fixed ſtars commonly are, and ſo continued almoſt ſixe moneths. The ſame ſtarre was found to be in place celeſtiall, farre aboue the Moone, otherwiſe than euer any comet hath béene ſéene, or naturally can appeare: therefore it is ſuppoſed, that the ſignification thereof is directed purpoſely, and ſpecially to ſome matter not naturall, but celeſtiall, or rather ſuperceleſtiall, ſo ſtrange, as from the beginning of the world neuer was the like.
               The 14 of Nouember, Edward Earle of Darby, Lord Stanley and Strange, L.The Earle of Darby deceaſed. and Gouernor of the Iſle of Man, knight of the noble Order of

the Garter, and one of the Quéenes Maieſties Priuie Counſell, deceaſed: His life and death deſeruing commendation, and crauing memory to be imitated, was ſuch as followeth. His fidelity to two Kings and two Quéenes in dangerous times and great rebellions, in which time & alwaies as cauſe ſerued, he was Lieutenant of Lancaſhire and Cheſhire. His godly diſpoſition to his tenants, neuer forcing any ſeruice at their hands, but due payment of their rent. His liberality to ſtrangers, his famous houſkéeping, his féeding of aged perſons twice a day forty and odde, beſides all commers thrice a wéeke appointed for his dealing daies, and euery good Friday 35 yeares relieued one with another 2700, with meate, drinke, and mony worth. His cunning in ſetting bones diſioynted or brake, his chirurgery & deſire to helpe the poore, his deliuery of his George and ſeale of the Lord Strange,
                  An. reg. 15 with exhortation that he might kéepe it ſo vnſpotted in fidelity to his Prince, as he had, and his hope that he died in the Quéenes fauour, his ioyfull parting this world, his taking leaue of all his ſeruants by ſhaking of hands, and his remembrance to the laſt day.
               The 18 of Ianuary William Lord Herbert Earle of Worceſter, began his iourney toward France, to the chriſtning of the Kings daughter there, in ſtead of the Quéenes maieſty of England. The ſaid Earle with many of his company, were robbed vpon the ſea of much of their baggage▪ and thrée or foure of their men ſlaine.
               
                  In the moneth of February through ſundry hainous complaints brought to the Quéenes Maieſty and her Counſell,The narrow ſea ſcoured. of Pirats that kept the narrow Seas, doing many robberies, as alſo the robbing of the Earle of Worceſter, it pleaſed her Maieſty to ſend one of her Ships named the Swallow, vnder the charge of William Holſtocke Eſquire, controller of her highneſſe ſhippes, who had with him the Gillian, the Barke Garet, and the Barke of Yarmouth, and 306 able Marriners, Gunners, and Souldiers in the ſaid three ſhippes, and one Barke which ſcoured the narrow Sea, from the North forland as farre Weſtward as Falmouth in Cornwall, and tooke twenty ſhips and Barkes of ſundry nations, viz. Engliſh, French, and Flemmings, (but all Pirats) and in faſhion of warre.Pirats on the Weſt ſeas. He apprehended in thoſe ſhips and Barkes to the number of 900 men of all nations, and ſent them to Sandwich, Douer, Wight, and Portſmouth (whereof three of them that rebbed the Earle of Worceſter were ſhortly after executed at Wight.) Alſo the ſaid William Holſtocke did reſcue and take from the aboueſaid Pirats, xv. other merchants ſhippes laden with merchandiſes, yt were their priſes,Pirats executed. being of ſundry nations, and ſet at liberty the ſaid fifteene merchants ſhippes and goods: which done hee returned.
               The 25 of March being Wedneſday in Eaſter weeke, George Browne cruell murdered neare to Shooters-hill in Kent, a wealthy merchant of

London named George Sanders,
                  1573. G. Sāders murdered. & Iohn Beane of Wolwich, which murder was committed by the procurement of miſtreſſe Sanders, wife to the ſaid George Sanders,
                  G. Brown, Anne Sā
                     ders, Anne Drury, & truſty Roger, hanged. for the which fact, George Browne was hanged in Smithfield in London, the 20 day of Aprill, and after hanged in chaines neare vnto the place where hee had done the fact. Miſtris Anne Sanders, miſtris Anne Drewry, and truſty Roger miſtris Druries man, were al as acceſſary, hanged in Smithfield on the 13 of May. Not long after Anthony Browne,
                  A. Browne hanged at Yorke. brother to the forenamed George Browne, was for notable felonies conueied from Newgate to Yorke, and there hanged.
               This yeare the Quéene of England being moued by the Regent of Scotland, ſent a power of 1500 Engliſhmen to the ſiege of Edenborow Caſtle, ſir William Drewry knight Marſhall of Barwicke, to be generall of her forces there, who with his Captaines and ſouldiers marched thitherward from Barwicke to Léeth, and from thence on the 25 of Aprill to Edenborough, entred the towne, & the ſame day, ſummoned the Caſtle, raiſed mounts, & began the ſiege in fiue places,Edenborough caſtle yeelded to the Engliſh. continuing the ſame ſo hote, ye on the 28 of May, the Caſtle was ſurrendred into his hands, & his enſigne was ſet vp, and afterwards ſpred in ſundry places of the Caſtle, and afterwards, by him it was deliuered vnto the vſe of the K. of Scots, part of the ſpoile was giuen to the ſouldiers, the Canons and artillery with certaine other inſtruments left to the King:

more you may reade in my Annales.
               The ſecond of Iune,Haile in Northāptonſhire. a great tempeſt of raine happened at Toceſter, in Northhampton ſhire, where-through ſixe houſes of that Towne were borne downe, and fourtéene more ſore periſhed, the haile-ſtones were ſixe inches about, one child was there drowned: and many ſhéepe with other cattell.
               The ſixtéenth of Iune, T. Woodhouſe
                  Thomas Woodhouſe. Prieſt was arraigned in the Guild hall of London, and condemned of high Treaſon, who had iudgment to be hanged and quartered, and was executed at Tiburne, the 19 of Iune.
               The ſixtéenth of Auguſt, Walter, Earle of Eſſex, accompanied with the Lord Rich, and diuers other Gentlemen, embarked themſelues in ſeuerall ſhips at Lerpoole, and tooke their voyage towards Ireland.The Earle of Eſſex ſailed into Ireland. The Earle after many and great dangers on the Sea, landed at Knockfergus. The Lord Rich with the like dangers, landed at Caſtle Kilcliffe; where being met by Captaine Malby, maſter Smith, and maſter Moore, was conductdd to maſter Malbies houſe, where he had in readines on the morrow morning 150 horſemen for their ſafegard to Knockfergus, beſide 50 kernes.
               Sir Brian Makephelin on the 6 of September, came to Knockfergus, to the Earle of Eſſex, and there made his ſubmiſſion.
               After him, Ferdorough Macgillaſticke Roze, Oge, Macwilline did the like, and diuers others, ſent their meſſengers to the Earle, to ſignifie,

that they were at his diſpoſition, as the Baron of Dongarrow, Condonell, Odonell, and the Captaine Kylulto.
               
               The Earle of Eſſex, hauing the country of Clanyboy,Earle of Eſſex Generall of Vlſter. and other, the Quéenes Maieſty directed her Letters to the Lord Deputie of Ireland, willing him to make the Eſſex Captaine generall of the Iriſh Nation, in the Prouince of Vlſter, and to diuide the country won, Clanyboy, and elſe-where, &c.
               
                  Shrieues.
                  Iames Haruey, Thomas Pulliſon.
               
               
                  Maior.
                  Sir Iohn Riuers, Grocer.
               
               
                  An. reg. 16 A monſtrous fiſh.The 6 of Iuly in the Iſle of Thanet, a monſtrous fiſh of the ſea, did ſhut himſelfe on ſhore, where for want of water, beating himſelf on the ſands, he died. The length of this fiſh was twenty two yards, the nether iaw, 12 foote, the opening, the thicknes from the back whereon helay, to the top of his belly, was 14 foote, his taile of the ſame bredth, betwéen the eyes, 12 foote, ſome of the ribs were 16 foot long, his tongue was fiftéene foot long.
               
                  Obſequie for the K. of France.The 7 of Auguſt, a ſolemne Obſequie was kept in Pauls Church in London, for Charles the 9. King of France.
               The 15 of Auguſt, being Sunday, Agnes Bridges, a maid about the age of 20 yeares, and Rachel Pinder, a wench about 12 yeres old, who both of them had counterfeited to be poſſeſſed by the diuell, ſtood at Pauls Croſſe, where they acknowledged their hypocriticall counterfeiting, requiring forgiueneſſe of God, & the world: for

they had made the people beléeue many things.
               The 4 of September in the afternoone,A Ladde drowned in a channell in London. ſuch a forme of raine hapned at London, as the like of long time could not be remēbred, wherethrough, the chanels of the City, ſuddenly ran with a forcible courſe, that a lad about the age of 18 yéeres, néere vnto Dowgate, was borne ouer with the ſtreame, and by the ſame, carried from the conduit there, towardes the Thames, with ſuch a ſwiftnes, that no man with ſtaues, or otherwiſe, could ſtay him, till hee came againſt the cart whéele, that ſtood in the water gate, afore which time he was drowned, and found ſtarke-dead.
               
                  Thomas Blanke, Antony Gammage.
               
               
                  Iames Hawes Hawes, Cloathworker.
               
               This Maior kept no feaſt at the Guild hall, but diued at his owne houſe,No Maiors feaſt. with his brethren the Aldermen, the companies dined at their ſeuerall halles.
               Michaelmas Tearme,Terme adiourned. Two tides in one houre. Fiery impreſſions maruailous. An. reg. 17 which had bin adiourned by Proclamation, beganne at Weſtminſter on the ſixt of Nouember. The ſame ſixt day in the morning, there happened two great tides in the Riuer of Thames: the firſt, by courſe, the other, within an houre after, which ouer-flowed the marſhes. The 14 of Nouember, about midnight, diners ſtrange impreſſions of fire and ſmoake were ſéene in the Aire, to procéede forth of a black cloud in the North, towards the South, which ſo continued til the next morning.

The next day following, the heauens from 
                     〈◊〉
                   parts did ſéeme to burne, and ouer our heads 
                     〈◊〉
                   flames from the Horizon round about riſing 
                     〈◊〉
                   meete.
               
                  Flies in February, the number ſtrāgeThe foure and twentieth of February, 
                     〈◊〉
                   Tewkeſbury a ſtrange thing happened after 
                     〈◊〉
                   flood, which was not great. In the afternoon
                     •
                   there came downe the riuer of Auen, great number of Flies and Béetles, ſuch as in Sommer euenings vſe to ſtrike men on the face, in great heapes, a foot thicke vpon the water, ſo that to credible mens iudgement, there were within a paire of buts length of thoſe flies, about a hundred quarters. The milles there-about, we
                     ••
                   dammed vp with them, for the ſpace of foure dayes after, and then were cleanſed by digging them out with ſhouels, from whence they came, as yet vnknowne, but the day was colde, and a hard froſt.
               The 16 of February, betweene foure and fiue of the clocke in the afternoone,Earthquake. great Earthquakes happened in the City of Yorke, Worceſter, Gloceſter, Briſtow, Hereford, and the Countries about, which cauſed the people to runne out of their houſes, for feare they ſhould haue fallen vpon their heads. In Tewkeſbury, Bredon, and other places, the diſhes fell from the cupbords, and the Bookes in mens ſtudies from the ſhelues. In Norton Chappell, the people being on their knées at euening prayer, the ground mouing, cauſed them to runne away in great feare, fearing that the dead bodies

would haue riſen, or the Chappell haue fallen: part of Rithing Caſtle fell downe, with certaine bricke Chimnies in Gentlemens houſes.
               On Eaſter day, the third of Aprill,1575. Anabaptiſts at Pauls croſſe. was diſcloſed a Congregation of Anabaptiſts, Dutchmen, in a houſe without the barres of Algate, at London, whereof 17 were taken, and ſent to priſon, and foure of them bearing fagots, recanted at Pauls croſſe, on the 15 of May.
               The 17 of May, Mathew Parker,
                  Archbiſhop of Canterbury deceaſed. Doctor of Diuinity, Arch-biſhop of Canterbury deceaſed at Lambeth, and there was honorably buried.
               This reuerend Father examined throughly the Engliſh tranſlation of the holy Bibles, wherein he partly vſed the helpe of his brethren Biſhops, and other Doctors, and cauſed the ſame to bee newly printed in the largeſt Volume, for the furniture of many Churches then wanting. Alſo making diligent ſearch for the antiquities of the Britons, and Engliſh Saxons, to the end thoſe monuments might be carefully kept, he cauſed them to be well bound, and trimly couered, and ſuch, whereof he knew very few copies to bee extant (amongſt the which, whereunto I am witneſſe, and was an helper, was Mathew Paris, Mathew Florilogus, and Thomas Walſingham) he cauſed to be printed. The famous Palace of his Sea at Canterbury decayed, hee renewed and fully reſtored with the charges of more then one thouſand foure hundred pound.
               
                  He founded a Grammer ſchoole in Rach
                     •
                  a
                     •••
                   in the County of Lancaſter, and did many other good déedes to Colledges, in giuing ſcholarſhips, Bookes, Money, and Plate, &c.
               The 21 of May, one man, and tenne women Anabaptiſts Dutch,Anabaptiſts baniſhed. were in the conſiſtory of Pauls, condemned to be burnt, only one woman was conuerted, the other were baniſhed.
               
                  Family of Loue.The 21 of Iune, ſtood at Pauls Croſſe, fiue perſons, termeth, the Family of Loue, who there confeſſed themſelues vtterly to deteſt as well the Author of the Sect, H. N. as all his damnable errors and hereſies.
               
                  Anabaptiſts burnt.The 22 of Iuly, two Dutchmen Anabaptiſts were burnt in Smithfield.
               
                  Thunder and haile.The 30 of Iuly in the afternoon, was a great tempeſt of lightning and thunder, wherthrough both men and beaſts in diuers places were ſtricken dead. Alſo at that time fell haile ſtones ſeuen inches about.
               The 26 of September, a Poulters wife in the Pariſh of Chriſts Church,Four children at a burden. within Newgate in London, was brought to bed of foure children at one burthen, all maiden children, and the ſame day moneth, the mother was buried, but all the foure children liuing, and were chriſtened, but liued not long.
               
                  Shrieues.
                  Edward Osborne, Wolſtone Dixie.
               
               
                  Maior.
                  Sir Ambroſe Nicholas Salter.
               
               This Maior went by water to Weſtminſter,

and there tooke his oath: hee kept no feaſt at Guild-hall, but dined at his owne houſe with his brethren.
               The Companies dined at their ſeuerall Halles.
               The 11 of February Anne Aueries widdow, forſwearing her ſelfe for a little money,An. reg. 18 God puniſheth periury. that ſhee ſhould haue paide for ſixe pounds of 
                     ••
                  w at a Shop in Woodſtréet of Londun, fell immediatly downe ſpéechles, caſting vp at her mouth, the ſame matter, which by Natures courſe, ſhould haue béene voided downewards, till ſhe died. A terrible example of Gods iudgement, vpon ſuch as make no conſcience of ſwearing, though it be againſt their owne elder brother.
               The 15 of February, Edmond Grindall,
                  Archbiſh. elected. ſometime Biſhop of London, late Archbiſhop of Yorke, was in the Chapter houſe of S. Paules Church at London, elected Archbiſhop of Canterbury.
               The 5 of March, in the night, a Tilt-ooat,Tiltboat drowned. 1576. with about the number of thirty perſons, comming from Graueſend, toward London, were all drowned, one by excepted.
               The 15 of Iune, Martine Frobiſher,
                  Frobiſhers firſt voyage for the diſcouery of Cathay. with two ſmall Barkers, and one Pinneſſe, departed from Blackwall, vpon his voyage for the diſcouery of a paſſage to Cathay, by the Northweſt ſeas. Vpon the firſt of Iuly, he had ſight of Freeſland, but durſt not approch the ſame, by reaſon of the great Ice that lay along the coaſt:

not farre from thence he loſt his pinneſſe, and one of his Barkes, who miſtruſting the danger of tempeſts, returned home, with report that their Generall Martine Frobiſher was caſt a
                     •
                  way, which Captaine notwithſtanding continued his courſe Northweſt, beyond any man that hath heretofore diſcouered, and the 20 of Iuly, had a ſight of a high land, which hee named Quéene Elizabeths foreland, and after that another foreland with a great paſſage, diuiding as it were, the two maine lands aſunder, this place he named Frobiſhers ſtraight. After hee had paſſed ſixtie leagues further, he went a ſhore, found the ſame to be inhabited with ſauage people, brought one of them into his Barke, and returning, arriued in England in the moneth of Auguſt. One of his company brought from thence a péece of blacke ſtone, which being brought to certaine Goldfiners to make a ſay thereof, found it to hold gold (as they ſaid) and that very richly.
               The moneth of Auguſt, many complaints being brought to the Quéene againſt the Fluſhingers, for great ſpoiles and robberies by them daily committed vpon her Subiects, her maieſty gaue order to put foure good ſhips and two Barkes of her owne to the Seas, vnder the charge of maſter William Holſtocke Eſquire, controller of all her highneſſe ſhippes, with 1100 men, victualled for ſixe wéekes, in which time was by them taken eight Fluſhingers ſhippes, and ba
                     •
                  kes, prizes, and two hundred and

twenty Sea Rouers in them, who were ſent to ſundry priſons.
               
                  Walter, Earle of Eſſex, and Earle Marſhall of Ireland, Knight of the Garter,Earle of Eſſex deceaſed. falling ſicke of a laſke, the 25 of Auguſt, deceaſed on the 12 of September, at Diuelon in Ireland, and was buried at Carmarthen in Wales.
               
                  William Kempton, George Barne.
                  Shrieues.
               
               
                  Iohn Langley Goldſmith.Maior.
               
               The 17 of March,An. reg 19 Patricke Brunton ouerturned. through a ſtrange tempeſt which happened in the North, néere to a Towne called Richmond, not onely cottages, trees, barnes, and hay-ſtackes, but alſo the moſt part of a Church called Patricke Brunton, was ouerthrowne, with moſt ſtrange ſights in the Aire, both terrible and fearefull.
               The 26 of March,1577. Charitable acts of M. Lamb. Holborne conduite builded. the new conduit néere vnto Holborne, with one cocke at Holborne Bridge, were begunne to be founded by William Lambe, ſometime Gentleman of the Chappell to Ring Henry the eight, now citizen and Cloth-worker of London. The water whereof is conueyed into pipes of Lead, to the ſaid conduit, more then two thouſand yards in length; all which, of his own coſts and charges, amounted to the ſumme of 19 hundred pound, was fully finiſhed the 24 of Auguſt, in the ſame yeare.
               The ſaid W. Lambe hath giuen to the company of Stationers, 6 pound 13 ſhillings, foure

pence, in the Pariſh Church of S. Faiths vnder Pauls Church in London, to giue to twelue poore people euery friday, 12 pence in money, and 12 pence in bread.
               Item to Chriſts Hoſpitall in London, yearely for euer, 6 pounds, and 100 pounds in many to purchaſe lands.
               Item to Saint Thomas Hoſpitall in Southwarke, foure pounds yearely.
               Item to the Hoſpitall, called the Sauoy ſomtime. 10 pounds at once, to buy bedding for the poore.
               Item to the Cloth-workers in London, 4 pounds in the yéere. Alſo more, his late dwelling houſe, with other, to the value of 30 pounds the yeare, to the intent they ſhould hire a Miniſter, to ſay diuine ſeruice euery Sunday, Wedneſday, and Friday, and that foure Sermons euery yeare, after his deceaſe, bee preached in the Church, to the ſaid houſe belonging, called S. Iames in the wall by Creple-gate, and alſo to giue to 12 poore men, yearely, on the firſt of October, to euery one a Gowne of good Fréeſe, ready made, a ſhirt of good locoram, & a ſtrong paire of ſhooes. And 12 poor women, 12 gown
                     •
                   of the like Fréeſe, 12 ſmockes, and twelue paire of ſhooes for euer.
               
                  A Free ſchoole and almes houſes at Sutton in Kent.Item he erected a frée Schoole, and ſixe almes houſes at Sutton valens in Kent, where hee was borne, and appointed for the Maſter, twentie pounds, and the vſher tenne pounds yearely for euer, and to the ſixe almes-houſes,

tenne pounds yearely, with an orchard and gardens.
               Item towards a free Schoole at Maidſtone in Kent.
               Item to ſet poore Clothiers aworke, in the country of Suffolke, one hundred pounds.
               To the towns of Ludlow and Bridgenorth, each of them a hundred pounds.
               The 31 of May, Martine Frobiſher,
                  A Second voyage toward Cathay. with one Ship and two Barkes, furniſhed for that purpoſe, ſailed from Harwich, in Eſſex, towardes Cathay, by the Northweſt Seas, and entred his ſtraits, beyond Quéene Elizabeths fore-land, about thirty leagues, where he went on ſhore, and finding ſtore of gold Ore (as he had bin enformed) fraught his Ship and Barke, caught a man, woman and child of that country, and then on the twenty foure of Auguſt, returning, arriued at Milford hauen on the twentieth of September.
               The 20 of Iune, W.
                  Worth the reading. 
                  Lumney a poore man in the Pariſh of Emely, in the county of Worceſter, being kept in priſon by a wealthy Widow, he hauing a Mare of 22 yeares old, with Foale, within thrée daies after, his Mare foaled a Mare Colt, the which immediatly had an Vdder, out of the which was milked the ſame day a pint of Milke, and euery day after, gaue aboue three pintes, to the great ſuſtentation of the ſaid poore mans wife and children, the which Colt continued in that ſort, long time after, as hath béene ſéene of many thouſands.
               
                  
                  Strange & ſudden ſicknes at Oxford.The fourth, fift, and ſixt dayes of Iuly, was the Aſſiſes held at Oxford, where was arraigned and condemned one Rowland Ienkes, for his ſeditious tongue, at which time there aroſe amidſt the people a dampe, that almoſt all were ſmothered, very feweſcaped, that were not taken at that inſtant, the Iurors died preſently: ſhortly after died Sir Robert Bell, Lord chiefe Baron, Sir Rode Olie, Sir W. Babington, Maſter Weneman, M. de Olie, high Shrieue, M. Danuers, M. Harcourt, M. Kirle, M. Pheteplace, M. Greenewood, M. Foſter, M. Naſh, Serieant Baram, M. Stephens, &c. There died in Oxford three hundred perſons, and ſickened there, but died in other places, 200 & odde, from the ſixt of Iuly, to the twelth of Auguſt, after which day died not one of that ſicknes, nor one of them infected not another, nor any one woman or child died thereof.
               
                  Tempeſt in Norff.On Sunday, the fourth of Auguſt, betwéene the houre of 9 and 10 of the clocke in the forenoone, whilſt the Miniſter was reading of the ſecond Leſſon in the Pariſh Church of Blib
                     •
                  
                  rough (a town in Suffolke) a ſtrange and te
                     ••
                  
                  le tempeſt of Lightning and Thunder, ſtroke through the wall of the ſame Church, into the ground, almoſt a yard déepe, draue downe all the people on that ſide, aboue 20 perſons, then renting the wall vp to the Reueſtry, cleft the doore, and returned to the Stéeple, rent the timber, brake the chains, and fled toward Bongey, ſixe miles off: the people that were ſtricked downe,

were found groueling more then halfe an houre after, whereof a man and a boy were found ſtack dead, the other were ſcorched. The like flaſh of Lightning and crackes of Thunder, rent the Pariſh Church of Bongey, nine miles from Norwich, wrung in ſunder the wires & whéeles of the clocke, ſlew two men which ſate in the belfrey, and ſcorched another, which hardly eſcaped.
               The ſtone Tower of London Bridge,The tower vpon Londō Bridge new builded with timber. being decayed, was taken downe, and a new foundation drawne, Sir Iohn Langley, Lord Maior of the City of London, laide the firſt ſtone, the 28 of Auguſt, in the preſence of the Shrieues of London, and the two Bridge-Maſters.
               
                  Nicholas Backhouſe, Francis Bowyer.
                  Shrieues.
               
               Sir Thomas Ramſey, Grocer.Maior.
               
               This ſir Thomas Ramſey,
                  Sir Thom. Ramſeyes gift, is of 243 l. the yeare, to Chriſts Hoſpitall Lord Maior of the City of London, with the goodly and vertuous Lady, Dame Mary his wife, both liuing, being ſeiſed of lands in the right of the ſaid Dame Mary, and of her inheritance, haue giuen the fée ſimple of the ſame lands, being the yearely value of 243 
                  l to Chriſts Hoſpitall in London. The rents and profits whereof are limited to be imployed, as followeth, viz. vnto Peter Houſe in Cambridge, ſhalbe giuen yearely forty pound to the finding of foure ſchollars, and two fellowes there. More, tenne pound yearely towardes

the relieuing of the poore, harboured in the Hoſpitall of Saint Bartholomew in London, and other tenne pounds yearely, to the relieuing of poore Priſoners, in the foure Priſons of London, to wit, Newgate, Ludgate, and the two Counters, this to be continued for euer, the reſidue to be conuerted towardes reliefe of the poore children of Chriſts Hoſpitall aforeſaid. This gift ſhe afterward in her widowhood, confirmed, and augmented greatly, both in her life, and by her Teſtament.
               
                  
                     A blazing Starre.The 11 of Nouember, at night, was ſeene a blazing Starre with a long ſtreame, which was nightly ſéene, till eight of the clocke.
               
                  An. reg 20 Sergeants feaſt.Tae 19 of Nouember, the new Sergeants at the Law, ſeuen in number, held their feaſt in the Temple of London.
               
                  
                     A warning to Coniurers.The 17 of Ianuary, one Simon Pembrooke, dwelling in Southwarke, being vehemently ſuſpected to be a Coniurer, by commaundement of the ordinary Iudge for thoſe parts, appeared in the Pariſh Church of Saint Sauiour, at the court holden there: which Simon buſied in entertaining a Proctor, and hauing money in his hand, leaned his head vpon the pew, wherein the Proctor ſtood, which after he had done a certain ſpace, the Proctor began to lift vp his head, to ſée what he aild, and found him departed out of life, and ſtraightway the ſaid Simon fell downe, ratling a little in the throat, and neuer ſpake word after. This was done euen as the Iudge came into the church, who ſaid it

was the iuſt iudgment of God, towards thoſe that vſed Sorcery, and a great example to admoniſh others to feare the iuſtice of God. After his clothes being opened, there were found about him diuelliſh bookes of coniuration, and abominable practices, a picture of a man, hauing thrée dice in his hand, and this writing, Chance dice fortunately, and diuers papers of ſuch like matters, as hee had dealt in for men, ſuch as are mentioned in Leuiticus, the 20 chapter, the 6 verſe. If any ſoule turne himſelfe after ſuch as worke with ſpirits, and after ſouthſayers, to go awhooring, (ſaith the Lord) I will put my face againſt that ſoule, and will cut him off from among my people.
               
               The 3 of February, Iohn Nelſon,
                  Nelſon executed. for denying the Quéenes ſupremacy, was drawen to Tiburne, and there hanged and quartered.
               The 10 of March,1578. deceaſed the Lady Margaret, Counteſſe of Lineaux, and was buried at Weſtminſter.
               The 31 of May, Martine Frobiſher,
                  Frobiſhersthird voyage. with fiftéene ſaile of good ſhips well appointed, departed from Harwich in Eſſex, on his third voyage towards Cathay. The 31 of Iuly, after many attempts, and ſundry times being put backe by Ilands of Ice in his ſtraites, he came to anker in the Ilands, now by her Maieſty named Meta incognita, wheras in the yere before, they fraght their ſhippes with the like Ore, and then on the laſt of Auguſt, returning thence, arriued ſafely

in England, about the firſt of October.
               
                  Shrieues.
                  George Bond, Thomas Starky.
               
               
                  Maior.Sir Richard Pipe, Draper.
               
                  An. reg. 21 Caſſimere receiued.The 22 of Ianuary, about 7 of the clocke at night, Iohn Caſſimere, Count Palatine of the Rhene, and Duke of Bauaria, landing at the Tower of London, was there by diuers Noble men, and others, honorably receiued, and conueyed by creſſet-light, and torch-light to Sir Thomas Greſſams houſe in Biſhops-gate ſtréet, where hee was feaſted and lodged till Sunday next, and then by the Nobility, brought to the court at Weſtminſter, and after lodged in Sommerſet-houſe. On the eight of February, he was made Knight of the Garter, and on the fourtéenth of February, departed from London homewards, with great rewards giuen by the Quéenes Maieſty, the Nobility, and men of honour.
               
                  Deepe ſnow upon a ſudden.The fourth of February, and the night following, fell ſuch abundance of ſnow, that on the fift in the morning, the ſame was found at London, to be two foot déepe in the ſhalloweſt, and otherwiſe being driuen by the winde very boiſtrous in the Northeaſt, on bankes, an ell, or yard and a halfe déepe, in the which drifts of ſnow in the countries, many cattell, and ſome men and women were ouer-whelmed and loſt, it ſnowed till the eight day, and fréezed till the tenth. When following a thaw, with continuall

raine a long time after,Greatland waters which cauſed ſuch high floods, that the Marſhes and low grounds being drowned, the water roſe ſo high in Weſtminſter hall, that after the fall thereof, ſome fiſhes were found there to remaine.
               The 20 of February deceaſed ſir Nicholas Bacon Lord Kéeper of the great Seale of England,Lord Keeper deceaſed. who was honourably buried vnder a ſumptuous monument in Pauls Church of London, the 9 of March.
               The 25 of Aprill ſir Thomas Bromley knight,1579 Lord chā
                     cellor. was made Lord Chancellor of England.
               The 14 of Aprill,An heretick burnt at Norwich. 
                  Matthew Hamont of Hitherſey, thrée miles from Norwich ploughwright, for denying Chriſt to be our Sauiour, and publiſhing diuers other horrible hereſies, was conuented before the Biſhop of Norwich, condemned in the conſiſtorie, and deliuered to the Shrieues of Norwich to bée executed: but becauſe he had ſpoken words of blaſphemy againſt the Quéenes Maieſty and other of her Counſell, he was by the Maior Sir Robert Wood, and Sergeant Windam Recorder, condemned to loſe his eares, which were cut off the thirtéenth of May in the Market place of Norwich, and on the 20 of May he was burnt in the Caſtle ditch there.
               This yeare Marke Scalior,
                  A locke & key weighed but one wheat corne. Blackeſmith of London, for triall of his workemanſhip made one hanging locke of Iron, ſtéele and braſſe of eleuen ſeuerall péeces, and a pipe key, all cleane wrought, which waied but one graine of gold.

He alſo at the ſame time made a chaine of gold of forty thrée linkes, to which chaine the locke and key being faſtned and put about a fleas necke,Great art and labor to very ſmall purpoſe. ſhe drew the ſame with eaſe. All which locke and key, chaine, and flea, wayed but one graine and a halfe: a thing moſt incredible, but that I my ſelfe haue ſéene it.
               
                  The traiterous fact of Thomas Appletree.The 17. of Iuly the Quéenes Maieſty being on the riuer of Thames, betwixt her Mannor of Gréenwich and Depford, in her priuy barge, accompanied with the French Ambaſſadour, the Earle of Lincolne, and, others; it chanced that one Thomas Appletree, ſeruingman in the company of others, rowing vp and downe the Thames, hauing a Calliuer charged with a bullet, & ſhooting at randon, by miſfortune ſhot one of the watermen (the ſecond next vnto the bales of the ſaid barge which ſate within ſixe foote of her Highneſſe) cleane through both armes, for the which fact the ſaid Thomas was on the 21 of Iuly brought to the water ſide, where was a Gibbet ſet vp, and when the hangman had put the rope about his necke, he was by the Quéenes pardon deliuered from execution.
               
                  Iohn Fox deliuered 269 Chriſtians out of the Turkes hands.This years Iohn Foxe of Woodbridge, William Wicnor, Robert Moore Engliſhmen, hauing béene priſoners in Turkey about the ſpace of thirtéene yeares, with more than 260 other Chriſtians of diuers nations, by killing of their kéeper, meruailouſly eſcaped, and returned to their natiue countries.
               
                  Great water floods.In the month of September and October fell

great winds and raging floods in ſundry places of this Realme, where through many men, cattle, & houſes, were drowned. In ye town of Newport the cottages were borne downe and the corne loſt, paſture ground ouerwhelmed, cattell drowned. In the towne of Bedford the water came vp into the Market place, where cubbords, cheſts, and formes, ſwam about the houſes, their fuell, corne and hay was wract and borne away. Alſo the towne of Saint Edes in Huntingtonſhire was ouerflowed ſuddenly in the night, when all men were at reſt, the waters brake in with ſuch force, that the towne was all defaced, the Swannes ſwam downe the Market place, and all the towne about the boates did floate. Gormancheſter was ſuddenly ſuppreſt, their houſes full of water, and their cattell deſtroied.
               
                  Martin Calthorpe, Iohn Hart.
                  Shrieues.
               
               
                  Sir Nicholas Woodroofe, Haberdaſher.
                  Maior.
               
               On the 21 of September,An. reg. 22 Sir Thomas Greſham deceaſed. Sir Thomas Greſham knight, agent to the Quéene (who had builded the Royall exchange in London) deceaſed ſuddenly at his houſe in Biſhops gate ſtéets of London, and was buried in the pariſh Church of S. Elen there.
               The 6 of Aprill being Wedneſday in Eaſter weeke,1580 Earth quake generall. about ſixe of the clocke towards the euening, a ſudden earthquake happened at London, and generally throughout England, by

violence whereof, the great clocke bell at Weſtminſter ſtrooke againſt the hammers, as diuers clocks and bells againſt their hammers and clappers both in the City and country did the like. In London a péece of the Temple Church fell downe. In the late diſſolued Church of the Gray Friars now called Chriſts Church, in the Sermon time one falling from the top, killed a yong man out of hand, and one other ſtone ſo bruiſed a maiden, his fellow ſeruant both to one maſter, that ſhe liued but 4 daies. Diuers other were ſore bruiſed running out of the Church. Some ſtones fell from the Church of Saint Paul in London, and ſome from the Church of Saint Peter at Weſtminſter, diuers chimnies with ſhaking loſt their tops, and ſhips on the riuer of Thames and on the Seas, were ſéene to totter: this earthquake continued about London not paſſing one minute of an houre, but in Eaſt Kent, and the ſea coaſt, thereabout it was felt three times, to wit, at 6.9.11. of the clocke. The firſt of May, after 12 of the clocke in the night, was an earthquake felt in diuers places in Kent, namely at Aſhford, great Chatte, &c. which made the people there to riſe out of their beds, and to runne to their churches to call vpon God, by earneſt praier to be mercifull vnto them.
               
                  Strange haile.The 13 of Iune about 6 of the clocke in the morning, at Shipwaſh within Bothell Barony in Northumberland, there happened a tempeſt of lightning and thunder, after the which

of a ſudden, came great ſhowers of haile, amongſt the which were ſtones of diuers ſhapes.
               The 17 of Iune,A monſtrous child. in the Pariſh of Blanſdon in Yorkeſhire, after a great tempeſt of lightning and thunder, a woman of foure ſcore yeares old named Alice Perin, was deliuered of an hideous monſter, whoſe head like vnto a ſallet, the fore part of his body like a man, but hauing eight legges, not one like another, and a taile of halfe a yard long.
               About the 18 of Iuly,Souldiers tranſported into Ireland. the Lord Gray tooke his voiage towards Ireland, as Lord Deputy thereof, after whom were ſent diuers bands of luſty ſouldiers, both horſemen and footmen, vnder the leading of expert captaines.
               The 23 of September at Fenniſtanton in Huntingtonſhire, one Agnes,
                  child mō
                     ſtrous. wife to William Linſey, was deliuered of an vgly and ſtrange monſter, with a face blacke, mouth and eyes like a Lyon, and both male and female.
               
                  Ralph Woodcocke, Iohn Allot.
                  Shrieues.
               
               The eight of October appeared a Crinicall or blaſing ſtarre, buſhing toward the Eaſt,Blaſing Starre. which was nightly ſéene more than two monthes after.
               The eightéenth of October,Sergeants feaſt. were made 8 Sergeants at law, to wit, William Fleetwood Recorder of London, Edward Flowerdew, Thomas Snagge, William Periam, Robert Halton, Iohn Clench, Iohn Puckering, Thomas Walmſley, and

held their feaſt in the new temple at London.
               The 19 of October, proclamation was publiſhed at London, for the apprehenſion, and ſeuere puniſhing of all perſons ſuſpected to be of the familie of loue.
               
                  Maior.
                  Sir Iohn Braunch, Draper.
               
               There arriued vpon the Weſt coaſt of Ireland, certaine companies of Italians and Spaniards ſent by the Pope to aide the Earle of Deſmond in his rebellion, which fortified themſelues ſtrongly neare Smerwicke, in a fort which they called Caſtle delore, there erecting the Popes Banner againſt her Maieſty: which when the Lord Gray of Wilton deputy of Ireland vnderſtood, marched thitherward, and the ſixt of Nouember, hearing of the arriuall of foure or fiue of the Queenes Maieſties ſhips, & alſo of three barkes, fraughted from Limorket and Korke with victuals, on the morrow after marched towards the fort, vnto which he gaue ſo hot an aſſault, that on the ninth of Nouember the ſame was yeelded, all ye Iriſh men & women hanged, & more then 400 Spaniards, Italians, & Byſcaies at ye time put to the ſword, the Coronell, Captaines, Secretary, & other (to the number of 20) ſaued for ranſome. In which fortreſſe was found good ſtore of money, biſket, bacon, oyle, wine and diuers other prouiſions of victuall, ſufficient for their company for halfe a yeare,An. reg. 23 beſide armour, powder, ſhot, and other

furniture for two thouſand men and vpwards.
               The 28 of Nouember, were arraigned in the Kings bench, William Randall for coniuring to know where treaſure was hid in the earth, and gods felloniouſly taken, Ralph Spacie, and Chriſtopher Waddington for being preſent, Randall, Elas, Spacie, and Waddington were found guilty, and had iudgement to be hanged, Randall was executed, the other were repriued.
               About the foure and twentith of December in the towne of Walſam in the County of Suſſex, a Child of eleuen yeares old,Strange ſpeeches of a child. named William Withers, lay in a trance, and then comming to himſelfe againe, vttered to the ſtanders by many ſtrange ſpeeches, againſt pride, coueteouſneſſe, and coldneſſe of Charity, &c.
               About the 12 of Ianuary proclamation was publiſhed at London,Againſt Ieſuites & maſſing prieſts. for reuocation of ſundry the Queenes Maieſties ſubiects remayning beyond the ſeas vnder colour of ſtudy, and yet liuing contrary to the lawes of the Realme. And alſo againſt the retayning of Ieſuites and maſſing Prieſts, ſowers of ſedition, and other treaſonable attempts, &c.
               The 13 of Ianuary, a man was drawne to S. Thomas of Watrings, & there hanged, headed, & quartered, for begging by a licence, wherunto the Queenes hand was counterfeited.
               The ſixteenth of Ianuary the Parliament began at Weſtminſter,Parliamēt at Weſtminſter. and on the twentith of Ianuary the Queenes maieſty went from White hall, to the Parliament houſe by water.
               
                  
                  Iuſting at Weſtminſter.The 22 of Ianuary triumphant iuſting was accompliſhed at Weſtminſter, where many of the beholders as well men as women ſore h
                     ••
                  t, ſome maimed, and ſome killed by falling of ſcaffolds.
               
                  Mice deuoured graſſe.About Halontide laſt paſt, in the marſhes of Dainſey hundred, in a place called Southminſter, in the County of Eſſex, there ſuddenly appeared an infinite multitude of Mice, which ouerwhelming the ſaid marches, did ſheare and gnaw the graſſe by the roote, ſpoyling and t
                     •••
                  ting the ſame with their venemous teeth, in ſuch ſort, that the cattell which graſed there
                     ••
                  , were ſmitten with a morraine and died therof, which vermine by policy of man could not be deſtroied, till it came to paſſe that there flocked together all about the ſame marſhes, ſuch a number of Owles, as all the ſhire was not able to yeeld, whereby the marſh-holders were ſhortly deliuered from the vexation of the Mice, the like of this was alſo in Kent.
               The 4 of Aprill, the Queene dined at Depford,Francis Drake knighted· and there after dinner entred the ſhippe wherein captaine Drake had ſailed about the world, and being there, a bridge that her Maieſty came ouer brake, being vpon the ſame th
                     ••
                   
                  200 perſons, and no hurt done by the ſame, and there ſhe knighted Captaine Francis Drake i
                     •
                   in his ſhip.
               The Banqueting houſe builded at Weſtminſter,1581 beginning on the 26 of March, and finiſhed on the eighteenth of Aprill, in which me
                     •••
                  
                  
ſpace, to wit,Banqueting houſe at Weſtminſter. Ambaſſadors out of France. on the ſixtéenth of Aprill arriued at Douer certaine noble men of France, to wit, Francis Burbon, Prince Daulphine of Auergne, Arthur Caſſe Marſhall of France, Lodowike Luſigaian, Lord of Lanſac, and others. Theſe came from Graueſend by water to London, and ſo to the Court; then being at Weſtminſter, where they were honourably entertained, the Nobles and gentlemen deſirous to ſhew them all c
                     •
                  rteſie, prepared a triumph in moſt ſumptuous order, vpon Whitſon Munday & Tewſday: the chiefe chalengers of which attempts,Iouſting, tourneying and barriars. were the Earle of Arundell, L. Windſor, Philip Sidney and other, the defendants to the number of one and twenty, all which of them ſixe courſes againſt the former chalengers, who performed their parts valiantly.
               The 21 of Iune in the night,Croſſe in Cheap defaced. the loweſt Images about the Croſſe in Cheap, were broken and defaced, whereupon proclamation was made, that who ſo would bewray the doers thereof, ſhould haue forty Crownes, but nothing came to light, but an euill end befell the doer.
               This yeare were to be ſéene in London two Dutchmen of ſtrange ſtatures,Two men of ſtrange ſtature. the one in height ſeuen foot and ſeuen inches, in breadth betwixt the ſhoulders thrée quarters of a yard and two inches, the compaſſe of his breaſt one yard halfe and two inches, and about the waſt one yard, quarter, and one inch, the length of his arme to the hands a full yard, a comely man of

perſon, but lame of his legs, for he had broken them with lifting of a barrell of Béere. The other was in hight but thrée foot, he had neuer a good foot nor any knée at all, and yet could dance a galliard, he had no arme, but a ſtump to the elbow or little more on the right ſide, on the which ſinging he would daunce a cup, and after toſſe it about thrée or foure times, and euery time receiue the ſame on the ſaid ſtumpe, hée would ſhoote an arrow néere the marke, flouriſh with a rapier, throw a bowle, beat with a hammer, hew with an axe, ſound with a trumpet, and drinke euery day tenne quarts of the beſt béere, if he could get it.
               
                  Priſoners arraigned for not cō
                     ming to Church.The 18 of Iuly were brought from the Fléete, the Gatehouſe, Newgate, and the Counters, ſundry priſoners indicted for refuſing to come to the Church, all which being conuicted by their owne confeſſion had iudgement accordingly to pay twenty pounds for euery moneth of ſuch wilfull abſence.
               
                  Shriues.
                  Richard Martine, W. Webbe.
               
               
                  Maior.
                  Sir Iames Haruy, Ironmonger.
               
               
                  Monſieur Duke of Anioue came into Englād An. reg. 24.The firſt of Nouember Monſieur the French Kings brother Duke of Anioue, and other Nobles of France hauing lately arriued in Kent, came to London, and were honourably receiued and retained at the Court with great banqueting.
               
                  Campion & others executed.The firſt of December Edmond Campion
                  
Ieſuite, Ralph Sherwin, and Alexander Brian Seminary Prieſts, hauing béene arraigned and condemned for high treaſon, were drawne from the tower of London to Tiburne, and there hanged and quartered.
               The firſt of February the Quéenes maieſty,Monſieur returneth, and is honourably conuaied toward the ſea. with her whole Court accompanied Monſieur Duke of Anioue from Weſtminſter to Canterbury, where, when ſhe had feaſted all the French Nobility, either tooke leaue of another, and her Maieſty returned. The ſixt, the Duke lodged at Sandwich, and on the next morning tooke the ſea, being accompanied with the Earle of Leiceſter, the Lord Hunſdon, the Lord Howard, knights of the Garter, the Lord Willowby, Lord Windſor, Lord Shefild, Lord Hyward, and Lord Audley, Mr. Sidney, ſir George Cary, Maſter Iohn and Robert Cary, and a great number of Gentlemen, ſo as the whole traine that attended vpon the ſaid Earle, was one hundred gentlemen, and more then thrée hundred ſeruingmen. The Lord Hunſdon, had of gentlemen and others to the number of one hundred and fifty, and the Lord Hayward had as many,Duke of Anioue receiued into Zeland. all which ſailed in 15 ſhips to Fluſhing in Zeland, where the Prince of Orenge and the States of the Low Countries, receiued the ſaid Duke and our Nobles of England with great ioy,Duke of Anioue created Duke of Brabant, &c. conducting them from thence to Middleborow, and then to Antwerpe, where before the twentith day of the ſame moneth, they ſolemnely created the ſaid Duke of Anioue, Duke Lothyer,

Braband, &c. and our Nobility returned into England.
               
                  1581. Paine executed, at Chelmſford.
                  Iohn Paine Prieſt being indicted of high treaſon for words by him ſpoken, was arraigned & condemned at Chelmſford, and there executed on the ſecond of Aprill.
               
                  The Conduit in Fleetſtreet newly built.This yeare the water Conduit in Fléetſtréete was new builded with a larger Ceſterne at the charges of the City.
               The fiftéenth of May at night about ten of the clocke a blaſing ſtarre appeared, deſcending in the Northweſt,A blaſing ſtarre. the beard whereof ſtreamed Southeaſt.
               
                  7. Prieſts executed at Tiburn.The 28 of May, Thomas Ford, Iohn Sheret, and R. Iohnſon Prieſts, hauing bin before condemned of high treaſon, were drawne from the Tower of London to Tiburne, and there hanged and quartered. And on the 30 of May, Luke Kerby, William Filby, Thomas Cotten, and Laurence Richardſon, were for the like treaſon in the ſame place likewiſe executed.
               
                  Lord Wilowby Ambaſſa-into Denmarke.The 14 of Iuly, Peregrine Bartue, Lord Willowby of Ereſby, appointed Ambaſſador to Frederick King of Denmarke, with the Garter, imbarked at Kingſtone vpon Hull, and proſperouſly arriued at Eliſmore in Denmarke, on the twentith of the ſame moneth. On the fouretéenth of Auguſt, the ſaid King receiued robes of the order, ware the Garter, Collar & George, and the Lord Ambaſſadour returning with his traine, arriued at Bromtholine in Norffolke, on the twentith of September.
               
                  This yeare was firſt founded a publike lecture in Surgery,The Lecture of Surgery firſt founded. to begin to be read in the Colledge of Phyſitions in London, Anno 1584. the ſixt of May, &c. by Iohn L. Lumley, and Richard Caldwell D. in Phyſicke. The Reader whereof, to be a Doctor of Phyſicke.
               The 19 of Iuly certaine firkins of gunpowder (to the number of ſeuen) and as many more firkens of Sturgeon,A ſtrange misfortune of gunpowder on Galley key▪
                   laden in a cart vpon Galley key, ſome ſmall portion of the ſame powder being ſhed on the ground, the horſe in the ſaid Carre ſtrooke fire with his foot, and fired all together, where through the Sturgeon was blowne away, ſome into the Thames, ſome elſe where, one firken was driuen through alomed wall that was boorded ouer, the Crane on the wharfe with the houſes neare to adioyning ſhatred, many men and horſes ſo blaſted, the 3 men and 7 horſes died thereof.
               The 12 of Auguſt there aroſe a great tempeſt of lightning, thunder, whirlewind, and raine,A ſtrange tempeſt in Norffolke. beſide haileſtones faſhioned like to the rowels of ſpurs, 2 or 3 inches about, in the Country of Norfolke, betwéene the townes of North Walſam, & Worſtéed, which tempeſt beat the corne flat to the ground, rent vp many great trées, and ſhiuered them in péeces, or wound them like writhes, at Hemming (a mile from Worſted) the weſt doore of the Church weighing more then 300 weight, was lifted off the hookes, & blowen ouer the Font within one yard of the Chancel doore, the top of the Church was riuen vp, and

the lead blowen away, fiue webbes of Leade were rufled vp together like a gloue, and blown into the field without the Churchyard. At Eaſt Ruſſen were many barnes blowne downe.
               
                  Shrieues.
                  William Roo, Iohn Hayden deceaſed the twenty foure of Nouember, and Cuthbert Buckle ſucceeded.
               
               
                  Maior.
                  Sir Thomas Blanke Haberdaſher.
               
               
                  Terme kept at Hartford.Michaelmas terme was adiourned to the Caſtle of Hertford, there to begin in Craſtina Animarum.
               
               
                  Thames Water brought into the high ſtrets of Londō.
                  Peter Morris frée denizon, conuaied Thames water in pipes of Lead, ouer the ſtéeple of Saint Magnus Church: at the North end of London bridge, & ſo into diuers mens houſes in Thames ſtréet, Newfiſhſtréet, and Graſſe ſtreet, vp to the Northweſt corner of Leaden hall (the higheſt ground of London) where the waſte of the main pipe ranne firſt this yeare on Chriſtmas euen, and ſince being diuided into foure ſpouts, oft times running foure waies, plentifully ſeruing to the commodity of the inhabitants neare adioyning in their houſes, and alſo clenſing the kennels of the ſtréet towards Biſhops gate, Algate, the Bridge, and the Stocks market. But now no ſuch matter, priuate commodity being preferred, common commodity is neglected, and not reformed as was promiſed.
               The 17 of Ianuary in the Pariſh of Armitage, in a place called Blackemore in Dorcetſhire,

a péece of ground contayning three acres remoued from the place where it was firſt planted, and was carried cleane ouer another cloſe,Ground remoued in Docetſhire. where Alder and Willow trées grow,An. reg. 25 the ſpace of forty goad (euery goad contayning 15 foote) and hath ſtopt vp a high way that directed towards the market towne of Cerne, and yet notwithſtanding the hedges wherewith it was incloſed, enuiron it ſtill, and the trees ſtand thereon bolt vpright, ſauing one Oke that is well nigh twenty loads, remoued the place, whereas this ground had his being, is left like vnto a great pit.
               The 23 of Ianuary being Sonday,A gratious admonition to keepe the Sabbaoth. about 4 of the clocke in the afternoone, the old and vnderpropped ſcaffolds round about the Beare-garden, on the South ſide of the Thames, ouer againſt the City of London, on excharged with people, ſell ſuddenly downe, whereby to ye number of 8 perſons men and women were ſlaine, & many others ſore hurt and bruiſed. A friendly warning to ſuch, as more delight themſelues in the cruelty of beaſts, then in the workes of mercy, the fruits of true poſſeſſed faith, which ought to be the Sabboth daies exerciſe.
               This yeare 1583,
                  1583. The Prince of Orenge ſlaine. Note. 
                  William Prince of Orenge was ſlaine by Iohn Iowrigny a Wallon Souldier, who notwithſtanding ſundry extreame torments inflicted vpon his body and limbs in priſon, as alſo hauing his fleſh pluckt off with hot pincers vpon an open ſtage, yet he neuer ſhrunke, nor craued any fauour, neither

repented him of the fact, but feared he had not ſlaine him.
               
                  The Arch biſhop of Collē expulſed for marrying a wife.About this time the Archbiſhop of Collen being well in yeares, married a wife, whereupon the Emperor with other Princes of Germany, made war vpon him, and forced him to flie into Holland for aid, but could not preuaile; & forthwith there was an other preferred in his roome, and all was quiet.
               
                  A houſe blowne vp with gunpowder in Fetter-lane.On the ſixtéene of Aprill about eight of the clocke in the morning, a gunpowder houſe in Fetter-lane, and diuers other houſes neare adioyning, were blowen vp, with the ſpoile of fiftéene hundred waight of powder, two men and one woman were ſlaine, and diuers other perſons ſore hurt, and ſome ſtrangely ſaued.
               
                  Alaſco of Poland.
                  Albertus Alaſco frée Baron of Laſco, Vainoide, or Palatine of Siradia in Poland, arriued at Harwich in Eſſex, and on the laſt of Aprill, came by water to Wincheſter houſe in Southwarke, where he remained for the moſt part of his abode here.
               
                  Elias Thacker was hanged at Saint Edmond bury in Suffolke on the fourth of Iune, Iohn Coping on the ſixt for ſpreading certaine bookes ſeditiouſly penned by one Robert Brown againſt the Booke of Common praier, eſtabliſhed by the Lawes of this realme.
               On the ninth of Iuly deceaſed Thomas Ratcliffe, Earle of Suſſex, Lord Chamberlaine to her Maieſty, and knight of the Garter, at Bermendſey beſides London, and was on

the 28 of Iuly, conueyed through the ſame city of London, toward Newhall in Eſſex, there to be buried.
               
                  Edmond Grindall Doctor of Diuinity,Archbiſh. of Canterbury deceaſed. Archbiſhop of Canterbury, deceaſed in Croydon, in Surrey, on the 6 of Iuly, and was there buried.
               
                  Barnard Randolph Eſquire, common Sergean of the city of London, deceaſed on the 7 of Auguſt. This man in his life-time, deliuered to the company of the Fiſh-mongers in London, the ſumme of nine hundred pounds,Iuſtice Randolph his charity of 900 pounds. to be imployed towards the conducting of Thames water, ceſterning the ſame in Lead, and caſtleying with ſtone in the Pariſhes of Saint Mary Magdalen, and Saint Nicholas Colde Abbey, néere vnto Fiſh-ſtréet, ſeuen hundred pounds. The other two hundred pounds, to pay for euer yearely the ſumme of tenne pounds, viz. towards the maintenance of a poore ſcholar in the Vniuerſity of Oxford, yearely foure pounds: towards the mending of the high-wayes in the Pariſh of Tiſehurſt, in the County of Suſſex, foure pounds. And to the poore people of the Pariſhes of Saint Nicholas Oliue in Bred-ſtréet, and Saint Mary Magdalen, néere old fiſh-ſtréete, forty ſhillings.
               More, he bequeathed to be beſtowed in lands or annuitie, to the reliefe of the poore, inhabiting in the Wards of Quéene-hith, and caſtle Baynard, in the city of London, and in the afore-ſaid Pariſh of Tiſehurſt, in the County of Suſſex,

the ſumme of 1000 pounds, a faire Legacie, if it be performed.
               
                  At this time Pyrats, and great Rouers troubled the Seas.In the moneth of Iune, were ſent to the ſeas, a ſhip, called the Barke Talbot, and a ſmal Barke, both manned with one hundred men, vnder the charge of William Borough Eſquire, Clerke of her Maieſties Nauie, for the apprehending of certain out-ragious ſea-rouers, who for that they were many in number, and well appointed, ſo boldly behaued themſelues, as that ſhortly after, it was confidently bruited, that they had vanquiſhed in fight the ſaid Ship and Barke, but within few dayes after, beyond all exſpectation, they were by the ſaid W. Borough and his company, diſcomfited and taken, to the number of ten ſaile,Sea Rouers apprehended and executed. whereof thrée priſes, and ſome of the chiefe Pirats, namely T. Walton, alias Purſer, Clinton, Athinſon, W. Ellis, W. Valentine, alias Bagh, T. Beuen, and foure more, on the ninetéenth day of Auguſt, were hanged at Wapping. Walton as he went to the Gallowes, rent his Venetian Bréeches of crimſon taffata, and diſtributed the ſame to ſuch his old acquaintance as ſtood about him: but Atkinſon had before giuen his murrie Veluet doublet, with great gold buttons, and his like coloured Veluet Venetians, laid with great gold lace, which he had worne at the ſeas of Porbeke, vnto ſuch of his friends as pleaſed him.
               
                  An heretick burned at Norwich.On the 17 day of September, Iohn Lewes, who named himſelfe Abdoit, an obſtinate Hereticke, denying the Godhead of Chriſt, and

holding diuers other deteſtable hereſies, was burned at Norwich.
               On the 22 of September, Albertus de Laſco,
                  Palatine of Siradia in Poland returned. Palatine of Siradia in Poland, after he had wel viewed the order of our Engliſh Court and Nobility, with other places of this Realme, eſpecially, the Vniuerſity of Oxford, he returned towards Poland.
               On the 23 day of December, Iohn Whitgift,
                  Doctor Whitgift Archbiſh. of Canterbury. Doctor of Diuinity, late Biſhop of Worceſter, was at Lambeth, tranſlated to the Arch-biſhoprick of Canterbury.
               The 25 of September, a monſtrous childe was borne in Yorke-ſhire, hauing two heads.
               
                  William Maſham, Iohn Spencer.
                  Shrieues.
               
               
                  Sir Edward Osborne, Clothworker.
                  Maior.
               
               The tenth of October, at Caſter in Norfolke,
                     A monſtrous fiſh. about two miles from Yarmouth, there was a Fiſh, by force of the Eaſterly winde, driuen aſhore, the length whereof, from the necke to the taile, was, ſeuentéene yards and a foote, the head was great, for the chap of the iaw was thrée yards and a quarter in length,An. reg 26 with téeth of thrée quarters of a yard compaſſe, great eyes, and two great holes ouer them, to ſpout water, her taile was fourtéene foot broad in thicknes, from the backe to the belly, ſhe was foure yards and a halfe.
               This yéere 1583, the Quéene being at Barne Elmer, at the earneſt ſuite of ſir Francis

Walſingham, ſhee entertained twelue Players into her ſeruice,Players. and allowed them wages and liueries, as Groomes of the Chamber, and vntill then ſhe had none of her owne, but diuers Lorde had Players.
               
                  Iames Earle of Deſmond in Ireland, ſecretly wandring without any ſuccour, being taken in his cabine by one of the Iriſh,Deſmonds head ſet on Londō bridge. his head was cut off, and ſent into England, where the ſame (as the head of an Arch rebell) was ſet on London Bridge, on the 13 of December.
               The 13 of December, through negligence of vndiſcréet perſons, brewing in the Towne of Nantwich,Nantwich in Cheſhire burnt. the fire being careleſly left, ſet vpon ſome light matter, and ſo burſt forth to the roofs of the houſe, and in ſhort time increaſed, that from the Weſt end of the Towne, the flame was diſperſed ſo furiouſly, that in ſhort ſpace a great part of the South ſide, and ſome of the Eaſt ſide, was burned downe to the ground. Which fire beginning at ſixe of the clocke in the Euening, and continuing till ſixe of the clocke in the Morning, conſumed in a manner, all the whole towne, and about the number of two hundred houſes, beſide brew-houſes, barnes, ſtables, &c. In all about 600 houſes.
               
                  Someruile Arden & others arraigned.
                  Iohn Someruile of Edſtow in Warwickſhire, of late diſcouered and taken in his way, comming to haue killed the Quéene, confeſſed that he was moued thereunto by certaine traiterous perſons, his kinſmen and allies, and alſo by often reading of certaine ſeditious bookes lately

publiſhed: for the which the ſame Someruile, Edward Arden Eſquire, Mary Arden his wife (father and mother in Law to the ſaid Someruile) and Hugh Hall Prieſt, were on the 16 of December, arraigned in the Guild hall of London, where they were found guilty, and condemned of high treaſon.
               On the 19 of December, I. Someruile,
                  Someruile ſtrangled himſelfe. and E. Arden, being brought from the Towre of London, to Newgate, and there ſhut vp in ſeuerall places, within two houres after, Someruile was found to haue ſtrangled himſelfe. And on the morrow after, E. Arden was drawne from Newgate, into Smithfield, and there hanged,Arden executed. bowelled and quartered: whoſe head with Someruiles, was ſet on London Bridge, and his quarters on the gates of the City.
               On the 10 of Ianuary, William Carter was arraigned and condemned of high treaſon,Carter executed for printing of trayterous books for printing a ſeditious and traiterous booke, intituled, A Treatiſe of ſchiſme, and was for the ſame on the next morrow, drawne from Newgate to Tiburne, and there hanged, bowelled and quartered, and forthwith a booke was publiſhed, intituled, A Declaration of the fauourable dealing of her Maieſties Commiſſioners, &c.
               The 7 of February,Fiue executed for treaſon. were arraigned at Weſtminſter, I. Fenne, George Hadocke, I. Munden, I, Nutter, and Thomas Hemerford, all fiue were found guiltie of high treaſon, and had iudgement to be hanged, bowelled, and quartered,

and were executed at Tiburne, on the 12 of February.
               
                  1584. Throgmorton executed.The 21 of May, Francis Throgmorton Eſquire, was arraigned in the Guild-hall of the city of London, where being found guilty of high treaſon, he was condemned, and had iudgment to be drawne, hanged, bowelled and quartered. The tenth of Iuly next following, the ſame Francis Throgmorton was conuayed by water, from the Tower of London, to the Blacke Fryars ſtaires, and from thence by land to the Seſſions hall in the old Baily, without Newgate, where he was deliuered to the Shrieues of London, laid on a hurdle, drawne to Tiburne, and there hanged and quartered.
               
                  Antwerpe beſieged, & yeelded to the Duke of Parma.This yeare 1584, the rich and moſt flouriſhing City of Antwerpe, was ſtrongly beſieged by Alexander Duke of Parma, with eleuen thouſand men: All which was in vaine, except hee could ſtoppe all reliefe by water, therefore he made a Bridge ouer the great Riuer of Scheld, by meanes whereof, the Citizens were wholly impeached of all maner of ſuccour, ſo as they were conſtrained to ſubmit themſelues again to the King of Spaine gouernment, hauing endured a yeares ſiege: during which time,Citizens become reſolute ſouldiers. fiue hundred gallant Marchants, at their owne charges, became reſolute Souldiers, ſkirmiſhing daylie with the enemy, vntill by their owne forwardneſſe, and the chance of warre, they were either ſlaine or taken.
               
                  
                  Stephen Slanie, Henry Billingſley.
                  Shrieues.
               
               
                  Sir Thomas Pulliſon, Draper.
                  Maior.
               
               The 12 of Nouember,An. reg. 27 the Quéene (returning after her Progreſſe) came to her Manor of S. Iames, where the Citizens of London, to the number of two hundred, in coates of Veluet, and chaines of gold, on horſebacke, and 1000 of the Companies on foot, (hauing torches ready, to giue light on euery ſide, receiued and welcommed her. And on the twenty foure day of the ſame moneth, her Maieſty and the Lords, rode to the Parliament, which was that day begun at Weſtminſter.
               In the moneth of Ianuary deceaſed Edward Fines, Lord Clinton, Earle of Lincolne,Earle of Lincolne deceaſed. and Lord Admirall of England, Knight of the Garter, and one of her Maieſties priuy Councell, and was buried at Windſor.
               The 21 of Ianuary, Ieſuites,Seminaries, and maſſing Prieſts baniſhed. Seminaries, and other Maſſing Prieſts, to the number of 21, late priſoners in the Tower of London, Marſhalſey, and Kings Bench, were ſhipped at the Tower Wharfe, to bee conueyed towardes France, and baniſhed this Realme for euer.
               
                  Henry Earle of Darby,Earle of Darby Ambaſſadour into France. appointed by her Maieſty, Ambaſſadour to Henry, the third French King, to inueſt him with the order of the Garter, on the 26 of Ianuary paſſed with his traine from London to Graueſend, and from thence to Douer, where they embarked &

landed at Calleis on the firſt of February, and returning againe, landed at Douer on the 11 of March.
               
                  W. Parry executed.The ſecond of March, W. Parry was drawne from the Tower, through the city of London, to Weſtminſter, and there in the Palace Court, hanged and quartered for high treaſon, as may appeare by a booke, intituled, A true and plaine declaration, of the horrible treaſons, practiſed by William Parry, &c. hee was a cunning Traitor.
               This yéere, ſir Walt. Mildmay Knight, one of her Maieſties priuy Councell, founded a Colledge in the Vniuerſity of Cambridge, and named it Emanuel colledge.Emanuel Colledge founded.
               
               
                  1585. Parliamēt diſſolued.The twenty nine of March, the Parliament was diſſolued, at the breaking vp whereof, her Maieſty in the Parliament houſe, made an Oration, as ye may reade in my larger labours.
               About the 24 of Aprill, by commandement from har Maieſty, the citizens of London appointed out of the companies of the ſame city, to the number of foure thouſand men with armour enſignes, &c. the greater part whereof were ſhot,Citizens of London trained vp with ſhot. the other were pikes and halbarts in faire corſlets, all theſe were trained vp vnder expert Captaines, and other officers, who muſtered and ſkirmiſhed daily at the Miles end, or in Saint Georges field, and on the 18 of May, muſtred in the Parke of Gréenewich, and ſkirmiſhed before the Quéenes Maieſty, who

gaue them thankes.
               The 25 of April,Earle of Arundell ſent to the Tower. 
                  Philip Howard Earle of Arundell, was brought to the towre of London, for attempting to haue paſſed beyond the Seas, without licence of the Quéene.
               On the twentieth of Iune, Henry Percy, Erle of Northumberland, priſoner in the towre of London, vpon vehement ſuſpition of high treaſon, was found there to haue murdered himſelfe, as more at large in a larger booke I haue ſet downe.
               The 26 of Iune, arriued at London,The ſoueraignty of the Low Countries preſented to her Maieſty, and a pedigree drawne to proue the Q' title to thoſe prouinces by deſcent. Deputies for the States of the Netherlands, who were lodged about the Tower ſtréete, and had their diet worſhipfully appointed at the charges of her Maieſty, in the Clothworkers hall. Thoſe on the 29 of Iune, repayred to the Court then at Gréenewich, where they preſented to her Maieſty, the ſoueraignty of thoſe countries.
               The 4 of Iuly, Charles, Lord Howard, late Lord Chamberlaine, was made Lord Admirall: and Henry, Lord Hunſdon, was made Lord Chamberlaine of the houſhold.
               The 5 of Iuly, T. Awfield Seminary Prieſt,Awfild & Welby executed. and T. Welby Dyer, were arraigned at London, found guilty, and had iudgment to be hanged, as Felons, for publiſhing of bookes, contayning falſe, ſeditious, and ſlanderous matter: theſe were on the next morrow executed at Tiburne.
               The ſixteenth of Iuly, Sir Francis Ruſſel
                  
Knight, Lord Ruſſell, third ſonne to Francis Ruſſell, Earle of Bedford, was ſlaine with a dagge in the borders of Scotland, beſide Barwicke, by a Scot, as they met vpon a truce day. On the next morrow, Francis Ruſſell, Earle of Bedford, Knight of the Garter, and one of her Maieſties priuy Councell, Father to the late named Sir Francis Lord Ruſſell, ſlaine on the borders of Scotland,
                  Earle of Bedford deceaſed. deceaſed, and was honourably buried at Cheineies in Bedford-ſhire.
               
                  Souldiers tranſported into the Low Countries by commiſſion.In the moneth of Iuly, Souldiers were preſſed in the Citie ef London, and being furniſhed for the warres, at the charges of the companies, ſet forth towards the Seas, on the 13 of Auguſt, and were tranſported ouer into Holland, Zeland, &c. as other the like Sruldiers, out of other parts of the Realme before had béene.
               
                  Ground and trees ſunke.On the fourth of Auguſt, at the end of the Towne called Motingham, in Kent, 8 miles from London, the ground began to ſinke, thrée great Elmes being ſwallowed vp, and driuen into the earth, paſt mans ſight.
               The fourtéenth of September, Sir Francis Drake Generall, as well by ſes, as by land, Chriſtopher Carlile Eſquire, Lieuetenant Generall, Martine Frobiſher, with diuers other Gentlemen Captaines, and two thouſand and three hundred Souldiers and Sailers in twentie two Shippes and Pineſſes, departed from Plimouth: and paſſing by the Iſles of Bayon, and

the Canaries, arriued at Saint Iago, which citty they tooke and burned: after, they ſailed to Saint Domingo, which they ſpoiled and ranſomed: from thence to Cartagena, which they alſo tooke, ſpoyled and ranſomed: and retiring homewards, razed and burned the city and Fort of S. Auguſtine, in Terra florida, and the 27 of Iuly, in Anno 1586, arriued at Plimouth: their ſouldiers and ſaylers got but ſmall ſpoyle.
               The ninetéenth of September,Seminary Prieſts baniſhed. to the number of two and thirty Seminary Maſſing Prieſts, and other late priſoners in the Towre of London, Marſhalſey, Kings Bench, and other places, were imbarked, to be tranſported ouer into the coſtes of Normandy, to be baniſhed for euer.
               
                  Antony Ratcliffe,
                  Shrieues. 
                  Henry Pranell
               
               
                  Sir Wolſtone Dixie, Skinner.
                  Maior.
               
               In the moneths of Nouember and December, many men and horſes were ſhipped at the Tower wharfe, to be tranſported ouer into the Low countries.
               The 2 of December,An. reg. 28 
                  Fredericke Lord Windſor, deceaſed at Weſtminſter,The Earle of Leiceſter Lieutenant generall of the Low countries. and was honourably buried at Bradenham, in Buckinghamſhire.
               And on the ſixt of December, the Lord Robert Dudley, Erle of Leiceſter, Lord Lieutenant Generall, with his traine, entred the Towne

of Colcheſter in Eſſex, where he lodged at the houſe of ſir Thomas Lucas, on the next day he ſet forward to Harwich: and on the eight of December, the ſaid Earle, accompanied with the Earle of Eſſex, the Lord North, the Lord Audley, ſir W. Ruſſell, ſir Thomas Sherley, ſir Arthur Baſſet, ſir Walter Waller, ſir Geruaiſe Clifton, and other with his traine, to the number of 50 ſailes of ſhippes and hoyes, ſet forward towards Vluſhing, where, by ſir Philip Sidney Gouernor, and others, he was honorably entertained, as he was the like into all other townes of the Low countries.
               The Quéene tooke order for the peopling and inhabiting of the countries, late belonging to the Earle of Deſmond, to which end, diuers honourable and worſhipfull Gentlemen, prouided to be vndertakers of ſignories there, whereof ſome went into the ſaid Country, others according to order taken, ſent their people, among which were,Deſmond in Ireland, peopled of the Engliſh natiō. Sir Chriſtopher Hatton, ſir Walter Rawleigh, ſir William Courtney, ſir Richard Molinox, ſir George Bourchire, ſir Edward Fitton, ſir Valentine Browne, ſir Walter Luſon, Iohn Popham, her Maieſties Atturny Generall, and others.
               The nineteene of Ianuary, Nicholas Deuorox, alias Wodſon, was condemned for treaſon,Order for plantation in Ireland. in being made Prieſt at Reymes in France. Alſo Edward Barbat, being made Prieſt as aforeſaid, and comming into this Realme, was likewiſe condemned of treaſon, and

both drawne to Tiburne, and there hanged, bowelled and quartered, on the one and twentieth of Ianuary.
               On the ſame day,Archbiſh· of Canterbury called ro be of the priuy Coun- a Wench was burnt in Smithfield, for poyſoning of her Aunt and Miſtriſſe, and attempting the like to her Vncle.
               On the feaſt day of the purification of our bleſſed Lady, Doctor Iohn Whitegift, Archbiſhop of Canterbury, William Lord Cobham, Warden of the fiue Ports, and Thomas, Lord Burckburſt, were choſen and taken to bee of her Maieſties priuie Councell: the two firſt were ſworne on that day, and the third on the next morrow.
               The eleuenth of February,T. L. loſt his eares for treacherouſly practiſing to enioy the goods and lands of his naturall kinſmen. 
                  Thomas Louelace was brought priſoner from the Tower of London, to the Starre-chamber, againſt whom her Maieſties Atturney did informe, that the ſame Louelace, vpon malice conceiued againſt Leonard Louelace, and Richard Louelace, his couſin germanes, had falſely and deuiliſhly contriued and counterfeited a very traiterous Letter in the name of Thomas Louelace (another brother of the ſaid Leonard and Richard, then reſident beyond the Seas) purporting that the ſame Thomas ſhould thereby incite and prouoke the ſaid Leonard, to procure the ſaid Richard, to execute her Highnes deſtruction, with other circumſtances of treaſon.
               This Letter he caſt in an open high-way, pretending thereby, that vpon the diſcouery

thereof, his ſaid kinſmen Leonard and Richard, ſhould be drawne in queſtion for the treaſonable matter againſt, her Maieſty in that bill contained, euen in the higheſt degrée, for which offence, her Maieſties Atturney prayed, that the ſaid Thomas, then priſoner, might receiue condigne puniſhment.
                     A notable & praiſeworthy enſample of Iuſtice. Whereupon the Court adiudged him, that he ſhould be remitted to the Tower, from whence he came. That he ſhould be caried on horſebacke about Weſtminſter hal, with his face to the horſetaile, and a paper on his backe, wherein to be written: For counterfeiting of falſe and trecherous Letters againſt his owne kindred, containing moſt trayterous matters againſt her Maieſties perſon. And from thence to be caried in that maner, and ſet on the pillory in the Palace at Weſtminſter, and there to haue one of his eares cut off, alſo to be caried in like maner into London, and ſet on the pillory on market day in Cheape, with the like paper. And after that, caried into Kent, and at the next Aſſiſe there, to be ſet on the pillory with the like paper, and his other eare to be cut off: alſo to be ſet on the pillory, one market day at Canterbury, and another at Rocheſter in the like manner, and at euery the ſaid places: this order taken touching this offence openly read, the ſentence whereof was duly executed.
               
                  Strange ſicknes at Exceſter.The 14 of March, at the Aſſiſes kept at the City of Exceſter in Deuonſhire before Sir Edmond Anderſon, L. chiefe Iuſtice of the common pleas, Sergeant Floriday, one of the Barons

of the Exchequer, and other Iuſtices, there happened a ſtrange ſickneſſe: firſt, amongſt the priſoners, and then amongſt other perſons, and beſide the priſoners, many of all degrées died thereof, namely Serieant Floriday, Sir Iohn Chicheſter, Sir Arthur Baſſet, and Sir Bernard Drake Knights, Tho. Carew, Richard Carie, I. Forteſcue, I Waldran, and Tho. Riſdone Eſquires, and Iuſtices of the peace: of the common people died, very many Conſtables, Reues, Tithmen, and Iurors, and namely of one Iury being twelue of them, died eleuen.
               The ſeuentéene of March a ſtrange thing happened, Maſter Dorington of Spaldwickt,A ſtrange worme found in the heart of a horſe. in the Countie of Huntington Eſquire, one of her Maieſties Gentlemen Pentioners, had a horſe which died ſuddenly, and being ripped to ſée the cauſe of his death, there was found in the hole of the heart of the ſame horſe, a ſtrange worme, which lay on a round heape, in a Call or ſkinne, in the likeneſſe of a Toade, which being taken out & ſpread abroade, was in forme & faſhion not eaſie to be deſcribed, the length of which worme, diuided into many graines, to the number of 50, ſpred from the body, like the branches of a trée) was from the ſnout to the end of the longeſt graine, 17 inches, hauing foure iſſues in the grains, from whence dropped forth a red water, the body in bignes round about, was 3 inches & a halfe, the color whereof was very like to a mackarell. This monſtrous worme found in maner aforeſaid, crawling to haue got away,

was ſtabbed in with a dagger, and died, which after being dried, was ſhewed to many honourable perſons of the Realme.
               
                  1586. Seminary Prieſts executedThe 18 of Aprill, in the Siſes holden at London, in the Iuſtice hall, William Tompſon, made Prieſt at Reymes in France, and remaining within this Realme, was condemned of treaſon. Alſo Richard Lea, made Prieſt at Lions, was likewiſe there condemned, which ſaid William and Thomas, were both on the twentieth of April, drawne to Tiburne, and there hanged, bowelled, and quartered.
               
                  Sir Henry Sidney deceaſed.The firſt of May ſir Henry Sidney, knight of the Garter, Lord preſident of Wales, departed this life, and was honourably buried at Penſhurſt in Kent.
               
                  Ambaſſadors from the K. of Denmark.The 8 of May, arriued at London on the Tower Wharfe, Henry Ramelius, Chancellor for Germany, Ambaſſadour from Frederick the ſecond King of Denmarke, vnto the Quéenes Maieſty of England, he was honourably receiued of the Lord Talbot, the Lord Cobham, and other great eſtates, and by them conuayed through Tower ſtréete, Fanchurch ſtréet, and Grace-ſtréet, into Biſhops-gate ſtréet, to Croſby place, where he remained till hee had finiſhed his Ambaſſage, and returned on the thirtieth of May towards Denmarke.
               
                  Wolſton Dixie Maior, 1586, founded a frée ſchoole at Boſworth, in Leiceſter-ſhire, endowed with twenty pounde land by yéere & better: more, he gaue to the gouernors of Emanuel

Colledge in Cambridge, 600 pounds to buy land, for the mainteinance of two ſcholarſhips, and two fellowſhips there, the ſcholars to come forth of Boſworth ſchoole: he gaue alſo toward the erecting of Emmanuel Colledge 50 pounds, to Chriſts hoſpitall in London, 42 pounds the yeare for euer, toward the Diuinity lecture, to S. Michaell baſſings hall in London 10 pounds the yeare for euer. Vnto his company of Skinners, 500 pounds, to be lent vnto young men of that company, viz. 200 pounds to foure yong men marchant Aduenturers for 3 yeare, at 3 pounds 6 ſhillings, 8 pence the yeare, and thrée hundred pounds to ten other, after the ſame rate, part of the profits to be ſpent in coles yearly to the poore of Saint Michaels pariſh, Baſing hall, for euer. To Saint Bartholmewes hoſpitall, and Saint Thomas hoſpitall 50. l. to each. The poore of Bridewell 20. l. To the poore of Newgate 20. l. To the poore of the Compters 10. l. to each, to Ludgate 10. l. To Bethlem 10. l. To the foure priſons in Southwarke 20. pounds thirtéene ſhillings and foure pence. To poore maides marriages 100. l. To poore ſtrangers of the Dutch and French Churches 50. li. To the poore of Baſings-hall 10. l. To the poore Eling in Middleſex, foure pounds. And 200. toward building of the Peſthouſe.
               The 17.
                  The Earle of Arundel cenſured in the Star-chamber. of May Philip Earle of Arundell was conuaied from the Towre of London to Weſtminſter, and there in the Star-chamber, by the Counſell condemned to pay 10000. l. fine

for his contempt, and to remaine in priſon at the Quéenes pleaſure.
               
                  League with the King of Scots.A Commiſſion was erected from her Maieſty, tending to the ratifying of a firme League of amity, betwéene her Maieſty and Iames King of Scots, which League being articuled, Commiſſioners were appointed, Edward Earle of Rutland, W. Lord Euers and T. Randolph Eſquire, who with their Traine came to Barwicke on the 19. of Iune, were the Ambaſſadors of Scotland being preſent, they accompliſhed the matter, according to the commiſſion, the Articles of the ſaid league in all and euery part ſufficiently confirmed on 1. of Iuly, which being done, the ſaid Earle of Rutland with his traine returned home. Maſter Randolph went into Scotland to take his leaue of the King and returned into England.
               
                  Captains of the artillery garden, other wiſe called London Captaines.This yéere 1586. certaine Merchants and other gallant actiue Citizens at their owne proper charges onely for their countries ſeruice and defence, practiſed wéekely diuers feats of Armes, and by orderly courſe euery man bare al degrées of Offices from the corporall to the captaine: and when they had by vſuall practiſe attained vnto ſome perfection with obſeruation of Martiall diſcipline, then they trained the common ſouldiers of the City & taught them the managing of their péeces, pikes, & halbeards, to march, countermarch, and ring: this preſident was taken from the Marchants of Antwerp.
               The 18. of Iune Henry Elkes clarke, for

counterfeiting the Quéenes ſigne manuell,Elkes executed for counterfeiting the Q. ſigne manuell, to a preſentation of the perſonage of all Saints in Has
                     •
                  ings, directed to the Archbiſhop of Canterbury, or to his Comiſſary generall (the Dioceſſe of Chicheſter doing void) that he might be inſtitued Parſon there, was drawne to Tiburne & there hanged and quartered.
               A Lottery for maruellous rich and beautifull Armor,A lottery at Londō for rich armour. was begun to be drawne at London in Pauls Church yeard, at the great Weſt gate (an houſe of timber and boord being there erected for that purpoſe) on Saint Peter and Pauls day in the morning, which Lottery continued in drawing, day and night for the ſpace of two or thrée daies.
               
                  Tho.
                  Tho. Candiſh his voiage. 
                  Candiſh hauing of his owne charges built and furniſhed for two yeares prouiſion, a ſhip called the Deſire, of 140. tun, & a leſſe of 60. tuns, named the Content ioyning thereto a barke of 40. tuns named Galliane, in which fléet were 125 men, ſet ſaile from Plimoth on the 21 of Iuly, and began his voiage about the Globe of the earth, which voiage he finiſhed in the ſpace of two years & leſſe then two moneths, as ye may read in R. Hacluyt.
               
               In the moneth of Iuly,Great reioicing in London for apprehenſion of traitors. diuers traiterous perſons were apprehended, and detected of moſt wicked conſpiracie againſt her Maieſty, and alſo of minding to haue ſtirred vp a generall rebellion throughout the whole Realme. For ioy of whoſe apprehenſion, the Citizens of London on the 15 of the ſame moneth at night,

and on the next morrow cauſed the Bels to be rung, and bone fires to be made, and alſo banqueted euery man according to his ability, ſome in their houſes, ſome in the ſtréets, with ſinging of Pſalmes and praſing God for preſeruing of her Maieſty, and people of this Land: which doings of the Citizens were ſo well accepted of her Maieſty, as by her letters to them directed may appeare.
               
                  Traitors indicted.The ſeuenth of September certaine of theſe wicked Subiects were indicted, firſt for intending Treaſon againſt the Quéenes owne perſon, ſecondly, for ſtirring ciuill wars within the Realme, and thirdly for practiſing to bring in forraine power to inuade the Realme, 7 of them appeared at Weſtminſter, on the thirtéenth of September, who all pleaded guiltie, and were condemned.
               On the fiftéenth of September, other 7 were likewiſe arraigned, who pleaded not guilty, were found guilty by the Iurie, and had iudgement.
               Theſe traitors 14 in number were executed in Lincolnes Inne fields, on a ſtage or ſcaffold of timber ſtrongly made for that purpoſe, euen in the place where they had vſed to méet,Traitors executed. and to confer of their traiterous practiſes, there were they hanged bowelled and quartered, ſeuen of them on the 20 of September, to wit, I. Ballard Prieſt, A. Babington Eſquire, I. Sauage gentleman, R. Barnewell, gentleman, Chidirke Tichborne Eſquire, Charles Tilney Eſquire, E.

Abington Eſquire. The other 7 were likewiſe executed on the 21 of September, to wit, T. Salisbury Eſquire, Henry Dunne Gentlemen, Edward Iones Eſquire I. Trauarſe gentleman, I. Charnocke Gentleman, R. Gage gentleman, Ierome Belamie gentleman &c.
               The twenty two of September,Sir Philip Sidney wounded, and died thereof. ſir Philip Sidney knight, a moſt valiant and towardly gentleman, ſonne and heire to ſir Henry Sidney late deceaſed, in ſeruice of his Prince and defence of his country, in the warres of the Netherlands, was ſhot into the thigh with a muſket, at Zutphen in Gelderland, whereof he died on the 17 of October, whoſe body was conuaied into England, & on the 16 of February conuaied from the Minories without Algate of London through the principall ſtréets of the ſame Citie, accompanied of many honourable perſons vnto S. Pauls Church and there honourably buried, the Captaines of the Artillery Garden being 250 in number, all in mourning habit, accompanied the Corps to Church, theſe Captaines at this time flouriſhed.
               The eight of October, Iohn Low,
                  Seminary Prieſts executed. 
                  Iohn Adams, and Richard Dibdaile, being before condemned for Treaſon in being made Prieſt by authority of the Biſhop of Rome, were drawne to Tiburne and there hanged bowelled and quartered.
               
                  Robert Houſe, William Elkin.
                  Shrieues.
               
               
                  Sir George Barnes, Haberdaſher.
                  Maior.
               
               
                  
                  Ludgate at Londō new builded.One of the Weſt gates of the City of London, commonly called Ludgate, being ſore decaied, & in perill to haue fallen, was taken down, the priſoners thereof in the meane time remaining, in the Southeaſt quadrant, to the ſame gate adioyning; which quadrant, for the eaſe of the priſoners was ſometimes builded by Stephē Forſtar, Fiſhmonger, Maior, and Dame Agnes his wife, &c. And this yeare the ſaid gate was againe not onely newly, but alſo ſtrongly and beautifully builded at the charges of the Citizens of the ſame City. The foundation whereof in the name and preſence of Sir Wolſton Dixie Maior, certaine Aldermen, Anthony Radcliefe, & Henry Prannel ſhrieues, was laid on the ſecond of May, & forthwith ſo diligently applied, that the ſame gate was fully finiſhed in the ſpace of ſixe monthes or leſſe, ſo that on the twenty nine of October in the ſame yeare the ſaid gate was ſet open to Sir William Cecill Knight Lord Treaſurer, who firſt entred the ſame on horſebacke, accompanied of the Earle of Darby, and diuers other honourable perſons & noble men of her Maieſties priuy Counſell, who all rode to the Guild hall, where, on the ſame day George Barne Lord Maior of that City kept his feaſt, after he had taken his oath and charge in the Exchequer at Weſtminſter.
               On the ſame 29 of October the Archbiſhop of Canterbury, the L. Treaſurer and the Earle of Darby,Parliamēt at Weſt. repreſenting the Quéenes Maieſties perſon, began the high Court of Parliament by

proie, which Seſſion of Parliament was at this ſtate aſſembled for triall of matters concerning Mary Quéene of Scots &c. The 23 of Nouember the Earle of Leiceſter, Lieutenant generall of her Maieſties forces in the vnited Prouinces of the Low countries, returning from thence arriued at London.
               The ſecond day of December the Parliament was proroged vntill the 15 of February:Parliamēt againſt the Queene of Scots. the ſubſtance of matter handled in the ſame Seſſion of Parliament, concerning the Queen of Scots is ſet downe in a letter learnedly penned, and publiſhed, directed to the Earle of Leiceſter.
               The 6 of December,Proclamation againſt the Queene of Scots. the Lord Maior of London, aſſiſted with diuers Earles, Barons, the Aldermen in their ſcarlet, the principalleſt officers of the Citie, the greateſt number of Gentlemen of the beſt account in and about the City, with the number of eighty of the graueſt Citizens in coats of veluet and chaines of gold, all on horſebacke in moſt ſolemne and ſtately manner, by ſound of foure Trumpets, about ten of the clocke in the forenoone, made open and publike proclamation and declaration of the ſentence lately giuen by the Nobility againſt the Queene of Scots, vnder the great Seale of England, bearing date at Richmond the fourth of December, being openly read by Maſter Sebright, Towne-Clarke of London, and with loud voice ſolemnely proclaimed by the Serieant at Armes of the ſaid Citie,

in foure ſeuerall places, to wit, at the Croſ
                     •
                   Cheap, at the end of Chancery lane in F
                     •
                   ſtréet, ouer againſt the Temple, at Leaden
                     •
                   corner, and at S. Magnus corner neare Lon
                     •
                   bridge; during which time, like ſolemne 
                     •
                  clamations were made with great ſolemnity the country of Middleſex, namely in the Palace at Weſtminſter, without Temple Bar
                     •
                   in Holborne, by the Shrieues of London 
                     〈◊〉
                   Middleſex, aſſiſted with ſundry Noblemen 
                     〈◊〉
                   Gentlemen of good account, and the Iuſtice 
                     •
                   Peace of the ſaid country, to the great and w
                     •
                  derfull reioycing of the people, as it ſéem
                     •
                   ringing of bells, making of bonefires, and 
                     •
                  ing of Pſalmes.
               The Quéenes Maieſty foreſéeing the g
                     •
                  rall dearth of corne and other victuals, grow partly through the vnſeaſonableneſſe of 
                     〈◊〉
                   yeares paſt, partly through the vncharita
                     •
                   gréedineſſe of ſuch as bee great corne maſte
                     •
                   but eſpeciallie through the vnlawfull and 
                     〈◊〉
                   much tranſportation of graine into for
                     •
                   countries, by the aduice of her honour
                     •
                   Councell, publiſhed a proclamation, and b
                     •
                   of orders, to be taken by her Iuſtices, for reli
                     •
                   of the poore, notwithſtanding all which, the 
                     ••
                  ceſſiue prices of graine ſtill encreaſed, ſo 
                     〈◊〉
                   wheat and meale was ſold at London for 
                     〈◊〉
                   the buſhell, and in ſome other parts of t
                     •
                   Realme dearer.
               The 8 of February being Wedneſday accor
                     •
                  ding to ſentence lately giuen by the nobili
                     •
                  
                  
                  Mary Steward Quéene of Scots,Queen of Scots after 19 yeeres impriſonment in Scotland & Englād was beheaded. about tenne of the Clocke before noone, was executed and ſuffered death, by beheading vpon a ſcaffold ſet vp for that purpoſe, at the great Hall of the Caſtle of Fodringay, in the preſence of George Talbet Earle of Shrewſburie, Henry Grey Earle of Kent, principall Commiſſioners, and others the Gentlemen of the Country neare adioyning, to the number of about 300, all her apparell was burned, but her body with the head was royally buried at Peterborow, on the firſt day of Auguſt next following.
               The 15 of February the Parliament began at Weſtminſter,Parliamēt at Weſtminſter. wherein was granted to her Maieſty towards her charges for the defence of this Realme, a ſubſidy by the Clergy of 6 ſhillings the pound, and of the temporalty two ſhillings eight pence goods, and foure ſhillings lands, with two fiftéenes &c.
               Munday the twenty foure of Februarie a man hanged for felony at Saint Thomas of Waterings being begged by the Chirurgions of London, to haue made of him an Anatomie, after he was dead to all mens thinking, cut down, ſtripped, laid naked in a Cheſt, throwne in a Carre, and ſo brought from the place of execution through the Borow of Southwarke,A man reuiued after he had beene executed. and the city of London, to the Chirurgions hall, neare vnto Alderſgate, the cheſt being there opened and the weather extreame cold, he was found to be aliue, and liued till thurſday next following, and then died.
               
                  The twentie thrée of February a gunpowder houſe at Radriffe was blowne vp with much harme.
               Sir Thomas Bromley knight, Lord Chancellour of England, deceaſed on the 12 of Aprill, and was buried at Weſtminſter.
               
                  The firſt making of great roūd Globes.This yeare 1587, Maſter William Sanderſon of London Fiſhmonger, attained the perfection of making the great round globes, viz. Celeſtiall and Terreſtriall.
               On the 16 of Aprill, deceaſed the Dutcheſſe of Somerſet at Hanworth, and was buried at Weſtminſter.
               
                  Ea
                        •
                     le of Rutland deceaſed.
                  Edward Earle of Rutland, Knight of the Garter, departed this life at London on the 18 of Aprill, and was very honourably conuaied from thence to his Caſtle of Beauoyre, and buried in the Pariſh Church at Bettifford.
               The 29 of Aprill, Sir Chriſtopher Hatton knight late Vicechamberlaine, and one of her Maieſties priuy Counſell,Sir Chriſtopher Hatton L. Chancellour. was made Lord Chancellor of England at Croidon, & on the 3 day of May, being the firſt day of the tearme, he rode from Ely place in Holborne to Weſtminſter, there to take his oath, before whom went about the number of forty, his gentlemen in one liuery and chaines of gold, diuers Pentioners and other Gentlemen of the Court vpon footclothes, the officers and Clarkes of the Chancery, and then the Lord Chancellour, hauing on his right hand the Lord Treaſurer, and on the left hand the Earle of Leiceſter, after whom

rode certaine of the Nobility, the Iudges of the Realme, and many knights.
               The 22 of May was publiſhed by proclamation an order,Clothes to be tranſported generally. granted by the Quéene in fauour of her Subiects, for the tranſporting of clothes out of the Realme, to wit, that the Merchants of the Stilyard reſident in London, and all other Merchants, ſtrangers, or other of the realme, may buy of the Clothiers, any cloth vnwrought, vnbarbed or vnſhorne, and ſhall haue full liberty to ſhip and carry away out of the port of London, any ſuch cloaths: and further, that all Merchants, ſtrangers, and Engliſh, that ſhall not haue liberty to buy cloathes at Blackwell-hall, or within the liberties of the City of London, may buy all manner of clothes, in the Citie of Weſtminſter.
               The 18 of Iune Robert Earle of Leiceſter was made Lord Steward of the houſhold, & Robert Deuorex Earle of Eſſex, was made maſter of her Maieſties horſe.
               The fiftéene of Iune Robert Earle of Leiceſter tooke ſhipping at Margate in Kent, toward the Low Countries, where he remained not long but returned.
               This yeares was a late ſpring, and a cold Sommer,A ſtrange backward ſpring. ſo that at Midſomer Peaſon in the cods were ſold at London for 8 pence the pecke, yet after were plenty, no cherries ripe till Saint Iames-tide or Lammas, and then ſuch plenty that they were ſold for a penny the pound.
               The 7 of September ſir Thomas Henage was

made Vicechamberlaine.
               
                  Shrieues.
                  Thomas Skinnet, Iohn Catcher.
               
               
                  Maior.
                  Sir George Bond Haberdaſher.
               
               
                  An. reg. 30
                  Richard May Merchant-tailor lately deceaſed, gaue to the Chamber of London 300 poūds, toward the new building of the Blackwell Hal, which at length tooke effect.
               Vpon this gift the ſaid Blackwell hall was taken downe,Blackwell hall. a new foundation was laide, and within the ſpace of ten moneths after, with the charges of 2500 l. the ſame was finiſhed.
               
                  1588Great prouiſion was made this yeare both by Land and Sea, to withſtand the inuaſion by the Spaniſh Armado againſt the Realme, for beſides the generall forces of the Realme appointed to be muſtered, trained, and put in readineſſe in the ſeuerall ſhires, for the defence of the land there was alſo a leauy made of two ſeuerall armies, the one to make the body of a campe to reſide at Tilbury in Eſſex,Campe at Tilbury. to encounter with the Enemy, if he ſhould attempt to land in any place of that country, whereof the Earle of Leiceſter, Lord Steward of her Maieſties houſhold was Lieutenant Generall, as alſo of the Armies leuied againſt forraine inuaſion. The other to be imploied for the guard of her highneſſe perſon, vnder the charge of the right Honourable the Lord Hunſden, Lord Chamberlaine to her Maieſtie. The campe at Tilbury, conſiſting both of horſemen and footemen, raiſed out of

all the ſhires, were of Lancers 253, of light horſmen 769, of footmen 22000. the armie for the guard of her Maieſties perſon, Lances 481, light horſemen 1431. footmen 34050. The Nauie ſet forth and armed to the ſeas, conſiſted partly of her Maieſties ſhippes, partly of the ſhips of her ſubiects, which were furniſhed out of the Port townes whereunto they belonged, of this Nauie, the chiefeſt and greateſt part was vnder the charge of the Lord Charles Howard of Effingham, Lord Admirall of England, and were addreſſed to encounter with the Spaniſh Fléet: the reſt of the ſhips were aſſigned vnto the Lord Henry Seimer, Admirall of the Fléete to guard the narrow Seas, and to impeach the iſſuing forth of the ſhips and veſſels, prepared by the Duke of Parma at Dunkirke.
               The 23 of May, the Lord Admirall came to Plimouth with the Fléet aforeſaid, finding there Sir Francis Drake in a readineſſe with more then 50 ſhips and pinnaces. The 24 of Iune the Lord Admirall iſſued out toward the Sea from Plimmouth: he diuided her Maieſties Fléet into thrée parts, viz. Sir Francis Drake Vice Admirall in the Reuenge with other, towards the Iſlands of Sillie, Iohn Hawkens Rere-Admirall in the Victory, with other toward the Iſles of Vſhent: And the Lord Admirall with the reſt, remayning in the ſléeue, appointed other there, all to diſcerne, if the Spaniſh forces did any way paſſe.
               
                  The 19 of Iuly, intelligence was brought to the Lord Admirall by a pyrate Pinnis, whoſe captaine was Thomas Fleming, that the Spaniſh Fléete was ſéene in the ſea.
               The 20 of Iuly, the Lord Admirall made toward the Sea, and the ſame day had ſight of the Spaniſh Fléete, in number by eſtimation 158 ſailes. The Lord Admirall caſt about toward the Land to interrupt them from approaching, & hauing got the wind of them, proſecuted them all that night, and ſo continually, from place to place, vntill the ſecond of Auguſt, in which ſpace hauing by the power GOD wonderfully ouercome them, he returned to Margate in Kent. Now the Campe being kept at Tilbury in Eſſex,Her maieſty went to the Campe at Tilbury. vnder the charge of the Earle of Leiceſter, the ninth of Auguſt her Maieſty repaired thither; where all the whole Campe being ſet in order of Battaile, ſhe paſſed through euery rank of them, to their great reioycing, & lodged that night, and the night following, in the houſe of Maſter Edward Rich a Iuſtice in the Pariſh of Hornedon. On the next morrow her Maieſtie returned to the Campe, and on the twelfth returned to Saint Iames, and ſhortly after the Campe was diſſolued.
               
                  Sermon of thankſgiuing.Sonday the 20 of Auguſt Maſter Nowell Deane of Pauls, at Pauls Croſſe, in the preſence of the Lord Maior, the Aldermen in Scarlet, the Companies in their liueries, preached, mouing them to giue land vnto God, for the great victory giuen to our Engliſh Nation, by

the ouerthrow of the Spaniſh Fléete.
               The 26 of Auguſt,Seminaries & others executed. at the Seſſions hall neare vnto Newgate, were condemned 8 perſons, for being made Prieſts beyond the Seas, and remayning in this Realme contrary to a Statute; foure Temporall men for being reconciled to the Romiſh Church, and foure other for relieuing the others. The 28 W. Deane and H. Welby were hanged at the Miles end, W. Hunter, R. Morton, and Hugh More at Lincolnes Inne fields, T. Acton at Clarken well, T. Fulton, and Iames Clarkeſon, betwéene Brainford and Hounſlow. The 30 Richard Flower, G. Sheſley, Richard Leigh, Richard Martin, Iohn Roch, and Margaret Warde gentlewoman, who had conueied a cord to a Prieſt in Bridewell, whereby he eſcaped from thence, were hanged at Tiborne.
               This yeare 1588,
                  The tranſferring of the Greek patriarke from Greece into Ruſſia. the Patriarke of the Gréeke Church came from Chyo, alias Syo in Gréece, vnto the City Moſco in Ruſſia, and for a certaine ſumme of money reſigned all his Eccleſiaſticall Iuriſdiction, ſtate, ſtile, and dignity, vnto the Metropolitan of Moſco and his ſucceſſors for euer, which done, the old Patriarke left Moſco, and in his returne towards Grecia, the Turkes robbed him of all his treaſure, and ſlue him. A iuſt reward for his cowardiſe and couetouſneſſe.
               The 2 of September at night, a vehement fire brake foorth againſt the Dutch Church in London, to the great terrour of the whole City,

but by the burning of one houſe, and pulling downe of ſome other the fire was quenched.
               The 4 of September, deceaſed Robert Dudley Earle of Leiceſter,Earle of Leiceſter deceaſed. Lord Steward of her Maieſties houſhold, lieutenant generall, and Marſhal of England, at Cornebury in Orfordſhire, from whence hée was conuaied to his Caſtle of Kenelworth, and from thence to Warwicke, where hee was honourably interred. He had in his towne of Warwicke, founded one Hoſpitall of an old guilde, giuen him by the townes for twelue poore men, endowing the ſame with lands to the yearely value of 200. pound, and fifty load of Wood out of Killingworth Parke, and gaue to the ſame Hoſpitall, by his Teſtament, 200 pounds in money, for a ſtocke: hée was extreame tyrannous in authority.
               
                  Banners taken frō the Spaniards ſhewed at Pauls Croſſe.Vhe 8 of September, the Preacher of Pauls Croſſe moued the people to giue God thankes for the ouerthrow of our enemies the Spaniards, and there were ſhewed 11 enſignes or banners, takn in the Spaniſh ſhips by our men, and on the next morrow hanged on London bridge towards Southwarke, where then the Faire was kept, being our Lady day.
               
                  Shrieues.
                  Hugh Offley, Richard Saltonſtall.
               
               
                  Maior.
                  Sir Martin Calthorp Drapor.
               
               
                  Seminary Prieſts executed.The 5 of October Iohn Welden and William Hartley made Prieſts in France were hanged, the one at Miles end, the other at Holliwell; Robert Sutton, for being reconciled to the Church

of Rome was hanged at Clarkenwell.
               The 8 of October at night was burnt one ſtable with horſes about the number of twenty at Drury houſe, neare to the Strand.Stable and horſes burnt. An. reg. 32
               
               The 19 of Nouember was this yeare kept holy day throughout the Realme, with ſermons, ſinging of Pſalmes, Bone fires, &c. for ioy and thankſgiuing vnto God, for the ouerthrow of the Spaniards, our enemies on the ſea, and the Cittizens of London aſſembled in their Liueries that day at a Sermon at Pauls Croſſe tending to that end.
               The 24 of Nouember being Sunday, the Quéenes Maieſty hauing attendants vpon her,The Qu. Maieſty came to Palus. the Priuy-Counſel, Nobility and other honorable perſons, aſwell ſpirituall as temporall in great number, all on horſe backe, did come in a chariot throne, made with foure pillars behind to haue a Canopy, on the top wherof was made a crowne imperiall, and two lower pillars before, whereon ſtood a Lion and a Dragon, ſupporters of the Armes of England, drawne by two white ſtéeds from Somerſet houſe, to the Cathedrall Church of Saint Paul &c. At the temple Barre, the Lord Maior and his Brethren the Aldermen in Scarlet receiued and welcomed her Maieſty to her city, deliuering to her hands the Scepter, which her Highneſſe deliuered to the Maior, who bare the ſame before her. The Companies in their Liueries ſtood along to Pauls Church, where at the great weſt dore ſhe diſmounted about 12 of the clock,

and was receiued vnder a canopy by the Biſhop of London, the Deane & others of the Clergy, to the number of more then 50. all in rich Coapes, and by them brought to a Cloſet, towards, the Pulpit Croſſe, where ſhe heard a Sermon made by Doctor Pierce, Biſhop of Saliſbury, and then returned to the Biſhops Pallace, where ſhe dined, and returned to Somerſet houſe by Torchlight.
               
                  Great winde.The 5 of Ianuary at night, a great wind in the Northeaſt ouerturned trées, and otherwaies did great harme in very many places.
               
                  The Qu. receiued into Weſtminſter.The 30 of Ianuary, the Quéenes Maieſty came from Richmond to Chelrich, and ſo to Weſtminſter, and was receiued by the Maior, Aldermen and commoners of her city of London, in coates of veluet, and chaines of gold, all on horſe-backe with the Captaines of the citty, betwixt 5. and 6. of the clocke at night by torchlight.
               
                  Souldiers puniſhed for abuſing their Captains.The firſt of February two Souldiers were ſet on the Pillory at the Leaden hall, whereon they ſtood by the ſpace of thrée houres, the one had his eare nailed, the other his tongue pierced with an aule, which aule remained in his tongue till hee was taken from the Pillory, for abuſing their captaines, and Gouernours with had ſpéeces.
               
                  
                     A Parliament.The 4 of February began the Parliament at Weſtminſter.
               
                  An Heretick burned.About this time Francis Ket, M. of Art of Wimondham, for holding diuers deteſtable

opinions againſt Chriſt our Sauior, was burnt néere to the city of Norwich.
               The 5 of February,Marſhall Law. two ſouldiers were hanged on trées at the Miles end, for being mutinous.
               The 29 of March, being Eaſter Euen,1589. Parliamēt diſſolued. the Parliament brake vp at Weſtminſter, wherein was granted two ſubſidies, of two ſhillings eight pence the pound the péece, foure fiftéenes, and a tenth.
               The 14 of Aprill, Philip, Earle of Arundell,Earle of Arundell arraigned. was arraigned at Weſtminſter of high treaſon, and found guilty by his Péeres, had iudgment accordingly.
               The 18 of Aprill, Sir Iohn Norris, and Sir Francis Drake, Generals, with ſixe of her Maieſties ſhips, 20 ſhips of warre, and 
                     
                        •
                     00 fit for burden, hauing in them a choice company of Knights, Captaines, Gentlememen and ſouldiers, departed from Plimouth, and the 23 of the ſame, arriued at the Groine. The 26, they tooke the lower Town, with great ſtore of ordinance,Voiage to Portugall. victuals, cables, and other furniture for ſhipping. About the 6 of May, they fought with the Spaniards, at Borges bridges, where the enemies fled with the loſſe of 700 men. The lower town of Groine was burned, and the ninth of May, our Fléet ſet ſaile the thirtéenth, the Earle of Eſſex, ſir Philip Butler, and ſir Roger Williams met the ſaid Fléet, ſo that on the ſixtéenth, the whole Nauie arriued at Phinicha, where they ſet a land, and the ſame day wanne both Towne

and Caſtle. After this they diuided the Armie, whereof part marched with Sir Iohn Norris, by land, to Liſborne, the reſt with Sir Francis Drake, paſſed by Sea to Caſcales. The twenty fourth, our men entred the ſuburbes of Liſborn, where they obtayned rich ſpoyles, and plenty of euery good thing. The twenty ſeuenth, the Army left Liſborne, and came to Caſcales, without any great fight or ſkirmiſh, where they tooke the caſtle, and thence returned for England, but landing at Vigo, they tooke the towne, and waſted the country.
               
                  Norris & Drake returne frō Portugall.The 21 of Iune, ſir Francis Drake arriued at Plimouth: and the third of Iuly, ſir Iohn Norris, with the reſt of the Fléet, arriued there alſo, the two Generals being offended the one with the other.
               
                  L. Maior deceaſed.The third of May, deceaſed Martin Calthrope Lord Maior of London, M. Richard Martin Alderman ſucceeded.
               
                  Maior.
                  Richard Martin Goldſmith, the 5 of May.
               
               
                  Lightning and thunder.The firſt of Auguſt at night, was the greateſt lightning and thunder about London, that euer was ſéene or heard, of any man liuing, and yet but ſmall hurt done, thankes bee to God tharefere.
               Sir Iohn Norris, and ſir Francis Drake being returned, as you haue heard, many of their ſailers and ſouldiers, ſhortly after their landing, fell ſicke, and died, of a ſtinch bred amongſt

them on ſhipbord, otherſome of them ſo rudely behaued themſelues, about the country, and elſewhere,Sailers & ſouldiers executed. that diuers of them being apprehended, on the 27 of Auguſt, one of them was hanged on the end of a ſigne, at an Inne doore, in Kingſton vpon Thames, for a terror to the reſt: and on the 29 of Auguſt, two more of them were hanged in Smithfield, two at the Towerhill, two beſides Weſtminſter, and one at Tiburne. It was now vſuall with ſailers and others, at their returne of ſuch voyages, to rob, pilfer and mutiny at their arriuall.
               In the moneth of September,Souldiers ſent into France. the Citizens of London furniſhed 1000 men to be ſent ouer into France, to the aiding of Henry late King of Nauarre, then challenging the Crowne of France.
               
                  Richard Gurney, Stephen Some.
                  Shrieues.
               
               The 21 of October,Serieants feaſt. 
                  Richard Martin Maior of London, accompanied with his brethren the Alderman, being inuited gueſts, rode to the Serieants feaſt, then holden in the new Temple hall, and at the Temple gate, the Lord Maior was by certaine young Gentlemen, denied to enter with his ſword before him, whereupon he with his brethren returned home.
               
                  Sir Iohn Hart Grocer, the 28 of October.
                  Maior.
               
               The 6 of Nouember, Lodowicke Griuell of

Warwickſhire Eſquire,Lodowick Griuel preſſed to death. was brought from the Tower of London, to Weſtminſter, and the
                     ••
                   at the Kings bench barre, for murther, and other notorious treſpaſſes, wherewith he was charged, arraigned and found guilty: but ſtanding mute, had iudgement to bee preſſed to death, which iudgement was put to execution in the Iayle of the Kings bench in Southwarke,An. reg. 32. on the 14 of Nouember, on the which day, for the ſame fact, his man was hanged in the Palace court at Weſtminſter.
               
                  Citizens of Londō frighted by fire.In this moneth of Nouember, the citizens of London, were ſundry times affrighted by caſualtie of fire: firſt on the 20, about 4 of the clocke in the morning, on Fiſh-ſtréete hill, where one large houſe was burned to the ground, and ſome people, in helping to quench, were conſumed, and the houſes next adioyning: alſo the one ſide of Saint Leonards Church was ſore ſpoiled. On the 22 at night, about 11 of the clocke, one other houſe, ouer againſt the firſt, on the other ſide of the way, was in great danger, but ſoone ſlaked. On the twenty ſixt, about one of the clocke in the morning, one other houſe, and ſome people were burnt, on the backſide of the firſt houſe burnt, and other houſes neere about, were ſore ſpoyled, &c.
               
                  Tempeſt of winde.The 5 of Ianuary, about fiue of the clocke in the euening, before twelfth day, began a great and terrible tempeſt of winde in the Southweſt, which continued with great vehemency, till about eleuen of the clocke of the ſame night,

this in the city of London, blew the Tiles off mens houſes, and cauſed them to feare the ouerthrow of their houſes. The leſſer weſt gate of Saint Paules Church,
                     A doore of Pauls blowne ouer. next to the Biſhops Palace, was broken, both boltes, barres and lockes, ſo that the ſame was blown ouer.
               In the countrey, houſes and barnes were borne ouer, & ſome blowne farre from the places wheron they had ſtood, beſides trees in great numbers, blew vp by the roote. On the ſeas, no man can tell what harme was done. At Southhampton, the ſhips and barkes riding at anchor, were driuen aland, and ſunke, the like was neuer ſéene.
               Sir Iohn Hart, Knight,Sir Iohn Harts bountie. Alderman of London, builded a frée Schoole, in Cuccold, alias Coxold in Yorkeſhire. And endowed it with thirtie and fiue pounds a yéere for euer. He likewiſe gaue fin to Suſſex, Sidney Colledge in Cambridge, two Fellowſhips, and four Schollarſhips, viz. forty and fiue pounds a yéere, for euer.
               The 21 of February, Ambroſe Dudley, Earle of Warwicke deceaſed, and was buried at Warwicke.
               This yeare 1589,
                  
                     A new kinde of weauing. was deuiſed and perfected, the Art of knitting, or weauing of ſilke ſtockings, Waſtcoteh, Couerlets, and diuers other things by ingines, or ſtéele Loomes, by William Lee, ſomtime Maſter of Arts of Saint Iohns colledge of Cambridge: and ſixtéen yéeres

after this, he went into France, and taught it to the French, becauſe he was not regarded in England.
               
                  
                     A Wench burnt.The 5 of March, a Wench was burned in Saint Georges field without Southwarke, for poyſoning her Miſtris and other.
               
                  The Duke of Guiſe ſlaine.This yeare 1589, Henry Duke of Guiſe, and his brother the Cardinall Guiſe, were both ſlaine by commaundement of the French King Henry the third. This Duke was wonderouſly beloued of the Clergy, and of the Peeres and commons of France: he was alſo very highly eſtéemed of the Conclaue, and of many other forraine Princes. The manner of his death was taken very grieuouſly, eſpecially by ſuch as had combinde themſelues in league to ſuppreſſe the Proteſtants, and preferre the Romane Catholike Religion,
               Within a while after, the ſaid King Henry the third was alſo ſlaine by a Frier, in reuenge of the death of the two brethren before named, and the Frier himſelfe was inſtantly ſlaine by ſuch as were about the King, who ſlew him with the ſaid enuenomed knife, wherewith hee ſtabd the King.The Frēch K. ſlaine. This Henry the third, was the laſt of the houſe of Valois. And preſently vpon his death, Henry of Burbon, King of Nauarre, laid iuſt claime to the crowne, who with great difficultie, and almoſt eight yeares, ſharpe warres with the Leagers, he got peaceable poſſeſſion of the whole Kingdome. But at the firſt, the Leagers droue him into diuers extremities,

and forced him to flie into Déepe, where he was ready to haue embarked for England, if the Quéene had not ſpéedily ſent a reſolute Armie vnto him, vnder command of the Lord Willowby. And from that time, the Quéene ayded him with diuers Armies, vnder the commaund of the Earle of Eſſex, Generall Norris, ſir Roger Williams, and many others, beſides inceſſant ſupplies, vpon ſudden occaſions from London, Kent, Eſſex, Suffolke, Surrey, Suſſex, and Hamhſhire, both of horſe, men, and munition.
               The next yeare following,Paris beſieged. the great and ancient Citie of Paris was beſieged by their new King, Henry the fourth: which City vntill their day of viſitation, was a glorious and a flouriſhing City, and the moſt populous of all the cities in Europe, vntill for their better defence, they were conſtrained to pull downe all their ſuburbes: and albeit the ſiege held not full fiue moneths, yet ſuch was the extremitie of famine vnto all the inhabitants, as it may well be ſaid to be greater and more miſerable, then either the ſiege of Samaria, or Ieruſalem: for, after they had eaten vp all manner of herbage and carrian, and all manner of moiſt leather, with whatſoeuer elſe they could get to eate, they did eate many children: concerning which, and many other memorable and capitall Accidents, you may reade more at large in my larger Chronicle. Yet ſith I haue ſpeken thus much of France, I will alſo for thy further delight, giue

thee a touch of ſome of the chiefe ancient Kings thereof.The firſt K. of Frāce. 
                  Faramond was the firſt King of France, in the yeere 431, and raigned 11 yéeres. Clodouius, alias, Clouis, was the fift King of France, in the yeare 485, he was the firſt King of France that was chriſtened, he was baptized by S. Remy, Arch-biſhop of Reynes, after diuers victories vpon his enemies, and had enlarged his territories. Pope Anaſtaſius ſent him the name and title of Patrician and Conſull, with a crowne of gold, richly adorned with precious ſtones. At this time, the Arrian hereſie much troubled Chriſtendome. Clotarius, alias, Cotane, the firſt & ſeuēth King of France, his ſon Cranus wt a ſtrong faction,Diſobedience ſeuerely puniſhed. rebelled againſt him, whō he ouerthrew in battaile, tooke him priſoner, & burned him, his wife and children, and the chiefe of his ſeruants, Pepinus, alias, Pepin, the Briefe, began in the yeere 750. He inſtituted the Parliament at Paris. Carolus Magnus, alias, Charles le Maine, ſo called, for his many noble Acts which he did, for the generall good of Chriſtendome, beganne his raigne in the yéere 800, hee was King of France forty ſix yeares, and Emperor thirtéene yeares, and died at 71 yeares of age.
               
                  Vlfringhampton burnt.On Wedneſday in Eaſter wéeke, by ſhooting of a Gunne, in the Towne of Vlfringhampton, in Staffordſhire, about the number of 80 houſes were burned.
               
                  Souldiers tranſported.In the moneth of April, 3000 footmen were ſent from hence into Britaine in France, vnder

the conduct of Sir Iohn Norris, Knight, to ioyne with the Prince, ſonne of the Duke Mountpoinſier, and Generall of the French Kings forces in the Prouince: which company, were often ſince ſupplied.
               About this time,Free Schooles and hoſpitals founded. (as I am informed) Robert Iohnſon, a zealous Miniſter, Preacher and Parſon of Northlumffingham, in the County of Rutland, finding the poore of thoſe quarters, to be vnprouided for, and no Grammer Schoole erected in that country, for edification of youth, at his owne proper coſts and charges, cauſed two faire free Gramer Schools to be builded in Okam, and Vppingham, the two market townes of that ſhire, and in each of them prouided a Schoolemaſter, and an Vſher: more, he cauſed Hoſpitals to be builded in the ſaid Towns, both called Chriſts Hoſpitall: in euery of which may be placed twenty foure poore people: and for their maintenance héere, he bought and procured lands of the Quéen, with a corporation & mortmaine for the ſame. This man hath left a good example to the other Miniſters and Preachers, to the glory of God, for hee preached both by word and life, not to inrich himſelfe, but was bountifull to the poore, both in his own Pariſh, where he was maried, and kéepeth a good houſe, and alſo in the Towne of Stamford, where hee was borne: in which Towne, for many yeares together, hee cauſed forty poore mens children to be taught at his charges.
               The 21 of September, being the Feaſt of

Saint Mathew in the afternoone, was a great ſtir at Lincolnes Inne, by Prentiſrs, and others, againſt young Gentlemen ſtudents at Law there, for ſome rude demeanore, late before by them done, againſt the inhabitants of Chancerie Lane, which had like to haue growne to great miſchiefe, had not the ſame béene by wiſe Magiſtrats ſoone appeaſed: for the vprore grew great and violent, ſuddenly.
               
                  Shrieues.
                  Nicholas Moſley, Robert Brooke.
               
               
                  Maior.
                  Sir Iohn Allot Fiſhmonger, the 28 of Oct,
               
               
                  An. reg. 33Hee deceaſed in the moneth of September, next following, and ſir Rowland Heyward clothworker, ſerued out the reſt of that yéere.
               
                  A purueier hanged.In the moneth of Ianuarie, one Nichols a Purueyer, for conuerting to his owne vſe, certaine prouiſion taken for her Maieſty, was hanged for example to other the like purueyers.
               
                  Bold impoſtures that diſtracted the people.The 16 of Iuly, Edmond Copinger, and Henry Artington Gentlemen, came into Cheap, and there in a carre, proclaimed newes from heauen, (as they ſaid) to wit, that one William Hacket Yeoman, repreſented Chriſt, by partaking his glorified body, by his principall ſpirit, and that they were two Prophets, the one of mercie, the other of Iudgment, called and ſent of God, to aſſiſt him in his great work, &c. Theſe men were afterward apprehended. The 20 of Iuly Hacket, was arraigned, and found guilty, as to haue ſpoken diuers moſt falſe and trayterous

words againſt her Maieſty, to haue raſed and defaced her Armes, as alſo her picture, thruſting an iron inſtrument into that part that did repreſent the breſt and heart, &c. For the which he had iudgment, and on the 28 of Iuly, brought from Newgate, to a gibbet by the croſſe in Cheape, where being moued to aske GOD and the Quéene forgiueneſſe, he fell to rayling and curſing of the Quéene, and began a moſt blaſphemous prayer againſt the diuine Maieſty of GOD,Hacket hanged. he was there hanged and quartered. His immodeſt ſpéeches at his arraignment and death, vtterly diſgraced all his former-ſeemed ſanctity, wherewith he had ſhroudly poſſeſſed the common people.
               The next day, Edm. Copinger,
                  Copinger died in Bridewel. hauing wilfully abſtained from meat, and otherwiſe tormented himſelfe, died in Bridewell, and Henry Artington, long after in the Counter, ſubmitting himſelfe, writ a Book of repentance, and was deliuered. The people had formerly receiued a very reuerent opinion of them.
               In this moneth of Iuly, Robert Deuorex, Earle of Eſſex, was by her Maieſty appointed to haue the charge and conduction, as her Lieutenant Generall of 4000 footemen, and ſome number of horſemen, and Pioners ſent into France, for the aſſiſtance of the French King, againſt the confederats of the League. In which expedition, he was alſo honorably accompanied with ſundry Gentlemen Souldiers, that voluntarily followed him in his ſeruice.
               
                  
                  Shrieues.
                  William Rider, Benedict Barnham.
               
               
                  Maior.
                  Sir William Webbe.
               
               
                  Proclamation againſt Ieſuites and Seminaries.In the moneth of October, a Proclamation was publiſhed, contayning a declaration of troubles, pretended againſt the Crowne, by Seminaries and Ieſuites, &c. For the preuenting whereof, charge was giuen to all Officers, to looke to their charges, for defence of the Realme: and ſpeciall Commiſſioners were appointed in all Shires, to enquire out the ſaid Seminaries, and ſuch as might be reconciled by them, &c.
               
                  Bren O Royrke apprehended.On the 28 of October, Bren O Royrke, a great man of Ireland, was arraigned at Weſtminſter, where hee was found guilty of high treaſon, and after for the ſame, executed at Tiburne, on the third of Nouember, as more at large I haue expreſſed in mine Annales.
               The 20 of Nouember, ſir Chriſtoper Hatton,
                  An. reg. 34 Lord Chā
                     cellor deceaſed. Knight, Lord Chancellor of England, deceaſed at his houſe in Holborne, commonly called Ely houſe, becauſe it belongeth to the Biſhop of Ely. On the 16 of December, he was honorably buried in Saint Pauls Church at London, one hundred poore people, hauing gownes and caps giuen them, and goe before him, of Gentlemen and Yeomen in gownes, cloakes and coates, more then thrée hundred, with the Lords of the Councell, and other, beſide 80 of the guard, that followed, &c. A ſumptuous

monument for him, was ſince prouided in Pauls Church.
               The 10 of December, three Seminaries,Seminaries & others executed. for being in this Realme, contrary to Statute, and foure other for relieuing them, were executed, to wit, Ironmonger, a Seminary, and Swithen Welles, Gentleman, in Graies Inne fields: Blaſton and White, Seminaries, and three other their abetters at Tiburne.
               The fourteenth of Ianuary,Captaine Cosby executed. Captaine Arnolde Cosby, an Iriſh-man, did forcibly ſet vpon Iohn, Lord Burke, (alſo an Iriſh-man) neare to the Towne of Wanſworth, in the County of Surrey, and there vpon a malicious intent, did wilfully murder him, giuing him one mortall wound with a Rapier, by meanes whereof, hee fell downe, and after that, the ſaid Cosby with a dagger, gaue vnto the ſaid Lord Burke, twelue, or more, grieuous and ſeuerall wounds, of the which mortall wound, hee died within two houres after, For the which fact, Cosby was hanged on a gibbet, neare vnto Wanſworth, on the 27 of Ianuary.
               The 18 of February, Thomas Parmort,
                  A Seminary executed in Paules Church-yard. was conuicted of two ſeuerall high treaſons, the one for being a Seminary Prieſt, and remaining in this Realme, and the other for reconciling Iohn Barwis, againſt the forme of a ſtatute. The ſaid Barwis was likewiſe conuicted of treaſon, for being ſo reconciled, and alſo of felony, for relieuing the ſaid Prieſt, Thomas Parmort
                  
was executed in Pauls Church-yard, on the 20 of February.
               In the moneth of February, Sir Edmond Yorke,
                  Souldiers ſent into France. Knight, conducted ouer into France, two thouſand footmen, ſent from hence, for the ſeruice of the French King, which vpon their arriuall, remained vnder the charge of Sir Roger Williams, Generall of the Engliſh companies there.
               The twenty ſeuenth of Aprill, Sir Iohn Parrat Knight,1592. was arraigned at Weſtminſter, found guilty of treaſon, and had iudgment in the ſame place, on the 16 of Iune, but died in the Tower.
               
                  Tiltboat drowned.The fourth of May, a Tiltboate of Graueſend, hauing in the ſame Boate about the number of forty perſons, was ouer-runne by a Hoy, ſo that the greater part of thoſe people were drowned ouer againſt Gréenewich, the Court then being there, and the Quéene beheld the miſchance.
               
                  New Lord Keeper.The 4 of Iune, Sir Iohn Puckering made Lord Kéeper of the Great Seale.
               
                  Executiō in Smithfield for poiſoning Almes houſes founded by the Marchant Taylors.In the moneth of Iune, a young man was hanged in Smithfield, and a woman was burnt, both for poiſoning of her huſband, a Goldſmith.
               The Marchant Tailors in London, this yeare founded faire Almes-houſes, vpon a plot of ground neare vnto Eaſt Smithfield, in the Pariſh of S. Botolph without Aldgate, which plot of ground was giuen to them by Richard Hilles, ſometime Maſter of that Company,

as alſo one hundred load of Timber by Anthony Ratcliffe of the ſame ſociety, Alderman: In theſe Almes houſes fouretéene charitable men, brethren of the ſaid Merchant-Tailors yet liuing, haue placed fouretéene poore aged ſole women, which receiue euery one of them of their founder, ſixtéene pence or better wéekely, beſides 8. pounds, 15 ſhillings yearely paide for of the common treaſurie, to the ſaid Company for fuell.
               The fourth of September a woman was burnt in Smithfield,A woman burnt in Smitfield. The riuer of Thames ſeemed to be almoſt voide of water, and many things were foūd by diuers as they walked vp on the low ſands. for poyſoning of her huſband.
               Wedneſday the ſixt of September, the winde Weſt, as it had béene for the ſpace of two daies before very boiſterous, the Riuer of Thames was made voide of water, for forcing out the freſh and kéeping backe the ſalt; that men in diuers places might goe 200 paces ouer, and then fling a ſtone to the Land. A Colliar on a Mare rode from the North ſide to the South, and back againe, on either ſide London Bridge, but not without perill of drowning both waies.
               
                  Iohn Gerrard, Robert Taylor.
                  Shrieues.
               
               
                  Sir William Roe Ironmonger.
                  Maior.
               
               This Maior rode from the Guild-hall to the Tower, and there tooke his oath,No Maiors feaſt. being accompanied of the Aldermen, Recorder and Shriues, the Liuery and Batchelers of the Ironmongers, the liuerie of the Haberdaſhers, and no more,

theſe dined at the Lord Maiors houſe, and at the Halls of theſe two Companies, and this was done by the appointment of the Quéenes Coū
                  ſell, for auoiding infection of the plague.
               
                  Tearme kept at Hartford. An. reg. 35Michaelmas Terme was kept at Hartford, & began on Craſtina animarum.
               
               The third of Nouember deceaſed ſir Iohn Parat in the Tower of London.
               
                  A butchers daughter ſayd ſhe was daughter to King Philip and Queene Mary.The 13 of December, a certaine gentlewoman by the Councels commandement was whipped through the City of London, for affirming her ſelfe to be the daughter to Philip king of Spaine, as ſhe had béene perſwaded (by ſome accounted Sooth-ſaiers, after proued liers) for ſhe was knowne to be a Butchers daughter in Eaſtcheape.
               
                  Parliamēt at Weſtminſter.The 19 of February, the Parliament began at Weſtminſter.
               The 21 of March, Henry Barrow gentleman, Iohn Greenewood Clarke, Daniel Studley Girdler, Sapio Biſlot gentleman, Robert Bowley Fiſhmonger, were indicted of felony, the ſaid Barrow and Greenewood for writing ſundry ſeditious bookes,Barrow & Greenewood hanged. tending to the ſlaughter of the Quéen and State: Studley, Billot and Bowley, for publiſhing and ſetting forth the ſame Bookes, and on the 23, they were all arraigned, found guilty, and had iudgement on the laſt of March, Henry Barrow and Iohn Greenewood, were brought to Tiburne, and there hanged on the 6 of Aprill.
               The tenth of Aprill the Parliament at Weſtminſter

brake vp for a time,Parliamēt diſſolued. wherein was granted thrée Subſidies of two ſhillings eight pence the pound goods, & foure ſhillings lands, and 6 fifteenes.
               About the ſame time Penry, a principall penner and publiſher of bookes intituled Martin Marre prelate,
                  Penry apprehended and hanged. was apprehended at Stebbenheth by the Vicar there and committed to priſon. In the moneth of May he was arraigned at the Kings Bench Barre, condemned of Felony, and afterward conuaied from the Goale of the Kings Bench to Saint Thomas Waterings, and there hanged, this pernitious booke much troubled the people.
               The 19 of Iuly the Court of Aſſiſe for Surrey, was holden and kept in S. Georges field,Court of Aſſiſes kept in S. Georges field. in a Tent there ſet vp for that purpoſe, many priſoners were there arraigned, ninetéene were burnt in the hand, but none executed. This Aſſiſe was ended the ſame day, which was thought would haue laſted thrée daies, but the Iuſtices (all duties being paid) made haſt away, for feare of being infected with the peſtilence.
               This yeare was no Bartholmew faire kept at London,No Bartholmew faire at London. for the auoiding of concurſe of people, whereby the infection of the peſtilence might haue increaſed.
               
                  Paul Banning, Peter Hawghton.
                  Shriues.
               
               
                  Sir Cuthbert Buckle Vintner.
                  Maior.
               
               For part of ye yeare, ſir Rich. Martin goldſmth.An. reg. 36
               
               
                  
                  Number of the plague died in London.The whole number this yeare buried within the Citie of London, the ſuburbes and other places adioyning, as well of the plague, as of the other diſeaſes, from the 29 of December in the yeare 1592, vntill the 20 of December, 1593 was as followeth. Within the walls of all diſeaſes, 8598, whereof the plague, 5390, without the walles & in the liberties, 9295. the plague 5285. ſo that within the City and Liberties, of all diſeaſes 17863. whereof the Plague was 10675.
               
               
                  Prince Henry borne.The 19 of February 1593. at Edenburght in Scotland was borne Prince Henry the eldeſt ſonne of King Iames the 6. King of Scots.
               
                  A Seminary executed.The 18 of February Harington a Seminary, was drawne from Newgate to Tiborne, and there hanged, cut downe aliue, ſtrugled with the hangman, but was quartered.
               
                  Lopez arraigned.The laſt of February, Rodoricke Lopeza a Portugal (as it was ſaid) profeſſing Phyſicke, was arraigned in the Guild-hall of London, found guily, and had iudgement of high Treaſon, for conſpiring her maieſties deſtruction by poyſon.
               
                  1594. Great wind ouer turned trees.In this moneth of March were many great ſtormes of winde, which ouerturned trées, ſtéeples, houſes, barnes, &c. namely in Worceſter-ſhire, in Beaudley forreſt many Oakes were ouerthrowne. In Horton wood of the ſaid ſhire, more then one thouſand fiue hundred Oakes were ouerthrowne in one day, namely, on the Thurſday next before Palmeſunday.
               
                  In Stafford-ſhire, the ſhaft of the ſtéeple in Stafford Towne was rent in péeces along through the midſt, and throwne vpon the Church, wherewith the ſaid roofe is broken: 1000 pounds will not make it good. Houſes and Barnes were ouerthrowne in moſt places of thoſe ſhires. In Canke wood more then 3000 trées were ouerthrowne: many ſtéeples more or leſſe aboue 50. in Stafford-ſhire were periſhed or blowne downe.
               The 11. of Aprill was a great raine,Great raine. which continued more then 24 houres long, and withall a great North winde.
               The 14 of Aprill, a woman was burnt in Smithfield, for killing of her husband.A woman burnt for pety Treſon.
               
               The 16 of Aprill Ferdinando Earle of Darby deceaſed at Latham, in a very ſtrange manner.
               The ſecond of May came downe great flouds,Great flouds. by reaſon of ſodaine ſhowres of haile and raine that had fallen, which bare downe houſes, Iron milles, the prouiſion of coles prepared for the ſaid mils, it bare away cattle, &c.
               The ſecond of May,Serieants dinner. the new Serieants of the Law in number ten, held their dinner in the Temple.
               The third of Iune deceaſed Iohn Aylmer Biſhop of London, at Fulham,Biſhop of London deceaſed. and on the 26 of Iune was ſolemnly interred in his Cathedrall Church of Saint Paule in London.
               The 7 of Iune, Doctor Lopez,
                  D. Lopez & others executed. and two other Portugals, were drawne from the Kings

Bench in Southwarke, to Tiborne, and there hanged and quartered.
               
                  Maior of London deceaſed. Sir Richard Martin Maior. Ships ſet out by the Citizens of LondonThe firſt of Iuly, deceaſed Sir Cuthbert Buckle, Lord Maior of London, and on the next morrow was elected Sir Richard Martin to be Maior for the reſt of that yeare, & on the third of Iuly, he tooke his oath at the Tower of London.
               The fiftéene of Iuly by a common Counſell in the Guild hall was graunted (according to a precept from her Maieſty) that ſixe ſhips and two pinnaces ſhould be ſet forth at the charges of the City, the ſame to be ready with men, munition and victuals for thrée moneths by the laſt of Iuly.
               
                  Souldiers ſet out by the Londoners.More on the 17 of Iuly, the ſame Common Councell, according to another precept granted 450 men on foote to be likewiſe ſet out by the citizens, towards the charges whereof a fifteenth was ſeized and paid.
               This yeare in the moneth of May, fell many great raines, but in the moneth of Iune and Iuly much more, for it commonly rained day and night till Saint Iames Eue,Great raine. & on Saint Iames day in the afternoone it began againe, and continued for two daies together: notwithſtanding there followed a faire harueſt in the month of Auguſt, but in September great raines raiſed high waters,Bridges at Cābridge and at Wareborn downe. ſuch as ſtaied the carriages, and bare downe bridges, as at Cambridge, Ware, and elſewhere. Alſo graine grew to be of a great price, as a ſtrike or buſhell of Rie 5 s, a buſhell

of wheat 6, 7, or 8 s, &c. which dearth happened more by meane of ouermuch tranſporting by our Merchants, then the vnſeaſonablenes of the weather paſſed.
               This yeare Beuis Bulmar an ingenious Gentleman made an engine at Broken wharfe,Thames water connaied into London. thereby from thence to conuay Thames water vp into the Citie, ſufficient to ſerue the whole Weſt part thereof, being conuaied into mens houſes by pipes of lead. The ſame Gentleman on the 18 of October gaue vnto ſir Richard Martin then Lord Maior of the City of London, and to the Citie for euer, one cuppe of ſiluer with a couer, weighing 137 ounces of fine,A ſiluer Mine foūd better then the Sterling; the ſiluer of which cup with other (he ſaid) was digged out of the mine in England, in the moneth of Auguſt laſt before paſſed.
               
                  Robert Lee, Thomas Benet.
                  Shrieues.
               
               
                  Sir Iohn Spencer Clothworker.
                  Maior.
               
               The 30 of December a woman was burnt in Smithfield for coyning of money.An. reg. 37 
                  A woman burnt in Smithfield Biſhop of London elected. The ſame day D. Fletcher B. of Worceſter was elected B. of London.
               The 26 of Ianuary William Earle of Darby married the Earle of Oxfords daughter,Earle of Darby married. at the Court at Gréenewich.
               The tenth of February two ſouldiers or Captaines, named Yorke and Williams,
                  Yorke and Williams
                        •
                      executed. were executed at Tiburne for fellony.
               
                  
                  1595 A Ieſuit executed.The 10 of February Southwell a Ieſuite, that long time had laine in the Tower of London, was arraigned at the Kings Bench barre, he was condemned, and on the next morrow drawne from Newgate to Tiburne, and there hanged, bowelled and quartered.
               
                  Great dearth of corne and other victuals.This yeare by meanes of the late tranſportation of graine into forraine Countries, the ſame was here growne to an exceſſiue price, as in ſome parts of this Realme, from fourtéene ſhillings to 4 markes the quarter.
               
                  Diſodered youthes puniſhed.On the 27 of Iune, certaine yong men apprentiſes and other, were puniſhed by whipping, ſetting on the Pillory, &c. for taking of butter from the maket women in Southwarke, after the rate of three pence the pound, whereas the ſellers price was 5 pence the pound, they would be their owne caruers.
               
                  Coiner and a cunning coſoner puniſhed.Certaine men for coyning were hanged, and alſo a Scriuener in Holborne was hanged, and quartered for taking the great ſeale of England from the olde patent and putting the ſame to a new.
               On the 29 of Iune being Sonday in the afternoone, a number of vnruly youths on the Tower hill, being blamed by the Warders of Towerſtreete-ward to ſeuer themſelues and depart from thence,Vnruly youths on the tower hill apprehended for being ther aſſembled to do violence to the Lord Maior and to make inſurrection. threw at them ſtones, and draue them backe into Tower ſtréete, and were heartned thereunto by a late Souldier, ſounding of a trumpet, but the trumpeter and many other of them being taken by the ſhrieues of

London, and committed to priſon. About 7 of the clocke the ſame night, ſir Iohn Spencer Lord Maior rode to the Tower hill, attended by his officers and others, to ſée the hill cleared of all tumultuous perſons, where about the middle of the hill, ſome warders of the Tower or Lieutenants men told ſir Iohn that the ſword ought not to be borne vp there, and two or thée catching hold thereof, ſome bickering was there, and ſhe ſword bearer hurt, but the Lord Maior ſéeing the hill cleared of all trouble rode backe, the ſword bearer bearing vp the ſword.
               The two & twenty of Iuly,Vnruly youths executed on the Tower hill, they died penitent. in preſence of the Earle of Eſſex, and other ſent from the Queene, were arraigned in the Guild-hall of London, fine of thoſe vnruly youths that were on the Tower hill apprehended, they were condemned, and had iudgement to be drawne, hanged and quartered, and were on the twenty foure of the ſame month drawne from Newgate to the Tower hill, and there executed accordingly.
               Sir Thomas Wilford knight,Sir Tho. Wilford Prouoſt Marſhall within Londō h
                        •
                      behaued himſelfe very mildly and diſcreetly. Prouoſt Marſhall for the time in the City of London rode about, and through the city of London daily, with a number of men well mounted on horſebacke, armed with caſes of piſtols, &c. This Marſhall apprehended many vagrant and idle people, brought them to the Iuſtices, who committed them, &c.
               
                  Thomas Low, Leonard Haliday.
                  Shriues.
               
               
                  Sir Stephen Slany Skinner.
                  Maior.
               
               
                  
                  Two marſhals in London at one time.This yeare in February, 1595. the Lord Maior and Aldermen, as well for expelling vagrant people out of the City, reforming of common abuſes to be aiding to Clarks of the Market, for redreſſe of forrainers falſe waights and meaſures, as to be aſſiſtant vnto all Conſtables and other ciuill officers for the more ſpéedy ſuppreſſion of any diſtemperature that may ariſe by youth, or otherwaies; they ordained two Marſhals,An. reg. 38 
                  viz. Maſter Reade, and Maſter Simſon, and after them Maſter Roger Walrond was admitted alone.
               
                  Notorious knaues. The 20 of February fiue men for couzonage and counterfeiting of Commiſſions, &c. were ſet on the Pillory in Weſt Cheape, ſome of them had their eares nailed and cut off, others that had before loſt their eares were burnt in their cheekes, and forehead.
               
                  A Pinnace made in the Leadē Hall by a Land Carpenter being neuer taught nor vſed to make any Ships or Boats.This yeare a certaine Pinnace was made by a Houſe-carpenter, in the Gréene-yeard of Leaden hall in London, it was about ſome 5 tun, to be taken a ſunder, and ſet together with vices; the ſame was finiſhed and launched out of Leaden hall on the 12. of March in the night, and drawne by ſtrength of men and horſes on a ſléed with wheels made for that purpoſe, towards Algate, where about the pariſh Church of S. Catherine Chriſts Church, the wheeles taking fire on the Axeltrées, were broken about one of the clocke in the morning, where it ſtaied till the next night, and then was drawne to the Tower hill, where the ſame was calked

and pitched, and on the xx. of March drawne and lanched into the riuer of Thames, at the water gate by the Tower, and from thence by water drawne to Ratcliffe, and there tackled.
               The ninth of Aprill being good Friday in the afternoone,1596. Souldiers preſſed & diſcharged the Lord Maior and Aldermen were ſent from the Sermon in Paules Church-yeard, and forthwith vpon precept from the Councell, preſſed 1000. men, which was done by eight of the clocke the ſame night, and before the next morning they were purueied of all manner of furniture for the warres, ready to haue gone towards Douer, and ſo to the aid of Callis againſt the Spaniards, but in the afternoone of the ſame day, they were all diſcharged.
               And on the 11.
                  Souldiers preſſed. of Aprill being Eaſter day about tenne of the clocke came a new charge, ſo that all men being in the pariſh Churches ready to haue receiued the Cōmunion, the Aldermen,The Spaniards win Callis. their deputies, and Conſtables, were faine to cloſe vp the Churchdoores, till they had preſſed ſo many to be ſouldiers, that by 12. of the Clocke, they had in the whole City 1000. men, and they were forthwith furniſhed of armour and weapons, &c.Souldiers ſent to Callis. And they were for the moſt part that night and the reſt on the next morning ſent away, to Douer, as the like out of other parts of the Realme, but returned againe about a wéeke after, for the French had loſt Callis, &c. And in Iune 1598. the towne of Callis was quietly reſtored backe to the French.
               
                  
                  L. Keeper deceaſed.The laſt of Aprill at night, deceaſed Sir Iohn Puckering L. kéeper of the great Seale, he died of a great palſie, wherewith he had béene taken on the 26 of Aprill at night.
               On May day proclamation was made, that all ſouldiers appointed to ſea, ſhould in all haſt paſſe to Porteſmouth,Soldiers to the ſea. &c. to the Earle of Eſſex, and other the Nobility there.
               
                  New L. Keeper.The 6 of May ſir Thomas Egerton Maſter of the Rolles, was made Lord Kéeper, and had deliuered vnto him the great Seale. The 11. he rode (accompanied of the Nobility and others in great number) to Weſtminſter, and there tooke his place.
               
                  Water flouds. Theſe inundations were very ſtrange & terrible.In this moneth of May (as afore.) fell continually raines euery day or night, whereby the waters grew déepe, brake ouer the high waies, namely, betwixt Ilford and Stradford ye Bow, ſo that market people riding towards London, hardly eſcaped, but ſome were drowned: alſo towards Lambeth in the high way, people not on horſebacke were borne on mens backes, and rowed in wherries in Saint Georges field.
               
                  Robert Earle of Eſſex and Charles Howard, high Admirall of England,Cadize voyage. imbarked with 150. good ſaile of ſhips on the firſt of Iune weighed anchor, and hoiſed vp ſailes, outward their iourney from Plimmouth towards Spaine, and wonne Cadiz, and returned with great booties and ſpoiles.
               The 22 of Iuly Henry Carey Lord Hunſdon,
                  
and Lord Chamberlaine deceaſed at Somerſet houſe without Temple barre,L. Chamberlaine deceaſed. and was honourably buried at Weſtminſter: about the ſame time alſo deceaſed Sir F. Knoles, one of her Maieſties priuy Counſell.
               Sunday the eight of Auguſt,Triumph in Londō for victory in Spaine. great triumph was made in London for the good ſucceſſe of the Earle of Eſſex, and his company in Spaine, the winning, ſacking and burning of the famous Towne of Cadiz, the ouerthrow and burning of the Spaniſh Nauie, and other accidents. A Serman of thankſgiuing was preached at Paules Croſſe in the forenoone, and bon-fires with great ioy.
               In the yeare 528,
                  The Ciuil Lawes reduced into order. and in the 2 yeare of Iuſtinian the Emperor, he gaue charge that his firſt Cod
                     •
                   ſhould be compoſed of the Gregorian, Theodoſian and Hermoginean Code.
               In the third yeare of this Emperour, the firſt Code came forth.
               In the fourth yeare he commanded the Digeſts to be compoſed.
               In the ſeuenth yeare of his raigne the Inſtitutions were ſet forth, and within one moneth after them came forth the Digeſts.
               In the eight yeare came forth the new Code of Iuſtinian.
               
               In his ninth yeare, which was in the yeare of our Lord 535 diuers nouell conſtitutions were publiſhed.
               The 15 of Auguſt a new houſe of Timber not full finiſhed in Fléetſtréete, ſodenly fell downe,A warning to Carpen
                     
                        •
                     ers.
                  
and with it one old houſe adioyning, by the fall whereof the good man, with a man-ſeruant and a child were killed.
               In the moneth of Auguſt began a new collection, for ſo releeue the poore in this City, ſo that beſides their ordinary penſions in money giuen to them, they alſo receiued wéekely two ſhillings,Too good to laſt long. bread ready baked, euery lofe weighing 24 or 26 ounces the péece: but this charity laſted but a while.
               The 29 of Auguſt, the Duke of Bolloine being arriued in England, came to the Court at Greene-wich,Duke of Bolloine came into England. and there by oath for the King his Maſter, confirmed the League of amity betwixt the two Realmes of England and France.
               
                  Souldiers ſent into France.Shortly after ſouldiers were ſent ouer to aide the French in their warres.
               
                  Earle of Shrewsbury Ambaſſador into France.The 16 of September, Gilbert Talbot Earle of Shrewſbury, and ſir Anthony Mildmay Knight, Ambaſſadors, with Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, and other, to the number of more then two hundred horſe, departed towards France, arriued at Deepe on the twenty thrée, had audience of the King, who moſt princely welcomed them on the 7 of October, the fidelity or oth of the league was ſolemnly taken, the order of the Garter moſt royally performed, and the Ambaſſadors returning with great honours, arriued in the Downes on the 27 of October.
               
                  
                  Richard Godard, Iohn Wats, 28 Septem.
                  Shrieues.
               
               
                  Thomas Skinner Clothworker 28 Oct.
                  Maior.
               
               
                  Henry Billingſley 31 December.
               
               Through the diligent carefulneſſe of T. Skinner Maior prouiſion was made for corne to be brought from Danſke,Prouiſion made for grain frō beyond the ſeas. & other the Gaft Countries, by our Merchants, vnto whom was granted cuſtome and ſtowage frée, as alſo to make their owne price, or tranſport to any part of this Realme, whereupon it followed (were the price neuer ſo high) this City neuer wanted for their money.
               This yeare, like as in the moneths of Auguſt, September, October, and Nouember,Great lād waters. fell great raines, whereupon high waters followed:Dearth. wheat in meale was ſold at London for ten ſhillings the buſhell, Rie ſixe ſhillings, and Oatemeale eight ſhillings.
               The 17 of Nouember, a day of great triumph,An. reg. 39 Great triumph for the proſperous raigne of her Maieſty. for the long and proſperous raigne of her Maieſty at the Court, the Earle of Cumberland Champion for the Quéene, the Earle of Eſſex, Bedford, Southampton, & Suſſex, with other, ranne at the tilt moſt brauely.
               Sunday the fift of December, great numbers of people being aſſembled in the Cathedrall Church of Wels in Somerſetſhire,Tempeſts in the City of Wels. in the Sermon time before noone, a ſudden darkeneſſe fell among them, and ſtorme and tempeſt followed, with lightening and thunder, ſuch as

ouerthrew to the ground them that were in the body of the Church, all which Church ſéemed to be on a light fire, a loathſome ſtench following, ſome ſtones were ſtricken out of the Bel tower, the wires and irons of the Clocke were molten: which tempeſt being ceaſed, and the people come to themſelues, ſome of them were found to be marked with ſundry figures on their bodies, and their garments not periſhed, nor any marked that were in the Chancell.
               The 30. of December at night, deceaſed Peter Hauton,
                  
                     T. Skinner Maior deceaſed: he ſpent more of his time then any of his predeceſſors.
                     H. Billingſley Maior
                   an Alderman of London, and the ſame night alſo deceaſed Thomas Skinner Lord Maior of the ſame City. Whereby was made fruſtrate the great hope that men had conceiued of his good gouerment to come. And on the next morrow being the laſt of December, Henry Billingsley Haberdather, was elected Maior, who being chiefe cuſtomer for her Maieſty, on the twelth euen, ſate in the Cuſtome houſe with the ſword before him lying on the table.
               The eleuenth of Ianuary he tooke his oath at the Tower of London.
               In the moneth of May, Souldiers were preſſed in the city of London to the number of 550. with all the furniture,1597. Souldiers trained & ſent to the ſea. at the charges of the Cittizens: theſe were trained to the field, out of which was picked 400. and the reſt diſmiſſed: theſe and other picked men out of diuers Shires about the number of 6000. moſt brauely funiſhed of all things neceſſary, beſides the ſuperſfluities of voluntaries, who ſpared for no coſt,

namely, in gold lace and feathers, vnder conduct of Robert Earle of Eſſex, were ſent to the ſeas: they ſet from the weſt coaſts of England, about the tenth of Iuly, being Sunday, & on monday the ſame fléet was ſailed out of ſight from England, but the 17. being Saturday, hauing the winde againſt them, as the like for thrée or foure daies before, a tempeſt of lightning and thunder, raine, and darkeneſſe, ſhooke and diſperſed them, wherevpon they returned: Sir Water Rawley, with forty ſaile came to Plimmouth, and afterward the Earle and others, to Falmouth, ſome of their company wanting, namely, the Lord Thomas Howard, the Lord Mountioy, the Lord Rich, and other: the gallants or voluntaries came home againe, but not with ſuch iollity, as they went out, for many left their Feathers at ſea. About the twenty ſeauen of October, was newes that the Earle of Eſſex was returned, hauing before ſent home thrée or foure ſhips very richly laden, and lately taken: he left the fléet to purſue the action in taking more.
               This Summer arriued héere an Embaſſador from the King of Polonia, and had audience the twenty fiue of Iuly, whoſe Oration was preſently anſwered by her Maieſty in Latine.
               This yeare the Earle of Eſſex and the Lord Thomas Howard, the Earle of Southampton,The Iſlāds voiage. ſir Water Rawleigh, & other braue Commanders, with 18. of the Quéenes ſhips, & many Engliſh Marchants ſhips, and 12. Hollanders ſhippes, made a warlike voiage to the Iſles of Terceres.
               
                  In the moneth of Auguſt, the price of Wheate in the Markets of London, fell from thirtéene ſhillings the buſhell, to ten ſhillings: Rie from nine ſhillings, to ſixe ſhillings, and ſo to thrée ſhillings, but then roſe againe to the old greateſt price.
               
                  Ambaſſadors from Denmark.This yeare alſo, Arnold Whitefield, Chancellor of Denmarke, Ambaſſador, and Chriſtian Barnkun his aſſiſtant from the King of Denmarke, arriued héere: theſe had audience at the Court, then at Tibols, on the ſeuenth of September, and were anſwered by her Maieſty, without pawſe to euery point of their ambaſſage, and feaſted.
               
                  Shrieues.
                  Henry Roe, Iohn Moore, 28 September.
               
               
                  Maior.
                  Richard Saltonſtall, Skinner. 28 October.
               
               
                  Lectures read in Sir Thomas Greſhams Colledge.Monday, the 3 of Octob. began the reading of the Diuinity lecture in Sir Tho. Greſhams Colledge, by him founded in Biſhops-gate ſtréet.
               
                  Earle of Notinghā created. Parliamēt at Weſtm.The 23 of October, the honourable Lord Charles Howard. Lord high Admirall of England, was created Earle of Notingham at Weſtminſter.
               
                  The cauſe of this ſpoyle of the people was the indiſcreet behauiour of the inferiour Marſhals.A Parliament began at Weſtminſter, on the 24 of October: on the which day diuers people were ſmuldered and cruſhed to death, preſſing betwéene White-hall, and the Colledge Church, to haue ſéene her Maieſty, and Nobility ryding in their Robes to the ſaid Parliament.
               
                  This yeare,An. reg. 40 Price of Pepper. Pety treaſon. Pepper was ſold for eight ſhillings the pound.
               The 25 of Ianuary, one named Ainger, was hanged at Tiburne, for wilfully and ſecretly murdering of his owne Father, a Gentleman, and a Counſellor at the Law at Graies Inne, in his chamber there.
               The ninth of February,A Parliament. the Parliament hauing granted thrée Subſidies, of foure ſhillings the pound lands, and two ſhillings eight pence the pound goods, and ſixe fiftéenes was diſſolued and brake vp.
               On the third of Aprill, Twiford Towne in Deuonſhire was burnt by caſuality of fire,1958. Twiford Towne burnt. beginning in a poore cottage, a woman there frying pancakes with ſtraw, the ſame fired the houſe, and ſo to the Towne, about one of the clocke in the afternoone: the rage of which fire, laſting one houre and a halfe, conſumed 400 houſes, burned downe, one hundred and fifty thouſand pounds conſumed in money, Plate, Marchandiſe, houſhold ſtuffe, and houſes: fifty perſons, men, women, and children, conſumed: an Almes-houſe preſerued with poore men therein in the midſt of the flames: two thouſand pounds wéekely was beſtowed there in the market on Mondaies in Deuonſhire Carſies, nine thouſand people maintained by the cloathing of that town, in Cornwall, and Sommerſetſhire. It was the Earle of Deuonſhires chiefe ſeate, where yet ſtandeth his caſtle or court place. Thus much certified to her Maieſty.
               
                  
                  Sir Robert Cicil returneth out of France.On the firſt of May, Sir Robert Cicil, and other Ambaſſadors, returned out of France, and came to the Court.
               The 12 of Iuly, one Iohannes, alias, Buckley, a Prieſt made beyond the Seas,A Ieſuite executed. hauing béene arraigned in the King Bench, on the third of Iuly, and there condemned of Treaſon, for comming into this Realme, contrary to a Statute, was drawne to Saint Thomas a Waterings, and there hanged and quartered, his head ſet on the pillory in Southwarke, his quarters in the high-wayes towards Newinton, Lambeth, &c.
               
                  Lord treaſurer deceaſed.On the fourth of Auguſt, Sir William Cicil, Knight of the Order, Lord Burleigh, Maſter of the Wardes and Liueries, Lord high Treaſurer of England, a famous Counſeller to the Quéene Maieſty, during all her raigne, and likewiſe had béene to King Edward the ſixt; who for his ſingular wiſedome, was renowned throughout all Europe, departed this mortall life, at his houſe by the Strand, his body was conuaied to Weſtminſter, with ſolemne funerall, and from thence ſecretly to Stanford, and there buried among his Anceſters.
               
                  The King of Spaine dieth.The third of September, died Philip the ſecond of that name, King of Spaine, at Madrill, at 72 yeares of age, his ſonne Philip ſucceeded him.
               
                  Doctor Cotton, Biſhop of Exceſter.This yeere 1598, the 12 of the moneth of Nouember, William Cotton, Doctor of diuinity, ſometimes Cannon of Paules, was conſecrated

Lord Biſhop of Exceſter. He ſtrongly maintained the Rites, and Gouernement of the Church. And liued ſo long, that hee ſaw the change of Biſhops, throughout all the Biſhoprickes of England and Wales.
               The firſt of September, in the afternoone,Thunder and lightning. thunder and lightning at London, two great cracks, as it had béene the ſhooting of great Ordinance, ſome men ſmitten at the Poſterne by the Tower of London, and one man ſlaine at the Bridge-houſe in Southwarke, ouer againſt the Tower.
               
                  Edward Holmdon, Robert Hampſon,
                  Shrieues. 
                  the 28 of September.
               
               
                  Sir Stephen Some, Grocer,
                  Maior. 
                  the 28 of October.
               
               The ſecond of October,Earle of Comberland returned from the ſeas. arriued the Earle of Comberland, being returned from the ſeas, and hauing made ſpoyle of the ſtrong Towne and Caſtle of Saint Iohn de Portarico, &c.
               
               The 9 of Nouember, Squire of Gréenwich was arraigned at Weſtminſter,Squire executed for high Treaſon. condemned of high Treaſon, and on the thirteenth, drawn from the Tower, to Tiburne, and there hanged and quartered.
               The 14 of Nouember,The Qu. receiued. An. reg. 41 the Quéenes Maieſty came to Weſtminſter, and was there moſt royally receiued by the Maior of London, Aldermen and Shrieues in ſcarlet, and a great number of wealthy Citizens, in Veluet coates,

and chaines of gold, all on horſe backe in the euening by Torch-light.
               In the moneth of December, great froſts, the Thames nigh ouer-frozen at London.Great froſts. Souldiers ſent into Ireland. In the beginning of the moneth of Ianuary, ſouldiers in diuers ſhires, as alſo in the City of London, were preſſed and furniſhed of all things neceſſary for the warres, and were ſent into the Low countries there to ſerue, in place of old ſouldiers, from thence to bee tranſported into Ireland. The ſubſidy men in the city were ſeaſed at eight pence the pound, goods, or lands, toward this charge. Alſo in this moneth, great lones of money were demanded and granted, by the citizens of London.
               
                  Souldiers into Ireland.The moneth of February, a fiftéene was granted, and paid by the citizens of London, for the ſetting forth of more ſouldiers into Ireland.
               
                  1599. Earle of Eſſex rode towards Ireland.The 27 of March, about two of the clocke in the afternoone, Robert Deuereux, Earle of Eſſex, Lieutenant Generall, Lord high Marſhall, &c. departed from his houſe in Seding lane, through Fenchurch ſtréet, Grace-ſtreet, Cornehill, Cheape, &c. toward Iſeldone, High-gate, and rode that night to Saint Albons, towardes Ireland: he had a great traine of Noblemen and Gentlemen, on horſebacke before him, to accompany him on his iourney, his coaches followed him: he had alſo (by the pleaſure of God) a great ſhowre or twaine, of rain and haile, with ſome great claps of thunder, as he rode through Iſlington.
               
                  The moneths of March, Aprill, and May cold and dry, but on Whitſonday great haile and high waters, the like of long time had not béene ſéene, the extreame violence of this Tempeſt made London ſtréetes more freſh and faire then euer was ſéene before.
               In the Moneth of Auguſt by the Quéenes appointment (politickly to preuent daungerous annoiance of her eſtate,Ships ſent to the ſeas and men trained for the warres. then feared to haue happened, but not expreſſed) the Citizens of London were charged with the furniture and ſetting forth to ſea, of twelue ſhips, ſince increaſed to 16. &c. Alſo with 6000. men and furniture for the warres, which men with all ſpéede were made in a readineſſe. Thrée thouſand of them were daily trained in the field vnder Captaines, Citizens of the ſame City, from the ſixth of Auguſt, &c. The other thrée thouſand appointed to attend vpon her Roiall perſon, were alſo likewiſe trained vnder Captaines, in braue furniture, for they were houſholders of account: all which their charges was partly borne by themſelues, the reſidue performed by ſubſidies leuied of the Citizens.
               In this meane time, to wit, on the fifth of Auguſt at night by commandement from her Maieſtie, the chaines were drawne thwart the ſtréetes and lanes of the Citie, and Lanthornes with light of candles, hanged one at euery mans dore, there to burne all the night, and ſo from night to night, and great watches kept in the ſtréets, which ſo continued a long time.

The City and Citizens kept vnuſuall watch and ward, and all ſorts of people were much amazed and frighted, as well by reaſon of preparation for wars, not knowing any cauſe, as alſo by the ſoddaine ſtrange, and terrible rumors and reports of the Spaniards fierce approach.
               Alſo many thouſands of horſemen and footemen choſen perſons, well appointed for the warres, trained vp in armor, with braue liueries, vnder valiant Captaines in diuers ſhires, were brought vp to London, where they were lodged in the ſuburbes, townes, and villages neare adioyning, from the eight of Auguſt, till the 20. or 23. in which time the horſemen were ſhewed in Saint Iames field, the footemen traimed in other grounds about the City, and then all diſcharged homewards, with charge to be alwaies ready at an houres warning. And ſo it followed, that on the 25. of Auguſt at night, Poſts were ſent after them, to recall the horſemen, preſently to returne to London with all ſpéede poſſible, which charge they prepared to performe. But on the 27. of Auguſt the ſaid Poſts were likewiſe ſent to ſtay them at home, or to returne them backe, whoſe forwardneſſe in ſeruice of the Quéene was ſuch, as the like hath not béene ſéene or heard of, towards any Prince of this Realme, ſuch was the dutifulneſſe of her louing and obedient ſubiects. The 26. of Auguſt, being Sunday in the morning before ſixe of the clocke, by the commandement from the Quéene, the 3000. ſouldiers trained

vp by the Citizens, were all in Armour, in the open ſtréetes, attending on their Captaines, till paſt ſeuen of the clocke: at what time being thorowly wet by a great ſhowre of raine, were ſent home againe for, that day. On the next morrow, being the 27, the other 3000 Citizens, houſholders, and ſubſidy men, ſhewed on the Miles end, where they trained all that day, and other vntill the 4 of September, and ſo ceaſed they training: and whatſoeuer had béene foreſéene, and wiſely preuented by the Quéene, and her Nobility, (whereof the Comminalty were vtterly ignorant for that time) a good Peace within this Realme hath ſince followed, which God long continue among vs.
               
                  Humfrey Wilde, Roger Clarke,
                  Shrieues. 
                  the 28 of September.
               
               
                  Sir Nicholas Moſley, Clothworker,
                  Maior. 
                  the 28 of October.
               
               This Roger Clarke Shrieue, bidding the Companies of London to dine with him,Note. as had béene accuſtomed by other Shrieues his predeceſſors, tooke no beneuolence of them towards his charges.
               On Michaelmas euen, Robert, Earle of Eſſex, Lieutenant Generall for Ireland,Earle of Eſſex returned out of Ireland. hauing ſecretly returned into England, came to the Court at Nonſuch, & ſpake with the Quéene, and on the ſecond of October, was for contempt, &c. committed to the Lord Kéeper.
               
                  
                  The people ignorantly muttered many things.On the 29 of Nouember, the Lord Kéeper, and other Lords of the Counſell, in the Starre Chamber, perſwaded againſt rumorous talke of the Earle of Eſſex.
               
                  The Archdukes enſtalled.In December, the late Cardinall Albertus, and Iſabella his wife, Daughter to the late King of Spaine, with great pompe in Antwerpe, were ſworne Arch-dukes.
               
                  An. reg. 42A Tilt-boat from London, towards Graueſend, loſt againſt Woolwich, with 40 perſons, men and women, whereof 11 were ſaued.
               
                  Twenty priſoners ſent to Wisbich Caſtle.The 19 of Ianuary, 16 Prieſts, and foure lay men, were remoued out of diuers priſons, in, and about London, and ſent to the Caſtle of Wiſbich, in Cambridge-ſhire, whereof one was a Biſhop of Ireland, and another a Franciſcan Frier, of the rule of the Caputians, which wore his Friars wéede all the way as he went, a thing not ſéene in England many yéeres before.
               
                  L. Mountioy ſent into Ireland.The eight of February, Charles Blunt, Lord Mountioy, departed towards Ireland, as Lieuetenant there: ſouldiers out of diuers ſhires were ſent before him, and alſo after him in the month of February, namely the Citizens of London, at their owne charges, furniſhed and ſent 300 at that time into Ireland.
               The 21 of Iune, Iohn Rigby was drawne from the Kings Bench in Southwarke,1600. to S. Thomas Waterings, and there hanged and quartered, for being reconciled contrary to the Statute.
               In the month of Iuly, were drawn, hanged,

and quartered at Lincolne, two Prieſts,Execution of Seminaries. named T. Hunt and Sprat, for comming into this Realme, contrary to the Statute: two other Prieſts, Edward Thing, and Robert Nutter, were likewiſe executed for the like offence, at Lancaſter. Alſo T. Palafer a Prieſt, executed at Durham, and a Gentleman with him, for relieuing and lodging him in his houſe.
               In the moneth of Iuly,Souldiers ſent into Ireland. the Citizens of London ſent out 300 ſouldiers into Ireland with their furniture: alſo out of diuers ſhires, ſouldiers were likewiſe furniſhed and ſent thither.
               This yéere, in the moneth of April, Richard,
                  The Biſhop of London Ambaſſadour to Emden. Biſhop of London, with other Commiſſioners, to wit, Doctor Perkins, and Doctor Swale, were ſent Ambaſſadors to Emden, there to treat with the Commiſſioners from the King of Denmark, who had long remained there for that purpoſe: but their commiſſion expired, they were returned ere Ambaſſadors were come there: whereupon our Ambaſſadors alſo returned into England, the 8 of Iuly next following. In which ſeruice, the ſaid Reuerend Father, ſo wiſely, bountifully, & honorably caried himſelfe, that the Quéene very graciouſly accepted his procéedings.
               The fifth of Iune, the Earle of Eſſex was called before the Lords of the Councell,The Earle of Eſſex ſuſpended from his office. at the Lord Kéepers, where for matters laide to his charge, hee was ſuſpended from vſe of diuers offices, till her Maieſties pleaſure to the contrary, to kéepe his houſe, as before: whereat the

people ſtill murmured.
               
                  Conſpiracie againſt the King of Scots.The 5 of Auguſt, Charles Iames, King of Scots, in Scotland, eſcaped a ſtrange and ſtrong conſpiracie, practiſed by the Earle of Gowry, and his Brother, as at large appeareth in a booke thereof extant, firſt publiſhed, and printed in Scotland, and ſince in England.
               
               
                  Meanes for an intreaty of peace to be had.A peace being concluded at Veraine in France, in the yeare 1598, betwéene Henry the fourth, King of France and Nauarre, and Philip the ſecond King of Spaine: The Quéene of England, was likewiſe inuited by the French King, her confederate allye, to diſpoſe her ſelfe vnto a like treaty of amity with Spaine. To the effecting whereof, he had procured the conſent of the K. of Spaine, then liuing.
               After whoſe deceaſe, Philip the third, ſuccéeding his Father in the Crowne, the ſame was againe reuiued and ſolicited by Andreas of Auſtria, the Gouernour of the Low Countries, and the Biſhop of Conſtance, both for the houſe of Burgundy, and Kingdome of Spaine, afterwards ratified by the Arch-duke, Albert returned out of Spaine, with the Infanta his wife. Vpon which former promiſe made vnto her Maieſty, ſhee was at length induced to condiſcend vnto a treaty of peace at Bolaigne in France, a place choſen by mutuall agreement on either ſide, with the aſſent and good liking of the French King; whether both Princes ſent their Ambaſſadors, furniſhed with ample power and authority in that behalfe, where the Engliſh

Ambaſſadors arriued the ſixtéenth day of May, in this preſent yeare, 1600, being the day prefixed for this aſſembly, and the Spaniſh, the ſeuentéenth of the ſame moneth. The Commiſſioners on the Engliſh ſide were theſe, Sir Henry Neuel Knight, her Maieſties ordinary Ambaſſador, reſident with the French King, Iohn Harbert, Eſquire, her Maieſties Secretary in the North part, and Thomas Edmonds Eſquire, her Maieſties Secretary for the French tongue. The Commiſſioners for Spaine, were Baltazar de Caniga, and Fonſeca, Ambaſſador reſident for the King of Spaine, with the Arch-duke of Auſtria in the Low Countries, and Ferdinando Carillo, Doctor of the ciuill Law, vnto whom were adioyned on the Arch-dukes part, Iohn Richardot, Preſident of the counſell of the ſaid Arch-duke, and Lewis Verraken, the ſaid Arch-dukes Audiencer. The Commiſſioners on both ſides, being viewed and conſidered of, ſome queſtion for the preſidencie and ſuperiority of place, fell into diſputation and debate, her Maieſty challenging the ſame, as due vnto her, before the time of the Emperour Charles, (as appeareth by Volateran) in the time of King Henry the ſeuenth, her Highnes Grandfather, when this ſelf-ſame difference betwéene both thoſe Crownes comming into queſtion, the Pope preferred England, and adiudged vnto this Crowne, the moſt honourable place: but foraſmuch as the ſame was contradicted by the Spaniſh Commiſſioners,

who not onely refuſed to yéeld preſianſie vnto her Maieſty, but alſo to admit an equality, or of any other indifferent and middle courſe, whereby the honour of her Maieſty might bee preferred; the preſent treaty (which hitherto was perfourmed, onely by ſome priuate viſitations and conferences of ſome one or two of the Commiſſioners on either ſide, without comming to any generall méeting or colloquie) was on the ſecond day of Auguſt, in the yeere aforeſaid, for this time delayed, and by mutuall aſſent of the Commiſſioners on both ſides, according to their ſeuerall authorities, reſpectiuely granted vnto them in that behalfe, ſuſpended, vntill the the end of ſixtie dayes following, in which meane while it might be vnderſtood, what ſhould be the determination of both Princes, for a further 
                     •
                   preceeding in the ſaid colloquie of peace at ſome other time and place, wherein as yet no certaine reſolution hath béene hitherto taken.
               
                  Ambaſſadors from Barbary.The 8 of Auguſt, 1600, came Ambaſſadors from Abdela Wayhetanow, King of Barbary, the chiefe whereof was his Secretary, diuers in commiſſion with him were Artificers and Tradeſ-men:Right Turkiſh charity. they were very bountifully entertained at the Quéenes charges, during their ſixe monthes abode, they were very ſubtle and vnthankfull, they abhorred to giue any manner of Almes vnto any poore Chriſtians, they ſold their broken meat vnto ſuch as would giue moſt for it, they killed all their owne meat in the Ambaſſadors

houſe, as Lambes, and all kinde of Pullen, &c. which they vſually killed, turning their faces towards the Eaſt, they vſed to waſh their owne féete twice or thrice aday, and ſometimes to waſh their bodies: they vſe beades, and pray to Turkiſh Saints: they diligently obſerued the manner of our weights and meaſures, and all things elſe that might auaile their natiue Marchants, and preiudice the Engliſh Nation.
               The 18 of September,Ambaſſadors from Ruſſia. came Embaſſadours from Borris Pheodorwich, Emperour of Ruſſia, which ſaid Borris was newly come vnto that dignity by vſurpation, onely by meanes of his greatneſſe in popularity, hauing as he ſuppoſed long before made away the late immediat Heire Demetrius, ſecond ſonne to old Ivan Vaſſelowich, and yonger brother to the late Pheodor Vaſſelowich. This Borris at his firſt comming to the crowne, was as bounteous and liberall vnto all ſorts of people, as he was when he was a ſubiect; but within a while after he grew very couetous, and deſirous to fill his treaſure, by meanes whereof within ſixe yéeres hee was as generally hated of all the Ruſſians, as euer he was beloued: of whoſe ſudden and vnexſpected downefall, you may reade at large in the third yeare of King Iames.
               
               About the laſt of Auguſt, Robert,
                  Earle of Eſſex ſet at liberty. Earle of Eſſex was ſet at liberty.
               The 10 of September,They were ſent home at the Q. charges. the ſaid Embaſſadors of Barbary, were againe conueyed to the

Court at Oatlands,They were ſent home at the Qu. charges. there to take their leaue of her Maieſty, but were required to ſtay, to ſée the Iuſting, and other triumphs at Weſtminſter, on the 17. of Nouember.
               
                  Souldirs ſent into Ireland, run awaies puniſhed.In the moneth of September, ſouldiers preſt, in, and about the City of London, to the number of 350. and likewiſe out of diuers ſhires were ſent towards Ireland, wherof diuers running from their Captaines and colours, were afterward taken and hanged for example to others.
               
                  Ambaſſadors from Ruſſia and Muſcouia.The 18. of September, Ambaſſadors from Muſcouia or Ruſſia, landing at Tower wharfe, were there receiued by the Aldermen of London, in ſcarlets, the Muſcouy Marchants, and a number about two hundred, of the principall companies in veluet Coats, and chaines of gold, all well mounted, conueied them in c
                     •
                  aches, from the Tower to the houſe ſometime pertayning to Sir Cuthbert Buckell, Maior.
               The 14. of October, the ſaid Ambaſſadors rode to the Court, and had audience before the Quéene.
               
                  Hoſpital in Croydon founded.This yeare the moſt Reuerend Father in God Iohn Whitgift, Archbiſhop of Canterbury, did finiſh that notable monument of our time, to wit, his Hoſpitall of the holy Trinity in Croydon, in the County of Surry, by him there founded & builded of ſtone and bricke, for the releiſe and ſuſtentation of certaine poore people. As alſo a faire Schoole-houſe for the

increaſe of literature, together with a large dwelling houſe for the Schoolemaſter: and theſe premiſſes he hath through Gods aſſiſtance in his owne life time performed, for as (my ſelfe haue heard him ſay) he would not be to his Executors a cauſe of their damnation, remembring the good aduice that an ancient Father hath left to all poſterity.
               
                  Tutior via eſt, vt bonum quod quiſquis poſt mortem ſperat agi per alios, agat dum viuit ipſe per ſe: It is a way farre more ſafe for a man to do
                     •
                   good and charitable déedes by himſelfe, whilſt he liueth, then to hope that others will do the ſame for him after his death.
               
                  Thomas Smith, Thomas Cambell,
                  Shrieues. 
                  the 28 of September.
               
               
                  William Crauen, the fourteenth of Februarie.
               
               
                  Sir William Rider Haberdaſher,
                  Maior. 
                  the 28 of October.
               
               The 13 of Nouember, the Quéene being moſt honourably attended on by the Prelats, Nobles, and Iudges of this Realme, was receiued neere vnto Chelſey, by the Lord Maior of London with his brethren the Aldermen, in ſcarlet, beſides to the number of 500 Citizens, in coats of veluet, and chaines of gold, on horſebacke, euery of them hauing two ſtaffe-torches to attend on them, and they all wayted on her to her Pallace at Weſtminſter.
               
                  
                  An. reg. 43 Iuſts at Weſtminſter.The 17 of Nouember, there were moſt princely Iuſts performed at White-hall in honour of the Quéenes holy day by thrée Earles, foure Lords, ſeauen Knights and nine Gentlemen, her Maieſties Pentioners. At theſe Iuſts was ſo great an aſſembly of people, as the like hath not béene ſéene in that place before. There were alſo preſent ſundry Ambaſſadors, as namely from the French King, the King of Barbary, and Fez, and the Emperour of Ruſſia.
               
                  Tempeſt.The fift of February in the morning being Sunday, a great tempeſt of winde brake the Windmill beyond Saint Giles in the field without London, the Miller throwne one way, an other man an other way, one North, the other South, a part of the Mill roofe, and halfe the milſtone in like manner throwne.
               
                  Drumlers made in great haſt to little purpoſe.Notwithſtanding, that for many yeares together vpon ſundry deuiſes, the City was continually charged either with building, or furniſhing ſhips and ſouldiers to Sea, or elſe in trayning, muſtering, or leuying and ſending ſouldiers well appointed, either into Ireland or Holland, or into both: all which were euer performed with wondrous dexterity, ſo as their great trouble and charges for ſixtéene yeares ſpace neuer ceaſed. Ouer and beſides all which, it hapned the laſt yeare, vpon a ſtrong report of the Spaniards preparation for a ſecond inuaſion, that the City was at extraordinary charges in building and altering the vpper decks of many great ſtrong hoyes, and new cutting in

them lower port-holes apt for the ready vſe of great Ordnance,Gallies made by the Citizens of London, and giuen to the Queene. which veſſels ſo altered and prepared for warre were called Drumlers. And this yeare the Citizens gaue fiue fiftéenes towards the new making and ample furniſhing of two Gallies. And when theſe coſtly Gallies were lanched, rigged, and in all points furniſhed, then the City gaue them vnto the Quéene.
               The Croſſe in Cheape was partly repayred, which the Quéene thought had beene fully repayred, for ſo ſhe commanded it ſhould.
               Sunday the eight of February,Earle of Eſſex his riſing. about ten of the clocke before noone, Robert Deuoreux Earle of Eſſex, aſſiſted by ſundry Noblemen and Gentlemen in warlike manner-entered the City of London at the Temple barre, crying for the Quéene, till they came to Fenchurch ſtréet, and there entered the houſe of Maſter Thomas Smith, one of the Shiriffes of London, who finding himſelfe not maſter of his owne houſe (by meanes of the ſtrength the Earle brought with him) and being ignorant of his intent and purpoſes, conueied himſelfe out at a backe gate to the Maior, whereupon the Earle with his Troupe turned into Grace-ſtréete, & there perceiuing himſelfe with his Aſſiſtants to be proclaimed Traitors, alſo the Citizens to be raiſed in Armes againſt him, he with his followers wandering vp and downe the Citie, towardes Euening would haue paſſed at Ludgate, which was cloſed againſt him,

ſo that he was forced to returne to Quéene Hithe, and from thence by water, to his houſe by the Strand, which he fortified; he vnderſtanding that great Ordnance was brought to haue beat it downe, he yéelded and was conueied to the Tower about midnight.
               The 17 of February, Captaine Thomas Lee was drawne to Tiburne, and there hanged, bowelled, and quartered for conſpiracy againſt the Quéene: he tooke his death conſtantly, confeſſing he had diuers waies deſerued it, but to be innocent of that he was condemned for, &c.
               
                  A Seminarie executed.The eightéenth of February, Iohn Pibuſh a Seminary Prieſt, after ſeuen yeares impriſonment in the Kings Bench, hanged and quartered at Saint Thomas Waterings, for cōming into the Realme, contrary to the ſtatute Anno twenty ſeuen of the Quéenes raigne.
               
                  The Earls of Eſſex & Southāpton arraigned.The 19 of February, the Earle of Eſſex and the Earle of Southampton were both arraigned at Weſtminſter, and found guilty of high Treaſon.
               
                  The Earle of Eſſex beheaded.Aſhwedneſday, the fiue and twenty of February, the Earle of Eſſex was beheaded in the Tower, betwéene the houres of ſeuen and eight of the clocke in the morning, being preſent, the Earles of Hartfort and Cumberland, the Lord Thomas Howard Conſtable of the Tower for that time, and not paſſing ſixty or ſeuenty perſons more: the Hangman was beaten as he returned thence, ſo that the Shrieues of London

were ſent for, to aſſiſt and reſcue him from ſuch as would haue murdered him.
               The 27 of February, Marke Bakworth,
                  Executiō of Seminaries. and Th. Filcockes Seminary Prieſts, were drawne to Tiburne, and there hanged and quartered, for comming into the Realme contrary to the Statute.
               And the ſame day a Gentlewoman called Miſtreſſe Anne Lina, a Widow,A Gentlewoman hanged. was hanged in the ſame place, for reléeuing a Prieſt in her lodging contrary to the ſaid ſtatute.
               The laſt day of February, a young Gentleman, named Waterhouſe,
                  One hanged for libelling. was hanged in Smithfield, for ſpeaking and libelling againſt the Quéenes proclamation, and the apprehending of the Earle of Eſſex: at this time Libellers abounded.
               The fifth of March, the Earle of Marre,Ambaſſadors from Scotland, the Lord of Krynters, in Commiſſion, Ambaſſadors, and others from Scotland, came to London, and were lodged by the Exchange, in the houſe of Maſter Anthony Ratcliffe.
               
               The 13 of March, Sir Gelly Merike Knight,Merike and Cuffe executed. and Henry Cuffe Gentleman, were drawne to Tiburne, the one from the Tower, the other from Newgate, and there hanged, bowelled and quartered, as being actors with the Earle of Eſſex.
               The 15 of March, in the night, a new Scaffold was carried from Leaden Hall in London to the Tower hill, and there ſet vp by Torchlight.
               
                  
                  Danuers and Blunt executed.The 18 of March, Sir Charles Danuers, and Sir Chriſtopher Blunt Knights, were vpon the new ſcaffold on the Tower-hill beheaded.
               
                  1601In the Moneth of May, fiue fifteenes were leuied in London, toward the ſetting out of Gallies to the Seas (as was appointed by the Queene) and charges about the Earle of Eſſex, when he entered the City.
               The 20 of Iune Proclamation was made at London for deliuering of Priſoners to ſerue in the Gallies, made at the charge of the Citizens.
               
                  Bold offē
                     ders ſeuerely puniſhed.Two men were ſet on the Pillorie in Fleetſtreet, whipped with gags in their mouthes, and their eares cut off, for attempting to haue robbed a Gentlewoman in Fetter lane in the day time, putting gags in the mouthes of the ſeruants of the houſe becauſe they ſhould not cry. One of theſe theeues was afterwards hanged and quartered at Saint Thomas Waterings.
               
                  The Earle of Shrewſburie and Worceſter of coūſel. Souldiers ſent to the Low coū
                     tries.
                  Gilbert Talbot Earle of Shrewſburie, Edward Earle of Worceſter, & ſir Iohn Stanhope were called to be of the Queenes Councell.
               In the moneth of Iuly 1000. ſouldiers were ſent to the Low Countries, ſet out at the charges of the Citizens of London, 3 l 10. s. a man. More 800 ſouldiers ſet out by the Shires.
               
                  Deſmond brought out of Ireland.The 26 of Auguſt, Deſmond and an other Knight brought out of Ireland, were conueied to the Tower of London.
               About the 5 of September certaine Noblemen, and other of France, to the number of 300
                  
perſons arriued at the Tower wharffe,Marſhall Biron of France. the chiefe of them were conueied in Coaches through the City into Biſhopſgate ſtreete, and there the principall, namely Marſhall de Biron was lodged in Croſby place, the other neere adioyning to Corne-hill.
               
                  Henrie Anderſon, William Glouer,
                  Shrieues. 
                  the 28 of September.
               
               
                  Sir Iohn Garrard Haberdaſher,
                  Maior. 
                  the 28 of October.
               
               About the 13 of October,Lady Ramſey. An. reg. 44 
                  400 ſouldiers were ſet out of the City of London.
               In Nouember the Lady Mary Ramſey, widdow to Sir Thomas Ramſey, ſometime Maior of London was buried in the Pariſh church or Hoſpitall of Chriſts church by Newgate market: A charitable dole or almes was giuen for her, on the ſame day in the afternoone at the Leaden hall 17 poore weake people were there among the ſturdy beggars cruſhed and troden to death.17 poore people murdered.
               
               The 19 of December,Parliamēt diſſolued. with the grant of Subſidies and Fifteenes the Parliament was diſſolued.
               Lightning and thunder often before Chriſtmas, and in the holy dayes,Lightning thunder & earthquake at Chriſtmas. and an Earthquake at London on Chriſtmas euen at noone.
               In the moneth of Ianuary newes came out of Ireland,Victors in Ireland. that on Chriſtmas day the Spaniards and Iriſh were ouercome and ſlaine in

great numbers, and the Engliſhmen were victors.
               
                  Bonefires for victory in Ireland.The 18 of Ianuary at night bone-fires were made at London with ringing, &c. For ioy of newes out of Ireland, the victory of our Engliſh there againſt Tyrone.
               
                  Windſor boat caſt away. 1682 Executiō.Windſor boate was caſt away againſt the Blacke Fryers ſtayres at London by tempeſt.
               The ninetéenth of Aprill, Peter Bullocke Stationer, and one named Ducket, for printing of bookes offenſiue were hanged at Tiborne.
               
                  Seminaries executed.The 20 of Aprill, Stichborne, William Kenſon, and Iames Page, Seminarie Prieſts were drawne to Tiborne, and there hanged, bowelled and quartered, for comming into this realme contrary to the ſtatute of An. 27. &c.
               
               
                  Great leuying of ſouldiers to aid Holland.In the moneth of May, great preſſing out of Souldiers about London, to be ſent into the Low Countries.
               The 22 of Iune, proclamation was publiſhed for the pulling downe of late builded houſes,Proclamatiō againſt late building and Inmates, but neuer the better. and the auoiding of Inmates, in the City of London, Weſtminſter, and for the ſpace of three miles diſtant of both theſe Cities; but little hurt was done, and ſmall effect followed, more then of an Act of Parliament, made to that purpoſe: thoſe Cities are ſtill increaſed, and peſtred with cottages and Inmates, to the great infection of them both.
               
                  Seditious perſons puniſhed.The laſt of Iune, Atkenſon a cuſtomer of Hull, was ſet on the Pillory in Cheape, and with him three other, who had beene brought

thither on horſe backe, with their faces towards the horſe tailes, and papers on their heads. They were there whipped on the Pillory and loſt their eares by iudgement of the Star-chamber, for ſlanderous words by them ſpoken, againſt the Counſell.
               The ſame laſt of Iune in the afternoone fell great lightning and thunder with hale-ſtones in many places of nine inches compaſſe,Tempeſt of thunder and haile. which at Sandwich in Kent lay a foot déepe on the ground, brake the glaſſe windowes of their Churches, and many tiles of their houſes, ſome barnes were fired by lightning.
               About the firſt of Auguſt,Souldiers to Ireland the citizens of London ſet out and furniſhed 200 ſouldiers towards Ireland.
               
                  Iames Pemberton, Iohn Swinarton,
                  Shrieues. 
                  the 28 of September.
               
               
                  Sir Robert Lee Merchantailor,
                  Maior. 
                  the 28 of October.
               
               In the moneth of Ianuary,An. reg. 45 the citizens of London were charged with ſhips to ſea, to lie before Dunkerke, two ſhips and a Pinnace, furniſhed, manned and maintained.
               The 17 of February William Anderſon alias Richardſon, a Seminary Prieſt,Seminaries executed. was drawne to Tiborne, and there hanged, bowelled and quartered, for being found in England contrary to the ſtatute of Anno 27. &c.
               In the moneth of March, the Quéene lying

at Richmont,Staight watches kept. dangerouſly ſicke, ſtraight watches were kept in London with warding at the gates, lanthornes with lights hanged out all the night, at which newes the people were ſore perplexed.
               
                  Queene Elizabeth deceaſed.Thurſday the foure and twenty of March, about two of the clocke in the morning, deceaſed Quéene Elizabeth at her Mannor of Richmont in Surrey, being then aged ſeuenty yeeres, and had raigned, forty foure yeares fiue moneths and odde daies. Whoſe corps was priuily conueied to Whitehall, and there remained till the 28 of Aprill, and then buried at Weſtminſter.
               
                  King Iames proclaimed.The ſame day aforeſaid, the Nobility and Priuie Counſellors of Eſtate, with as great peace, prudence and prouidence, as the heart of man could imagine, aſſembled themſelues together, and farre beyond the generall imagination of all men, being a matter moſt remarkeable, tooke ſpeedy order, aſwell for the inſtant manifeſting the Quéenes death, as in publiſhing to the whole Realme, for their laſting comfort, the true and lawfull ſucceſſor. And about eleuen of the clocke the ſame Thurſday in the forenoone,There were 37 Earles & Barons & Biſhops dined that day with Maſter Shrieue Pembertō, beſides Iudges & chiefe gē
                     try that dined with Maſter Shrieue Swinartō. which according to the computation of the Church of England is the laſt day of the yeare 1602, being accompanied with the Lord Maior, Aldermen and Shrieues of London, and very many others of moſt reuerend and honorable quality at the high Croſſe in Cheapeſide, proclamed Iames the ſixth of that name King of

Scotland, to bee the right King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, defender of the Faith, being lineally deſcended from Margaret, the eldeſt daughter to King Henry the ſeuenth, by Elizabeth his wife, which was the eldeſt daughter of King Edward the fourth, the ſaid Margaret was married to King Iames the fourth of that name, King of Scotland, in the yeare of our redemption, 1503 who had iſſue Iames the fifth, who was Father to Mary Quéene of Scotland: And the ſaid Mary was mother to Iames the ſixth, now ſole Monarch of the whole Iſland of great Brittaine, and King of France and Ireland, this forenamed Proclamation was moſt diſtinctly and audibly read by Sir Robert Cecill principall Secretary vnto Quéene Elizabeth. Alſo the Lords and Priuie Councellors of Eſtate with great diligence, ſent ſpéedily condigne Meſſengers vnto his Maieſty into Scotland, who manifeſted their whole procéeding with tender of their zealous loue and duety, and the peoples vniuerſall ioy, and great deſire to ſée their King, which his Maieſty moſt gratiouſly accepted, approued all their procéedings, and returned them all princely thankes, authorizing the Lords and others late Priuie Counſellors of Eſtate to the Quéene, to perſiſt as they had begun, vntill he came perſonally vnto them.
               This change was very plauſible, and well pleaſing to the Nobility and Gentry, and

generally to all the Commons of this Realme, among whom the name of a King was then ſo ſtrange, as few could remember, or had ſéene a King before, except they were aged perſons, conſidering that the gouernment of the Realme had continued neere the ſpace of 50. yeares vnder the raigne of two Quéenes, which is the far greater part of an old mans age, but tidings hereof being brought to the King in Scotland, he called a Councell to him, and taking order for ſetting all things in his realme of Scotland, began his voyage towards England.
            
            
               
               King IAMES.
               
                  PReſently vpon the death of Queene Elizabeth of famous memory,An. reg. 1. the Nobilitie of this Land and Priuy Counſellors of Eſtate vnto the ſaid Queene, acknowledged the immediate right of Iames the ſixt, then King of Scots, and within ſixe houres after her death, the ſaid Lords and Counſellors, gaue full ſatiſfaction vnto the people by three Proclamations, the firſt at the Court gate, the ſecond at the high Croſſe in Cheape, and the third at the Tower, by the name of Iames the 1. King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, defendor of the Faith, &c. The King being then full 36 yeares of age, and crowned King of Scots in his infancy, began his raigne ouer the great Iſle of Britaine the 24 of March 1602.
               The Nobility and State aforeſaid, with all ſpeed ſent Sir Charles Pearcy and Maſter Thomas Sommerſet with letters vnto the King, ſignifying the death of the Queene, and tender

of all their duties, loue and allegiance; but Sir Robert Cary rid poſte and brought the firſt newes to the King, and as he rode gaue knowledge vnto his brother Sir Iohn Cary, then Gouernor of Barwicke. This calme and diſcréet courſe of the Engliſh Lords, in proclaiming the King, and quiet ſetling the whole Eſtate, without faction or interruption, was as plauſible vnto all his Highneſſe Subiects as admited of all forraine nations.
               
                  1603. The King Beginneth his iorney for England.The 5. of Aprill the King came from Edenborough to Dunglaſſe, and the next day to Barwicke, and vpon the morrow after came newes of many diſordered perſons that were in Armes in the borders, whereat the King was ſomewhat troubled, and forthwith there was power ſent to ſuppreſſe them, and after that when the King came to London, he with the aduice of the Lords of his Counſell, ſet all the parts of the northborders in as good condition as any other part of his dominions.
               
                  The kings iorney frō Barwicke. to LondonThe 8. of Aprill the King went from Barwicke to Wytherington, and then to Newcaſtle, and from thence to Durham, to Yorke, to Grimſtone, to Danceſter, to Newarke vpon Trent, to Beuercaſtle, to Burleigh, to Hinchingbrooke, to Godmancheſter, to Royſton, to Standon, to Theobalos, where the Lords and ether of the Priuie Councell, and many other of the Nobility, attended his comming, and did their homage vnto his Maieſty: And here the King made of his Priuie Councell, the Lord

                  Henry Howard, the L. Tho. Howard, who was alſo made L. Chamberlaine, and the L. Mountioy, there the King made 28 knights.
               The 10 of Aprill diuers priſoners were diſcharged out of the Tower,Priſoners diſcharged. among whom the Earle of Southamton was the chiefeſt.
               The 27 of Aprill,Diuers ſlaine by Gunpowder. there were thirtéene perſons ſlaine, and blowne in peeces, by miſfortune, at the Gunpowder mill at Redriffe.
               The 7 of May his Maieſty came from Theobalds to London, againſt which time Maſter Iames Pemberton and Maſter Iohn Swinnarton,
                  The Lord Maior, Shrieues and chiefe Citizens, ride to receiue the King. ſhrieues of London and Middleſexe had furniſhed themſelues with 80 men on horſe backe, in faire Liueries, but Maſter Pemberton being ſicke, M. Swinnarton with the whole traine attended at Waltham to receiue his Maieſty, as the ſhrieues of other Coūties had formerly done in all the Kings progreſſe from Scotland. And at Stanford hill three miles from London, the L. Maior & Aldermen in ſcarlet robes, accompanied with the chiefe officers & councellors of the City, & 500. graue Citizens in veluet coats and chains of gold wel moūted, attēded his Maieſty: there met him alſo diuers his Highnes officers as Sergeants at armes, Heralds, & Trūpeters, euery one in due place: ye Duke of Lenox bare the ſword, the L. Tho. Howard receiued his Maieſty into the Charterhouſe, where he ſtaied 4 daies & made 80 knights; you ſhall vnderſtand ye whilſt the King was in his iourney,Priſoners releaſed. many priſoners were releaſed out of diuers priſons & the Maūdy

very ſolemnly performed. And the 28 of Aprill at Weſtminſter a very Royall obſequy for the late Quéene Elizabeth,
                  Funerall for Queen Elizabeth according to the Kings appointment by his letters to the Lords of the Priuy Councell, all auncient Engliſh rites and cuſtomes were fully obſerued, except only the feaſt of Saint George, which his Maieſty deferred vntill his perſonall comming vnto ſome of his owne palaces.
               
                  Proclamation.The 7 of May proclamation was made for ſuppreſſion of all manner of former Monopolies that hindered commerce, and protections that impeached mens ſuits in Law, and againſt the annoyance and oppreſſions done by ye Salt-peter men, Purueyors, and Cardmakers.
               
                  Barons Created.The 11 of May, the King rode priuately from the Charterhouſe to White-hall, and went from thence by water to the Tower of London, and there the 13 of the ſame he made Barons, viz. Robert Lord Cecill Baren of Eſſenden, Robert Lord Sydney Baron of Penſhurſt, William Lord Knowles Baron of Graies, Edward Lord Wotton Baron of Marley: he alſo made xi knights.
               
                  Proclamations.The 16 of May, Proclamation was made to prohibite all manner of perſons from killing of Déere, and all wilde foule, according to the Tenour of diuers ſtatutes, for preſeruation of the Kings game of hunting and hawking.
               The 19 of May, proclamation was made for the ſuppreſſion of diſordered perſons in the North-borders, and for the mutuall peace and

amity of both Kingdomes.
               The 20 of May, the King made Knights,Knights made. ſir Iulius Caeſar, ſir Roger Wilbram, maſters of the requeſts, ſir William Waad, ſir Thomas Smith, ſir Thomas Edmonds, clerks of the priuy Councell, and ſir Thomas Lake, Clerke of the Signet.
               The twenty two of May, the King knighte
                     •
                   ſir Robert Lee, Maior of London,The Lord Maior of London knighted. ſir Iohn Crooke Recorder, and ſir Edward Cooke, his Highnes Atturney generall. And that day the King made a great feaſt, and was ſerued with great ſtate, and at night ſundry fire-workes vpon the Thames, the Court being at Gréenewich.
               In the laſt yéere,Sergeants feaſt. and laſt terme of Quéene Elizabeth, there was a call of Sergeants at Law, viz. Thomas Couentrie, Robert Houghton, Laurence Tanfield, I. Crooke, Thomas Foſter, Edward Philips, Thomas Harris, Iames Altham, Henry Hubert, Auguſtine Nichols, and Robert Barker: theſe receiued writs from the Quéene, de ſtatu & gradu ſeruientum ad legem ſuſcipiendi, returnable tres Paſcae next following, being the ſecond returne in Eaſter terme: but the Quéene dying in the meane time, their Writtes abated, which notwithſtanding the King being aduertiſed thereof in Scotland, from the Councell of England, of their late election, gaue order for the reſt of their procéedings, according to their ancient laudable cuſtomes, ſo far forth, as that they procéed by new Writs, in his name

returnable the day aforeſaid, and added vnto their number thrée others, viz. Iohn Sherly, George Snig, and Richard Hutton: theſe fouretéene, vpon Tueſday the ſeuenth of May, being the next day after the returne of their writs, made their appearance before ſir Thomas Egerton, Lord Kéeper of the great Seale, in the high Court of Chancerie, and were then ſworne Sergeants at Law, and vpon Tueſday following, being the 24 of May, they were admitted to the Common pleis barre, and the ſame day kept their ſolemne feaſt in the middle Temple hall. At this feaſt, Sir E. Philips was choſen the Kings Sergeant: you ſhall vnderſtand, that albeit ſome of the Sergeants were knighted, yet amongſt themſelues they had no precedence, but euery man held his place according to his antiquity.
               
                  Note. Preſumption puniſhed.The 1 of Iune, there was one whipped through London for preſuming to come to the Court, hauing his houſe infected.
               
                  Valentine Thomas executed for high treaſon.The 4 of Iune, Valentine Thomas hauing béene many yéeres priſoner in the Tower, was arraigned at the Kings Bench Barre, and there condemned of high treaſon, for conſpiracy againſt our late Quéene, and ſome of her Councell, and the 7 of Iune about ſixe of the clocke, he was drawne from the Kings Bench in Southwarke, to S. Thomas Waterings, and there hanged and quartered.
               
                  Ambaſſadour.About this time came Ambaſſadors from many forraine Princes, namely Monſieur Roſney,
                  
from the French King, Don Iohn de Taſſis, from the King of Spaine, others came from the Archduke, from the King of Poland, the Signory of Venice, the Duke of Florence and the States of Holland.
               The twenty one of Iune Roger Earle of Rutland was ſent Ambaſſador vnto Chriſtianus the fourth King of Denmarke to ſolemniſe the Baptiſme of his ſonne,The Earle of Rutland Ambaſſador into Denmark. and to preſent him with the Garter, being attended by W. Segar Norroy King of Armes, he returned into England the thirtieth of Iuly.
               The 2.The great Ladies of England doe their homage to the queen. Knights of the Garter. of Iuly the King ſolemnized the feaſt of S. George at Windſor, and enſtalled Prince Henry Knight of the Garter, and there the chiefe Ladies of England did their homage vnto the Quéene.
               There were alſo made Knights of the Garter with Prince Henry, the Duke of Lenox, the Earle of Southampton, the Earle of Marre, and the Earle of Pembrooke.
               Within few daies after were made diuers Proclamations for the apprehenſion of Anthony Copley, Sir Griphin Markham Knight,Proclamations. The Lord Cobham, and the Lord Grey and Sir Walter Rawleigh apprehended. and William Watſon, and William Clearke Prieſts, and about the ſame time were apprehended as traytors the Lord Cobham and his brother, the Lord Grey, ſir Walter Rawleigh and others.
               The 21. of Iuly, at Hampton Court, Henry Wri
                        ••
                     heſley Earle of Southampton was created and reſtored,Cration of Earles and Barons. the Lord Thomas Howard created Earle of Suffolke, Charles Lord Montioy
                  
created Earle of Deuonſhire, Sir Thomas Egerton Baron of Eleſmire, ſir William Ruſſell Baron of Thornehaugh, ſir Henry Grey, Baron of Grooby, ſir Iohn Peter, Baron of Writtle, ſir Iohn Harington, Baron of Exton, ſir Henry Danuers, Baron of Dawnſey, ſir Thomas Garrerd, Baron of Gerrardes Bromley, ſir Robert Spencer,
                  Sir Thomas Edmonds Ambaſſadour. Baron of Wormeleighton, ſir Thomas Edmonds is ſent Ambaſſadour Lieger to the Arch-duke. The twenty thrée of Iuly, the King made ſixty and one Knights of the Bath.
               
                  Knights of the Bath. Coronation.Againſt this time of Coronation, the citizens had made wondrous great prouiſion; but through the terrible encreaſe of peſtilence in the City and Suburbes, their ſumptuous Pageants, and other triumphant entertainments, ſtood like ruines, being not yet finiſhed, and the King conſtrained to omit his former determination, in ryding through London, as Kings haue accuſtomed, and all Londoners prohibited by Proclamation from comming at Court: there died that wéeke of all diſeaſes, eleuen hundred and thrée: the twenty fiue of Iuly being Munday, and the feaſt of Saint Iames the Apoſtle, King Iames the firſt of that name, King of England, and the moſt noble Lady Quéene Anne his wife, were both crowned and anointed at Weſtminſter, by the moſt reuerend Father in GOD, Iohn Whitgift, L. Archbiſhop of Canterbury, in preſence of all the Nobility, and diuers others, namely, Sir Robert Lee, Maior of London, in

a Robe of crimſon Veluet, & all the Aldermen in ſcarlet gownes, and twelue Citizens admitted to attend them.
               The twenty ſixt of Iuly,The Aldermen of London knighted. the King ſent for all the Aldermen of London, to Weſtminſter, and knighted them, and the ſame day the King knighted ſir Chriſtopher Parkens, Doctor of the Law, Maſter of the Requeſts, and Deane of Carlil
                     •
                  .
               At this time,The 5 of Auguſt, to be kept holy day. the Biſhops commanded the 5 of Auguſt to be held as a Holy-day, with prayers, preaching and thankſgiuing to God for the Kings eſcape from being murthered by Earle Gowry in Scotland.
               
               The plague encreaſed ſtill moſt grieuouſly in London, and thereupon it was ordayned,A holy decree. that euery Wedneſday there ſhould be a generall faſting and prayer, with preaching throughout the land, to draw the people vnto humble and hearty repentance of their ſinnes.
               This yeare,Faires forbidden. Terme at Wincheſter. No Maiors feaſt at Guild hall. Inmates ſuppreſſed 
                  Bartholmew Fayre was forbidden, and Michaelmas tearme adiorned vnto Menſem Michaelis, and to be kept at Weſtminſter: but by reaſon of the ſicknes, it was afterward held at Wincheſter, and the Lord Maiors triumphs and great feaſt at Guild hall was this yéere omitted. At this time there was a ſtrict Proclamation againſt Inmates, and diuers new built houſes and ſheds, ſtanding noyſomely, ch
                     •
                  aking the ſtréetes, or other places, all which were by expreſſe order beaten downe, there was alſo great care and prouiſion for the

baniſhing of Rogues and Vagabonds,Rogues baniſhed. according to the tenour of the Statutes in that behalfe.
               
                  Shrieues.
                  Sir William Rumney, Sir Thomas Middleton, Shrieues.
               
               
                  Maior.
                  Sir Thomas Bennet Mercer, Maior.
               
               
                  The Lord Spencer ſent Ambaſſadour to the Duke of Wytenberge.The 8 of October, Robert Lord Spencer, was ſent by his Maieſtie vnto Fredericke, Duke of Wytenberge, to inueſt him Knight and Companion of the moſt noble Order of the Garter, and returned before Chriſtmas.
               The 4 of Nouember, the Lord Cobham, the Lord Grey of Wilton,Priſoners carried from the Tower vnto Wincheſter. were conueied from London Tower vnto Wincheſter, to be arraigned, and to that purpoſe the 19 of Nouember, were alſo conueyed from the Tower to Wincheſter, Sir Walter Rawleigh, Sir Griffin Markham Knights, George Brooke, brother to the Lord Cobham, Anthony Copley Gentleman, William Watſon,
                  Arraignement at Wincheſter. and William Clearke Prieſts, and the ſame day out of the Gate-houſe at Weſtminſter, went Sir Edward Parham Knight, and Brooksby Eſquire of Leyceſter-ſhire, they were all condemned of high treaſon, ſaue onely ſir Edward Parham, who was acquitted by the Iury. The 29 of Nouember were executed the two Prieſts, and ſixe dayes after was George Brooke hanged, and the ninth of December,Executiō. ſir Griffin Markham, and the two Barons, after they had bin ſeuerally brought vpon

the ſcaffold in the Caſtle of Wincheſter, and had made their confeſſions, and prepared themſelues likewiſe ſeuerally to die, vpon the ſudden, the Kings warrant, written with his owne hand, was there deliuered to ſir Beniamin Tichborne, high Shiriffe of Hamſhire, commanding him to ſtay execution: theſe thrée, and ſir Walter Rawleigh, were returned priſoners to the Tower, the 15 of December.
               From the 23 of December, 1602,The great Plague in London. The whole land viſited with ſicknes except London. vnto the 22 of December, 1603, there died of all diſeaſes, within London and the Liberties, thirty eight thouſand, two hundred, and forty foure, whereof, the plague, thirty thouſand, fiue hundred, ſeuenty eight: and the next yéere following, London was cleare of that infection, and then were all the ſhires in England grieuouſly viſited: note the worke of God.
               The 29 of February died the moſt renowned and reuerend Father in God, D. Whitgift,
                  Archbiſhop of Canterbury deceaſed. Archbiſhop of Canterbury, he was a holy & mercifull man.
               The 5 of March, was Proclamation made,Proclamation. for the authorizing the Booke of Common prayer.
               The thirtéenth of March,Creation of Earles. the Lord Henry Howard, was created Baron of Marnehill, and Earle of North-hampton, and Thomas, Lord Buckhurſt, was created Earle of Dorſet.
               This yeare, ſir William Rumney, & ſir Thomas Middleton, ſhriues of Londō, through their

great paine and diligence, cleanſed the City of Rogues and lewd people, which at that time ſwarmed excéedingly.
               
                  The King, Queene, & Prince, with al the Nobility, ride in ſtate through London.The 15 of March, the King, Quéene and Prince, with the Lords ſpirituall and temporall, the Gentry and all Officers, aſwell of honor and armes, as otherwiſe, paſſed moſt triumphantly from the Tower, through the high ſtréetes of his Highneſſe Royall Chamber of London, to Weſtminſter, and all the way hee went, euen from his firſt entrance into the City, vntill he came to Temple barre, his Maieſty was receiued and attended by the Lord Maior, in a Robe of crimſon Veluet, bearing a golden Scepter in his hand, and the graue Citizens of euery Company in their Liueries, ſtanding in their ſtalles with great ſtate, hauing their banners and bannerets diſplayed on the one ſide of the ſtreetes, and the other ſide very ſtrongly rayled, to giue frée paſſage, and kéepe backe the violent preſſing of the multitudes of people, which at that time excéeded, as well in houſes, as otherwiſe,The ſecōd Pegeant was ſet vp at the charges of the Italians, & the third at the charges of the Netherlanders. and at this time, the former gates of Pageants, being ſeuen in number, were all moſt ſumptuouſly beautified and adorned with ſolemne orations, melodious harmony, and diuers ingenious deuices: the firſt Pageant ſtood in Fan-church ſtreet, the ſecond in Gracious ſtreet, the third in Corn-hill, the fourth at the Eaſt end of Cheape ſide, and at the Eaſt ſide of the high Croſſe in Cheape, was erected a low Gallery, wherein ſtood the Aldermen, the

Chamberlaine, the Towne Clerke, with the Counſell of the City, where Sir Henry Mountegue, Recorder of London, after his Oration in the behalfe of the Lord Maior, and the whole body of the City, preſented thrée Cups of gold; one for the King, the ſecond for the Quéene, and the third for the Prince. The fift Pageant ſtood at the Weſt end of Cheape, the ſixt in Fléet-ſtréete, and the ſeuenth at Temple Barre: at this time, all the chiefe Conduites ran Claret wine: there was an other Pageant erected in the Strand, at the charges of the inhabitants there-abouts.
               The 19 of March beganne the Parliament at Weſtminſter,A Parliament. and continued vntill the 7 of Iuly, and was there proroged vntill the 7 of February next after.
               Sir Edward Denny was made Baron of Waltham by writ,Sir Edw. Denny, Baron of Waltham. and ſate in his Robes in the Parliament houſe, the day wherein the Parliament was adiourned.
               Sir Thomas Smith,
                  1604. An. reg. 2. Ambaſſador to Ruſſia. late Alderman of London, is ſent Ambaſſador vnto Borris Pheodorwich, Emperor of Ruſſia.
               This yéere,The King granteth a Corporation vnto the Felt-makers of London. his Maieſty by his Letters Pattents, incorporated the Felt-makers of London by the name of Maſter, Wardens, and Communalty of the Art or Myſterie of Felt-makers of London, graunting vnto them thereby diuers priuiledges and liberties for the good gouernment of the ſame corporation: this was the firſt Company that the King incorporated, and

was obtained by the humble and earneſt ſuite of Richard Baniſter, Iohn Sands, Hugh Philips, Robert Browne, & others, Felt-makers of London.
               
                  Peace with Spain proclaymed.The 5 of Auguſt, arriued Don Iohn de Velaſco, Conſtable of Caſtile, being ſent from Philip the third King of Spaine, to take the oath of the King of England, for ratification of the Articles of Peace, then agreed vpon by certaine Engliſh Lords, authorized by the King, and by former Commiſſioners, ſent the laſt yeere from Spaine and the Arch-duke, which ſaid Don Iohn, with all the Commiſſioners, vpon Sunday, the 19 of Auguſt, were moſt royally entertained and feaſted at Whitehall, and the ſame forenoone, the King in his owne Chappell, was ſworne vnto the foreſaid Articles,Oſtend beſieged 3 yeares & 3 months. and in the afternoon the Peace was proclaimed with Spain and the Arch-duke, at the Court, and in London. And this moneth, the Arch-duke wonne the ſtrong Town of Oſtend in Flanders, after it had béene beſieged with all extremity, 3 yéeres, and 3 moneths.
               
                  The Lord Robert Cecil created Viſcount Crāborn.The 20 of Auguſt, the Lord Robert Cecill, Baron of Eſſenden, was created Viſcount Cranborne.
               
                  The Cuſtomes of merchandiſe let to farme.In October, the Cuſtomes of Merchandiſe were raiſed both inward and outward, and were then let to farme.
               
                  K. Iames proclaymed King of Great Brittaine.The 24 of October, with great ſtate, by a King at Armes, and Heralds, and two Sergeants at Armes, aſſiſted by the L. Maior and Aldermen, K. Iames was proclaimed in London,

King of Great Brittaine, France and Ireland, Defendor of the faith, &c.
               
                  Sir Thomas Hayes Knight.
                  Shrieues.
               
               
                  Sir Roger Iones Knight.
               
               
                  Sir Thomas Low Knight, Haberdaſher.
                  Maior.
               
               The 10 of December,D. Bancroft archbiſhop of Canterbury. the moſt reuerend Father in GOD, Richard Bancroft, Doctor of Diuinity, late Lord Biſhop of London, was tranſlated to the Archbiſhoprick of Canterbury.
               The 24 of December Richard Vaughan,
                  D. Vaughan, Biſhop of Londō. Doctor of Diuinity, late L. Biſhop of Weſtcheſter, was by his Deputy, inſtalled Biſhop of London in Pauls Church.
               
               The 4 of Ianuary, at Whitehall,Sir Philip Harbert married. ſir Philip Harbert, brother to the Earle of Pembrooke, maried the Lady Suſan Vere, yongeſt daughter to the Earle of Oxford; the King himſelfe gaue her in mariage.
               The 6 of Ianuary in the afternoone, Charles D. of Albany, ſecond ſon to K. Iames, Robert,
                  Knights of the Bath. L. Willoughby, the L. Chandois, William, L. Compton, the Lord Norris, William Cecill, ſon and heire to the L. Viſcount Cranborne, Allaine Percy, brother to the Earle of Northumberland, Thomas Somerſet, ſecond ſonne to the Earle of Worceſter, Francis Manners, brother to Roger, Earle of Rutland, Ftancis Clifford, brother to the Earle of Cumberland, Thomas Howard, ſecond ſonne to the Earle of Suffolke,

and Iohn Harington, Sonne and Heyre to the Lord Harington. All theſe were made Knights of the Bath, and two dayes after that, they performed all appropriate Rites and Ceremonies. And the ſame time the fore-named Duke Charles, was alſo created Duke of Yorke,The Duke of Yorke created. being not full foure yéeres of age, the Earles of Oxford and Eſſex were his eſquires.
               
                  Lyons whelped in the Tower.The twenty ſixt of February was a Lyon whelped in the Tower, which whelpe was taken from the Damme, and brought vp by hand, as the King had commaunded, by reaſon that the ſame Lyoneſſe, in Auguſt laſt, had whelped a Lyon, and ſpoyled it, by carrying it in her mouth vp and downe the denne, to hide it: this yong Lyon liued but ſixtéene dayes: after this, the King cauſed a conuenient place to bee made, néere to the Lyons Denne for the Lyoneſſe to bréede in: and the ſame Lyoneſſe afterward, brought foorth two Lyons at one litter, and they liued, and became as luſty as any other in the Tower: theſe foure were the firſt that ouer were whelped in the Tower.
               
                  All Ieſuites & Seminaries baniſhed by Proclamation.The 22 of February 1604, Proclamation was made againſt all Ieſuites and Seminaries, and that they ſhould forthwith depart out of the kingdome.
               
                  A Proclamation for eſtabliſhing the Epiſcopall authority, & the booke of commō prayer.The 5 of March, Proclamation was made for confirmation of the Eccleſiaſticall gouernment of the Church of England, and the Booke of

Common prayer, as it hath béene vſed in the time of Queene Elizabeth, &c.
               The 28 of March 1605, the Earle of Nottingham, Lord high Admirall of England, imbarked for Spaine, to take the Kings oath, for confirmation of the Articles of Peace, lately agréed vpon, & returned the ninetéenth of Iune:An. reg. 3. 1605. The Lord Admirall ſent to the King of Spaine, to take his oath. he left ſir Charles Cornwallis Ambaſſador Lieger in Spaine.
               The 19 of Aprill, Edward, Earle of Hertford, was likewiſe ſent Commiſſioner into Flanders, to the Archduke and Dutcheſſe, to take their oathes for confirmation of the ſaid Peace, and returned the 20 of May.The Earle of Hertford goeth to take the oath of the Archduke. A charitable deed.
               
               At this time Ro. Doue of London, Marchant-taylor, gaue competent maintenance for euer, for the tolling of a Bell in Saints Sepulchres Church, to cauſe good people to pray for ſuch priſoners as are to be executed out of Newgate, and to ceaſe when they are executed: this Bell doth begin to toll at ſixe of the clocke in the morning, & the ſame is made knowne vnto the priſoners, that the ſaid Bell is to put them in mind to prepare themſelues for death, &c.
               The 29 of March was borne Philip,
                  The Prince of Spaine borne. Prince of Spaine, ſon to Philip, the 3 of that name.
               At Gréenwich the 8 of Aprill, was borne the Lady Mary,
                  The Lady Mary borne. Daughter to our Soueraigne Lord the King, betwéene 11 and 12 a clocke at night.
               The twenty one of February laſt died Clement the eight, Pope of Rome,3 Popes in ſixe weekes. after hee had

raigned full thirtéene yéeres, after him ſuccéeded Leo the eleuenth, who dyed within fourtéene dayes after his inſtalment, and after him came Paul the fift.
               
                  Knights of the Garter elected.The Feaſt of Saint George was kept at Gréenewich, where the King elected the Duke Vlricke, brother to our moſt gracious Quéene Anne, and Henry, Earle of North-hampton, knights of the Garter.
               At Gréenewich the fourth of May, the King made Earles and Barons,Creation of Earles & Barons. 
                  viz. Sir Robert Cecill, Viſcount Cranborne, Baron of Eſſenden-was created Earle of Saliſburie, Thomas Cecil, Lord Burghley, elder brother to ſir Robert Cecil, was created Earle of Exceſter, Sir Philip Harbert, younger brother to the Earle of Pembrooke, was created Baron of Shurland, and Earle of Montgomery, Rober, Sidney, Baron of Penhurſt, was created Viſcount Liſie, Sir Iohn Stanhope was created L. Stanhope of Harington, Sir George Carew, was created Lord Ca
                        •
                     ew of Clopton. M. Thomas Arondell, was created Lord Arondell of Wardour, and M. William Cauendiſh, was created Lord Cauendiſh of Hardywicke.
               
                  The Lady Mary chriſtned.The next day after, being Sonday, the Lady Mary was chriſtned.
               
                  The pretended ſleeping preacher.Vpon May day laſt, Richard Haydocke, a Phyſition, aſked forgiueneſſe of the Lord Archbiſhop of Canterbury, for deluding the King, and many others, vnder pretence of being inſpired, and to preach in his ſléepe by night, with

which deceite he had ſo ſtrongly poſſeſt the vulgar, as it was hard to remoue them, although he confeſſed the abuſe.
               The 19 of May, the Quéene was churched,The Qu. churched. and two dayes after
                     •
                  , the King made twelue Knights.
               In this moneth, Iohn Lepton of Kepwicke,Maſter Leptons ſwift iourney betweene London & Yorke. in the County of Yorke Eſquire, a Gentleman of an ancient Family there, and of good reputation, his Maieſties ſeruant, and one of the Groomes of his moſt honourable Priuy Chamber, performed ſo memorable a iourney, as I may not omit to record the ſame to future ages, the rather for that I did heare ſundry Gentlemen, who were good horſemen, and likewiſe many good Phyſicions affirme it was impoſſible to bee done without daunger of his life.
               Hee vndertooke to ride fiue ſeuerall times betwixt London and Yorke in ſixe dayes, to be taken in one wéeke, betwixt Monday morning, and Saturday following: he began his iourney vpon Monday, being the 20 day of May, betwixt two and thrée of the clocke in the morning, forth of S. Martins, néere Alderſgate, within the City of London, and came into Yorke the ſame day, betwixt the houres of 5 and 6 in the afternoone, where he reſted that night: the next morning being Tueſday, about 3 of the clock, he tooke his iourny forth of York, and came to his lodging in S. Martins, aforeſaid, betwixt the houres of 6 & 7 in the afternoon,

where he reſted that night: the next morning being wedneſday, betwixt 2 and 3 of the clocke, he tooke his iourney forth of London, and came into Yorke about ſeuen of the clocke the ſame day, where he reſted that night: the next morning being Thurſday, betwixt two and thrée of the clocke, he took his iourney foorth of York, and came to London the ſame day, betwixt 7 and 8 of the clocke, where he reſted that night; the next morning being Friday, betwixt two and thrée of the clocke, he took his iourney towards Yorke, and came thither the ſame day, betwixt the houres of 7 and 8 in the afternoone, ſo as he finiſhed his appointed iourney, (to the admiration of all men) in fiue dayes, according to his promiſe: and vpon Monday, the 27 of this moneth, he went from Yorke, and came to the Court at Gréenwich vpon Tueſday, the 28, to his Maieſty, in as freſh and chearefull maner, as when he firſt began.
               
                  Duke Vlrich returneth to Denmark.The firſt of Iune, Prince Vlricke, Duke of Holſtaine, &c. embarked for Denmarke.
               
                  The King maketh ſpeciall prouiſion for the breeding of Lyons in the Tower.About this time the King cauſed a conuenient place to be made on the backe part of the Lyons Denne, for the Lyons to bréed in, which tooke good effect: reade my large Booke, concerning the Tryall and Concluſions with the Lyons, touching their Inſtinct of Nature, in not fearing the Cocke, nor greedy deuouring the Lambe, as alſo the vndaunted Courage of the Engliſh Maſties, againſt the fierceſt Lyon in the Tower.
               
                  The 15 of Iune Thomas Dowglaſſe was committed to the Tower, who arriued in England but thrée daies before, being then ſent priſoner by the County Palatine of the Rheine,Thomas Dowglaſſe ſent priſoner out of Germany, and after that condemned & executed for his treaſon. the 26 of Iune the ſaid Thomas Dowglaſſe was brought to the Seſſions houſe at Newgate, and there condemned of high treaſon, viz. for counterfeiting the Kings Priuie ſignet, and for counterfeiting the Kings hand vnto Letters of his owne deuiſing vnto diuers Princes of Germany, &c. and the next day after his triall he was drawne, hanged, and quartered in Smithfield.
               The ſecond of Iuly 1605 ſeauentéene Scottiſh Miniſters contrary to the Kings former expreſſe commandement held a ſolemne aſſembly at Aberdine in Scotland,An vnlawfull aſſembly of Miniſters. who being conuented for the ſame before the Councell of Scotland, vtterly denied not onely their Lordſhips authority in that behalfe, but the kings alſo, ſaying, that in matters Eccleſiaſticall, they neither owe nor ought to knowledge themſelues in any ſubiection, either to the King, or to any temporall Counſell, and that all ſpirituall differences ſhould be tried and determined by the Church, as competent Iudges, &c. Iuſtifying their voluntary méeting to be good and warrantable by the word of God, alleadging the ſeuerall aſſemblies of the Apoſtles without knowledge or conſent of any temporall eſtate, &c. for which riot, and for denying the Kings ſupremacy in cauſes Eccleſiaſticall, ſixe of the chiefe of them,

the tenth of Ianuary following at Blackenéeſe were arraigned and condemned of high treaſon.
               The fift of Iuly arriued at London, Prince George Lodwicke Langraue, of Lutenburgh, &c.A ſpeciall Ambaſſador from the Emperour of Almaine. being ſent Ambaſſador from Rodolphus the ſecond of that name, Emperour of the Romans, vnto the Kings Maieſtie, to congratulate his peacefull enioying this Kingdome, and the reſt of his lawfull inheritance, and for continuance of ancient amity with the King of Great Brittaine, and the Emperours emperiall dignity: this Ambaſſador was accompanied with thrée Earles, and 24 Knights and Gentlemen, he had a guard of muſkets, and an hundred other common perſons, and returned the 22 of Iuly.
               
                  A proclamation againſt Pirats and peace-breakers.The 8 of Iuly proclamation was made againſt Pirats, and other Engliſh Mariners and Souldiers, who vnder pretence of ſeruing the States, robbed diuers Engliſhmen and other Nations, who made complaint thereof vnto his Maieſty: This is the third Proclamation againſt Pirats.
               
                  Shiriffe Iones died and a new ſhiriffe choſen in his place.The 24 of Iuly died ſhireiffe Iones, and two daies after Oliuer Stile Grocer was choſen ſhiriffe for the remainder of that yeare, but the ſaid Oliuer Stile was not choſen Alderman, but remained as a Commoner, becauſe he had paid a fine before, to acquite himſelfe thereof, and as he ſuppoſed of all other publicke offices, wherein he deceiued himſelfe.
               The firſt of Auguſt, died Sir Edmond Anderſon
                  
Lord Chiefe Iuſtice of the 
                     〈◊〉
                   Pleas, a man very famous for Law,The Lord Anderſon deceaſed. Equity and Conſcience, he ſate Iudge of that High Court thrée and twenty yeares, he abhorred briberie, he was vtterly againſt all Monopolies, and Polipragmaes in concealements: after him ſuccéeded Sir Francis Gawdie, a moſt iuſt Iudge, and a great Lawier, he died the 15 of December next following.
               The 11 of Auguſt the King made Proclamation to redreſſe the miſimployment of lands and goods,A proclamation for continuance of things giuen to charitable vſes. and other things giuen to charitable vſes.
               
                  William Caluerley of Caluerley in Yorkeſhire Eſquier, murdered two of his owne children in his owne houſe,A cruell homicide. then ſtabd his wife into the body with full entent to haue killed her, and then inſtantly with like fury went from his houſe to haue ſlaine his youngeſt Child at nurſe, but was preuented: he was preſt to death in Yorke the 5 of Auguſt.
               The 27 of Auguſt the King,The kings progreſſe to Oxford Quéene & Prince with many of the Nobility being accompanied with the Ambaſſadors of Spaine and the Archduke, were very royally receiued into Oxford, where the King heard ſundry diſputations, and himſelfe made an Oration in Latine in preſence of the whole aſſembly, and for thrée daies ſpace they were moſt ſumptuouſly feaſted by the Earle of Dorſet, Lord Treaſurer of England and Chancellour of that Vniuerſity, who alſo gaue frée entertainement vnto all

commers from morning vntill night during the Kings abode in Oxford.
               
                  The Woodmō
                     gers and Carmen of London made a corporation.The 29 of Auguſt 1605. the King by his Letters Pattents did incorporate the Woodmongers and Carmen of London, and the Suburbes to be a Body Corporate and Politicke for euer, by the name of Maſter Wardens and Fellowſhip of Woodmongers, Thomas Hunt, and Marke Snelling and Cuthbert Coleman were the firſt Maſter and Wardens thereof.
               
                  A ſpeciall Ambaſſador from the King of Denmarke.The laſt of Auguſt arriued at London Henricus Remelyus Principall Secretary of Eſtrate vnto Chriſtianus the 4 King of Denmarke, to be enſtalled Knight of the Garter in his Kings right, to whom the order of the Garter was ſent two yeares before, he returned the 28 of September.
               
                  The Archbiſhop of Canterbury ſworne a priuy Counſellor.The 29 of September the L. Archbiſhop of Canterbury was ſworne a Priuy Counſellor of Eſtate at Hampton Court.
               About the 20 of September ſir Thomas Smith returned out of Ruſſia, being ſent thither Ambaſſador the laſt yeare vnto the Emperour Boris Pheodorowich Godonoua,
                  
                     Sir Tho. Smith returneth from Moſco.
                     Demetrius came out of Poland and was brought vp there.
                   at whoſe arriuall there he found the country in vprore, and the Emperour in open warres againſt Demetrius, who claimed the crowne, then entered his territories with an armie of Polonians, and ſeconded by certaine diſcontented Ruſſians, all which notwithſtanding the Emperour vſed and entreated him very reſpectiuely, and became ſo gratious with him as the Emperour graunted

all that he deſired, and being returned from Moſco to Vollogda to embarke for England, he vnderſtood that the ſaid Boris Pheodor had poiſoned himſelfe, and that his ſonne Pheodor Boroſſowich ſuccéeded him, who vpon knowledge that the Engliſh Ambaſſador was not yet departed, dealt as kindly with him as his father had done, as well in accepting his letters, as promiſing to confirme whatſoeuer his father graunted, but this yong Emperour died within eight wéekes after his coronation: and the forenamed Demetrius the ſuppoſed ſonne to the ancient Euan Vaſelowich obtained the crowne, which ſaid Demetrius after his counſell had duely informed him of the ſerious purpoſed and diſcreet carriage of the Engliſh Ambaſſador from the King of England, and that he remayned yet in Ruſſia, with all ſpéed ſent Gauarillo Salmanoue a great Courtier vnto his Lordſhip, with commiſſion to giue him a honourable diſpatch, and to ſignifie his Maieſties moſt earneſt deſire to be in loue and amity with King Iames of England, aboue all the Kings in the world.
               
                  Thomas Pearcy, Robert Catesby,
                  The practiſe of the blowing vp of the Parliment houſe. 
                  Thomas Winter and others in the laſt yeare of the raigne of Quéene Elizabeth, by the inſtigation of certaine Ieſuits, practiſed with the king of Spain, to ſend a well furniſhed Army vpon England, promiſing him great aide to entertaine them at their arriuall at Milford Hauen, & to that purpoſe the King promiſed to ſend them fifty thouſand pound for leuying of horſe and 
                     •
                  oot, and

preparation of Munition in England to ſecond them: but whilſt this was in a manner concluded, Quéene Elizabeth died, and the King of Spaine vpon certaine knowledge that King Iames was eſtabliſhed, diſpatched his Ambaſſadors and Commiſſioners for England, for confirmation of a laſting Peace betweene them, yet neuertheleſſe the ſaid Robert Catesbie ſent Thomas Winter againe to the King of Spaine to reſolicite their former proiect, but the King anſwered him, your old Queene is dead with whom I had warres, and you haue a new King with whom I haue euer beene in good peace and amity, and for continuance thereof I haue ſent my ſpeciall Commiſſioners, and vntill I ſée what will become thereof, I will not hearken vnto any other courſe whatſoeuer. When Winter returned, and made this knowne vnto Catesby, Pearcy and the reſt, then they beganne to caſt about what they might doe of themſelues to aduance the Roman Catholicke Religion, but firſt they would ſee the euent of the firſt Parliament, if that would mitigate any former Lawes, and trie what good the Concluſion of Peace with Spaine would doe vnto them before they attempted any further: but when they perceiued that neither Parliament, nor publicke Peace ſorted in any part to their deſire, and that the Peace concluded was rather a more ready meanes for the Law to proceede againſt them then otherwiſe, becauſe the Peace

concerned onely the Amitie of Chriſtian Princes for the generall good of Chriſtendome, without any particular or priuate reſpect: then Catesby told the reſt, hee had a deuice in his head that ſhould free them, and the reſt of the Engliſh Catholiques from their oppreſſions, and when he had found out fit Miniſters for execution of his deuice, after they had taken oath and Sacrament for ſecreſie, hee tolde them hee had deuiſed the meane to vndermine and blow vp the Parliament houſe, at the inſtant when the King, Queene, Prince, Peeres, and Commons were all aſſembled, which proiect they preſently embraced, and forthwith Pearcy hired certaine lodgings cloſe to the Parliament houſe: and then they appointed Miners, who with great difficulty digged and vndermined a part of the wall, but after a while they vnderſtood that the Vaut right vnder the Parliament houſe was to bee let to hire, then Guydo Fawkes went and hired it: this Fawkes was of late a Souldier in Flanders, and for this purpoſe was ſent for, who by conſent of the reſt changed his name, and was called Iohn Iohnſon Maſter Pearcies man: after they had hired the Vant, they ſecretly conuaied into it thirty and ſixe barrels of powder, and couered them all ouer with Billets and Fagots.The diſcouery of the gunpowder treaſon.
               
               About tenne daies before the Parliament ſhould beginne, an vnknowne party in the Euening met a ſeruant of the Lord Mounteagles
                  
in the ſtreet, and deliuered him a letter, 
                     •
                  h
                     •••
                  
                  ing him ſpeedily to giue it vnto the Lord, which he did: when his Lord had read it, and obſeru
                     ••
                   the dangerous contents, with a ſpeciall ca
                     ••••
                  , not to appeare the firſt day of Parliament, 
                     〈◊〉
                   was amaſed, and forthwith deliuered it to the Earle of Saliſbury the Kings principall Secretary, a chiefe Counſellor of Eſtate: when th
                     •
                   Earle had indiciouſly obſerued the ſtran
                     •••
                   Phraſe and Tenor thereof, with the terrible threates therein againſt the whole State, he acquainted the Lord Chamberlaine therewith, & then they conioyned vnto them the Lord Admirall, the Earles of Worceſter and Northampton, who inſtantly conſulted what was fitteſt to be done, omitting neither time diligence nor induſtry, all which notwithſtanding, they could not as yet find out the depth of this myſterie, and were therefore much troubled in minde, becauſe the appointed day of Parliament draw neare, which was Tueſday the fift of Nouember: vpon the Saturday before, the King being returned from hunting, the ſaid Lords acquainted his Highneſſe with what had paſt, and when his Maieſty had well noted the ſtrange contents of the letter, which purported the ſodaine ruine of the State, the King ſaid notwithſtanding, the ſleight regard which might be giuen to ſcattered Libels, yet this was more quicke and pithie then was vſuall in libels, and willed them to ſearch in all places, as well not dayly frequented, as of vſuall repaire; and concerning any

forraine diſturbance or inuaſion, he well knew the preſent force and preparation of all Chriſtian Princes, and that whatſoeuer practiſe of treaſon was now in hand, it muſt be performed in ſome vnſuſpected place, and by ſome home-bred traytors: thereupon new ſearch was made in all places about the Court and the Parliament houſe, but could not as yet finde any thing worthy their labours: all which ſearches were performed with ſuch ſilence and diſcretion, as there 
                     •
                  oſe no manner of ſuſpition either in Court or City, the Lord Chamberlaine whoſe office it moſt concerned, neuer reſted day nor night, and the night before the Parliament, as Sir Thomas Kneuet with others ſcowted about the Parliament houſe, eſpied a fellow ſtanding in a corner very ſuſpitiouſly, and asked him his name, what he was, and what he did there ſo late, who anſwered very bluntly his name was Iohn Iohnſon Maſter Pearcies man, and kéeper of his ledgings. Sir Thomas Kneuet continued ſtill his ſearch in all places thereabouts, and returning thither againe, found him lingering there ſtill, ſearched him, and found vnder his cloake a cloſe Lanterne, and a burning Candle in it: and about him other ſignes of ſuſpition, that he ſtood not there for any good: then the Knight entered the Vaut, where they found the powder couered with billets and fagots as afore-ſaid, and then the Lord Chamberlaine cauſed the Traytor to 
                     •
                  e bound, and being now about thrée a clocke in the morning he went vnto the King, and

with excéeding gladneſſe told his Maieſty the treaſon was diſcouered and preuented, and the traitor in hold, the King deſired to ſée Fawkes, who when he came before the King vſed like trayterous and audacious ſpéeches as he did at his firſt apprehenſion, affirming himſelfe was the onely man to performe this treaſon, ſaying, it ſore vexed him that the déed was not done, and for that time would not confeſſe any thing touching the reſt of the Conſpirators, but that himſelfe onely and alone was the contriuer and practiſer of this treaſon.
               Betwéene fiue and ſix a clocke in the morning the Councel gaue order to the Lord Maior of London to looke to the City, & in very calme manner to ſet ciuill watch at the city gates, ſignifying therewithall that there was a plot of treaſon diſcouered, and that the King would not goe to Parliament that day: and the ſame day in the afternoone, the manner of the treaſon was by Proclamation made knowne vnto the people, for ioy whereof, there was that night as many bonefires in and about London as the ſtréetes could permit, and the people gaue humble and hearty thankes vnto Almighty God for their King and Countries right bleſſed eſcape.
               Within 3 daies after two other proclamations were made, ſignifying vnto the people who were the chiefe conſpirators, with commandement to apprehend Pearcy and Catesby, and to take them aliue if it were poſſible, which ſaid Pearcy and Catesby were gone to Holbach in

Warwickſhire to méet Winter, Grant, and others: where vnder pretence of a great hunting, they meant to raiſe the country, and ſurpriſe the Lady Elizabeth from the Lord Harington, whom they meant to proclaime Quéene, and in whoſe name they meant to enter into Armes, being perſwaded that the King, the Prince and Duke of Yorke were by that time blowne vp in the Parliament houſe: but when they knew their treaſon was knowne and preuented, and ſaw the Kings forces round about the houſe, ſo as they could not eſcape, Pearcy and Catesby very deſperately iſſued forth, and fighting backe to backe were both ſlaine with one musket ſhot.
               Saturday the ninth of Nouember the King went to Parliament, wherein the preſence of the Quéene, the Prince, the Duke of Yorke, the Ambaſſadors of the King of Spaine, and the Archduke, and all the Lords Spirituall and Temporall, and Commons of the ſame, he made a very ſolemne oration, manifeſting the whole complot of this Treaſon.
               
                  Sir Clement Scudamour Knight,
                  Shrieues. 
                  and Maſter Iohn Iolles Shrieues.
               
               
                  Sir Leonard Halliday Merchantaylor Maior.
                  Maior.
               
               At this time the ſolemne triumphes & pleaſant trophies in honour of the Lord Maior,The Lord Maior. triumphés and the City of London were held two ſeuerall daies, viz. the day of his oath, and all Hollonday, but there was none in thrée yeares after by

reaſon of continuall ſickneſſe.
               
                  The Lord Knowles married.The 19 of Ianuary the Lord William Knowles Baron of Graies maried Elizabeth Howard eldeſt daughter vnto the ſaid Thomas Earle of Suffolke.
               
                  A preſent from the King of Spaine.The 4 of Ianuary the Spaniſh Ambaſſador deliuered a Preſent from King Philip his maſter vnto King Iames, viz. ſix Ienets of Andaluſia, with rich ſaddles and ſaddlo cloaths, and all other things ſuteable.
               
                  Sir Georg Carew Ambaſſador in France.Sir George Carew is ſent Ambaſſador Lieger into France.
               The 19 of Ianuary a great Porpos was taken aliue at Weſtham, in a little Créeke, a mile and a halfe within the land,A great Whale came vp as hie as Wolwich. and was preſented vnto Francis Goſton Eſquire, chiefe Auditor of the Impreſts, and within a few dayes after, a verie great Whale came within eight miles of London whoſe length was diuers times ſéene aboue the water, and the ſame was iudged to be a great deale longer then the longeſt ſhip in the Riuer.
               
                  Three entire Subſidies, and ſix fifteens giuen by the tēporalty, and foure Subſidies giuē by the Clergy.A few dayes before Chriſtmas the Parliament brake vp, and began to ſit againe the 22 of Ianuary being Tueſday, and continued vntill the 27 of May next following, in which Parliament they gaue the King and his ſucceſſors thrée entire Subſidies, and ſixe fiftéenes, and then the Parliament was prorogued vntill the 18 of Nouember: at this time the Clergy gaue vnto the King and his Succeſſors foure entire Subſidies: And in this Parliament it was enacted

that the 5 of Nouember for euer ſhould be kept holy day,The 5 of Nouember ordayned holy day. with preaching and thankſgiuing vnto Almighty God for his mercy, in preuenting the terrible danger of the late practiſe by Pearcy, Catesby and the reſt, to blow vp the Parliament houſe.
               The 27 of Ianuary at Weſtminſter were arraigned Thomas Winter, Guydo Fawkes,
                  Arraignement of Traytors at Weſtminſter. 
                  Robert Keyes and Thomas Bates for plotting to blow vp the Parliament houſe, digging in the mine, taking oath & Sacrament for ſecreſie, &c. and Robert Winter, Iohn Graunt, Ambroſe Rookewood, for being acquainted with the treaſon afterward, giuing their full conſent thereunto, and taking oath and ſacrament for ſecreſie, and ſir Euerard Digby for being made acquainted with the ſaid treaſon, yeelding aſſent, and taking his corporall oath for ſecreſie: all which indictments were prooued againſt them, and by themſelues confeſſed, and thereupon had iudgement giuen them to be drawne, hanged and quartered, their limbes to be ſet vpon the Citie gates, and their heads vpon the Bridge: according to which ſentence the thirtith of Ianuary, Sir Euerard Digby, Robert Winter,
                  Execution in Londō and Weſtminſter. 
                  Iohn Grant & Bates were executed at the weſt end of Saint Paules Church, and the next day after the other foure were executed in the Parliament yeard, 6 of the 8. acknowledged their guiltineſſe in this horrible treaſon, and died very penitently, but Graunt and Keyes did not ſo.
               Saturday the 22 of March betwéene ſixe and

ſeuen a clocke in the forenoone,A terrible rumor that the King was ſlaine. a rumor was ſodainely ſpread throughout the Court, and the City of London, that for certaine the King that morning was ſlaine as he was hunting in Okeeing Parke, 20 miles from London, which dreadfull newes ſtill encreaſed vntill nine a clocke, being ſeconded by infinite ſuggeſtions, by reaſon whereof it was generally receiued for truth, and thereupon the Court gates were kept ſhut, the Lord Maior began to ſet guard at the City gates, and to raiſe their trained ſouldiers: Sir William Wade Lieutenant of the Tower did the like with his hamlets within his Liberties, and the Parliament was greatly amaſed: but by 11 a clocke the ioyfull newes of ye Kings good health was made knowne in London by proclamation, as it had béene an houre before at the Court gate, whereat the people began to reuiue their vexed ſpirits, which vntill then were wondrouſly ſurcharged with hearts griefe, yea men and women, old matrons, and yong virgins made exceeding great lamentation: this flying terror went three daies iourney into the country before it was fully ſuppreſt.
               
                  An. reg. 4. Henry Garret arraigned. 1606Friday the 28 of March 1606 in the Guildhall in London was arraigned and condemned Henry Garnet Prouinciall of the Ieſuites in England, for being acquainted with the Gunpowder plot, and concealing the ſame, for the which he was adiudged to be drawne, hanged & quartered, and his head to be ſet vpon London bridge, and according to that ſentence he was

executed the third of May at the weſt end of S. Paules Church,Garnet executed. where he acknowledged the greatneſſe of his offence in concealing the treaſon, and beſought all Catholikes to forbeare and deſiſt from treaſon, & all other violent attempts whatſoeuer againſt Kings and Princes, ſaying that all ſuch practiſes were vtterly againſt the Catholicke Religion.
               The twenty nine,Great winds and flouds and ſhipwrack. and thirtith of March the wind was extreame violent, ſo as it cauſed much ſhipwracke vpon the coaſts of England, France & the Low countries, it brought in the ſea and drowned much cattell, and in Picardie neare Dyope, it blew downe a ſtéeple which ſlue foureſcore perſons in the fall thereof, in Flanders and vp towards Germany, there were many Churches, Townes, Wind-milles, and trees blowne downe, and the 8 of Iune following it rained 24 houres, and the next day there 
                     •
                  oſe ſtrange land-waters which carried away mils, trees and houſes, made new currants where neuer any was ſeene before, it brake downe the heads of pooles and trenches, and carried quite away great quantities of cattell, timber and other things from off vp land grounds.
               The 24 of Aprill arriued Don Iohn de Mendoza, Marques of Saint Germaine,A ſpeciall Ambaſſador from Spaine. from the King of Spaine vnto the King of Great Brittaine, to congratulate his happy deliuerance frō the late pretended treaſon, and to deliuer certaine preſents from Queen Margaret of Spain, vnto Queene Anne of Great Brittaine, viz.
                  
a robe of morrey ſatten,Preſents from the Queene of Spaine vnto the Queen of Great Britaine. imbrodered all ouer with amber leather, & in many places with gold, vpon the fore part thereof was forty eight tags of beaten gold, three ynches long, hollow within, and filde with amber greece very curiouſly wrought, and two large chaines of amber greece, two Karkanets of Amber gréece, a veluet Cappe with gold buttons, pleaſantly enameld like the tagges, euery of theſe were ſeuerally incloſed in an ouall boxe of gold, & were preſented all together in a veſſell of gold like vnto a Baſon.
               
                  Knights of the Garter made.Tueſday the 20 of May at Windſor were enſtalled Knights of the Garter Robert Earle of Saliſbury, and the Lord Thomas Howard Viſcount Bindon.
               
                  Lords brought from the Tower & cenſured in the Star chamber.The third of Iune, Henry Lord Mordant, and Edward Lord Sturton were conuicted in the high Court of Star-chamber of diuers miſpriſions and contempts, and for the ſame the Lord Mordant was cenſured to pay ten thouſand markes, the Lord Sturton ſixe thouſand markes, and impriſonment during his Maieſties good pleaſure.
               
                  A proclamation againſt all Ieſuits & Seminaries.The tenth of Iune proclamation was made for the baniſhing of all Ieſuits, Seminaries and Roman prieſts.
               The Lady Sophia daughter to our Soueraign Lord the King was borne at Gréenewich vpon Sonday the 22 of Iune, at thrée a clocke in the morning,The Lady Sophia borne. and died the next day, and vpon Thurſday next after was very ſolemnly conuaied

by barge, couered with blacke veluet, accompanied with thrée other barges couered with blacke cloth, vnto the Chappell royall in Weſtminſter, and was there enterred by Doctor Barlow Lord Biſhop of Rocheſter, where were preſent all the great Lords of the Councell with the Heralds and chiefe officers of the Court.
               The 27 of Iune Henry Earle of Northumberland was brought from the Tower vnto the Starre-chamber,The Earle of Northū
                     berland conuicted in the Star chamber. and there conuicted of diuers miſpriſions, contempts and offences, and for the ſame was adiudged to pay thirty thouſand pound and to be remooued from the place of a Priuy Counſellor, and from being Captains of his Maieſties Pentioners, and from all other offices which he held of his Maieſties grace and fauour, and to remaine priſoner during life.
               At this time returned Signior Nichola Molyno of honourable family, hauing béene here thrée yeares Ambaſſador Lieger for the Signory of Venice,Ambaſſador from Venice. whom the King honoured with Knight-hood, and in his ſtead came the honourable Signior Georguo Iuſtiniano from the Duke and State of Venice, of which moſt famous and flouriſhing city, I haue here very briefly ſet downe the firſt foundation and State thereof as followeth.
               
                  Bleda and Attilla Brethren Kings of the Hunnes, after they had made great excurſions and ſpoyles vpon Illyria and Thrace, as farre as Thermopyle, Attilla deſirous to be ſole Soueraigne

ſlue his brother Bleda,
                  The Originall and State of Venice. then he ſubdued moſt nations Eaſtward, and after that with fiue hundred thouſand men he inuaded the Roman Empire, viz. the Romans and Viſygotes, who encountred him with diuers Armies, he paſſed violently through Italy, and forced the people to flie from City to City and other places, of which ſort ſome went and poſſeſſed certaine very ſmall Iſlands in the ſea, which then were not well knowne by any name: but were afterward called Venice as you may read: he alſo inuaded France, and beſieged Orleance in the yeare of the world, 4414. and after Chriſt, 452 and gaue battaile vnto Detyus Aefius the Vice Emperour, and Theodoric King of Vyſ
                     •
                  
                  gotes: the fight continued one whole day, wherein was performed all martiall prowes, and two hundred thouſand ſlaine on both ſides, yea, ſuch was the effuſion of bloud, that very many dead bodies floted vp and downe, as it had béen a brooke of bloud: in this fight Attilla had the worſt, yet neuertheleſſe, he reencouraged himſelfe, and furiouſly aſſailed Italie, and had vtterlie ſpoiled it, if the Pope had not humbled himſelfe before him, then he returned into his owne Country of Hungarie: The Emperour Valentinian the third, being in a manner conſtrained, gaue him his ſiſter in mariage, after that he maried an other, at which Nuptiall he became ſo drunke, that he died thereof: the City of Venice being at firſt but a ſmall thing was gouerned by Conſuls, who reſiſted Pelagius, Neſtorius
                  
and Pharamond the firſt King of France, then it increaſed and was gouerned by Tribunes. And in the yeare, 582. Pope Pelagius the ſecond, in a Councell of twenty Biſhops by meanes of the Archbiſhop of Aquilea, it was agréed that Grado ſhould be the Metropolis of Venice and Iſtria, by reaſon that Grado was then more Noble and populous then Venice, & ſo continued vntill the yeare, 654. Afterward Mallo Mocco and Paleſtina by meanes of a great aſſembly of people from Padua and Mount Telice, which came in company of the Biſhop of Padua, Venice was greatly increaſed: this was done when Padua had beene deſtroyed by the Lombards, the third and fourth time, in the yeare 593. And in the yeare 654 vnto the foreſaid ten Tribunes, were added two more to rule in Hyraclia, which Hyraclia tooke his name of Hyraclius the Chriſtian Emperour: the ſaid Hyraclia in the yeare 603 was reedified and enlarged by Biſhop Magno, but Rotaryo King of Lombards ſtill exerciſing his crueltie, deſtroyed Oderzo and other places, as alſo there was ciuill wars a long time in moſt parts of Italy, ſo as many auncient Noble habitations being ruinated,Theſe Iſlands vntill then were not known by any name. the diſtreſſed perſons for their conuenient ſafety reſorted and inhabited theſe foreſaid ſmall plots or Iſlands, lying in the ſea, the chiefe whereof was then call Ryuo Alto, and is now called the Ryalto, which they found to lie commodious for traffique and Nauigation: then they encreaſed ſo faſt in people and building

that theſe petty plots or Iſlands became well inhabited, and therein with great Chriſtian piety erected eight faire goodly Churches with many ſtately pallaces, ſo as the City was growne very great, and theſe laſt twelue Magiſtrates of Tribunes continued vntill the yeare 697. and was then by the forenamed Hyraclius & Pope Sergius the firſt, in the generall Councell of Aquilea: thoſe foreſaid Iſlands, were called Venice, and by vertue of the ſame Councell it was ordained that they ſhould chooſe themſelues a Duke out of their City ſucceſſiuely for euer: and for concluſion of peace after long diſſenſion betwéene Grado and Venice, the Pope was content that the Patriarchie of Grado ſhould be tranſferred vnto Venice, ſince which time, he hath there held his Cathedra, and the Venetians haue béene gouerned by Dukes, aſſiſted by Senators, Paulus Lucius was the firſt Duke, and haue ſo continued Dukes by election vntill this preſent yeare 1606. with great honour and proſperity, ouer whom Leonardo Donato now raigneth, there haue béene ninety & one Dukes, ſince the forenamed Councell.
               
                  Sir Edw. Cooke Lord chief Iuſtice of the common pleas.At this time the King made Sir Edward Cooke Lord chiefe Iuſtice of the common Pleas, after he had béene fouretéene yeares his Maieſties Solicitor and Atturney generall.
               
                  A Tombe for Queen Elizabeth.This yeare at the appointment and charges of the King the ſtately Tombe for Quéene Elizabeth was fully finiſhed, and ſet vp in a little Chappell on the North ſide of the high Altar

in the Chappell Royall at Weſtminſter and her Image or Status placed amongſt the Pictures of other Kings and Quéenes in an vpper roome on the North ſide of the high Alter in the Abbey Church at Weſtminſter, which ſaid, Images of former Princes were wont to ſtand in a darke loſt or Chappell behinde the high Altar, and were remooued thence into a more lightſome place by Doctor Neile, Deane of Weſtminſter, which ſayd Deane repayred the Tombe of Anne of Cleaue, gaue a rich Altar Cloath vnto the Church, and reformed the impeachments of light in the Quire thereof.A monſtrous mother.
               
               The 15 of Iuly the wife of Richard Homwood of Eaſt Grimſted in Suſſex without any knowne cauſe murdered her owne thrée children, and threw them into a pit, and then cut her owne throat likewiſe.
               Thurſday the 17 of Iuly,The King of Denmarke arriueth in Englād. 
                  Chriſtianus King of Denmarke with eight ſhippes caſt anker before Graues-end, and the next day King Iames with Prince Henrie and diuers Nobles went thither to him, and dined a ſhip-boord, and after diner both Kings came to Gréenewich, where Chriſtianus and all his traine were royally entertained. The 24 of Iuly theſe Kings rode progreſſe together, and for foure daies ſpace they and their traine were worthily feaſted by the Earle of Saliſbury at Theobalds: and vpon Thurſday the laſt of Iuly, both Kings with all magnificence rode through London, againſt which time, and vpon very ſhort warning the

Citizens had made diuers Trophies, viz. a Bower of the Muſes at the Eaſt end of Cheapeſide; a braue ſtately Pageant with delicate muſicke, eloquent Orations, and variable pleaſant deuiſes, at the Weſt end of Cheapeſide, vpon the South ſide whereof ſate the Lord Maior, and Aldermen in Scarlet Robes, where Sir Henry Mountegue Recorder of London, after his ſolemne Oration in Latine, preſented the King of Denmarke with a faire Cuppe of gold: and vpon the Fountaine in Fléetſtréete was a pleaſant paſtorall deuiſe with muſicke and pleaſing ſongs: and for their more State and eaſie paſſage, the Stréetes were rayled in, on the one ſide, and the Companies ſate in their Liueries on the other ſide in as great brauerie as is vſed at a Coronation: And that night the Kings were lodged at White-hall: the next day the King of Denmarke after he had ſéene and noted the rare Architecture and ſtately monuments in the Chappell royall at Weſtminſter: he ſuruaied Paules Church, and on the toppe of the ſtéeple thereof, he cauſed the Kéeper of the ſtéeple to take the iuſt length and breadth of his foot in the leade: from thence the King went to the Royall Exchange, and to the Tower, where Sir William Wade banqueted him and all his attendants;Sir William Wade. and within few daies after that, the Earle of Rutland feaſted all the King of Denmarkes Priuy Counſellors, hauing made his prouiſion to haue feaſted the King alſo.
               
                  Sonday the 10 of Auguſt the King of Denmarke with his Counſell and chiefe Gentlemen were royally feaſted by the King of Great Brittaine in the Elizabeth Ionas at Chatham,The King of Denmarke returneth. and the next day Chriſtianus feaſted King Iames Quéene Anne, Prince Henrie, and others of the Nobility in his owne ſhippe, and about foure a clocke in the afternoone, all princely complements being performed, they tooke their leaue one of another: and the Thurſday following the King of Denmarke with all his ſhips and traine, hauing a faire wind ſet ſaile of Denmark. The King whileſt he was in England heard two ſermons in Latine, and dealt bountifully and royally with all men.
               The 24 of September the French King baptized his Sonne the Prince Dolphin,Prince Dolphin of France chriſtned. being then full fiue yeares of age.
               This yeare diuers churches in London were well repayred, and ſomewhat beautified,Churches repaired. namely, Chriſt-church, Trinity Church, Saint Brides church, and Bow-church with others: The city alſo very carefully clenſed their ditches and common ſhewers, and made floud gates in Holborne ditch, and Fléet ditch: and beyond all expectation they turned Moorefield into diuers pleaſant and princely walkes, and planted it round on all ſides and quarters with good ſtore of young trées, and rayled it round in like manner to preſerue the walkes,Morefield otherwiſe called the new walks and keepe the trees from violence, and defended the out-ſides therof with a new ſtrong bricke wall: there was

alſo made diuers vauts vnder ground, ſome to conuey away fowle water without offence, and one to bring freſh water into the towne ditch to keepe it ſweet. This field was euer vntill this preſent a rude noyſome place like a Lay-ſtall, halfe enuironed with ſtincking ditches, very offenſiue to the City and all paſſengers: Sir Leonard Hallyday Lord Maior was very forward and carefull to the furtherance of this worke, and for contriuing to bring a riuer to the North part of London to ſerue the City, and to clenſe their ditches and ſewers; and what he could not performe in his Maiorality, his Succeſſor Sir Iohn Wats did his full endeauour to accompliſh: and Maſter Nicholas Leate a graue wiſe, and wealthy Citizen was wondrous painfull and induſtrious in the furtherance of this worke,A truce betweene the Emperour of Germany and the great Turke. and of the reſt thereunto adioyning: alſo there were many thouſands of worthy citizens wondrous earneſt to expreſſe their bounty towards the bringing of the foreſaid riuer to the city, according to the Tenor of a ſtatute lately made for them in that behalfe.
               This yeare was concluded a truce for 15 yeares betweene Rodolphus the ſecond of that name Emperour of Almaine, and the Great Turke.
               
                  Shrieues
                  William Walthall, Iohn Leman a batchelor.
               
               
                  Maior,
                  Sir Iohn Wats knight, Clothworker Maior.
               
               The 18 of December, the Lords, Knights,

and B
                     •
                  rgeſſes of the Parliament had leaue to go home vnto their houſes, and the tenth of February they all began to ſit againe.
               The ſixt of Ianuary at Whitehall with very great ſolemnity the Lord Iames Hay was maried vnto Honora the daughter and heire of the Lord Edward Denny.
                  The Lord Hay maried.
               
               The twentith of Ianuary if pleaſed God to ſend a mighty weſt wind which continued ſixtéene houres, which brought in the ſea,Great flouds. by reaſon whereof, and of high ſpring tides, both which encountred the land waters, after a great raine; which cauſed the Riuer of Seuerne beginning as farre as the mount in Cornewall, to ouerflow her bankes all along on both ſides vp into Somerſetſhire, and Gloceſterſhire, in ſome places the Waters ouerflowed their Bankes, thrée foote, in other places fiue foote, and ſome places ſeuen foote, by meanes of which ſodaine inundation, much people and cattell were drowned, diuers Churches and villages borne downe and ſpoiled, and ſome vtterly deſtroyed, & in Wales in diuers places, it did moſt harme in manner as aforeſaid,A Seminary executed Reconciliation between the Graue of Emden & his Subiects. the like whereof in England is not knowne to be mentioned in any Chronicle.
               The 26 of February Robert Drewrie a Seminary was executed at Tiburne.
               The 1 of March a peace and reconciliation was concluded and proclaimed betwéene the Graue of Emden, and the City of Emden, and the Graue entered and tooke poſſeſſion of the

City, his Subiects aſſured him his royalties and profits, and concerning all other differences betwéene the Graue and the Citizens it was agréed the ſame ſhould be determined by the Emperour, this was done after the people had waſted their wealth, and were wearied with thrée yeares warre.
               
                  An. reg. 5. 1607 The King manifeſteth his minde to both houſes.Tueſday the laſt of March, the Lorde Knights and Burgeſſes of the Parliament came before the King at Whitehall, vnto whom he made a ſolemne ſpéech. And from that time the houſes ſate not vntill the 20 of Aprill following, and the 2 of May the King made an other ſolemne ſpéech vnto the ſaid Lords, Knights and Burgeſſes concerning the vnion.
               
                  Great flouds in diuers houſes.Maundy thurſday the 2 of Aprill, there happened great inundations of water in Kent, Eſſex, Suffolke and Norffolke. And the 17 of Aprill there aroſe in the City of Couentry a moſt ſtrange and dreadfull inundation.
               The 8 of May ariued Prince Ienuille of the houſe of Lorraine, ſecond ſonne to Henry late Duke of Guiſe, which was ſlaine in the yeare 1589 he was very honourably feaſted and entertained by the King.Prince Ienuile came into England. And the 22 of May he accompanied the King, Quéene and Prince vnto Theobalds, where they were royally feaſted and entertained with pleaſant and ingenious deuiſes by the Earle of Saliſbury, being the appointed day, in which his Maieſty came to take poſſeſſion thereof. Tueſday the 25 of May, the ſaid Prince Ienuille with others ran at Tilt at

White-hall, viz. The Prince Ienuille. The Duke of Lenox. The Earle of Arundel. The Earle of Pembroke. The Earle of Montgomerie. The Viſcount Haddington.
               
               
                  The L. Compton. The L. Hay.
               
               
                  Sir Henry Cary. Sir Richard Bulkley. Sir Richard Preſton. Sir Henry Guntrot. And the 29 of May the ſaid Prince returned into France.
               About the middle of May,Vnlawfull aſſemblies to lay opē incloſures. certaine common perſons aſſembled themſelues in Northamptonſhire, Warwickſhire, and Leiceſterſhire: they cut and brake downe hedges, filled vp ditches, and laide open all ſuch encloſures of commons and other grounds, as they found encloſed, which of ancient time had béen open, and imploied to tillage. And the laſt of May, they were ſtraitly commanded by Proclamation to ſurceaſe their diſorder, but yet they ceaſed not: whereupon the Sheriffes and Iuſtices had authority giuen them, to ſuppreſſe them by force. And after that, the King ſent certaine Noblemen and Iudges to puniſh the wilfull offenders according to law. And the 28 of Iune, the King made another proclamatiō, ſignifying his great vnwillingneſſe to haue procéeded againſt them, either by marſhall law, or ciuill iuſtice, if lenity or gentle admonition might any way haue preuailed with them, to deſiſt from their turbulent rebellions and traiterous practiſe.
               Tueſday, the ſecond of Iune,Doctor Rauis lord Biſhop of London. in Pauls Church, the right reuerend Father in God Thomas Rauis, Doctor of Diuinity, late Biſhop of

Gloceſter, was by his deputy Doctor King, Deane of Chriſt-church, enſtalled Lord Biſhop of London. He died the 14 of December, 1609.
               Friday the 12 of Iune, the King dined with the Lord Maior,The King dineth with the Lord Maior, and made free of the Cloath-workers. and after dinner went into Cloath-workers Hall, and was there made frée of that company. At that time alſo were made frée ſir Patricke Murry knight, gentleman of the Kings Bedchamber, ſir Arthur Arſton knight, ſir Hugh Carmychel knight, Iames Medow Doctor of Diuinitie, one of the Kings Chaplaines, and others.
               The 16 of Iuly, being the great feaſt day at Merchantailors hall, the Lord Maior feaſted all the Aldermen that were not frée of the Merchantailors, and with them theſe honourable Perſonages following, viz. Patricke Steward, Earle of Orqueney, ſir Iohn Ramſey knight, Lord Viſcount Hadington, ſir Iohn Selby knight, Edward Ramſey gentlemen Sewer to the King. Theſe were alſo made frée of the Cloathworkers, ſir William Stone being then Maſter of the company, Henry Walton, Thom
                        •
                     s Boſtocke, Richard Boothe, and William Kymber Wardens.
               
                  His Maieſtie paieth 600000. l. which was lent vnto Elizabeth. Ambaſſadors from the StatesThe third of Iuly, the Kings Maieſtie repaied thréeſcore thouſnd pound vnto the Citizens of London, which ſumme the Londoners had lent vnto Quéene Elizabeth the 3 of Februarie 1598.
               On Saturday, being the fourth of Iuly, arriued Iohn Berke, chiefe Councellor of Dort,

and Iames de Maldere Knight, Lord of Heyes, and had audience the ſixth of Iuly: they were honourably entertained and feaſted in many places.
               The fourth of Iuly, the right honourable ſir Thomas Kneuit knight,Sir Thomas Kneuit made Baron. was called by writ to the Parliament, by the name and title of Baron of Eſcricke, and ſate that day in his roabes among the Barons, being the laſt day of that Parliament, holden vpon prorogation,A Parliament. and ſo againe proroged vntill the 16 of Nouember following.
               Sunday the 5 of Iuly,Sir Iulius Caeſar made a Priuie Coūſellor. ſir Iulius Caeſar knight, Chancellor of the Exchequer, was ſworne a Priuie Councellor of Eſtate.
               Thurſday the 16 of Iuly 1607 the Kings moſt excellent Maieſtie, with Prince Henry,
                  The King & Prince feaſted at Merchantailors hall. and diuers honourable Perſonages, dined at Merchantailors hall, and were moſt ioyfullie entertained with great varietie of melodious harmony of voices and inſtruments, and pleaſant ſpéeches (being the day they held their feaſt for the election of Maſter and Wardens) and after dinner Maſter Iohn Swinnarton the Maſter, and Richard Wright, Andrew Osborne, Edward Atkinſon, and William Albany the foure Wardens of the Company, being accompanied with maſter Baron Southerton, and ſir Leonard Halliday, ſir William Crauen, ſir Iohn Swynerton, knights, and Aldermen, and Ieffrey Elwes Alderman, being all members of that Company, reſorted to the Kings moſt excellent Maieſtie,

who dined in their chamber called the Kings Chamber, and ſir Henry Mountague knight, Recorder of London being there preſent, did in the name of the whole Company moſt humbly thanke his Maieſty, for that it had pleaſed him to grace it with his royall preſence that day. And the Maſter of the Company did preſent his Maieſtie with a purſe full of gold, & Richard Langley the Clarke of the Company, did deliuer vnto his Maieſty a roll, wherein was entred the names of ſeuen Kings, one Quéene, ſeuentéene Princes and Dukes, two Dutcheſſes, one Archbiſhop, thirty one Earles, fiue Counteſſes, one Viſcount, twenty foure Biſhops, ſixty ſixe Barons or Lords, two Ladies, ſeuen Abbats, ſeuen Priors, and one Sub-prior (omitting a number of Knights, Eſquires &c.) who had béen frée of the Company, which his Maieſtie moſt gratiouſly accepted, and ſaid, that he himſelfe was frée of another Company, yet he would ſo much grace the Company of Merchantailors, that the Prince his eldeſt ſonne ſhould be frée thereof, and that he would ſée and be a witneſſe, when the garland ſhould be put on his head. And then they in like manner reſorted to the Prince, who dined in the great hall. And the ſaid Maſter preſented his Highneſſe with another purſe full of gold,Prince Henry made free of the Merchantailors. and the Clarke deliuered his Highneſſe a like roll, which were alſo gratiouſly accepted, and his Highneſſe ſaid, that not onely himſelfe would be frée of the Company of Merchantailors, but commanded one of

his Gentlemen, and the Clarke of the Company to goe to all the Lords preſent, and require all of them that loued him, and were not frée of other companies, to be free of his Company: whereupon thoſe Lords whoſe names enſue (with humble thankes to his highneſſe) accepted of the freedome: viz.

                     
                        Iohn Berke Lord in Godſchalckcoort, &c.Strangers. Counceller of Dort in Holland.
                     Sir Iames du Maldere knight, Lord of Heyes, &c. Counceller of Zeland.
                     Sir Noel de Caron knight, L. of Schoonwal, &c. Ambaſſador Lieger from the States, &c.
                     The Duke of Lenox.
                     Earle of Nottingham Lord Admirall.
                     Earle of Suffolke Lord Chamberlaine.Noblemē.
                     
                     Earle of Arundell.
                     Earle of Oxenford.
                     Earle of Worceſter.
                     Earle of Pembrooke.
                     Earle of Eſſex abſent, yet entred by order from the Prince, vnder his Highneſſe owne hand.
                     Earle of Northampton.
                     Earle of Saliſbury principall Secretary to the King.
                     Earle of Montgomery.
                     Earle of Pearth.
                     Lord Viſcount Cranborne.
                     Lord Euars.
                     
                     Lord Hunſdon.
                     
                     Lord Knolles.
                     
                     Lord Haye.
                     
                     
                        Lord Sanker.
                     
                     Lord Borley.
                     
                     M. Howard. Sir Iohn Harington.
                     
                     
                        Knights.M. Sheffield.
                     
                     Sir Thomas Challoner, Gouernor to ye Prince.
                     Sir Roger Aſhton Maſter of the Wardrobe, & Gentleman of the Kings Bed-chamber.
                     Sir Thomas Vauaſor, Knight Marſhall.
                     Sir Dauid Fowlis.
                     
                     Sir Dauid Murry.
                     
                     M. Doctor Mountague, Deane of the Chappell.
                     M. Adam Newton Deane of Durham, and Tutor to the Prince.
                     Sir Thomas Sauage.
                     
                     Sir Lewes Lewknor, M. of the Ceremonies: and many other Knights, Eſquires, and Gentlemen ſeruants to the King, Queene, and Prince, and to Noblemen.
                  
               
               
                  The new Maſter & Wardens of the Merchantailers.The new Maſter and Wardens choſen in the preſence of the King and Prince, was Iohn Iohnſon Maſter of the Company, and Thomas Owen, Richard Scales, Iohn Woller, and Randolph Wolley Wardens.
               
                  The Earle of Arundels eldeſt ſonne.The next day the King chriſtened Iames, the eldeſt ſonne of Thomas Earle of Arundel, borne of Alethea, youngeſt daughter to Gilbert Earle of Shrewſbury, the Earle of Suffolke and the Lady Arbella were the other goſſips.
               
                  The Earle of Tyrone and other Iriſh lords fled out of Ireland.About the beginning of September, there fled out of Ireland into the parts beyond the Seas, Hugh Earle of Tirone, Terconnel, Hugh Baron of Don Gannon, Caffer Oge Odonnel,
                  
brother to the Earle of Terconnel, Orto Oge Oneale, Nephew to the Earle of Tyrone, the Counteſſe of Tyrone, and two of the younger ſonnes of Tyrone, and the ſonne and heire of the Earle of Terconnel, being an infant of one yeare of age, or thereabout, with diuers other their ſeruants and followers, they imbarked at Lughſwillie.
               The ſeuenth of September was borne Duke Charles, ſecond ſonne to the King of Spaine.The King of Spaines ſecond ſon borne.
               
               Wedneſday the 16 of September died the Lady Mary,
                  The death of the Ladie Mary. daughter to our Soueraigne Lord the King, and was ſolemnly interred at Weſtminſter the twenty thrée of the ſame, in a vaut of the ſame Chappell, and in the ſame manner as was her ſiſter the Lady Sophia.
               
               Sir Ieruais Clyfton of Layton Bromeſwold Knight, was made Baron by writ,Sir Iaruais Clyfton made barō The Lord Awbignye maried. by the title of Baron of Layton Bromeſwold, and ſate in his roabes with the Lords in the Parliament houſe, the 16 of Nouember, being the day of the adiornment of the Parliament. And the twentith day of Iuly following, the Lord Eſme Stewart, Lord of Awbigny in France, gentleman of his Maieſties Bedchamber in England, and ſole brother vnto Lodouicus Duke of Lenox, maried Katherin in the onely daughter and heire of the ſaid Lord Clyfton.
               
               The firſt day of March in the ſecond yeare of his Maieſties raigne,Inmates & increaſe of building forbidden by proclamation. Alſo the preſeruation of timber & vniformity of building throughout London commanded by proclamation. proclamation was made, ſtraitly prohibiting all increaſe of buildings within the city of London, and one mile

thereof,Contemners cenſured in the Star-chamber. and expreſly commanding all perſons to build all the fore front and windowes of al their new buildings, either of bricke or ſtone, but it tooke ſmall effect: whereupon the 12 of October this preſent yere 1607 Proclamation was made again to the ſame effect, & commanding them to build all their vtter wals & windowes, either 
                     〈◊〉
                   brick or ſtone. And ye 16 of October there were 2 cenſured in the the ſtar Chamber, for building contrarie to the tenour of his Maieſties firſ
                     •
                   Proclamation.
               
                  The old rottē Banquetting houſe of timber taken down, and a new builded of bricke and ſtone.This yeare the King new builded the ſtatelie Banquetting-houſe, with increaſe of many faire lodgings at Whitehall.
               
                  Prouiſion for ſuch Preachers as ſhall preach at Pauls Croſſe.Doctor Ailmer, late L. Biſhop of London, and the right honourable Elizabeth Counteſſe Donger of Shrewſbury, haue giuen certaine ſums of money for the better maintenance of ſermon hereafter at Pauls Croſſe, and Thomas Ruſſell Draper, hath likewiſe giuen ten pound a yeare for euer, to be giuen vnto ſuch vnbeneficed Preachers as ſhall preach at Pauls Croſſe, whereupon the Lord Maior and Court of Aldermen for the due imployment of the foreſaid ſummes, and encreaſe of the ſame, haue further prouided for the ſaid Preachers, ſo as euery o
                     •
                   them, being vnbeneficed, ſhall not onely receiue a grauitie in money, but alſo euery one that ſhall preach there, ſhall at his pleaſure be fréely entertained for fiue daies ſpace, with ſwéet conuenient lodgings, fire, candle, and all other neceſſarie, viz. from thurſday before their appointed

day of preaching, vntill tueſday morning following.
               
                  Geffrey Elwes, Nicholas Style.
                  Shrieues.
               
               
                  Sir Henry Row Mercer, Maior.
                  Maior.
               
               The 16 of Nouember,The diſcouerie of the Earle of Tyrons treaſon. proclamation was made concerning the Earle of Tyrone, Terconnell, and others of Ireland, ſignifying their purpoſe and practiſe to extirpe the Engliſh nation out of Ireland, and to conferre and yéeld the kingdome of Ireland vnto the Pope, and Tyrones ſoliciting forraigne Princes to attempt the conqueſt thereof.
               The 20 of December, proclamation was made to apprehend the Lord Maxwell,
                  The Lord Maxwell brake out of priſon. who wounded the Porter and ſo brake priſon out of Edenbrough Caſtle. This Lord Maxwell aided Iames Macdonell to eſcape likewiſe.
               The 24 of December,Sir Thomas Parry ſworne a Priuie Counſellor of Eſtate. ſir Thomas Parry Knight, Chancellor of the Dutchie, was ſworne a Priuie Counſellor of Eſtate.
               The 8 of December began a hard froſt, & continued vntill the 15 of the ſame, and then thawed: and the 22 of December it began againe to fréeze violently,A great froſt. ſo as diuers perſons went halfe way ouer the Thames vpon the Ice: and the 30 of December, at euery ebbe many people went quite ouer the Thames in diuers places, and ſo continued from that day vntill the third of Ianuary: the people paſt daily betwéene London and ye Banke-ſide at euery halfe ebbe, for the floud remooued the Ice, and forced the people daily to tread new paths, except onely

betwéene Lambeth and the ferry at Weſtminſter, the which by inceſſant treading, became very firme and frée paſſage, vntill the great thaw: and from Sunday the tenth of Ianuary, vntill the fiftéenth of the ſame, the froſt grew extream, ſo as the Ice became firme, and remoued not, & then all ſorts of men, women, and children, went boldly vpon the Ice in moſt parts; ſome ſhot at prickes, others bowled and danced, with other variable paſtimes; by reaſon of which concourſe of people, there were many that ſet vp boothes and ſtandings vpon the Ice, as Fruit ſellers, Victuallers, that ſold béere and wine, Shoomakers, & a Barbers tent, &c. Euery of them had fire néere their beings. The 15 of Ianuary it began ſomewhat to thaw, and ſo continued 4 daies together: yet neuertheleſſe the great Ice vpon the Thames held firme and paſſable, and became ſomewhat ſmooth, like as in the laſt great froſt in the yeare 1564. which till then were very craggy and vncertaine. The 19 of Ianuary the froſt began againe, but not violently vntill Sunday the 24 of Ianuary, and then held on vntill the 30 of the ſame.All the Hartichokes in gardens about London were kild with this froſt. The 1 of February the Ice began to breake by little and little, and the next day in the afternoone, all the Ice was quite diſſolued and cleane gone, ſo as no ſigne remained thereof: many bridges were ſpoiled by this froſt, and much fowle periſhed, eſpecially ſmal birds which in many places were found frozen to death: this froſt was more grieuous in Ireland and France, then in England.
               
                  The 9 of February,Viſcount Hadingtō maried. ſir Iohn Ramſey knight Baron of Barnes Viſcount Hadington, maried Elizabeth the eldeſt daughter of Robert Earle of Suſſex, the King gaue her in mariage, and at dinner the King dranke to the bride and bridegrome in a faire cup of gold which he gaue him. And with it a patent of 600 pound yearely penſion out of the Exchequer to the longeſt liuer of them both: this the King did to reward his faithfull ſeruice againſt the dangerous treaſon of Earle Gowry in Scotland.
               The 10 of March was laid the firſt ſtone for the new building of Algate,Allgate new builded. but it was not fully finiſhed vntill the end of the next yeare after, this old gate was taken downe and new builded at the charges of the Citizens.
               The eleuenth of Aprill George Ieruas a Seminarie,An. reg. 6. 1608 A Seminarie executed. was drawne to Tiburne and there executed.
               The eleuenth of Aprill being Monday,S. Edmōds Bury ſpoiled by a ſudden fire. th
                     •
                   quarter Seſſions was held at Saint Edmondſbury, and by negligence an out malt-houſe was ſet on fire, from whence in moſt ſtrange and ſudden manner, through fierce windes, the fire came to the farther ſide of the Towne, and as it went, left ſome ſtréets and houſes ſafe and vntouched: the flame flew cleane ouer many houſes néere vnto it, and did great ſpoile to many faire buildings fartheſt off, and ceaſed not vntill it had conſumed 160 dwelling houſes, beſides other, and in dammage of wares and houſhold ſtuffe, to the full value of thréeſcore thouſand

pound.The King was very forward to do them any fauor. The King ſhewed great kindneſſe to the diſtreſſed inhabitants, as well in giuing them fiue hundred load of timber to repaire their buildings, as in preferring their beſt meanes to raiſe their generall and particular eſtates, and in giuing them a new Charter. The Knights and chiefe Gentlemen of that County performed likewiſe great kindneſſe vnto the Townſmen: the Citie of London gaue kindly towards their reliefe.
               The 17 of Aprill Doctor Montague, Deane of the Kings Chappell,Doctor Mountague Lord Biſhop of Bath and Wels. was conſecrated Biſhop of Bath and Wels, by the Lord Archbiſhop of Canturbury. At this conſecration were preſent Prince Henry, the Duke of Yorke, and moſt of the great Lords of the Priuie Counſell, and diuers Biſhops.
               
                  The Earle of Dorſet dieth.The 19 of Aprill, at Whitehall died Thomas Earle of Dorſet, Lord high Treaſurer of England. He died ſuddenly at the Counſell Table.
               
                  The oth of allegiance miniſtred vnto ſuſpitious perſons.The 29 of Aprill, proclamation was made, commanding the oth of allegiance to be miniſtred vnto all perſons that ſhould come from beyond the ſeas, onely to diſtinguiſh honeſt ſubiects from traiterous practiſers, and not for any point or matter in religion: all knowne Merchants and others of honeſt ſtate and quallitie were exempt from taking this oth. This proclamation was made, by reaſon that many ſuſpitious perſons of baſe ſort came daily from beyond ſeas, and refuſed to take the oth.
               
                  At this time Henry Earle of Northampton was made Lord Priuie Seale.The Earle of Northampton made L. Priuie Seale.
               
               Friday the 6 of May, Robert Earle of Saliſbury was ſworne Lord high Treaſurer of England at Weſtminſter, being accompanied with the moſt part of all the Earles and Barons,The Earle of Salisbury made Lord high Treaſurer of England. and with an extraordinary company of Knights and others of honorable ranke and qualitie; & that day he feaſted the King, Quéene, and Prince, the Lady Elizabeth, the Duke of Yorke, and all the Counſell.
               The 20 of May at Windſor were made knights of the Garter,
                     The Earls of Dunbar & Montgomery made Knights of the Garter.
                     Francis Earle of Comberland is the other lord Lieutenant.
                   
                  George Earle of Dunbar, Baron Hume of Berwick, Lord of Norham, Lord high Treaſurer of Scotland, one of the two Lords Lieutenants in equall authority ouer the middle ſhires of Great Britaine, ſometime the borders of both the kingdomes Lord Gouernour and Captaine for his Maieſtie of the ſaid towne of Berwick, and the Garriſon thereof, and one of his Maieſties moſt Honourable Priuie Counſell: and Philip Earle of Montgomery, Baron of Shurland.
               In the moneth of Iune the King knighted Sir Alexander Hay,
                  Sir Alexander Hay knighted. Secretary for the Scottiſh affaires.
               The 23 of Iune Thomas Garnet a Ieſuite was executed at Tyburne,A Ieſuite executed. hauing fauour offered him, if he would haue taken the oth of allegiance aforeſaid, which he refuſed to doe.
               This Summer at Aſtley in Warwickſhire, by reaſon of the fall of the Church, there was taken

vp the corps of Thomas Gray,
                  The corps of the lord Marqueſſe. Dorſet taken vp whole, hauing been 78 yeares enterred. Marqueſſe Dorſet: he was buried the tenth of October 1530 in the twenty two yeare of Henry the eight: and albeit he had laine 78 yeares in the earth, yet his eyes haire and fleſh remained in a manner as if it had béene newly buried. Concerning which you may read the new Epitaph ſet ouer his ſepulchre.
               
                  Doctor Neyle, Lord Biſhop of Rocheſter.The ninth of October Doctor Neyle Deane of Weſtminſter was conſecrated Biſhop of Rocheſter at Lambeth.
               
                  Shrieues.
                  George Bolles, Richard Farrington, Shrieues.
               
               
                  Sir Humphrey Weld Grocer, Maior.
                  Maior.
               
               
                  The Viſcount of Cramburne maried.The firſt of December William Viſcount Cramburne, ſonne and heire to Robert Earle of Salisbury, Lord Treaſurer of England, married Catheren Howard, the third Daughter of Thomas Earle of Suffolke.
               
                  Conſorts of pirats within the Streights, and in the maine ſea.For theſe fiue yeares laſt paſt, great and manifold roberies, ſpoyles, pyracies, murthers and depredations within the ſtreights & elſewhere haue béene committed by ſeuerall companies of Engliſh pirates, as well vpon our owne nation as others, but eſpecially vpon the Florentines and Venetians wherewith his highneſſe being much grieued, publiſhed from time to time ſundry proclamations, denouncing the ſaid offenders to be rebels, and therewithall gaue order for their ſuppreſſion and apprehenſion as traitors and peace-breakers. But all this preuailed

not, for they ſtill increaſed and perſiſted in their former villanies: with which offenders, there were ſome Engliſh Merchants, who very cunningly vnderhand vſed cōmerce, trucke, and traffique for ſtolen goods, to the great cheriſhing and abetting of thoſe malefactors, and diſhonor to this nation; for redreſſe whereof, the King by proclamation the eighth of Ianuary, prohibited all Engliſh Merchants from any manner of medling or dealing with them, vpon great penaltie, commanding the Iudge of the Admiraltie, to proceed ſeuerely in Iuſtice againſt all ſuch offenders, and that from him there ſhould be no appeale granted to any perſon touching the premiſes: all which notwithſtanding the number of Pirats ſtill increaſed, and did great damage vnto the Engliſh Merchants, and to all other nations. There were Hollanders and Eſterlings that at this time and before, became fierce Pirats, and held conſort with the Engliſh robbers, viz. Ward, Biſhop,
                  This Sir Francis Verney did turne vpon hope of aduācement, but hee became extreame poore and miſerable. Sir Francis Verney, and others. Whereupon the King of Spaine ſent certaine ſhips of warre, vnder command of Don Lewis Faxardo, who very politikely about the middle of Iuly, came vpon them at Tunis, and ſuddenly burned about 20 of their ſhips lying in harbor: at which time, though captaine Ward eſcaped in perſon by being then a ſhoare, yet his great ſtrength & riches periſhed in the fire, with other his confederates.
               And the 22 of December,Pirats executed. there were executed at Waping 19 Pirats, ſome whereof had

béene in conſort with the forenamed Engliſh pirats.
               
                  Strange ſhifting of the tides.Sunday the ninetéenth of February, it ſhould haue béene dead low water at London bridge, but quite contrary to courſe, it was then hie water, and preſently it ebbed almoſt halfe an houre, the quantitie of a foote, and then ſuddenly it flowed againe almoſt two foote higher then it did before, and then ebbed againe, vntill it came néere the right courſe, ſo as the next floud began in a manner as it ſhould, and kept his due courſe in all reſpects, as if there had béene no ſhifting nor alteration of tides. All this happened before twelue of the clocke that forenoone, the weather being indifferent calme.
               
                  The yong Earle of Dorſet maried, and the Earle of Hertfords grandchild maried.The 25 of February, Richard Lord Buckhurſt, maried the Lady Anne Clyfford, the onely child of George Earle of Cumberland. And the laſt of February died Robert Earle of Dorſet, father to the forenamed Richard, L. Buckhurſt. And the firſt of Iune next following, Edward Seymour, the ſonne and heire of the Lord Beauchampe, maried the Lady Anne Sackuyle, ſecond daughter to the ſaid Robert Earle of Dorſet.
               
                  An. reg. 7. 1609 A general truce in the Netherlands for twelue yeares. In this month of March 1609. vpon full 3 yeares deliberate aduice, was concluded and proclaimed a generall and particular truce & ceaſſation from all maner of hoſtilitie by ſea and land for twelue yeares, betwéene Philip the third of that name King of Spaine, and Albertus and Iſabella Archdukes of Auſtria on the one part, and the generall Eſtates of Holland, Zealand,

and Frizeland on the other part. In this truce were included all the newter Townes, Forts, and Cities. This was done after either ſide had tried their vtmoſt fortunes, and felt the bitter ſting and cruell miſerie of almoſt fiftie yeares bloudy wars, to the great damage of all Chriſtendome, and aduantage of the vnreconcileable common enemy the Turke.
               The laſt yeare, and this ſpring,The firſt generall planting of Mulbery trees in England. according to his Maieſties expreſſe order, vpon apparant reaſon and great likelihood of future good & vtilitie to the common ſubiects of this land, there were many thouſands of young Mulbery trées brought hither out of France by Monſieur Francis Vertron, alias Foreſt of Verton in Pycardie Eſquire, who had a Patent for the ſame for two yeares: which were likewiſe by order ſent into diuers ſhires, and there planted for the féeding of Silkewormes to make ſilke,In Dawpheny & other parts of France, there was ſilke made a good while before, but not thorowout the whole kingdome vntill of late yeres. like as it is made in France. The laſt yeare at Gréenwich he kept great ſtore of Engliſh Silkewormes, the which the King with great pleaſure came often to ſée them worke; and of their ſilke the King cauſed a peece of Taffata to be made. It is but twenty yeares ſince the firſt generall making of ſilke in France. And the like generall planting of Mulbery trées there, who vntill then could not make Silke. All which notwithſtanding for many yeares paſt héere in England haue béene diuers ingenious and induſtrious Engliſh gentlemen, who haue planted Mulberies, made many trials, taken great paines, and

béene at expences to bréede and féed their wormes and to make ſilke, whereof they brought ſome to good perfection. Amongſt whom of moſt note is William Stallendge Eſquier, who at this time and before,M. Nicholas Ieffe & many others had put it in practiſe long before. by his proper practiſe had bred great ſtore of wormes to good perfection, and thereof made good ſilke in London, viz. 13 yeardes of Taffata, and diuers payres of Stockings of ſū
                  dry colours which he preſented vnto his Maieſty, and vnto the Quéene and Prince, and vnto many others the other yeare: This Stallendge about thrée yeares paſt had a Pattent for ſeuen yeares to bring in Mulbery ſéeds: and this yere according to the kings direction, he and the forenamed Forreſt planted Mulbery trées in moſt ſhires of England, viz. M. Stallendge furniſhed the Weſterne parts and M. Foreſt the Northen part, the King planted Mulbery trées neere Saint Iames Parke.
               
                  Britaine Burſe builded.The beautifull building in the Strand neare Durham houſe was begunne the tenth of Iune laſt paſt, and was fully finiſhed in Nouember following, at the proper charges of Robert Earl of Saliſburie Lord high Treaſurer of England,They were there entertained with pleaſant ingenious ſpeeches, gifts and deuiſes. and vpon Tueſday the tenth of Aprill this yeare 1609 many of the vpper ſhops were richly furniſhed with wares, and the next day after that the King, Quéene and Prince, the Lady Elizabeth and the Duke of Yorke with many great Lords and chiefe Ladies came thither, and then the King gaue it a name; and called it Britaine Burſe.
               
               
                  The 8 of May the King by his Proclamation prohibited all forraine Nations that after Auguſt next they ſhould not fiſh vpon any the coaſts of England, Scotland or Ireland,Al forrain nations forbidden to fiſh vpon the coaſts of England Scotland & Ireland without ſpeciall licence. nor the Iſles adiacent without ſpeciall licence from the Commiſſioners in that behalfe ordained, viz. to haue licence from the Commiſſioners in London for Fiſhing neare England and Ireland, and from the Commiſſioners in Edenbrough to fiſh in the Scottiſh ſeas, and the Iſles adiacent.
               The firſt, ſecond and third of Iune,The King heareth the Biſhops and ſecular Iudges. the king in perſon royall heard the differences betwéene the eccleſiaſticall and the temporall Iudges argued, touching prohibitions out of the Kings Bench, and Common Pleas.
               The 8.9. and 10.The King heareth the complaints touching his nauie. of Iune his Maieſty alſo in proper perſon accompanied with the L. Treaſurer, the Lord Priuy Seal, the Lord Admirall, the Lord Chamberlaine and others, heard the manifold complaints of the abuſes of the officers of his Nauy royall.
               The 23 of Iune ye King, Quéen and Prince,A triall of fight between a Lyon, a Horſe and a Bare. with diuers great Lords and many others came to the Tower to make triall of the Lions ſingle valour, and to haue the Lions kill a great fierce Bare which had kild a child, but the Lions being tried by one and one at a time, and laſtly by two together which were bred in that open yard where the Bare was put looſe for combat, yet would none of them aſſaile him but ſled from him, and ſought to returne into their dens. After

the firſt Lyon was put forth, then was there a ſtone horſe put into the Bare, and Lyon, who when he had gaſed vpon them a little, he fell to graſing ſtanding in the midſt betwéene them both, and whereas at firſt there was but two maſtifes let in, who boldly ſought with the Lyon, there was now 6 dogges let in, who flue all vpon the horſe, being moſt in their fight at their firſt entrance, and would ſoone haue woried the horſe to death,The parents of the childe had as much as 
                        •
                     aw and reaſon could afford. but that ſodainely euen as the King wiſht there entered in 3 ſtout Bearwards, who wondrous valiantly reſcued the horſe and brought away the dogges, whileſt the Lyon and Bare ſtood ſtaring vpon them. And the fift of Iuly this Bare according to the Kings expreſſe commaundement was bayted to death with dogs vpon a Stage, and the mother of the murthered child had twenty pound giuen her out of the mony, giuen by the people to ſee the death of the Bare.
               About two yeares paſt, viz. at Chriſtmas, 1607.Kingly paiments beyond preſident. the King borrowed of Francis Iones, and Nicholas Salter and their partners being Farmers of the Cuſtome houſe, one hundred and twenty thouſand pound for one whole yeare, which ſaid ſumme his Maieſty very gratiouſly and carefull repayed at Chriſtmas 1608. with full royall conſideration for the ſame.
               In the moneth of March the laſt yeare 1608. the King borrowed of certaine other Citizens the ſum of thréeſcore and thrée thouſand pound for fiftéene months: and this Midſomer day

1609 the King not onely repayed them all the ſaid ſum,There was neuer the like royall payment made by any King to the cō
                     mon ſubiects. but allowed them likewiſe their full intereſt for the ſame, viz. ſeauen thouſand and fiue hundred pround as a royall recompence: the King ſent them word that hee had money ready for them, and that if they would they ſhould receiue their money before their day, but they refuſed it.
               Of late yeares certaine ingenious and induſtrious perſons deuiſed and found out the making of Allome within the Kings Dominions,The firſt making of Allome in England. 
                  viz. in Deuonſhire, and Ireland, and laſtly at Gyſborrow, and other places in Yorkeſhire, where the ſayd Allom by this time was brought to full perfection by the Lord Sheffield, and Sir Thomas Challoner, Sir Dauid Fowllis, Sir Iohn Bowrchier Knights, and William Turner, Nicholas Cryſpe, Elias Cryſpe, Abraham Chamberlaine Citizens of London, to the great vſe & profit of the common wealth, whereupon the firſt of Iuly the King by his Proclamation prohibited the bringing in of any Allome from beyond the ſeas into any part of his Maieſties dominions vpon pain of confiſcation. The King likewiſe ordained fit places for Storehouſes of Allome, for the ready vſe therof to ſuch as would buy the ſame, the King alſo gaue very gratious reſpect & princely remuneration vnto all thoſe, who of late had taken paines & béene at expences in the practiſing and atchieuing to bring this royall commodity vnto due perfection, and then tooke the traffique thereof vnto himſelfe.
               
                  This yeare the King had ayde of his Subiects throughout the Kingdome of England for knighting his ſonne Prince Henry according to the Law of this land,An ancient duty. in the leuying whereof the Subiects were very fauourably dealt withall, for whereas by the ancient law of this land the ſubiects ought to haue paid twelue pence in the pound of the yearely value of their lands, his Maieſty very gratiouſly ordained ſeuerall Commiſſioners in the ſeuerall ſhires, who according to the purpoſe of their commiſſions did ſo moderately demeane themſelues as no man was compelled to pay any more then he would willingly giue, being a very auncient duty due vnto the King, and was now in a manner quite forgotten.
               
                  Let al that are pardoned note this for example.
                  Robert Allyley being arraigned at Newgate for fellony, ſtood mute and refuſed the ordinary tryall, whereupon as the manner is, the hangman came vnto him to binde his hands, but Allyley reſiſted, and with his Fiſt ſmote him on the face in the preſence of the Iudges, who preſently remembred that this priſoner but the laſt Seſſions before, was there conuicted of fellony, and for the ſame had obtained the Kings ſpeciall pardon, which pardons in generall are vnto all perſons, but onely vpon their good behauiour vnto the King and his ſubiects,His hand was nailed at the Gybet end before his face. and thereupon the Court inſtantly gaue Iudgement, that for the blow he gaue, his hand ſhould firſt be cut off: And then his body to be hanged for that fact for the which he had his pardon, according to

which ſentence he was preſently executed vpon a Gybbet at the Seſſions gate.
               In December in the 34 yeare of Quéene Elibeth,
                  The originall and foundation of the Eaſt India Company. there were letters pattents graunted for fiftéene yeares to the Eaſt India Merchants trading to the Eaſt Indies, and in May laſt 1609. The Kings Maieſtie vpon mature deliberation in fauour of the ſaid Company, finding the ſame to be very commodious traffique and Nauigation, and as propitious and honourable for this Kingdome renued and enlarged the foreſaid letters pattents and Charter to continue for euer, enabling them thereby to be a body corporate and politique. The firſt gouernour of this Company named and ordained both in the firſt and laſt pattent was Sir Thomas Smith Knight, who is alſo Gouernour of the Muſcouy Company, and preſident and treaſurer of the Company and counſell for Virginea. This yeare the ſaid Eaſt-India Company builded a moſt ſtately ſhip at Detford of the burthen of twelue hundreth tunne, being the greateſt and goodlieſt ſhip that euer was builded in this kingdome by any Merchants. At this time they alſo builded a Pinace of two hundreth and fifty tunne to attend her. And vpon Saturday the 30 of December, his Maieſtie and Prince Henry, with the Lord Admirall, the Lord Chamberlaine, the Earle of Worceſter, and many other Lords went to ſée theſe ſhips launched, and were all entertained with a banquet in the chiefe Cabin of the great ſhip, and the reſt were

banquetted at a long Table in the halfe decke▪ theſe rich and plentifull banquets were all ſerued in fine Chyna Diſhes which were fréely permitted to be taken and carried away by al perſons. The King gaue the Gouernor a very faire chaine of gold with a Iewell wherein was the Kings picture: highly commending his endeauour, care and induſtry for the good of the common wealth, maintenance of traffique and Nauigation, for the which alſo his Maieſt
                     •
                   with very gratious reſpect commended and thanked the aſſiſtants of that companie, wh
                     •
                   likewiſe kiſſed his Highneſſe hand, the King called the great ſhip the Trade
                     •
                   Encreaſe, and the other the Pepper Corne.
               
                  Shrieues.
                  Sebaſtian Haruie, William Cokayne ſheriffes.
               
               
                  Maior.
                  Sir Thomas Cambell Iremonger Maior.
               
               
                  Tranſlation, and conſecration of Biſhops.The ſixt of Nouember the famous Doctor Lancelot Androwes Lord Almner, Biſhop of Chicheſter was tranſferred vnto the Biſhopricke of Ely. And the 3 of December George Abbot Doctor of diuinity, Deane of Wincheſter, was conſecrated Lord Biſhop of Couentry and Lychfield. And Samuel Harſenet Doctor of Diuinity was conſecrated Lord Biſhop of Chicheſter. And 12 of February, the forenamed Doctor Abbot was tranſferred to the Biſhopricke of London and was enſtalled in Paules, by his deputy Doctor Pasfielde.
               
               The ſixe of Ianuary at the Court of Whitehall

in the preſence of the King and Quéene and the Ambaſſadors of Spaine and Venice, and of al the Péeres and great Ladies of the land, and of many thouſand of others, there the Prince performed his firſt feats of armes, viz.
                  Prince Henry his firſt feats of Armes. at Bar
                  
                     •
                  yers againſt all commers, being aſſiſted onely with ſixe other, viz. the Duke of Lenox, the Earle of Arundel, the Earle of Southampton, the Lord Hay, ſir Thomas Somerſet, and ſir Richard Preſton, who ſhortly after was created Lord Dingwell: againſt theſe challengers came 56 braue defendants, conſiſting of Earles, Ba
                  
                     •
                  ons, Knights and Eſquiers euery challenger fought with eight ſeuerall defendants two ſeuerall combats at two ſeuerall weapons, viz. at puſh of pyke and with ſingle ſword, the Prince performed this challenge with wondrous ſkill and courage to the great ioy and admiration of all the beholders, the Prince not being full ſixtéene yeares of age vntill the 19 of February: theſe feates of Armes with ſundry ſtatelie ſhowes and ingenious deuiſes began before tenne a clocke at night, and continued vntill thrée a clocke next morning being Sonday, and that day the Prince feaſted all the Combatants at Saint Iames houſe, and then gaue thrée rich priſes vnto thrée of the beſt deſeruers defendants, viz. vnto the Earle of Mountgomery, M. Thomas Darcy, ſonne and heire to the Lord Darcy of Chich, and vnto ſix Robert Gourdon.
               
               In the yeare 1584. was diſcouered ye Country

which is now called Virginea,The firſt diſcouery and plantation of Virginea. and was ſo called by Quéene Elizabeth, and ſhe aſſigned the ſame vnto ſir Walter Rawleigh, as being the chiefe diſcouerer thereof. And in the yeare 1587. there were ſent thither aboue 100 ſoules, viz. men, women, and children, ſince which time vntill the third yeare of his Maieſties raigne, the yearely ſending thither for plantation ceaſed, and then vpon more exact diſcoueries there were ſundrie yearely ſupplies ſent thither of men, women and children with all things neceſſary vnder conduct of captaine Newport, and alſo in the Month of may there were ſent thither nine ſhips with fiue hundred men, women and children with all neceſſary prouiſion vnder commaund of Sir Thomas Gates Lieutenant generall, Sir George Somers Admirall of Virginea, and captaine Newport Vice Admirall, with other expert captaines and reſolute gentlemen. And likewiſe at the end of this preſent yeare 1609. there was ſent an other ſupply of thrée ſhippes with an hundred and fifty men, being for the moſt part Artificers vnder commaund of the right Honourable Thomas Lord La Ware, who by the frée election of the Treaſurer and Counſell of Virginea, and with the full conſent of the generality of that company was conſtituted and authorized during his naturall life to be Lord Gouernour and captaine generall of all the Engliſh Colonies planted, or to be planted in Virginea, according to the tenor of his Maieſties Letters Pattents

granted this preſent yeare vnto the ſaid company.
               The Lord La Warre had his Pattent ſealed by that Company the twenty eight day of February this yeare 1609.The Lord La Warre goeth to Virginea. he went accompanied with Knights and Gentlemen of qualitie: And in Iune next there was one ſhip with 20 men, and a yeares competent prouiſion for the whole Colony ſent after him.
               The ninth of February the Parliament began at Weſtminſter,The Parliament adiorned. and continued vntill the twenty third of Iuly, and was then prorogued vntill the 16 of October following, and then the Lords and Commons ſate againe vntill the ſixt of December, and then it was adiourned vnto the ninth of February.
               The Kings Maieſty in his princely prouidence for the preſent and future good of his Kingdomes,The plantation of the North of Ireland by the Citizens of London. and chiefely for preuention of all rebellion in the Kingdome of Ireland, and in his eſpeciall fauour, and kingly reſpect vnto the City of London, did in Iuly laſt make a liberall offer vnto the Lord Maior and citizens of London for the preſent poſſeſſion and plantation of Engliſhmen in the Prouince of Vlſter; And when the Lord Maior and Citizens had well aduiſed themſelues therein, then in Auguſt they ſent foure diſcréet expert perſons, being accompanied and directed by Sir Thomas Philips as the Lords of the Councell had appointed, to ſuruay that Prouince, and to obſerue the profits with the eſtate and condition thereof, and to report

what ruines were to be repayred, and what cities, caſtles and townes were preſently to be builded, and when theſe 4 ſuruayors were returned, they aſcertained the Lord Maior & Citizens, aſwell of the true eſtate and validity thereof, as of the ſeuerall commodities, honor & dignity yt would therby enſue, & then they humbly accorded vnto the Kings moſt gratious and bounteous offer; then the Lord Maior & Citizens vpon mature deliberation leuied 20000. li. to be employed in theſe Iriſh affaires, & by vertue of their act of common Councell they conſtituted 24 Committies conſiſting of 6 Aldermen and 18 Commoners, the two chiefe wherof were called the gouernor & deputy, all which are to be new choſen euery yeare, hauing power & authority giuen them to order & diſpoſe of all matters for plantation, traffique, rule & gouernment in that North part of Ireland, whereupon the 14 of February they made publication therof, ſignifying vnto all handy crafts men their preſent entertainment & employment in this expedition, & that they ſhould haue their full wages with their dwelling houſes and other good meanes for the honeſt maintenance of themſelues & their families: vpon knowledge wherof there came about 300 ſeuerall perſons, who were preſently fitted and furniſhed with all things neceſſary, & with all conueniency were ſent to Vlſter: and ſo this expedition procéeded proſperouſly; William Cokaine Alderman was the firſt gouernor.
               
                  Thurſday the 3 of May, the French Quéene,An. reg. 3. 1610 The king of France murdered. with all ſolemnity was crowned in Paris, hauing béene ten yeares before maried to the king: and the next day after the King was murthered in his coach as he rode through Paris by a baſe villain that ſtabd him into the body with a long knife twice, that he died inſtantly, and his body was carried to the Loouer: preſently vpon the Kings death the Quéene was made Regent during her ſons minority, viz. Lewis the 13. The 20 of May being Sonday, our King & Quéene, the Prince, the Duke of Yorke, the Lady Elizabeth, and all the Lords and Ladies in the Court mourned in blacke for the death of this French King Henry the 4. and about the end of Iune, was he buried in Paris with as great royalty, as euer was any king of France. Vpon the murther of this French king the Lords & Commons of the Parliament of England, humbly beſought the King our ſoueraigne Lord to haue a more eſpeciall care then formerly had béene for the preſeruation of his royall perſon, & alſo to take ſpéedy order for the auoiding imminet danger, and kéeping his Subiects in their due obedience: and forthwith the Commons of the Parliament for manifeſtation of their allegiance, loue and duety, they voluntarily of their owne accord tooke the oath of allegiance, and after them the Lords of the vpper houſe did ſo likewiſe, who alſo miniſtred the ſame oath vnto all their ſeruants and followers, and ſuch as refuſed to take the oath were put from

their Lords ſeruices, and the Biſhops in their Conuocation houſe ordained that euery Biſhop in their ſeuerall viſitations ſhould miniſter the ſame oath vnto all their Clergy, which they performed accordingly: this oath was alſo miniſtred vnto others as followeth, according to the tenor of a ſpeciall ſtatute made this Seſſion of Parliament in that behalfe.
               
                  Prince Henry created Prince of Wales.The appointed time now drew neere for Prince Henry to be created Prince of Wales: and vpon thurſday the laſt of May the Lord Maior and Aldermen being accompanied with 54 ſeuerall companies of citizens of London in their ſeuerall Barges bearing Armes, diſtinguiſhed by their proper Enſignes banners and ſtreamers in braue and warlike manner, and therewithall plenteouſly furniſhed with ſundry ſorts of excellent muſicke, and had alſo to entertaine the Prince diuers ingenious and pleaſant trophies vpon the water, all which in very comely order went to Chelſea, the Lord Maior as Admirall going formoſt, where from nine a clocke in the morning vntill paſt three in the afternoone, they attended the comming of the Prince, who could not come ſooner by reaſon of the low ebbe, at which tſme the Prince came from Richmond being very honourably accompanied and attended: And from Chelſea the Lord Maior and citizens conducted his Highneſſe vnto the court at White-hall: as they returned from Chelſea the citizens ledde the way, and the Lord Maior followed them, going alwaies

next before the Princes Barge: To ſée this ioyfull fight, the people for 7 miles ſpace ſwarmed on both ſides the riuer, & the Thames was couered with boates, barges, and lighters full fraught with men, women and children. And vpon Sonday the 3 of Iune the King made 25 knights of the Bath whoſe names follow: And the next day the King created and crowned the Prince his eldeſt Sonne Henry, Prince of Wales in the Great White Chamber at Weſtminſter, being performed with all magnificence and ſolemnity, and with the full conſent of the Lords ſpirituall and temporall, and commons of the Parliament, being all there preſent, the Lord Maior and Aldermen of London were alſo preſent at this Creation: the Princes titles were proclaimed, viz. Henry Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornewall and Rotheſey, and Earle of Cheſter. In honour of this Creation there was the next night at the Court a moſt rich and royall maske of Ladies, viz. the Quéene, the Lady Elizabeth, daughter to our Soueraign, the Lady Arabella, the Counteſſe of Arondel, the Countes of Darby, the Countes of Eſſex, the Countes of Dorſet, the Countes of Mountgomery, the Viſcounts of Haddington, the Lady Elizabeth Gray, the Lady Elizabeth Guilford, the Lady Katherine Peter, the Lady Winter, and the Lady Winſor: and vpon Wedneſday in the afternoon in the Tiltyard there were diuers Earles, Barons and others being in rich and glorious armour, and

hauing moſt coſtly capariſons wondrous curiouſly imbrodered with pearle, gold and ſiluer; the like rich abiliments for horſes were neuer ſéene before, preſented their ſeuerall ingenious Trophies before the King, Quéene and Prince, and then ran at Tilt, where there was a world of people aſſembled to behold their trophies; and that night there were other triumphes vpon the water with ſhips of warre and Gallies fighting one againſt an other, and againſt a great Caſtle builded vpon the water: and after theſe battailes, then for an houres ſpace there were many ſtrange and variable fire workes in the caſtle, and in all the ſhips and gallies.
               
                  The Knights of the Bath.
                  
                     Knights of the Bath.The Earle of Oxford.
                  The Lord Gourdon.
                  
                  The Lord Clifford.
                  
                  The Lord Fitzwalter.
                  
                  The Lord Fitzwarren.
                  
                  The Lord Hay.
                  
                  The Lord Erskine.
                  
                  The Lord Winſor.
                  
                  The Lord Wentworth.
                  
                  Sir Charles Somerſet.
                  
                  Sir Edward Somerſet.
                  
                  Sir Francis Stewart.
                  
                  Sir Ferdinando Dudley.
                  
                  Sir Henry Cary.
                  
                  Sir Oliuer Saint Iohn.
                  
                  Sir Gilbert Gerrard.
                  
                  Sir Charles Stanhope.
                  
                  
                     Sir Edward Bruce.
                  
                  Sir William Stewart.
                  
                  Sir Robert Sydney.
                  
                  Sir Ferdinando Tuchet.
                  
                  Sir Peregrine Bartye.
                  
                  Sir Henry Rich.
                  
                  Sir Edward Sheffield.
                  
                  Sir William Cauendiſh.
                  
               
               The 4 of Iune Proclamation was made,A proclamation touching Ieſuits and Recuſants. commanding all Roman Prieſts, Ieſuits, and Seminaries to depart this Kingdome by the 4 day of Iuly next, and not to returne vpon paine of the ſeuerity of the law: alſo by this proclamation, the King ſtraightly commaunds all Recuſants to returne home to their dwellings, and not to remaine in London, nor to come within ten miles of the Court without eſpeciall licence, but to depart from London and the Court by the laſt day of this moneth, and to remaine confined according to the tenor of the ſtatute in that behalfe prouided.
               Preſently after that the oth of allegiance was miniſtred vnto all officers, atturneyes & Clerks,The oath of allegiance miniſtred. belonging to any of the Courts of Weſtminſter hall, and the Exchequer, and vnto all Aduocats and Proctors of the ſpirituall Courts. This oth was alſo miniſtred vnto all Lawyers and Students in the Innes of Court and Chancerie, and vnto all Studients and Schollers in both the Vniuerſities.
               The 25 of Iuly 1610.The Lord Clifford maried. the Lord Henry Clifford, ſonne to Frances Earle of Cumberland

maried the Lady Francis Cecill daughter to Robert Earle of Saliſbury Lord high Treaſurer of England.
               This yeare the King builded a moſt ſtately ſhip for war,The King buildeth the greateſt and goodlieſt ſhip of war that euer was built in Englād the Kéele whereof was an hundred and 14 foot long, and the croſſe beame was forty and foure foot long: ſhe will beare 64 péeces of great Ordnance, and is of the burthen of 1400 tunne: This royall ſhip is double built, and is moſt ſumptuouſly adorned both within and without with all manner of curious caruing, painting and rich gilding, being in all reſpects the greateſt and goodlieſt ſhippe that euer was builded in England: and this glorious ſhip the King gaue vnto his ſonne Henry Prince of Wales: and the 24 of September the King, the Quéene, the Prince of Wales, the Duke of Yorke, and the Lady Elizabeth with many great Lords went to Wollwich to ſée it lanched, but becauſe of the narrowneſſe of the Docke, it could not then be launched, whereupon the Prince came the next morning by thrée a clocke, and then at the launching thereof the Prince named it after his owne dignity, and called it the Prince, Maſter Phynyes Pet. was Warden and chiefe worke maſter in building this ſhip.
               
                  The Lord Wotton ſent to take the oth of the French King.The King ſent the Lord Wotton Ambaſſador into France to take the oath of the young King, and of the Quéene Regent his mother, for performance of a league newly made betwéene the two Kingdomes: he arriued at Callis the 28 of Auguſt, and came to Paris the 7 of

September, and the King was ſworne the 12 of the ſame moneth. And the Ambaſſador returned into England, the 7 of October. And the French King, viz. Lewis the 13. was crowned the ſixth of October at Reynes in Champaigne.
               Sunday the 21 of October,Three Biſhops conſecrated. by Commiſſion from the King to the Lord Biſhop of London, the Lord Biſhop of Elye, the Lord Biſhop of Worceſter, and to the Lord Biſhop of Rocheſter, they did conſecrate in the Chappell of the Lord Biſhop of London, Maſter Iohn Spottyſwod Archbiſhop of Glaſco, Maſter Gawen Hamelton Biſhop of Galloway, and M. Andrew Lambe Biſhop of Breachyn: which conſecration was performed mutatis mutandis, according to the forme of the Church of England.
               
                  Richard Pyot, Francis Ihones, Shreeues.
                  Shrieues.
               
               
                  Sir William Crauen Merchantaylor, Maior.
                  Maior.
               
               The Triumphes, Trophies, and pleaſant deuices at this time, in honour of the Lord Maior and Citie of London, were extraordinarie great, being in a manner twice ſo much as hath béene vſuall within the Citie, and ſo likewiſe were the ſtately ſhewes and ingenious deuices vpon the water, at the charges of the Company of Marchantaylors.
               Notwithſtanding the Citie of Londons formerThe Citie of Londō buildeth new granaries and ſtore houſes. plentifull prouiſion of ſundry Granaries and other Storehouſes for the generall ſeruice

thereof, and for preuention of ſudden famine, yet ſuch is the late vnſpeakeable increaſe of people within and about the City, as well of ſtrangers as Natiues, ſo as the Magiſtrates in their prouidence, for preuention of famine, and for prouiſion for the poore, very carefully about two yeares paſt beganne to build a Bridewell twelue new faire Granaries, being ſufficient to kéepe ſixe thouſand quarters of Corne, and two ſtore houſes for ſea-coale for the poore, which will keepe foure thouſand loade of coales. Theſe neceſſary houſes were not finiſhed vntill this time. Maſter Alderman Leman vſed great paines and diligence in the contriuing and accompliſhing of this memorable worke.
               
                  The prince of Anhalt commeth to ſee the King.This laſt Summer there were warres in Cleueland, and the vnited proteſtant Princes, with their ſeuerall forces aided the Marqueſſe of Brandenberg in his claime to that Dukedome, and the Dukedome of Gulich: in which wars, and at the taking the Citie of Gulich, Chriſtianus Prince of Anhalt, was chiefe Generall of all the vnited forces;Sir Edward Cecill, Lord Generall of all the Engliſh and Sots forces in Cleuelād and Gulich, and ſir Edward Cecyll, otherwiſe called Colonell Cecyll, was then Lord Generall of the Engliſh and Scottiſh Army. This Prince Chriſtanus, arriued of late at Douer, and came to ſée the King, who entertained and feaſted him and all his traine very roially. He tooke great pleaſure to view the Citie of London: he beheld the pleaſant triumphs vpon the water, and within the City, which were then extraordinary

in honor of the Lord Maior and Citizens: and that day, this Prince with all his German traine, were feaſted in the Guild hall, where he manifeſted his princely former admiration touching the greatneſſe, ſcituation, ſtate, and wealth of the City; and then he alſo admired the goodly vniforme order & rich habit of the citizens, and ſaid, that there was no State nor citie in the world, that did elect their Magiſtrates with ſuch magnificence, except the citie of Venice, vnto which the city of London commeth very neere, &c.
               The 7 of December Iohn Roberts,
                  A Monke and a Seminary executed. a Benedict Monke, ſomtime prouinciall of the Benedictans in England, and Thomas Somers a Seminary, were condemned at Newgate, & executed at Tiburn, they hauing bin before ſundry times takē and baniſhed, & yet preſumed to returne againe, and here to practiſe againſt the King and State.
               
                  George Palyn, Citizen and Girdler of London, at this time gaue ad pios vſus, 3600. pound,M. Palyns bounty. that is to ſay, twelue hundreth pound vnto the two Vniuerſities, and nine hundreth pound for an Almes-houſe, and the reſt he bequeathed vnto other godly and charitable purpoſes, in which legacies he beſtowed the better part of all his wealth.
               This month of December 1610.The Prince of Wales ſetleth his houſhold. 
                  Henry Prince of Wales kept his Court at Saint Iames néere Charing Croſſe, & ſetled his houſe, and ordained his Officers, as well the Officers of his Highneſſe Reuenewes, as thoſe

of his houſhold, the names of the chiefe whereof follow.
               
                  Of his Highneſſe Reuenewes.
                  Sir Edward Philips Chancellor.
                  Maſter Adam Newton, Secretary.
                  Sir George Moore, Receiuer Generall.
                  Sir Willi. Fleetwood, Suruaier generall.
                  Sir Auguſtine Nichols Sergeant.
                  M. Thomas Stephens, Atturney.
                  M. Richard Cunnock, Auditor.
               
               
                  Of his Highneſſe Houſhold.
                  Sir Thomas Challoner, Chamberlaine.
                  Sir Charles Cornewalleys, Treaſurer.
                  Sir Iohn Hollis, Comptroller.
                  Sir Dauid Fowllis, Cofferer.
                  Sir Dauid Murrey. Gentleman of the Bed-chamber.
               
               
                  The Parliament diſſolued by Proclamation, dated the 31 of December.Whereas the Kings moſt Excellent Maieſtie hath continued this Parliament together, longer then hath beene vſuall, or might well haue ſtood either with his important affaires of State, or with the publike buſineſſe of three whole Termes ſpent in the two laſt Seſſions, or with the occaſions of the Countrey, where the ſeruice and Hoſpitality of many Perſons of quality hath beene miſſing, and diuers Shires, Cities and Burrough Townes haue beene burdened, with allowances made to the Knights,

and Burgeſſes whom they imployed, beſides the particular expence of the nobility, and others attending that ſeruice; And all this in expectation of a good concluſion, of ſome of thoſe weightie cauſes, which haue béene therein deliberated, not onely for the ſupply of the neceſſities of his Maieſties eſtate, but for the eaſe and fréedome of his ſubiects, in many things propoſed by his Maieſtie in Parliament, farre differing & ſurpaſſing the fauors and graces of former times, both in nature and value: His Maieſtie hath now reſolued (for preuenting of further trouble, of all thoſe that would prepare themſelues, to be here againſt the time limited by the laſt prorogation) to declare by theſe preſents, that they ſhall not néed, to giue their attendance at the day appointed, for any ſeruice to be done, as members of this Parliament, becauſe his Maieſtie (for many good conſiderations knowne to himſelfe) hath now determined to diſſolue this Parliament, by his Commiſſion vnder the great Seale of England.
               Vpon New yéeres night,The Prince of Wales, his maske at Whitehall. the Prince of Wales being accompanied with twelue others, viz. two Earles, thrée Barons, fiue Knights, & two Eſquires, they performed a very ſtately maſke, in which was an excellent Sceane, ingenious ſpéeches, and rare ſongs, and with great variety of moſt delicate muſique.
               The French King ſent Monſieur de la Verdyne,
                  A ſpeciall Ambaſſador frō the Frēch King. one of the Marſhals of France, Gouernor of Maine, accompanied and attended with ſixeſcore

perſons all in mourning habit. He and his whole traine came to Lambeth the 16 of Ianuary, and were lodged in the Archbiſhops palace, which the King cauſed to be very roially furniſhed, and during their abode, they were alſo entertained at the Kings charge. The Ambaſſador had audience vpon Sunday the 20 of Ianuary; and the next Sunday the King tooke his oath, for performance of a league lately made betwéene the two Kingdomes.
               
                  M. Teaſdale his bounty.
                  Thomas Teaſdale of Glymton in Oxfordſhire-Gentleman, at this time gaue fiue thouſand pound to purchaſe land, for perpetual maintenance of ſeuen Fellowes and ſix Schollers, to bee placed in Bailyoll Colledge in Oxford, and to be choſen thither from time to time out of the Free-ſchoole of Abingdon in Backſhire. He alſo gaue lands for perpetuall maintenance for an Vſher in that Schoole, beſides many other charitable legacies. He deceaſed the 13 of Iune 1610.
               
                  Dunbar deceaſed. Viſcont Fenton a Priuie Counſellor.The 30 of Ianuary 1610. died the Earle of Dunbar, and the 18 of Aprill next following, viz. 1611 his funerall was very honorably performed at Weſtminſter. The 31 of Ianuary 1610 the Lord Viſcont Fenton captaine of the Guard, was ſworne a Priuy Counſellor.
               
                  Sir Marmaduke Dorrell buildeth a Parriſh Church.About this time ſir Marmaduke Dorell knight then Maſter of the Kings houſhold, but was afterward cofferer of the kings houſhold, builde
                     •
                   a very faire new Pariſh Church in the Town of Fulmer in Buckingham-ſhire neere Vxbridge,

this church was conſecrated by Doctor Barlow Lord Biſhop of Lincolne, and within fiue yeres after this time, moſt of the Churches within and about London with their ſteeples, were either newly enlarged or repaired, or beautified, as alſo about 3 yeares after, there were diuers Chappels new builded and conſecrat, as a Chappell builded by Baron Altham at Oxhey, & a Chappell builded in the Strand by ſir Iulius Caeſar Knight Maſter of the Roles, as alſo diuers Church-yards ordained and conſecrated, ye laſt whereof was that at White-chappel néere Mile-end-gréene, and at this time Bow-ſtéeple in Cheap-ſide was well repaired and the faire Dial ſet vp.
               The 11 of February 1610.Sir Henry Montegue made Sergeant. ſir Henry Montegue Knight recorder of London, was made Sergeant at Law, and preſently after he was made the Kings Sergeant, & ſo remained Recorder of London vntill the 18 of Nouember 1610. and then was made L. Chiefe Iuſtice of the Kings Bench,An. reg. 9. 1611 Viſcon
                        •
                      Rocheſter created. & the next day road to Weſtminſter-hall with great ſtate being very honorably accōpained & attended. Vpon our Lady-day, being thē Eaſter-day, the King created Sir Robert Car Knight, L. Viſcont of Rocheſter, at White-hall.
               The 9 of Aprill 1611.Doctor Abbot L. Archbiſhop of Canterbury. the moſt reuerend Father in God, George Abbot Doctor of Deuinity Lord Biſhop of London, was tranſferred vnto the Archbiſhoprick of Canterbury, and vpon Sonday the 23 of Iune he was ſworne a Priuy Counſeller at Gréenewich.
               
                  
                  Sir Thomas Dale and ſir Thomas Gates ſent with ſupplies to Virginia.About the middle of March laſt Sir Thomas Dale Knight Marſhall of Virginia was ſent thither with thrée ſhips and three hundreth men, and all things neceſſary for the Colony, and alſo twelue Kine twenty Goates, beſides Coneies, Pigeons and Pullen, and toward the end of May following, Sir Thomas Gates Knight, Lieutenant Generall of Virginia was ſent with thrée ſhips and thrée Caruells, and two hundreth and foureſcore men, and twenty women, and two hundreth kine, and as many ſwine, with other neceſſaries. And the next ſpring were ſent thither more ſupplies, beſides a particular ſupply for the Engliſh in the Bermodes.
               
                  Sir Thomas Ouerbury.The 20 of Aprill 1611 Sir Thomas Ouerbury was committed to the Tower, and died there the 15 of September next following.
               Thurſday the 9 of May this yeare 1611. the King in perſon came in the forenoone,The King in perſon commeth into the Star-chā
                     ber to ſee the triall of his Pixe. and ſuruaied Weſtminſter-hal, the Court of Exchequer and all the Offices, the King being accompanied and attended, by the Lord Chancellor, Lord Treaſurer, Lord Priuie Seale, the Lord Chamberlaine, with ſix other Earls & ſir Iulius Caeſar Knight Chancelor of the Exchequer, and went into the Star-chamber, being thither come of purpoſe to ſée his Moneys of Gold and Siluer, and cauſed them to be taken out of the Pixe, which were then brought from the Tower to be tried, as well for their weight as fineneſſe, where Edmond Doublday Eſquire, Warden of

the Mint, with the reſt of the Officers of the Mint, with their ſeuerall keyes opened the Pix, and powred foorth the gold and ſiluer before his Maieſtie to be tried and aſſaied by their ſeuerall ſtandards,Proclamation againſt the tranſportation of gold & ſiluer and the quoin aduanced. which was more then was done by any King this hundreth yeares, the King then alſo gaue them a Iury of ſixtéene Goldſmiths of the beſt ſkill, and note to make farther tryall and ſatiſfaction, and preſently after this his Maieſtie made a ſtrict Proclamation for preſeruation of his moneys within his dominions, which were moſt ſubtilly tranſported in great aboundance by Hollanders and others, ſo as his Maieſty in his wiſdome and kingly care was conſtrained to aduance his quoines, and to make an encreaſe of the price and valuation read my large Booke.
               The 13 of May being Monday in Whitſon weeke,The Duke of Yorke the Earle of Arundell and the Viſcont Rocheſter made knights of the Garter. at Windſor were enſtalled knights of the Garter, Prince Charles Duke of Yorke, ſonne to our ſoueraigne Lord the King, and Thomas Earle of Arundell, and Robert Viſcont Rocheſter.
               The ninth of Iune Doctor Buckeredge was conſecrated Lord Biſhop of Rocheſter,Doctor Buckeridge B. of Rocheſter. did Doctor Melburne Biſhop of Saint Dauies.
               The 23 of Iune arriued Prince Otto, ſonne and heire to Mawrice,
                  The yong Landgraue of Heſſon arriueth in England. Langraue of Heſſon of 17 yeares of age, being very Princely accompanied and attended, the king honoured two of his Attendants with knight-hood, this young Prince went vnto both the Vniuerſities, and

ſaw diuers of the Kings pallaces, and returned the 3 of Auguſt.
               The 6 of Iune the King by Proclamation ſtraightly commanded the oath of Alleageance to be miniſtred vnto all ſorts of people,The oath of Alleageance miniſtred. and a true certificate to be made thereof vnto the great Lords of the Counſell.
               
                  Proclamatiō againſt al encreaſe of buildings with in Londō and the Suburbs and 20 miles therof.The 8 of Auguſt the King by proclamation very ſtraightly commanded, that there ſhould be no more encreaſe of buildings within London and ye Suburbs, and twenty miles thereof, & to build in vniforme of bricke and ſtone, for the preſeruation of timber, wherof there was plain
                     •
                   appearance of extreame want, except by prouidence preuented, as alſo that the ſudden increaſing of people in London and Weſtminſter was the decay and depopulating of many Townes and Hamlets in diuers ſhires, for the more ſpéedy and aſſured redreſſe whereof and other ſuch like enormities, the King made an other proclamation the 10 of September following.
               
                  Doctor King Lord Biſhop of London.The 18 of September 1611 Doctor King Deane of Chriſt-church in Oxford, was conſecrated Lord Biſhop of London.
               
                  France & Spaine match togither.At this time was concluded a double match betwéene the yong French King and the King of Spaines daughter, and the Prince of Spaine and the French Kings ſiſter·
               
                  The Earle of Pembrooke a Priuie Counſeller.Wenſday the 29 of September, the Earle of Pembrooke was ſworne a Priuie Counſeller.
               
                  
                  Edward Barkeham, George Smithes Shrieues.
                  Shrieues.
               
               
                  Sir Iames Pemberton Knight Gold-ſmith,
                  Maior. 
                  Maior.
               
               Wenſday the 18 of March 1611.Two Heretiques burned. 
                  Barthelmew Legat an obſtinate Arian Heretique was burned in Smithfield. And the eleuenth of Aprill following viz. 1612. Edward Wightman. an other peruerſe Heretique, hauing refuſed more fauour then hee could either deſire or deſerue, was burned at Lichfield, this Heretique would faine haue made the people beléeue, that hee himſelfe was the Holy Ghoſt and immortall, with ſundry other moſt vile opinions, not fit to be mentioned amongſt Chriſtians.
               The 22 of Aprill the Viſcont Rocheſter was ſworne a Priuie Counſeller.An. reg. 10 1612 Viſcont Rocheſter a Priuie Counſellor.
               
               The 29 of May 1612. Richard Newport and William Scot Seminaries, were executed at Tiburne.Two Seminaries executed.
               
               The 25 of Iune Robert Carliel & Iames Edwin were executed for murthering Iohn Turner a Fencer, and the 27 of Iune the Lord Sanquire was arraigned at the Kings Bench barre,The Lord Sanquire executed. for conſpyring and hireing the ſaid two perſons to kill the ſaid Turner, the Lord confeſſed the indictment, and was executed vpon a Gibet the 29 of Iune at Weſtminſter.
               The 25 of Iune 1612. began a great Lottery in London,Lotteries in Londō. the greateſt Lot or Prize was

a thouſand pound in plate, and three yeares after that there was an other greater Lottery drawne at the ſame place viz. at the Weſt end of Saint Paules Church.
               The 26 of Iune died Roger Earle of Rutland at Cambridge,Roger Earle of Rutland deceaſt. and was buried at Bottyſford, his brother Sir Francis Maners ſucceeded him in the Earledome.
               At this time the corps of Queene Mary late Queene of Scotland,The King buildeth a royall Toombe for his mother, & tranſlateth her corps from Peterborow to Weſtminſter. was tranſlated from Peterborough to Weſtminſter, being thither attended by the Lord Biſhop the Couentry and Lichfield. And vpon Thurſday of 8 of October, the Lord Archbiſhop of Canterbury, the Lord Chancellor, the Lord Priuie Seale, the Earle of Worceſter with other Noble men and Gentlemen, and the Lord Biſhop of Rocheſter and the Deane of Weſtminſter met the Corps at Clarkenwell about ſixe a clocke in the Euening, and from thence with plenty of Torchlights, the body of the ſayd Queen was brought into the Chappell Royall, at Weſtminſter, and was there placed in a vaute, vpon the Southſide whereof the King had new made a Royall Toombe for her, where ſhe now reſteth.
               
                  Great windes & ſhipwrack.In the monethes of October, Nouember and December there happened great windes, violent ſtormes and tempeſts, which cauſed much ſhipwracke vpon the Ocean, in hauens and riuers, and did great damage vpon the Land, and the next ſpring there fell extroardinary raine euen vntill Saint Iames-tyde, and yet vpon

ſhe humble and hearty praiers of the people in all Churches, it pleaſed Almighty God to ſend a more ſeaſonable and plentifull harueſt then in many yeares before.
               The laſt yeare in Sommer here arriued ſir Robert Sherley knight an Engliſhman,An Ambaſſador from the King of Perſia, to the King of Great Brittaine. from the King of Perſia. And by him ſent Ambaſſador to the King of Great Brittan, and was very honourably receiued and entertained, he returned in Ianuary this yeare 1612.
               The Kings Maieſty by his letters pattents, dated the ſeuenth of Iune,Hicks-hall builded. in the ſeuenth yeare of his raigne, did enfeoffe 15 knights and Eſquires of the County of Middleſex, of a peece of ground, lying in Saint Iohns ſtreet in Middleſex, to be for euer imployed for a Seſſions houſe, and for the keeping of a priſon or houſe of correction for that county, vpon which peece of ground Sir Baptiſt Hicks knight, one of the Iuſtices of that county, at his owne proper charge builded a faire Seſſion houſe of Bricke and Stone, and vpon Wenſday the 13 of Ianuary this yeare 1612. the houſe being then newly finiſhed, there were aſſembled ſixe and twenty Iuſtices of that countie, where the founder feaſted them all, and when they had wel conſidered what name that houſe ſhould beare, then with one conſent they all agreed it ſhould be called Hicks-hall, after the name of the Founder, and then the Founder gaue it freely to them and their Succeſſors for euer.
               Vntill this time the Iuſtices of Middleſex

held their County Court or méetings, in a rude common Inne called the Caſtle, néere Smithfield-bars, anoyde with Carriers and many other ſorts of people.
               
                  Sir Baptiſt Hicks his farther boū
                     tie.The ſaid Sir Baptiſt Hicks hath alſo builded a very faire Hoſpitall of frée ſtone at Camden in Glouceſter-ſhire for ſixe poore men and ſix women, allowing them competent mainetenance for euer, he alſo repaired the Parriſh Church and gaue them a Bell.
               
                  Lent ſtrictly kept.This yeare vpon ſondry apparant reaſons of preſent enſuing famine, the Faſt of Lent was ſtraightly commanded to bée ſtrickly kept, and that all perſons ſhould vtterly abſtaine from killing and eating of all manner of Butchers fleſh, which courſe tooke good effect as you read at large.
               
                  Shrieues.
                  Edw. Rotherham, Allexander Preſcot, Shrieues.
               
               
                  Maior.
                  Sir Ioh. Swynarton knight Merchātaillor, Maior.
               
               Friday the 16 of October 1612. at 11 a clock at night, arriued at Graues-end the moſt illuſtrious young Prince Frederick the fifth of that name Count Palatine of the Reyne &c.The Palſgraue a
                     
                        ••
                     ueth in England. being very Princely accompanied and attended, he was receiued by Sir Lewis Lewkenor Knight, Maſter of the Ceremonies, whom the King had ſent thither before to attend the comming of the Prince, vpon knowledge of his ariuall the King ſent ſpéedily the Duke of Lenox with other Earles and Barons to ſignifie his hearty

welcome, and the next Sonday they accompanied the Palſgraue by Barge from Graues-end to White-hall, where Prince Charles Duke of Yorke receiued and entertained him at his firſt landing, and brought him vp into the great Banqueting-houſe, where he was likewiſe entertained by the King Queene, Henry Prince of Wales, and the Lady Elizabeth.
               
               The 29 of October the Palſgraue dined at the Guild-hall, and was accompanied with the Lord Archbiſhop of Canterbury, and the Duke of Lenox, being the great Feaſt day of the Lord Maior, after dinner the Lord Maior in the behalfe of the City and himſelfe, in ſigne of loue and hearty welcome, preſented the Palſgraue with a Baſon and Eure, and two faire Liuerie pots curiouſly wrought and richly gilded, and in euery of them was engrauen Ciuitas London.
               
               Friday the ſixt of October died the moſt Noble and hopefull Prince Henry Prince of Wal
                     •
                  s,Henry Prince of Wales deceaſed. hée was Royally buried in the Chappell Royall at Weſtminſter the ſeuenth of December.
               Spon Saint Thomas day the Palſgraue and Graue Mawrice were elected Knights of the Garter,The Palſgraue and Graue Maw
                        •
                     ice made Knights of the Garter, and vpon Sonday the 7 of February the Palſgraue in perſon was enſtalled at Windſor, and Graue Mawrice was enſtalled by his Deputy and kinſman Count Lodowicke of Naſſaw,
               
                  
                  The Lady Elizabeth married vnto the Palſgraue.The 14 of February being Shroue Sunday the Lady Elizabeth was married vnto the Palſgraue: In honour whereof there were ſundry warlike Tryumphs and Trophies vpon the Thames thrée daies before the daie of marriage, and vpon the wedding day there was Tilting and other Royall entertainements of Time, and that night there was a Maske of Lords and Ladies, and two nights after that there were two ſeuerall Maskes performed by the Gentlemen of the foure Innes of Court, all which were ſet out and adorned with more ſundry propperties, ſpeeches and ingenious deuices, then euer was any before in this Kingdome,A preſent from London. and the Lord Maior and Aldermen of London in the behalfe of the citie and themſelues, preſented the Bride with a very faire chaine of Orientall pearle.
               
                  Prince Charles biſhopped. An. reg. 11 1613Vpon Eaſter day, the King the Palſgraue and the Lady Elizabeth receiued the Sacrament in the Chappell of White-hall, and the next day Prince Charles was confirmed or Biſhopped in the ſame Chappell, by the Lord Archbiſhop of Canterbury, in the preſence of the King and Quéene, the Prince hauing beene formerly conferred withall by the Lord Archbiſhoppe, and the Lord Biſhop of Bathe and Wells, touching the principles of Religion, vnto whom hee manifeſted ſuch princely vnderſtanding and forwardneſſe, and there withall vpon the ſodaine gaue ſuch ready anſweres and reaſons of his Faith, as draue them and all

the reſt that heard him into great admiration, the Prince being then but twelue yeares of age the 19 of February laſt.
               Satterday the tenth of Aprill 1613.The Palſgraue and the Lady Elizabeth ſet forward for Heydelberg. the Palſgraue and the Lady Elizabeth ſet forward on their iourney for Heydelberge, being accompanied with the King and Quéene, and Prince Charles, and went by barge from White-hall to Gréenewich, and vpon Tweſday they all in like manner went by Coach to Rocheſter, where the next morning the Palſgraue and the Lady Elizabeth tooke their leaue of the King, Quéene and Prince, and then rode to Canterbury, and from thence to Margate, where the Lord Admirall of England with nine ſhips and pinaces attended their comming and receiued them and their traine, and with them there went to conduct them the Duke of Lenox, the Earle of Arundell, the Viſcont Liſle, and the Lord Harrington, all theſe were imbarked the 23 of Aprill, but through contrary windes it was the 25 of Aprill before they arriued at Fluſhing, and from thence paſſed through the vnited Prouinces, and through the Dukedome of Cleaueland Gulych, and through the Biſhopricks of Collen and Tayer, and through part of Heſſia, in all which places they were moſt kindly entertained, and preſented with many princely preſents, and being arriued at Heydelberge, they were likewiſe as ioyfully receiued and welcomed by the Princes Electors and others with great Tryumphs and royall entertainements.

The Palſgraue during his abode in England demeand himſelfe ſo Nobly, that he won the hearts of the whole Nation, and at his departure hee expreſt his Princely bounty in guifts and rewards.
               
                  A Ianus borne, ſhipwrack, great flames & fiers.The 17 of Aprill 1613. at Alington in Lancaſhi
                     •
                  e was borne a maiden child, hauing foure Legges, foure Armes, two Bellies ioynde to one backe, one head with two faces, the one before and the other behinde, and this yeare likewiſe was great Ship-wracke, by violent tempeſts, there happened alſo ſundrie Inundations, and ſtrange accidents, and much dammage done by fire in diuers places,The Globe burnt. and vpon Saint Peters day the Globe on the banckſide was burned.
               
                  The Millita
                        •
                     y exerciſ
                        •
                      of Armes in the Artill
                        ••
                     y Garden again p
                        •
                     t in practiſe.The practiſe of Armes and Millitary diſcipline in the Artillery Garden by the Citizens of London, formerly mentioned in the yeare 1586. being for the ſpace of almoſt foure and twentie yeares quite neglected and in a manner forgotten, beganne this yeare 1613. to be practiſed in farre more excellent manner then formerlie, and ſhortly after vpon the example of this warlike exerciſe of the Citizens of London, then the young Gentlemen of the Innes of Court and Middleſex and others, beganne the like practiſe of Armes, in a place called the Couent Garden, and after that they made themſelues a more conuenient place in a field betwéene Saint Iames, and Saint Gyles.
               
                  The 24 of October,Sir Peekſall Brocas doth penance at Paules Croſſe. ſir Peckſall Brocas knight did penance at Paules Croſſe, for ſtanding conuicted before the high Commiſſioners for ſecret and notorious Adulteries.
               The 26 of October ariued Olexſey Euanowich Iſzazen,
                  Sir Iohn Merick ſent Lord Ambaſſador to Ruſſia. from the yong Emperour of Ruſſia Michaell Euanowich Vryoue, hée returned the next ſpring, and then the King ſent Sir Iohn Merricke Knight, Lord Ambaſſador to the ſayd Emperour, who according to his Commiſſion, with great paines and long trauaile, made a firme Peace and League betwéene the King of Sweaden and the Emperour of Ruſſia.
               
                  Thomas Benet, Henry Iay, Shrieues.
                  Shrieues.
               
               
                  Sir Thomas Middleton Knight Grocer, Maior.
                  Maior.
               
               The 4 of Nouember 1613.Viſcont Rocheſter made Earl of Somerſet. the Viſcont Rocheſter was created Earle of Somerſet, and Baron of Branſpeth, and the ſame day in the afternoone Sir Edward Cooke Knight,L. Cooke a Priuie Counſellor. Lord chiefe Iuſtice of England was ſworne a Priuie Counſellor.
               Sonday the 26 of Decembert Robert Earle of Somerſet maried the Lady Francis Howard, daughter to Thomas Earle of Suffolke.Earle of Somerſet maried.
               
               Sonday the 2 of Ianuary 1613.Prince Henry Frederick borne at Heydelberg. betweene the houres of twelue and one in the morning, was Prince Henry Fredericke borne at Heydelberge in Germanie, the firſt borne ſonne of the moſt high borne Princeſſe the Lady

                  Elizabeth the eldeſt daughter of the moſt High and Mighty Prince Iames King of Great Brittaine, and wife to the moſt Noble Prince Fredericke the firſt Count Palatine, chiefe of the Princes Electors,An. reg. 12 1614 he was chriſtened the ſixth of March.
               
                  Sir Ralph Winwood made Secretary, & Sir Thomas Lake a Priuie Counſellor.Thurſday the 29 of March 1614. Sir Ralphe Winwood Knight, Maſter of the Requeſts was ſworne principall Secretary of Eſtate, and Sir Thomas Lake Knight, Clerke of the Priuie Signet was ſworne a Priuie Counſellor.
               The 15 of Iune died Henry Earle of Northamton, and was buried in the chappell of Douer caſtle,Henry Earle of Northamton deceaſt. he founded thrée Hoſpitalls, one whereof was at Gréenewich, which he ordained ſhould be for euer gouerned by the company of Mercers of London.
               
                  Chriſtianus King of Denmarke, his ſecond comming into England.In the moneth of Iuly this yeare 1614. the King of Denmarke with thrée ſhippes arriued at Yarmouth, accompanied and attended by his Lord Chancellor, and Lord Admirall and diuers other of quallity and a competent Number of his Guard and others.
               Friday the 22 of Iuly hee came to the Quéenes Court at Somerſet houſe in the Strand, the King of great Brittaine being then in Bedfordſhire ryding progreſſe, where hauing ſpéedie knowledge of his brothers a ryuall ſet forward inſtantly for London, and vpon the next Sunday both the Kings, the Quéene and and Prince Charles met at Somerſet houſe,

where the Biſhop of London preached before them.
               And the firſt of Auguſt the King of Denmarke being accompanied with King Iames and Prince Charles, went by Barge to Woolwich, and to Graues-end, where they dined, and after dinner went aboord the King of Denmarkes ſhippe, and there the King of Great Brittaine tooke leaue of his brother, and returned that night to Theobalds, Prince Charles accompanied his Vncle the next day to Rocheſter, and and hauing viewed the Nauy Royall, they returned to the King of Denmarkes Ship, and the next daie Prince Charles returned to London, and the King with a faire winde ſet ſaile for Denmarke, hauing euery way expreſt his Royall bounty as formerly.
               The thirtéenth of Iuly,The Earle of Suffolk Lord Treaſurer The Earle of Somerſet Lord Chamberlaine. 
                  Thomas Earle of Suffolke was made Lord high Treaſurer of England, and at this time Robert Earle of Somerſet was made Lord Chamberlaine.
               This Michellmas Tearme there was a call of Seargeants at Law, viz. the eleuenth of Nouember.A call of Sergeants.
               
               At this time was finiſhed and builded the new faire Counſell Chamber for the Lord Maior and Aldermen of London,A new Counſell Chamber for the L. Maior of London. by reaſon the former Chamber was too little, Sir Thomas Middleton Knight being then Lord Maior.
               In September there was a generall muſter of horſe and foote throughout the Land,A general muſter & trayning. and therewithall trayning of ſouldiers, but chiefly

in the City of London by the citizens them
                     •
                  ſelues, many whereof by their former voluntary exerciſe of Armes and Millitary diſcipline, was now ſo ready and expert that they taught o
                     •
                  thers. And whereas at this time there was by the Lord Maior and citizens, twenty ſelect
                     ••
                   captaines choſen to traine and gouerne th
                     •
                   trained bands of London, viz. ſixe thouſand
                     •
                   there were found in the ſaid former company viz. of the Artillerie garden, ſufficient men 
                     •
                   be their Lieutenants and all other officers 
                     〈◊〉
                   the apt and ready trayning of others, fr
                     ••
                   whom vpon good obſeruation all the ſhires 
                     〈◊〉
                   England tooke example: the captaines and gen
                     •
                  tlemen of the Artillerie garden, demeand themſelues ſo wel, exerciſing all points of warre▪ that it pleaſed Prince Charles to goe in perſon to the Artillery garden to ſée their wéekely exerciſe of armes, and to goe into Hoxton field to ſée their great muſter and trayning of the ſixe thouſand citizens, which wéekely practiſe now vſed in the Artillery garden, they were determined to remooue from thence, and to hold their vſual Marſhall méetings and practiſe of armes in the great third field from Mooregate viz. next the ſixe Windmills, which field, Maſter Leat with great paines hath béene diuers yeares a preparing to that purpoſe.
               
                  The Thames cleered of Piles, Stops and Weyres.At this time the riuer of Thames was cléered of ſtops, pyles and weyres by the Water Bayly of London, as he was appointed by the Lord Maior and Court of Aldermen.
               
                  Maſter Hugh Middleton,
                  Maſter Middletō bringeth a riuer to London. Citizen and Goldſmith of London, borne in Denbigh-ſhire hauing ſpent fiue yeares time with the aduiſe and direction of the beſt and moſt skillfull Artizens, imployed beſtowed great ſummes of money, forced to vſe ſeuen hundred workemen at one time, and endured infinit Callumny and detraction, he brought a delicate Riuer of ſwéet water from two plentious ſprings, viz. the one whereof is called Chawldwell néere Ware, and the other Amwell in Herefordſhire, which two ſprings being vnited, runne ioyntly togither to the North-ſide of London, which Riuer with the Trenches to conuay it, and the great Ceſterne to receiue it with great difficultie was brought vnto deſired effect in Sommer, 1613. but the Currant was reſtrained from running into the Ceaſterne vntill Michaelmas day in the yeare 1613. And that day there came to behold it the Lord Maior if London, and Sir Thomas Middleton Knight, Lord Maior Elect for the yeare enſuing, brother to this Maior Hugh Middleton Maſter of this memorable worke, with many Aldermen, and a great number of graue Citizens and others, who were entertained with excellent Muſique, and the royall ſound of drums and trumpets, & with ſpéeches and other pleaſant entertainements, and at the lifting vp of the Scluce to let the Riuer runne into the Ceaſterne there was a peale of Chambers, ſince which time with all poſſible

expedition this water is conuaied from this Ceaſterne by pipes of Elme into all high ſtré
                     •
                   and chiefe lanes of the city and the ſuburbe
                     •
                   thereof, the generall and particular benefit their of is vnualuable.
               
                  Shrieues.
                  Peter Proby, Martin Lumley. Shrieues.
               
               
                  Maior.
                  Sir Thomas Hayes Knight Draper, Maior.
               
               
                  Two Hoſpitalls founded.At this time was founded the Great Hoſpi
                     •
                  tall at the Charter-houſe néere London, for foureſcore men, and forty children, and the new built Hoſpitall at Dulwich in Surrey, read my large booke.
               
                  Great froſts, ſnow, and great flouds.The 17 of Ianuary 1614. it began to fréeze in ordinary manner, and the 23 of Ianuary it beganne to ſnow, and continued fréezing, and ſnowing many daies, and vpon Sonday the twelfth of February it beganne to ſnow moſt extreamely, and continued vntill the foureteenth of Februarie at noone, and then it abated, and from that time, for many daies after it continued fréezing and ſnowing much or little, vntill the ſixth or ſeuenth of March, by meanes whereof much cattell periſhed as Calues and Lambes, Déere and Coneys &c. by reaſon the earth lay long couered with déepe ſnow, to the great hurt of all manner of cattell, and many were forced to vſe new deuices to fadder, this ſnow brought extreame daunger to all Trauaillers, after this ſnow thawed there followed Inundations, great and violent which

did great ſpoiles and dammages as you may read in my large booke.
               Tueſday the ſeuenth of March 1614.The King is entertained at Cambridge. the King was royally receiued into Cambridge, where he ſtaied vntill Satterday following, in which ſpace the Vniuerſitie entertained his Maieſtie with learned diſputations in Diuinitie, Philoſophy, &c. and with Comodies in Lattin and Engliſh, with great feaſting of the King his Nobility and traine, the King in moſt gratious manner came to them againe in May next following, what is more to be ſaid touching his Maieſties being at Cambridge, I could neuer learne, notwithſtanding my letters and mediation to the Vice Chancellor, therefore I cannot promiſe any more in my large booke.
               The 25 of March 1615.An. reg. 13 1815 Proclamation againſt tranſportation of children, & of gold and ſiluer. proclamation was made to reſtraine the ſending of children ouer beyond the ſeas, to make them Roman Prieſts, Ieſuits or Seminaries, and there was an other Proclamation made to ſtay and preuent all further tranſportation of gold or ſiluer out of this land, vpon ſeuerall penalties, as well to the Counſellor as Tranſporters.
               Sonday the 23 of Aprill 1615.Sir George Villers Knighted. 
                  George Villers Eſquire, was ſworne gentleman of the Kings Bed-chamber, and the next day he was Knighted.
               The 24 of Aprill there were 18 Ieſuits and Seminaries taken out of Newgate,Ieſuits & Seminaries ſent to Wiſbidge. and ſixe out of the Gatehouſe at Weſtminſter, and were all 24 ſent to Wiſhydge.
               
                  
                  Two Knights of the Garter.The 23 of May were enſtalled Knights of the Garter, the Lord Viſcont Fenton captaine of the Gard, and the Lord Knowles Maſter of the Court of Wards.
               
                  The Lord Hay made a Baron.The 29 of Iune, Iames Lord Hay, was created Baron of Sawley in Yorkeſhire.
               The next day being Friday, Sir Robe
                        ••
                      Dormer Knight and Baronet,Sir Robert Dormer made Baron. was created Baron Dormer of Wing.
               The 19 of Iuly Doctor Milburne Deane of Rocheſter,Doctor Milburne Biſhop. was conſecrated Biſhop of Saint Dauies.
               
                  Proclamation againſt encreaſe of building about London.At this time proclamation was made againe, not onely to ſtay, all further encreaſe of buildings, which were daylie erected in and about London, contrary to ſundrie former Edicts, and thereupon this Proclamation rattified and confirmed all the former Proclamations, and ſtreightly charged all Commiſſioners in that behalfe, to looke and ſearch into the depth of all ſuch offenders, and offences, and to punniſh them accordingly. This Proclamation was dated the 16 of Iuly 1615. And yet for all this, there was wonderous new encreaſe of buildings round about London, chiefly on the North-ſide of the Couen-garden vpon a field called Long Acar neere Saint Giles in the field &c.
               
                  Biſhop of Wincheſter a Priuie Counſellor.The 3 of Auguſt, Doctor Bilſon Biſhop of Wincheſter was ſworne a Priuie Counſellour.
               This yeare 1615. was builded a Houſe of

Correction for the County of Middleſex nere Clearken-well in a large garden plot,A houſe of correction builded for the Countie of Middleſex. purchaſed by the Iuſtices of that countie for that purpoſe the purchaſe and building whereof coſt aboue fiue and twentie hundreth pounds, part of which money was the free guift of the Iuſtices of the county, and the reſt was leuied by the Inhabitants.
               The Citie of London at the requeſt of the Counſell, gaue fiue hundreth pounds in readie money to make a ſtocke for the ſaid houſe of correction, but it was imployed in the building and furniſhing of that houſe.
               And then the Iuſtices ordained two Gouernours and a Matrone, to order and gouerne the Vagrants committed to that houſe, and they to haue a Sallarie of two hundreth pound a yeare allowed them for their paines, In regarde of which Sallarie, they doe receiue the Vagrants, and keepe them at worke without farther charge to the countie, vntill they be diſcharged thence by order of the Iuſtices of peace.
               This Sommer alſo was the Weſt Smithfielde of London paued all ouer,Smithfield paued all ouer. and ſtronglie Rayled in on all ſides, and likewiſe the new raiſed mount or middle of the Field was ſtrongly Railed abount for the better ſaffetie of paſſengers, and ſecuretie of all that ſhould walke therein from the danger of Coathes, Carts, Horſes, Oxen and all other Cattell, of all which that field is ſeldome emptie,

and the laſt yeare the new Pallace yard before Weſtminſter-hall was likewiſe paued, the pauing of theſe two places, was formeth held as ſtrange and difficult to bée ſo fully per
                     •
                  formed, as well for that it was generally ſup
                     •
                  poſed there could not bée ſufficient quanti
                     •
                   of ſtones found to repaire the daylie decay 
                     〈◊〉
                   London ſtréetes, and to paue new them ſtréetes, as it was of late yeares to ſée moſt of the high ſtréetes of London to bee paued all along by their ſhops ſides with broad frée ſtone, which manner of ſmooth pauement beganne firſt by the Gold-ſmithes and Mercers toward the Eaſt end of Cheape-ſide about fiue yeares paſt, and ſince by degrées many other ſtréetes did the like, though very ſlowly, but the Stationers in Paules Church-yard in the yeare 1616 bordered their ſide in vniforme order all in one Sommer.
               
                  The high-cawſes in London taken downe & made leuell.And about eight yeares paſt the ſondry high Cawſes which lay in the middeſt of diuers his ſtréetes, and great thorough-faires were taken downe, and the ſtréetes made ſweeter fairer, and more paſſable, as the Strand, where the firſt reformation beganne, in Holborne, in long Southwarke, the great high-way by the Minors to Algate, from Algate to White-chappell, which was the laſt Cawſey that was taken downe: there was an other great cawſey from Biſhops-gate to Shoredich-church, there were diuers others as in Saint Iohns-ſtréete, Barbican, Red-croſſe-ſtréete, White-croſſe-ſtréete,

and in other places, the which are all remooued and new paued, and no ſigne remaines of any of the former offences or anoyance to paſſengers or inhabitants, which remooue of thoſe ſundry broad long & high cawſes were euer formerly held impoſſible to be remooued, and the ſtréets to be made ſo ſwéet and paſſable as now they are.
               The 27 of September 1615.The Lady Arbella deceaſt. died the Ladie Arbella in the Tower, ſhe was buried in the Chappell Royall at Weſtminſter.
               
                  William Gore, Iohn Gore. Shrieues. They were brehren borne in London,
                  Shrieues. 
                  and both free of the Company of Merchantayllers.
               
               
                  Sir Iohn Iolles Knight Draper Maior.
                  Maior.
               
               He builded a Frée-ſchoole, and eight faire ſliues houſes at Stratford-bow for eight poore families, towards the maintenance of all which he gaue fifty thrée pounds thirtéene ſhillings and foure pence a yeare for euer.
               And during the time of his Mayralty,Sir Iohn Iolles his bounty. he dilligently adminiſtred Iuſtice, and very bounteous and chéerefull, he with certaine Aldermen, names follow, viſited and ſuruaied the bounds and limits of the Riuer of Thames, and held Courts and Iuries in ſundry places, in this progreſſe, he was as honourable accompanied and attended, as was befitting ſo honourable a Maiſtrate of ſo famous a Citie as London,

the like viſitation had not beene in about fourſcore yeares before.
               Monday the 23 of October 1615. Richard Weſton yeoman,Weſton executed. was indicted and condemned in the Guild-hall of London for poyſoning 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  Thomas Ouerbury Knight, and was executed at Tiburne the next Wenſday.
               Thurſday the ninth of Nouember 1615 Anne Turner widow,Miſtreſſe Turner executed. was indicted and condemned at Weſtminſter, for being acceſſarie before the murther of Sir Thomas Ouerbury, ſhe was executed at Tiburne the twelfth of Nouember.
               
                  The Lieutenant of the Tower executed.Thurſday the 16 of Nouember 1615. Sir Ieruas Elweſe Knight Lieutenant of the Tower, was indicted and condemned in the Guildhall, for being acceſſarie before the murther of Sir Thomas Ouerbury, and was executed vpon the Tower hill the 20 of Nouember.
               
                  Franckline executed.Monday the 27 of Nouember 1615. Iames Franklin Gentleman, was indicted and condemned at Weſtminſter, for being acceſſarie alſo before the murther of the ſayd Sir Thomas Ouerbury, and was executed at Saint Thomas Awaterings vpon Satterday the ninth of December.
               The next yeare viz. the 24 of May, Frances Counteſſe of Somerſet was brought to Weſtminſter-hall, and the next day Robert Earle of Somerſet was brought thither likewiſe, and had their ſeuerall tryalls by their Péeres, touching the buſineſſe laſtly mentioned, and from

thence they returned backe againe to the Tower.
               The ſeuenteenth of Nouember 1615.The ſecond Lottery. began ſhe drawing of the ſecond great Lottery for Virginia.
               At the end of this yeare 1615.Captaine Beniamin Ioſeph goeth to the Eaſt Indies. the Eaſt India Merchants ſent out ſixe braue ſhips to the Eaſt Indies, vnder command of Beniamine Ioſeph, an excellent Nauigator.
               The third of December 1515.D. Abbot B. of Sallisbury. 
                  Robert Abbot Doctor of Diuinity, and brother to the Lord Archbiſhop of Canterbury, was conſecrated Lord Biſhop of Sallisbury.
               The thrée and twentith of December,The Earle of Pemb. made L. Chamberlaine. the Earle of Pembrooke was made Lord Chamberlaine.
               The third of Ianuarie,The Earle of Worceſter L. Priuy Seale. the Earle of Worceſter was made Lord Priuie Seale.
               Thurſday the fourth of Ianuary,Sir Georg Villers Maiſter of the horſe. Sir George Villers was made Maſter of the Horſe.
               The third of Aprill 1616.Sir Iohn Digby made a Prime Counſellor. Sir Iohn Digby Knight, was ſworne a Priuie Counſellour, and was made Vice-Chamberlaine to the King.
               At this time Maſter William Iones Merchant,1616 An reg. 14 Maſter William Iones his Bounty. and frée of the Company of Haberdaſhers of London, gaue nine thouſand pounds to build twenty Almes houſes at Monmouth in Wales, for twenty poore men and women with competente, maintinence for them for euer.
               
                  He builded there alſo a faire Frée ſchoole, the Maſter thereof to haue a hundreth Marke yerely for euer, and the Vſher a hundreth Nobles yearely for euer.
               And at Newland he haue likewiſe fiue thouſand pounds for the maintenance of a Preacher, and for the reliefe of the poore and others for euer.
               In London hee gaue ſixtéene hundreth pounds, to allow a learned Preacher a hundreth pounds a yeare for euer.
               He gaue alſo fouretéene hundreth and forty pounds to purchaſe a yearely reliefe for euer of nine poore men of the Company of Haberdaſhers.
               He haue to the foure Hoſpitalls of London fiue hundreth pounds.
               He gaue a thouſand pounds to be giuen to poore Preachers throughout the Land for a preſent guift.
               All theſe his guifts and bounty, he ordained ſhould be for euer at the diſpoſe of the Company of Haberdaſhers, the full ſumme of money to the aforeſaid vſes is eightéene thouſand pounds fiue hundreth and forty, beſides his bounty in Hambro and Stode, &c.
               
                  Sea-coale and Pit-coale make glaſſe and melt Mettels. At this time was brought to perfection the making of all manner of Glaſſe, viz. Venice Glaſſe, and all other ſorts of Glaſſes, by the burning onely of Sea-coale, and alſo the melting of Iron and all other Mettles onely with Sea-coale, and alſo the burning of Brick with

Sea-coale, whereof I will ſay more in my large Booke.
               The ninth of Iune 1616.Sir Frances Bacon a Priuie Counſellor. Sir Francis Bacon Knight, was ſworne a Priuie Counſellour.
               Thurſday the twentith of Iune, the King in perſon being accompanied with Prince Charles and the great Lords of the Counſell,The King maketh an oration in the Starchamber. went into the Starre-chamber, and there made an excellent Oration vnto the Iudges and others.
               Monday the firſt of Iuly 1616.A Seminary hanged and a woman burned. one Maxfield a Seminary was executed at Tiburne, and the ſame fore-noone a woman was burned in Smithfield for killing her huſband.
               Wenſday the third of Iuly Sir Iohn Iolles Knight,The Lord Maior in perſon ſurueieth the boūds of the Riuer of Thames and reformeth, all maner of anoyances. Lord Maior of London accompanied with Alderman Preſcot, Alderman Iones, Alderman Rotherham, Alderman Lumley, Maſter William Gore one of the Shréeues of London, Maſter Iones common Sergeant, Maſter Smart Sword bearer, Maſter Sparrey Water Bayliffe, with diuers other chiefe officers and gentlemen, went to Suruay the bounds, and limits of the Riuer of Thames Eaſtward, and to cleanſe the Riuer of annoyances, and to reforme the abuſe of vnlawfull fiſhing and ſpoile of Fry &c. And to that purpoſe kept Court at Graues-end, and gaue a Iurie to make dilligent enquiry of all abuſes and annoyances, from thence he & his whole traine rode to Rocheſter, where the Maior and Aldermen of that

City entertained him and all his traine verie kindely, and the next morning thoſe three Barges that brought them to Graues-end, being come about, carried his Lordſhip and the reſt from Rocheſter,Maſter Rock. to Lée, and Maſter Rocke, The Maior of Rocheſter in his owne Barge conducted the Lord Maior as farre as his liberties extended, and paſſing by the Kings Caſtles and Nauy Royall, they were ſaluted with many volleis of great ſhot.
               And being come to Lée, the Lord Maior that after-noone held a Court and gaue a Iury for Eſſex as he had done before in Kent, and the next day returned to London, hauing demeand himſelfe very Nobly and performed all things very honourably, and giuen very kinde entertainement to ſuch Gentlemen of the ſeuerall Counties, as came either to ſee him or obſerue the carriage of the buſineſſe, becauſe the like viſitation to this purpoſe had not beene in the memorie of the oldeſt man then liuing.
               And the 16 of Iuly the Lord Maior with eight Aldermen kept like Courts at Putney for Surrey, and at Fullham for Middleſex, and the ſixteenth of September, the Iury for Middleſex made their preſentments before the Lord Maior in Weſtminſter-hall. And the 18 of September, the Iury of Kent made their preſentments before the Lord Maior at Detford in the fore-noone, & the Iury of Eſſex gaue in their Preſentments vnto the L. Maior at Barking in the after-noone. And the 25 of

September, the Lord Maior kept Court againe in Weſtminſter-hall in the forenoone, and in Southwarke in the after-noone, to take Preſentments and giue order for reformation.
               Sonday the 7 of Iuly Doctor Thomas Morton, Deane of Wincheſter,Doctor Morton Biſhop of Cheſter. was conſecrated Biſhop of Cheſter.
               The ſame day were enſtalled Knights of the Garter at Windſor, Francis Earle of Rutland,Knights of the Garter made. Sir George Villers Knight Maſter of the horſe, and the Lord Viſcont Liſle.
               
               At White-hall the ninth of Iuly 1616.Two barons created. were created Barons, viz. Sir Iohn Hollis Knight was created Baron of Hawghton, and Sir Iohn Roper Knght was created Baron Tynchham of Tyncham in Kent.
               Tueſday the 16 of Iuly 1616. the Earle of Arondell was ſworne a Priuie Counſellor.The Earle of Arondell ſworn a Priuie Counſellor.
               
               The 20 of Iuly the Lord Carew was ſworne a Priuie Counſellor.The Lord Carew a Priuie Counſellor.
               
               At Woodſtocke vpon Tueſday the 27 of Auguſt 1616. Sir George Villers Knight of the Garter and Maſter of the Horſe, was created Viſcont Villers, and Baron of Whaddon.Viſcont Villers created.
               
               By vertue of a ſpeciall Commiſſion from his Maieſty, and from the Citie of London, bearing date the fifteenth of May this yeare 1616. Peter Proby Alderman of London,The Citie of Londō ſendeth Alderman Proby into Ireland to reforme abuſes, & to ratifie good lawes and conſtitutions in the Prouince of Vlſter viz. Londons plantation. and Gouernour for the new plantation of the Prouince of Vlſter in Ireland, accompanied with Maſter Mathias Springham Merchantailor, and Maſter Clement Moſſe Solyciter for London with

others, did there eſtabliſh ſuch Lawes and conſtitutions for the City of London Derie, and the Borough of Colerame, as ſhould thenceforth be obſerued and kept, according to the Tenor of the Kings Charter granted to the City of London in that behalfe. The ſayd Alderman Proby by vertue of the Kings Commiſſion, did there alſo Miniſter oath vnto all officers and others, for the well gouernment and making of true accompts. He caried ouer thither with him two rich ſwords, the one whereof he deliuered to Sir Iohn Vawghan Knight Maior of Lonon Dery, and the other to Tryſtram Beryfford Eſquire, Maior of Coleraine for that time being, and to be borne before them and their ſucceſſors for euer. There was alſo ſent vnto the Maior of London Dery, a great gilded Man being ſent him from the Gouernors and Aſſiſtants for that plantation. Alderman Proby with his company went from London the eight and twenty of May laſt, and returned to London the 28 of Auguſt 1616. what is more to be ſaid touching this buſineſſe, I muſt referre you to my larger booke.
               
                  The Biſhop of Flie a Priuy Counſellor.Sonday being Michaelmas day, Doctor Androwes Biſhop of Ely was ſworne a Priuy Counſellor at Hampton Court.
               The fourth of October Doctor Mountague was tranſlated from Bathe and Wells to Wincheſter, and forthwith he expelled all Inmates out of Wincheſter houſe on the Banke-ſide, reduced diuers parts thereof from fowle noyſomneſſe

vnto ſwéetneſſe and comlineſſe, he repayred the whole houſe throughout, and builded ſome part new, and encloſed a great part of the wharfe, and made a new faire paire of ſtaires into the Thames, he ſpent almoſt thrée thouſand pound in the repaire and beautifying this ancient houſe, which for a long time had béene ſuffred to run to ruin.
               
                  Allan Cotton, Cutbert Hacket, Shrieues.
                  Shrieues.
               
               
                  Sir Iohn Leman Knight Fiſhmonger a batcheler Maior.
                  Maior.
               
               In his Maioralty the old ruinous Gate called Alderſgate was quite taken downe,Alderſgate new builded. and fairely new builded from the foundation. The riuer of Thames cleared of ſhelues in all parts, and the Hauen of Quéene Hyth cleanſed, and likewiſe the making of the great wharſe on the South-ſide of the riuer by the Willowes, and alſo the new ſtrict order for the paſſage of Cars and Carts in the ſtréets, for the preſeruation of all paſſengers.
               Thurſday the laſt of October 1616. viz.
                  Prince Charles created Prince of Wales. Alhollond Eue, Prince Charls came in great ſtate by Barge from Barne Elmes to White-hall, accompanied & attended by diuers great Lords, and others of honorable rancke and quallity beſides his owne traine, and was moſt ioyfully met at Chelſey by the Lord Maior, Aldermen and Citizens of London, each Company in a ſeuerall Barge, and diſtinguiſhed by their ſeuerall Armes in their rich Banners

and ſtately Streamers, beſides the Royal ſound of Drum and Trumpet, and great variety of excellent Muſique, beſides all which and the infinit number of people vpon the ſhore and in Boates and Barges to behold this ioyfull daie, there was alſo at the Cities charge in honour of his Highneſſe creation more particular pleaſant Trophies and Ingenious deuices met him vpon the water then euer was at any former creation of any Prince of Wales.
               And vpon Monday the fourth of Nouember, at White-hall, where the Kings Maieſty inueſted & crowned Prince Charles Prince of Wales,The Earle of Arondell was then Earle Marſhall. at this ſolemne creation were preſent moſt of the Nobility of the Land. The Lord Archbiſhop of Canterbury and diuers other Biſhops and reuerend Prela
                     •
                  s, all the Iudges of the Law, ſir Edward Cooke onely excepted; there were preſent alſo the Lord Maior and Aldermen of London, in their ſcarlet Robes as were the Iudges.
               
                  26 Knights of the Bath made.In honour of this ioyfull creation, there were made fiue and twenty Knights of the Bath, who performed all their Ceremonies in the vpper Parliament houſe, and the next Sonday withall Magnifiſence being luſtily mounted, they rode to White-hall, and were there Knighted by his Maieſty.
               
                  
                     Knights of the Bath.
                     Iames Lord Maltreuers.
                  
                  
                     Algernon Lord Percy.
                  
                  
                     Iames Lord Wryotheſley.
                  
                  
                     
                     Edward Lord Clynton.
                  
                  
                     Edward Lord Beauchamp.
                  
                  Lord Barkley.
                  
                  Lord Mordant.
                  
                  Sir Alexander Erskin.
                  
                  Sir Henry Howard.
                  
                  Sir Edward Sackuill.
                  
                  Sir William Howard.
                  
                  Sir Edward Howard.
                  
                  Sir Montague Barty.
                  
                  Sir William Stourton.
                  
                  Sir Henry Parker.
                  
                  Sir Dudley North.
                  
                  Sir Spencer Compton.
                  
                  Sir William Spencer.
                  
                  Sir William Seymor.
                  
                  Sir Rowland Saint Iohn.
                  
                  Sir Iohn Candiſh.
                  
                  Sir Thomas Neuill.
                  
                  Sir Iohn Roper.
                  
                  Sir Iohn North.
                  
                  Sir Henry Carey.
                  
               
               In honour of this ioyfull creation, there were ſolemne Tryumphs performed at Lowdon in the County of Salop, the fourth of Nouember, and publiſhed by Maſter Daniell Powel Gentleman.
               Alſo in honour of this creation, there were forty young gentlemen ſelected out of the foure Iunes of Court who fought at Barriers, viz. the one halfe againſt the other.
               
                  
                  Barons created.Thurſday the ſeuenth of Nouember Thomas Elſmer Lord Chancellor of England was created Viſcont Brackley. And William Lord Knowles was created Viſcont Wallingford, and Sir Philip Stanhope Knight, was created Baron of Shelford, and vpon the next Satterday the Lord Maior feaſted the Knights of the Bath.
               
                  The Lord Chiefe Iuſtice of the Kings Bench put from his place.Satterday the 16 of Nouember 1616. Sir Edward Cooke Knight was diſcharged from his Office, viz. from being Lord Chiefe Iuſtice of the Kings Bench.
               Monday the 18 of Nouember Sir Henry Montague Knight, the Kings Sergeant at Law was ſworne Lord chiefe Iuſtice of the Kings Bench.Sir Henry Montague Lord chief Iuſtice of the Kings Bench.
               
               This Sommer, and harueſt was ſo dry, that paſſengers were anoyde with duſt in the highwaies the 20 of Nouember.A dry Sommer.
               
               Sonday the 8 of December 1616. Arthur Lake Doctor of Diuinity was conſecrated Biſhop of Bathe and Wells.Two Biſhops conſecrated.
               
               
                  Lewis Bayly Doctor of Diuinity, was conſecrated Biſhop of Bangor.
               
                  The Archbiſhop of Spalato ariueth in England.Monday the 16 of December 1616. Marcus Anthonius de Domynis, Archbiſhop of Spalato in the Territory of Venice, was very honorably entertained and receiued at Lambeth by the Lord Archbiſhop of Canterbury with whom he remained, and writ a briefe declaration of his Reaſons for leauing that Prelacy, and forſaking his Natiue Country, which Booke

was preſently publiſhed in eight Languages, and diſperſt through Europe: and in Sommer following he printed in London the firſt foure of his ten bookes, intituled of the Commonweale of the Church.
               Monday the two and twentith of December,Sir Thomas Edmonds a Priuie Counſellor. Sir Thomas Edmonds Knight, Ambaſſador Leger in France was ſworne a Priuie Counſellor, and made Comptroller of the Kings houſhold, and the Lord Wotton was made Treaſurer of the Kings houſhold.
               Sonday the fifth of Ianuary the Lord Viſcont Villers was created Earle of Buckingham at White-hall.Earle of Buckingham created.
               
               Tweſday the fourth of February 1616.Earle of Buckingham a Priuy Counſellor. the Earle of Buckingham, was ſworne a Priuie Counſellor.
               Tweſday the 13 of February, the King in perſon ſate in the Star-chamber,The King ſitteth in the Star-chamber. and made an excellent Oration to the Lords, and to the Iudges, vnto whom hee gaue a charge and direction how they ſhould proceed in the Circuits.
               Shroue Tweſday the 4 of March,Diſordered youths many diſordred perſons of ſondry kindes, amongſt whom were very many young boyes and laddes that aſſembled themſelues in Lincolnes Inne field, Finsbury field, in Ratliffe and Stepney field, where in ryotous manner they did beate downe the walls and windowes of many victualling houſes, and of all other houſes, which they ſuſpected to bee bawdie houſes,

And that after-noone they ſpoyl'd a new Playhouſe and did likewiſe more hurt in diuers other places, in pulling downe walles and windowes, and ſpoyling of houſe-hold-ſtuffe, and were ſo head
                     •
                  ſtrong, that they diſpightfully vſed and reſiſted the Shrieffes of London and the Conſtables and Iuſtices of Middleſex. Whereupon the Lords of the Counſell by the Kings appointment, ordained diuers of the Chiefe Iuſtices of Middleſex to be Prouoſt Marſhals, and to execute Marſhall Law if the like occation ſhould happen.
               Shroue-tweſday the fourth of March this yeare 1616. the Queene feaſted the King at her Palace in the Strand,Denmark houſe. formerly called Somerſet-houſe, and then the King commanded it ſhould no more be ſo called, but that it ſhould from henceforth be called Denmarke-houſe, which ſaid Denmarke-houſe the Queene had many waies repaired, beautified, new builded and enlarged, and brought to it a pipe of conduit water from Hyde-parke.
               
                  Sir Francis Bacon Lord Chancellor.The ſeuenth of March, the Great Seale of England was deliuered to Sir Francis Bacon Knight the Kings Atturney, and was then made Lord Kéeper, and the next day toward Euening died the Lord Eliſmer late Lord Chancellor, and the fourth of Ianuary following, Sir Francis Bacon Lord Keeper was made Lord Chauncelor.
               
                  Sir Henry Yeluerton the Kings Atturney.When Sir Francis Bacon was made Lord Kéeper, then was ſir Henry Yeluerton Knight

the Kings Soliciter made the Kings Atturney, and Maſter Thomas Couentry Eſquire Recorder of London was made the Kings Soliciter, and was Knighted the 16 of March.
               Friday the fouretéenth of March 1616.The King rydeth into Scotland. the King being accompanied with the Queene and Prince Charles, and many of the Chiefe Nobility and others, went from White-hall to Theobalds, and from thence the King with his appointed traine ſet forward toward Edenborough, the next Monday being Saint Patricks day.
               And vpon his Maieſties returne to London,The King returneth from Scotland. 
                  viz. the 15 of September next following, the King came from Windſor to London, and was met at Hyde-parke by the Lord Maior and Aldermen, and aboue foure hundreth of the chiefe Citizens with chaines of gold, and well mounted, the Lord Maior preſented the King with a purſe, and in it fiue hundreth péeces of gold called the Vnity, and there the King Knighted ſir Anthony Ben Recorder of London.
               The 20 of March 1616.The Lord Hay a Priuy Counſellor. the Lord Hay was ſworne a Priuie Counſellor at Hynching-brooke.
               Sonday the 23 of March 1616.Lord Noell created. at Burley on the hill in Rutland-ſhire, ſir Edward Noell Knight and Baronet, was created Lord Noell of Rydlington.
               At this time neere Wapping,A new Chappell of eaſe builded. in the Pariſh of White-chappell, was new builded a very faire large Chappell and a Church-yard to it,

which were conſecrated the 7 of Iuly 1617. by the Lord Biſhop of London.
               Vpon Michaelmas day Doctor Montague Lord Biſhop of Wincheſter was ſworne a Priuie Counſellor at Hampton Court,The Biſhop of Wincheſter a Priuie Counſellor. and that day at that place Sir Iohn Villers maried Frances the daughter of Sir Edward Cooke Knight.
               
                  Shrieues.
                  William Hallyday, Robert Iohnſon, Shrieues.
               
               
                  Maior.
                  Sir George Bolles Knight Grocer, Maior.
               
               
                  Ambaſſadors from Ruſſia.Tweſday the fourth of Nouember, here ariued Stephen Euanowich Lieutenant of Raſco, and Marke Euanozin Poſdieof, of one of the thrée Chancellors of Ruſſia, from the late mentioned Michaell Pheodorowich Emperour of Ruſſia, they had audience the next Sonday, and vpon Now yeares day the King feaſted them and their chiefe followers and attendants at Whitehall, being fifty in number, their whole Traine was 75.
               
                  The L. Hay maried.Thurſday the 6 of Nouember, the Lord Hay married the Lady Luce, daughter to the Earle of Northumberland.
               
                  The L. Archbiſhop of Spalato preacheth in London.Sonday the laſt of Nouember 1617. the Lord Archbiſhop of Spalato, preached at the Marcers Chappell in the Italian tongue, there were preſent the L. Archbiſhop of Canterbury, the L. Chancellor, the Earles of Arondell & Pembroke Lord Zowch, the Lord Compton, and many others of great note, he preached there againe

vpon Sonday the ninetéenth of Aprill 1618.
               Sonday the foureteenth of December, at 
                     •••
                  beth were two Biſhops conſecrated, viz.Two Biſhops Conſecrated. 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  Felton Maſter of Pembroke-hall was conſecrated Lord Biſhop or Briſtow, and Doctor Montaigne Deane of Weſtminſter, was conſecrated Lord Biſhop of Lincolne, at this Conſecration were preſent and aſſiſtant at the impoſition of hands with the Lord Archbiſhop of Canterbury, the Lord Archbiſhop of Spalato, the Biſhops of London, Ely Rocheſter and Lichfield.
               Monday the foure and twenty of December 1617.The ſecond ſon of the Lady Elizabeth born at Heydelberg. was borne Charles Lodowick at Heydelberg about foure a clocke in the morning, and was chriſtened in March following, Prince Charles was out of his Godfathers.
               At this time the Appothecaries of London obtained a corporation for themſelues and their ſucceſſors for euer,The Appothecaries London made a particular Company. and by Letters pattented were made a Body Pollitique and Corporate, and that all ſuch as vſe and profeſſe the Apt, and Miſtery of Appothecaries within London and the Suburbs thereof, and within ſeuen miles compaſſe thereof, ſhall be ordred and gouerned by the Maſter, Wardens and ſocitie of the Art and Miſterie of the Appothecaries, Edmond Philips was the Maſter, Stephen Hyggines, and Thomas Fanes were the firſt Wardens.
               New yeares day being Thurſday 1617.

                  George Earle of Buckingham was created Marqueſſe of Buckingham at White-hall.Marques of Buckingham created.
               
               Thurſday the eight of Ianuary 1617. Sir Robert Manton Knight was ſworne the Kings Secretary.Sir Robert Manton Secretary.
               
               
                  This yeares fleet to the Eaſt Indies.At the end of February this yeare 1617. the Company of the Eaſt India Merchants ſent nine braue goodly ſhips well appointed to the Eaſt Iudies. And Sir Thomas Dale Knight went Generall, this was the firſt fléet of the ſecond ioynt ſtock.
               At the beginning of this month of Aprill 1618.An. reg. 16 1618 the Lord De la Ware with about eight ſcore perſons, viz. men & women, went ye ſecond time to Virginea to make good the plantation the Lord De la Ware at his firſt being in Virginia through extreamity of ſickneſſe was conſtrained to returne for England about ſixe yeares paſt,The Lord De La Warre his ſecond going to Virginia. and could not recouer his perfect health vntill the laſt yeare, in which he builded a very faire ſhippe, and went now in it himſelfe,Captaine Spilman. and after him went Captaine Henry Spilman with thirty perſons, this Captaine Spilman had béene formerly tenne yeares in Virginia, knew moſt of the Kings of that Country, and ſpake their Languages very vnderſtandingly.
               
                  The Pallace of Paris burnedThe ſeuenth of March this yeare 1617. about one a clocke at midnight, there was ſéene in the ayre ouer the Pallas of Paris in France, a flame of fire (as it were a Starre of a Cubit

long, and a foot broad, which fired the Palas, and with extreame terror and violence burnt it downe, and therewithall burned the ancient Records of France, and the Pictures and Statuaes of the Kings of France, this fire notwithſtanding the redineſſe of water, and twenty thouſands of willing perſons endeauoring to quench it, yet it continued about twenty houres, in which ſpace it alſo burned a priſon, with great dammage to other houſes and Tradeſmen, great Pillers and Arches of ſtone burned with great flames as if they had béene made of Timber and commixt with Brimſton,Chagford in Deuonſhire. and the firſt wéeke of this moneth of March, happened in the Towne of Chagford in Deuonſhire, at a Court of Stanery, a wall fell downe and after that part of the houſe, and fiue Maſter Nicholas Eueligh then Steward of that Court, and two of his ſeruants. And Maſter Richard Cottell of the Middle Temple Eſquire,Sol and Mars were in coninuction at that time. and ſeuen other) there were alſo about thirty perſons ſore hurt, within few daies of theſe two accidents aboue ſaid, the Townehouſe of Delph in Holland by negligence was ſet a fire and quite burned downe.
               
                  Martine Fotherby Doctor of Diuinity,Doctor Fotherby Biſhop of Salisbury. and Chaplaine to the Kings Maieſty, one of the Canons of Chriſt-church in Canterbury, borne at Grimſby in Lincolneſhire, he was Kinſman, Pupile and Chaplaine to the good Archbiſhop White-gift, and was Conſecrated Biſhop

of Saliſburie vpon Sonday the ninetéenth of Aprill 1618. by the moſt Reuerend Father in God Doctor Abbot, Lord Archbiſhop of Canterbury.
               
                  Sir Dudley Digs ſent Ambaſſador to the Emperor of Ruſſia.This moneth of May, 1618. the forenamed Ruſſia Ambaſſadour with his Traine returned, and Sir Dudley Digges Knight was ſent Ambaſſador to the Emperour of Ruſſia from his Maieſty.
               
                  William Parker Citizen and Merchantaillor of London,The vpper part of Paules new glaſſed and repaired. died about two yeares paſt, and amongſt other things which hee gaue to Pius and Publique vſes, he gaue a thouſand pound towards the new building of Alderſgate, which was imployed therein according to the Tenor of his Will, he gaue alſo fiue hundreth pounds towards the new glaſing of the decayed windowes in the vpper part of Paules Church in London, and the ſame to be done in rich colloured glaſſe with Effygies and holy ſtories as it had béene formerly glaſed and adorned, the firſt window whereof being new made was prepared and appointed to be ſet vp on the Northſide of the Quire in the moneth of Iune, this yeare 1618. and much of the old glaſſe repayred the decaies of diuers broken windowes.
               Dura enim eſt Hiſtoriographorum conditio, ſi vera dicant, homines prouocant; ſi falſa ſcripturis commendant, Dominus, qui vera dicta ab adulteris ſequeſtrat, non acceptat, ſaith Matthew of Paris.
               
            
            
               
               Of the Vniuerſities in England, and Colledges of the ſame, with the Founders and principal Benefactors.
               
                  I Haue before time reioyced (ſaith Eraſmus Roterdam) that England was ſo well furniſhed with ſo many men of excellent learning, but now I begin to enuie her felicity, for that he ſo flouriſheth with all kind of literature, that by taking the commendation thereof from the other regions, ſhe doth as it were maruailouſly obſcure them. And yet notwithſtanding, this commendation is not as now firſt due to England, in the which (it is well knowne) haue béene of long time men of great learning. The Vniuerſities proue this to be true, which both for their antiquitie and worthineſſe, contend with the moſt antient and worthy Vniuerſities in the world.
               
                  Peter Colledge was erected of t
                     •
                  o antient

Hoſtels,Peter Colledge. ſometime belonging vnto the Brethren of the ſect called De poenitentia Ieſu Chriſti) by Hugh Balſam, ſometime Subprior of Ely. 1256.
               This Hugh was afterward the tenth Biſhop of Ely, and finiſhed this Colledge in Anno 1248.
               
                  Clare-hal.
                  Clare Hall was firſt builded by Richard Badow, then Chancellor of the Students there, and the ſame was called Vniuerſity Hall. 1326.
               It was ſince that inlarged by Gwalther Thanſteed Maſter of the ſame hall, who with conſent of the ſaid Richard Badow reſigned the foundation thereof to Elizabeth Lady of Clare, third daughter of Gilbert, and ſiſter and one of the heires of the laſt Gilbert de Clare Earle of Gloceſter, who was firſt married to Iohn Bourgh, Earle of Vlſter in Ireland, after to Theobald of Verdon, and thirdly to Sir Roger Damary, and had iſſue by them all: ſhe I ſay named it Clare Hall.
               
               
                  Pembroke hall.
                  Pembroke Hall w
                     •
                  s founded by Mary of Valentia, daughter to Guydo Earle of Saint Paul in France, wife to Adomate de Valentia Earle of Pembroke. She obtained of King Edward the third, whoſe coſen ſhe was, to found this Colledge in her owne ground, with purchaſing two or thrée t
                     •
                  nements thereby, and named it Aula de Vale
                        •
                     ce Marie, An. 1343.
               
                  Corpus Chriſti Colledge.
                  Corpus Chriſti Colledge was firſt begun to be builded by the Aldermen and brethren of Corpus Clriſti Guild.
               
                  This Colledge was brought ſo far forth; ſhe rather by the helpe of Saint Maries Guild and fraternitie, newly adioyned to the other Guild.
               In the yeare 1353. they did elect Henry Earle of Darby and Lancaſter, who ſhould obtaine them fauour for the purchaſing of Mortmaine, for ſuch lands and tenements as after many did ſell thim. This Earle of Darby in the 28 yeare of Edward the third was created the firſt Duke of Lancaſter, and then they elected him their Alderman, who recogniſed their ſtatutes, not by the Dukes ſeale, but by the ſeale of the Alderman of that Guild.
               
                  Trinity hall was firſt an Hoſtell,Trinitie Hall. purchaſed by Iohn Cranden, ſometime Prior of Ely, who procured it for his brethren, the Monkes of that houſe, to be ſtudents there in the time of Edward the third, which hoſtell was afterward purchaſed by William Bateman Biſhop of Norwich, who builded this Colledge of Trinity hall vpon the ſaid ground, being the firſt founder thereof; he deceaſed in the yeare of Chriſt 1354.
               
                  Gunuile and Caius Colledge was firſt founded by Edmund Gunuile,
                  Gunuile and Caius Colledge. ſometime Parſon of Terington in Norffolke, he gaue it to name Gunuile Hall as appeareth by his ſtatute 1354.
               At his deceaſe, leauing a good maſſe of mony, commended the further finiſhing of the ſame Hall to William Bateman Biſhop of Norwich, who with the aſſent of the Aldermen and Brethren

of the Guiles of Corpus Chriſti and our Lady, changed with them the ſaid houſe, with their houſe called the Stonehall, where now Gunuile and Caius colledge ſtandeth.
               
                  Iohn Caius Doctor in Phyſick, ſometime fellow and late Maſter of the ſame colledge, hath inlarged the houſe, and now made a ſecond foundation, with giuing certain manors and lands to the ſame, 1557.
               
                  Kings Colledge was firſt founded by King Henry the ſixth,Kings Colledge. in Anno 1441.
               The ſame King altered the forme of his firſt foundation, Anno 1443.
               
                  Edward the fourth in diſpleaſure of the firſt foundation, withdrew from the colledge ſo much land as the firſt founder had giuen them: but afterward he reſtored them to the inheritance of fiue hundred marks. After him, Henry the ſeuenth finiſhed that notable chappell, begun by Henry the ſixth, to the glaſing ſtalls, and pauing with marble, which was done by King Henry the eighth.
               
                  Queenes Colledge.
                  Queenes Colledge was begun by Lady Margaret, wife to King Henry the ſixth, 1446. She procured Mortmaine 100. l. by yeare, Anno 1448. At the interceſſion of Andrew Ducket, ſometime Principall of Barnard hoſtell (which hoſtell he gaue to the ſaid colledge.) He was Parſon of Saint Botolphs in Cambridge, who by his owne mony and helpe of others, purchaſed certaine tenements, and builded his colledge, being the firſt Preſident of the ſame, who gaue

as well by his life, as by his Teſtament, diuers 
                     •
                  ummes and parcels of land, and alſo procured 
                     •
                  ertaine gifts of the Duke of Clarence, of Cecily Dutcheſſe of Yorke, of Richard Duke of Glo
                  
                     •
                  eſter, of Anne Dutcheſſe of the ſame, of Edward Earle of Saliſbury, Maude Counteſſe of Ox
                  
                     •
                  ord, and Marmaduke Lumnee Biſhop of Lin
                  
                     •
                  olne, with diuers other. Elizabeth wife to 
                     •
                  ing Edward the fourth, finiſhed that which Queene Margaret had begunne in the yeare 
                     •
                  465.
               
                  Katharine Hall was founded by Robert Woodlarke, Doctor of Diuinity,Katherine Hall. and Prouoſt of the Kings colledge, and Chancellor to the Vniuerſity, as is teſtified by the charter of King Henry the ſixth, bearing date the 37 of his raign, which was the yeare of Chriſt, 1459.
               
                  Ieſus Colledge was founded by Iohn Alcock,
                  Ieſus Colledge. the 29 Biſhop of Ely, who did conuert the Monaſtery of S. Radigond (the Abbeſſe liuing a diſſolute life, the Monaſtery then deſtitute of gouernment, the edifices then fallen into ruine, and 
                     •
                  n concluſion, the Nunnes departing thence, leauing it deſolate) into a colledge of chaplens and ſchollers, the yeare 1496.
               This Alcocke borne at Beuerley, founded a Frée-ſchoole at Kingſton vpon Hul, and a ſchoole 
                     •
                  n the ſouth-ſide the Pariſh church of the Trinity, wherein his parents were buried.
               The rents of Ieſus Colledge haue béen more amplified by Sir Robert Read Knight, Doctor Eleſtone, Doctor Roiſton, and Doctor Fuller.
               
               
                  
                  Chriſts Colledge.
                  Chriſts Colledge was founded by King Henry the ſixth, who named it Gods Houſe, 
                     〈◊〉
                   was ſometime a great hoſtell ſo called, firſt fo
                     •••
                  ded by W. Bingham, Parſon of Saint Sakery London, and other. King Henry the ſeue
                     ••
                   granted his Charter to Lady Margaret his 
                     ••
                  ther, Counteſſe of Richmond and Darby, to 
                     •••
                  creaſe the ſtudents there, tranſlating at her 
                     〈◊〉
                   poſition, ſo that from thenceforth it ſhould 
                     〈◊〉
                   called Chriſts Colledge.
               
               
                  S. Iohns Colledge.
                  S. Iohns Colledge being firſt an hoſtell of religious Canons, was erected by Nigellus the ſ
                     ••
                  cond Biſhop of Ely, Treaſurer to King Hen
                        ••
                     
                   the firſt, the yeare of Chriſt, 1134.
               Thoſe Canons liued by the name of the Hoſpitall and Brethren of Saint Iohn, vntill the yeare of Chriſt 1510. though at that time ſo 
                     〈◊〉
                   decaied, that there was but a Prior and two Brethren, and by the dilapidations of their goods moueable, and vnmoueable, they abuſe their reuenues and within the ſpace of ten yeres laſt paſt, from the ſumme of one hundred and forty pounds, to thirtie pounds, &c. Whe
                     ••
                  upon Henry the eight, Richard Biſhop of Wincheſter, Iohn Biſhop of Rocheſter, Charles Somerſet Lord of Herbert, Thomas Louel, Henry Marne, and Iohn Saint Iohn, Knights, Henry Horne, and Hugh Aſhron Clerks, Executor
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   the Teſtament of Lady Margaret, Counteſſ 
                     〈◊〉
                   Richmond and Darby, grandmother to Kin
                     •
                   
                  Henry the eighth, and mother to King Henry the ſeuenth, vpon the ſuppreſſion of the ſaid

Priorie, ſhe being preuented by death, leauing behinde her ſufficient goods, and committing the 
                     〈◊〉
                   to thoſe her ſaid friends and executore, they erected the ſaid Colledge, 1511.
               
                  Magdalene Colledge was firſt an hoſtell or hall,Magdalen Colledge. inhabited by diuers Monkes of ſundrie Monaſteries; Edward Duke of Buckingham tranſlated the ſame to a Colledge, naming it Buckingham Colledge, who builded vp the Hal in the yeare of Chriſt, 1519.
               After him Thomas Audley of Walden ſometime Chancellor of England, tooke vpon him to be founder of the ſaid colledge, and going about to eſtabliſh the ſame, was preuented by death, ſo that what he had begun, he left vnperfect, and altogether vnfiniſhed. Chriſtopher Wray Lord chiefe Iuſtice of England repaired and beautified it.
               
                  Trinity Colledge was founded by King Henry the eighth, in the yeare of Chriſt, 1546.Trinity Colledge.
               
               The colledge was builded in the plot where ſometime Edward the third builded his houſe called the Kings Hall, in the yeare of Chriſt 1337.
               There was ioyned vnto this Hall, a colledge called Michael Houſe, with an hoſtell called Phiſwicke hoſtell, and after the building there (being made of thrée) King Henry the eight named it Trinity Colledge. Quéene Mary augmented it with 338 pounds lands the yeare.
               
                  Michael Houſe was founded by Haruie de Stanton, Prieſt,Michael houſe. Chancellor of the Exchequer to

                  Edward the ſecond, of whom he obtained 
                     〈◊〉
                   to erect the ſaid colledge, in the yeare of our Sauiour Chriſt 1324.
               
                  Emmanuel Colledge.
                  Emmanuell Colledge founded by ſir Walter Mildmay, in Anno 1584.
               
                  Suſſex Sydney Colledge founded.
                  Suſſex Sydney Colledge, was founded in the yeare 1598. by the right Honorable the La
                     ••
                   
                  Francis Sydney, ſometime Counteſſe of Suſſex.
               And thus much in briefe, concerning the Vniuerſity of Cambridge with the Colledges and Halls in the ſa
                     ••
                  .
            
            
               
               The Vniuerſity of Oxford was inſtituted by King Alfred a Saxon, after the birth of Chriſt 873. yeares: and hath Colledges.
               
                  
                     VNiuerſitie Colledge,
                  Vniuerſitie Colledge. or Saint Marie Church (as ſome haue written) founded in the time of King Alfred, by Sir William Archdeacon of Dureſme, in the yeare 873.
               But more likely by William Biſhop of Dureſme, in the 12 yeare of William Conqueror, in Anno 1081.
               
                  Baliol Colledge was founded in the time of Henry the third, by Iohn Baliol,
                  Baliol Colledge. father to Iohn Baliol King of Scotland, in the yeare of Chriſt, 1263.
               
                  Merton Colledge was founded in the raigne of Henry the 3.Merton Colledge. by Walter Merton ſometime Canon of Pauls, and alſo of Saliſbury, at a

Towne in Surrey by Nonſuch, called 
                     〈◊〉
                  , Anno 1264. And after, in Edward the firſt time, being Biſhop of Rocheſter, he tranſlated i
                     •
                   to Oxford, and deceaſed.
               
                  Exceſter Colledge.
                  Exceſter colledge was founded in the time of Edward the ſecond, by Walter Stapleton Biſhop of Exceſter, 1156.
               And augmented in the time of our Soueraigne Lady Quéene Elizabeth, by Sir William Peter knight, in the yeare of Chriſt, 1566.
               
                  Orial Colledge.
                  Oriall Colledge was founded in the time of Edward the ſecond, by Sir Adam Browne, Almoner of the ſaid King, and for the ſaid King, the yeare of Chriſt, 1323.
               
                  Queenes Colledge:
                  Queenes Colledge was founded in the time of Edward the third, by Robert Engliſhfield in his owne ground, and by him called the Quéens Hall. Hée was chaplaine to the Lady Philip, wife to the ſame Edward, the yeare of Chriſt, 1340.
               
                  New Colledge.
                  New Colledge was founded in the time of King Edward the ſecond, by William Wickham Biſhop of Wincheſter, the yeare of Chriſt 1379. Edmond Grindall Archbiſhop of Canturbury, was a benefactor of twenty pounds the yeare, beſide bookes and places. William Wickham alſo founded a colledge in the citie of Wincheſter, by the like name of New Colledge in Anno 1389.
               
                  Lincolne Colledge.
                  Lincolne Colledge was founded in the time of King Henry the fifth, by Richard Fleming Biſhop of Lincolne, 1440.
               
                  And augmented in Richard the thirde time Thomas Rotheram Biſhop of Lincolne in the 
                     〈◊〉
                   1479.
               
                  All Soules Colledge,
                  All Soules Colledge. was founded in the time King Henry the ſixth, by Henry Archbiſhop of Canturbury, in the yeare 1437. King Henry the 
                     〈◊〉
                   gaue it to ſoure Priors alians, to wit, Al
                     
                        ••
                     erbury in Salope, Runmey in Kent, Langua
                  
                     •
                  th in Southwales, Wedon Pinkney in Northamptonſhire: and therefore is he in the 
                     •••
                  ord called the founder of that colledge.
               
                  Chichley alſo founded Bernard Colledge in Oxford, ſince ſuppreſſed by Henry the 8. and now re-edified by Sir Thomas White, and by him called Saint Iohns Colledge. More, he founded a colledge at Higham ferris, with Almeſ
                  
                     •
                  ouſes there.
               
                  Diuinity Schoole was founded in the raigne of Henry the ſixth,Diuinitie Schoole. by Humfrey Duke of Gloceſter, 1447. He gaue 129 bookes to the Library there.
               
                  Magdalen Colledge was founded in the time of King Henry the ſixth,Magdalen Colledge. by William Wamflet Biſhop of Wincheſter, 1459.
               He builded a good part of Eaton Colledge, begun by King Henry the ſixth. He builded a frée-ſchoole at Wamflet in Lincolneſhire.
               
                  Braſen-noſe Colledge was founded in the raigne of King Henry the ſeuenth,Braſennoſe Colledge. by William 
                  
                     •
                  mith Biſhop of Lincolne. He deceaſed in the yeare 1513.
               
                  Corpus Chriſti Colledge was founded in theCorpus Chriſti Colledge.
                  
raigne of King Henry the ſeuenth, by Richard Fox Biſhop of Wincheſter in the yeare 1516.
               
                  Chriſt Church was founded in the time of Henry the 8.Chriſt, Church. by Thomas Wolſey Cardinall and Archbiſhop of Yorke, in the yeare of Chriſt 1539.
               And finiſhed by the ſame King Henry the eight in the yeare 1549.
               
                  Canterbury Colledge.
                  Canterbury Colledge in Oxford founded by Simon Iſlip Archbiſhop of Canterbury in the yeare of our Lord 1353.
               And lately ſuppreſſed in the 31 yeare of King Henry the eight, was ioyned to Chriſts-church
                     ••
                   in Oxford.
               
                  Trinity Colledge ſometime Durham Colledge.Trinity colledge was founded and ſo named in the time of Quéen Mary, by S. Thomas Pope Knight in Anno 1556. which colledge was firſt founded in the time of King Edward the third by Thomas Hatfield Biſhop of Durham, and by him named Durham colledge for eight Monks, and ſeuen clarks, admitted by the Prior of Durham, there to ſtudy, Anno 1370. Robert Walworth Prior of Durham indowed it with 3 
                     ••
                  
                  nates of land, &c. in Readington and Clarton, 
                     •
                   the adnowſion of ye church of Readington, which colledge at the ſuppreſſion by King Henry the eight, might diſpend land as the ſame was the
                     •
                   valued by the Viſitors 115 pounds, foure ſhillings foure pence.
               
                  Saint Iohns Colledge was founded and is named, in the time of Quéene Mary by Sir Thomas White Merchantailor, Anno 1557.

which Colledge ſometime called Bernards Colledge,S. Iohns Colledge ſometime Bernard Colledge. being amongſt other ſuppreſſed in the time of King Henry the eight, and greatly ruinated, the ſame Sir Thomas White purchaſed, and after beſtowed large ſummes of money in building thereof, and did lay the ſame Colledge in very good land neare to the Vniuerſity of Oxford, to the yearely value of 500 pounds which he purchaſed with his money, and hath left order to make it diſpend ſixe hundred pounds the yeare.
               Alſo the ſame ſir Thomas White, founded a hall for ſtudents, by him called Saint Iohns Hall, ſometime Gloceſter Colledge, founded by Iohn Glifford for Monkes: which Colledge being ſuppreſſed, he redeemed from ſpoyle and waſt with his money, placing there a Principall and Schollers to the number of an hundred perſons or more made great reparations of the houſe, and adioyned it to his ſayd Colledge of Saint Iohn.
               
               
                  Wadham colledge was founded in the yeare 1613.Wadham Colledge founded. by Nicholas Wadham of the county of Sommerſet Eſquire, and Dorothy his wife, ſiſter to the right honorable, Iohn Lord Peter of Writle.
               
                  Oxford hath Halls.
                  Brodegate Hall.
                  Heart Hall.Walter Stapleton William Wanſtock
                  
                  Magdalene Hall.
                  Alborne Hall.
                  Saint Mary Hall.
                  
                     White Hall.
                  New Inne.
                  
                     Edmond Hall.
               
               In the Vniuerſities of England (ſaith Eraſmas Roterodam) there be certaine colledges, in the which there is ſo much Religion, ſo ſtrait Diſcipline, and ſuch integrity of life, that if you did ſée it, you would neglect in compariſon of them, all Monkiſh rules and ceremonies.
               All ye cities in England, many market towns and ſome villages, haue frée Grammer ſchooles erected in them, for the further increaſe of learning and vertue.
               Vertuous men haue, to the perpetuall regiſtring of their good names, done theſe good déeds: learned men haue not béene all the doers: Some therefore for the ſupply in other, of that which wanted in themſelues, haue done wiſely, all to this purpoſe (that vertue and learning vnited and knit together, might in this curage make a learned vertuous world) haue done godly. It were much (there are ſo many) in a ſmall roome to comprehend them, but the chiefe and worthy patterns of the reſt are:

                     
                        Eaton Schoole.
                        
                           Henry the 6.
                        1443
                     
                     
                        Weſtminſter.
                        Queene Elizabeth.
                        
                         
                     
                     
                        Wincheſter.
                        
                           W. Wickham Biſhop of Wincheſter.
                        1387
                     
                     
                        Paules Schoole in London.
                        
                           Iohn Collet.
                        
                        1510
                     
                  
               
               
                  Saint Antonies in London by Iohn Tate: Merchantailors ſchoole in London, by the Merchantailors.
                  1560
               
            
            
               
               How a man may iourney from any notable towne in England to the City of London, or from London to any notable Towne in the Realme.
               
                  The way from Walſingham to London.
                  
                     FRom Walſingham to Picknam.
                  xii. mile
                  From Picknam to Brandō fery.
                  x. mile
                  From Brandon fery to Newmarket.
                  x. mile
                  From Newmarket to Braban.
                  x. mile
                  From Braban to Barkeway.
                  x. mile
                  From Barkeway to Puckrich.
                  vii. mile
                  From Puckrich to Ware.
                  v. mile
                  From Ware to Waltham.
                  viii. mile
                  From Waltham to London.
                  xii. mile
               
               
                  
                  From Barwicke to Yorke, and alſo to London.
                  FRom Barwicke to Belford.
                  xii. mile
                  From Belford to Anwick.
                  xii. mile
                  From Anwicke to Morpit.
                  xii. mile
                  From Morpit to Newcaſtle.
                  xii. mile
                  From Newcaſtle to Durham.
                  xii. mile
                  From Durham to Darington.
                  xiii. mile
                  From Darington to Northalerton.
                  xiiii. mile
                  From Northalerton to Topcliffe.
                  vii. mile
                  From Topliffe to Yorke.
                  xvi. mile
                  From Yorke to Tadcaſter.
                  xvi. mile
                  From Tadcaſter to Wentbridge.
                  xii mile
                  From Wentbridge to Doncaſter.
                  viii. mile
                  From Doncaſter to Tutford.
                  xviii. mile
                  From Tutford to Newarke.
                  x. mile
                  From Newarke to Grantham.
                  x. mile
                  From Grantham to Stamford.
                  xvi. mile
                  From Stamford to Stilton.
                  xii. mile
                  From Stilton to Huntington.
                  ix. mile
                  From Huntington to Royſten.
                  xv. mile
                  From Royſton to Ware.
                  xii. mile
                  From Ware to Waltham.
                  viii. mile
                  From Waltham to London.
                  xii. mile
               
               
                  From Carlile to Doncaſter, and ſo to London.
                  FRom Carlile to Haſket yate.
                  viii. mile
                  From Haſket yate to Pirath.
                  viii. mile
                  
                     From Pirath hardby to Apelbie.
                  x. mile
                  From Apelby to Burghley.
                  vi. mile
                  From Burghley to the Spittle.
                  viii. mile
                  From the Spittle to the Bowes.
                  viii. mile
                  From the Bowes to Grethaw bridge.
                  iiii. mile
                  From Grethaw Bridge to Catrike Bridge.
                  x. mile
                  From Catrike bridge to Limon.
                  vi. mile
                  From Limon to Borowbridge.
                  xii. mile
                  From Boroughbridge to Wetherby.
                  viii. mile
                  From Wetherby to Aberforth.
                  v. mile
                  From Aberforth to Ferrybridge.
                  vii. mile
                  From Ferrybridge to Doncaſter.
                  x. mile
                  From Doncaſter to London 
                  as afore.
               
               
                  From Carnaruan to Cheſter, and ſo to London.
                  FRom Carnaruan to Conway.
                  xxiii. mile
                  From Conway to Denbigh.
                  xii. mile
                  From Denbigh to Flint.
                  xii. mile
                  From Flint to Cheſter.
                  x. mile
                  From Cheſter to Wich.
                  xiiii. mile
                  From Wich to Stone.
                  xv. mile
                  From Stone to Lichfield.
                  xvi. mile
                  From Lichfield to Colſill.
                  xii. mile
                  From Colſill to Couentry.
                  viii. mile
                  And ſo from Couentrie to London 
                  as hereafter followeth.
               
               
                  From Cokermouth to Lancaſter and ſo to London.
                  FRrom Cokermouth to Kiſwicke.
                  v. mile
                  From Kiſwicke to Grocener.
                  viii. mile
                  
                     From Grocener to Kendale.
                  xiiii. mile
                  From Kendale to Burton.
                  vii. mile
                  From Burton to Lancaſter.
                  viii. mile
                  From Lancaſter to Preſton.
                  xx. mile
                  From Preſton to Wigam.
                  xiiii. mile
                  From Wigam to Warington.
                  xx. mile
                  From Warington to Newcaſtle.
                  xx. mile
                  From Newcaſtle to Lichfield.
                  xx. mile
                  From Lichfield to Couentry.
                  xx. mile
                  From Couentry to Daintrie.
                  xiiii. mile
                  From Daintrie to Toceſter.
                  x. mile
                  From Toceſter to Stonyſtratford.
                  vi. mile
                  From Stonyſtratford to Brickhill.
                  vii. mile
                  From Brickhill to Dunſtable.
                  vii. mile
                  From Dunſtable to S. Albones.
                  x. mile
                  From S. Albones to Barnet.
                  x. mile
                  From Barnet to London.
                  x. mile
               
               
                  From Yarmouth to Colcheſter, and ſo to London.
                  FRom Yarmouth to Becclis.
                  viii. mile
                  From Becclis to Blybour.
                  vii. mile
                  From Blybour to Snapbridge.
                  viii. mile
                  From Snapbridge to Woodbridge.
                  viii. mile
                  From Woodbridge to Ipſwich.
                  v. mile
                  From Ipſwich to Colcheſter.
                  xii. mile
                  From Colcheſter to Eaſtford.
                  viii. mile
                  From Eaſtford to Chelmſford.
                  x. mile
                  From Chelmſford to Brentwood.
                  x. mile
                  From Brentwood to London.
                  xv. mile
               
               
                  
                  From Douer to London.
                  FRom Douer to Canterbury.
                  xii. mile
                  From Canterbury to Sittingborne.
                  xii. mile
                  From Sittingborne to Rocheſter.
                  viii. mile
                  From Rocheſter to Graueſend.
                  v. mile
                  From Graueſend to Datford.
                  vi. mile
                  From Datford to London.
                  xii. mile
               
               
                  From S. Burien in Cornewall to London.
                  FRom S. Burien to the Mount.
                  xx. mile
                  From the Mount to Thury.
                  xii. mile
                  From Thury to Bodman.
                  xx. mile
                  From Bodman to Launſtone.
                  xx. mile
                  From Launſtone to Occumpton.
                  xv. mile
                  From Occumpton to Crokehornewell.
                  x. mile
                  From Crokehornewell to Exceſter.
                  x. mile
                  From Exceſter to Honiton.
                  xii. mile
                  From Honiton to Charde.
                  x. mile
                  From Charde to Crokehorne.
                  vii. mile
                  From Crokehorne to Shirborne.
                  x. mile
                  From Shirborne to Shaftſbury.
                  x. mile
                  From Shaftſbury to Saliſbury.
                  xviii. mile
                  From Saliſbury to Andeuor.
                  xv. mile
                  From Andeuor to Baſingſtocke.
                  viii. mile
                  From Baſingſtocke to Hartlorow.
                  viii. mile
                  From Hartlorow to Bagſhot.
                  viii. mile
                  From Bagſhot to Stanes.
                  viii. mile
                  From Stanes to London.
                  xv. mile
               
               
                  
                  From Briſtow to London.
                  FRom Briſtow to Maxfield.
                  x. mile
                  From Maxfield to Chapnam.
                  x. mile
                  From Chapnam to Marleborough.
                  xv. mile
                  From Marleborough to Hungerford.
                  viii. mile
                  From Hungerford to Newburie.
                  vii. mile
                  From Newburie to Reading.
                  xv. mile
                  From Reading to Maydenhead.
                  x. mile
                  From Maydenhead to Colbrooke.
                  viii. mile
                  From Colbrooke to London.
                  xv. mile
               
               
                  From S. Dauids to London.
                  FRom Saint Dauid to Axford.
                  xx. mile
                  From Axford to Carmarden.
                  x. mile
                  From Carmarden to Newton.
                  x. mile
                  From Newton to Langburie.
                  x. mile
                  From Langbury to Brecknocke.
                  xvi. mile
                  From Brecknocke to Hay.
                  x. mile
                  From Hay to Harford.
                  xiiii. mile
                  From Harford to Roſo.
                  ix. mile
                  From Roſo to Gloceſter.
                  xii. mile
                  From Gloceſter to Ciceſter.
                  xv. mile
                  From Ciceſter to Farington.
                  xvi. mile
                  From Farington to Abington.
                  vii. mile
                  From Abington to Dorcheſter.
                  vii. mile
                  From Dorcheſter to Henley.
                  xii. mile
                  From Henley to Maydenhead.
                  vii. mile
                  From Maydenhead to Colebrooke.
                  vii. mile
                  From Colebrooke to London.
                  xv. mile
               
               FINIS.
            
            
               
               The principall Fayres of England and Wales, orderly ſet foorth; with the Moneth, Day, and Place, where they bee kept.
               
                  Fayres in Ianuary.
                  THe iii day at Llanibither. The xii day at Salisbury. The vii. day at Llanginnie: the xxv. day (Conuerſion of S. Paul) at Graueſend, at Briſtoll, at Churchingford, at Northalerton in Yorkeſhire euery Wedneſday from Chriſtmas till Iune: the xxxi. day at Llandyſſell.
               
               
                  Fayres in February.
                  THe firſt day (Bridget) at Bromley: the ii day at Maidſtone, at Bath, at Linne, at Bickleſworth, at Budworth, at Reading, at Faringdon, at the Vizes in Wiltſhire, at Godlemew, at Whiteland. The iii. at Boxgroue, at Brimley.See the Records in the Roles. The ſixt at Stafford for thrée daies, for all kinde of Merchandize, without Arreſts.

The viii. at Tragarron: the ix. at Llandaffe. The xiiii. at Owndle in Northamptonſhire at Feuerſham in Kent: the xxiii. at Vppingham in Rutlanſhire, at Higham-ferries, at Baldocke, at Walden, at T
                        •
                     wkesbury, at Froome, at Henly vpon Thames.
               
               
                  Faires in March.
                  THe firſt day at Llangadog, at Madrim, and at Llangeuelah. The viii day at Tregarron: The xii day at Stamford, at Sudbury, at Wooborne, at Wrexham, at Bodnam, at Spaford: ye xiii. at Wye, at Mountbowin in Cornewall: the xvii. at Pattrington: The xviii. at Sturbridge. The xx. at Durham, at Aleſbury. The xxiiii. at Llanerchimeth. The xxv. at Northhampton, at Malden, at Cardigan, at Malpas, at Saint Albones, at Huntingdon, at Newcaſtle, at Aſhwell in Hartfordſhire, at great Cartwalden in Eſſex, at Saint Iones in Worceſterſhire, at Woodſtocke. The xxxi. day at Malmeſbury.
               
               
                  Faires in Aprill.
                  THe ii. day at North-fléete, at Rochford, at Hitchin. The iii. day at Léeke in Staffordſhire. The v. at Wallingford. The vii. at Darby. The ix. at Billingſworth. The xxii. at Stabford, the xxiii. at Northampton, at Chicheſter, at Tamworth, at Ipſwich, at Charing, at Amptill,

at Hinningham, at Saint Pembs, at Bury, at Wilton, at Wortham, at Brewton, at Caſtle Combes, at Bewdley, at Lonquer, at Riliborough, at Biſhops-Hatfield, at Gilford, at Nutlay in Suſſex, at Engfield in Suſſex, at Brigſtocke, at Sabrigworth in Hartfordſhire. The xxv. at Coſbrooke, at Buckingham, at Inings in Buckinghamſhire, at Darby, at Winchcombe in Glouceſterſhire, at Calne in Wiltſhire, at Cliffe by Lewis in Suſſex, at Dunmow in Eſſex, at Vttoxeter. The xxvi. at Tenderden in Kent, at Clete.
               
               
                  Faires in May.
                  THe firſt day at Leiceſter, at Warwicke, at Oſweſtrée, at Kinuax, at Worſeworth, at Brick-hill, at Congerton, at Reading, at Stow the old, at Pombridge, at Chenſford, at Perin, at Andouer, at Maidſtone, Llatriſſent, at Vske, at Grighonell, at Rippon, at We
                        •
                     dore, at Blackborne, at Flockingham, at Laighton, at Phillipſnorton, at Stokerley, at Lerfield, at Oceſtrie, at Linfield, at Stanſtead. The ii. at Pwltheley. The iii. at Noneaton in Warwickſhire, at Ratſdale in Lancaſhire, at Waltham Abby, at Elſtow a village by Bedford, at Bramyard, at Hinningham, at Cherſay, at Chipnam, at Cowbridge at Abergauenny, at Mounton, at Denbigh, at Mirthir, at Tiduile. The v. at Marchenleth. The vi. Almeſbury, at Hoy, at Knighton. The vii. at Beuerley, at Newton in

Lancaſhire, at Oxford, at Stratford vpon Auon, at Hanſlop, at Bath, at Hateſbury: the ix. at Maidſtone: the x. at Aſhburn in the Peake: the xi. at Dunſtable: the xii. and xiii. at Greys Thorrocke in Eſſex: the xv. at Welſhpoole: the xvi. at Llangarranogge: the xix. at Odchill, at Rocheſter, at W
                        •
                     llow, at Manfield: the xxv. at Blackborne: the xxvi. at Lenham: xxix, at Cambroke.
               
               
                  Fayres in Iune.
                  THe iii. day at Aileſbury. The ninth at Maidſtone. The 10. at Marfield, at Newborough in Lancaſhire, at Okingham, at Holt, at Wellington, at Llanwiſt, at Newcaſtle in Emli
                        •
                     , at Kingwilgaio. The 13 at New-towne in Kedewen. The 14 at Bangerk: the 15 at the Vizes at Perſhore, ſeuen miles from Woceſter. The 16. at Newport in Keames, at Bealth. The 18. at Higham-ferries, at Tow-greene, at Hadſtocke, at Llanuilling: the 19. at Bridgenorth: the 21. at Yſtradmeyricke: the 22. at Shreweſbury, at Saint Albons: the 23. at Barnet, at Caſtle Ebichen, at Dolgelly. The 24 at Weſtcheſter, at Colcheſter, at Wakefield, at Horſham, at Wenlocke, at Croydon, at Bedford, at Bramſgroue, at Barnewell, at Gloceſter, at Lincolne, at Peterborow, at Windſor, at Halifaxe, at Lancaſter, at Aſhburne, at Biſhops caſtle, at Tunbridge, at Leiceſter, at Boughtongréene, at Kerkhame in Aunderneſſe, at Hartford,

at Kingſtone in Warwickſhire, at Reading, at Ludlow, at Romford, at Pemſey, at Shaftſburie, at Bricknock, at Preſton, at Yorke, at Boſworth, at Aukenburge, at Weſtō, at Aſhburne in the Peake, at Hurſt, at Crambrocke in Kent, at Warmeſter in Wiltſhire, at Farnam, at Harſtone in Norfolke, at Bedle, at Stracſtocke, at Beuerley. The 26. at Northop: the 27. at Folkſtone, at Burton vpon Trent, at Llandogaine: the 28. at Royſton, at Heſcorne, at Pombes, at Matchenleth: the 29. at Munſtrill in Leiceſterſhire, at Woluerhampton, at Sarſtrange, at Lower Knotſ-ford, at Woodhurſt, at Wem, at Mansfield, Southam, at Tring, at Bolton, at Bilballenec, at Peterborough, at Yorke, at Onay, at Buntington, at Vpton in VVorceſterſhire, at VVitney in Oxfordſhire, at Holdworth, at Grayes, at Thurrocke in Eſſex, at Hornedon, at Sudbury in Suffolke, at Lemſter, at Gorgange in Lancaſhire, at Peterfield, at Aſhwell, at VVeſtminſter, at Sinnocke in Kent, at Stockworth in Lincolneſhire, at Marleborow, at Bromley in Lancaſhire, at Buckingham, at Barkhamſtead, at Tring, at Bemington, at Hodſdon, at Stafford, at Mount-ſorrell, at Llanbeder, at Pont-ſtephen, at Cardiffe, at Llamergaine, at Bala: the 30. at Maxfield in Cheſhire.
               
               
                  
                  Fayres in Iuly.
                  THe ii. day at Congerton, at W
                        •
                     borne, at Huntington, at Aſhton vnder line in Lancaſhire, at Smeath in Kent, at Rickmanſworth in Hartfordſhire, at Swanley. The iii. at H
                        ••
                     uerſon. The v. at Burton vpon Trent. The vi. at Llanidlae, at Lanibither. The vii. day at Canterbury, at Albrighton, at Vppingham, at Chip
                        •
                     pingnorton, at Vlzes, at Burntwood, at Cappell-frith, at Richmond, at Tenburie, at Hauerfordweſt, at Treſhenimicha, at Emlin, at Caſtlemaine, at Denbigh, at Sweaton, at Shelford. The xi. at Patacy, at Lidde. The. xv. at Pinchbacke, at Gréeneſtead in Suſſex. The xvii. at Léeke, at Winchcombe, at Saint Kenelmes, at Llanuilling. The xx. at Awſerton, at Bowli
                        •
                     , at Vxbridge, at Cateſby at Saint Margarets, at Odiham, at Chimmocke, at Bolton in the Moore, at Barkeway, at Ickleton in Cambridgeſhire, at Betley, at Tenbie, at Neath, at Llanymthinery, at Woodſtocke. The xxii. at Stonyſtratford, at Kimolton, at Bickleſworth, at Bridgenorth, at Barnards caſtle in the North, at Yarne in Yorkeſhire, at Broughton in Fornace, at Clytherall in Lancaſhire, at Keſwicke in Cumberland, at Batlefield by Shreweſbury, at Northwich in Cheſhire, at Stockbury, at Kingſtone, at Marleborough, at Turbury, at Witherall, at Colcheſter, at Calne, at Coolaige, at Yadland, at Maudlin-hill by

Wincheſter, at Newarke vpon Trent, at Roking in Kent, at Maudlin-hill by Heydowne in Yorkeſhire, at Ridwallie, at Withgrig, at Ponterley. The xxiii. at Cheſtone, at Carnarnon. The xxv. at Saint Iames by London, at Saint Iames by Northampton, at Briſtole, at Darby, at Dudly, at Chicheſter, at Stone, at Shiſnal, at Stamford, at Louth, at Lyuerpoole, at Thrapſto, at Barcamſtead, at Buntingford, at Doncaſter, at Baldocke, at Walden, at Tilburie, at Ipſwich, at Rauenglaſſe, at Erith, at Bromley, at Aſhwell, at Hatfield, at Breadoke, at Reading, at Chilholme, at Douer, at Malmeſbury, at Aldergame, at Broomeſgroue, at Camden, at Wigmore, at Chickham, at Trobridge, at Roſſe, at Machenbleth at Landengeiram, at Capell-Iago, at Stackpoole, at Biſetour at Linfield, at Kirtham the Iſle, at Wetherby in Yorkeſhire, at Themblegréene, at Skipton in Crauen. The xxvi. at Tiptry at Bewdley, at Raiadargwy. The xxvii. at Chappelfrith, at Richmond in the North, at Warington, at Horſham, at Canterbury, at Malpaſſe, at Aſhford.
               
               
                  Fayres in Auguſt.
                  THe i. day at Shreweſburie, at Loughborough in Leiceſterſhire, at Yorke, at Newcaſtle vpon Trent, at Selby, at Newton in Lancaſhire, at Dunſtable, at Bedford, at Saint Néeds, at Yelland in Yorkeſhire, at Northamchurch,

at Selborne, at Exceter, at Thack
                        ••
                     ead, at Rumney, at Mailing, at Feuerſham all th
                        ••
                      in Kent: at Wiſbitch, at Horſeney in Holde
                        •
                     neſſe, at Hay, at Bathe, at Karmarthen, 
                        〈◊〉
                      Ka
                        •
                     rgwilly, at Llantriſſent, at Chepſtow, 
                        〈◊〉
                      Llaurwen, at Flint: the 4. at Linton, at R
                        ••
                     nor: the ninth, at Aberlew: the tenth, at M
                        •
                     
                     ton Mowbra, at Chorlay, at Rugby, at Chidl
                        ••
                     , at Owndle, at Sedole in Yorkeſhire, at Weydon, at Frodiſham in Cheſhire, at Banbury, at New Brainford, at Wilton, at Waltham Abbey, at Alchurch, at Farneham, at Wor
                        •
                     
                     ſter in Wiltſhire, at Hungerford, at Hawckhurſt, at Blackamore, at Mearworth, at Ludlow, at Saint Lawrence by Bodwin, at Winſtow, Touceſtour, at Kellom, at Sherborne in Yorkeſhire, at Doncaſter, at Croyley, at 
                        ••
                     
                     garron, at Haliegh, at Diffringoly wich, at Newborough, at Kenwilgaio, at Harley: at Marras. The xv. day at Hinckley in Leiceſterſhire, at Saint Albones, at Belton, at Huntington, at Preſton in Aunderneſſe, at Wakefield, at Carlile, at Giſborough, at Goodhurſt, at Cambridge, at Dunmow in Eſſex, at Stroud by Rocheſter in Kent, at Northampton, at Luton, at Dryfield in Yorkeſhire, at Elſemere, at Tutbury, at Hinkley, at Marleborough, at Whitland, at Kardigan, at Roſſe, at Swanſey, at Eglwyſuait, at Yminith, at Newin, at Newport in Munmouthſhire. The xvi, at Rayaydargwy: the 24. at London, at Nantwich at Riddermuſter, at Pagets Bromley, at Harewood,

at Croyley in Lancaſhire, at Northalerton, at Tuddington, at Faringdon, at T
                        •
                     wkſbury, at Sudbury, at Norwich, at Douer, at Oxford, at Chorley, at Beggars buſh beſide Rye, at Bromley, at Alborough in Holderneſſe, at Watford in Hartfordſhire, at Aberconwey, at Mummouth, at Mountgomery. The xxviii at Aſhford, at Sturbridge in Worceſterſhire, at Taliſarnegréene, at Welſhpoole. The xxix. at Watford, at Coby in Lincolneſhire, at Karmarthen, at Brecknocke, at Kaerwis. The Sunday after Saint Bartholomew at Sandbich.
               
               
                  Faires in September.
                  THe firſt day S. Giles, at Chappel-filuy, at Neath. The iiii. at Oakham. The vii. at VVare, at VVoodburihill. The viii. at Sothwarke nigh London, at Sturbridge, at VVakefield, at VValtham on the VVoulds, at Giſborough both the Lady dayes, at Brewood, at Drayton, at Blackborne, at Northampton, at Atherſton, at Vlceſter, at Gliborne, at VVorſeworth, at Chaul
                        •
                     on in Cheſhire, at Partney, at Burie in Lancaſhire, at Huntington, at VVol
                     
                        •
                     epit, at VVeſtneme, at Chattom, at Smeath, at Raculuor, at Snide, at Malden, at Rockingham, at Hartford, at Drifield, at Llandiſſell, at Kardigan, at VVhitland, at Cardiffe, at Tenby, at Bewmorris. The xiii. at Pwlhely, at Newtowne in Redwin. The xiiii. at

Newport: at Cheſterfield: at Richmond: at Rippon in the North: at Stratford vpon Anon, at 
                        •
                     arſeley: at Hetſburie: at Smalding, at Waltham Abby, at Penhad, at Wotton vnder hedge, at Barſeley, at Hidome in Holderneſſe, at Denbigh, at Newborough, at Roſſe: at Mun
                        •
                     ton: at Abergauenni. The .xv. at Raiadargwy. The xvii. at Cliffe, a Llanidlaſſe. The xx. at Llanuellie, at Kothin. The xxi. at Nottingham, at Strafford: at Shreweſburie, at Peterborough, at Kingſton in Warwickſhire: at Holden in Holderneſſe, at Maydenbrackley: at Daintry in Northamptonſhire: at Baldock, at Bedford at Saint Edmondſburie, at Woodſtocke, at Lentham, at Eaſtrid at Milnall, at Clanone, at Braintrie, at Wendouer, at Douer, at Witherall, at Katherinehill by Gilford, at Malden in Eſſex, at Croydon, at Vizes, at Marleborough, at Canterbury, at Abergwilly, at Knighton. The xxiii. at Pa
                        •
                     
                     cridge in Staffordſhire a great Horſe faire, at Malton a great faire of horſes and of cattle all the wéeke long in Yorkeſhire: at Llanuillin
                        ••
                      The xxviii. at Dolgeth, at Kaermarthen. The xxix. at Leiceſter, at Weſtcheſter, at Lancaſter, at Blackborne, at Aſhorne, at Tuddingtin, at Saint Iues, at Saint Albones, at V
                        •
                     bridge, at Highamferries, at Brunningham, at Selby, at Killingworth, at Ludlow, at Balmeſtocke, at Newbery, at Michael Deane, at Canterburie, at Sittingborne, at Woodham ferry in Eſſex, at Kingſtand, at C
                        •
                     ke
                        •
                     mouth, at Baſingſtoke, at

Maldon an Horſefaire, at Way-hill by Andouer, at Bookeham, at Headly, at Buckland, at Biſhop ſtratford, at Shelford in Bedfordſhire, at Hull, at Merthir, at Llanuihangell, at Aberconwy, at Llocher, at Machenleth, at Llnidlaſſe, at Wemer vii daies, at Hay.
               
               
                  Faires in October.
                  THe Monday after Saint Michael, at Falſeley. The iii. at Boulton in the Moores. The iiii. at Saint Michael. The vi. at Saint Fayths beſides Norwich, at Hauent in Hampſhire, at Maidſtone in Kent. The viii. at Hereford, at Biſhops-ſtratford, at Chicheſter, at Swanſey, at Llambedder▪ at Pont-ſtephen. The ix. at Harborough in Leiceſterſhire, at Gainſborough, at Blith in Nottinghamſhire, at Aſhborne in the Peake, at Sabridgeworth in Hartfordſhire, at Hodnet, at Deuizes. The ix and tenth dayes at Greys Thorrocke in Eſſex: the xii. at Boulton in Furnace, at Llangoneth. The xiii. at Edmondſtow in Nottinghamſhire, at Tamworth, at Drayton, at Cruſton, at Stapforth, at Graueſend, at Hitchin, at Royſton, at Windſore, at Marſhfield, at Colcheſter in Eſſex, at Staunton, at Charing, at Aberfrow, at Newport in Monmouthſhire, at Leighton-buſſard. The xviii. at Welingborough, at Burton vpon Trent, at Bridgenorth, at Tiſdale in Darbiſhire, at Wyham, at Barnet, at Banburie, at Middlewich, at Biſhopshatfield,

at Ely, at Brickhill, at Newcaſtle, at Faringdon, at Charing, at Henley in Arden, at Marlow, at Vphauen, at Tunbridge, at Aſ
                        •
                     
                     well, at Yorke, at Thirſt, at Wrickley, at Holt, at Charleton, at Lawhadden, at Kidwelly, at Iſke, at Radnor. The xix. at Saint Frideſwides by Oxford. The xxi. at Couentrie, at Newmarket, at Stokeſley, at Ciceſter, at Lentham, at Saffron-walden, at Hereford, at Llanibither. The xxiii. at Whitchurch, at Lower Knotisford, at Ratſdale, at Bickleſworth, at Preſton. The xxx. at Beuerly: the xxviii. at Warwicke, at Aſhby de la Zouch, at Lamſter, at Preſton in Andernes, at Stanford, at Hartford, at Oxford, at Biddenden, at Waxmeſter in Wiltſhire, at Willon, at Aberconwey, at Llanedy. The xxix. at Taliſarnegréene. The xiii. at Stokeſley, at Wakefield, at Ruthin, a Pwſhely, at Abermarles.
               
               
                  Faires in Nouember.
                  THe i. day at Brickleſworth, at Ludlow, at Kellome, at Caſtlemaine, at mountg
                        •
                     mmery. The ii. at Loughborow, at Léeke, at Marfield, at Blechingley, at Mayfield in Suſſex, at Biſhops caſtle, at Elſemere, at Kingſtone vpon Thames, at Yorke in Petergate. The iii. at Kaermarthen. The v. at Welſh-poole. The vi. at Newport pond in Eſſex, called Cole faire; at Wellington, at Pembridge, at Salforth▪ at Leſſorth, at Stanley, at Trigney in Cornewall, at

Andiuer, at Wetſhod, at Hartford, at Mailing in Kent, at Bedford, at Marron in Holderneſſe, at Brecknock. The x. at Lenton by Nottingham vii daies, at Rugbie, at Wem, at Shifnall, at Llambither, at Aberwingrin: the xi. at Marleborow, at Douer, at Fockingham, at Newcaſtle in Emlin, at Yorke, at Botingam in Yorkſhire, at Shafteſbury, at Tlathara Maies at Aberkenuen, at Monmouth, at Tream, at Withgrig. On Monday after Saint Martin, at Engleſrow in Kemes, at Carnaruan. The xiii. at S. Edmondſburie, at Gilford in Surrey. The xv. at Llanithinery, at Machenleth. The xvii. at Harlow, at Hide, at Northampton, at Spaldocke, at Lincolne. The xix. at Horſha in Kent. The xx. at S. Edmondſbury in Suffolke, at Health at Hide, at Ingerſton. The xxii. at Penibont, at Sawthey. The xxii. at Sandwitch, at Ludlow, at Frome, at Tuddington, at Kateſcroſſe by Prittlwell in Eſſex, at Bwelth, at Bangor, at Carline. The xxv. at Highamferries. The xxviii. at Aſhborne in the Peake. The 29. at Lawreſt. The 30. at Boſton a Mart, at Cublay in Darbiſhire, at Kimolton, at Bedford in Yorkeſhire, at Warington, at Gargraue, at Wakefield, at Baldocke, at Peterfield, at Colongborough, at Amptill, at Cobham, at Maydenhead, at Rocheſter, at Gréeneſtéed in Suſſex, at Oceſtry, at Bewdley, at Mayden-brackley, at Narbert, at Pecorées in Gower, at Gargréene, at Preſton, at Harleight, at Bradford.
               
               
                  
                  Faires in December.
                  THe v. day at Pluckley, at Dolgeth, at Newton. The vi. at S. Needes, at Northwich in Cheſhire, at Arundle, at Spalding, at Exceter, at Caſed, at Hendingham, Seuenoeke in Kent, at Woodſtocke, at Grantham, at Hethin, at Horneſay. The vii. at Sandhurſt: the viii. at Leiceſter, at Northampton, at Malpaſſe in Cheſhire, at Clitherall in Lancaſhire, at Kinnax, at Heirſome, at Whitland, at Kardigan, at Bewmarris at Llanunen: the xxi. at Hornebie in Lancaſhire. The 22. at Llandilauaw: the 29. at Canterbury, Saliſbury, Royſton.
               
               
                  A Note of the moueable Faires here in England.
                  THe three Mondaies next after Twelft day, at Hincklay in Leiceſterſhire: the Tweſday next following Twelft day, at Melton Mowbray, an Horſefaire at Saliſburie.
                  The Thurſday after Twelft day at Banburie, at Litterworth in Leiceſterſhire: and euery thurſday after for 3 wéeks. The Aſhwedneſday, at Lichfield, at Tamworth, at Dunſtable, at Fakinghame, at Royſton, at Eaton by Windſor, at Exceter, at Cicetour, at Candaine in Gloceſterſhire, at Tunbridge in Kent: the firſt Monday in Lent at Abington, at Wincheſter, at Chicheſter, at Cherlay in Surrey. The firſt Tweſday in Lent at Bedford: the firſt Thurſday in

Lent at Banbury. On Mid-lent ſunday at Standford, at Odſham, at Saffron Walden: the Friday, and ſaterday before Care-ſunday at Hartford. The Monday before our Lady day in Lent at Kendall, at Wiſbitch, at Denbigh in Wales: the fift ſunday in Lent being Careſunday at Hartford, at Grantham at Salisbury, at Sudbury, at Helxſome in Suſſex. On Palme ſunday euen at Pumfract, and euery fourtnight vntill Trinity-ſunday, and that is three weekes betwixt: and euery fourtnight after till S. Andrewſmas at Leiceſter, at Aleſbury, at Skipton vpon Crauen, at Fockingham, at Wiſbich. On Palme
                        •
                     unday at Worceſter, at Billingſworth, at Kendall in Lancaſhire. On Maunday-thurſday at Kettering, at Sudmyſter in Eſſex. On good Friday at Millonie. On Munday in Eaſter wéeke at Gainſborough a Mart, at Onay in Buckinghamſhire, at Drifield in Yorkeſhire:
                  On Tweſday in Eaſter weeke at Longner, at Couentry, at Hitchin. And a fourtnight faire begins the Tweſday in Eaſter wéeke, and continueth euery Tweſday fortnight vntill Chriſtmas, being great faires of cattle: the Tueſday and Wedneſday at Brailes, at Sandbatoth, at Rochford, at Northſlect.
                  On the Wedneſday in Eaſter wéeke at Wellingborough, euery Wedneſday betweene Eaſter and Michaelmas, a faire of cattle at Beuerley. On Friday in Eaſter wéeke at Skipton in Crauen. On Low-ſunday at Bickleſworth in Buckinghamſhire. The Monday after Low-ſunday

at Enlome. The third Sunday after Eaſter at Lowth in Lincolnſhire.
                  Rogation wéeke, all the wéeke is for retayling at Beuerley, at Inglefield in Lancaſhire, at Rech. Holy Thurſday, or Aſcention day, at Litterworth, at Hallaton in Leiceſterſhire, at Rippon, at Brunningham, at Wigham, at Biſhop Stratford, at Newcaſtle, at Middlewich, at Burton vpon Trent at Chapplefrith, at Stapport in Cheſhire, at Yarne, at the Vizes, at Braſtead in Kent, at Sudmaſter in Eſſex, at Darkin, at Grantham, at Beuerley. The Sunday after Aſcention day at Tharſtead, at Bur
                     
                        •
                     ington in Yorkeſhire.
                  On Whitſon euen at Skipton in Crauen, at Wiſbitch. On Whitſonday at Ratiſdale, at Leutham, at Kerby Steuen in Weſtmerland, at Ryhill, at Cribby. On Whitſon-monday at Darrington in the North, at Burton, at Midlome, at Harſl-gréene in Lancaſhire, at Oundle in Northamptonſhire, at Whitchurch, at Bicleſworth, at Saint Iues, at Sléeforth in Lincolneſhire, at Cokermouth in the North, at Salforth, at Exceter, at Eaſdome, at Apleby, at Rygate, at Sitingbridge at Bradford, at Amerſon, at Dryfield in Yorkeſhire, at Yorke, at Agmonham, at Stokechéere. On Whitſon-tueſday at Melton Mowbray, at Longuer in Staffordſhire, at Aſhby, at de la zouch in Leiceſterſhire, at Higher Knotsford in Cheſhire at Oringſtoke, at Laighton Buzzard, at Farringdon in Barkſhire, at Perith in Cornewall, at

Long-guilford, at Canterburie, at Rothford in Eſſex, at Lewis in Suſſex, at Chipping at Daintry in Northamptonſhire. On Wedneſday in Whitſon wéeke at Léeke in Staffordſhire, at Sandborow, at Royſton, at Newarks vpon Trent. On Thurſday in Whitſon wéeke at Kingſtone vpon Thames, at Cockfield. On Friday in Whitſon wéeke at Darby, at Cockfall. On Trinity euen at Skipton in Crauon, at Punfract, at Rowell in Northamptonſhire for ſixe daies. On Trinity Sunday at Southcane in Yorkeſhire, at Kendall, at Hounſlow, at Stokeſley, at Saint Mary Awke, at Tunbridge. On Trinity Monday at VVatford, at Spilby, at Ray in Eſſex. On Corpus Chriſti day at Couentry, at Stamford, at Banbury, at Stopport, at Preſcoate, at Saint Néedes, at Hallaton, at Newberie, at Saint Annes, at Hemptſtead, at Biſhop Stratford, at Roſſe. The Sunday next after Trinity-Sunday at Belton. On the Eue and on the Feaſt or day of Apoſtles Peter & Paul, at Greys Thorreck in Eſſex. On Relique Sunday, which is the ſunday fortnight after Midſommer, at Fodringay. The ſunday after the third of Iuly at Hauerhull. The ſunday after Saint Bartholomew, at Sandbitch in Cheſhire. The Tweſday after Michaelmas at Salisburie. The Thurſday after Michaelmas at Banburie.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            A Table of Theſe Particular Notes following,
            
               GAllen. page 15
               The firſt Emperiall crowne of gold. page 17
               The originall of the Patriarchy of Conſtantinople. pag. 17
               The death of Saint Ierome. pag. 17
               Saint Patrique. pag. 18
               Rome ſpoyled by the Gothes. pag. 18
               The death of Saint Auguſtine. pag. 18
               A ſtrange peſtilence. pag. 23
               The life and death of the falſe Prophet Mahomet. pag. 24
               Clocks and Dials appointed. pag. 26
               The tyranny of Iuſtinian the Emperor. pag. 28
               France ſpoiled by the Saracens. pag. 31
               Germany conuerted. pag. 30
               Saxonie conuerted. pag. 31
               The Originall of Flanders. pag. 31
               Solemne muſicke in Churches. pag. 31
               The Biſhopricks of Hambro and Bream founded. pag. 32
               The originall of Normandy. pag. 33
               The Danes and Norweys conuerted. pag. 35
               
                  The tranſlation of the Empire. p. 36
               The Gamoth inuented. p. 37
               The end of the race of Charlemaigne, and the beginning of Hugh Capet. p. 38
               Lubeck founded. p. 40
               Froſt fiue months together in England. p. 44
               Goodwynſands. p. 49
               The conqueſt of Ieruſalem by Godfrey of Bolloigne. p. 50
               The Story of Lybuſſa and Velaſca, with her Army of Ladies. p. 56
               Iohannes de Temporibus. p. 60
               Gratianus. p. 62
               London Bridge built of timber. p. 64
               Yorke burned. p. 67
               Paris ſtreetes and London ſtreetes paued. p. 68
               A fiſh like a man. p. 69
               The Iewes commit great outrages. p. 71
               The firſt Kingdome of Tartars. p. 78
               London Bridge built of ſtone. p. 79
               Three thouſand perſons ſpoiled vpon London Bridge. p. 81
               Winchellea deſtroied by a ſtrange inundation. p. 94
               The Shepheards of England and France go a pilgrimage. p. 95
               The twelue Peeres of France ordained. All the youth of London ſworne. p. 96
               The Saracens attempt to ſpoile Chriſtendome, with other things of note. p. 97
               Strange tempeſt: the firſt great rot of ſheepe. p. 102
               
                  The originall of the Knights Templers▪ Knights of Rhodes and Malta. p. 104
               Iuſtices puniſhed, fifteene thouſand Iewes baniſhed. p. 109
               Sea-coale forbidden to be burned nere London. p. 113
               The French King burneth infected perſons. p. 116
               The Iewes in Germany burned. ibid.
               A terrible mortality with other things of note. p. 118, 119. and 100.126
               The moſt honourable order of Knights of the Garter. p. 129
               The misfortune of fiue great Princes. p. 131
               A ſerpent in England with two heads. p. 133
               The ſtaple of wooll remoued. p. 143
               A wondrous mortality in England of great note. p. 136
               The famous Poets, Francis Petrarch and Iohn Boccace. p. 139
               Tamberlayne taketh Baiazeth, & reſcueth Conſtantinople. p. 149
               The firſt Duke of Millaine, with other things of note. p. 154
               The firſt impoſt of ſalt in France. p. 161
               The King of Englands Seale vſed in Paris, with other things of note. p. 163
               Francis Sforce made Duke of Millaine. p. 167
               The King of England crowned in Paris. p. 169
               George Scanderbeg. p. 174
               The originall of Printing. p. 178
               An admirable ſudden peſtilence in Paris. 
               Rome taken and ſacked by the Duke of Burbon,

vide in Anno 1526. 
               The firſt Duke of Florence. p. 219
               The laſt Duke of Millaine. p. 222
               Barbaroſſo King of Argier. p. 232
               The houſe of Ferneze made Dukes of Parma. p. 250
               The laſt fall of baſe mony in England. p. 282
               The Archbiſhop of Collen expulſed for marying a wife. p. 341
               The Prince of Orenge ſlaine. p. 340
               Antwerpe beſieged. p. 348
               Captaines of the Artillery Garden. p. 359
               The Patriarch of Greece ſelleth his dignity. pag. 371
               The Duke of Guyſe ſlaine, and the French King ſlaine, being the laſt of the houſe of Valois, the houſe of Nauarre ſucceedeth him, the miſerie of Paris during the ſiege, and a briefe touch of ſome of the chiefe ancient Kings of France. p. 379
               The Ciuill Law reduced into order. p. 398
               The originall and State of Venice. p. 464
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   