
      
         
            
            
            A
FIFT PROCEEDING
in the Harmony of King
Dauids Harpe.
            
            That is to ſay, a godly and learned Expoſition
of 5. other moe Pſalmes of the princely Prophet Dauid:
beginning with the 68. and ending with the 72. Pſalme, being the laſt part of the firſt Tome,
or one halfe of the booke
of Pſalmes.
            
               Written in Latin by the reuerend Doctor Victorinus
Strigelius: profeſſor of Diuinity in the Vniuerſity
of Lipſia in Germanie.
Anno. 1576.
            Tranſlated into Engliſh by Richard Robinſon
Citizen of London. 1594.
            Seene, and allowed.
            
               Pſalme 36. verſe 10.O continue forth thy louing kindneſſe to them that know thee:
and thy righteouſneſſe vnto them that are true of hart.
            
               Pſalme 37. verſe 35.Hope thou in the Lord and keepe his way, and he ſhall promote
thee: that thou ſhalt poſſeſſe the land, when the vngodly ſhal periſh
thou ſhalt ſee it.
            AT LONDON,
Printed by P.S. for Matthew Lownes, and are to be
ſold at his ſhop vnder S. Dunſtons Church in
the Weſt. 1598.
         
         
            
            
            To the Right Reuerend father in God, Richard
by Gods prouidence Biſhop of London; To the Right
Honorable Sir Richard Saltonſtall Knight, Lord Maior of
London; and to the Right worſhipful his Brethren the Aldermen
and Sheriffes of the ſame City: grace, mercy, peace
and plenitude of temporall and eternall beatitude
in the ſacred Trinity.
            
               OUR Lord and Sauiour Chriſt Ieſus (right reuerend
Father in God, honorable Lord,Iohn. 14. 6 and right worſhipful
Patrons) as hee rightly called himſelfe the way, the
truth, and the life of all faithfull beleeuers and good
liuers, and was ſo in deed: the way by example not erring;
the truth, by promiſe not failing; and the life by reward neuer ending:
ſo on a time aſcending up a certaine hill (after he had in a prolix
ſermon inſtructed his Diſciples, and a multitude of others his followers
in the way, truth, and life of perfect bleſſedneſſe vpon earth, and the
fruitfull effects thereof in the life euerlaſting) ſaid vnto them; yee are
the ſalt of the earth, & the light of the world:
               Matth. 5. 13 14 As it might well ſeeme
attributing the first title (ſalt of the earth) vnto his diſciples, as they
which (with the table of the Teſtament) deliuering ſincere doctrine, &
it (with the pot of Manna) miniſtring the ſacraments by Chriſts inſtitution
(ſeaſoning the ſoules of Gods ſeruants) and (with Aarons rod)
executing diſcipline vpon diſordered liuers within the Church: And
by the ſecond title, light of the world, fully attributing vnto temporal
magiſtrates (as to the learned in the lawes divine & humane) the light
of righteouſnes, ſword of truth, and ballance of iuſtice, with iudgement
to cheriſh the good and puniſh the euill liuers in the common wealth.
And ſo making of both a bleſſed and happy coniunction or incorporation
of good gouernement, hee added hereunto this rare and notable concluſion,
A citty that is ſet on a hill cannot be hid: ſignifieng thereby
a Citty ſo gouerned, is a right Hieropolis or ſacred Citty; and a kingdome
ſo adminiſtred is a right Hierarchia or ſacred principalitie,
knowne, beloued of friends; feared and made famous among enemies
both neare and far off. Such in truth (bleſſed bee the true omnipotent
and immortall God) hath been the happy ſtate of this citty of London,
yea and whole kingdome of England, though low inſituation, yet high
in acceptation with God and good people of all nations: vnto which as
I a poore member thereof (God be my witnes, defender, Iudge, and

reuenger) haue alwaies wiſhed well in goodwill, goodworde, and good
workes (to my poore power,) ſo eleuen yeares nowe paſt I ſignified the
ſame ſpecially by tranſlating the learned Vrbanus Rhegius his godlie
expoſition vpon the 87. Pſalme, intituled the Solace of Sion and ioy
of Ieruſalem; and dedicating the ſame vnto the then Right Honorable
Sir George Barne Knight, Lord Maior of this Citty, who thankfully
accepted my good wil therein. For it carried this credit with it,
Her foundations are vpon the holy hils, and holy, innocent and the
beſt members of this our Church and common wealth have profited
thereby I doubt not: But nowe if there bee any vnholy, nocent and bad
perſoyet remaining, either within or without the gates of that Hieruſalem
or viſion of peace, (as God which once promiſed to ſearch it doth
beſt ſee;Sopho. 1. 12 for man ſeeth not as God ſeeth. 1. Sam. 16. 7.) whether he
be a forger of falſhood. Iere. 10. 14 ſlanderous ſeruant. Pro. 13. 5.
euill nurtured child. Ecclus. 22. 7. and ſo a carnall maſter, Iohn. 3.
10. and a careleſſe parent, 1. Tim. 5. 8. with blinde ſeer and deafe
hearer, Eſay. 42. 8. (whereof too many I haue found as I can conuince)
I pray to God humbly and hartely theſe either ſpeedely (if it be his heauenly
holy will) to conuert by doctrine and diſcipline in the church; or
(if ſo they will not bee conuertible) at his good pleaſure, in his iuſtice
and iudgement, to ſubuert them perſeuering in their malignities inflexible.
In the meane time with all humble and hartifull duty I
commend this my preſent poore labour to the aduancement of Gods
glory ineffable, hir maieſties continuall honour, and your honours and
worſhips fauorable protection; firſt as vnto that Aaron whoſe ſincere
doctrine with example of life, and diſcipline as your rod (which God
long make to bud and bloſſome in bleſſednes,) and conſequently as vnto
that Mercury which tuning this my harp in right concord of goodwil
(as I deliuer it / may ſende the ſweete ſolace thereof from your ſincere
breſts, not vnto an earthly Apollo to regratifie you with an earthlie
ſcepter, but to the heauenly Iehoua, who may beſt rewarde you with all
abundance of heauenly happines in the life euerlaſting, which God for
his ſonne Chriſts ſake grant vnto your honors and worſhips.
            
               At my poore houſe in S. Brides pariſh in fleetſtreet, this 24. of
Auguſt. 1598.
                
               Your honorable good Lordſhips, and worthy
worſhips, humble poore Orator. Richard Robinſon, Cittizen
of London.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               PSALME. LXVIII.
               Exurgat Deus & diſsipentur Inimici, &c.
            
            TO HIM THAT
EXCELLETH.
            A Pſalme or Song of Dauid demonſtratiue touching
the wonderfull mercies of God towardes his Church, in reſpect
of his pormiſes, graces, and victories which he giueth her: and it
is exhortatorie: that his Church ſhould therefore prayſe God
for euer.
            
               The Argument.
               
                  THIS Pſalme is a glorious and plentifull prophecie,
touching the reſurrection and triumph of Chriſt in
his aſcenſion, touching his gift of the holy ghoſt, his
gathering of the Church by the miniſtry of the Apoſtles,
the deſtruction of the Iewiſh policy or ſtate, and the benefits
of his new and euerlaſting kingdome. And like as the fine
verſes of Poets do edifie, vttered from a ſincere and ſacred breſt:
So no doubt of it, Dauids penne in the writing of this Pſalme
was filled with ſpirituall ioy, which exceedeth all capacitie and
conſideration of man: For he vſeth not a ſimple kinde of phraſe
deſcribing the magnificence of Chriſtes kingdome, but moſt e-legantly
with figures hee deſcribeth euen as it were the triumphant

pompe of this King: For he frameth his beginning of impracation
or curſing, and of gratulation or reioycing: For hee
curſeth the enemies of Chriſt; but he reioyceth at the welfare of
the godly ones. The declaration of the Pſalme comprehendeth
the deſcription of the pompe, The Lord commeth and bringeth
with him his hoaſt of them which preach the Goſpell: Out
of theſe are deſcribed the Apoſtles and Biſhops as it were Princes
of prouinces or countries, which do comfort and refreſh theſe
countries afflicted and perſecuted: The Lord aſcendeth vpon
high, hee leadeth in his triumph the captiues, hee diſtributeth his
gifts vnto his ſoldiours and people, and threatneth puniſhment
vnto his enemies: The people go before, and one commeth after
which ſingeth the ſong of triumph. This is almoſt the ſcope
of this Pſalme: which let the godly ones reade not ſo much for
the wonderfull and delectable diuine excellencie of eloquence
wherewith it aboundeth.
            
            
               
                  ❧The Pſalme and Expoſition
thereof.
               
                  
                  Let God ariſe, and let his enemies bee ſcattered; Let
them alſo that hate him flee before him.
                  
                  Like as the ſmoake vaniſheth, ſo ſhalt thou driue them
away: and like as the waxe melteth at the fire, ſo let the
vngodly periſh at the preſence of God.
                  
                     LIKE as the next Pſalme following deſcribeth
Chriſt humbled upon the Croſſe; and (by reaſon of
our ſinnes) ſirtuing with moſt bitter ſorrowes:
in this Pſalme ſetteth forth Chriſt riſen from

death to life and gloriouſly ſitting at the right hande of his
Father:The glorious effectes of Chriſts reſurrection. He beginneth then with the effects of the moſt ioyfull
reſurrection of Chriſt; namelie by the deſtruction and
ſcattering abroad of his enemies, and by the reuiuing or reſtoring
of his church: as if he ſaid, when Chriſt was dead and
buried, not onlie the blind and raging Iewes leaped for ioy,
but alſo the Deuill and his companions, namelie ſinne and
death, triumphed at full, as if Chriſt ſhoulde ſo for euer remaine
in the graue. But this graund guide of life the third
daie riſing againe had a glorious triumph ouer the Iewes,
and the whole kingdome of the Deuill, often times repeating
that ſaying of the Prophet Oſea cap. 13. 14. O death I will be
thy death, O graue I will be thy deſtruction. For although the
ſtubborne and vncurable Iewes carried ſtately mindes as
then, and reſiſted the Apoſtles with a malignant countenance:
yet in the xl. yeare after Chriſtes reſurrection, they
ſuffered grieuous and iuſt puniſhmentes for their outrages.
And the kingdome of the deuill, ſinne and death is ſo broken
and cruſhed in peeces by Chriſt, that it can bring no danger
vnto the godlie ones: Let vs therefore with S. Paule ſing
this triumph ſong 1. Cor. 15. 55. O death where is thy ſting, O
graue where is thy victory? The ſting of death is ſinne, and the
ſtrength of ſinne is the Law: But thankes be to God which hath
giuen vs victory, through our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt. verſe 56. 57.
And what is more elegant then the deſcribing of theſe enemies
which he here vſeth, comparing them unto ſmoke and
ware? Great is the pride of ſmoke when it burſteth out of the
top of the chimney and his ſpreading heat couereth the ayre.
So an Image of waxe maketh both a terrible shew of grauitie

                        •
                      of hardnes; but as the ſmoke which ſéemeth to pearce
the verie firmament is ſcattered by the wind here and there:
and as the image of ware laide to the fire melteth quite awaie:
So the enemies of the Goſpell and of the Church (by
the breath of Chriſtes mouth, which is both winde and flame)
are either healed, or taken vtterlie awaie and deſtroied altogether:
So in like maner, Athanaſius compared Iulian the

Apoſtat vnto a little cloud, whome the Sunne within a while
after ſhould ſo driue away and vanquiſh, that no man ſhould
ſée anie trace therof more: With theſe debaſings and downfalles
of the enemies of the goſpell and of the church agreeth
that ſentence of Iſay ca. 51. 7. Feare ye not the reproch of men;
neither be yee afraide of their rebukes. verſe 8. For the moath
ſhall eate them vp like a garment, and the worme ſhall eat them
like wooll.
                  
               
               
                  
                  But let the righteous be glad and reioyce before God:
Let them alſo be merry and ioyfull.
                  An other effect of Chriſts reſurrection, is the reuiuing or
reſtoring of his Church: for as Saint Paule ſaith, Rom. 14.
17. The kingdome of God is not meate and drinke, but righteouſneſſe,
peace and ioy in the holie Ghoſt. It is indéed Righteouſneſſe,
as thus: frée remiſſion of ſinnes, reconciliation with
God,The ioy of the faithfull in the triumph of Chriſt. and free acceptation vnto life euerlaſting. It is Peace
thus: Tranquillitie of heart riſing from faith, hope & a good
conſcience. Finallie, it is Ioy, thus: Conſolation, which is the
vanquiſher of all feares and doubtings: All theſe benefites
are the effects of Chriſts paſſion and reſurrection, which ſaint
Paule acknowledgeth, Phil. 3. 12. He hath not yet attained vnto,
but he tooke(he ſaide) the right courſe whereby he might attaine
vnto this reach of wiſdome. The ſame thing let vs alſo
confeſſe and craue of God, that hee would illumine and increaſe
in our hearts this light acknowledging the benefites
of Chriſt.
               
               
                  
                  O ſing vnto God, and ſing praiſes vnto his name: magnifie
him that rideth vpon the heauens, as it were vpon
an horſe: praiſe him in his name, yea and reioyce before
him.
                  Not only in the heart (ſaith Dauid) let true knowledge of
Chriſt ſhine, whereto is ioyned ſpirituall ioy, but let the toong

alſo magnifie this Lord riſen from death to life, and raigning
for euer: who though he be the ſonne of Dauid after the
Sencalogie, yet is hee declared the Sonne of God by his riſing
from death to life, and by ſending his holie ſpirit, as in
Rom. cap. 1. ver. 3. 4 it is ſaid, This Lords diuinitie vnited to
his humanitie, and his victorie, triumphes, and benefits, ſee
that ye honor (ſaith Dauid) and in them reſt and ſweetlie repoſe
your ſelues For he doth not thumpe nor thunder it out,
but is carried faire and ſoftlie, and ſuffereth ſuters to haue
eaſie acceſſe vnto him. Let no man therefore be driuen from
him, but let all and euerie one come vnto this Lord, truſting
in his moſt ſwéete promiſe, who ſaith, Matth. 11, 28. Come
vnto me all ye that labour, and are laden, and I will refreſh you.
And where he ſaith, Magnifie him that rideth vpon the heauens,
that maie be vnderſtoode, Make your way before him,
and is ſpoken as touching our true repentance not fained
with amendment of life: for the firſt ſtep vnto health is, To
know the diſeaſe, and ſeeke a Phiſition. But contrariwiſe, it
is a heauie ſigne, if the minde being ſicke, know neither the
diſeaſe, nor looketh for phiſicke. Let vs therefore acknowledge
our maladies, namely, ſin and death, and let vs craue
to haue right medicine laide to theſe miſeries by the phiſition
and ſheepheard of our ſoules, euen the ſonne of God, who
came therefore into the world, to ſaue ſinners.
               
               
                  
                  He is a father of the fatherleſſe, and defendeth the cauſe
of the widowes: euen God in his holy habitation.
                  Although the Church is doubtleſſe in the world a widowe,
and an Orphane (for ſhe is both of enemies cruellie perſecuted,The Church is as a widow and orphane in the world, yet comforted and defended by Chriſt.
and of falſe friends forſaken) yet the ſonne of God leaueth
her not without defence and ſuccour, but partly nouriſheth
her with inward conſolation (which is called here, His
holie habitation,) and partly he prouideth for her ſome reſting
place for ſuccor, and giueth her Halcion daies, that ſhe may
happily nauriſh and bring up her birds. Hither to pertaineth

that notable ſaying of the ſonne of God, Ioh. 14. ver. 16, 18
I will not leaue you comfortleſſe, but I will come vnto you: I
will aske my father, and he ſhall giue you another comforter, euen
the ſpirit of truth, which ſhal abide with you for euer.
                  
                  And whatſoeuer is true touching the whole bodie, the ſame
may in like maner bee applied of all the members thereof:
For to let paſſe the examples of other Orphnaes, and ſpeak
of my ſelfe, ſurely euen me (who haue beene left an Orphane
euen from the verie thirde yeare of my age) hath Chriſt the
ſonne of God ſuccoured and helped, not onely with things
neceſſarie for my bodie, as meate and drinke, defence from
harme, good health, and honeſt reſidence or dwelling place among
men, &c. but alſo vnto theſe adding greater benefites,
as for example, bringing me out of the kingdome of darkeneſſe,
and tranſlating me into the kingdome of this ſonne of
God, wherein wee haue by his blood full remiſſion of our
ſinnes: To the end therefore a publique teſtimonie of my
thankfulneſſe may appeare, I giue vnto this father of Orphans,
& Iudge of widowes cauſes, ſo great thanks as my
mind is able to conceiue for his cheriſhing and mainteining
of mee ſo manie yeares, and for his benefits neceſſarilie beſtowed
vpon me, both for, my bodie and ſoule which in the
life to come euerlaſting, I ſhall more feruently commemorate,
and magnifie his name therefore.
               
               
                  
                  He is the God that maketh men to bee of one mind in
an houſe, and bringeth the priſoners out of captiuity: but
letteth the runnagates continue in ſcarceneſſe.
                  Chriſt (in the 9. cap. of Iſay, verſ. 6.) is called not without
cauſe, The euerlaſting father, becauſe in all ages by the ministerie
of his worde and ſacraments, hee regenerateth many
vnto life euerlaſting, whom the Church foſtereth and bringeth
vp, and ſo is shee made of a barren or ſolitarie woman,
a mother of manie children: according to the propheſie
of Iſay. Cap. 54. verſe 1. Reioyce O barren that diddeſt

not beare, breake foorth into ioy and 'reioyce, thou that
diddeſt not trauell with childe, for the deſolate hath mo children
then the married wife hath. Of this conſolation the
godlie ones haue néede,The Lord is carefull for the deliuerāce of his ſeruants. leaſt they take offence at the ſmall
number of true beleeuers, and the great number of other
ſectes. Alſo this Lord in time conuenient ſetteth Captiues
at libertie, that is, not in ſuch ſort as we thinke, but in his
meruailous prouidence, as in the 4 Pſalme it is ſaide, The
Lord knoweth how to deliuer his holy one, verſe 3. And the priſon
out of which we are deliuered, as S. Paule ſaith 2 Cor. 7.
5. Are inward feares, &c. outwarde fightings. For the godlie
ones for moſt part are toſſed with inwarde and outwarde
ſtormes of calamities, and at length getting out of the great
ſtormes of trouble do ſee their wiſhed hauen:But altogether neglecteth the vngodly ones. But the vngodlie
ones and diſobedient perſons hee deſpiſeth as the baſe
gotten children of this worlde, neither chaſteningnor comforting
them till they come to vtter deſtruction.
               
               
                  
                  O God, when thou wenteſt forth before the people:
when thou wenteſt through the wildernes:
                  
                  The earth ſhooke, and the heauens dropped at the preſence
of God: euen as Syna alſo was moued at the preſence
of God, which is the God of Iſraell.
                  
                  Thou O God ſenteſt a gratious raigne vppon thine inheritance: and refreſhed it when it was weary.
                  Hitherto hath hee made the hearer or learner attentiue
and docible, as in beginnings it is a thing vſuall: nowe goeth
he to the height of the cauſe, namelie into the place mentioning
of Chriſt and the Goſpell, and compareth the publiſhing
of the lawe, with the propagation of the goſpell, where
he ſaith, When thou publiſhedſt the lawe, the earth was in one
place moued, and the heauens dropped at thy preſence: But
now that the goſpell by preaching is ſpread abroad of the Apoſtles,
all the whole earth is moued: as in Haggias the Prophet
it is ſaid cap. 2. verſe 7. Yet a little while & I wil ſhake the

heauens, the earth, the ſea, and the drie land, &c. and a gracious
raine is powred vpon all parts of the world, where by the
Church is gathered both from among the Iewes and Gentiles,
and is watered as it were the inheritance of God.
And what is there more ſweete, then that the preaching of the
Goſpel is not onely compared vnto thunder,A ſweet Allegorie of the preaching of the Goſpel, how it is cōpared vnto thunder and raine. but vnto raine
alſo? For like as the earth bringeth forth fruit, partlie made
warme with the heate of the ſunne, and partly watered with
raine and waters: So the Church is refreſhed and recreated
of the holie Ghoſt by the miniſterie of the Goſpell. Let no
man therefore kéepe backe this raine from his Orchardes,
but let euen all our furrowes, and glebe landes receyue the
ſame with great deſire: That is, let our hearts without loathing
and ſurfetting heare the doctrine of the Goſpel, that
they may take thereby moſt ample fruit and profite. Touching
which ſaint Paule ſpeaketh Rom. 1. 16. The Goſpell is
the power of God vnto ſaluation for al that beleeue. Further,
more Chriſt is here called the God of Sinay, & of Iſrael, by reaſon
of the teſtimonies of his manifeſtations or appearings
made in mount Sinay, and in this people: For the pollicie or
gouernment of Moyſes was no other thing, but a ſtorehouſe
of diuine appearences and witneſſes.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Verſ. 10 Thy congregation ſhall dwell therein: for thou O God
of thy goodnes haſt prouided for the poore.
                  Chriſt is our ſheepheard becauſe hee teacheth vs,Chriſt the ſhepheard of our ſoules. comforteth,
gouerneth and defendeth vs, healeth vp our woundes,
and finallie carieth vs lying as it were vpon his ſhoulders;
not pretermitting anie kinde of dutie which a faithfull ſhéep,
heard might vſe, or is able to beſtowe upon ſillie and weake
ſhéepe: Let vs therefore remember in our dailie prayer
that we are the ſhéepe of this ſhéepheard, and let vs run for
ſuccour vnto him; and let vs craue helpe, gouernement and
defence of and from him: But touching this purpoſe I haue
ſpoken ſufficiently inough in the xxiii. Pſalme.
               
               
                  
                  
                  The Lord gaue the word; great was the company of
the Preachers.
                  
                     S. Paule in the 3. Gal. 19. and Heb. 2. verſe 2. ſaith,The publiſhing of the law and preaching of the Goſpell. 
                     The
lawe was giuen by the miniſtry of Angels, but the preaching of
the Goſpel was immediatly publiſhed by the ſonne of God, and
commended to his Apoſtles as an excellent gift and treaſure of
great price. For although the world outraglouſlie deſpiſe the
preachers and teachers of the Goſpell, and iudgeth them as
S Paule ſaith 1. Cor. 49. as gaſing ſtockes vnto the worlde:
yet in verie truth, the chiefeſt and greateſt bleſſing vppon
earth is, when men may heare the preachers and teachers
ſtirred vp by God to aduance and ſet forth the doctrine of the
Goſpell, wherein true acknowledgement of God and prayer
vnto him are ſhewed, which are the conſolation of mens
mindes and direct rules of good life.
               
               
                  
                  Kings with their armies did flee and were diſcomfited:
and they of the houſhold deuided the ſpoile.
                  Chriſt our Sauiour in the 9. cap. of S. Markes Goſpell
verſe 49. giueth charge vnto the Apoſtles and to the teachers
of the goſpell,The ſalt of the earth purity of doctrine▪ and the vnity of the teachers. 
                     That they haue ſalt in themſelues; that is, to retaine
the puritie of doctrine, and to be at vnitie and concord
amongſt themſelues. And in S. Iohns Goſpell cap. 17. verſe
17. & 21. Chriſt in his agonie praieth, that, God would ſanctifie
vs in his truth: and make vs to be one in him: For the chiefe
ornaments of Gods church are purity of doctrine, and concord
of teachers: So in this place the Pſalme affirmeth, that the
Apoſtles ſhoulde be all of one minde, and not trouble their
godlie conſent with Ambition or other fooliſh deſi
                        •
                     es. But
how rare a thing ſuch concord is amongſt the other teachers,
not onlie ancient hiſtories, but alſo the examples of this age
ſufficientlie declare. Euſebius biſhop of Caeſ
                           •
                        ia ſorrowed in
ſeeing Baſill to proſper, and oppreſſed him what hee could.

Betwéen Epiphanius and Chryſoſtome there was ſuch a contention
and controuerſie,Examples of hurtful emulation, euen in the ancient Biſhops of the Church. that Epiphanius in heate of anger
ſaid, Thou ſhalt not die O Chryſoſtome within thy iuriſdiction.
And Chryſoſtome made and anſwere, That Epiphanius ſhould not
return aliue into his country. To theſe curſings or gainſayings
the euent it ſelfe anſwered. For Epiphanius ſayling into the
Ile of Cyprus died before he came thither: & Chryſoſtome not
long after was baniſhed his Country. S. Hierome framed
his inuectiue againſt Ruffinus with whom hee liued manie
yeares moſt louinglie and moſt familiarlie. But why do I
recite olde examples, ſéeing this our age aboundeth with ſuch
examples?
                  For like as with Epaminundas prince of Thebes the liberty
or freedome of his country was alſo buried, and vtterlie extinguiſht:
euen ſo, when D: Luther departed this life and was
buried,Diſcord ariſing felſe brethren. then alſo ceaſed the concord of teachers. For nowe,
Some not with learned ſpeach cōtend: But with euil tearms their
cauſe defend; as the Poet Ennius ſaith. And the teachers, like
vnto Cadmeys brethren, ſtriue one againſt another with hatred,
ambition and ſlanders. Therefore more are the ſubtle deceits
of falſe brethren to be feared, then the enterpriſes and practiſes
of our enemies. But I cut ſhort this complaint, and I
beſeech God to cure our wounds and to reſtore vnto his Church
a godly and proſperous concord.
                     Why the Apoſtles and good Biſhops are called Kings with their hoaſts. And further it is not indeed
a thing obſcure to conſider why the Apoſtles and Biſhoppes
are here called [Kinges with their hoaſts] becauſe they fight
the battels againſt the Diuels and their inſtrumentes;
and are furniſhed not with braſen péeces, but with the word
and prayer. For the ſonne of God armeth and ſetteth forth
his ſoldiours with a mouth and wiſedome, which all the enemies
are not able to reſiſt, Luke 21. 15.Verſes 4. 5. 6 And as S. Paule ſaith,
2. Cor. 10. 4. 5. 6. The weapons of our warfare are not carnall,
but mighty to caſt downe holds, which bringeth to captiuity euerie
thought vnto the obedience of Chriſt, and hauing ready the
vengeance againſt all diſobedience, &c. Finally, [they of the
houſhould] That is, the ſpouſeſſe or church of the ſon of God.
               
               
                  
                  
                  Though ye haue line among the pots: yet ſhall ye be
as the winges of a Doue, that is couered with ſiluer
wings, and her feathers like gold.
                  He compareth the teachers of the goſpell vnto Doues of
diuers colours, becauſe of the diuerſitie of giftes: For one
excelleth in the knowledge of languages, an other hath the
giftes of interpretation, another iudgeth right ſoundlie the
controuerſies touching opinions. Finallie, The holie ghoſt
giueth vnto euery one ſome gifts,
                     Teachers of the Goſpell compared vnto doues, for the diuerſity of their gifts. 
                     for the building vp of the church
as S. Paule ſaith, 1. Cor. 12. 28. He alſo here alludeth vnto the
ſimplicitie of Doues, as Chriſt ſaith, Matth. 10. 16. Be ye ſimple
as Doues. For the Doue is without gall, hurteth not with
her bill, and hath harmeleſſe clées. Furthermore, like as
Goſhawkes and kites do aſſault and deuoure ſillie Doues:
So tyrants practiſe all meanes they can vtterlie to ſubuert
all godlie teachers. The Church therefore is an hoaſt of
doues, which are laide open for all the weapons of tyrants.
                  But if anie man in this place had rather applie the mixture
of ſiluer and golden colour, vnto that ſhewe which poliſhed
or bright ſhining armour, and warlike furniture hath,
with Enſignes and weapons diſplaied in tents where fields
are fought. Againſt this I nothing contend any waie.
               
               
                  
                  When the almighty ſcattered Kings for their ſake: then
were they as white as ſnow in Salmon.
                  
                  This verſe admoniſheth the Reader of two thinges:The vocation or calling of the Miniſter. The
firſt touching the vocation of miniſters, concerning which
in 10. Rom. 15. it is ſaide, How ſhall they preach except they
be ſent? And in 9. Matth. 9. 38. Chriſt ſaieth, Pray ye vnto the
Lord of the harueſt, that hee would thruſt forth workemen into
the harueſt. Let vs therefore acknowledge, that the miniſters
which deliuer ſound doctrine, are the excellent and ſingular
giftes of God, and as it were the mothers own breſts

wherewith ſhe giueth vs ſucke. Secondlie, let vs learn what
is the effects of the goſpell: namelie to reſtore light by driuing
awaie moſt filthie darkeneſſe, ſuch as are heathen and
popiſh errors:The 3. effects of the Goſpell. Therefore S. Peter compareth 2. Pet. 1. 19. the
ſcriptures propheticall vnto a lanterne with a candle giuing
light in a darke place. And this our Prophet Dauid ſaith, Pſal.
1 19. Patt. 10. verſſe 1. Thy word (O Lord) is a Lanthorne vnto
my feete, and a light vnto my ſteps. For without this light
men doe wander in greateſt darkneſſe of error, and in the
ignorance of the chiefeſt matters. For no man (except Gods
word firſt giue him light) knoweth the eſſence & will of God;
no man rightly repenteth him, neither doth any mā rightly
call vpon God,Iohn. 12. 35. 
                     Except he follow the guide and good
gouernment
of Gods word. Let vs then walke in the light while wee
haue light, leaſt the darkeneſſe do oppreſse vs. Then which caſe
nothing can be thought more ſorrowfull.
               
               
                  
                  As the hill of Baſan, ſo is Gods hill; euen an high hill
as the hill of Baſan.
                  
                  Why hop ye ſo ye high hils? This is Gods hill, in the
which it pleaſeth him to dwell: yea the Lord will abide
in it euer.
                  The firſt effect of the goſpell, as I ſaid, is a light ſhewing
the true acknowledgement and prayer unto God:The 2. effect of the Goſpell. The other
fruit is fatnes, that is a conſolation to bee oppoſed againſt
ſinne and death: For they which are deſtitute of this fatneſſe
they muſt néeds waxe leane: that is, he plunged into deſperation.
For Philoſophicall conſolations are nothing but idle
pratings and 
                        •
                     anlings, and do heale the ſcarres onely but not
the wounds: wherefore ſéeing Philoſophie may confeſſe her
darkeneſſe, and acknowledge her leaneneſſe, let vs ſeeke for
the fat hill bringing forth effectual and wholeſome remedies
for our ſorrowes.
                  And ſuch a hill is the true Church, which embraceth and
profeſſeth the doctrine deliuered from God, and ſhewing

conſolations healing the wounds of the heart.
                  The third effect or fruit of the Goſpell,The 3. effect of the Goſpell. is, that they which
with saith and good conſcience embrace this doctrine, profeſſe
the ſame, and practiſe to propagate or aduance the ſame, are
made according to the ſaying in the 14. v. 23. of ſaint Iohns
Goſpel, The Temples and dwelling places of God: Namelie,
If anie man loue mee he will keepe my worde, and my Father
will loue him, and we will come vnto him and make our dwellings
with him.
                  
                  But in other ſects doth not God dwell, but he hateth and
deteſteth them, yea though they he high hilles, that is, though
they excell others in dominions and politicall glorie. Of this
doctrine and conſolation haue we now need eſpeciallie, leaſt
our minds taking offence, and being carried awaie with admiration
at the power and ſucceſſe of the Turkiſh nation, do
decline or ſtart away from God: And let not us iudge by fortune
(but by the worde of God) which is the true Church of
God, and let vs become & remaine Citizens of the ſame yea
although all feares, and all daungers ſhoulde hang ouer our
heades.
               
               
                  
                  The Charets of God are twentie thouſand, euen thouſands
of Angels: and the Lord is among them as in the
holie place of Sinay.
                  
                     Salomon ſaith well Prou. 14. 28. The multitude of the people
is the honour of the Prince.
                     The exceeding great traine of Chriſt our triumphant king. So here he addeth vnto this
victorious king an excéeding great train, namely the church
of the Fathers, Prophets, and Apoſtles, and theſe remnants
now in the olde age of the Church: for they go before the chariot
of Triumph; we ſillie ſoules follow the ſame, and yet
are we fellowes and companions of this glorious triumph,
then which benefite nothing may bee thought better or more
wiſhfull.
               
               
                  
                  
                  Thou art gone vp on high, thou haſtled captiuitie captiue,
and receiued gifts for men: yea euen for thine enemies,
that the Lord God might dwell among them.
                  Like as Paulus Emilius aſcended vp into the Capitoll to
giue thankes vnto Iupiter, led Perſcus as his priſoner in the
triumph, and gaue vnto his owne aſſociates large giftes of
ſpoyles: ſo the ſonne of God is aſcended into heauen, and in
his triumphant pompe gloriouſslie ſhewed his priſoners the
princes of darkenes tied in Chaines, and dealt moſt ample
benefites vnto the Apoſtles, and to the vniuerſall Church.
                  But ſéeing this verſe of all other in this Pſalm ſhineth like
a precious ſtone of rare vertue, let the waightines of all the
wordes be moſt diligentlie conſidered. And firſt indéede let
the article touching Chriſtes aſcenſion into heauen be vnderſtoode
according to the declaration of the godlie olde rule.
Athanaſius in his diſputation againſt Arius,
                     The ſaying of Athanaſius, (againſt Arius) of the aſcenſion of Chriſt: ſaith thus. Eius
eſt ire & venire qui aliquibus locorum terminis circumſcribitur,
& eum in quo erat deſerens locum ad eum vbi non erat, veniat. Ceterum
verbi diuinitas vniuerſa implens nullis locorum terminis
concluditur, ſicut nihil eſt vndediſeedat, it a nihil eſt quo veniat,
&c. In Engliſh thus. It is for him to go and come, who is
preſcribed for certaine places limited, and forſaking that place
wherein he was, that he may come thither where hee was not:
but the Godhead of the worde filling all places, is not preſcribed
to any limits of places: for as it is not material from whence
it departed, ſo is it not materiall whither it commeth. And ſo
ſpeaketh Cyprian in his rehearſall of the Créed. Aſcendit ad
coelis non vbi verbum Deus, antea non fuerat, quippe qui erat ſemper
in coelo, & manebat cum Patre; ſed vbi verbum caro factum
antea non ſedebat. That is: He aſcendeth vp to the heauens, not
where God the worde was not before, becauſe hee was alwayes
in heauen, and remained with the Father, but where the worde
become fleſh, fate not before.
                  
                  [Thou haſt led captiuitie captiue] That is:The deliuerance of the captiues. thou half redéemed
mankind, or reduced him into his olde libertie and dignitie

when he was holden captiue of the Diuell, that Lord of
death and ſin; as in the 2. cap. 14 to the Hebrewes, it is ſaid;
And haſt led thy enemies captiue in the triumph, according to
that notable ſaying extant in the 2. Coloſſ. 15.The captiuing of the enemies and the ſpoiling of them. 
                     Spoyling the
Principalities and powers, haſt made a ſhew of them openly, and
haſt triumphed ouer them, &c. So often then as feare of death
and dangers of hell do ruſh togither vpon vs, and the deuill
with innumerable ſleights aſſaulteth vs, let vs be conuerted
in minde and thought vnto this triumph, and let vs craue
that this captaine and conquerour would treade downe ſathan
vnder our feete, and would giue vs victorie againſt ſin
and death.
                  The latter particle reſteth touching gifts. [Thou haſt receiued
gifts for men.] The ſpeciall gift of this triumph is, The
holie Ghoſt powred out with a manifeſt light vpon the Apoſtles,
and their ſcholers: Touching this gift, ſaint Peter in the
2. cap. Acts. ver. 33. ſaith. He being exalted at the right hande
of God, receiuing the promiſe of the holy Ghoſt from the Father,
hath poured out this which yee nowe ſee and heare. O the excéeding
great goodnes of God, powring out his ſpirit vpon
all fleſh. Sine 
                           •
                        uius numine nihil eſt in homine nihil eſt innoxium.
Without whoſe diuine grace in man, nought well hee doth, nor
well he can: As the Church ſingeth godlilie. And although
Paule applieth this particle vnto the miniſterie of the Goſpel,
which is the inſtrument of the holie ghoſt, yet may it bee
rightlie applied vnto all gifts neceſſarie for the bodie and the
ſoule: amongſt which is not the laſt gift the ſtabilitie of his
Church, and ſubduing of his enemies, which are ſo brideled
and reſtrained by Chriſt. that they cannot outrage nor hurt
ſo fore as they would. Whereas then all the world is not full
of Turkiſh tyranie, and beaſtly cruelty, but that as yet there
is a holie ſeede; that muſt not we aſcribe and attribute vnto
humane enterpriſes and defences, but vnto the triumph of
the ſonne of God. But ſo great is the plentie and abundance
of effect in this little verſe, that it can not bee conſidered or
deſcribed with anie eloquence, I do therefore paſſe on to the

reſt which remaine in this Pſalme.
               
               
                  
                  Prayſed bee the Lord dayly, euen the God which helpeth
vs, and powreth his benefits vpon vs.
                  
                  He is our God▪ euen the God of whom commeth ſaluation:
God is the Lord by whom we eſcape death.
                  Séeing Goſpell is a witneſſe of the croſſe, hee comforteth
the Church burdened with the croſſe, by reaſon of our
confeſſion,A comfort vnto the Church burdened with the croſſe. and the remnants of ſinne. But a ſpeciall conſolation
is the promiſe of Gods preſence and helpe in calamities:
Alſo his mitigation and deliuerance from the ſame.
And it is a ſpeciall deliuerance: whereas by Iordan, that is,
by the miſeries of this life the ſonne of God leadeth vs into
the land of Canaan, that is, into the life euerlaſting. But the
whole doctrine touching cauſes and remedies of humane miſeries
is elſewhere plentifullie expounded. He that will may
from thence borrow more matter. For we do not now write
of places, but we interpret Pſalms, and leaſt this Commentarie
appeare too much in matter, we are contented with the
direction of thoſe places which are extant in all mens hands.
               
               
                  
                  God ſhal wound the head of his enemies, and the hairy
ſcalpe of ſuch a one as goeth on ſtill in his wickednes.
                  
                  The Lord hath ſaid I will bring my people againe, as I
did from Baſan: mine owne will I bring againe, as I did
from the deepe of the ſea.
                  
                  That thy foote may be dipped in the blood of thine enemies:
and that the tongue of thy dogges may be red
through the ſame.
                  He addeth vnto the deſcription of the triumphant pompe
a prophecie touching the deſtruction of the Iewiſh nation for
their blinde obſtinacie,A prophecie touching the deſtruction of the Iewiſh nation. ſtriuing & ſetting themſelues againſt
the Goſpel: And this prophecie agréeth with the ſaying of
Chriſt, Luke. 19. 44. All thoſe things ſhall come vpon thee, becauſe

thou haſt not known the time of thy viſitation. Nowe indéed
it is ſufficientlie apparant that the Iewes (for their contempt
of Chriſt) hauing loſt their kingdome and prieſthoode,
do wander in perpetuall baniſhment, and are the moſt miſerable
perſons of all others vppon whome the ſunne ſhineth.
And although the greateſt multitude of the Iewes be with
tragicall puniſhments oppreſſed, yet notwithſtanding out
of this ſkum of mankinde God hath culled or picked out
ſome remnantes, as in the 2. cap. Actes: When Peters preaching
was heard, 3000. Iewes were conuerted vnto Chriſt:
and in the next yeare after the reſurrection of Chriſt, Paule
the apoſtle was conuerted: And there is extant in the 11. cap.
of S. Paule to the Rom. 27. a prophecie touching the downefall
of the Chruch of the Gentiles, and of the conuerſion
of the Iewes.
               
               
                  
                  It is well ſeene, O God, how thou goeſt, howe thou
my God and King goeſt in thy ſanctuary.
                  
                  The ſingers go before, the minſtrels follow after: in
the midſt are the Damſels playing with the timbrels.
                  He returneth vnto the triumphant pompe, whoſe ornament
was muſicke:The ſweete ioies of this triumph. For the greeke 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      hath his
name 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , that is, by the deſcription of a figs
leafe, and the foote Iambus in verſe. For nothing is more
ſwéete then victorie, and the foote Iambus is moſt ſpeciallie
applied vnto the following of enemies which are led captiues
in the triumph. And what maner of ſong, the people both
going before and alſo following the chariot ought to ſing,
S. Paul in the 5. Epheſ. v. 19. and 4. Coloſſ. verſe 2. there preſcribing
the rule of ſpirituall muſicke teacheth vs at large.
               
               
                  
                  Giue thankes O Iſraell, vnto God the Lorde in the
congregations from the ground of thy hart.
                  This little verſe is ſhort, but it admoniſheth the Reader

touching the greateſt matters: God will not haue vs to
ſerue him with the ſacrifice to Ceres ſhut vp in cloſe place of
vs. For as Chriſt ſaith, Matth. 5. 15. No man lighteth a candle,
and afterwards putteth it vnder a buſhell:
                     A thankeſgiuing of the church for the victory by Chriſt obtained. But he will haue
the church to bee a viſible congregation and to haue honeſt
meetinges publikelie, wherein the preaching of the Goſpell
maie ſound and hee heard touching the ſonne of God. And
therfore doth he with a meruailous power ſaue, yea and ſhall
preſerue his church in honeſt congregations: and he wil haue
euerie man to helpe and maintaine the preſeruation of theſe
publique méetings, that the miniſtery of teaching maie bee
preſerued. There will God haue a common praier and
thankeſgiuing to be made, there will hee haue confeſſion to
be ſhewed: which kind of doctrine euerie man may embrace.
And he biddeth vs to take the doctrine of the church not out
of the ceſterns of mans traditions, nor out of Ariſtotles Ethickes,
but out of the holie and ſacred fountaines of Iſraell,
that is, from the Prophets and Apoſtles: for all other ſectes
without the true church, do onelie teach a particle of the law,
touching externall and ciuill duties, and ſome of them do
bring with them other worſhippings of Idols. But they
are altogether ignorant of the ſonne of God and of his gospell,
that is the promiſe of the free remiſſion of ſinnes, alſo
of our reconciliation, and of our inheritance of life euerlaſting
to be giuen vs by faith in the ſonne our Mediator. But
the Church draweth out of the welſpring of Iſrael the ſound,
perfect and vncorrupt doctrine of the law and the goſpell, and
the pure knowledge of the ſonne of God for vs crucified and
raiſed from death to life.
               
               
                  
                  There is little Beniamin their ruler, and the Princes of
Iuda their Counſaile: The princes of Zabulon and
the princes of Nephthaly.
                  Although the world do iudge the Apoſtles to be miſerable
wandring perſons, and hateth and curſeth them as gaſing

ſtocks, & the ofscourings of the world, 1. Cor. 49. 13. yet the holie
ghoſt adorneth theſe miniſters with the moſt praiſe worthy
title of princes: For the Apoſtles haue the teſtimonie of
the holie ghoſt, that they do not erre in doctrine:The order of the Apoſtles marching as Princes in the tryumph of Chriſt. Theſe Captaines
do other teachers and preachers in the church followe;
vnto whom no credit muſt bee giuen, except their confeſſion
do agrée with the foundation of the Apoſtles as S. Paule ſaith
2. Epheſ. 20. And are built vpon the foundation of the Prophets
& Apoſtles, Ieſus Chriſt himſelfe being the chiefe corner ſtone.
                  
                  But why doth he here ſaie [There is little Beniamin their ruler]
Certes, it may ſignifie that only of all the Apoſtles; Paul
being borne of the tribe of Beniamin, a great and good part
of the Church ſhould be gathered out of Europe and Aſia: I
ſtand not to be preciſe, touching the ſpeciall dignitie of anie
apoſtle, but I reuerence them al as the inſtruments of God
ſounding forth the preaching of the goſpell throughout all the
world: And yet cannot this bee denied that Paule himſelfe
with a liuelie voice witneſſeth of himſelfe, and letting paſſe
moſt vpright teſtimonies of others: He did greater thinges
then the other Apoſtles, like as he himſelfe not vntruly glorieth,
Let vs therefore giue thankes to God for this excellent
Organ or inſtrument, and like little hounds let vs licke
vp the crums falling from Paules table, which are full of excellent
words and ſentences.
               
               
                  
                  Thy God hath ſent forth ſtrength for thee: Stabliſh
the thing (O God) that thou haſt wrought in vs.
                  Firſt, in this verſe let the miſterie of the Trinitie be well
marked: For like as in 45. Pſal, the perſons of the godhead
are diſcerned, where he ſaith in the 8. ver. of the pſal. Therefore
God euen thy God hath anointed thee with oyle of gladnes
aboue thy fellowes, So in this place is the Meſſias cléerelie
and perſpicuouſlie diſtinguiſhed from the eternall father.
Here he saith [Thy God hath ſent forth ſtrength] that is, thy
eternal father (from whom thou art ſent to publiſh and preach

the goſpell and to redéeme mankind) hath inſtituted and ratified
thy kingdome:The ſtability and felicity of Chriſts church & kingdom. it ſhall therefore ſtand immoueable, and
ſhall not be weakened by anie force, neither ſhall it by anie
meanes poſſible be remoued out of place. Of this conſolation
ſtoode the church in neede when Diotleſian and the other
tyrants ruled and raigned, who ſeemed to doe what they could
vtterlie to race out the name of Chriſt from the memo
                        •
                     ie of
all poſteritie: For writers affirm
                        •
                      when Diocleſian raigned
there were euerie daie at the leaſt xx. godlie perſons put to
death in the Cittie Alexandria, for profeſſion of the goſpell.
And now alſo in this olde age of the church, the Church likewiſe
needeth the ſame conſolation: For from the Eaſt 
                        •
                     arts
the Turkiſh tyrant aſſaulteth her, and from the Weſt parts
the Pope armed and fortified with the defence and cruelty of
manie kings vexeth her.
                  What is then remaining where with we maie defend our
ſelues from this Turkiſh and Popiſh outrage, but this moſt
ſtrong wall [Thy God hath ſent forth ſtrength for thee: Stabliſh
the thing O God, that thou haſt wrought in vs:] For ſeeing
God is the guide and giuer of this kingdome, doubtleſſe
he will be alſo the effecter and worker in vs, and he only will
be the foundation thereof. Neither indéed let this praier and
promiſe be vnderſtood onelie touching the whole bodie of the
Church, but let it alſo bee applied unto euerie particular
member; and let it alwaies ſound in our mindes, eares and
tongues. Let vs dailie with ſeruent ſighing ſaie. Seeing O
God thou haſt tranſlated vs out of the kingdome of darkeneſſe
into the kingdome of thy light, and that theſe beginnings of
life euerlaſting are diuers waies aſſaulted, partely by the Diuell,
partly by the world, and partly of our own fleſh (in which word
I comprehend our wandring opinions and affections) I humbly
beſeech thee that thou wouldſt eſtabliſh that benefit thou haſt
begun in vs, and defend vs againſt our enemies domeſticall and
externall. For as he that buildeth anie thing doth not onlie
frame the foundations, but goeth forwarde in ſetting vp the
whole building whatſoeuer it be: So God will not haue vs

begin our conuerſions and turnings vnto him, but much
more will he haue our ſaluation to bee perfected by him: for
as it is ſaid, 2. Phil. 13. It is God that worketh in vs the will and
the deed euen of his good pleaſure, to the ende ſome acceptable
ſeruices may be done vnto him.
                  
               
               
                  
                  For thy temples ſake at Ieruſalem: ſo ſhall kings bring
preſents vnto thee.
                  He foreſheweth hereby,Dauids prophecie of kings and princes which ſhuld be patrones of the Church. that ſome kings and princes ſhall
be aſſociates of the true church, nurſing fathers of them which
teach and learne in the ſame, and ſhall ſurely be made members
of life euerlaſting. For although Religion do bring forth
Riches, as one ſaith elegantlie, yet the daughter like an vnthankefull
Stockedoue hath deuoured her mother. For the
Biſhops in ſome ages haue not béene ſo vpright or ſincere,
as that their eſtate of life might agrée with their calling: that
is, they taught not the Goſpel ſoundlie, nor adminiſtred the
Sacraments rightlie: no, they cared not for edifying the
people with true doctrine, but became ſtately Lords in kings
courts, and being ordained to ſacred buſines, they intermedled
themſelues with prophane matters nothing agreeable to
their calling. Therefore both of theſe are beſt, Meane wealth,
and meane pouertie, in ſuch like perſons.
               
               
                  
                  When the companie of the ſpearemen, and multitude
of the mightie are ſcattered abroad among the beaſtes
of the people: (ſo that they humblie bring peeces of
ſiluer) and wh
                        •
                     n he hath ſcattered the people that delight
in warre.
                  He addeth vnto this prophecie of the calling of the Nations
a heauie effect,Dauid denoūsceth a downfal and deſtructiō of Antichriſt, and his cruel bloody beaſtly▪ warriours. touching the kingdom of Antichriſt, whoſe
chiefeſt members, and as it were twinnes at one birth borne
900. yeares agone, are the Pope and Mahomet: Theſe hee
compareth vnto mightie ſtrong Bulles treading vnder foote

the true doctrine, and true worſhippings of God, for to eſtabliſh
their owne power. Againſt theſe is this Verſe, as if we
in our time ſhould now ſay: O God reſtraine and ouerthrow
the practiſes of theſe, leaſt the true knowledge of thy moſt holie
name be extinguiſhed in mankind: For thy name, for thy name
ſake, O God do thou this, that thou bee not blaſphemed: Helpe
vs O God our Sauiour, and for the glorie of thy names ſake deliuer
vs, and be mercifull vnto our ſinnes for thy names ſake, leaſt
at any time the Gentiles do ſay vnto vs: Where is nowe thy
God? Pſal. 79. 10.
               
               
                  
                  Then ſhall the Princes come out of Egypt: The Morians
land ſhall ſoone ſtretch out her hands vnto God.
                  This is a notable prophecie touching the calling of the
Gentiles: and I haue often elſewhere ſaide,Dauid reciteth a prophecie touching the calling of the Gentiles to the church of God. that the Reader
is to be put in minde of the chiefeſt matters, ſo often times
as the Prophets doe make mention touching the calling of
the Gentiles. For firſt, this calling is a notable teſtimonie
implying that ſaying of ſaint Paule, Rom. 5. 15. 20. Grace
oueraboundeth aboue ſinne. For if ſo great force or effect were
not procéeding from the louing ſauour and mercie of God, he
would not haue receyued into fauour nations polluted with
Idolatrie, lusts, and other moſt filthie and foule ſinnes, which
are partlie ſo filthie, and partlie ſo flagitious, that they ſeeme
euen filthie to ſpeake of them.
                  Secondlie, the ſame calling of the Gentiles witneſſeth
that the promiſe of the Goſpel is vniuerſall, & pertaineth vnto
all perſons that do trulie call vpon God: for in God there is
no courtlike reſpect of perſons, but God is indéede equall to
the equall: that is to them which trulie repent, and flie vnto
the Mediator. Touching this conſolation mo things are
ſpoken by Paul, Rom. 10. verſes, 6, 10, 11, 13, 14. Finally this
ſelfe ſame vocation of the Gentiles refuteth the Phariſaical
opinion, which imagineth that ceremonies are righteouſnes
before God: for the Gentiles are by God receyued into fauor

without Circumciſion, and other ceremonies of Moſes.
               
               
                  
                  Sing vnto God, O yee kingdomes of the earth: O ſing
prayſes vnto the Lord.
                  
                  Which ſitteth in the heauens ouer all from the beginning:
lo he doth ſend out his voice, and that a mightie
voyce.
                  
                  Aſcribe ye the power vnto God ouer Iſraell: his worſhip
and ſtrength is in the cloudes.
                  The Epilogue or latter part of the Pſalme is an exhortation:
for he exhorteth all degrées of men vnto Thankeſgiuing:
As if he ſaid,The Epilogue or concluſion of this Pſalme, is a general exhortation vnto thanksgiuing for manifold benefites. ſéeing the benefits of this king are ſo great, meet
it is that hee bee honoured and magnified with all ſpeech and
writing: [O ſing prayſes vnto God] that is acknowledge yee
his wiſedome, righteouſneſſe and mercie: It is Mercie, that
we are not conſumed, and brought into nothing, nor caſt away
amongſt the Diuels after our firſt fall. It is Righteouſneſſe,
that there is no forgiuenes of ſinnes without an equall
recompence and redemption equiualent. This when no creature
is able to pay, it is decreed by his wonderfull wiſedome
that his ſonne ſhould pay the ranſome for vs. For God declineth
not from his righteouſnes, and yet by his wonderfull
wiſedome doth hee temper his righteouſneſſe with mercie.
As by the Prophet Oſeas, cap. 11. 9. I might indeed iuſtlie deſtroy
thee, but I will not exerciſe the furie of my wrath: becauſe
I am God and not man, the holy one in the middes of thee. Neither
indéed here muſt I paſſe with ſilence the particle containing
a teſtimonie of the efficacie of the Goſpell. [He ſhal ſend
out his voyce, and that a mightie voice.] as if he ſaid. The preaching
of the Goſpel ſhall not be a vaine ſound of ſpéech: but it
ſhall be as ſaint Paule ſaith moſt ſwéetlie. Rom. 1. 16. and
2. Cor 3. 3. The power of god vnto ſaluation for al that beleeue:
and the miniſterie of the ſpirit of life, &c.
               
               
                  
                  
                  O God wonderfull art thou in thy holy places: euen
the God of Iſrael, he will giue ſtrength and power vnto
his people: Bleſſed be God.
                  In concluſion, he teacheth that Gods Church is by marueilous
meanes gouerned, preſerued, and defended; as in the
4. Pſal. 3. it is ſaid: The Lord hath choſen vnto himſelfe the man
that is godlie. For when we ſeeme to bee weak, then are wee
ſtrong. For, the power of God is made ſtrong in our infirmitie.
And to let paſſe other things: In quietneſſe and hope conſiſteth
our ſtrength, &c.
                  
               
            
         
         
            To him that excelleth vpon
Of Shoſhanim, reade Pſal 45. Shoſhanim.
            A Pſalme of Dauid: a Figure of Chriſt,
perſecuted by his enemie.
Saluum me fac Deus quoniam, &c:
            
            
               The Argument.
               
                  THis Pſalme is memorable in the writings of the Euangeliſts
and Apoſtles. For Saint Iohn the Euangeliſt
in his 2. 15. 19. cap. citeth three verſes out of
this Pſalme: And Peter the Apoſtle ſpeaking of the
puniſhment which Iudas the traitor had, vſeth in 1. cap. 18. Act.
the wordes of this Pſalme. Finallie, Paule in the 11. and 15. cap.
Rom. ſpeaketh of this pſalme in many wordes: And it is a prophecie
touching the paſſion of Chriſt, and the horrible puniſhments
of the Iewiſh nation; and of the proper worſhip appertaining
to the Church of the new Teſtament.A threefolde Meditation of this Pſalme. But it is a threefold
Meditation vpon the paſſion of the Sonne of God: one of

inſtruction, an other ſpiritual, & the third of example or imitatiō.
               The inſtructiue meditation, is to read much and often the interpretations
which are extant in the Euangeliſts,The inſtructiue meditatiō. touching the
paſsion of this Lord, and to confer them with the hiſtories of the
Prophets; that this conference of the hiſtories and prophecies
might confirme in our minds an aſſent, whereby we might embrace
this article. But whereas in hiſtories wee muſt not onelie
looke for the euentes, but much more the cauſes of the euents
muſt bee ſought for this meditation comprehendeth alſo a conſideration
of the cauſes, for which the Meſsias was made a ſacrifice
and Redeemer. For it is needefull that the cauſes of ſo great
a matter bee neither ſlender nor fained, but great and weightie
cauſes, which we ſhall thorowly beholde when God ſhall be all
in all. Now let vs diligently learne the elements which are deliuered
in the worde, and let vs craue of God that hee would gouerne
with his holy ſpirit, our purpoſe vndertaken touching the
greateſt matters.
               And although ſome vnlearned perſons fondly diſpute, yt God
ſeeing he is omnipotent, could reſtore mankinde into his ancient
liberty and dignity by other maner of means: yet let vs ſo hold it
determined yt god doth not any way decline frō his righteouſnes
which thing ſith ſo it is, God muſt not only haue his place of mercy,
but alſo of righteouſnes attributed vnto him, touching his ſecret
prouidence in the redeeming of mankind. As therefore the
immenſe mercy of God would not beholde the vniuerſall death
and deſtruction of our nature, according to that ſaying of Ieremy,
Lament. 3. cap. 22. It is the mercy of the Lorde that we are not
conſumed: So the eternall and vnchangeable righteouſneſſe of
God required a ſatisfaction for the offence and for the puniſhment.
For the Law of God which is a rule of iuſtice in God, diſcerneth
good and euill, and bindeth the reaſonable creature
to become conformable to that rule, and denounceth horrible
deſtruction vnto all thinges which are contrary to that rule.
Wherefore ſeeing the ranſome pacifieng the wrath of God, and
ſatisfieng the righteouſneſſe of God, could neither bee paide by
Angels nor by any other creature, becauſe the malice of ſinne is
infinit, and no creature is able to endure the wrath of God, it is

by Gods wonderfull wiſedome decreed; that the ſecond perſon
of the Godhead which is called the word ſhould take vpon him
the nature of man, and ſhould ſatisfie the lawe of God for the
fault and puniſhment in mankind: That is, that he, which knew
no ſinne, ſhould take vpon him to redeeme vs from ſinne, that
by him we might bee made the righteouſneſſe of God. In this
decree, with admiration whereof the very Angels ſtand amazed
at, do ſhine the righteouſneſſe and mercie of God: alſo the vnſpeakeble
humility and loue of God towardes vs. For there is
no remiſsion of ſinnes graunted, without recompence and ſatisfaction
made. For, thinke, I pray you, howe great the force of
Gods wrath is againſt ſinne, when he could not be pacified with
any other ſacrifice, but by the paſsion and death of the immaculate
Lambe: And we indeed by the greatneſſe of this remedie
may eſteeme the greatneſſe of our ſickneſſe and ſore. For, as
Hippocrates ſaith,The ſaying of Hippocrates.
                   
                  vnto extream diſeaſes we muſt lay extreame remedies.
Againe, how great mercy is there in God not ſparing his
only begotten ſonne, but giuing him for vs all, and giuing vs with
him all things alſo? The ſonne of God adorning and amplifieng
this mercy ſaith, Iohn 3. 16. So God loued the world that hee ſent
his onely begotten ſonne, that euery one which beleeueth in him
ſhould not periſh,
                  The ſaying of Clement B. of Alexandria. 
                  but haue life euerlaſting. Notably therefore ſaith
Clement B. of Alexandria: Man is beloued of God: For, how ſhould
he not bee beloued, for whoſe ſake the onely begotten ſonne of God
was ſent from the boſome of his father?
               
               What ſhall I ſay of the humility of the Sonne, turning vpon
himſelfe the reproches of other men, and for the loue he bare towards
his church, for whoſe ſake he put on the ſhape of a ſeruant
and was by all meanes tempted, like as we are tempted (except
with ſinne onely) that he bring and repoſſeſſe this his ſpouſeſſe
into her ancient liberty.Pontanus. 
                  Pontanus telleth, that in his time there
was a cettaine husband-mans wife carried away by the Pirates
of Tuneta, and when her husband heard of this matter, hee leapt
into the ſea, and beſought the Pyrats with great deſire, that they
would alſo carry him away with his wife: they maruailing at the
faith and mind of the man, tooke him alſo with them, and when

they arriued at Tuneta, and had openly ſhewed their prize, they
declare vnto the King a rare and memorable acte; who though
he were a Prince barbarous and enemy to Chriſtianity, yet merueiling
and perceiuing the vertue of the man, did ſet him and his
wife both at liberty, and commaunded them to bee regiſtred as
of the number of thoſe which were the guard of his perſon. So
the ſonne of God leaped from high and heauenly beatitude into
the ſea of our miſchiefes and miſeries, and of free became bondman,
of rich poore, that by his virtue and power hee might obtaine
liberty for vs, and coopt vs into the ſociety of heauenlie
bleſsings: Let vs therefore be aſhamed of our pride and impatience,
wherein we diſdaine to ſuffer ſome ſorrowe to profit the
Church thereby.
               The ſpirituall meditation of the paſsion of the ſonne of God
conſiſteth in Feare and in Faith:
                  The ſpiritual meditation of this Pſalme. 
                  Feare is to tremble with acknowledgement
of Gods wrath againſt ſinne, whoſe ſpeciall
teſtimony is the death of the ſonne of God. For although the
threatnings added vnto the Law, and horrible examples of puniſhments
and feares of conſcience doe ſhew the iudgements of
God deſtroying contemptuous perſons: yet if we looke well into
this glaſſe of Chriſt crucified, wee ſhall ſee a far more euident
ſigne of Gods horrible wrath, For, ſeeing God could not be pacified
with the obedience of anie creature, but did decree that
his Sonne ſhould be the propitiator or attonement maker in his
bloud, as S. Paule saith:
               Aſſuredly me muſt confeſſe that great, earneſt, and vnſpeakeable
is the wrath of God againſt ſinne. And leaſt this acknowledgement
of Gods wrath ſhould leaue in our minds the ſtinges
or darts of ſeruile feare, which is a ſorrowe without faith, and a
grudging againſt God, and a horrible fleeing from God, as was
in Saule and Iudas, let faith take roote in vs, whereby the hart is
ſtirred vp in the acknowledgement of Gods mercie promiſed
for his ſonnes ſake. For, ſeeing God hath not ſpared his only begotten
ſonne, but giuen him for vs all, ſurely it cannot otherwiſe
be, but with him alſo he will giue vs all thinges: Therefore ſpirituall
meditation, is not only to knowe the hiſtory touching the

paſsion, and to beleeue the ſame; but alſo to feele in our hart ſorrowes
and conſolations.
               The exemplary or imitatiue meditation of Chriſtes paſsion
is to follow the humility and patience of Chriſt,The exemplary meditation. as S. Peter ſaith,
1 Pet 2 21. Chriſt ſuffered for vs leauing vs an example, that wee
ſhould follow his ſteps. And although none of vs in this our imbecility
or weakenes is able to follow the example of Chriſt, yet
notwithſtanding let there bee ſome lineaments agreeable in vs
with this Image of imitating Chriſt.
            
            
               
                  ❧The Pſalme and Expoſition
thereof.
               
                  
                  Saue me O God, for the waters are come in euen vnto
my ſoule.
                  
                  I ſticke faſt in the deepe myre, where no grounde is: I
am come into deepe waters, ſo that the flouds runne ouer
mee.
                  
                  I am weary of crying, my throate is drie: my ſight faileth
me, for waiting ſo long vpon my God.
                  
                     SOme men do merueile whie the Euangelistes
write,The firſt part of this Pſalme is a praier to the 31. verſe. 
                     That the ſonne of God was grieued with
ſorrow and vexed in mind, when he was in the Orchard:
ſeeing it ſeemeth a thing vnméete for
a strong, graue and constant perſon, to weepe
and waile and ware pale with feare of death, as women vſe
to do. For of Hercules addreſſing to caſt himſelfe into a burning
fire, Seneca ſaith thus.
                  
                     
                     Quis ſic triumphans laet us in curruſtetit
                     Victor?Senecas verſes of Hercules. Quis illo gentibus vultu dedit
                     Leges tyrannus? quanta paxobitium tulit
                     Vultus petentis astra, non ignes erant,
                  
                  
                     Who did ſo ioufull victor triumph make?
                     What Tyrant with ſuch auſtere countenance?
                     Preſcribed lawes to Nations for their ſtate,
                     How great a peace toth' skies did him aduance,
                     No fiers they were.
                  
                  But let vs knowe, that Christ vare upon him a greater
burthen then Hercules did: for he was not in anguiſh and veration
of minde for death onelie,Chriſt bare vpon him the burthen of all our ſinnes. and for thinking vpon the
tormenting of his bodie, but he felt the wrath of God to bee
turned vpon him against mine, thine, and all mens ſinnes.
This féeling of Gods wrath ſore vexed and grieued his most
sacred breast. For although euerie creature groneth and moneth
when it is burthened aboue the abilitie of bearing the
ſame, yet the greatneſſe of this burthen, expreſſed in Chriſt
not onelie teares, but also drops of water and blood mingled
togither, which the Grecians call 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Therfore omitting
diſputations, let vs tremble with feare in acknowledgement
of Gods wrath againſt our ſinnes, and with the Prophet Iſay
let vs saie: Surely he hath borne our infirmities, and caried our
ſorrowes, &c. He was wounded for our tranſgreſſions, hee was
broken for our iniquities, the chaſtiſement of our peace was vpon
him, and with his ſtripes we are healed. ſay. 53. verſes 4, & 5.
               
               
                  
                  They that hate me without a cauſe are mo then the haires
of may head: they that are mine enemies and would deſtroy
me guiltleſſe are mightie: I paide them the things
that I neuer tooke.
                  The former thrée verses contained a description of feares
inwardlie in his heart: This verse ſetteth forth his outward

enemies: As in truth for moſt part alwayes inward feares,
and outward fightings and hostile inuaſions do méete togither.
But we are admoniſhed by this ſaying [They that hate
me without cauſe, &c.] that we ſuffer not as murtherers and
theeues, &c. but like vnto Chriſtians, &c. 1. Pet. 4. 15, 16. That
is, for the confeſſion of the Goſpel. And there is a notable ardent
affect in the particle [without a cauſe:] As if he had ſaid,
They hated me not only as one neither guilty of ſin, nor hurting
them, but alſo moſt feruentlie coueting to do them good,
yéelding with great humilitie, and taking vpon my ſelfe the
puniſhments which they temſelues deſerued, not ſéeking
any reuenge, but rather with great ſorrow deploring or bewailing
their wilfull obſtinacie and deſtruction: For this
great good will, and full of sorrow and lamentation for them,
and earneſt deſire to do them good, do I beare this hatred. Let
Teachers, or Preachers conſider this figure, and let them know
that it is a common diſeaſe almoſt in all mankinde to be vnthankfull,Preachers oftimes very, vnthankfully delt with of thoſe whom they haue beſt deſerued of. and let them for their great good will and great benefits
ſuffer with patience to haue euill will, hatred, reproches,
and other miſchiefes rendred them; like as all Hyſtories
are full of examples of vnthankfulneſſe: The Citie of Athens
kept Miltiades in priſon almoſt euen to his verie death: and
baniſhed Ariſtides, Themiſtocles, and Cimon, who had well deserued
of the ſame Citie. Finallie, there is an infinite number
of ſuch,Examples of the heathen, moſt vertuous perſons. whose examples maie admoniſh vs, that we for
Gods cauſe be carefull to do well, not for reward of man, and
that we be not dismaid when mens indeuours and duties are
not anſwerable to our good will and deſeruings. And that
particle must we diligently conſider, where he ſaith: [I paide
them the things that I neuer tooke] That is, he hath peformed
our duties: for euerie bond is cancelled and made voide when
the debt is paid: neither is it materiall whether he that oweth
the debt do pay it, or an other for him. Then this our Redeemer
tooke quite away, or rather fruſtrated our obligation
wherein wee were bound to the curſe of the lawe and euerlasting
puniſhments, becauſe he performed for vs the dutie by

vs owing to the lawe, according to that ſaying, Galat. 3. 13.
Chriſt being made a curſe for vs, redeemed vs from the curſe of
the lawe.
                  
               
               
                  
                  God thou knoweſt ſimpleneſſe: and my faultes are
not hid from thee.
                  How great humilitie was that, where Chriſt proſtrating
himſelfe before his father did beare his wrath, as if he had polluted
himſelfe with the moſt heinous ſins of all men? This is
no Rhetoricall ſpéech nor vaine amplification, but indeed ſuch
was the ſorrow of Chriſt taking vpon him the wrath of God,
as if he himſelfe had committed theſe our ſinnes. But who
can at full declare the greatneſſe of this humilitie? Where
the ſonne of God yéeldeth himſelfe as a guiltie perſon in ſo
great and grieuous ſinnes. This humilitie doth Paule with
excellent wordes thus deſcribe 2. Cor. 5. 21. Him that knewe
no ſinne made hee ſinne for vs, that by him we might bee made
the righteouſneſſe of God. Moſt trulie ſaid Ariſtotle: Iuſtitiam
eſſe Heſpero & Lucifero formoſiorem.
                     Ariſtotles ſaying of iuſtice. 
                     Iuſtice is more beautifull
farre, then the morning or the euening ſtarre. For there is nothing
better nor more excellent then the congruencie with
the whole law, which is a rule of righteouſneſſe in the will of
God: Contrariwiſe, nothing is more filthie then ſinne wherewith
God is horriblie angrie: For the Sonne of God taketh
and turneth vnto himſelfe this deformitie, and beſtoweth vpon
vs his obedience, that by his meanes wee might be righteous
before God. But the excellencie of this purpoſe in God,
can neither the eloquence of Angels, nor of men, ſufficientlie
diſclose or manifeſt vnto vs: I do therefore exhort the reader,
to conſider the ſame diligently, and to giue thankes vnto
Chriſt Ieſus the ſonne of God for his wonderfull humilitie
and ſeruent love towards vs.
               
               
                  
                  Let not them that truſt in thee O Lord of hoſtes bee aſhamed
for my cauſe: let not thoſe that ſeeke thee be

confounded through me, O Lord God of Iſrael.
                  
                  And why? for thy ſake haue I ſuffered reproofe: ſhame
hath couered my face.
                  The ſonne of God in this verſe applyeth his ſacrifice vnto
the Church: for it belongeth unto the Prieſts dutie, not
onelie to offer ſome thing, but he muſt haue therwith a mind
to pray for him touching whom the ſacrifice is made, and teſtifying
that for his ſake he performeth this obedience. Therefore
that theſe wordes in this place, and in the 17. cap. ver. 19,
of S. Iohn, are recited by Chriſt the ſon of God, we are faithfullite
to remember: I (ſaith he) do ſanctifie my ſelfe for them,
that euen they alſo might be ſanctified in the truth. Againe, verſ.
9. I pray not for them onelie, but for all thoſe which shall beleeue
in me for my wordeſake. Here doth Chriſt openlie affirme that
his ſacrifice is effectuall, not onlie for his Apoſtles, but for all
them that embrace the goſpell. But this application muſt we
firmelie take holde vpon by faith, and wee muſt beleeue that
the fruite of this ſacrifice perteineth vnto vs, and that by
meanes of this ſacrifice the wrath of god is vnfainedlie pacified
towardes vs, yea, that we are receiued into gods fauour,
heard and ſaued by him. Therefore ſaith Paule, Rom. 3.
34. We are freely iuſtified by his grace through the redemption
which is in Chriſt Ieſus, whom God hath ordained our propitiator
(or mercifull Sauiour,) by faith in his blood. So (ſaith he) is
he thy mercifull Sauiour, when thou beleeueſt that by means
of his ſonne Chriſtes death, god is pacified with thee. This
doctrine of application let vs for euer, and with ſpeciall care
remember.
               
               
                  
                  I am become a ſtranger vnto my brethren: euen an aliant
vnto my Mothers children.
                  
                  For the zeale of thine houſe hath euen eaten mee: and
the rebukes of them that rebuked thee are fallen
vpon mee.
                  
                     
The worde zeale ſignifieth a diſpleaſure in vs driuing awaie
the iniurie from that which we loue,The godlie zeale which Dauid had for the aduancement of Gods glory. or ſtriuing that the
perſon whom we loue be not taken awaie form vs: As when
Sampſons wife was taken from him, euen he a man of moſt
mightie courage, conceiued great ſorrowe and diſpleaſure,
that for the loue he bare to his wife, he woulde either plague
and ſcourge the Philiſtians, or elſe haue her to him home againe.
Alſo by this zeale are manie motions or rather paſſions
of the minde intermixed in men like as Virgill ſaieth:
                        Vrigils verſe. Scipios zeale for his country
                     Mixta eſt Inſania luctu, Euen with verie mourning mood, is
mixed motion mad or wood: And the Poet Ouid, with notable
wordes deſcribeth this mixture of affections, where hee
ſaith: Cor dolet atque it a mixtus abundat amor. The heart of
louers ſorroweth ſore, and loue abounds by mixture more. So
Scipio was in perſon preſent, at thrée battles where he ſaine
his country ouercome. Theſe ouerthrowes brought him both
great ſorrow and enflamed his anger to reſtore the ancient
glorie of this countrie and to ſubdue or repreſſe Annibal. This
great affection or rather paſſion did Chriſt feele in ſuffering
aduerſitie,The ſeruent zeale of our ſauiour Chriſt for our ſaluation. which he muſt and would needes beare to reſtore
the glorie of his eternall father, and to deliuer his Church,
which he loued feruentlie, and knew the would not be otherwiſe
deliuered except the himſelfe ſhould be made a ſacrifice
for her. Therefore ſaith he in this 9. verſe: The zeale of thine
houſe hath euen eaten me: That is, conſumeth me; in that I
haſard my life for deliuerance of the congregation which I
loue: and to vanquiſh and ouercome thoſe reproches wherewith
God is agréeued, which bring me great ſorrow and prouoke
my anger against the balſphemous perſon.
               
               
                  
                  I wept and chaſtened ſelfe with faſting; and that
was turned to my reproofe.
                  
                  I put on ſackloth alſo; and they ieſted vpon me.
                  
                  They that ſit in the gate ſpeak againſt me: and the drunkards make ſongs vpon me.
                  
                     
Well it is ſaid by Auguſtine: Bona conſcientia mihi mea cauſa
opus eſt, ſedbona fama opus eſt propter proximum.
                     
                        S. Auguſtines ſaying touching a good conſcience & a good name. I had néed in
anie my cauſe to haue a good conſcience; but I haue néede of
a good name, by reaſon of my neighbor: For although a guiltleſſe
conſcience maie well ſcorne lying reportes, ſo far as to
the effect of the cauſe apperteineth, becauſe the knoweth that
Truth at length wil haue ye victory ouer ſclanders: yet ye vertuous
or noble mind is ſore grieued with the lewd iudgments
of men, and had rather ſuffer great puniſhments in the bodie,
then to heare the poiſonfull backbitings ſtickled on with
popular and plawſible arguments. Wherefore, ſéeing Chriſt
was tempted by all means as we are tempted (except ſinne
onelie) let vs not maruell that his moſt ſacred breſt was vexed
and diſquieted touching the peruerſitie of mens iudgements,
which are more fleeting then the flowing ſtreames:
For looke whither fortune leadeth, thither listeth the will of
men. And the thing it ſelfe ſheweth that enterpriſes are ballenced
or ratified by the euents: For if anie man haue once
good ſucceſſe in anie thing,The blind affection of man, hee is by and by counted a wiſe
man: But if the world go awrie with him, then euerie man
reprehendeth him. But I omit to be here longer diſputing
vpon a thing ſo manifeſt: whereof wee ſee dailie example in
our life time.
               
               
                  
                  But Lord I make my praier vnto thee, in an accceptable time.
                  
                  Heare me O God in the multitude of thy mercy: euen
in the truth of thy ſaluati
                        •
                     n
                  
                  Take me out of the mire, that I ſinke not, and let me
be deliuered from them that hate me, and out of the
deepe waters.
                  
                  Let not the water ſhould drowne me, neyther let the
deepe ſwallowe me vp: and let not the pit ſhut her
mouth vpon me.
                  
                  Heare me O Lorde, for thy louing kindneſſe is comfortable:
Turne thee vnto me according to the multitude

of thy mercies.
                  
                  And hide not thy face from thy ſeruaunt, for I am in
trouble, O haſt thee, and heare me.
                  
                  Draw nigh vnto my ſoule and ſaue it, Oh deliuer mee
becauſe of mine enemies.
                  Chriſt teacheth vs by his example, which is the gate, the
tower,Chriſt is ye gate and the tower altar of refuge for vs to runne vnto with harty and humble praier. and altar for the godlie ones, whereunto they maie
ſafelie runne for refuge, when they are toſſed with diuers
ſtormes in this life: For as Salomon ſaith, Prouerbs cap. 18
10. The name of the Lord is a ſtrong tower, &c. That is, true
praier, whereunto the iuſt perſon fleeing is deliuered. So often
therefore as all maner feares and dangers fall vpon vs,
let vs not ſéeke after vnlawfull remedies for our ſorrows,
ut let vs craue of God inward conſolation and deliuerance
or mitigation of calamities according to Gods prouidence.
He that obeieth and ſubmitteth himſelfe to this rule, hee in
verie deede ſhall finde, by proofe that praier vnto God is not
a vaine ſound, but obtaineth greater thinges then anie man
dare aſke or looke for. Ioſeph when he was in priſon,
                        Ioſephs praier. wrongfullie
caſt (vpon the ſiniſter ſuſpicion of adultery) doubtleſſe
aſked not of God in his praier the ſecond roome or place in
dignitie next to the king, neither gold nor riches; but onelie
defence of his life and good name, and the bringing of him
againe into his Country, out of which through the vngodlie
and wicked practiſe of his brethren he was baniſhed: But he
obtained of God not onelie wiſhed benefits, but alſo thinges
greater then thoſe: for of a ſeruant, and in déede a captiue or
priſoner, he was made the chiefeſt counſellor and gouernour
of the moſt flouriſhing kingdome of Egypt; yea, and ſuccoured
his father Iacob with all houſhold, and kept them
in greateſt penurie and famine fo foode.
                        Daniels Praier. So when Daniell
was caſt among the Lions, he deſired not of God to be a gouernour
of countries, nor to haue deuine giftes of reuelations
touching greateſt matters; and yet was hee ſo by God
deliuered, that he afterwards ruled and gouerned the whole

country of Suſian, and enioyed the gift of Gods wiſedome
reuealing hidden myſteries: namelie the ſure and certain decription
of time appointed for the comming of the promiſed
Redéemer, and the hiſtorie of the church or congregation of
Chriſt, and gouernements of kingdoms euen vnto the verie
end of the world.
                  Let theſe examples of Gods promiſes ſtir vs vp vnto praier,
and let not the cogitation of our vnworthines diſcourage
vs: Séeing Daniel and all the holie ones euen from the verie
beginning of the worlde made their praiers vnto God,
not in confidence of their owne worthineſſe, but in the confidence
of the mercie promiſed for Chriſtes ſake; and for this
Lordes ſake (who ſaith, Iohn 16. 23. Verely, verely I ſay vnto
you, whatſoeuer you ſhall aske my father in my name hee will
giue it you) they are heard, and obtaine their petitions.
                  For ſo Daniel praieth, cap 9. 17 Wee poure out our prayers
before thee, not in our righteouſneſſe, but in thy manifold mercies,
heare vs for the Lords ſake. And the ſame forme of praier
is in the 17. verſe of this pſalme before recited: Heare me O
Lorde, for thy louing kindneſſe is comfortable; according to the
multitude of thy mercies, turne thee vnto me. Let vs therefore
ſet against out vnworthineſſe the preceptes and promiſes
of God: Thou O God haſt commanded praier to bee made,
and wilt of vs in this maner be worſhipped and honoured: I
acknowledge then that I am bound to obay thy commandement.It is Gods commandement and will that we ſhould pray vnto him, and his promiſe is aſſured performance.
For although I am vnworthie, yet thy commandement
and thy will is worthie, whereunto I yeeld; thy promiſes
worthie whereunto I agree, and repoſe my full truſt in the
ſame. Wherfore I make my praier vnto thee, not truſting
in my worthineſſe, but in the worthineſſe of the name of thy
ſonne Chriſt Ieſus, and of God the father which commandeſt
and promiſeſt performance of that which I pray for.
               
               
                  
                  Though haſt knowne my reproofe, my ſhame, and my
diſhonour, mine aduerſaries are all in thy fight.
                  
                  Thy rebuke hath broken my heart, I am full of heauineſſe:

I looked for ſome to haue pitie on mee, but
there was no man, neither found I anie to comfort me.
                  
                  They gaue mee gall to eate, and when I was thirſtie,
they gaue me vinegar to drinke.
                  He addeth vnto his prayer a complaint of the falſehoode
of his friends, and euill reioycing which his enemies haue at
his calamities. Seeing then that there is likelie familiaritie
betwéene the head and the members, let vs not maruell if the
ſame thing chance vnto the Church: for the in her calamities
is both forſaken of her friends, and cruellie aſſaulted of her
enemies. Like as certaine yeares agone we haue ſéene (not
without great ſorrow) manie examples thereof. But admit
it be ſo, that we ſpeake not of the Church: ſhall I ſay how
much Dauids prophecie (here deſcribing the laſt act of Chriſts
paſſion) liketh me. For the Euangeliſt Saint Iohn declareth,The laſt act of Chriſts paſſion
                     Cap. 19. verſes 29. 30. How Chriſt the ſonne of God hanging
vpon the Croſſe, when he had firſt taſted the Vinegar giuen him
by the Souldiours, cried out, It is finiſhed; and bowing his head,
gaue vp the ſpirit. This conſonancie of this prophecie which
Dauid hath, and that Hyſtorie of ſaint Iohns Goſpell maie
confirme vs againſt the venemous doubting which ſome
haue touching the certainite of the doctrine from God deliuered
vs. For ſéeing the euent anſwereth not in breadth, but
in ſtreitneſſe vnto the predictions or foretellings of the Prophets:
it is not to be doubted, that the whole doctrine of the
Prophets is true, and procéeding from God.
               
               
                  
                  Let their table bee made a ſnare to take themſelues
withall: and let the things that ſhould haue beene for
their wealth, be vnto them an occaſion of falling.
                  
                  Let their eies bee blinded that they ſee nor: and euer
bow downe their backes.
                  
                  Powre out thine indignation vpon them: and let thy
wrathfull diſpleaſure take holde of them.
                  
                  Let their habitation be void: and no man to dwelt in

their tents.
                  
                  For they perſecute him whom thou haſt ſmitten: and
they 
                        •
                     alke howe they may vexe him, whom thou haſt
wounded.
                  
                  Let them fall from one wickedneſſe vnto another: and
not come into thy righteouſnes.
                  
                  Let them be wiped out of the booke of the liuing: and
not be written among the righteous.
                  
                  As for me when I am poore and in heauines: thy helpe
O God ſhall lift me vp.
                  HItherto,The 2. part of this Pſalme containing a curſe againſt the enemies of Chriſt the firſt part of the Pſalme, (namelie a prayer
full of moſt ſorrowfull affections) is expounded: Nowe
followeth the ſecond part, wherein Chriſt reckoneth vp againſt
the blaſphemous Iewes dire and grieuous matters:
When we read this curſing, let vs tremble with feare in all
our bodie, and let vs ſcare the wrath of God which is bent against
the contempt of the Goſpell: for, If God ſpare not the
naturall branches, how much leſſe will he ſpare the wilde branches?
Rom. 11. 20. 24. 1 And the firſt degrée of puniſhments
for deſpiſing the Goſpel is furie and blindnes,Fiue degrees of puniſhmēts inflicted vpon the Iewes and wherefore. which wickedly
corrupteth the natiue meaning of the worde. The impudencie
and ſawcineſſe of the Iewes of late dayes is knowne in
peruerting the ſayings of the Prophets: As when they interpret
the 9. ca. of Iſay, they imagine that the Prophet ſpeaketh
there of Ezechias king of Iuda. With the ſame face do they
bragginglie ſtriue that the ſame Prophet in the 53 cap. preacheth
not of the Meſſias or Sauiour that was to come, but
of the Iewiſh people. So where they buſie themſelues vpon
the ninth chapter of Daniel, then peruert with their horrible
ignorance and impietie, the race of the kings of the Perſians,
ſo as by all meanes they do but trifle out the prophecie
of Daniel. Finallie, the vniuerſall writing of the Prophets,
which was ſometime a table furniſhed for this people
with moſt wholeſome meates, is now by their blaſphemies
no other thing but a ſnare and offence of falling, as in this

23. verſe is ſaid. 2 The ſecond degree of puniſhment, is
perpetuall thraldome, and moſt miſerable; for although now
and then they haue put in practiſe with warres to recouer
their Countrey, and restore their Church and policie, yet by
Gods prouidence being ouerthrowne, they acknowledged
themſelues but to rol the ſtone with Syſiphus, & to play at the
dice vpon a broken boord, that is, to be vtterly conſumed with
vaine contention. 3 The third degree is the wrath of God
which they cannot by anie meanes eſcape. 4 The fourth degree,
was the moſt ſorrowfull deſtruction of their gouernement,
and of their Temple. 5 The fifth degree is, that ſins
are puniſhed with ſinnes: for they are euerie day more then
other become like mad dogs, howling, ſtirring vp and heaping
vp ſinnes and offences. 6 The ſixt and laſt degree, is
the depriuing of them of the life, and righteouſneſſe euerlaſting.
For according to that ſaying of ſaint Iohn: He that
beleeueth not in the Sonne hath not life, but the wrath of God
reſteth vpon him. This plague O God vouchſafe thou to turn
quite away from vs.
               
               
                  
                  I will praiſe the name of God with a ſong: and magnifie
it with thanksgiuing.
                  
                  This alſo ſhall pleaſe the Lord better: then a bullocke
that hath hornes and hooffes.
                  THe thirde and laſt part of this Pſalme is a thankeſgiuing,
which inſtructeth the reader touching the abrogation
of Moſes ceremonies: The Prophet ſaith here,The 3. and laſt part of this Pſalme containing a thanksgiuing by Dauid, or rather by Chriſt, and the maner thereof in 3. degrees. 
                     Hee will
not offer vnto God the blood of Bulles and Calues, but the true
ſignification of thankfulnes, wherewith God is more pleaſed and
delighted, then with the Ceremonies of Leueticall ſacrifices.
Well do the Lawiers ſay: Ceſſante ratione legis, ceſſareipſam
legem. When the reaſon or cauſe of the lawe ceaſſeth, then alſo
ceaſſeth the verie law it ſelfe.
                      And the ſpeciall reaſon or cauſe
for which the Lord God ordained theſe ceremonies, was that
they ſhould be tipes or figures of one onelie ſacrifice taking

away the ſinnes of the world. When this ſacrifice was once
offered, then by good right and reaſon ceaſed the Leuiticall
ſacrifice. But what time the Leueticall prieſthood flouriſhed,
the ſlaughter and ſacrificing of beaſts without faith and morall
obedience pleaſed not God anie thing at all. For it is not
inough to do the workes by God commanded, except they be
done in ſuch order, as the wiſedome of God hath ordained.
Nowe then it appeareth plainlie, that Faith is the foundation
of all worſhippings, according to that ſaying of ſaint
Paule, Rom. 14. 23. Whatſoeuer is not of faith is ſinne, 2 The
ſecond and next degree is morall obedience, which containeth
loue and other vertnes, according to the commaundements
3 The third degree is the vſe of ceremonies, which (as I ſaid)
pleaſe not God, except there be firſt a foundation laid, that is,
a Pediator acknowledged, and that remiſſion of ſinnes bee
had for his ſake, reconciliation to God, and morall obedience
begun anew in the heart of man. This order of workes doe
manie Sermons if the prophets lay open vnto vs: As Iſay
ſaieth, Cap. 1. 11. I will none of your burnt offerings, &c. But
rather, verſ. 17. Seeke ye iudgement and relieue the oppreſſed,
&c. Againe, the ſame Iſay in the 58. cap. 7. Breake thy breade
vnto the hungrie, &c. And the prophet Micheas, cap. 6. 7. Will
the Lord be pleaſed with thouſands of Rammes, &c? Hee hath
ſhewed thee O man what is good, and what the Lorde requireth
of thee, ſurelie to doe iuſtly, and to loue mercie, and
to humble thy ſelfe to walke with thy God, ver. 8. And the
Prophet Zacharias ſayth, cap. 7. 6. When yee did eate, and
when yee did drinke, did yee not eate for your ſelues, and drinke
for your ſelves? Thus ſaith the Lord of hoſtes, execute true iudgement,
and ſhewe mercie and compaſſion euerie man to his brother,
oppreſſe not the widow nor the fatherleſſe, the ſtranger, nor
the poore, and let none of you imagine euill againſt his brother in
your heart, verſes, 9. and 10, &c.
               
               
                  
                  The humble ſhall ſee this and bee glad: ſeeke ye after
God and your ſoule ſhall liue.
                  
                     
The chiefe bleſſings which the reaſonable or ſenſible creature
hath, are Wiſdome, righteouſneſſe, and ioie in God.
Theſe bleſſings being loſt by Adams tranſgreſſion,The bleſſings loſt by Adam are in and by Chriſt reſtored vnto vs. Chriſt
againe by his paſſion and reſurrection hath reſtored vnto vs:
For he died for our ſinnes and roſe againe for our righteouſneſſe,
that is, through his obedience which he performed in
ſuffring his death he deliuered the church from euils; namely
from Gods wrath, the curſe of the lawe, ſinne, euerlaſting
death, and the tyrannie of the deuill. But if he had remained
ſtill in death, and in the graue, (which was a thing impoſſible)
he had not reſtored thoſe bleſſings vnto vs, which are oppoſed
and ſet againſt moſt grieuous euils. To the end therfore,
that deliuerance ſhould not be onelie the remoouing of
euill from vs, but alſo the placing of benefits for vs: he roſe
againe from death the third daie, and making his glorious
triumph, and beginning his euerlaſting kingdome in vs, he
reſtoreth vs vnto righteouſneſſe and life euerlaſting: as Daniel
in the 9. cap. 24. verſe ſaith, Seuenty weeks are determined
vpon thy people, and vpon thy holy citie, to finiſh the wickedneſſe,
to ſeale vp the ſinnes, to reconcile the iniquitie, and to
bring in euerlaſting righteouſneſſe, &c. But although this deſtinction
of the effects of the paſſion and reſurrection of Chriſt
ſeeme vaine vnto manie men: yet notwithſtanding ſeeing
the Apoſtle S. Paule ſo often ſpeaketh hereof, (and ſpeciallie
in the 3. cap. Philippians 10. verſe. That I may knowe him and
the vertue of his reſurrection, and the fellowſhip of his afflictions
and be made conformable vnto his death, &c.) let vs without
feare of cauilling follow the ſpeech or ſaying of Paule, and let
vs know that we muſt conſider both the merit and efficacie
of Chriſt crucified, and riſen from death to life: Like as
Paul in 5. Rom. 6. ioyneth together grace, and the gift by grace.
And S: Iohn Baptiſt ſaith, 1. cap. verſe 17. by Chriſt came grace
and truth. Theſe are not ſpoken to corrupt the article of iuſtification,
wherein we diſcerne wiſelie imputation from gifts,
and expreſlie do affirme that we haue remiſſion of ſinnes and
reconciliation with God, and imputation of righteouſneſſe

for the onelie obedience and merit of Chriſt: but ſo that the
full and whole benefit of Chriſt be not thereby obſcured: which
is not onelie imputation, but alſo a reuiuing and raiſing againe
from death to life and glorie euerlaſting. To be briefe:
it is one thing to ſpeake of the article of iuſtification, and an
other thing to ſpeake of the whole kingdome of Chriſt,Gratiae priuatiur & poſitiuae. which
containeth (as the ancients do ſpeake) graces priuatiue and
poſitiue; that is, not onelie deliuerances from euils, but alſo
reſtorings vnto or giftes of euerlaſting bleſſinges. But ſo
often as wee diſpute of theſe matters, in Churches and
Schooles, let vs follow Paules rule which biddeth vs, 2. Tim.
2. 15. To deuide the word of truth aright: and not indirectlie
to confuſe or ſeparate the members from the bodie againſt
the Analogie of the faith, and againſt the ſimple and natiue
meaning of euerie article. The Article of iuſtification admitteth
no copulatiue,The diuers Epithites of our iuſtification by Chriſt. becauſe of the excluſiues ſo often repeated:
Freely, without workes, without law, in the ſeede, not
in the ſeeds: And the Article touching the kingdom of Chriſt
cannot be expounded without coupling together grace, and
the gifte by grace: neither doe theſe ſtriue betweene themſelues,
becauſe when wee ſeeke for conſolation in feares of
conſcience, we do not diſpute of giftes, but we are troubled
touching remiſſion of ſinnes, and reconciliation with God,
which is onelie obtained by faith for Chriſtes ſake, whome
in his bloudſhedding, God hath ordained our mercifull redeemer
and Sauiour. This is not the wiſedome of vaine
and ſecure minde, but of the godlie ones, who are mortified
and quickened, yea brought downe into hell, and againe are
plucked as it were out of the iawes of hell.
               
               
                  
                  For the Lord heareth the poore, and deſpiſeth not his
priſoners.
                  
                  Let heauen and earth praiſe him; the ſea and all that
moueth therein.
                  
                  For God will ſaue Syon, and build the cities of Iuda;
that men may dwell there and haue it in poſſeſsion.
                  
                  
                  The poſterity alſo of his ſeruants ſhall inherit it; and
they that loue his name ſhall dwel therein.
                  Theſe laſt verſes in this Pſalme need no long decalration,
or interpretation:A concluſion. Exhortation, for they exhort euerie creature to the
aduauncing of the honour of God, and of his ſonne our Lord
Ieſuſ Chriſt: and they promiſe ſtabilitie vnto the Church,
according to that ſaying Matth. 16. 18. The gates of hell ſhall
not preuaile againſt her: Wherefore ſith it needeth not to
make long commentaries vpon matters ſo euident; I conclude
the expoſition of this Pſalme; And I beſeech God to
ſeale in the hartes of manie men the natiue meaning of the
articles of the Chriſtian faith, Amen.
               
            
         
         
            To him that excelleth.
            ¶ A Pſalme of Dauid: to put him in rememberance
for his deliuerance.
            
               Deus in adiut orium meum intende.
            
            
               The Argument.
               
                  SHort indeede is this Song,
                  The effects of this Pſalme are touching faith, and the force thereof mightily ſhaken by three meanes. but long is the effectuall
concluſion thereof; For it teacheth that by three
Engins the walles of Faith are mightely ſhaken,
whereof, the firſt is greatneſſe of temptation and
calamities. The ſecond is multitude or concourſe
of tempeſts or ſtormes: and the third is the long continuance of
theſe. For, whom doth not greatneſſe ouercome, him the ſame
multitude of calamities do weaken and bring low; but whome

neither of theſe twaine doe ouermaſter, yet euen him doth long
looking for helpe vtterly diſcourage. Theſe all may be plainely
ſeene in Iob, as it were in a looking glaſſe: when worde was
brought to this moſt holy man Iob of the loſſe of all his ſubſtance
and death of his children, whom his houſe ſlew when it fell vpon
them: Hee was ſo far from impatience, not ſhewing any token
thereof, that hee euen as it were praiſed God with a notable
verſe ſaying, cap. 1 verſe 21. If wee haue receiued good thinges of
the handes of the Lord, why ſhould we not alſo ſuffer euill thinges?
The Lord hath giuen,
                  
                     Iobs patience in his calamities. 
                  the Lord hath taken away, as it hath pleaſed
the Lorde, ſo is it come to paſſe: bleſſed therefore be the name of the
Lord. But this ſo holy man when hee could not bee remooued
from his purpoſe with greatneſſe of calamities, at the verie laſt of
all, being vanquiſhed and ſore broken with concourſe of aduerſities
and with the long continuance thereof, cryed out cap. 3. ver.
3. Let the day periſh wherein I was borne, and the night, when it was
ſaid, there is a man child conceiued, &c. He therfore that ſtandeth
let him take heed he fall not. For the diuell knoweth a thouſand
ſleights wherewith the wals and towers of faith (except they be
by God defended) may eaſilie be raced and ouerthrowne. And
ſeeing there is much danger in delay: This Pſalme three times
rehearſeth a praier vnto God to haſten his helping hand. verſe 1.
Hast thee O God, &c. Haſt to helpe me O Lord, v. 6. Thou art my
helper and my redeemer (O Lord) make no long tarrying. For althought
it is not in our power to preſcribe God anie certaine
meane or certaine time of deliuerance: yet after a ſort, we muſt
craue, that God woulde euen at the very firſt inſtant (according
to his prouidence) deliuer his church, and the godly ones which
are exerciſed in greateſt miſeries: This indeed is not only to aske
and ſeeke, but alſo to knocke: Or as the lawyers vſe to ſay, to
cite God peremptorily: And ſuch a ſearching for finding, and
knocking for opening, according to that moſt ſweet ſaying ceaſeth
to our moſt wiſhful deſires: Aske and ye ſhal haue ſeeke and ye
ſhall find,
                  Matth. 7. 7. 8 
                  knocke and it ſhall be opened vnto you. Thus much for the
Argument of this Pſalme.
            
            
               
                  
                  ❧ The Pſalme and Expoſition thereof.
               
                  
                  Haſte thee O God to deliuer mee: make haſt to helpe
me, O God.
                  
                  Let them be aſhamed and confounded that ſeeke after
my ſoule: let them bee turned backeward and put to
confuſion that wiſh me euill.
                  
                  Let them (for their reward) be ſoone brought to ſhame:
that crie ouer me, there, there.
                  
                     LIke as when we take an oath (which is a kinde of
taking God to witneſſe in calling vpon him) we
craue that God woulde bee witneſſe of our promiſe,The effect of an oath.
and a iuſt Iudge in puniſhing the partie
which breaketh promiſe: So in euerie our praier, wee muſt
craue of God, that he would confirme the worke that he hath
begun in vs:The effect of prayer. and that hee would deſtroy the workes of the
diuell and his inſtruments: As when we recite theſe wordes,
(Hallowed be thy name) we do not onelie craue that the glorie
of God maie bee made more excellent, both by the true
doctrine, and by good examples: but that alſo all wicked opinions
in Religion, and lewde examples in life, (by reaſon
wherof the name of God amongſt ye nations is blaſphemed)
might euerie where be vtterlie extinguiſhed. So in like maner
Dauid craueth helpe and defence in a good cauſe, and the
ſubuerſion of his malicious cruell enemies;Dauid praieth for defence frō God in a good cauſe, and for the deſtruction of his enemies. whoſe diueliſh
malice and euill cuſtome in working miſchiefe was ſuch,
that both their will was groedilie deſirous of hurting, their
tongue earneſtlie giuen to manifeſt the ſame, and their
hands nights and dayes prepared to ſhed the blood of the godlie

lie ones. Againſt theſe poyſonfull Aſpes prayeth Dauid here,
for their euill ſucceſſe of their enterpriſes, and (except they
will bee ſpéedilie conuerted) for their vniuerſall deſtruction.
So let vs craue of God,We muſt pray to God to cut off the Pope and Turke, the 2 ſtrong arms of Antichriſt. that hee would with his mightie
hand, reſtrain or vtterlie cut off both Pope and Turke the two
ſtrong armes of Antichriſt; and that he would not long deferre
the execution of his moſt iust iudgement, but that hee
would make haſte to puniſh the enemie, for the glorie of his
names ſake.
               
               
                  
                  But let all thoſe that ſeeke thee bee ioyfull and glad in
thee: and let all ſuch as delight in thy ſaluation, ſay alway,
the Lord be praiſed.
                  
                  As for me I am poore and in miſerie: haſte thee vnto
me, O God.
                  
                  Thou art my helper and my redeemer: Lord make no
long tarrying.
                  Vnto the godlie ones which exerciſe faith in their dailic
calamities and dangers, theſe ſpeeches of Dauid are not obſcure:
[I am poore and in miſerie:] That is, deſtitute of mans
helpe and defences: Thou therefore, OGod, bee my helper
and deliuerer, and that indeed without tarrying helpe and
ſaue me, leaſt I perish or be ouercome of the cruell enemie:
for thou knoweſt thine owne creature, out infirmitie is
knowne vnto thee. Thou knoweſt alſo that, the Diuell goeth
about and ſeeketh whom he may deuour and deſtroy, 2. Pet. 5.
8. Wherefore ſeeing thou art a faithfull God, do not thou ſuffer
vs to be tempted aboue our ſtrenght but giue with temptation
an end, that me may be able to endure that thou laieſt
vpon vs.
               
            
         
         
            
            A Pſalme of Dauid.
            
               In te Domine ſperaui, &c.
            
            
               The Argument.
               
                  ALthough certaine perſons too much louers of
themſelues,A debaſing of mans ſelf conceit in his own nature. do imagine in their mindes that they
excell in wiſdome and ſtrength the firſt flower
of mankinde: yet notwithſtanding the thing it
ſelfe ſheweth that the nature of man as it were
barren, is at this day more weake and of leſſe ſtrength then it
was in the beginning. For moſt trulie is it ſaide of the learned
ones: In prima eatate mundi regnaſſe rationem gubernatricem, &
inuentricem optimarum artium. Deinde ſucceſsiſſe aetatem bellatricem,
in qua, armis imperia conſtituta ſunt, & quatuor Monarchiae
orbem terrarum rexerunt.
                  A deſcription of the 3. ages of the world. 
                  In hac vero Senecta mundi dominars.
That is: In the firſt age of the world Reaſon ruled as gouerneſſe
and inuenter of good artes. After that ſucceeded the
warlike age, wherein by force of armes kingdomes were ordained,
and the foure Monarchies ruled and gouerned al the world.
But now in this olde age of the worlde, concupiſcence reigneth:
for, nature of man being now made weaker, neither ſtudieth for
wiſdome as they did of olde, neither taken vpon her thoſe toyling
labours of warfarre, which ſtrong men did in times paſt, but
as it were weakned in the ſinewes, ſeeketh after delites and pleaſures.
This infirmitie of nature in vs doth the diuell more outragiouſlie
aſſault at this day,The diuel ſtirs vp tyrants and heritikes in the laſt olde age of the world most wickedly weakning the ſtate thereof. and as it were leaning vpon a bending
wall ſtirres vp Heretikes and tyrants, partlie with craft or
guile, and partlie with manifeſt violence to ouerthrow and vtterlie
deſtroy all the holie ones, yea, and extinguiſh the name of
Chriſt: whom this foreſaid deadly enemie of ours well knoweth
ſhall hereafter not long to come and iudge all people, and

giue vnto his Congregation euerlaſting bleſſings, and ſhall caſt
away theſe diuels with all the wicked ones into eternall deſtruction
and torments. Therefore now greater and more difficult is
our neceſſitie & cauſe, then euer it was at any time in the church,
becauſe wee haue againſt vs the skem and ende of the worlde:
that ſame extreame outrage of the Pope, and of the Turke: who
(as D. Martin Luther ſayeth) ſeeke to deuour vs. And I pray
you how many trouble the Church now in her olde age, with
mouing vnneceſſarie or needleſſe diſputations, and like peeuiſh
olde women dauncing out of order ſtirre vp a great duſt, as the
Greeke Prouerbe ſaith. And others like wawling Cats running
away out of this life leaue an euill ſmell behind them. This maſſe
of miſchiefes and miſeries, Dauid foreſeeing to come in his
time, craueth moſt feruentlie of God, that hee would not forſake
nor caſt away his Church in her extreame olde age, ſo fowly deformed:
but that he would ſuccour and defende her againſt the
Diuell, who in the ende of his tyrannie rageth more cruelly. Seeing
then Dauid foreſeeing future ſtormes and tempeſtes in his
time, made ſuch prayers for the ſhip which bare the Church, of
what minde behooueth it vs nowe at length to bee, who are
toſſed with the verie ſame ſtormes. But the verie ſame thing
happeneth vnto vs which did to the Apoſtles, which neither vnderſtoode
the greatneſſe of Chriſtes ſorrowes, nor are yet greatlie
grieued in minde therewith: no rather are wee ouercome
with heauie ſleepe, as the Apoſtles were. Let vs therefore correct
this ſecuritie and negligence, and let vs craue of God, that
hee would helpe, gouerne and ſtrengthen vs, leaſt either our
careleſſe mindes fall headlong into Epicureal contempt of God,
or elſe being oppreſſed with the burthen of calamities bee vtterlie
deſtroyed with deſperation, like as Ely, Saule, and innumerable
others were.
            
            
               
                  
                  ❧ The Pſalme and Expoſition
thereof.
               
                  
                  In thee O I orde haue I put my truſt; let me neuer bee
put to confuſion: but rid me and deliuer me in thy righteouſneſſe;
encline thine eare vnto me and ſaue me.
                  
                     WHere as before in the II. Pſalme verſe 6. and 8.Two effects of this Pſalme.
theſe words are ſufficientlie expounded, I wil
now onelie admoniſh the reader touching the
little worde [righteouſneſſe] which is vsed in
ſome places actiuelie, in other ſome places paſſiuelie.
The righteouſneſſe of God manifeſted
in the lawe, is a will wherewith God preſcribeth vs to do
thoſe things which are right,The righteouſnes of God in the law. and after a certaine gladneſſe of
his reſteth well pleaſed with thinges rightlie done: and will
not haue contrarie thinges to be done by anie, but with an
vnfeined diſpleaſure repelleth and deſtroieth them: Touching
this righteouſneſſe▪ It is ſaide in the 5 Pſalme verse 4.
For thou art the God that haſt no pleaſure in wickedneſse: neither
ſhall any euill dwell with thee▪ verſe 5. Such as bee fooliſh
ſhall not ſtande in thy ſight, for thou hateſt all them that worke
vanitie. verſe 6. Thou ſhalt deſtroy them that ſpeake leaſing, the
Lord will abhor both the bloudthirſty and deceiptful man.
                  
                  The righteouſneſſe of God manifeſted without the Lawe,His righteouſnes in ye goſpel.
touching which both the Law and the prophets do beare witneſſe,

is the frée remiſſion of ſinnes, reconciliation with
God, and obtaining unto life euerlaſting for Chriſtes ſake
the mediator. He therefore craueth in this place to be deliuered in the righteouſneſſe of God, not indeed legall and actiue,
but euangelicall and paſſiue, as if he ſaide: Though I
maie ſurelie perſwade my ſelfe that I am righteous, not indeede
by my owne worthineſſe, but thy righteouſnes, that is
for thy ſonnes ſake imputed vnto me: I alſo craue this addition,
namely deliuerance and glorification according to the
prouidence of thy wiſedome; As it is ſaide, Rom. 8. 30. For
whome he hath iuſtified, them alſo hath he glorified.
                  
                  That this, interpretation is neither fained, nor forged, the
wordes of D. Martin Luther vpon the 42. cap. of Geneſis doe
witneſſe.
                        D. Martin Luthers ſaying vpon the firſt verſe of this Pſalme. In times paſt (ſaieth he) when it behooued me to
reade and praie that part of the 71. Pſalme, verſe 1. (Rid mee
and deliuer me in thy righteouſneſſe) I trembled for feare in
all the parts of my bodie, and with all my whole heart I beteſted
that ſaying (Deliuer me not thought I) in thy righteouſneſſe
wherein thou art righteous actiuely: Therefore paſsiuelie
muſt I embrace and take holde of thy righteouſneſſe wherewith
I am juſtified. And a little after that hee ſaieth, In times paſt
when I came to thoſe propoſitions, (the righteouſneſſe of God,
the worke of God, thy worke, thy righteouſneſſe) they found me
worke inough to deale withall. Which if they be vnderſtood actiuely,
they are death, but paſsiuely vnderſtoode, they are life
and ſaluation.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Be thou my ſtrong holde, wherunto I may alway reſort:
thou haſt promiſed to helpe me, for thou art my houſe
of defence and my caſtle.
                  
                  Deliuer me (O my God) out of the hand of the vngodlie,
out of the hande of the vnrighteous and cruell
man.
                  All men are careleſſe in their doings ſo long as they haue
a refuge and humane ſuccours or defences: But when theſe

are once loſt, verie manie are drowned in deſperation, and
crie out with that Tyrant, Deſertus ab amicis miſer pereo:
                     Tyrants truſting in mans helpe are deſperately deceiued.
                     Wretch that I am, forſaken of friend, I wretchedly nowe my life
do ende. But amongſt theſe rockes is faith ſafelie caried and
with great care ſhunneth both of them, namelie, ſecurity and
deſperation. And neither is ſhe puft vp or ſwelling proudlie
in proſperitie, neither is the diſcouraged in aduerſitie, but
howſoeuer fortune fare with her, the beleeueth ſhe hath God
for her mercifull defender and deliuerer, and craueth of God
helpe and gouernement, and findeth by triall that God doth
helpe her according to his promiſes. Dauid had a moſt large
kingdome and dominion furniſhed with wealth, weapons
for warre, and hoaſtes of men: but hee repoſeth not anie
thing at all the hope of his helpe in theſe defences: Afterwardes,
when hee was baniſhed out of his kingdome hee
was not diſcouraged in minde, but ſuccoureth himſelfe
with this conſolation. Pſalme 27. verſe 12. My father and my
mother haue forſaken me, but the Lord hath taken me vp. Theſe
matters without ſome vſe or exerciſe in them cannot be vnderſtood.
Therefore is the Church ſore charged and burdened
with the croſſe that faith maie,The Church ſore charged and burdened with the croſſe
in exerciſes of the croſſe,
encreaſe and be ſtronger, which in idleneſſe and pleaſures is
vtterlie extinguiſht. But Dauid here beſeecheth God to defend
him not onelie againſt the violence of his enemies, but
alſo againſt the falſhoode of ſuch as he tooke to be his friends.
For a great deale more doe the domeſticall friendes hurt a
man then outward enemies do.
               
               
                  
                  For thou O Lord, art the thing that I looke for, thou art
my hope euen from my youth.
                  
                  Through thee haue I beene holden vp euer ſince I
was borne: thou art he that tooke me out of my mothers
wombe, my prayſe ſhall be alwaies of thee.
                  He annexeth unto the propoſition thrée reaſons, whereof
the firſt is deriued from Gods promiſe, the ſecond from a
former benefit, and the third from the cauſe finall. No doubt

of it faith beareth her ſelfe correlatiuelie to the promiſe of
God: So often then as mention is made of faith or hope, let
vs call to minde the promiſe giuen from God: The ſame
then ſignifieth this verſe, Thou Lorde art my hope, and thou
Lord haſt promiſed me helpe and other neceſſarie benefits. So
as afterwardes hee calleth to minde the benefites done him
before time, by reaſon whereof he conceiueth aſſured hope of
deliuerances in time to come. Thou (ſaith he) haſt brought
me out of my mothers wombe, and haſt beſtowed vpon mee
of thy moſt bountifull liberalitie manie other benefits. O.
vouchſafe therefore to finiſh and perfect vp the web of thy
good will and working goodneſſe, and doe thou neuer forſake
me. Laſt of all Icraue and looke from thee defence againſt
the violence and guilefull dealings of mine enemies: not to
the ende that I maie liue all at pleaſure, but that I maie reuerentlie
honour thee in thy benefits, and be a witness of thy
true doctrine.
               
               
                  
                  I am become as it were a monſter vnto many: but my
ſure truſt is in thee.
                  
                  O let my mouth bee filled with thy praiſe (that I may
ſing of thy glory) and honour all the day long.
                  He addeth vnto his praier an ardent affect of his ſtate.
For like as S. Paule ſaith. 1. Cor. 4. 9; The Apoſtles are counted
for gazing ſtockes in the world: So Eſayas the Prophet in his
8. cap. 18. verſe crieth out, Beholde, I and my children whome
the Lord hath giuen me, are as ſignes and as wonders in Iſraell.
Theſe complaintes do ſignifie how difficult and hard a thing
it is for vs to ſuffer the vnrighteous iudgementes of the
world: for ſome doe condemne vs of hereſie, other obiect
vnto vs the crime Laeſae maieſtatis, or as detractors of the ſupreame
authoritie.
                  But ſéeing then that godly men cannot without great ſorrow
endure ſlanders or reprochfull taunts though vninſt,When good men are vnjuſtly ſlaundered, it behooueth them to hold faſt the conſolations left them in the word of God, againſt vnrighteous iudgements. it
is needful that they holde faſt the expreſſe conſolations againſt

vnrighteous iudgements, ſo as they map ouercome
ſorrowe and beleeue that they are not for ſuch vniuſt iudgements
caſt away from god, or excluded from the true church.
Let us therefore euermore looke vpon theſe ſayings, viz. Pſal.
109. verſ. 27. Let them curſe, but do thou bleſſe. Let my enemies
be confounded, but let thy ſeruant be glad and ioyfull. Iſay. 52.
7. Feare not ye the reproches of men. Math. 5. Bleſſed are you
when men reuile you, and preſecute you, and ſay all maner of
euill againſt you for my ſake, falſelie, verſ. 11. And in ſuch conflicts
let the difference betweene the true Church, and of that
companie bee knowne, which falſely arrogateth vnto them
the title of the Church: when it is moſt aſſured that the enemies
of the truth are not the Church of God, according to
theſe ſayings, Iohn 10. 27. My ſheepe heare my voyce. But of
the enemies it is ſaid thus. Ioh. 10. 26. Ye are not of my ſheep.
Againe, Iohn. 8. 44. Ye are of your father the Diuell, &c.
               
               
                  
                  Caſt me not away in the time of age: forſake mee not
when my ſtrength faileth me.
                  
                  For mine enemies ſpeake againſt me, and they that lay
waite for my ſoule take their counſell togither, ſaying:
God hath forſaken him, perſecute him and take him,
for there is none to deliuer him.
                  The firſt verſe is a principall propoſition of this pſalme,A principall propoſition of this Pſalme, conſiſting in a Prayer and a Promiſe.
which is not onelie a praier, but alſo a promiſe, according to
the rule, All praiers of the holie Ghoſt are promiſes: But I pray
you thinke how neceſſarie a prayer is this: Like as in aged
perſons all things are more faintlie ſeene in them: ſo in
this old age of the world, the Church is more weake & fuller
of wrinckles in her forehead then the hath had before time,
becauſe ſhe is not onelie grieued with infirmitie of her age,
but is alſo fore worne and wrecked with puniſhments which
are increaſed by reaſon of her ſinnes. And againe the outrage
of the diuels both the more ercaede, becauſe they know
within a ſhort time their iudgement draweth neare, wherein

their filthineſſe ſhall be clearelie and openlie reuealed before
all Angels and men. Let vs therefore craue with moſt ſeruent
praier, that God would not caſt away the remnants of
the Church now in her old age, becauſe of her dotings and other
blemiſhes: but ſeeing he knoweth that olde age had néed
to haue quietnes and reſt, that he would vouchſafe mercifullie
to ſuccour, help and comfort his Church now in extreame
olde age; as he hath promiſed ſo to do, Iſay. 46. verſe 3, and 4
Heare ye me houſe of Iacob, and all that remaine of the houſe
of Iſrael, which are borne of me from the wombe, and brought
vp of me from the birth. Therefore vnto olde age, I the ſame, euen
I will beare you, vntill the hoare haires: I haue made you, I wil
alſo beare you. and I will carie you, and I will deliuer you. Let
vs with this promiſe comfort our ſelues, when in theſe confuſions
and ruines of kingdomes we being diſquieted, do ſéeke
where the Church ſhall remaine.
                  The latter of theſe two verſes is eaſilie to be vnderſtood
of them which do conſider the hyſtorie or ſtate of theſe daies:
For, what ſleights hath not Sathan exerciſed by his inſtruments
the Tyrants and Hypocrites of our time, to oppreſſe
and extinguiſh the light of the refined and purified doctrine?
He mooueth ſeditions, he kindleth ciuill warres, he deuiſeth
odde formes and orders of fained reformation in religions
and opinions of men, hee hath troubled our congregations
with vnnéedfull and vnneceſſarie diſputations. Finallie,
hee hath prepared and practiſed all manner of meanes which
might ſeeme to tend to the deſtruction of the truth. But like
as the foming waues daſhing and mounting vpon the rocks
do with their owne force fall off againe into the ſea, when the
rocks ſtand firme and immooueable: ſo the miſchieuous enterpriſes
& practiſes of Sathan (ſo much as to the effect of the
cauſe appertaineth) haue beene, are, and ſhall be redounding
to no purpoſe, according to theſe ſayings of Chriſt our Sauiour.
Mat. 28. 20. Behold I am with you euen vnto the end of
the worlde. Againe, Mat. 16. 18. The gates of hell ſhall not
preuaile againſt her. Furthermore, Iohn. 10. 28. No man ſhall

take my ſheepe out of my hands.
               
               
                  
                  Go not ſarre from me, O God, my God▪ make haſte to
helpe me.
                  
                  Let them be confounded and periſh that are agaynſt
my ſoule: let them be couered with ſhame and diſhonour
that ſeeke to do me euill.
                  Such perſpicuitie there is in this praier, that he which will
expound the ſame with long Commentaries, ſhall ſéeme to
lights a Candle euen at the midday: Letting paſſe therefore
diligence vnneceſſarie and needleſſe in this point, I come to
the verſes next following.
               
               
                  
                  As for me I will pacientlie abide alway: and will praiſe
thee more and more.
                  
                  My mouth ſhall dayly ſpeake of thy righteouſneſſe and
ſaluation: for, I know none end thereof.
                  
                  I will go forth in the ſtrength of the Lorde: and will
make mention of thy righteouſnes onely.
                  
                  Thou O God haſt taught me from my youth vp vntill
now: therefore will I tell of thy wonderous workes.
                  The Church in her olde age promiſeth vnto God for his
defence and preſeruation of her ſome recompence: namelie,The Church in her old age thankfull vnto God.
                     Confeſſion and propagation of the true doctrine: And euen this
is ſpecially to be obſerued, that thée affirmeth ſhe will not
be the aduancer of her owne righteouſneſſe, but of the righteouſnes
of God, according to that ſaying 1. Cor. 3. 1. He that
reioyceth, let him reioyce in the Lord. Againe where he ſaith,
3. Phil. 9. That I may be found in him, not hauing my owne
righteouſneſſe which is of workes, but that which is from God
by faith in Chriſt. This pronounced praiſe (as elſe where is often
ſaid) attributeth vnto God and his ſonne Chriſt true glorie,
and ſetteth downe firme conſolation vnto our conſciences,
and diſcerneth the church from other ſects which maruaile

at nothing, but the figge leafe (that is) a wretched and
vncleane hypocriſie of outward works: And truely when I
reade theſe verſes, it ſeemeth to me that the holie ghoſt forepropheſied
in them the refining or purifying of the doctrine
which in this age hath beene made by the miniſtrie of the reuerend
D. Martin Luther. For which let vs bee thankfull
vnto God, and the ſame as an excellent gift and treaſure of
great price, left vs by the power of the holie ghoſt, faithfullie
kéepe, that it may paſſe and procéed vnto our proſteritie, pure
and vncorrupt without anie our default therein.
               
               
                  
                  Forſake mee not O God in mine olde age: when I am
gray headed, vntill I haue ſhewed thy ſtrength vnto
this generation: and the power to them that are yet
for to come.
                  The repetitions in Pſalms are not vaine repetitions of
the ſame things,A prayer for the Church in her old age. but ſignes of moſt feruent affects or
motions of the mind. For what thing is it that with greater
force of mind can be craued. of God, then that he would not
ſuffer the Church his ſpouſe now in her extreame olde age
(almoſt dotage, for or by reaſon of her manifold deformities)
to be either forſaken or caſt out of his fauour? Wherefore it
is not inough that we make theſe prayers once, but that we
do repeate them dailie, yea euerie moment, and truelie for
this cauſe, that there may be a propagation or publiſhing of
doctrine in the poſteritie: for like as God graunteth vnto
the Halcion bird the quietneſſe and calmeneſſe of the ſea to
hatch and bring forth their yong ones, ſo muſt we pray that
God in the ruines and confuſions of kingdomes in the latter
age of the world, would preſerue his church and miniſtrie,
that in time to come there want no publiſhers of the moſt
mightie workes of God.
               
               
                  
                  Thy righteouſneſſe O God is verie high: and great
things are they that thou haſt done: O God who is like
vnto thee?
                  
                     
This ioyfull conluſion which the Prophet here hath, maie
more eaſilie be vnderſtoode;The great mercy of God aboue mans merit. if we conſider the hiſtorie of the
Church from the beginning when Adam and Eua had tranſgreſſed,
and could not be helped by the meanes of anie creature:
God of his immenſe grace and goodneſſe publiſhed a
promiſe touching the Redéemer which ſhoulde come: which
when theſe our parentes heard, they vnderſtoode that they
ſhould bee receiued againe into Gods fauour and brought againe
from euerlaſting death.
                  Afterwardes when all mankinde miſerablie periſhed in
the vniuerſall deluge, God according to his wonted goodnes
preſerued Noah and his wife and familie, that they ſhoulde
yet ſcape the daunger of the floud, and remaine the young
plantes of the Church. And that I maie for breuitie ſake omit
particular deliuerances, howe glorious was the bringing
and deliuering of the Iſraelites out of Egypt? And no
leſſe glorious was the bringing backe againe of the ſame
people from out of Babilon, and the reſtoring of them into
their ancient ſtate. What ſhall I ſaie of the church gathered
from out of the whole world, by the miniſterie of the Apoſtles?
What ſhall I ſpeake of the continuall preſeruation
and defence of this little flocke againſt the violence of Tyrants
and wicked deceipts of heretickes▪
                     The reſtoring of the church in the latter daies comparable to the deliuerances by God in former ages. And that I would
not repeat all ſtories, I will cōprehend in briefe (for ſo I purpoſed)
this laſt reſtoring of the goſpell euen by God effected,
(maugre the malice and repugning thereagainſt all the
gates of hell) to be no leſſe worthie of admiration then other
deliuerances of the church, mentioned in the hiſtories of the
Prophets and Apoſtles: Theſe and other thinges innumerable
when we call to minde, it cannot be otherwiſe, but we
muſt needes crie out with Dauid in this verſe. Howe great
thinges are they O God which thou haſt done: O God who is
like vnto thee?
                  
               
               
                  
                  O what great troubles and aduerſities haſt thou
ſhewed me? and yet diddeſt thou turne and refreſh

mee: yea and broughteſt mee from the depth of the
earth againe.
                  
                  Thou haſt brought me to great honour and comforted
me on euery ſide.
                  The hiſtorie of the Church doth ſpeciallie ſet forth this interchange
of temptations & conſolations. The church of the
people of Iſraell had ſome reſt, peace, and quietneſſe in the
time of K. Salomons raigne, but a little while after when the
Kingdome was deuided, there followed continuall ciuill
warres,1 Kinges. 10
                     1 K
                           •
                        ngs 12
                     2 
                           〈◊〉
                         13 40 vntill the tenne Tribes were by Salmanazar carried
a waie into exilement: The two other Tribes had great
tryall of diuers changes, calamities and deliuerances euen
vntill the comming of our Sauiour Chriſt. But the church
of the newe Teſtament, being firſt grieuouſlie afflicted by
Tyrantes, next of heretickes, and afterwardes by Antichriſt,
hath had thenceforth ſome ſpace of breathing: So let
vs not doubt but the Church of this laſt age toſſed and turmoiled
with diuers ſtormes and ſurging ſeas,The church in the latter age ſhal at length deſcry and attaine vnto the port of life euerlaſting. ſhall hereafter
(not verie long to, getting out of theſe great troubles)
deſire and attayne vnto the porte of euerlaſting life.
               
               
                  
                  Therefore will I praiſe thee and thy faithfulneſſe, O
God, playing vpon an Inſtrument of muſicke: vnto
thee will I ſing vpon the harpe, O thou holie one of
Iſraell.
                  
                  My lips will bee faine when I ſing vnto thee: and ſo
will my ſoule whom thou haſt deliuered.
                  
                  My tongue alſo ſhall talke of thy righteouſneſſe al the
day long: for they are confounded and brought vnto
ſhame that ſeeke to do me euill.
                  Oftentimes in the Pſalmes Dauid keepeth theſe degrees
of order, Beleeuing, he is tempted, tempted he prayeth praying
he is deliuered, and being deliuered he giueth thanks vnto God:
So the Church beholding the deſtruction of her enemies or

their purposes diſappointed, with ioyfull minde and mouth
magnifieth and praiſeth God, who knoweth howe to deliuer
his out of temptation.
               
            
         
         
            ¶ A prayer compoſed by Dauid as
touching the proſperitie of Salomons
Kingdom: which was a figure of Chriſt,
and his euerlaſting kingdome,
1. Kinges. 3.
            
               Deus iudicium tuum Regi da.
            
            
               The Argument.
               
                  TIS Pſalme with great excellencie of wordes
preacheth of the perſon and office or of Chriſtes
kingdome,The effects of this Pſalme with a refutation of the Iewes contrary opinion in two points. of the calling of the Gentiles, of the
worſhipping in the newe Teſtament, and of the
Croſſe which the Church muſt beare. But firſt,
to beginne with all the Iewes muſt bee refuted,
which with a blinde wilfull boldneſſe contend that this Pſalme
muſt not bee vnderſtoode touching Chriſt, but touching Salomon.
And trulie the firſt refutation may bee taken from the limits
and long continuance of his Kingdome, touching whome
the Pſalme ſpeaketh: For he expreſly affirmeth in verſe 5. That
the limits or boundes of his kingdome extend from the riſing to the
ſetting of the Sunne, and this King ſhall rule and raigne verſe. 17.
in all poſterities without end. Becauſe therefore it appeareth ſufficiently
that neither Salomon nor any other King had euer anie
Kingdome ſo largely limited and bounded, and that all and euerie
kingdome in the worlde haue their fatall periods: Let vs

here then confeſſe it to be moſt euident, theſe things cannot bee
ſpoken of any other King, but of the promiſed Sauiour Chriſt
Jeſus. Of this Argument ſuch is the perſpicuity, that if the Iewes
woulde burſt themſelues with vaine contention therein, they
 cannot ſay ſo much as a word againſt it. The ſecond refutation
is taken from the ſtability of peace, touching which it is ſaide
in verſe 7. In his time ſhall the righteous flouriſh: yea and aboundance
of peace ſo long as the moone appeareth: And wee knowe
that the latter ende of King Salomns raigne was vnquiet and
troubleſome as the hiſtorie of the 1. lib. Regum cap. 11. maketh
mention: Therefore are the commentaries of the Iewiſh Rabines
far wide from the ſcope of this Pſalme. But leaſt I ſeeme
to be too long in a thing ſo manifeſt and plain, I will be content
with the teſtimonie of the Caldean tranſlation, which interpreteth
this Pſalme as touching the promiſed Sauiour, Chriſt Ieſus.
This ground of the matter being thus ordained, wee muſt
thenceforth ſeeke who is the ſauiour: for the Iewes looke for a
Guide and a reſtorer of their kingdome, ſuch a one as Hercules
or Cyrus, or Auguſtus.
                  The vayne dreames of the Iewes. And ſuch a one doth Mahomet beleeue
that Chriſt was; and ſo haue manie heretickes alwaies thought
and held opinion, as Somoſatenus▪ Neſtorius and others.
               And I feare that euen this philoſophie ſtirres vp great tumults
in the mindes of manie men at this day: But let the godlie ones
fully beleeue, wee muſt ſo eſteeme of God, euen as hee himſelfe
inſtructeth vs in his teſtimonies. Theſe do affirme that there is
not onely in Chriſt humaine nature, but alſo the verie diuine eſſence
of the ſonne of God, which Saint Iohn calleth, cap. 1. verſ.
1. The worde which is the image of the eternall father.
                  This Pſalme diſcerneth Chriſt the ſauior from all other ſouerainty for euer And that
for breuitie ſake I may omit other teſtimonies, certainlie this
Pſalme diſcerneth Chriſt from Moſes, and other great perſonages,
when he ſaith that the Sauiour ſhall liue for euer, and bee
alwayes prayed vnto and worſhipped, as in the 17. verſe. His
name ſhall remaine vnder the Sunne among the poſterities. which
ſhall bee bleſſed through him. Againe, verſe. 5. They ſhall feare
thee as long as the Sun and the Moone endureth, from one generation
to another. Laſt of all, verſe 12. All kings ſhall fall downe before

him: all nations ſhall do him ſeruice for euer. In these words
is his eternitie moſt euidently deſcribed: Before the Sunne: that
is, before the ſhining Sunne in the heauens was created, hee was
the Sonne of God For the Hebrew Text vſeth in this place a notable
worde, ſignifying doubtleſſe that the Sonne of God was
borne before anie Sunne ſhined in the worlde. Againe alſo it
affirmeth manifeſtlie, that this Sauiour muſt alwayes bee called
vpon, yea, when he is not ſeene with our eyes. He ſpeaketh not
here then of the geſtures of the bodies, which with reuerence is
vſed towards them, but by them towardes Chriſt; and hee ſpeaketh
generallie of all good mindes, which do craue of the ſame
our Sauiour Chriſt, that he would haue mercie vpon vs, and bee
our Mediator vnto his father, that he would forgiue vs our ſinnes,
giue vs his holie ſpirit and life euerlaſting, and bee our defender
and helper in the daungers of this life againſt the furies of the
Diuels, and the wicked ones in this worlde. Such a kind of prayer
yeeldeth rightlie omnipotencie vnto the Sauiour, and witneſſeth
that he is God. But y• indeed his kingdom is not a worldlie
policie, but ſpirituall and eternall. Theſe Arguments do confirme
the ſame. The benefite of the Sauiour pertaineth vnto the
vniuerſall Church, from the beginning of the world vnto the end
of the ſame. Now if the kingdome of Chriſt had bin politike, it
ſhould not haue brought anie profit or vtilitie vnto the Fathers
and Prophets which haue departed out of this life, before the cō
                  ming
of the Sauiour. Therefore nothing ſhoulde their prayers
and hope differ in this caſe from the dreame of the golden fiſh,
wherof the fiſher reioyced, as Theocritus reporteth, Adde herevnto
a moſt ample promiſe of the calling of the Gentiles, which
ſhould be vaine and ridiculous, if the Iewes onely ſhould carrie
all the ſtately port and beare rule, and the Gentiles bee brought
into bondage as their ſlaues. But of all others chieflie the ſayings
of the Prophets confirme this opinion which wee would attaine
vnto,The predictions of the prophets touching Chriſts ſuffering for mans ſaluation. becauſe they preach of the death and reſurrection of the
Sauiour. D
                        •
                     niel ſayeth plainlie, cap. 9. verſ. 26. Chriſt ſhall bee
ſlaine. And Iſayas ſayeth, cap. 35. 10. He ſhall lay downe his ſ
                        •
                     ule
for ſinne. Ergo, he ſhall not haue anie corporall rule or gouernment

in this life. Theſe and manie other ſuch like when we read,
may we doubt any thing, but that the Iewes and others (dreaming
of the kingdome of Chriſt to be politicall) are wrapped in
the greateſt error, and blinded in the ignoraunce of the greateſt
matters? Alſo manie were woont to aske of vs what were the benefites
of Chriſts kingdom: Touching this queſtion the Pſalme
maketh anſwere: That the Sauiour of the worlde ſhall not giue
riches and Countries, but Righteouſneſſe and Peace. But Righteouſneſſe
ſignifieth in this place Forgiuenes of ſinnes, and reconciliation
with God, or imputation vnto righteouſnes, or acceptation
vnto life euerlaſting: wherewith after our reſurrection
ſhall be ioyned full and perfect newneſſe inflamed with ſpirituall
motions, ſuch as the lawe of God requireth. This true righteouſnes
differeth infinitelie from diſcipline, which is onely a ſhadow
of outward workes, and a miſerable and vncleane hypocriſie,
Peace in this place may not bee vnderſtoode of a politike
peace, which is nothing but a vaine name, as Plato ſaith: but it
muſt be vnderſtood touching the true conſolation and tranquilitie
of mindes, which is the ouercommer of death. For true it is
which Chriſt our Sauiour ſaid: Iohn. 16. In the world you ſhal haue
affliction, but by me Peace. 33. Be ye of good courage, I have ouercome
the worlde, ibidem. Laſt of all let the ſayinges touching the
calling of the Gentiles, the worſhippings of the newe Teſtament,
and Croſſe of the Church, bee conſidered in this
Pſalme. For it interpreteth the promiſe deliuered vnto Abraham,
Gene. 22. 17. In thy ſeede ſhall all nations bee bleſſed. And it
witneſſeth that the worſhipping of God in the new Teſtament
ſhall not be circumciſion or Leuiticall ſacrifices, but praiers and
thankeſgiuings. As here in the 12. verſe, They ſhall praiſe him
for euer. He alſo addeth a particle wherein not obſcurely he ſignifieth
the Church ſhall bee ſubiect vnto the Croſſe: As in verſe
14. Precious (ſaith he) is the bloud of them in the Lords ſight. Let
theſe ſeeme to be ſufficiently ſpoken touching the Argument of
this 72. Pſalme: Now let vs heare the Prophet Dauid excellently
prophecying and preaching of Chriſt Ieſus the Sauior that was
and is to com
                     •
                  
                  ▪
               
            
            
               
                  
                  ❧ The Pſalme and Expoſition
thereof.
               
                  
                  Giue the king thy iudgements (O God:) and thy righteouſnes
vnto the kings ſonne.
                  
                     WHat maner of ſpeaker Thucidides was in his Drations,
ſuch a one is the Prophet Dauid in his
Pſalms: ſo plentifull hee is in copie of matters,The excellencie of Dauids art oratoricall in compiling in 4. poynts.
that the multitude of his wordes almoſt are ſupplied
with as manie ſentences. Furthermore, ſo apt and
ſtrict he is in wordes, that a man cannot tell whether the
things are with ſpéech, or the wordes with ſentences more
beautified. For I pray you conſider how many great matters
are included in one litle verſe. For first he teacheth what
a one God is, namelie a iust iudge, that is allowing things
well done, and diſallowing and deſtroying the contrarie. And
ſurely ſuch a God he is, according to the law: but indéede according
to the Goſpell, he is not onelie iuſt in accuſing of ſin,
but alſo he maketh vngodlie ones become iuſt. which are juſt
by faith in Chriſt, as it is ſaid, Rom. 
                           •
                        . Secondlie, he aduertiſeth
the Reader touching the myſterie of the Trinitie. For it
is the euerlaſting Father which deliuereth out of his power
into the hands of his Son, both iudgemeent & iuſtice. The ſon
receiueth the power deliuered vnto him from 
                        •
                     is fa
                        •
                     her, according
to that ſaying, Ioh. 5. 22. The Father iudgeth no man,
but hath giuen all iudgement vnto his Sonne, which wee muſt ſo
vnderſtand touching the firſt comming of Chriſt, that the father
iudgeth not alone, but by his ſonne hee iudgeth and
maketh his iudgement knowne: For by his Sonne hee
maketh his Goſpell knowen, preſerueth the miniſterie,

and giueth the holie Ghoſt. But touching his ſecond comming,The ſentence of Saint Auguſtine cited by Proſperus.
let vs hold faſt that notable ſaying of Auguſtine cited
by Proſperus, Senten. 337. Although the Father neuer departeth
from the ſonns, yet is it not ſaide that hee ſhall come to
iudge the quicke and the dead, but the ſonne ſhall iudge them,
becauſe there neither the deitie of the Father, nor of the ſonne
ſhall be ſéene, but that forme or likenes of the ſonne which he
hath vnited vnto him by the myſterie of his incarnation. The
ſame forme or likenes in him then ſhall be Iudge, which ſtood
before the Iudge; the ſame ſhall iudge which hath bin iudged,
that the wicked ones may beholde his glorie, againſt whoſe
clemencie they haue grudged. Such a Iudge therefore ſhall
he appeare, as he may bee ſeene both of them whom hee ſhall
crowne, and of them whom he ſhall condemne. But the Father
ſhall not then appeare, becauſe he tooke not vpon him the
ſhape of a ſeruant, but vnto his Sonne who was alſo made
Man, hath be giuen all power of iudgement. Thirdly, this firſt
verſe confirmeth the Reader to acknowledge Chriſt, not onelie
to be the ſon of Dauid after the fleſh, but alſo the verie ſon
of God. For God giueth not his glorie vnto anie other, as
Eſaias 42. ſaith. Seeing then he deliuereth vnto this Sauiour
both his iudgement and his iuſtice, we muſt no time doubt
but that the Sauiour is trulie, and by nature God. Fourthlie,
this verſe teacheth vs what are the benefities of this Sauiour;
for iudgement by the phraſe of the ſcripture ſignifieth
a remoouing of euill, and the placing of that which is good, and
righteouſnes is the following of vertue, the eſchuing of vice.
Therefore the benefites of this ſauiour, are Deliuerance from
ſinne, eternall death and tyrannie of the Diuell. the gathering of
the Church by the miniſterie of the Goſpell, the gift of the holie
Ghoſt,
                     Our excellent benefits by Chriſt our Sauiour, 
                     defence and preſeruation of the remnants of the Church
in this life, and finally the riſing of the godly ones from death vnto
life euerlaſting. You ſee then what a pithie and profound Orator
Dauid is here, and what great efficacie and value euerie
worde of his hath.
               
               
                  
                  
                  Then ſhall hee iudge the people according vnto right,
and defend the poore.
                  There is a diuerſe vſe of the worde iudgement,
                     A diuerſe vſe of the worde iudgement and in expounding,
to obſerue the ſame varietie it is profitable: ſomtime
it ſignifieth, The taking awaie of euill, as when it is
ſaide in the 119. Pſalme, part 12. verſe 1. I haue done iudgement
and iuſtice, that is, I haue eſchewed thinges forbidden,
and done thinges commanded: in other places it ſignifieth
Gouernement: So the gouernors of Gods people, are called
Iudges. Laſt of all, to let paſſe other ſignifications, it is
taken for mitigation of extreame law, as in Ierem. 10. Correct
me O Lorde in thy iudgement, not in thy wrath, leaſt I bee
brought vnto nothing: That is, mitigate the paines which I
haue deſerued. do not deale with me according to the exiremitie
of the law. This Grammaticall admonition if we
rightlie conſider, this ſecond verſe is eaſilie expounded: As
if he ſaid,Dauids verſe interpreted touching the firſt & ſecond comming of Chriſt the chiefe Iudge. I craue of God that he would ſende the promiſed
deliuerer, that hee would gouerne his people in his righteouſneſſe;
that is, in aboliſhing ſinne and death; that he would
reſtore vnto his church righteouſneſſe and life euerlaſting:
[And defend the poore] as if he ſaid, Hee will not deale extremelie
with ſuters, or poore in ſpirit, but he will take vpon
him to defend their cauſe, hee will maintaine them againſt
their accuſers, and hee will ſtrengthen them and ſtaie them
frée and diſcharged in iudgement: Hee will alſo repreſſe the
rage of the Deuill, Tyrants and fanaticall perſons: and he
will mitigate the thraldome of the bodies of his ſeruantes
captiued.
               
               
                  
                  The mountaines alſo ſhall bring peace, and the little
hils righteouſneſſe vnto the people.
                  The mountaines and little hilles are the churches or congregations
and their miniſters: Theſe bring peace in righteouſneſſe;

that is, they teach,The peaceable eſtate of the Chucrch. 
                     That being iuſtified by faith wee
haue peace with God: For, Who ſhall accuſe the Elect ones
of God? ſhall God, which iuſtifieth? who is it that ſhall condemne?
is it Chriſt, who died, yea and roſe againe, who ſitteth
at the right hand of God and maketh interceſſion for vs? And againe,
Iohn. 5. He that hath my word and bleeueth in him that
ſent me hath life euerlaſting, and commeth not into iudgement,
but goeth by death vnto life. For this righteouſnes and peace,
let vs giue ſo great thankes vnto God as the whole ſcope of
our liuelie hart can conceiue, and let vs eſchew all contrarie
opinions and religions which trouble this peace.
               
               
                  
                  He ſhall iudge the ſimple folke by their right, defend
the children of the needie, and puniſh the wrong doer.
                  Theſe are ſpeaches Correlatiues as the Logicians vſe
thus to ſaie.The maner of Chirſts kingdome governed by his iuſtice & iudgement. 
                     The king and his people, &c. Now then here bee
deſribeth the people of this king: and the deſecription agreeeth
with the ſaying of Sophonias 3. 12. I will leaue in the midſt
of thee a needy and poore congregation; yet truſting in the
name of the Lord. For the church liueth an exile in the world.
and in deede as S. Paule ſaith, 2. Cor.7. tryeth outwarde fightinges
and feeleth inwarde feares: Therefore both maner of
waies it is a congregation poore and néedefull, not onely because
it is deſtritute of humane helpes, but alſo becauſe it carieth
about in the heart ſorrowes and feares riſing from acknowledgement
of ſinne, and the wrath of God: but there is
a two fold kind of conſolation ſet downe; one as the Pſalme
affirmeth, The Sauiour ſhall heale the woundes of the hart
according to that ſaying, Matth. 11. 28. Come vnto me all ye
which labour and are laden, and I will refreſh you. The other in
that he threatneth puniſhmentes vnto backbiters, & ſlanderers,
which inflameth mindes of kinges and princes againſt
the Chruch. This concluſion ſith it is neceſſarie for the vniuersall
Chruch, euen then ſpeciallie is it ſo in the behalfe of
poore people and Orphanes, which are made open praies

for all backbiters and ſlaunderers.
               
               
                  
                  They ſhall feare thee as long as the Sunne and moone
endureth: from one generation to another.
                  To feare God by an vſuall phraſe of the ſcripture, ſignifieth
not onelie to feare the wrath and iudgement of God,How Chriſt the Sauiour is to be honored in his kingdom but
alſo in a ſort to ſerue or worſhip God: And the feare of God
ſignifieth all the worſhip done vnto God, or all the obedience
due vnto God. This verſe teacheth vs then that Christ the
ſauiour is not honoured with expences or outwarde pompe,
nor tragedies of captiues, but with duties by vs done, touching
which the lawe morall preacheth, and therewith affirmeth
that the Church ſhall not bee vtterlie deſtroied in this
world. This promiſe ought to bee acceptable vnto the godlie
ones, eſpeciallie when the turkiſh armies are within their
beholding; which practiſe no other thing but to deſtroie the
preaching of the goſpell, and ſcatter abroad the congregation
of Gods Church. And although ſome diſpute whether the
kingdome at Chriſt be euerlaſting, ſeeing Paule ſaith, 1. Cor.
15. 24. Then ſhall the ſonne deliuer the kingdome vnto the father:
Yet the kingdome of the ſonne without all doubting is
euerlaſting, becauſe in all eternitie, hée raigneth together
with the father and the holie ghoſt, and remaineth the heade
of the church: And whereas Paule ſaith, 1. Cor. 15. 24. That the
ſonne in the laſt day of the worlde ſhall deliuer the kingdome
vnto the father; let that be vnderſtoode thus: The ſonne shall
bring vnto the Father the Church gathered throughout all
mankinde, and then all the whole godhead ſhall be ſeene in
preſence and ſhall raigne, not by the miniſterie of the goſpel,
but immediatly or without anie meane. With this ſimple
vnderſtanding let vs be contented, leaſt we ſéeme to ſeeke to
be more wiſe then it behooueth vs.
               
               
                  
                  He ſhal come down like the raine into fleece of wool;
euen as the drops that water the earth.
                  
                     
There is no doubt but the prophet doth allude in this verſe
vnto the hiſtorie of Gedeon which is recited in lib. Iudicum. 6.The application of Daulds verſe, firſt to Gedeons, and ſecondly to Chriſt his victorie.
                     and 7. chapters. But other interpreters do applie this figure
taken out of the hiſtory of Gedeon, another waie: For ſome
doe refer it vnto the birth of the ſon of God borne of the virgne:
as the meaning might thus be, Chriſt like vnto the deaw
of heauen was conceiued by the holy ghoſt in the wombe of the
virgin Mary, without all ſpot of ſinne. This interpretation,
though I reiect not, ſéeing it agréeth with the analogy or rule
of faith: yet I do more allowe the application thereof vnto
the kingdome of Chriſt: For like as graſſe reuiueth and refreſheth
his colour when the deawe falleth vpon it; ſo our
hearts, when we heare the preaching of the goſpell conceiue
new comfort, which is the beginning and taſte of life euerlasting.
Againe alſo, that similitude maie well bee conſidered
herein which in the ſame hiſtorie is ſet downe: Before Chriſt
was borne the ſinagogue was a fleece of wool wet with heauenlie
dewe: Now the drie lande, that is, the Gentiles are watered
with this dewe. What ſhall I ſaie of the wonderfull and almoſt
incredible victorie of Gedeon? vnto whom Eſayas in the
9. chapter compareth the triumph of Chriſt: For as Gedeon
leaueth forth a ſlender hoaſt againſt the huge multitude
of his enemies, and yet by God obtained the victorie: ſo
wee wretched and weake ſoules following the gouernement
and good guide of the ſonne of God our Captaine Chriſt, in
the onelie preaching of the goſpell which we profeſſe, and with
the ſparke of faith ſhining in miſeries, doc ouercome moſt
mightie enemies. viz. ſinne, death, and the deuill. But this figure
verie well and excellentlie doth Doct. Martin Luther ſet
forth in his expoſition vppon the ninth chapter of Eſay: Hee
therefore that will may read thereof in that place.
               
               
                  
                  In his time ſhall the righteous flouriſh: yea and abundance
of peace ſo long as the moone endureth.
                  He repeateth a ſermon as it were of the effects of Christs

kingdome,Righteouſnes and peace two effects of chriſt his kingdome, namelie righteouſneſſe and peace: In the Church
ſhall both righteouſneſſes flouriſh: the one of Faith, whereby
the perſon is accepted and pleaſing vnto God, fréely for the
Mediators ſake. The other of a good conſcience, touching which
let vs hold faſt that moſt ſwéete ſaying of Nazianzen. Nihil
exhilarat nos ita vt conſcientia pura & ſpes bona. Nothing ſo
much reioyceth vs as a pure conſcience, and a good hope. And
where hee ſaith, (abundance of peace. &c.) that is tranquilitie
of the heart riſing from faith, hope, and a good conſcience.
                  Nowe conſider what a thing it is not to be pluckt away
from God, and to be able to haue acceſſe vnto God, to call vpon
him, craue and looke for helpe of him, as in the 1. Epiſt. 3.
cap. and 20. verſ. of ſaint Iohn. it is ſaid, If our heart condemne
vs not, then haue we boldness towardes God. But the particle
touching the eternitie of peace muſt not be at a bluſh, as wee
ſay, but throughlie looked vpon. For it containeth moſt ſweet
conſolation, which Iſayas expreſſeth, cap. 54 ver. 10. in theſe
wordes, The hilles ſhall be mooued, and the little hilles ſhall
tremble, but my mercie ſhall not depart from thee, neither ſhall
the couenant of my peace fall away, ſaith thy mercifull Lorde:
That is, though down-falles of kingdomes ſhall ſhake and
terrifie the Church verie ſore, yet my couenant that I haue
made with my Church ſhall be firme, for euer ratified and
vnmooueable. Let vs be quietlie contented with this league or
couenant. yea though the whole world fruſhed togither fall
downe about vs.
               
               
                  
                  His dominion alſo ſhall bee from the one ſea to the other:
and from the flood vnto the worlds end,A great difference between the bounds of Chriſts kingdom, and the kingdoms of earthly Princes, namely iſ ſixe points
                  
                  The kings of Babylon and Perſia held in their power verie
rich kingdoms: but theſe kingdoms were included within
the limits of Aſia; Alexander the great ioined ſome part of
Europe vnto the Empire of Aſia: The Romane Empire greateſt
of all others, was extended no further then Euphrate: Finally,
no gouernment in ye whole world was contained in the

proper iuriſdiction: wherefore ſeeing Chriſtes kingdome is
comprehended within the ſame boundes wherein the whole
world is comprehended, doubtles we muſt confeſſe that this
kingdome is not a worldlie Empire, like as the Iewes do
dream. But peraduenture ſome man would ask what maner
of kingdom, the kingdom of Chriſt is? There is nothing that
we may so eaſily expresse. The kingdome of the Chriſt in this life;
is to kéepe and reſtore the miniſterie of the Gospell: alſo to
gather and reuiue the Church with his worde and holie ſpirit
giuen, and to protect her wonderfullie againſt the diuels and
tyrants, & after this life to raiſe her members vp from death
to life, and bring them to his eternall Father. Out of this description
maie be taken the difference of Chriſtes kingdome
and a politike kingdome. Alſo they differ in obiects, in benefites,
in forme of gouernment, glorie, defences, and stabilitie:
for, firſt the politike power gouerneth the part which is moueable,
and brideleth the externall members, that they may remaine
within their duties: but the kingdome of Christ not
onelie gouerneth externall manners, but reprehendeth and
healeth the hearts, as in Iſay, 61. ver. 1. To binde vp the broken
hearted. Secondlie, the chiefe benefits of politike power
are discipline and peace of bodies: but the ſpirituall and eternall
benefits of this kingdome, are righteouſneſſe and peace
of conſcience before God. Thirdlie, they differ in forme gouernment:
for other kings and princes chuſe fit miniſters to
beare authoritie in the Common-wealth, endued with wiſedome
and eloquence: but Chriſt chooſeth the fooliſh things of
this world to confound the wiſedome of the wiſe: or as the 8,
Pſalme, ver. 2. ſaieth. Out of the mouth of verie babes and ſucklings,
he hath made perfect his kingdome. Moreouer they differ
in forme of execution, as in defence, and punishments: for
the politike power defendeth his ſubiects with weapons, and
puniſheth diſobedient persons with corporall force, or with
the ſworde: but Chriſt by the preaching of the Goſpell giueth
euerlaſting benefits, remiſſion of ſinnes, the holie Ghoſt, and
life euerlaſting, and puniſheth diſobedient persons, not with

corporall force, but with his worde, namelie lawfull excommunication.
Fourthlie, they differ in glorie: for the glorie of
gouernments is in the excellencie of counſell in ciuill or
peaceable gouernment, and in valiancie and good successe in
warre: but the proper glorie of the Church in this life is, true
knowledge of God, prayer, profeſſion of the true doctrine,
and perpetuall preſeruation of the Church, although ſhee bee
perſecuted in ſome members. The greatnes of minds in ouercomming
or vanquiſhing all inticements and terrifying
torments of the wicked, the ornament of manie vertues
wherein the preſence of God is perceiued and ſeene. Fiftlie,
the defences of a politike kingdome are hoaſts of men, and riches
neceſſarie in charges of domeſticall affaires & to maintaine
warres abroad: but the Church is not defended with
viſible helpes, but is gouerned by the ſonne of God, and hath
the Angels her ſuper intendents or watchmen. Laſtlie, they
differ in ſtabilitie: for all politike gouernements haue their
end and limit of time: but of this kingdome there shall bee
none end, becauſe the king in eternall, and he giueth vnto his
people eternall life, which is here begun, and shall be accomplished
after the reſurrection. These things muſt bee often recited
touching the difference betweene Chriſts kingdome, and
politike kingdomes: not onelie to refuſe the Iewes, but euen
to inſtruct vs alſo, leaſt the conſolation & inuocation vpon
the Sonne of God, and our exerciſes of faith be obſcured
or darkened with politike imaginations. For the eyes being
bent vpon politike benefits (when they are once gon) do think
that the church is but a caſtaway from god. This imagination
muſt we refuſe, and ſtedfaſtlie, beleeue, that true beléeuers are
not therfore, caſt away from the ſonne of God, no though they
be in the middes of punishments or torments: for as ſaint
Paule ſaith, We ſtand, and reioyce vnder the hope of the glorie of
God not onelie, but alſo We reioyce in tribulations, &c. Rom. 5.
verſes, 2. & 3.
               
               
                  
                  They that dwell in the wildernes, ſhall kneele before

him: his enemies ſhall licke the duſt.
                  
                  The kings of Tharſhis and of the Iſles ſhall bring preſents:
the kings of Arabia and Saba ſhall bring gifts.
                  
                  All kings ſhall fall downe before him: all nations ſhall
do him ſeruice.
                  He amplifieth the maieſtie of Chriſts kingdome: the inhabitants
of the wildernes (ſaith he) ſhall not onelie be petitioners
vnto this king, but euen they alſo which dwell in faire
and ſumptuous houſes, which are garnishcd with coſtly works
and pictures: and neither ſhall his friends but euen his enemies
also humble themſelues and fall down before this Lord.
What shall I say of the kings which ſhall be nurſing fathers
of Christs kingdome:Of kings and Queenes, the nurſing fathers and mothers of the Church from the beginning. for in all ages from the firſt beginning
of mankind there haue béene, are, & ſhalbe ſome magiſtrates
choſen of God vnto euerlaſting ſaluation, and called vnto the
ſocietie of the true Church, as Nebuchadnezar, and Euilmerodach
in the kingdome of Babylon, Darius Medus, Cyrus, and
Artaxerxes with the long, hande ſo called, in the kingdome of
Perſia: and Conſtantine, Valentinian, Theodoſius, Charles the
great, and certeine other in the Empire of Rome. For as in
that saying, 3. Mat. 5. ver. All Iurie went out vnto Iohn Baptiſt,
is the figure Synecdoche, (i. part for the whole) ſo in this verſe
[All kings ſhall fall downe before him] the vniuerſall particle
muſt be reſtrained. For it both not ſignifie that all kings ſhal
become the friends of Chriſt, but ſome cut of all kingdomes.
Now sée I pray you, howe great a glorie it may bee, that not
onlie obſcure and baſe perſons ſhall embraſe the preaching of
the Gospel, but euen mightie kings and Monarches: Alſo vnto
thoſe kings which are conuerted to Chriſt ſhall nothing be
attributed more glorious, then that they are reputed & called
citizens and members of the true Church of Chriſt.
               
               
                  
                  For he ſhall deliuer the poore when he crieth: the needy
alſo and him that hath no helper.
                  
                  He ſhal bee fauourable to the ſimple and needie: and
ſhall preſerue the ſoules of the poore.
                  
                  
                  He ſhall deliuer their ſoules from falſhood and wrong: &
deare ſhall their bloud be in his ſight.
                  This is a moſt ſwéet and delectable reason of the former next
verſes: As if he ſaid, therefore ſhall they fall down and worſhip
him, becauſe he helpeth them that call vpon him, when they are
forſaken of earthlie creatures. This ſentence is greatlie ſet
forth in the example of our firſt parents. Adam and Eua after
their fall could neither be helped by Angels,The great mercie of God in ſending his ſon Chriſt to deliuer the diſtreſſed. their own deuiſes,
nor yet by anie other creature: Here commeth Chriſt the ſonne
of God from his ſecret ſeat, receiueth offenders into fauour,
and giueth them life. So afterwards followed innumerable
eramples of this Lordes benefits beſides and without ſecond
causes: as when he preſerued Noah in the deluge: when he ſaued
Ioſeph whom his brethren would haue ſlain: when he made
an open waie for the people of Iſraell to paſſe through the red
ſea: and afterwards performed manie benefits vnto them beſides
and without all ſecond cauſes or meanes. Like as he defended
Dauid againſt Golias, and others: as he ſaued the 3. men
in the burning ouen: Daniell amongſt the Lions, and Ionas in
the whales belly: And al men which call vpon God, may declare
and speak of some deliuerances which they haue had; when they
haue béene manifeſtlie preſerued beſides and without ſecond
cauſes. Furthermore, whereas the church is for moſt part rent
in péeces with diſcords of opinions and féeleth the crueltie of tyrants;
this pſalme promiſeth her deliuerance from the wicked
craft of hereticks,The application of the fable touching the viper and the palme. and violence of Nero, Diocleſian and ſuch like
tyrants. But truly when I thinke vpon this verſe the fable of
the Viper and the palme commeth into my minde: For like
as the viper is with the palme leaues nourished, and with the
ſame againe deſtroyed: ſo Heretikes abuſing the ſcripture are
refuted by the teſtimonies of ſcripture rightly conferred: as although
Samoſatenus corrupteth the firſt chapter of S. Iohns goſpel;
yet in the courſe of the ſame ſermon & conference of other
teſtimonies he may be euidently refuted or conuinced. But as
vnto Tyrants appertaineth this Pſalme in this place doth notably
comfort vs; He ſhall deliuer their ſoules from falſhoode and
wrong, &c. That is, he ſhall inflame their hearts with ioy and
gladnes the vanquiſher of death, and ſhall giue them life euerlaſting,

according to that ſaying, Iohn. 10. 28. I giue vnto them
euerlaſting life. And their blood ſhall be precious, becauſe tyrants
ſhall ſuffer great & iuſt torments for their crueltie vſed againſt
the godlie ones: and partlie becauſe by this teſtimonie of their
death the truth of Chriſts doctrine is ſealed and confirmed. But
inaſmuch as elſewhere I haue often ſpoken touching the puniſhments
for tyrants, and the ſufferings of Martyrs, nowe
I willinglie omit the recitall of them in this place.
               
               
                  
                  He ſhal liue, and vnto him ſhall be giuen of the golde of
Arabia: prayers ſhall be euermade vnto him, and daylie
ſhall he be praiſed.
                  We do remember that D. Martin Luther oftentimes ſaid:
In the olde Teſtament there is a notable witnes of the GodheadTouching the eternail godhead of Chriſt, and the royaltie of his euerlaſting kingdome.
of the Sauiour promiſed; which affirmeth that he was called
vpon, & by this propertie the ſame ſauiour is there diſcerned
from other Prophets. That moſt graue witnes was by
ſome complained to be obſcured & weakned by tranſlating the
ſame inuocation vnto other men. And for that one cauſe (ſaide
he) the cuſtome of praying vnto others was to bee disallowed.
But where the Prophet Dauid affirmeth here, that this Sauiour
ſhall liue, &c. Let that be vnderſtoode in that meaning touching
which Chriſt ſaith, Iohn, 14. 19. I liue, and you ſhall liue. That is,
like as I of mine owne power do liue, ſéeing that I am conſubſtantiall
with the father, and ſecond perſon in deitie: ſo by
my merit, and through my effectuall working you ſhall liue alſo:
for I in dying haue deſtroied death, and in riſing againe
haue reſtored life, as in the old godly verſe the Church ſo ſingeth:
Yea I will raiſe vp againe your bodies from death, and
theſe euen counited with your ſoules, I will adorne with gifts
agréeable vnto the ſtate of life euerlaſting.
               
               
                  
                  There ſhall bee an heape of corne vpon the earth, high
vpon the hilles: his fruit ſhall ſhake like Libanus, and ſhal
be greene in the citie like graſſe vpon the earth.
                  He compareth the fruitfulneſſe of
the Church or kingdome
of Chriſt vnto the moſt lightſom flouriſhing corne,The floriſhing ſtate of the Church with puritie of doctrine & cōcord of the Church. which is anſwerable
to the huſbandmans praier and expectation. For as
the thicke growing corne delighteth the beholders: ſo there is
no ſight more pleaſant then to ſee the flouriſhing Churches,
wherein vnto the puritie of doctrine preached, the concorde of

the teachers is adioined or annexed. There is a great force in
the Nowne Bar: which ſignifieth moſt pure wheate: as if hee
ſhould ſay; In the Church of Chriſt ſhall not beare ſway anie
vaine chaffe of humne traditions, which haue no iuice in them:
but wheat ſhall flouriſh, which with the body of man hath great
affinitie: for euē as of liuely wheat, the beſt blood is increaſed: ſo
the Goſpel deliuered without corruption, bringeth to the godly
ones firme conſolation.
               
               
                  
                  His name ſhall endure for euer, his name ſhall remaine
vnder the Sun among the poſterities, which ſhal be bleſſed
through him: and all the heathen ſhall praiſe him.
                  This verſe gliſtereth moſt clearelie like a notable precious
ſtone throughout the whole Pſalme;The euerlaſting renowme of Chriſt, God and man eternal king of the faithfull, and their euerlaſting bleſſednes in and by him. for it teacheth the reader
touching the divine nature and benefits of the ſauior, and touching
the calling of the Gentils. It cleerelie affirmeth that this
lord hath alwaies bin, as he himſelfe ſaith. Iohn. 8. 5. 8. Before
Abraham was I am. And he vſeth the word (Linnon) the generation
of the ſon from the father eternall. And therefore Micheas
ſaith, 1, Mic. 3. This our deliuerer went forth before the daies of the
world: That is, hee was the sonne of God before he tooke vpon
him nature of man. Let vs beleeue therefore being confirmed
with theſe & like teſtimonies, that the Sauiour is God indeed,
and by nature the ſon of God, light of light, as in the Creed it is
ſaid. But although there be manie deſcriptions which teach why
and for what cauſe the ſon was ſent: yet the effect of the matter
is brieflie in the worde [Bleſſed] ſignified. And for that by the
wanting of any thing, the ſame may bee better eſtéemed which
we haue, as by darknes light, let vs ſee what the curſe is. All
mankind after our firſt fall was ouerthrowne with the curſe of
the law: that is, of gods wrath, & of euerlaſting death by reaſon
of ſin: as Paule ſaith, Epheſ. 2, ver. 3. We were by nature the children
of wrath, euen as others were. This curſe when no creature
could take away or blot out, the ſonne of God tooke vpon himſelfe,
both the wrath of God and our puniſhments, that his father
might be at peace with vs. So Paule Gal. 3. 8. interpreteth
the promiſe giuen to Abraham: In thy ſeed ſhal al the Gentiles be
bleſſed. Chriſt became accurſed for vs, and redeemed vs from the
curſe, that we might obtaine the bleſſing of Abraham, Laſt of all
let the particle be conſidered touching the calling of the Gentiles.

in this verſe, The poſterities ſhall be bleſſed in him, and all
the heathen ſhall praiſe him. For the calling of Gentiles is a
notable teſtimonie of Paules affirmattion, wherein it is ſaide,
Rō 5. 15. Grace oueraboundeth aboue ſin: for no man can without
ſome humbling of his mind read the examples of miſchief
ſtriuing with the firſt and ſecond table, wherein the Ethnickes
wickedlie and filthily with great raſhnes and impudencie are
defiled Let vs therefore giue God thankes that hee receiueth
ſuch caſtawayes into ſauour, and coopteth them into the ſocietie
of Chriſts kingdome.
               
               
                  
                  Bleſſed be the Lord God, euen the God of Iſrael, which
onely doth wonderous things.
                  
                  And bleſſed be the name of his maieſtie for euer: and al the
earth ſhall be filled with his maieſtie, Amen, Amen.
                  It liketh me well in this place to ſet downe the words of D. Luther,
                     The myracle of myracles in the Meſſias Chriſt, God & man, king immortall.
expounding the 7. ca. of the prophet Mic: Like as the deliuerance
in the new teſtament is by many waies greater and
more excellēt then that which was out of Egypt: ſo are the new
miracles by infinite meanes farre greater then the olde: for
what might be more wonderfully ſaid, then that ſon of God
take upon him nature of man, and was borne of a virgin?
What is more to be amazed at, then when the ſon of god wraſtling,
with death and Sathan, ſuffered himſelfe to be ouercome,
laieth downe his life before theſe enemies, and while he is ouercome,
conquereth? So a ſpeciall miracle it is, that Chriſt, dying
like a man vpon the croſſe, did the third day riſe againe from
death and (out of the graue cloſed vp) after this with immortall
fleſh aſcended vnto heauen, and ſitteth at the right hand of
God: what may be like notablie ſaid, yea or thought
of any other miracles in reſpect of theſe? Therefore
belſſed be God, who onelie doth
theſe and other myracles.
So be it.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
         Here end the prayers of Dauid the
ſonne of Iſhai.
            
         
      
   