
      
         
            
            A THIRD PROCEEDING IN THE HARMONIE OF KING DAVIDS HARP: That is to ſay, A godly and learned Expoſition vpon 17. Pſalmes moe of the Princely Prophet DAVID, beginning with the 45. and ending with the 61. Pſalme: Done in Latine by the learned Reuerend Doctor VICTORINVS STRIGELIVS, Profeſſor of Diuinitie in the Vniuerſitie of Lypſia in Germanie, Anno Chriſti, 1562.
            
               Tranſlated into English, by RICHARD ROBINSON Citizen of London. An. Chriſti, 1595.
            
               Seene, peruſed, and allowed.
            
            
               Iudith, cap. 16. verſ. 2.
               Begin vnto my God with tymbrels; Sing to my Lord with cymbals; Tune vnto him a Pſalme; exalt his prayſe, and call vpon his name.
            
            AT LONDON, Printed by Valentine Sims. Anno Dom. 1595.
         
         
            
            
               
                  SEMPER EADEM.
               
            
            Gallia victa dedit Flores, Inuicta Leones
            Anglia; Ius belli, in Flore, Leone ſuum:
            O ſic, ô ſemper ferat ELIZABETHA triumphos,
            Inclita Gallorum Flore, Leone ſuo.
         
         
            Briefe contents of the ſaid xvij. Pſalmes in this Booke expounded.
            
               Of Doctrine as Pſalme 45. 49, 50.
               Of Doctrine, and prophecie 47
               Of Prayer, as Pſalme 51, 54, 55, 56, 57, & 59.
               Of Conſolation, as Pſalme 58.
               Of Victories or Triumphs. 46, & 48.
               Of Dauids inuectiue to the detection of Doeg. 52.
               Of Slander conuinced,
               Of Truth aduanced 53
               Of Humiliation & exaltation 60
               Of Prayer and thankeſ giuing. 61
            
            
               Humilium Deus Auxilium.
               
                  Iudith 9. verſ. 
                        ••
                     
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            To the right high and mightie Princeſſe, moſt gracious QVEENE, and Elect nurſing Mother of Gods Iſrael, ELIZABETH by the grace of God, Queene of England, France and Ireland, defender of the faith: and (next vnder God) of the Churches of England and Ireland, on earth the Supreme head and Goueruour.
            Your Maieſties moſt humble and loyall ſubiect R. R. prayeth vnto God to graunt your Highneſſe a long, gracious and bleſſed raigne ouer vs, to the aduancement of Chriſts euerlaſting kingdome, the comfort of the faithfull, and either to the conuerſion, or ſubuerſion of all inward and outward enemies to the ſame: by and through Ieſus Chriſt our Lord and Sauiour Euerlaſting.
            
               MOST Chriſtian Princeſſe, moſt Gracious QVEENE, and my moſt ſacred Souereigne Lady; if Cicero the moſt learned eloquent Oratour, being deſired to ſay his minde in matters of importance, anſwered, (excuſing himſelfe) that he had read nothing the day before: and if the Centurion a man of valour and authoritie diſabled himſelfe asMatth. 8. 8. one vnworthy to receiue Chriſt the King of kings vnder his roofe: much more may I being long ſince a ſimple poore ſcholler from ſeuen to fourteene yeeres of age enfranchiſed in a free Grammar ſchole, (whereof was Founder and Patrone that learned worthie ſubiect M. Iohn Magnus, an officer of good accompt to the moſt noble King Henry the eight, your Maieſties

deare father of bleſſed memorie) after that other ſeuen yeeres diſcontinuing from the ſame in this franchiſed Citie of London, and for theſe 31. yeeres here labouring (as God vouchſafed me ability) to renewe and increaſe my poore and ſimple talent, not yet atteining to perfection of learning, nor maintenance of liuing; much more, I ſay, may I ſeeme ſo ſimple a ſcholler to excuſe my ſelfe as altogether inſufficient to preſent or preferre my mind, or any my ſo ſlender labors vnto your ſo learned and excellent Maieſtie. And much more may I ſeeme to diſable my ſelfe (a ſubiect of ſuch inferiour eſtate) as vnworthie to craue or receiue for protection of my vndeſeruing induſtry, the gracious fauor of ſo ſacred a QVEENE, the peereleſſe Peragon of all earthly Princes at this day. But becauſe (as Christ the God of Gods, and Kings of kings onely knoweth, whoſe image and authoritie ſhineth in your roiall Maieſty, and in whom and for whom according to all duty I honor your moſt excellent Highneſſe) I come not with Cicero, vttering eloquence plauſible to any Romane Caeſar, nor with Demoſthenes to admire at prophane King Philip the ſon of Amyntas, but (by your ſacred Maieſties moſt Gracious pardon, and godly Princely fauour, here with all ſubmiſſion, craued) I come dutifully addreſſing, dedicating, and preſenting this my poore vnpoliſhed trauell, and tranſlation of theſe fewe Pſalmes mo into Engliſh: yeelding them alſo for a deuoted pledge of my loyal duetie and duetifull allegeance vnto your moſt excellent Maieſtie, as to the elect nurſing mother of Chriſtes Apoſtolicke Church, a Royall foſterer of the right, true, and Euangelicall faith, and a magnificent defender of the true Chriſtian profeſſors of the ſame, Euen ſo, (my moſt

Gracious, Natural, and dread ſouereigne Lady) in all loyall and dutifull obedience, I humbly craue and beſeech your moſt excellent Highneſſe, albeit with aged Barzillai I haue herein brought my imperfect2. Sam. 19. 35. ſence and ſkill in this muſicall melodie and heauenly harmonie of the Harp ſounding in King Dauids Court. And though I ſerue in here at the Bridegromes feaſt (where Chriſt our Sauiour is preſent) meare water with cleare wine, that it would pleaſe your moſt gracious Maieſtie,Iohn 2. 7. of your ſacred cenſure and Princely beneuolence to conceiue and receiue in good part my true intent, dutifull zeale, and painfull poore trauell herein: euen as our Sauiour Christ couceiued and receiued The
               Iohn 5. 9. 
               petition of that perſon 38. yeeres grieued with a diſeaſe, and in his mercie cured him. Alſo, As one awaking vp last of al,
               Ecclus 33. 
               gathering after others in the vintage, &c. And finally, as
               Iohn 2. 10. 
               the Lord Ieſus accepted in good part the ſeruitors beſt wine kept vntill the laſt ſeruice. Which my preſent poore trauell, as I beſeech the onely Almightie, true & eternall God to frame adapt and coapt to the perpetuall aduancement of his glorious name and euerlaſting kingdome: So I humbly craue and heartily beſeech his diuine Maieſtie, long, graciouſly, victoriouſly and bleſſedly to protect and prolong the dayes of your Royal Maieſties reigne ouer vs, to defend you kingdome and true ſubiects, with the happie increaſe of your faithfull friends, either to the ſpeedy conuerſion or vtter ſubuerſion of all inward and outward enemies to the premiſes, by and through Christ Ieſus our Lord and Sauior euerlaſting. Amen. Sept. 29.
            
               Your Maieſties moſt humble and obedient poore ſubiect
Richard Robinſon
               
            
         
         
            
            
               ❧ 
               To the curteous Reader.
            
            THis booke hath many and great recommendations; The text is warranted by God himſelfe; The pen is king Dauids, as great a Prophet as a Prince. The origiuall Latine Commentarie made by a man of great learning and iudgement, Victorinus Strigellius, in the Vniuerſitie of Lypſia in Germanie, which you ſee; what accompt is to be made of M. Robinſons great paines in the tranſlating of ſuch a worke ſo well warranted, and thereby of moſt aſſured profit to the Chriſtian and aduiſed Reader.
            
               Richard Mulsaſter.
            
         
         
            CAn I declare, or any els,
            what they deſerue to haue,
            That labour much, and paines doe take,
            mens ſoules to feede and ſaue?
            But whatſoeuer is their hire,
            at mans vnthankefull hand,
            They ſhalbe ſure for to enioy,
            at length the quiet land.
            Which God wil giue vnto eche one,
            that vertue doth attend.
            And alſo here it ſhall appeare,
            that he will be their friend.
            Worke on therefore ô Robinſon,
            ceaſe not thy skill to ſhowe.
            For well it will be with the good,
            when wicked are in woe.
            Tho. Buckminſter.
         
      
      
         
            
            PSAL. XLV. Eructauit cor meum
            
            
               
                  
                     ¶To him that excelleth on
                        This was a certaine tune or an inſtrument. 
                        Shoſhannim, a Song of loue to giue inſtruction: committed to the ſonnes of Korah.
                     
                  
               
               The Title.
               
                  TO him that ouercommeth, a learned ſong touching Roſes, ful of loue: ſung by the ſonnes of Chora.
                  
               
               
                  IN this title, we muſt firſt ſpeake of the Author, next of the kindThree things handled in the title. of ſong, and laſtly of the Subiect, as they call it: The Authors of this moſt ſweete ſong were the ſonnes of Chora, whoſe father (with the opening of the earth beeing ſwallowed vp) died ſo wretchedly, as the 16. Chapter of the booke of Numbers mentioneth. But as in puniſhing the father, Gods wrath appeared againſt thoſe heinous offences, ſo in the giftes of his children is manifeſted an example of Gods mercy which muſt be referred

vnto Ezechiels ſermon in his 18. Chapter, The1 The Author of the Pſalme. ſonne ſhall not beare the iniquity of the father 
                     •
                  er. 20. For, that the poſterity of Chora was indued and adorned with excellent giftes of the holy ghoſt, and eſpecially with the gifts of propheſie, the Pſalmes do wel witnes, which are intituled to the ſonnes of Chora Very wel then touching this progeny prophetical may that be ſaid, which Prometheus (as AEſchilus reciteth) ſpeaketh of his deliuerer. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   Inuiſi patris hoc mihi dulce eſt pignus. In engliſh, A ſweet pledge is this truly of my father hated before me.
               
               
                  And the kind of ſong is 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   a ſong of mirth,2 The kind of ſong. iolity & loue, or it is 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   a mariage ſong, wherin the holy Ghoſt is a maker vp of the marriage betweene Chriſt and his Church: For in this kind of matter here is handled an vſuall commendation of the Bridgrome, ſpouſe, or husband, which is borrowed from the excellency of his wiſedome and vertue, yea, from the ſweetnes of his humanity, from his eloquence, his riches, dignity or comelineſſe of perſonage, or other thinges which are 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   the leading cauſes of loue. For euery loue is ſtirred vp by manifeſtation of ſome good thing giuen.
               But, why is mention made of Roſes? Roſes doe miniſter matter of ioy and gladnes in garlandes made at marriages: therefore they betoken the celebrating of3 The ſubiect of the matter. marriages with ioy, and that ſweet ſurpaſsing ſauour of the heauenly doctrine which doth chiefly make vp or accompliſh this marriage: for with the word, as with a ſweete ſmelling Roſe the mutuall loue betweene Chriſt & his church is confirmed. And certes let theſe

ſeeme to be ſufficiently enough ſpoken touching the Title, novve let vs come to the Argument of the Pſalme.
            
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               
                  THoſe things which are ſaid in this Song,
                  The argument borrowed of a compariſon of Mariage, and betweene Chriſt and his Church. as touching the Bridegrome and the Bride, the Spouſe, and his Spouſeſſe, the Husband and the Wife, doe properly appertaine vnto the Meſsias and vnto the true Church: This ground of purpoſe in the Pſalme, S. Paules epiſtle to the Hebrews, cap, I. doth not only confirme, but the confeſsion of the Rabines alſo: For the better learned and ſounder ſort of the Rabines, (being vtterly vanquiſhed with the circumſtance of the phraſe and compariſon of the partes thereof) doe confeſſe indeed, that this Pſalme was written as touching the Meſsias. Now then this ground of purpoſe in the Pſalme being thus confirmed (that it ſpeaketh expreſly of the Meſsias and of the true Church) let vs compare, if it pleaſe you, the Mariage togither with the league that is betweene Chriſt and his Church: for there are fiue ſpeciall properties or tokens of ſincere Matrimony: namely, the firſt, mutuall loue: theFiue ſpeciall ſignes of ſincere matrimony. ſecond faith: the third ſociety or partaking in weale and in woe: the fourth procreation of iſſue: and the fift defence from the husband to the wife. And firſt of all indeede, the loue of man and wife ought to be feruent, without diſsimulation and compulſion, ſincere without ſuſpitions, and finally, ſweetely delightfull without bitternesThe firſt mutuall loue betweene the husband and the wife. and diſdaine. That ſuch kind of loue was in the ſonne of God, towards his ſpouſes the church, his taking of humane nature vpon him doth well witnes: for, ſeeing by that ſecret and marueilous league he ioyned vnto himſelfe this nature, let vs moſt firmely beleeue, that in Chriſt there is not a fained, but a true and feruent loue

towards vs: and here hath that ſentence of the poet Theocritus his effect:

                     Quae minime ſunt pulchra, ea pulchra videntur amanti.
                  
                  
                     Thoſe things indeed which baſe doe ſeeme,
                     The louer beautifull doth deeme.
                  
               
               For although the Church by reaſon of perſecution is the more deformed, and alſo in that ſhe carrieth about her the remnants of ſinne; yet is ſhee vnfainedly loued of Christ, as this Pſalme ſaith, ver. 12. So ſhal the king haue pleaſure in thy beuty. Secondly commeth faith in place,The ſecond▪ Faith vnited of the one to the other. 
                  Chriſt loueth the Church onely embracing the gofpell, he loueth none other ſects, either Mahometicall or Hereticall: ſo againe, the Church acknowledgeth onely Chriſt for her Mediator, and embraceth his doctrine only, and will not be an harlot, ſhe polluteth not her ſelfe with the opinions and worſhippings which other ſectes doeThe third. Conſociation or partaking of weale and woe. vſe. Thirdly, there is ordained a Society or partaking of them both in weale and wo: Chriſt beſtoweth his benefits, righteouſnes, and life vpon his church, & returneth vnto himſelfe the calamities of the church, and was made a ſacrifice for our ſinnes; ſo againe the Church beſtoweth her benefits vpon her husbande, namely her confeſsion wherewith ſhee worſhippeth & honoureth her husband, and becommeth a partaker of the croſſe of her husband: and like as touching matrimoniall fidelity this Pſalme ſaith in the 11. ver. Harken O daughter and conſider, encline thineeares: forget alſo thine owne people and thy fathers houſe; euen ſo, touching ſociety or partaking of proſperity and aduerſity theſe verſes doe make mention. ver. 14. The kings daughter is all glorious within, &c. alſo in the 9 ver. All thy garments ſmell of Myrh Aloes and Caſsia out of the Iuery pallaces, whereby they haue made thee glad▪
                   For although theſe ſmels or ſauours▪
                  
are pertinent vnto the royal eſtate of any king or Queene, yet rightly doe they ſignifie the afflictions, which Chriſt and his Church do ſuffer. Fourthly, there is a generation or ofſpring in the Church, ſo as Chriſt giuethThe fourth. Generation or procreation of Iſſen. his word and holy ſpirit, wherby daily new members are borne in the Church, but this comes to paſſe by the miniſtery of the goſpell in the church, as it were a mother nouriſhing and bringing vp her child: vnto this property of loue, let that litle verſe be referred ver. 17. Inſteed of thy fathers, thou ſhalt haue children, whom thou maieſt make princes in al lāds, Fiftly, like as it is the ſpouſe
                  The fift, The Huſbands protection or defence of his wife. or husbands part to defend or maintaine his Spouſes and wife, ſo Chriſt euermore defendeth his church, ſubduing deuils, Tyrantes and heretickes; and although hee will haue her a partaker with him of his croſſe and affliction, yet he mitigateth thoſe afflictions, preſerueth the body of his Church, and in midſt of death giueth life to thoſe that are put to death. The compariſon of the Mariage, and the league that is betweene Chriſt and his Church, doth greatly adorne the reading of the 45. Pſalme.
               
            
            
               Pſalme. XLV. And expoſition thereof.
               
                  
                     Verſe. 1.
                     My heart is inditing of a good matter; I ſpeake of the things which I haue made vnto the king.
                     Verſe. 2.
                     My tongue is the penne of a ready writer.
                  
                  
                     LIKE as Orators are placed next vnto Kings, ſo vnto the heart of man are added the inſtruments of vtterance and ſpeech, that if nature be ſound and vpright of her ſelfe, there ſhould be an excellent conſent

or agreement of heart and tongue: namely, mans heart enflamed with the light and loue of God ſhoulde manifeſt diuine motions with the tongue honouring God, and in ſpeaking things iuſt and vpright towardes men the hearte and tongue ſhould agree in one: Now in this corruption of mans nature, the heart oftentimes diſagreeth from the tongue as Cicero ſaith, 
                        Frons, vultus, oculi perſaepe mentiuntur, oratio verò ſaepiſsime. The face, the countenance, and the eies very often deceiue men: but the ſpeech of tongue moſt often deceiue them. But yet in thoſe that are newe borne of the holy ghoſt the conſent of heart and tongue is reſtored, as in this place the S
                           •
                        nnes of Chora do ſay, My heart is inditing of a ſweete ſong, and that the tongue is the interpreter of godly cogitations. This prouidence of the almighty worke-maſter in knitting the heart and tongue togither let vs firſt of all conſider, ſo often as we reade the beginning of the 45. Pſalme: Next of all, let vs embrace and extoll this Pſalme, ſeeing the holie ghoſt affirmeth that he ſetteth downe vnto vs a certain excellentThe circumſtance of this Pſalme, is a ſubſtantiall mariage betweene Chriſt and his Church. kinde of ſong. Alſo the thing it ſelfe ſheweth, that this verſe was largely and plentifully written, and both repleniſhed and adorned with all the moſt choyſe words and moſt graue ſentences of Rhetoricke. Laſtly, the ſubiect of the matter (as we in ſchooles doe argue) doth allure vs much vnto the reading of this Pſalme. For he ſaieth profoundly that he ſingeth this ſong concerning the King, the Meſsias, and the mariage which he maketh vp with the true Church.
               
               
                  
                     Verſe. 3.
                     Thou art fairer then the children of men: full of grace are thy lips, becauſe God hath bleſſed thee for euer.
                  
                  Firſt, here is praiſed the perſon of the Meſsias, and isThe praiſe of the Meſsias or ſpouſ. preferred before the beauty or comelineſſe of all men, becauſe in very deed, neither is the wiſedome nor vertue of any

man like vnto the wiſedome and vertue of Chriſt, of which things, the beauty or excellency is ſincere and ſpeciall aboue all other: for in him clearely ſhineth a moſt firme acknowledgement of his eternall father, and in him is inflamed a ſpecial loue towards the eternall father, and other moſt excellent vertues. Wherefore when we thinke vpon the Meſsias, let vs thinke vpon this ſincere excellency of perſonage, that is, of the wiſedome ſhining foorth in him, and all other vertues wherewith he is moſt ſpeciallie adorned: and as the Husband beſtoweth not only his body, but alſo al his worldly ſubſtance vpon his Wife: So Chriſt the huſband endoweth his wife the Church withall his benefits or bleſſings, namely wiſedom, which is the acknowledgement of the mercy of God, for his ſake in the goſpell promiſed, & alſo righteouſnes & life euerlaſting. Although therefore we are by nature, deformed and without all fauour, that is in very deed defiled with ſinnes, and therefore guilty before God, and worthy of all miſeries and calamities, yet by reaſon Chriſt imparteth vnto vs his beauty or excellency, we are receiued by God, as if we were without any blemiſh, as in the 2. Cor. 5. cap. it is ſaid. For he hath made him to be ſinne for vs, which knew no ſinne, that wee ſhoulde bee made the righteouſnes of God in him. verſ. 21. Chriſt knew no ſinne, for as the Prophet Iſay ſaith, cap. 53. verſ. 9. He did no ſinne, neither was any guile foūd in his mouth. And what ſay you to that, where he was not only conceiued and borne without ſinne, but alſo liued and died without ſinne? And yet was hee made ſinne, that is, a certain guilty thing & a caſtaway into moſt grieuous puniſhmēts. For God powred forth his diſpleaſure vpon the Sonne, who was made our Mediatour and ſacrifice for ſinne, and therefore ſuffered iudgement and puniſhment, that wee might become righteouſnes of God, by his meanes, that is, iuſt and acceptable vnto God for the Mediator ſake, Laſt of all the eloquence of this King is praiſed, Full of grace is thy lips, as if hee

ſaid. Thou art not onely of an excellent mind, but vnto thy eloquent ſpeech there is a ſpeciall grace alſo annexed: And we were went to behold him whom God had adorned with eloquence, as the verſe ſaith in Homer.
                     
                        Attentique 
                              •
                           udire omnes cum dulcia fundit
                        Verba ver
                              •
                           cunde, ciues veriſque gubernat
                        Conſiliis, longe quos inter hic eminet vnus
                        In dubiis rebus cum concio magna coacta eſt.
                     
                     
                        When he ſhould ſpeake they all were bent to heare,
                        Sweet modeſt words vnto them forth he giues
                        His citizens, and with counſels ſinceare
                        He rules, as one in honour high which liues
                        In doubtfull matters hee's the only man,
                        To ſpeake for him and his conſtrained than.
                     
                  
                  What hony ſweet eloquēce is that in Chriſt thē? Certes I beleeue there is no man of ſo baſe a minde, but (when he heareth theſe words. Come vnto me all yee which labour and are loden, and I will refreſh you. Math. 11. 28: alſo. So God loued the world &c. Iohn. 3. 16.) that they areChriſts royall wiſedome and power incomparable. ſweeter then the hony or hony combe, he wil eaſily confeſſe: For no Mother can with more ſweete perſwading wordes call vnto her, her only and moſt deareſt childe, then Chriſt doth vſe in calling ſinners vnto him. Touching this eloquence of Chriſt, ſpeaketh Io. Baptiſt where he ſaith, Ioh. 3. He that hath the Bride is the Bridegrome, but the friend of the Bridegrome which ſtandeth and heareth him, reioyceth greatly becauſe of the Bridegromes voice, This my ioy therefore is fulfilled. verſ. 29.
                  
                  But although Wiſedome, Vertue and Eloquence are ſingular ornamentes: yet notwithſtanding without power and ſtrength in doing things they are not much worth: For, often time Wiſedome is driuen away, and Might ruleth the matter, and as the verſe ſaith,

                        
                        Spernitur Orator bonus, horridus Miles amatur.
                     
                     
                        Men do deſpiſe the ſpeaker good,
                        And loue the ſouldier fierce of mood,
                     
                     
                        Non doctis dictis certatur, ſed maledictis,
                     
                     
                        Some, not with learned ſpeech contend:
                        But with euill tearmes their cauſe defend:
                     
                  
                  As the Poet Ennius ſaith in thoſe verſes. Therefore, the Pſalme not only attributeth theſe thinges vnto Chriſt, which I haue ſpoken of, but alſo armeth as it were this king with diuine power or might, in theſe words: Therefore hath God bleſſed thee for euer. He expreſly calleth the Meſſias a bleſſed king, that is, acceptable or pleaſing to God, and ſo furniſhed with diuine power, as that he is able both to deſtroy ſinne and death, and to giue righteouſneſſe and life euerlaſting vnto all beleeuers: al theſe things doth the only word of bleſſing there comprehend.
               
               
                  
                     Verſe. 4.
                     Gird thee with thy ſword vpon thy thigh, O thou moſt mighty: according to thy worſhip and renowme.
                     Verſe. 5.
                     Good lucke haue thou with thine honour, ride on, becauſe of the word of truth, of meeknes and righteouſnes; and thy right hand ſhal teach thee terrible things.
                     Verſe. 6.
                     Thy arrowes are very ſharpe, and the people ſhal be ſubdued vnto thee: euen in the midſt, among the kings enemies.
                  
                  The ſworde and arrowes here doe not ſignifie carnall weapons of warfare, but, the effectual preaching of the goſpell,Chriſt an inuincible warrior, and what his weapons are. 
                     bringing into captiuity euery thought to the obedience of Chriſt. 2. Cor. 10. 5. For Chriſt fighteth not with weapons, but with the word: which is the power of God vnto ſaluation, to all that beleeue. I. Rom. 16. And becauſe good ſucceſſe very much auaileth to do notable exploits,

the Pſalme addeth vnto thoſe forenamed ornaments, good ſucceſſe. Good lucke haue thou (ſaith he) with thine honour, that is, All things ſhal ſubmit themſelues vnto this King, and all things are ready to obey him. He ſhall take nathing in hand, but with moſt ſpecial ſpeede, and with woonderfull ſucceſſe he ſhall fully accompliſh the ſame: for, he is Schilo, that is, happy and fortunate, and hee is Porek, that is, a Breaker vp, asCap. 2. 13. 
                     Micheas the prophet calleth him, For he ſo burſteth open the kingdome of the Diuell, that as the Latin verſe ſaieth,

                        Vt aggeribus ruptis cum ſpumeus amnis
                        Exit, oppoſitáſque euicit gurgite moles,
                        Fer
                              •
                           ur in arua furens tumulo campóſque per omnes,
                        Cum ſtabulis armenta trahit.
                     
                  
                  As when a ſurging foming floud the broken bankes ouer
                        •
                     onnes, And ſo contrary mighty ſtoppes by great increaſe ouercomes, Of vehement force is caried forth throgh al the field, euen there, With folde or cotage quite away the cattell ſo doth beare.
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 7
                     Thy ſeate (O God) endureth for euer: the ſcepter of thy kingdome is a right ſcepter.
                     Verſe 8
                     Thou haſt loued righteouſneſſe, and hated iniquitie: therefore God (euen thy God) hath anointed thee with the oile of gladnes aboue thy fellowes.
                  
                  Hitherto hath the Pſa. deſcribed the king armed & fighting the greateſt battels: now doth he paint out as it were the liuely por
                        •
                     rature of a peaceable ruler or gouernor. For, Chriſt is, both a moſt gracious king & an inuincible warriour:Chriſt the only Prince of peace. ſithence then iuſtice or righteouſnes in domeſticall gouernment is a chiefe vertue, it affirmeth, that The ſcepter of Chriſt is a right ſcepter: neither let righteouſnes bee

vnderſtood of vs in that ſence, as if it were ment in Chriſt himſelfe, but, as touching the ſame to be beſtowed vpon others, like as the promiſe ſaith, Gen. 18. 18. In thy ſeede ſhall all nations be bleſſed. Al other perſons are accurſed, that is, guilty before God, and oppreſſed with ſinne and death: but this our king is not only bleſſed, bicauſe he pleſeth God, and is endued with diuine wiſedome, righteouſnes, and life; but therefore alſo, becauſe he deſtr
                        •
                     yeth ſinne and death and reſtoreth vnto his people righteouſnes and life: and the vertue very neare vnto righteouſnes is that Nemeſis or Zeale, that is, a iuſt diſpleaſure againſt ſinnes: with this godly zeale ought all good Princes and rulers to be inflamed: wherefore euen this alſo doth he pronounce to be in the Meſſias, in the 8. verſe. Thou haſt loued righteouſnes, and hated iniquity. So, in the 69. Pſa. it is ſaid. For the zeale of thy houſe hath euen eaten me, ver. 9. That is, I bring my life in danger for the deliuerance of thy church, which I loue, and to ſuppreſſe thoſe reproaches wherewith God is diſhonoured, which bring me great griefe and ſorrow, and doe thorowly mooue my diſpleaſure againſt this blaſphemy. Laſt of al, this our King is annointed, that is, ordained from the eternall father, vnto this kingdome, and endued with the holy ghoſt for accō
                     pliſhing of this marueilous deliueraunce of the Church, which ſhal be gathered out of all mankinde, and rewarded with righteouſnes and life euerlaſting.
                  But, why ſaith he in the ſame verſe, [aboue thy fellowes? Uerily, becauſe he may diſcerne the Meſſias from the prophets, and from al men whoſe vertue was excellēt. As, Moyſes had a glorious calling, he brought the peopleExod. 14. 13. out of Egypt, and ruled them in the wilderneſſe: But yet this calling did not deliuer the people from euerlaſting death. Alſo the ſame Moſes had in him a light or acknowledgement of God, and a righteouſeneſſe onlie newe begunne, and as then hee was troubled with a doubting or miſtruſt, which ſhewed it ſelfe, when hee ſmoate

the rocke, twiſe. So may it in like manner be ſaide touchingExod. 17. 6. the vocation, light, and righteouſnes of each other of the Prophets: but Chriſt is farre aboue all other Prophets, in fulnes of the holy ghoſt, and in calling: for as Iohn Baptiſt ſaith, cap. 3. God giueth not the ſpirite by meaſure vnto his ſonne Chriſt, ver. 34. Therefore hee aboundeth in the knowledge and righteouſnes of God, and hath a greater calling, he deliuereth from ſinne and death, and giueth righteouſnes and life euerlaſting: and that hee may effect this, he ſo aboundeth with the holy ghoſt, that he may therewith ſanctifie and quicken others, inflaming this light in them, namely the knowledge of God, righteouſnes, and life euerlaſting. Let vs therefore hiſſe out of dores thoſe dreames imagined of the politicall kingdome of the holy Meſſias, and let vs think vpon the things euerlaſting. Our Meſſias hath ordained a kingdome euerlaſting, aboliſhing ſinne, deſtroying death, and reſtoring euerlaſting righteouſnes and life. Theſe benefits let vs craue and looke for from him.
               
               
                  
                     Verſe. 9.
                     All thy garments ſmell of mirh, aloes, and Caſsia, out of the Iuory pallaces, whereby they haue made thee glad.
                     Verſe. 10.
                     Kings daughters were among thy houourable women: vpon thy right hand did ſtand the Queene in a veſture of gold, wrought about with diuers colours.
                  
                  Although theſe verſes do deſcribe a royal excellent ſtate,The churches excellent vocation feeling both croſſe and conſolation. yet ſignifie they ſomewhat, ſecretly, as touching both the croſſe and the conſolations in the ſame: Myrh purgeth and is more ſharp in taſte and ſcent, therefore it ſignifieth croſſe and ſorrowes, but ſuch as are wholeſome. Aloe, though it be of a grieuous ſauour, and a bitter taſte, yet it comforteth the ſtomacke, ſtancheth blood, and wonderfully healeth vp

wounds: therefore it ſignifieth conſolation, and the preaching of the goſpell, wherewith the woundes of the heart are healed, and in the heart is thereby ioy and life euerlaſting enlightened. Casſia is much like vnto Cinamon, and with her ſauour doth comfort the braine: I know there are diuers and differing opinions which the beſt learned men haue touching the proper names which are vſed in this place. But in ſo great variety of opinions, I doe follow the vſuall tranſlation, vntill ſkilfull interpreters in the Hebrew language doe deliuer vs more certaine knowledge.
               
               
                  
                     Verſe. 11.
                     Harken (O daughter) and conſider, encline thine eare; forget alſo thine owne people, and thy fathers houſe.
                  
                  This apoſtrophe (or turning ſpeach to the party abſent) is diligently to be marked, wherein the holy ghoſt ſpeaketh of the Church which is to bee gathered from among the Jewes: becauſe it inſtructeth the reader of the greateſt matters; namely of the kingdome of the Meſſias, of faith, of the abrogation of the Leuitical ceremony, and extinction of Moyſes law. For inaſmuch as to heare, and to teach, are two correlatiues, it followeth, that the Meſſias ſhal not be a king like vnto Alexander, who by art of warre and corporallChriſts kingdome not like worldly kingdomes. ſtrength keepeth his ſubiectes in their duety, but one which ſhall gouerne his church with his word, and ſhal encline or frame their mindes vnto moſt willing obedience. Furthermore (ſeeing▪ 
                     Faith commeth by hearing, and hearing by the word. Rom. 10. 17.) let vs not ſeeke for reuelations beſides or without the word of God, but let vs know that we muſt not ſeeke God any other waies, then by the word and teſtimonies from him deliuered, neither that we muſt call vpon any other God, but euen vpon the very ſame God, who ſending his ſonne and giuing his goſpel into the world ſo often times, hath manifeſted himſelf, by aſſured teſtimonies. This doctrine touching faith (ſetling

her ſelfe in Gods worde) doth this pſalme deliuer, where it ſaith in this verſe. Harken O daughter and conſider, encline thine eare, &c. And the phraſe of the pſalme agreeth with the eternal and immutable commaundement of the father crying, of his ſome. Mat. 17. This is my beloued ſonne, in whom I am well pleaſed, heare ye him, verſ. 5. Moreouer becauſe that people in the nation of the Jewes were not wilde by nature, but as kind and curteous people loued their cuntry eſpecially, & reuerenced the temple wherein God ſo often manifeſted himſelfe, and loued the whole order of the Jewiſh pollicy (then which they knew there was not a more excellent pollicy in al mākind) more than their life, therefore the Pſalme perſwadethMoſes pollicy extinguiſhed. the Church gathered of the ſeede of Abraham to forget his people, and to preferre the Meſsias before the ancient temple and pollicie, and all other things which men in their order do deſire, as life, poſſeſſions, and peace: It ſignifieth then, that the pollicie of Moſes muſt be extinguiſhed,Ceremoniall 
                           •
                        ites aboliſhed. and the Ceremonies in the Temple vſed, muſt be abrogated or aboliſhed.
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 12
                     So ſhal the King haue pleaſure in thy beutie: for he is thy Lord (God,) and worſhip thou him.
                  
                  There are many partes in this Pſalme, the conference or compariſon whereof vanquiſheth the godly ones, that they cannot but acknowledge the Meſsias to be both Man and God, and yet that the perſon of this Meſsias muſt be diſcerned from the perſon of the eternall Father. The firſt part is, the worthy praiſe of the excellenty of the Meſſias his perſon, in the third verſe, Thou art fairer thanFiue ſpeciall points of glory which the church hath by Chriſt. the children of men. Herehence is borrowed a manifeſt conſequence: All men ſprung of the carnall ſeede of Abraham are deformed and polluted with much 
                        ••
                     hineſſe, as in the third booke of Kings, cap. 8. Salomon ſaieth,

There is no man liuing, but hee ſinneth, verſe 46. andThe firſt part. as in the foureteenth pſalme it is ſaide, They are al gone out of the way, they are altogether become abhominable, there is none that doth good, no not one, verſe. 4. In this king and huſband of the church, there is neither any ſinne, deformitie, nor filthineſſe: Therefore Chriſt is not only man, but God, who is only good and harmeleſſe. The ſecond part is, that which confirmeth the article touchingThe ſecond part. the diuine nature of the Meſſias, Therefore hath thy god bleſſed thee. In this ſaying he interpreteth that promiſe giuen vnto Abraham. In thy ſeede ſhall all nations be bleſſed, Geneſ. 12. 3. 17. 8. 22. 17. as if he had ſaid, All men are accurſed, that is, guiltie before God, and worthy of all miſeries and calamities, becauſe God is vnfainedly and horribly angry with ſinnes: The greatneſſe of this diſpleaſure can no power alone created take away, no nor yet endure. Needeful then it is that the Meſſias be God, becauſe he taketh away the curſe, that is, Gods wrath, ſin and death, and giueth the bleſſing, that is, righteouſneſſe and life euerlaſting. The third part confirmingThe third part that ſame ſentence is this, Thy ſeate (O God) endureth for euer. The pſalme affirmeth euidently, that the kingdome of the Meſſias is euerlaſting: for it is moſt apparantly ſeene, that no worldly pollicie is perpetuall, and the thing ſheweth, that the complaint extant in Ouids verſe is true, where he ſaith:

                        Sic omnia verti cernimus, atque
                        Alias aſſumere pondera gentes:
                        Item, ſummiſque negatum ſtarediu.
                     
                     
                        So all things turned plainely we do ſee,
                        And other Nations beare another ſway:
                        And mightieſt ſtates oft times denied be,
                        For to endure with any longer day.
                     
                  
                  Seeing then no gouernements are perpetuall, it is a thing very cleare, that neither this king the Meſſias is onlie

man, nor that his kingdome is a pollicie which ſhall periſh, ſuch a one as the Jewes doe looke for. The fourthThe fourth part. part of this confirmation is where this pſalme ſaieth, Thy God hath annointed thee with oile of gladneſse aboue thy fellows. In the 34. and laſt chapter of Deuteronomie it is written of Moſes thus: But there aroſe not a prophet ſince in Iſrael like vnto Moſes, &c. verſe 10. Therefore this pſalme placeth and preferreth the Meſſias farre aboue Moſes: Then is there not onely humane, but alſo diuine nature in the Meſſias. The fift and laſt part ofThe fifth and laſt part. this glory is recited in this verſe, For hee is thy Lorde god, and worſhip theu him. But the Jewes do go about to trifle out ſo notable a teſtimony with this cauillation: They ſay by the word Worſhip is ſignified the geſture of the body which is made before the preſence of Kings: But this ſophiſticall trifling may be refuted by conference of other teſtimonies, as in the 72. pſalme it is ſaide: All kings ſhall fall downe before him: All nations ſhal do him ſeruice verſe 11. In theſe wordes the pſalme euidently affirmeth, that this Meſſias ſhal alwayes be called vpon, or prayed vnto, yea, when he ſhal not be ſeene with eyes: Therefore it ſpeaketh not of any bodily geſture the which is made before the preſence of Kings, but it ſpeaketh of the minde, which craueth of the Meſſias, that he would haue mercy vpon vs, and be a Mediatour for vs, would forgiue vs our ſinnes, would giue vs his holy ſpirit and life euerlaſting, and woulde bee our helper and defender, yea, euen in the daungers of this life againſt the outrages of the Diuell, and of vngodly perſons, like as hee himſelfe ſaieth, Iohn 10. My ſheepe heare my voyce: No man ſhall take them out of my hand, verſe 27. and 28. Such a worſhip doth truely attribute omnipotencie vnto the Meſſias, and doth witneſſe that he is God. And that the perſon of the Meſſias is to be diſcerned from the perſon of the eternall Father, theſe wordes do teach manifeſtly▪ 
                     Therefore hath thy God annointed thee with

oyle of gladnes aboue thy fellowes. For the Father annointeth this king with the oyle of gladneſſe, that is, with the holy ghoſt: which ſaint Iohn in his firſt epiſtle, and ſecond chapter, and twentieth verſe calleth Chriſma, that is, Ointment; The Meſſias 
                        •
                     s Chriſt, that is, your anointed king of the church. But there is a ſweete conſolation ſet foorth in this ſaying, And the King ſhall haue pleaſure in thy beauty. The pſalme praiſeth the beuty of the church, which ſeemeth (by reaſon of the Croſſe) vnto the iudgement of the worlde to be fowle and filthy, but alſo in very trueth is yet ſtill languiſhing, and beareth about her many blemiſhes, ignorance, and vi
                        •
                     ious affects: Although therefore we are indeed weaklings, and defiled with much filthineſſe, yet let vs beleeue, that for, and through, his great mercy we ſhalbe acceptable vnto this our King, and we ſhall haue our reputed and publiſhed beauty, that is, ſome vertues acceptable vnto God, as true inuocation, aduancement of true doctrine, and the remaining new begunne obedience.
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 13
                     And the daughter of Tyre ſhall bee there with a gift: like as the rich alſo among the people ſhall make their ſupplication before thee.
                  
                  The daughter of Tyre ſignifieth the Church gatheredA deſcription of the church gathered from out of the nations in three points. of the nations: And I haue often ſaid, touching what, and how great thinges the calling of the Nations admoniſheth vs. For, firſt it witneſſeth that grace aboundeth aboue ſinne: For who can either comprehend in thought, the greatnes of Gods mercy, or expreſſe the ſame in words: In which mercy, perſons (polluted with manifolde madde worſhipping of Images, bloody ſacrifyſing of men filthy Confuſion of luſtes, and finally with other maſt horrible miſchefes) are called vnto the ſociety of the bleſſed congregations, andre made as Paule ſayeth. 2. Epheſ. 19. Citizens

in the Citie of God and of the common wealth of the heauenly Citizens. Secondly, The calling of the Nations is a notable teſtimony, that the promiſe touching the goſpell is vniuerſall and free: For if the promiſe, were a priuiledge for certaine perſons, it ſhould not be tranſlated vnto the nations which are horribly polluted with wickednes: And that this promiſe conſiſteth not vppon our worthineſſe, but is freely promiſed, and beſtoweth eternall benefits vppon true beleeuers, that doth the calling of the nations moſt euidently witneſſe. For what doe the Nations bring vnto God, but filthy and horrible confuſions of opinions of worſhippings and of manners? Such Caſt-awayes ſeeing God receiueth and chuſeth them out, to place them in the fellowſhip of eternall bleſſednes, may we any thing doubt, but rather affirme that the promiſe of the goſpell parteineth freely? Laſtly, this gathering of the Church out of the Nations refuteth the Phariſaicall opinions touching righteouſnes of the lawe. For if men were righteous by the lawe, the Nations could not without the lawe be made Citizens and members of the people of God: Seeing then the nations without the lawe, of enemies are made frends, and of ſtrangers are made the moſt beloued Church of God, it is a thing very cleare that by faith onely, that is, by acknowledgement and confidence in the Mediator, all the elect ones are ſaued.
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 14
                     The Kings daughter is all glorious within, her cloathing is of wrought golde.
                     Verſe 15
                     Shee ſhall be brought vnto the King in raiment of needle worke: the Virgins that be her fellows ſhall beare her company and ſhall be brought vnto thee.
                     Verſe 16
                     With ioy & gladnes ſhal they be brought, and ſhall enter into the Kings pallace.
                  
                  
                     Albeit the Prophets deſcribing the kingdome of Chriſt, do vſe figures taken from the glorious eſtate of Kinges Courtes: yet notwithſtanding, bycauſe wee doe knowe that the Church by Gods aſſured prouidence is in this life ſubiect vnto the Croſſe, let vs vnderſtand theſe deſcriptions, not as touching the externall pompe, but concerning the inward glorie, whereof there are ſeauen degrees. The firſt is, the poſſeſſion of Gods word and the acknowledgementSeauen degrees of excellence proper vnto the true church of God. of the true God, as in Pſal. 147. and in Deuter. 4. Pſa. 50. 15. Pſa. 55. 18. The Second, is true calling vppon God, and his Deuine hearing vs, as in Deuter. 4. The Third, is his perpetuall preſeruation of the body of this Church, though ſhee bee perſecuted in ſome of her members as in Math. 16. Pſal 129. The Fourth conteineth Gods onely Deliuerances as the preſeruation of Noah in the Deluge Gene. 8. 16. Exod. 12. 2. Luke. 9. 56. The fifth, conteineth prophecies proper to the Church, and miracles accompliſhed in the prophecies, as in Micah. 3. 8 and. 2 Kings 5. 8. 2. Peter. 1. 19. 1. Pet. 1. 10 1 Cor. 12. 10. & 1. Cor. 14. 3 The Sixth is the ornament of many vertues in the ſuffering members as in Stephen Actes. 7. 58 others as in Heb. 11. 36, 37, 38, 39. Laurence. Eutrop lib. 9. The Seauenth, and laſt is the inheritance of life euerlaſting as in Iohn. 17. 3. Tit. 3. 7. Galath. 3. 18. 22. 1. Pet. 1. 4. Touching theſe 7 degrees of glorie which the true Church hath, I haue ſpoken more largely in a certaine oration made by mee at Iena on the 28▪ day of May in the yeare of Chriſt 1562.
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 17.
                     In ſteade of thy fathers thou ſhalt haue children: whom thou mayeſt make Princes in all landes.
                  
                  Notably ſaith Plato in lib. 6. de legibus,
                      as touching marriage. Let this conſolation be propoſed in marriage

that man and wife ought to be carefull for the perpetuity or continuation of humane nature: thatPlatos rule as touching parents. they leauing behinde them their childrens children, may euermore haue ſome worſhippers of God left to ſucceede them. Parents ought to beget and bring vp children, which may deliuer a direct order of life, as it were a Lampe of light, vnto their poſterity, ſo as there may alwayes be ſome worſhipping God, according to his lawe. Theſe hath he ſpoken (touching matrimony, for the man and the wife) holily and religiouſly. For, therefore giueth the ſonne of God his worde and holy ſpirit vnto the Church, that he may regenerate many vnto life euerlaſting, and that there might alwayes be ſome euen in this life truly calling vpon God and worſhipping him. For he not onely wonderfully reioyceth and delighteth in the ſaintes or holy ones which are in heauen, but euen in theſe which are vppon earth, as the 16. Pſalme witneſſeth, verſe. 3. Al my delight is vpon the Saintes that are in earth. &c. And he calleth Saintes, the kings and princes of the earth, not in that they gouerne by politike order, but when they vanquiſh the ſnares of the Deuill, the threatnings and inticements of the world, and the wandring luſtes of our nature, and doe gather vnto God an eternall Church.
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 18.
                     I wil remember thy name from one generation vnto an other: Therefore ſhall the people giue thankes vnto thee world without end.
                  
                  The laſt verſe preacheth moſt ſweetely as touching the ſtability of the Church, which ſhall remaine euer among the Downefalles of Kingdomes and it mentioneth here alſo of the life euerlaſting: For if the Church ſhould be oppreſſed and extinguiſhed with the Downefall of kingdomes, ſhe ſhould not for euer be able to remember

her Spouſe or huſband: Allwayes therefore ſhall there in this life remaine a Congregation reteyning the profeſſion of the true doctrine, and ſhall after the rayſing vp of the dead remayne in the eternall ſociety with God, where it ſhall enioy his wiſdome and goodnes without. end. So be it.
               
            
         
         
            PSAL. XLVI. Deus noſter refugium.
            
            
               
                  To him that excelleth vpon (Which was either a muſicall inſtrument, or a ſolemne tune vnto which this Pſalme was ſung, Alamoth) a ſong of triumph or thankeſgiuing for deliuerance, committed to the ſonnes of Korah.
                  
               
            
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               
                  HEere is ſet downe in this Pſalme, a moſt ſweete conſolation touching the ſtability of the church: For it affirmeth, that there hath alwayes remained, and for euer ſhall remaine hereafter, a Church or Congregation which ſhall embrace the goſpell of the ſonne of God, yea, though kingdomes practize the deſtruction thereof: For albeit the calamities of the Church be great, yet amongſt theſe is ſhe not forſaken of god, who ſaueth her in the middeſt of the raging floods, and ſo being troubled reſtoreth and healeth her: But other kingdomes and other religions are vtterly deſtroyed. Therefore let vs alſo apply this pſalme vnto vs, and let

vs render vnto him thankes, that the congregation of his elect ones is amongeſt vs: which moſt truely is only in the congregation of them that are called, whereas God will haue the preaching of the Goſpell to ſound forth amongeſt vs; wherewith hee doeth call and doeth gather vnto him a Church, and that hee gouerneth, preſerueth, and defendeth the ſame. Yea, let vs celebrate or haue in honour euen this ſame benefite of his alſo, that hee vouchſafeth to giue ſome meane harbours at this day, for the aduancement of the true doctrine. And though the enemies thereof doe threaten, that they will confuſedly ſcatter the congregation of the Teachers and Schollers; yet let vs hope, that God will defend ſome places of godly ſtudies, and let vs ſo pray, that he would defend them.
            
            
               Pſal. XLVI. And expoſition thereof.
               
                  
                     Verſe 1
                     God is our hope and ſtrength; a very preſent helpe in trouble.
                     Verſe 2
                     Therefore will wee not feare, though the earth be moued: and though the hilles bee carried into the middes of the ſea.
                     Verſe 3
                     Though the waters thereof rage and ſwell, and though the mountaines ſhake at the tempeſt of the ſame.
                  
                  
                     WE all by natures perswaſion do ſo reaſon: there is no congregation durable except it haue ſome certaine reſting place and gouernments ordained for defence thereof. The church hath neither any certain abiding place nor is defended by the amity of kings, but is rather oppreſſed, and diſmembred. Moreouer ſhee is a miſerable congregation, like as the Apoſtles calamities in times paſt, &

our daily miſeries do declare. In theſe ſpectacles or ſhews what other thing may mans reaſon conceue, but that within a while both the true doctrine, and ſtudies of this ſame doctrine ſhould vtterly be extinguiſhed▪
                  
                  But againſt this humaine reaſon, this Pſalme comforteth vs, ſaying verſ. 1. God is our hope and ſtrength, &c. For although kingdomes do not defend vs, yet notwithſtanding God himſelfe protecteth and preſerueth vs. Of tais conſolation the church of God ſtandeth in neede, that we may know ſhee ſhall yet remaine and be, though ſhee haue no certaine abiding place, or defence of kingdomes. Therefore often is this conſolation repeated, as in Eſay the 51. verſ. 16. I haue put my wordes in thyChriſt the King onely protecting the church. mouth, and haue defended thee in the ſhaddow of mine hand, that I may plant the heauens, &c. That is, I ordaine the miniſtery of the Goſpell, that ſhall not be defended of kingdomes, but ſhall rather be cruelly aſſaulted or oppugned; therefore do I my ſelfe promiſe defence thereof, I will protect the miniſters of the goſpell, the churches ſchooles, and godly ſtudies, yea though the whole worlde in a rage ſhould bende it ſelfe to deſtroy the goſpell. Although then we haue not any humane helpes or ſafegards at all, as in that Pſalme. 27. 10. ver. is written, My father and mother haue forſaken me: yet let vs ſet before vs theſe ſayings, wherewith if we ſhall ſtirre vp our faith we ſhall vnfainedly feele that God will be with vs, and that we ſhall be by him helped gouerned and defended.
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 4
                     The riuers of the flood thereof ſhall make glad the citie of God, the holy place of the tabernacle of the moſt Higheſt.
                     Verſe 5
                     God is in the middeſt of her, therefore ſhal ſhe not be remooued, God ſhall helpe her, and that right earely.
                     Verſe 6
                     The heathen make much adoe, & the kingdomes are moued, but god hath ſhewed his

voyce, and the earth ſhall melt away.
                     Verſe 7
                     The Lord of Hoſtes is with vs; the God of Iacob is our refuge.
                  
                  Wiſe men ſuppoſe, that in ſo great confuſion of kingdomes the ſtate of religion can neuer long endure in one and the 
                        •
                     ame ſafety, but are eft ſoones otherwhiles extinguiſhed, and otherwhiles ſpringing vp. What time the Caldeans held the 
                        •
                     oueraignety of Babylon, then, andNum. 25. 3. 
                           ••
                        ut. 4. 3. An. mun. 3628 ſecund. Dau. Chyt. Henric. Pantaleon. Anno Chriſti. 6
                           •
                        6. there was Baa
                        •
                      worſhipped. Afterward Alexanders conqueſt brought in thither Iupiter Olympus. And the thing it ſelfe ſheweth, that the deſtructions of kingdomes draw downe with them changes of religions; as when in Aſia and Africa the doctrine of Chriſt was extinguiſhed, then euery where raged the furies of Mahomet: with theſe examples many are mooued, that they ſuppoſe Chriſts doctrine euen much alike, and to be extinguiſhed with the very dreames of the Gentiles. And it is out of al doubt, that the Deuill fighteth fier
                        •
                     ely, and diſquieteth whole kingdoms eſpecially for this determinate end, euen to deſtroy the whole church of God: vnto this ſo great danger this pſalme oppoſeth a moſt ſweete conſolation in the 4. verſe, The riuers of the flood thereof ſhall make glad the cities of God, &c. That is, the miniſterie of the goſpel in the church ſhall remaine for euer, becauſe God dwelleth in her as in his holy Temple, and hath limited the ſea within his bounds, beyond which it ſhall not poſſibly paſſe: That is, though kingdomes enuying the church, greatly ſtorme and rage, yet notwithſtanding the power of the world ſhal not deſtroy the church, which ſhal ſtil remaine, yea though the whole world fruſhed together fall downe, as elſewhere it is ſaid, Math. 16. The gates of hel ſhal not preuaile againſt her, verſe 18. Let vs therefore holde firmely fired in our mindes this conſolation, and now ſet the ſame before vs in our preſent daungers.
               
               
                  
                  
                     Verſe 8
                     O come hither and beholde the workes of the Lord, what deſtruction he hath brought vppon the earth.
                     Verſe 9
                     He maketh warres to ceaſe in all the world: he breaketh the bowe, and knappeth the ſpeare inſunder, and burneth the chariots in the fire.
                  
                  Hee adioyneth vnto the Conſolation an exhortation, wherewith he perſwadeth the vniuerſall Church to conſider the wonderfull workes of God, namely the Downefalles of Kingdomes, the chaunges of other religions, and the perpetuall preſeruation of the doctrine deliuered from God, and the ſafety of his ſilly flock which reteineth this doctrine and endeuoureth to aduance the ſame. For although the foure kingdomes are diſperſed, and horribleThe churches ſtabilitie euen amids the ruines of kingdomes. confuſions and verations of all things in mankinde haue beene ſeene, as the whole hiſtorie of the world witneſſeth: yet amiddes ſo great downefalles and deſolations of kingdomes, ſome congregation of God hath remained, otherwhiles greater, otherwhiles leſſer, and the doctrine is eftſoones purified and publiſhed by apt teachers: which the ſonne of God ſitting at his right hand hath ſtirred vp, and giuen as it were notable gifts vnto his Church. Doubtles, god ſuffreth for a ſeaſon, tyrants, fanaticall teachers, and their Champions to rage with cruelty againſt the Church, and yet in meane time, the Confeſſion of many, and other ſignes are euident witneſſes of the goſpell: And afterwardes the furyes of vngodly perſons in notable examples are puniſhed, like as Pharao, the Cananites, Iewes, and Ethnickes, were deſtroyed, whoſe cruelty was very great.
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 10
                     Be ſtill then, and knowe that I am God, I

will be exalted among the heathen, and I will be exalted in the earth.
                  
                  This is a precept wonderfull and vnknowen vnto philoſophy, but it agreeth with that ſaying of Iſay. cap. 30, verſe 15 In reſt and quietnes ſhall yee be ſaued, in quietnes and in confidence ſhall be your ſtrength &c. what is that reſt and quietnes then, what is that to be ſtill?

                        Primum tollerare impoſitas aerumnas,
                        Deinde non accerſere negotia ſine vocatione,
                        Tertio, non vt ſolet humana diffidentia
                        Diſcur
                              •
                           ere ad varia praeſidia, &c.
                     
                  
                  Firſt to beare patiently calamities laied vpon vs. Next of all, not to deale in any buſines beyond our vocation, Thirdly, not (as mans diſtruſt was wonte) to runne, hither and thether to ſeeke diuers ſafegardes: Like as the kings of Iuda one while leaned vppon the Egiptians, an other while vppon the Syrian kings, and an otherRoboam 3. Reg. 14. 15. Ioſphat 1. Paralip. 19. Ioas 2. Chro. 24. 17, 18. while vpon others: and being intangled with fooliſh confederacies were compelled to follow other furies. Againſt this impatience, vnneceſſarie buſines, and diſtruſt of ſuch as ſeeke helpes without a right order, are theſe wordes oppoſed. Be ſtill then and knowe, &c. that is, be ſilent, looke for helpe from God, runne not hither and thither into Egypt, into Syria, to the Turkes, nor to the Afrikes. In a good cauſe be ye of quiet mindes, and looke for defence from God: and if any thing happen otherwiſe, it is yet better to endure calamities, than with indirect enterpriſes to blemiſh a good cauſe.
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 11
                     The Lord of Hoſtes is with vs: The god of Iacob is our refuge.
                  
                  
                     The laſt verſe is a concluſion, containing a teſtimony of Gods preſence in his church: and of deliuerances in calamities, which are not to be ouercome or vanquiſhed by mans enterpriſe.
               
            
         
         
            PSAL. XLVII. Omnes gentes plaudite manibus.
            
            
               
                  To him that excelleth, a Pſalme (exhortatory) committed to the ſonnes of Korah.
                  
               
            
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               
                  THis is a notable prophecy touching the calling of the Gentiles, which ſaint Paul in his Epiſtle the ſecond and third chapters to the Epeſians doth greatly manifeſt, where he teacheth, verſe eleuen, The Gentiles were in times paſt without God, without Christ, without his holy Spirite, without promiſe of the Goſpell, and without hope of eternall life. Then the which miſery none could bee conceiued greater. For what is man, ignorant of God and of Chriſt, but the enimy of God? the dwelling place of the Deuill, and a Caſt-away from God? not yet in trueth ſeeing the wrath of God, but within a while after ſhall feele it: and when he would eſcape beyonde all courſe of nature, yea and would be vtterly brought to nothing, and yet cannot, but ſhall be tormented with ſorrow euerlaſting. This horrible figure muſt we thinke vppon, that we may learne to extoll the gathering of the Church from amongſt the Gentiles. For at this day, the Gentiles which are called vnto the ſociety of Gods

people, are Citizens with the Saintes, and of the houſeholde of God, 2. Epheſ. 19. And againe, Coheires of one body, and coparteners of the promiſe touching Chriſt. Let others therefore be in loue with frayle and momentany benefits, let them thirſt after vaine honours, let them ſeeke after corrupt pleaſures, and their inſtruments: Let vs meruel at, and magnifie this benefit, that we are cooptate into the City of God, and Common wealth of the heauenly Citizens, where, together with the bleſſed Angelles we ſhall liue for euer and euer, and ſhall be filled full of lights and righteouſneſſe in God.
            
            
               Pſal. XLVII. And expoſition thereof.
               
                  
                     Verſe 1
                     O clappe your hands together (al ye people) O ſing vnto god with the voyce of melody.
                     Verſe 2
                     For the Lord is high and to be feared: he is the great king vpon all the earth.
                     Verſe 3
                     He ſhall ſubdew the people vnder vs, and the nations vnder our feete.
                     Verſe 4
                     He ſhall chuſe out an heritage for vs, euen the worſhip of Iacob whome he loued.
                     Verſe 5
                     God is gone vp with a merry noyſe: and the Lord with the ſound of the trumpe.
                  
                  
                     
                        THe kingdome of god (ſaith Paul) is not meate and drinke, but righteouſnes and peace, and ioy, in the holy ghoſt. Rom. 14. 17. This Pſalme deſcribing this kingdome of God, and Chriſt, is an exhorter vnto all people to clappe their hands together and to ſing with the voyce of melody, that is, let them ſhew with geſture and ſpeech their ioyfulneſſe illumined by the holy ghoſt: For ſeeing ioyfulneſſe is a motion wherewith the

heart contenteth himſelfe in ſome good thing, that good thing theweth what is the obiect or contrary vnto this ioyfulneſſe. Becauſe Iehouah the high, fearefull and great king aboue all the earth, that is, bicauſe the Meſſias God and man is the conqueror of ſinne and death, and beſtoweth this victory vpon all that beleeue, according to this ſaying. 1 Cor. 5. 57. But thankes be vnto God, which hath giuen vs the victory through our Lord Ieſus Chriſt. Againe Ioh. 16. Be yee of good comfort, I haue ouercome the world. verſe. 33. Moreouer, I liue and you ſhall liue alſo. Iohn. 14. 19. Namely, through my merite and effectuall power: For I by my paſſion haue deſtroyed ſinne and death, and by my reſurrection I am ſo effectuall, that I will reſtore vnto you righteouſneſſe and life euerlaſting. This victory and effectuall 
                        •
                     power of Chriſt raigning doth Paul freely confeſſe that he had not as yet comprehended at all, and ſaith further, his ſtrength ſtriueth that he may by ſome meanes comprehend the ſame. The ſame confeſſion let euery one of vs haue in mouth and mind, and craue, that with a face vncouered, we beholding the glory of God, may bee transformed as it were into the ſame image from brightnes to brightnes as it were of the ſpirit of the Lord. 2. Cor. 3. 18.
                  
                  But, although this be the ſumme of the verſes, which I haue recited; yet notwithſtanding let vs (if it pleaſe you) weigh and conſider all the words: the Meſſias is expreſly called Iehouah: wherefore ſeeing this name diſcerneth God from creatures and from all idols, no 
                        ••
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                      there is diuine nature in the Meſſias. Againe vnto the Meſſias is attributed highnes, or greatnes, which may be vnderſtood two waies, abſolutely and relatiuely: for abſolutely he is ſo exalted, that hee ſitteth at the right hand of God, and is God of the liuing and of the dead; like as he himſelfe ſaith. Math. 28. Vnto me is giuen all power in heauen and in earth, verſ. 18. But, relatiuely, hee

is exalted in true acknowledgement, and inuocation, wherein we craue and looke for from him neceſſary benefits for our body and our ſoule: and with a conſtant confeſſion, wherein we preferre this Lorde before all other things of our life, poſſeſſions and peace.
                  But, why is the epithet or word (Terrible) added? Not vainely nor vnaduiſedly is our King adorned with this title: for as he is proſperous and wiſhfull vnto vs, ſo he ſtriketh our enimies with feare, which no creature is able to expreſſe at full. As for example, the deuils do horribly tremble, becauſe they know aſſuredly that the ſonne of God wil iudge them: and they ſee before hand their puniſhments wherewith they ſhal be tormented world without end. The fourth particle, (The great king aboue all the earth) diſcerneth the king Chriſt from all gouernements. For, no Monarchy euer yet contained all the whole earth. For, it is manifeſt, that the vtmoſt bounds of the Roman monarchy (I wil not ſay of others) reached not beyond Euphrates; neither did the Perſians, Parthians nor the other Eaſt people at any time come in ſubiection vnder the Romanes. But this king gathereth his Church from out of al mankind, though the kingdomes of the world ſpight and repugue at the ſame. For, He is the king of glory, as in the 24. pſalme. and 10. verſ. it is ſaid, whoſe vaſſals and court-keepers are all the kings and Princes of the earth. Let vs therefore feare this king, and let us preferre his commaundements before the vngodlie decrees of all other kings, according to the rule, Acts. 5. 
                     
                        〈…〉
                      
                     
                        
                           ••
                        st obey God more then men.
                  
                  But where it followeth, (He ſhall ſubdue the peopleThe Iewes falſe & fabulous dreames of the kingdom of Chriſt vnder vs) that do the Jewes falſly wreſt to the dreame of the politicall kingdome of the Meſſias. For they imagin that the Meſſias hauing conquered the gentiles, ſhal only raigne in this world and ſhal with a iuſt and peaceable gouernment rule the nations of the world according to the law of Moſes: but this imagination do, both many other

things refute, which here I omit for vreuity ſake, and alſo the very firſt verſe of this pſalme. 7. O clappe your hands togither all yee people, &c. For no man oppreſſed with thraldome, and caſt vnder other mens feete hath been ſeene to take any great pleaſure by that eſtate of life. If therfore the Iſraelits only ſhould rule in the world, hauing enthralled the gentiles, ſurely I vnderſtande not what cauſe ſhoulde poſſibly ſtirre vp other people to ſo great ioyfulnes. Wherefore caſting away the dreames of Jewiſh dotages, let vs vnderſtand this verſe touching obedience due to the miniſtery according to the goſpell. For as S. Paul ſaith, 2▪ Cor. 10. 4. & 5. verſ. The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God, to caſt downe 
                           •
                        oldes. Caſting downe the imaginations and euery high thing, that is exalted againſt the knowledge of God, and bringing into captiuity euery thought to the obedience of Chriſt. Furthermore, though it be moſt true, that the people of Iſrael were in time paſt peculiarly beloued of God: yet, after the Jewiſh pollicy or gouernment was deſtroied▪ let vs know that there was no difference betweene the Jew and the Grecian, but that the heritage of the ſonne of God, is in all beleeuers, whether they bee called Jewes or Gentiles: like as S. Peter ſpake in the houſe of Cornelius: Actes. 10. verſ. 34. Of a truth I perceiue there is no reſpect of perſons with God. verſ. 35. But in euery nation, he that feareth him, and worketh righteouſnes is accepted with him. Let therefore the vaine bragging of the Jewes be quite driuen away, wherein they ſtriue▪ or contend, that they only are the heritage and peculiar people of God: becauſe as S. Paul ſaith, Ro. 9. ver. 8. They which are the children of the fleſh are not the children of God; but the children of the promiſe, are counted for the ſeede.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Verſe. 5.
                     God is gone vp with a merrie noiſe: and

the Lord with the ſound of a trumpe.
                  
                  It is a thing manifeſt, that the pſalme alludeth vnto the repreſentation of a triumph wherein a multitude of ſouldiers and people carried from place to place doth gratulate and reioice in the victory of their chiefe Captaine, partly with their voices, & partly with the ſound of trumpets, extolling his wonderfull and deuine felicity. But where it is ſaid, that our king is gone vp on high, it muſt needes be, that he firſt deſcended, or went downe: for ſo ſaint Paul reaſoneth in the 4. cap. Epheſ. 9. 10. verſes. Now in that he aſcended, what is it but that he alſo had deſcended firſt into the lower partes of the earth? He that deſcended is euen the ſame that aſcended, farre aboue all heauens that he might fill all things? That is, he which ſuffered the horrible feeling of Gods wrath againſt our ſinnes, &c. But of this aſcending and deſcending ſhall more hereafter be ſpoken in the 68. Pſalme.
               
               
                  
                     Verſe. 6.
                     O ſing praiſes, ſing praiſes vnto our God; O ſing praiſes, ſing praiſes, vnto our King.
                     Verſe. 7.
                     For, god is the King of all the earth: ſing ye praiſes with vnderſtanding.
                  
                  By the word (Singing) ſo often repeated, hee clearely declareth, and not obſcurely, what manner worſhippings this king requires ſpecially: for he is not worſhipped with gorgious ornamentes, nor with tragedies made vpon ſilly captiues, but he that will ſeeke to pleaſe this king, muſt ſing, yea, and ſing with vnderſtanding, that is, he muſt embrace true doctrine, with faith and good conſcience, and muſt profeſſe, and propagate or aduance the ſame. Theu doe not the enemies or contemners of true doctrine ſing with vnderſtanding, but they call vpon him with a contradiction or gain-ſaying. Neither doe Hipocrites (which breake the commaundementes of God, euen againſt their

conſcience) ſing with vnderſtanding, no, though they profeſſe the doctrine, bycauſe The kingdome of God conſiſteth not in word, but in power. 1 Cor. 4. 20. Therefore as Saint Paul ſaith. Let vs fight the good1. Tim. 6. 12. fight, keeping fayth and good conſcience, that is, let vs not yeld our ſelues to error, ſtriuing with the foundation of articles of fayth, neither let vs fall away againſt conſcience.
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 8
                     God raigneth ouer the heathen: God ſitteth vpon his holy ſeate.
                  
                  Although the ſonne of God hath alwayes euen from the very beginning gouerned the natiōs of the earth with a general action: namely, with ſuch wherein he is preſent with all creatures, ſo as he preſerueth them ſo long as he will preſerue them, and he deſtroyeth whome hee will deſtroy: yet by an other meanes hee is at this day preſent with the Gentiles called vnto the ſocietie of the church; namely, wherby he not only preſerueth the liues of them, but alſo worketh motions in them acceptable vnto him, and beginneth new light and righteouſneſſe. Touching this gouernement of Chriſt, ſeeing I haue elſe-where oftentime ſpoken, I come now to the next verſe.
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 9
                     The Princes of the people are ioyned vnto the people of the God of Abraham: for God (which is very high exalted) doeth defend the earth as it were with a ſhield.
                  
                  In al ages from the beginning of mankind there haue bin, and are, and ſhalbe ſome Magiſtrates or rulers choſen of God vnto eternall ſaluation, and called vnto the ſocietieKings and Princes are ſhieldes of the earth. of the true church: Touching this calling of Princes, this laſt verſe makes moſt ſweete mention. For firſt, it calleth them Shieldes of the earth, that is, defenders

of good men and good maners, and reputing their countries benefits to be their ſpeciall and chiefe commodities. For, good Princes are the preſeruers of peace and diſcipline, defending the bodies and goods of their ſubiects againſt vniuſt violence: thruſting away robberies and enemies. Therefore Alfonſus king of Naples had this proper creſt to his Armes, A Pelican ſucking out her owne blood for to feed her yong ones with. And he put therevnto this his poſie or ſentence, Pro lege, & pro grege, that is, for the law, and the people. And Achilles in the 9. booke of Homers Ilyades ſaith:

                        Sicut Auis, quae pro pullis implumibus ipſa
                        Euolat, & paſtum miſeris parat, haud ſecus ipſe
                        Pro Danais mala multa ferens quot ſaepe peregi
                        Peruigiles noctes, quot luces marte cruentas
                        Aſsiduò, dum bella gero, dum praelior ipſis:
                        Proque viris & coniugibus Dan
                              •
                           umque ſalute.
                     
                     
                        Like as the bird which for her yong ones flies
                        Forth, meate to get, and there with them to fee de,
                        So for my Graecians ſuffering harmes likewiſe
                        How many nights haue I watcht for their neede?
                        How many daies with martiall cruell might
                        Haue I made warres, whiles for all theſe indeede
                        Both men, and wiues, and Greekes welfare I fight.
                     
                  
                  Furthermore, it ſaieth, that they are ioyned vnto the people of the god of Abraham, as Noah faith in Gen. 9. 27. They dwell in the Tabernacles of Sem, that is, they are the companions of the true church of God, and do ſupport and cheriſh the ſame with godly dueties. Truly it is a great glory to be accompted and called a Shield of the earth, and a Tree, vnder which ſubiects are fedde. But it is a farce greater honor to be ſeene in that ſocietie, whoſe gouernour and head is the Sonne of God, and

which is ſanctified with the holy ſpirite vnto life euerlaſting.
                  Although then there haue beene mighty men and profitable perſons to their country, as Fabius and Scipio was: yet, by right we do preferre before theſe gouernours, Dauid, Ioſias, Conſtantine, Theodoſius, Iohn Frederike Duke of Saxony, and ſuch other like, who were not only members of the true church, but alſo with their godlie duties furthered the aduancement of the doctrine of God, of inuocation, and of life euerlaſting. Laſt of all, this verſe affirmeth, that God is very high exalted of the ſhieldes of the earth: Let this particle be applied vnto the perſons and dueties of Magiſtrates and Rulers: ForKings and princes wherin they exalt the Lord. then do the perſonages of Princes exalt the Lord, when they ſubmit and yeelde themſelues and all theirs which they haue in poſſeſſion, vnto Chriſt: and doe preferre the goſpel before their tranquilitie, life, and al worldly goods whatſoeuer: Such do rightly ſpreade their clothes before Chriſt. But as to duety appertaineth, the Lord is exalted by them in the ordinance of churches and ſchooles, wherein the worde of God dwelleth plentifully with all wiſedome. Let godly princes therefore vſe this verſe as a cognuſance or armes, and let them thinke that they are Shieldes of the earth: and not that indeed onely, but alſo that they are members of Gods people, and verely euen the chiefe and head members, whoſe race and courſe of life maketh moſt to the glory of Almightie God, and the ſaluation of many men.
               
            
         
         
            
            PSAL. XLVIII. Magnus Dominus & laudabilis valde.
            
            
               
                  A Song or Pſalme of deliuerance, committed to the ſonnes of Korah.
                  
               
            
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               
                  THis Pſalme is a moſt ſweete Sermon as touching the Church, containing doctrine, conſolation, and precepts: For, firſt it deſcribeth the church, and diſcerneth her from other ſects. For alThe Church diſcerned from other ſects. other ſects do onely teach the particle of the lawe touching externall diſcipline, and others deuiſe other worſhippings of Idolles: but they are vtterly ignorant of the Sonne of God and of the goſpell, that is, the promiſe of the free remiſsion of ſinnes, of reconciliation, and of the inheritance of euerlaſting life to be giuen by faith in the ſonne our mediator. But in the church is retained an vpright & ſcund doctrine of the Law and the goſpel, and the knowledge of the Sonne of God for vs crucified and raiſed from death to life. And that alone congregation (wherein the ſonne of God our Lord Ieſus Chriſt is acknowledged, who was crucified & raiſed from death to life) is the church indeede, praiſing and worſhipping God with true inuocation. This difference is needeful to be holden by

vs againſt Thammerus, Latomus the Louaniſt, Stenchus
                  Heretickes of our time. and ſuch other like, which do worke infinit confuſion, and imagine that the members of the church are in all places whether they be Ethnicks or others whoſe liues or manners are honeſt. After this, the Pſalme proponeth here a Conſolation very neceſſary touching the ſtabilitie of the Church: which as a Rock immoueable ſtandeth faſt in the ſea, according to thoſe verſes.

                     Vt pelagi rupes magno veniente fragore,
                     Quae ſeſe multis circumlatrantibus vndis
                     Mule tenet, ſcopuli nequicquam & ſpumea circum
                     Saxa fremunt, laterique illiſa refunditur alga.
                  
                  
                     As rocke or huge ſea bancke, (which ſowſing tide
                     With roaring waues ruſh-on) doth firme abide:
                     Nor rocke nor foaming ſtone do fret or fume,
                     But flagge or reede ytoſte to the ſhoare conſume.
                  
               
               For although, Turkes, tyrannicall Kinges, and Biſhops prepare and practiſe all their force and indeuor to the deſtruction of the Church: yet the gates of hell ſhall not preuaile againſt her. Math. 16. 18. neither ſhall the power of this world deſtroy her vtterly: Finally this pſalme deliuereth vs a precept, which biddeth vs to loue helpe, and adorne the true Church. This precept, O that euery man would in his place orAn admonition to loue, help, and adorne the true church. calling obſerue, and woulde not rend the Church with diſcordes, nor would not ſuffer the Cruelty of thoſe Tyranes to rage: But becauſe many men are little moued at this exhortation, it is therefore not to be merueiled at, that in euery place there are ſo many offenders which bleu
                     •••
                   the beuty of the Church: But woe be vnto them, by whom offences come. Matthew 18. 7.
            
            
               
               Pſal. XLVIII. And expoſition therof.
               
                  
                     Verſe 1
                     Great is the Lord, and highly to be praiſed: in the city of our God, euen vpon his holy hill.
                     Verſe 2
                     The hill of Sion is a fayre place, and the ioy of the whole earth: vpon the north ſide heth the Cittie of the great King, God is well knowen in her pallaces as a ſure refuge.
                  
                  
                     THe Churches proper glory (as I haue oft elſewhereThe churches proper glorie. ſaid) is true knowledge of God with true inuocation & worſhiping of him: this glory doth this pſalme with great exiellē
                     
                        •
                     y of words deſcribe. For it compareth the Church to a City and a hi
                        •
                      wherein God is praiſed, and worſhipped, partly with doctrine deliuered from himſelf, partly with obedience which he requireth. Furthermore he compareth the church vnto a farre place bringing forth moſt wholſome balme, which healeth woundes without ſorowe. For the preaching of the goſpell which the Church ſoundeth in the world is a remedy effectuall, taking away ſinne, and death: But why maketh he ſo often mention of the hill Sion? Becauſe the Sone of God was in Jeruſalem crucifyed and raiſe
                        •
                      from death to life, and after that diſperfed his gla
                        •
                      tidings of the goſpell throughout the whole world: Like as Iſayias in his 2. chap. 3 verſe. and Micheas. in his 4. chap. 2 verſe. did forſhew the ſame, Out of Sion ſhall the lawe goe and the word of the Lord out of Ieruſalem. Unto this hill ſhall al the nations runne, that is, they ſhall embrace the do
                        ••
                     rme publiſhed out of Sion. They their which altogether either refuſe and deſpiſe this worde, (the preaching where of is begunne in Sion) as the Mahometiſis and blaſphemous Jewes do, or they which vngodly & filthily corrupt the ſame, as the heritikes of all

ages, and the ſtubberne Papiſtes do: Let vs knowe, that theſe are not the Church, but the enemies of the ſonne of God and the chaffe ordayned vnto the eternall fire.
                  But ſome man will obiect, what difference is there betweene the Church of God and other Sectes ſeeing all men do acknowledge there is a God the creator and ruler of the world, and that we muſt obey him, according as there is difference betwene good and bad: Truly this is ſomewhat to purpoſe, but in this thing conſiſts not all things. For although other ſects do affirme that there is one deuine eſſence: yet not with ſtanding they are ignorant of the three perſons, the Father, Sonne, and Holyghoſt, eternall. For Chriſt ſaith expreſly in Iohn. 5. 23. Hee that honoureth not the Sonne, honoureth not the Father. Againe. Iohn. 14. 6. No man commeth vnto the Father but by mee Furthermore, although they knowe in ſome part the will of God manifeſted in the lawe or decalogue, yet the knowledg of the firſt table touching the true worſhipping of our God, and the vnderſtanding of the ſixt commaundement touching Chaſtitie is almoſt vtterly extinguſhe with people of other Sectes: as the horrible Confuſion in their worſhipings and luſtes doth ſhewe. Thirdly, they are altogether ignorant of Gods will in the goſpell manifeſted, touching remiſſion of ſines and life euerlaſting freely to be giuen vnto beleeuers for the Soune of God our Lord Jeſus Chriſt ſake. Therefore they cannot perſwade themſelues that God is a deliuerer and helper in their miſeries, but they do remaine in doubting, and at length fall headlong into deſperation. Theſe differences betweene the true Church and other ſects let euery one of vs imprint as ſeales in our minds, 
                        •
                     eſt that wee ſtraying from that Congregation, which is, and is called the true Church, ſhould be entangled with other Se
                        •
                     ts which are condemned by God.
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 3
                     For, loe, the Kings of the earth are gatherred:

and gone by together.
                     Verſe 4
                     They marueiled to ſee ſuch things: they were aſtonied, and ſodainely caſt downe.
                     Verſe 5
                     Feare came vpon them, and ſorrow: As vppon a woman in her trauell.
                     Verſe 6
                     Thou ſhalt breake the Shippes of the ſe a, through the caſt winde.
                     Verſe 7
                     Like as we haue harde, ſo haue wee ſeene, in the cittie of the Lord of hoaſts, in the Cittie of our God, God vpholdeth the ſame for euer.
                  
                  Hetherto hath he deſcribed the true Church. Nowe addeth he vnto her a conſolation touching her perpetuallA conſolation touching perpetuall ſtabilitie of the church. ſtability: And all men vnderſtand that the Church had great neede of this Conſolation againſt Her
                        •
                     tilies, Tyrantes, and their champions, yea, againſt Deui
                        •••
                     s, which rage more cruelly, becauſe they knowe within a while their iudgement is at hand, where in their filthines ſhall be plainely manifeſted or laid open before all Angels and men. But to the end the meaning of theſe verſes may be more apparant, I will breefely rehearce out of the fourth booke of Theodoretus, the hiſtory of Valence, the Emperor, whome God not onely reſirained with fearefull famine, but alſo with a tragicall death de
                        ••
                     r
                        •
                     ied: that he ſhould not be able to vſe cruelty againſt the Church after the luſt of his owne heart.
                  When Valens would needes confirme with his ſubſcription letters conteyning a Commaundement to baniſh quyte Baſilius, the biſhop of Caſaria, he was not able to make one letter (no when as God would he had worneVide Polyd. Vi
                           •
                        g. inuent. cap. 6. his penne to the vtmoſt) which when it hapned the ſecond time, and yet he would needes enforce the confirmatiou of an vngodly decree, euen then did his right hand ſhake and tremble with feare. There he at length beeing fearefull troubled ſtraitway cut in peeces the paper, which he

had taken betweene both his handes, and he is a moderator of all his affects though hee had ſo done well, and found that others had taſted like vexation by his ſufferance, and that Baſilius was proued a better man then that he was worthy of any ſuch iniurie▪ Afterward the GothesGods iuſt iudgement 
                           •
                        t
                           •
                         deſtroying Valence the tyrannicall Emperour. hauing taken the ſtreete wherein Valence purpoſed to hide him ſelfe (beeing knowen by the vproare made by his owne men) they both ſet fire vpon the place, and with all, burned to death the very ſame enimy to chriſtian Religion: This puniſhment ſuffered Valence for his miſchefes, and that euen in this life. But the verſe which foloweth laſt of theſe (Like as we haue heard, ſo haue we ſeene in the City of our God, &c.) admoniſheth the Reader of two cheefe things, firſt, touching the efficacie of Gods word, next of the difference betweene philoſophicall and Chriſtian aſſenting. For the worde of God is not a vayne ſound, and as the Graetians ſay, No vaine prating or langling, but is approued in purpoſe and euent. For ſeeing God is true, he ſheweth with horrible examples of puniſhments, that his threatnings are ſure and certaine. Moreouer the promiſes of God are not vayne delectations, after a ſort pleaſing mens mindes, but are conſolations in very deede, the efficacy whereof al ſ
                        •
                     ch as truly repent and beleeue the goſpell haue ſure triall of. For as we do heare, that they which are iuſtified by fayth haue peace of conſcience: So in true conuerſion we feele peace and tranquilitie of heart to riſe from confidence or ſure truſting in the Mediator. Againe, like as the promiſes are publiſhed touching ſtabilitie of the Church, ſo the thing ſheweth that the Church cannot be deſtroyed by the furies of tyrants and heretikes. Let vs therefore put great difference betweene the word of God, and the word of creatures, For he ſpake, and it was done, he commaunded, and it ſtoode faſt, verſe 9. Also this place (as I ſaide) admoniſheth vs touching difference betweene philoſophicall aſſenting and chriſtian faith: For

in philoſophie, aſſent followeth experience, as the 
                        ••
                     hyſitian hauing approoued that ginger doth warme the ſtomacke, afterwardes affirmeth the ſame. But in diuine conſolation, we muſt aſſent or graunt vnto the externall word, and then followeth conſolation. Theſe things muſt we learne in the true exerciſes of repentance and inuocation.
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 8
                     We wait for thy louing kindnes (O God) in the middes of thy Temple.
                     Verſe 9
                     O God, according vnto thy name, ſo is thy praiſe vnto the worldes end: thy right hand is full of righteouſnes.
                     Verſe 10
                     Let the mount Sion reioyce, and the daughters of Iuda be glad, becauſe of thy iudgements.
                  
                  Forſomuch as thy promiſes are not fabulous & vaine, but true, ratified and effectuall, we looke for mercy, according to thy promiſes, that is, benefites neceſſary for the body and ſoule (for mercy is oftentime taken for well-doing) and that indeede in the middeſt of thy Temple, that is, in the ſocietie of the true church, without the which there is neither any ſaluation nor life. Unto this acknowledgement doth ſpirituall worſhip and ioy appertaine: for rightly and learnedly ſaide Auguſtine touching the bleſſed ones: 
                        Tantum gaudebunt, quantum amabunt, tantum
                        Auguſtines ſaying touching the bleſſed ones. 
                        amabunt, quantum cognoſcent. They ſhall reioyce ſo much as they ſhalloue, they ſhal loue ſo much as they ſhall know. For euery affect or motion riſeth from the knowledge ſhewing the obiect, as it is ſaide, 
                        Ignoti nulla cupido, Men deſire not that they knowe not. To this intent or meaning the Pſalme ſaith here, O God, according vnto thy name, that is, thy acknowledgement, ſo is thy praiſe, that is, the worſhip following that acknowledgement. For ioy vnſpeakeable is the companion both

of acknowledgement and worſhipping of God, which he deſcribing ſaieth; Let the mount Sion reioyce, and the daughter of Iuda be glad, that is, the vniuerſall church, and all the godly ones, becauſe of thy iudgements, or becauſe thou art Judge. For euen as God ſharply puniſheth his enemies, the epicures and blaſphemous perſons: ſo he exerciſeth lenitie or mercy towardes the godly ones, and always in his anger thinkes vpon mercy. This great mercy of God mitigating puniſhementes which we haue deſerued, all mindes and tongues ought to haue in reuerence, like as Ieremy ſaith Lament. 3. 22. It is the mercies of the Lord that we are not deſtroyed.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 11
                     Walke about Sion, and goe round about her, and tell the towers thereof.
                     Verſe 12
                     Marke wel her bulwarkes, ſet vp her houſes, that ye may tel them that come after.
                     Verſe 13
                     For this God is our God for euer and euer, he ſhalbe our guide vnto death.
                  
                  
                     Plato ſaieth, 
                        Magis amandam eſſe Patriam quam Matrem,
                        Platoes ſaying touching the loue of our countrey. 
                        quia paetria ſit diuinum quiddam; We muſt loue our country more than our mother, becauſe our countrey is a diuine benefit. But our true countrey ought to be the church, and this is diuine indeede: for it is the temple of God and the congregation of Chriſtes members. Wherfore, to loue, adorne, help, and preſerue this, ought euery man to beſtow the addition of their dueties: Let the teachers teach aright, and with good conuerſation adorne the doctrine, and let them bee ſtudious of publike concord, and let them ſuffer and beare with ſome inconueniences, leſt they troble the publike peace of the church: let the Magiſtrates maintaine peace and diſcipline, and ſhew themſelues nurſing fathers of the church, and of the ſchooles. Let ſchollers learne the doctrine neceſſarie touching God, and other good effectes needefull for mankind,

leſt the knowledge of God be extinguiſhed amongſt men, but let the church be preſerued, and many bee made heires of eternall life, and let diſcipline be kept in vre. Finally, let euery one pray for thoſe things which concerne the peace of Hieruſalem, as in the 122. pſalme and ſixt verſe it is ſaide: which thing▪ who ſhall ſo do, the hoped for harueſt ſhall not diſappoint their good expectation: for that pſalme promiſeth much peace to them that loue the church.
               
            
         
         
            PSAL. XLIX. Audite haec omnes Gentes.
            
            
               
                  To him that excelleth, a Pſalme exhortatory committed to the ſonnes of Korah.
                  
               
            
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               
                  THe whole Pſalme is an antitheſis or contraryA contrary deſcription of the Church and the vngodly ones. deſcription of the Church, and vngodly ones agreeing with the hiſtory of the rich Glutton, and Lazarus full of vlcers, as in the ſixeteenth of ſaint Lukes goſpel. The thing ſheweth, that the church is in this life ſubiect vnto perſecution, and is oppreſſed with the kingdomes of this world: But contrariwiſe the vngodly ones rule all at their will and carry ſtately countenances of credit. This inequalitie of euents ſo troubleth

many, that they deeme the doctrine of the Church to be like a Cypres tree, which though ſhee be thicke in ſhew, yet is voide and barren of fruit. But the Pſalme oppoſeth againſt this obiection an anſwer moſt chiefly agreeing thereto, which is borrowed of the iſſue or euent, as if he ſaid:

                     Exitus acta probat, careat ſucceſsibus opto, &c.
                     Ouid. epiſt. 3.
                  
                  
                     The end approoues thats done before,
                     A wiſher may want welfare the more.
                  
               
               Euery man thinketh the deeds are to be marked by their euents. I acknowledge, that the Church, and all the godly ones for many cauſes are not opreſſed with a light burthen of calamities, and that the vngodly ones doe (by Gods ſufferance) now and then flouriſh for a time: but at the time of death there is a great difference betweene the godly and vngodly ones: For as the dead which die in the Lord (that is, in true acknowledgement and calling vpon him) are bleſſed, Apoc. 14. 13. Becauſe they enioy the eternall company of God: So the death of the vngodly ones is the paſſage vnto eternal miſery. For as touching the godly ones it is ſaid expreſly, God ſhall deliuer my ſoule from the power of hell, becauſe hee ſhal receiue me, verſe 15. that is, he ſhall not leaue me in death and deſtruction. But contrarywiſe, of the vngodly ones it is ſaide, They ſhall neuer ſee light any more, verſe 19. That is, they ſhall not feele conſolation and gladneſse repoſed in God, but they ſhall remaine in torments for euer. Seeing therefore all things are in this life ſhort and momentany, this Pſalm calleth vs from the loue of brittle fading things, and carieth vs to the conſideration of death and of the future indgement, wherein the chaffe ſhalbe ſeparated from the wheate, and the wheate cornes ſhal for certaine be

gathered into the barne of euerlaſting life, but the vaine chaffe ſhall be burned with neuer quenched fire. If we will regard this iudgement, let vs with mightie courage ſuffer diſcommodities heere momentany, becauſe while we looke and turne vs about, as they ſay, behold immortality ſhall ſtrait be heere.
            
            
               Pſal. XLIX. And expoſition thereof.
               
                  
                     Verſe 1
                     O heare ye this all yee people: ponder it with your eares, all yee that dwell in the world.
                     Verſe 2
                     High and low, rich and pore one with another.
                     Verſe 3
                     My mouth ſhall ſpeake of wiſdome, and my heart ſhall muſe of vnderſtanding.
                     Verſe 4
                     I will incline mine eare vnto the parable, and ſhew my darke ſpeech vpon the harpe.
                  
                  
                     THe Pſalme purpoſing to ſpeake of a ſpeciallOf the difference betwixt the godly and the vngodly ones at the later iudgement matter, vſeth a ſtately beginning: I exhort all perſons without exception to draw neare and take knowledge, what is to be thought of the difference betweene the godly and vngodly ones, and of the future iudgment. For ſo it ſhall come to paſſe, that they ſhal not onely prouide for this mortall life, but ſhall with a true feare and faith, and other duties pleaſing God prepare themſelues vnto that iudgement which is to come. Beaſts frame themſelues fit vnto that thing onely which is preſent, and as the time ſerueth, very little regarding either that is paſt, or that which is to come: But men, becauſe they are partakers of reaſon and are created to the iudgement of God, let them ſo order the courſe of their whole life, that

they go not aſtray from the Commaundement of God. Whatſoeuer thou doeſt do it wiſely, and regard theEccles. 7. 36 end. And ſurely the end of our life is either eternall ſociety with God, or otherwiſe eternall miſerie: Let vs therfore chuſe the meane wayes leading vnto the hauen of euerlaſting beatitude, and withal indeuour (as they vſe to ſay) let vs eſchew perpetuall and moſt miſerable death. Cheled is deriued of the word Chadal, that is, ceſſauit, hath ceaſed. For, it is a familiar tranſpoſition of theMetatheſis. letters vſed in the hebrue tongue. This phraſe of ſpeech then ſignifieth, that the world within a while after ſhall haue his end, as in the I. Corin. 7. it is ſaid The faſhion of this world goeth away, verſe 31. Neither in deede isThe difference betwixt Homo and Vir in ſignification it hupoſtaſis a Forme, not Subſtance, as the Philoſophers ſpeake, but Emphaſis, that is, a baniſhing away. Furthermore the difference knowen betweene Homo, and Vir, which is oftentimes vſed by the Prophets and Apoſtles, as in Iohn. I. verſe. 13. Not of the will of the fleſh, nor of the will of man; For as Homo ſignifieth a baſe and obſcure perſon: So Uir ſignifieth a great and noble perſonage, excelling others in wiſdome, power, Juſtice and authoritie. Like as then Saint Paul ſaith, Rom. I and 14. verſe. That he is debter both to the wiſe man, and to the vnwiſe: So this Pſalme calleth vnto this ſermon, both high and low, learned and vnlearned perſons.Doctrine of future iudgement.
                  
                  Finaly, it calleth the doctrine of future iudgement, and of life and death euerlaſting, wiſedome, vnderſtanding, a parable and darke ſpeech, becauſe this ſecret wiſdome placed far beyond the ſight of mans reaſon, muſt be diſcerned from Phyloſophy. For the alone doctrine of the church affirmeth, there is a life remaining after that wee ſhal depart from hence, ſhe alone preacheth vnto vs touching the iudgment that ſhall be vppon all mankind, and nameth certaine witneſſes, which ſhalbe the beholders of many that being dead, ſhall liue againe.
               
               
                  
                  
                     Verſe 5
                     Wherefore ſhould I feare in the euill day, and when the wickednes of my heeles compaſſeth me round about?
                     Verſe 6
                     There be ſome that put their truſt in their goods, and boaſt themſelues in the multitude of their riches.
                  
                  Unto the beginning is annexed a Propoſition, which ſetteth downe a conſolation to be applyed from the example of one member, vnto the whole body of the church, as is here ſayd: Like as Lazarus being all full of ſoares ſtraied not away from God, becauſe he ſawe the rich manA reſemblāce of the Church in Lazarus, & her enemies, ſuch as Diues. Luke 16. 19, 20 abound with wealth and pleaſures, and himſelfe placed in an extreame ſtate of miſerable perplexity. So let not any the other Godly ones be ouercome with the threatnings and inticements of the world, that they thereby caſt away the goſpell, or doe any thing againſt the other Commaundements of God. This is the effect of the Propoſition.
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 7
                     But no man may deliuer his Brother: nor make agreement vnto God for him.
                     Verſe 8
                     For it coſt more to redeeme then ſoules: ſo that hee muſt let that alone for euer.
                  
                  There followeth a Reaſon which appeareth in the Antitheſis or contrarietie, as in the argument it is ſaide: For theſe verſes agree with that ſaying of Chriſt Math. 16. verſe 26 What ſhall it profite a man if hee gaine all the whole world, and loſe his owne ſoule. That is, the whole world is not a ſacrifice for ſinne, nor for death eternall, no nor yet for the death of the body. Why then are men ſo greatly carefull for things appertaining vnto this life? or why with ſuch diſquietnes ſeeke they after thoſe benefits, which can neither take away ſinne nor

death? But this prepoſterous care and greefe which the poet deſcribing crieth out vpon thus (O Ciues, Ciues, quaerend a pecunia eſt virtus poſt nummos) riſeth of a blindnes and ſecurity neglecting or contemning the iudgement of God, which euery one of vs after this death ſhall abide and ſuffer. Whereas if our whole life ſhould looke well vpon that Iudgement, truely ambitious honour, wealth, and filthy pleaſure ſhould leſſe trouble vs, which three the world doth eſteeme as three gods. But ſeeing this diſeaſe is farre more furious, then that it may by our owne abillityes be healed, or remedied, let vs flee vnto the Sonne of God: and craue that hee would illuminate our hearts with his holy ſpirit, ſo as vnto that iudgement we may bring but the beginnings of righteouſnes.
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 9
                     Yea, though hee liue long, and ſee not the graue.
                     Verſe 10
                     For, he ſeeth that wiſe men alſo die, and periſh together, as well as the ignorant and fooliſh, and leaue their riches for other.
                  
                  In the full poliſhing of the former verſes hee repeateth the ſame meaning: that, riches, power, and pleaſure are the fading benefits of this mortall life, and can neither driue away death, nor yet profite thoſe that are dead. For as we came naked out of our mothers wombe, ſo ſurely ſhall we returne into the earth either naked, or very thinly clothed. And here the Reader may repeate that ſaying in the 39. Pſalme 7. verſe. For man walketh in a vaine ſhadowe, and diſquieteth himſelfe in vayne, he heapeth vp riches, and cannot tell who ſhall gather them. That is, as Cicero in his dialog of Frendſhip ſayth, Catera cum parantur, cui parantur neſciunt, nec cuius cauſa laborent. Other things when they are prouided, or for whome they may be prouided, they knowe not, nor for whoſe ſake they take al that paines.
               
               
                  
                  
                     Verſe 11
                     And yet they thinke, that their houſe ſhal continew for euer: And that their dwelling places ſhall endure from one generation to another, and call the land after their owne names.
                     Verſe 12
                     Neuertheles man wil not abide in honour: ſeeing he may be compared vnto the beaſts that periſh.
                  
                  This is a patterne of the vngodly mens liues which dwell in goodly and gorgeous buildings, which are garniſhed with ſcutchions and pictures, and furniſhed withA patterne of epicurial pompous perſons ſuch as king Alexander. things wherein they abound, that are reputed for bleſſed: Such a life we all doe deſire, which exceedeth in pleaſure and other inſtruments. But the end ſheweth howe much vainitie there is in this trifling or britle brauery, when one ſeely houre may bring all topſituruy. All men will know what power and riches Alexander the great was of, who conſumed the huge treaſures almoſt incredible of theAnno mundi 3640. Perſian Kings, after his conqueſt obteined, and vppon Epheſtions funeral lauiſhed out twelue thouſand talents, that is, Threeſcore and twelue tunnes of golde, as wee call them. But this ſo mighty a perſonage when he had drunke too too much wine at the funeral feaſt of Epheſtion, and got himſelfe thereby a moſt greeuous burning feuer, died the 28. of June in the xxxii. yeare of his age, twelfth yeare of his raigne, and in the 323. yere before the birth of Chriſt. This example admoniſheth vs touching the incanſtancy of humane affaires, and ſetteth out this verſe of this Pſalme. Man will not abide in honour, &c.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Verſe. 13.
                     This is the way of them, and this is their fooliſhnes▪ and their poſterity praiſe their ſaying.
                  
                  That the chiefe felicity of man conſiſts in the pleaſures

of the body, not onely the epicure but the greateſt multitude of men doth ſo thinke. But this perſwaſion doth this Pſalme expreſly cal fooliſhnes: becauſe the obiect of mans will is not a benefit hauing end, that is, being ſhort and momentany, but a benefit without end and euerlaſting▪ as elſe-where more largely is ſaid in refutation of the epicure, and in the doctrine touching the obiect of mans will.
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 14
                     They lie like ſheepe, in the hell, death gnaweth vppon them and the righteous ſhal haue domination ouer them in the morning: their beutie ſhall conſume in the ſepulcher out of their dwelling.
                  
                  This verſe diſcribes the laſt degree of puniſhment alotted for the vngodly ones, namely eternall miſery which is a worme for euer gnawing the conſcience of man, and a fire neuer ceaſing, but without end tormenting them, as Iſayas ſayeth in his 66. and laſt chapter 24. verſe. TheirThe laſt degree of puniſhments alotted for the vngodly ones. worme ſhall not die, neither ſhall their fire be quenched. But as Neither the eie hath ſeene, nor eare hath heard, nor mans heart hath conceiued thoſe good things, which God hath prepared for them that loue him. 1 Cor. 2. 9. So no man can expreſſe either in thinking or ſpeaking the greatnes of the euerlaſting puniſhment ordayned for the wicked ones. But here ſome man would obiect, I ſee not by what reaſon Saint Paul being put to death by Nero, ſhould be lord ouer Nero: I anſwere, though Paul was ſlaine of a moſt cruell Tirant, yet was he not vtterly deſtroyed, neither was he left in deſtruction and death, as Nero is; but he is adorned with euerlaſting rewarde and in the laſt day of the world he ſhal with Chriſt iudge Nero and al the vngodly ones. Now indeede our life (as in the 3. Coloſs. verſe. 3. is written) is hidde with Chriſt in God. When

Chriſt which is our life ſhall appeare, then ſhall yee alſo appeare with him in glory. verſe 4. Then ſhall the vngodly ones haue in their minde and mouth the words extant in the 5. chapter of the booke of Wiſedome: verſe 3. Theſe are they whom we ſometime had in de
                        
                           •••
                        ion, and in a parable of reproofe. We fooles thought their liues madnes, and their end without honour, verſe. 4. Beholde how they are counted among the children of God, and their portion is among the ſaints. verſe. 5. Therefore we haue erred from the truth, &c. verſe 6.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Verſe. 15.
                     But God hath deliuered my ſoule from hell: For hee ſhall receiue me.
                  
                  Hetherto at large he handled the firſt parte of the Antitheſis, touching the vanitie and puniſhment of the vngodly ones which put all their full hope and confidence in their riches: Now doth he hereunto adioyne the other partie, as touching the godly ones, whoſe hearts are enclined vnto the teſtimony of the Lord, And not vnto death as in 119. Pſalme. is ſaid. And it promiſeth plainly vnto the Godly ones deliueraunce from euerlaſting death moſt miſerable, and reſtitution vnto life euerlaſting, for becauſe God in the very lawfull act of adoption receiueth and taketh vs for his children, it cannot be that he will leaue his deareſt children in death. Like as therefore in this life he giueth his holy ſpirit as a pledge and token of our inheritance: So when he hath raiſed vs from death to life, he will doubtles giue vs the full and perfect inheritance, and hee ſhall then be all in all. He then that hath this hope ſanctifieth himſelfe like as he is holy, ſaith Saint Iohn. 1. epiſt. 3. chapter. 3. verſe.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Verſe. 16
                     Be not thou afraid though one be made rich: or if the glorie of his houſe be increſed.
                     
                        Verſe 17
                     For hee ſhall carie nothing away with him when he dieth: Neither ſhall his pompe follow him.
                  
                  He repeateth a principal propoſition which comforteth the godly ones, leſt they taking offence at the felicitie and paſſing proſperitie of the vngodly ones, do ſlide away frō God, but that they would preferre the true and permanent good things before the ſhadowes of fraile and vaniſhing benefites. But ſeeing it is needeleſſe here with perſpicuous wordes to make any long interpretation, I wil recite two hiſtories worthy of memorie: which examples propone vnto the ſentence of the affirmatiue part, that the glory of exploits done, and other great benefites nothing auaile them that be dead: which things the blinde nature of man coueteth eſpecially. Saled▪ nus king of Aſia, SyriaSaladine liued about the yere of Chriſt. 1176. and Egypt ſaide, hee was not leſſe wiſe in his death, then when in his life time before, he had done any notable act: for he commanded that his very linnen garment next to his ſhert (which he vſed to weare) ſhould be borne vpon a long ſpeares point throughout all his tents, and he that carried it ſhould cry with a lowd voice and ſay, Saladine the conquerour of Aſia, of ſo great wealth which hee had gotten, caried away with him at his death but only this linnen garment. For wiſely, though lately being admoniſhed of mans miſery woulde hee alſo in ſuch ſort admoniſh others thereof. There is extant an hiſtorie in the ſeuenth booke and ſecond chapter of Baptiſta Fulgoſus, touching wiſe ſayings and doings: and as Dion writeth, theſe wordes are read of Seuerus the emperour:Seuerus died at Yorke in anno Chri
                           ••
                         212. Anno regni. 18. 
                     When as he lying at Yorke in Britaine neare the point of death, deploring mans miſeries ſaide, I haue beene all things, and nothing auaileth me.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 18
                     For while he liued, he counted himſelfe an happy man, and ſo long as thou doeſt

well vnto thy ſelfe, men will ſpeake good of thee.
                     Verſe 19
                     He ſhall followe the generation of his fathers, and ſhall neuer ſee light.
                     Verſe 20
                     Man being in honor hath none vnderſtanding, but is compared vnto the beaſts that periſh.
                  
                  Although (ſaieth he) the vngodly ſuperabound in pleaſures: yet within a while after they ſhall depart into the country of condemned perſons where is weeping & gnaſhing of teethe: for indeed damned perſons ſhall neuer ſee light, that is, conſolation, ioy and life, which the godlie ones ſhall poſſeſſe. But, as he ſaid before, Man wil not abide in honour; ſo now he ſaieth here, man is blinde in proſperitie and doth not acknowledge euen the Author of all goodneſſe, or the lawful vſe thereof, no, nor yet thinketh of his owne infirmitie, which is ſooner changed then the ſwifteſt flie that flieth. But let vs out of ſaint Paules ſayings learne theſe three things: firſt, from what fountaine good things come vnto vs: next, vnto what vſe good things granted by God are to be beſtowed: and laſt of all, how great our infirmitie is. Touching the firſt cauſe, let the ſaying be holden, 1. Corint. 4. 7. What haſt thou O man that thou haſt not receiued: or if thou haſt receiued it, why doeſt thou boaſt as though thou hadſt not receiued it? Touching the ſecond cauſe Saint Paul in 1. Cor. 12. 7. ſaith, All theſe things are giuen to the profit of the church. Touching the laſt cauſe there is extant a memorable ſentence 2. Cor, 4. verſe 7. Wee carry about vs this treaſure in earthen veſſelles, that the excellency of that power might be of God▪ and not of vs. And here I conclude this expoſition vpon this fortie nine Pſalme.
               
            
         
         
            
            PSAL. L. Deus deorum Dominus loquutus est.
            
            
               
                  
                     Of the Title; A Pſalme of Aſaph.
                     
                  
               
               THe Title admoniſheth the Reader touching that ſocietie of the Prophetes, which in the raigne of Dauid aduaunced the lawe and promiſes with ſpeech and writing: for, thinke with your ſelfe what conflicts and what conferences thoſe great perſonages Dauid, Nathan, the ſonnes of Chore, Aſaph, Heman,The praiſe of Dauid and his Muſicians▪
                      Ethan and Idithun had, whoſe Pſalmes lightſomely written by them are extant vnto vs. And in this place that I may ſay nothing of the reſt, who is ignorant what honourable mention is made of Aſaph ſo oftentimes in the Bookes of Paralipomenon or Chronicles lib. 2. cap. 29. verſ. 25, 26, 27.
               
               And Ezechias commaunded the chiefe of the Leuites to praiſe the Lord with the words of Dauid, & of Aſaph the Seer: whereby it appeareth that Aſaph the Author of this Pſalme was in great honour and reputation, and retained the very next place vnto Dauid in the Schoole of thoſe Prophets at that time.
               And in the ſecond Booke of Paralipomenon 35. chapter, And the Singers the ſons of Aſaph ſtood

in their ſtanding according to the commaundement of Dauid and Aſaph, and Heman and I dithun King Dauids Seers, verſe 15. Let vs therefore giue thankes vnto the Sonne of God ſitting at the right hand of the Father, and giuing ſuch giftes vnto his church: and let vs earnestly deſire the ſocietie of theſe perſons in the life euerlasting, and in the meane time let vs thankefully receiue thoſe crummes which fall from their table.
            
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               
                  THe fiftieth Pſalme is a notable doctrine touching fayth, true inuocation, and true worſhiping of God, and a refutation of the Ethnickes opinion in heaping vp ſacrifices. For this error is ſtraggled abroade in all ages amongſt all nations and people, That ſacrifices and other ceremonies are works pacifying Gods wrath, and merites remiſsion of ſinne by the deede done, as they now ſay. This opinion moueth mens minds that they heape vp ſuch ceremonies without end, it reprehendeth therefore this error deepely fixed in mens mindes, and ſheweth the true worſhipings of gods, repentance, feare of God, fayth which acknowledgeth the Mediator, and knoweth that we are for his ſake receiued, and yet it obſerueth ceremonies becauſe they are the teſtimonies of promiſes, and are ſignes of confeſſion and doe inuite others thereunto.
               So the prophet Ieremy in his 2. cap. reprehending the ſame error, ſaith verſe 22. For I ſpake not vnto your fathers nor commaunded them when I brought them out of the land of Egipt concerning burnt offerings and ſacrifices: But this thing commaunded I them ſaying, obay my voice. &c. verſe 23. And Chriſt ſaith in the fourth of Iohn,

verſe 23. True worſhippers ſhall worſhip the father in ſpirit and truth, that is, in true ſpirituall motions of the heart, ſuch as are repentance, feare of God, and faith, or confidence liuely beholding Chriſt.
               Finally, the diuine ſcripture is full of ſuch ſermons which muſt be conſidered, to the end hipocriſy may be reprehended, and true worſhiping of God may be illuminated or inlightned in vs. Thus much for the argument, and now to the expoſition of the Pſalme.
            
            
               Pſal. L. And expoſition thereof.
               
                  
                     Verſe 1
                     The Lord euen the moſt mightie God hath ſpoken, and called the world from the riſing vp of the Sunne to the going downe thereof.
                     Verſe 2
                     Out of Sion hath God appeared in perfect beuty.
                     Verſe 3
                     Our God ſhall come, and ſhall not keepe ſilence, there ſhall goe before him a conſuming fire: and a mightie tempeſt ſhall be ſtirred round about him.
                     Verſe 4
                     Hee ſhall call the heauen from aboue, and the earth, that hee may iudge his people.
                     Verſe 5
                     Gather my Saintes together vnto me: thoſe that haue made a couenant with mee with ſacrifice.
                     Verſe 6
                     And the heauens ſhal declare his righteouſnes: for God is iudge himſelfe.
                  
                  
                     THe Exordium or beginning of the PſalmeA firſt and ſecond comming of the Meſſias. is very great, wherein this is not onely ſignified, That God will haue his voyce to be heard of all mankinde, but alſo, a Sermon is ſet downe touching the twoo

folde comming of the Meſſias. For becauſe it maketh mention of the hill Sion, which is the ſtore-houſe of the goſpell publiſhed throughout all the world, no doubt, but the kingdome of Chriſt is deſcribed, as he firſt came in the fleſh. So therefore I vnderſtand the wordes of the Pſalme Iehou
                           •
                        h, the ſonne of God, which is the lord of of all creatures, and Logos the word,
                      by whom the father hath made himſelfe knowen vnto vs; by his voyce hath diſperſed the goſpell in lury, and as Paul ſaith, Was a miniſter of circumciſion. Heb. 8. 2. and being raiſed from death to life, gaue commaundement vnto the Apoſtles, to gather a church out of all nations by the miniſtrie of the goſpell, which thing ſheweth the glorie of God, and of his ſonne our Lord Jeſus Chriſt. And it is that glorie of Chriſt that hee of himſelfe hauing made a purgation or clenſing of our ſinnes, ſitteth on the right hand of maieſtie, in the heauens, beeing made heire ouer all, and lord aboue all principality, power, ſtrength, and dominion, is made of God for vs iuſtification, ſanctification, and redemption, as in Hebr. 1. 1. Col. 1. 1. Cor. 1. This glorie of Chriſt doeth the goſpell preach vnto vs. But for aſ much as the greateſt multitude of mankinde doth with horrible impiety contemne the acceptable comming of Chriſt full of louing kindnes and mercy, he addeth a ſermon touching the ſecond comming of Chriſt, which Saint Paul excellently describeth in 1. Theſſal. 4. 16. For the Lord himſelfe ſhal deſcend from heauen with a ſhowt, and with the voyce of the Archangell and with the trumpet of God, &c. This comming or comming againe of Chriſt, although it be proſperous and wiſhfull vnto the godly ones according to that ſaying. Luke. 21. 28. Then lift vp your heades, becauſe your redemption is nighe. Yet notwithſtanding it ſtriketh the vngodly ones with horrible feare, who ſhal then behold him whom they haue crucified, as Zacharias ſayeth cap. 12. verſe 12. For then when all men ſhall be

rayſed vp from death vnto iudgement, all diuilles ſhall be caſt away (yea, and all men which doe not firſt in this life turne vnto God) into euerlaſting torments.
                  And although it hath beene diuerſly diſputed vppon touching the interpretation of the 5. verſe, Gather my Saintes together, &c: yet I deeme this to be a moſt ſimple plaine meaning: There is a great multitude of hipocrits which boaſt themſelues to be the church, by reaſon of their profeſſion and ceremonies, when as their hearts are without true feare of God, and true fayth. From this multitude will I diſcerne mine owne people, that is, the right holy ones, which preferre the promiſe touching the mediator before ſacrifices, and doe knowe in what order ceremonies are to bee obſerued, and howe they pleaſe me namely by laying a foundation, that is, by acknowledging the mediator, and for his ſake in receiuing remiſſion of ſinnes, and beginning a new obedience morall in their heart, which the commandement of God requireth. Such holy ones are the faithfull keepers of the teſtament or promiſe from me deliuered, and they are the publiſhers of righteouſnes which is made manifeſt without the lawe, whereof the Lord and the Prophets doe beare witneſſe as in Rom. the 3. chapter.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Verſe. 7
                     Heare, O my people, and I will ſpeake: I my ſelfe will teſtifie againſt thee O Iſrael, for I am God, euen thy God.
                  
                  This apoſtrophe or turning ſpeech, appertaineth vnto the whole church, wherein there are not onely new borne members, but alſo many not new borne, but yet hauing a good opinion touching the true doctrine. Therefore it ſpeakes vnto them both, and truly it exhorteth thoſe new borne, to goe forwards in the race of godlines, but others to correct their opinions and affects, heare O my people (ſaith hee) a ſermon of the firſt commaundement, which

is the fountain and foundation of all other commaundements: I am the Lord thy God, that is, I haue madeExod. 
                           •
                        0. my ſelfe knowen vnto thee, not onely by a lawe giuen, but alſo by a promiſe publiſhed touching the mediator. Thou ſhalt therefore heare both kinds of doctrine, as well when the law preacheth vnto thee, thou ſhalt feare me vnfainedly without hipocriſie: and againe, when the promiſe preacheth vnto thee, thou ſhalt beleeue that I am thy God, that is, mercifull for the mediators ſake, looking vpon thee, hearing and ſauing thee, alſo giuing thee good things neceſſarie for thy bodie and thy ſoule. When thou haſt this fayth firſt ſhining forth in thee, then vſe the ceremonies which are ſignes of the promiſes and teſtimonies of thy confeſſion, and doe thou then 
                        •
                     uite other perſons to come into the ſociety of the church.
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 8
                     I will not reprooue thee becauſe of thy ſacrifices, or for thy burnt offerings: becauſe they were not alway before mee.
                     Verſe 9
                     I will take no bullocke out of thine houſe: Nor hee goates out of thy foldes,
                     Verſe 10
                     For all the beaſtes of the foreſt are mine: and ſo are the cattelles vppon a thouſand hilles.
                     Verſe 11
                     I knowe all the foules vpon the mountaines: and the wilde beaſts of the field, are in my ſight.
                     Verſe 12
                     If I be hungry I will not tell thee: for the whole world is mine and al that is therein.
                     Verſe 13
                     Thinkeſt thou that I wil eate Bulles fleſh, and drinke the blood of Goates?
                  
                  God affirmeth plainely, that hee taketh no delight in any worke done without acknowledgement and confidence in the mediator: But then doth the vſe of cermonies pleaſe him, when the perſon is by fayth imbraced,

and in the heart a morall obedience is begunne agreeable with the commaundement of God.
                  But as wee haue elſewhere often times vſed to compare Philoſophie with the doctrine of the church, becauſe the compariſon ſheweth the doctrine of the church to bee the more perfect: So euen in this place alſo let vs conferr the ſayings of Philoſophers (which diſcerne morall vertues from ceremonies) with the deuine prophecy of the Pſalme.
                  
                     Plato ſaith, 
                        Non geſtibus arte compoſitis demulcentes
                        Philoſophical rules ſhewing how God is to be worſhipped 
                        Deum, ſed vera virtute colentes;
                      which may thus be engliſhed: We muſt not regarde thoſe that flatter God with ſlie and ſubtill framed geſtures, but ſuch as worſhip him with true virtue. And Zaleucus the Law-giuer of the Locrenſes deliuered this law vnto his citizens; God is not worſhipped with pompe, nor tragedies ouer captiued perſons, as an euill man or tyrants, but he that will pleaſe God, ought to be good, not only in action, but alſo in the purpoſe of good and houeſt workes.
                  
                  Theſe ſayings, although they diſcerne learnedly the geſtures of ceremonies from the proper pointes of vertues, yet they ſpeake nothing touching faith and true calling vpon God, which are the Ladies and Queenes of other vertues. For other vertues are neither rightly gouerned, nor yet do pleaſe God, except faith and true praier firſt doe ſhine foorth. But this our Pſalme, not only preferreth morall obedience before ceremonies, but alſo ſheweth by what rule God is to be acknowledged, called vpon and worſhipped. For it affirmeth, that God hath deliuered a commaundement touching true prayer, and that hee hath promiſed to heare them that call vpon him, for the Mediator ſake: whereby it appeareth moſt manifeſt in what maner, euen in this point, the doctrine of the church is able to excell the doctrine of Philoſophie. Let vs therefore loue the wiſedome of the Church, and let vs

eſteeme this to be better than al the ſayings and writings of men.
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 14
                     Offer vnto God thankſgiuing, and pay thy vowes vnto the moſt Higheſt.
                     Verſe 15
                     And call vpon me in the time of trouble: ſo will I heare thee, and thou ſhalt praiſe me.
                  
                  Theſe two verſes beare themſelues correlatiuely with the firſt commaundement, that there is a mutuall leagueA mutuall league or couenant betweene God and his church or couenant betweene God and his church. God for his ſonnes ſake embraceth thee, and blotteth out thy ſinnes, and ſanctifieth thee vnto life euerlaſting: Thou againe knoweſt, that this is God indeed, who ſending his ſonne, and giuing his holy Spirit, hath made himſelfe knowen, and this true God doeſt thou call vppon in confidence of his ſonne. So is there made a mutuall couenant betwixt God and his church which are all they that truely beleeue in him. Offer vnto God (ſaith he) thankeſgiuing: that is, as the epiſtle of ſaint Paul cap. 13. 15. doth interpret it, The fruites of our lippes. And as he here ſaith, Pay thy vowes vnto the moſt Higheſt, that is, exerciſe thoſe vertues, whereunto the promiſe of the firſt commaundement bindes thee: which then are the vertues of this commaundement: Touching this queſtion, this pſalme anſwereth; Call vpon me in the day of trouble, ſo will I heare thee, and thou ſhalt praiſe me: As if he had ſaid, praier in time of trouble, and Thankeſgiuing for deliuerance are the chiefeſt and greateſt vertues of all others, touching which the firſt table enioyneth vs. Forſomuch then as the verſe of the Pſalme containeth a precept 
                        •
                      and promiſe to be conſidered in time of prayer, and in all the dangers of our life, I do exhort the godly Reader diligently to conſider with himſelfe the doctrine touching prayer and thankeſgiuing, which is vprightly and plentifully

expounded in places theologicall.
                  For there is a ſixe-fold conſideration of things neceſſaryA ſixefolde order to be conſidered in Prayer. in Praier; firſt, we muſt conſider what we call vpon, what maner of God, and where he made himſelfe knowen, to the ende thou maieſt diſcerne thy prayer from the prayer of the heathen: ſo in this place it is ſaide, CallWhat God we call vpon. vpon, not creatures, but me, the Creator and preſeruer of all things, made knowne by bringing the people out of Egypt, publiſhing the law, and ſending my onely begotten Sonne into the world. Secondly, we muſt conſiderThe commandement of God vnto vs. the commandement which is recited in theſe words, Call vpon me in the day of trouble: For, God will be worſhipped with crauing of his grace, or fauour, and other giftes; to the end he may be diſcerned from euil natures, and that this honour may be giuen him, that he is wiſe, good, liberal, giuer of life, wiſdome, and other good gifts, and that he vouchſafeth to communicate his benefites vnto vs. And like as the breaking of that commandement, Thou ſhalt not kill diſpleaſeth God: ſo alſo the breaking of the ſecond commaundement, which is the neglecting of praier, diſpleaſeth him, where it is ſaid Ioh. 14. 13. and 16. 23. Aske and ye ſhall receiue. The third conſiderationConuerſion of him that prayeth. concerneth our conuerſion: for ſome man would ſay, what ſhall I aſke, ſeeing it is written, God heareth not ſinners, Matth. 9. 31. Here we muſt take holde vpon the voice of the other Ezech. 33. 11. I liue (ſaieth the Lord) I will not the death of a ſinner, but that hee bee conuerted and liue. Let not him that calleth vpon God perſeuer and go forward in miſchiefes againſt conſcience, but let him be truely conuerted vnto God. And in euerie true prayer, conuerſion or repentance vnto God is made or increaſeth. The fourth conſideration is of the promiſePromiſe to him that praieth. of grace, and confidence of the Mediator, that wee may come vnto God according to the ſaying, Epheſ. 3. 12. By him we dare boldly come by faith in him. Needefull it is then that we firſt by faith receiue forgiuenes of ſins,

or reconciliation, and beleeue that praier pleaſeth God, and is not fruſtrate. Furthermore alſo other promiſes touching other benefits and the mitigation of calamities, muſt be looked vppon, as is here ſaide, Call vpon me in the day of tribulation, and I will deliuer thee. The fift conſideration of faith, here we muſt knowe, that faithAsking in faith: Beleeuing God. which craueth forgiueneſſe, reconciliation, life euerlaſting, and gouernment of the ſoule, ought in forme to craue theſe ſelfe ſame benefites, and looke for them without condition; becauſe God wil haue theſe to be craued for by name; and not to haue theſe gifts, is, to remaine an enemie of God, and to reproach God, or to iniure him according to the ſaying, He that beleeueth not in the Sonne, the wrath of God remaineth vpon him. Againe, he reproueth God of lying. But faith which craueth corporall good things, as Dauid crauing of God, that he might be brought againe into his kingdome, required it with a condition; if it pleaſed God: becauſe both things muſt be knowen of vs, that we muſt aſke theſe benefites, and yet, that the church muſt be ſubiect vnto the croſſe, and oweth obedience vnto God, according to the ſaying 1. Pet. 5. 6. Humble your ſelues vnder the mightie hand of God: and yet the prayer is not fruſtrated: for either the puniſhment is taken quite away, or elſe mitigated. Finally, needefull it is, that we moſt firmely keepe this rule: yea euen when we haue loſt our corporall benefits, and when we muſt aſſuredly forgo the life of the body, yet muſt we needes retaine the promiſe of grace and life euerlaſting, like as Iob ſaith cap. 13. 15. Yea thoug he ſhal kil me, yet will I truſt in him, and he ſhall be my Sauiour. The fixt conſideration of things to be craued, is, as ſaint Iohn ſaith in his firſt epiſtle ch. 5. 14, 15. Whatſoeuer thingAsking according to Gods will obtaineth all. you ſhall aske according to his wil he ſhal giue it you: that is, you may not aſke things forbidden by God, but ſuch as the manner of aſking them may agree with the table of the commandements, and with Gods promiſes,

touching ſpirituall and corporall benefits. And God will haue Prayer and Faith to be exerciſed of vs, in crauing, not onely ſpirituall, but corporall benefites, according to the ſaying in Mathew 6. 11. Giue vs this day our daily bread.
                  
                  For we muſt alwayes holde faſt the rule; In crauing of corporall benefites, faith ought to ſhine forth, which receiueth the promiſe of grace: and we muſt adde hereunto an admonition touching circumſtances; namely, of the time, and of the maner of our deliuerance: God wil haue his preſence in the church to be acknowledged, and his help to be craued and looked for: he will haue our faith, prayer and hope to be exerciſed, and will not haue mens counſels or mens deuiſes to beare any ſway in gouernement of our life; but hee will haue it knowen, that the church is gouerned by God aboue. He doth not then giue ſucceſſe by and by, and by ſuch maner of meanes, as mans reaſon conceiueth: like as Ioſeph, Ionas, and very many others in all ages were deliuered, far otherwiſe than they themſelues could deuiſe. Let theſe ſeeme to be ſufficiently well enough ſpoken touching Praier, becauſe there are exerciſed theologicall places in all mens hands, and other Bookes containing a longer explication or opening at ful of this vertue.
                  But like as God requireth of vs a petition in our praier, to the end we ſhould acknowledge that there is a God, and that he is almighty, preſent, and a helper, that hee might communicate himſelfe in ſuch acknowledgement vnto vs: So he requireth a giuing of thankes, that this acknowledgement may go forward in vs. For when the acknowledgement of God is extinguiſhed in vnthankeful perſons, God then ceaſeth any longer to communicate himſelfe vnto them: like as moſt part of ſecure perſons after benefites receiued, do trifle it out with ſuch like cogitations: perhappes thou art deliuered by chance, &c. ſo they loſe quite the acknowledgement and preſence of

God, when with the following commemoration and profeſſion they ought to nouriſh and confirme the acknowledgement of God and faith in him.
                  Seeing therefore Thankeſgiuing is a neceſſary worſhipping, there are for the moſt part, precepts ioyned together with Prayer and Thankeſgiuing; becauſe both of them are neceſſary vnto the acknowledgement of God, as in this Pſalme it is thus ſaid, Call vpon me in the time of trouble and I wil deliuer thee, and thou ſhalt praiſe me, Pſal. 50. 15. verſe.
                  To what purpoſe then is this particle, In the day of trouble? firſt it ſignifieth that the glory of praier (the chefeſt of all others) ſhineth in aduerſitie or calamities: for all men in time of proſperity become more negligent then at other times, as in that verſe it is ſaid, Ouid de art Am.
                     
                        Luxuriant animi rebus plaerumque fecundis.
                     
                     
                        Mens mindes moſt licentious be,
                        In time of their proſperitie.
                     
                  
                  But in aduerſities and calamities praier is feruent, and not only craueth, but ſeeketh and knocketh. Furthermore, this little clauſe admoniſheth vs, that we ſhould earneſtly thinke vpon the publike and priuate perilles, wherein the church waxing old, and al the godly ones are exerciſed and diſtreſſed: for the nearer the day of the latter iudgement is at hand, ſo much more outrageous wrathfull ſtirreth the deuill againſt Chriſt: namely nowe fearing the ſentence wherein the exceeding filthines of the moſt prowd ſpirit ſhal be manifeſted vnto all creatures, and the horrible torments due vnto him ſhalbe increaſed. Therefore in hatred towards Chriſt, he ſtirreth vp the Turkes, Biſhops, vngodly kings; finally, all his inſtruments againſt the church.
                  In ſo great dangers let vs not then be careleſſe and

negligent or drunken with pleaſures, but let vs obey the commandement of Chriſt, Matth. 26. 41. Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 16
                     But vnto the vngodly, ſaid God, why doſt thou preach my lawes and takeſt my couenant in thy mouth?
                     Verſe 17
                     When as thou hateſt to be reformed: and haſt caſt my wordes behinde thee.
                     Verſe 18
                     When thou ſaweſt a thiefe, thou conſentedſt vnto him; and haſt bin partaker with the adulterers.
                     Verſe 19
                     Thou haſt let thy mouth ſpeake wickednes: and with thy tongue thou haſt ſet forth deceit.
                     Verſe 20
                     Thou ſateſt and ſpakeſt againſt thy brother: yea, and haſt ſlaundered thine owne mothers ſonne.
                  
                  Hitherto hath he rebuked the people heaping vp ſacrifices, and hath ſhewed the true and chiefe worſhippings of God, namely, true calling vpon God, and thankeſgiuing: Now doth he ſeuerely rebuke thoſe teachers in the church, which do either corrupt the doctrine, or defile their profeſſion with euill kinde of life. And here, to the end, that we being warned by example might be more circumſpect, and eſchew and abhorre that boldeneſſe of men which forge and inuent opinions, and of them which cauil at true opinions. I will recite an hiſtorie of Origen, who when he ſhould beginne his reading in the church of Ceſarea, he ſate a long time ſorrowing and weeping, and at the length cried out thus, 
                        vt ſupra, But vnto the vngodly ſaide God, why doeſt thou preach my lawes? ver. 16 He often repeating this ſpeech, bewayled that he had diſputed many things inconſiderately and raſhly, and craued pardon, not onely of God, but alſo euen of the church, for

his errours; which church 
                        •
                     itting hard by the old man, 
                        •
                     eclared with teares, that ſhe was mooued with his lamentation: for there can no other furie nor ſorrow appeare in a good minde more ſharp or bitter, than that riſing out of a conſcience which hath corrupted the heauenly doctrine. But to the end a conſonancie of life and doctrine may bee neceſſary both together, theſe ſayings witnes 1. Cor. 9. 27 But I beate downe my body and bring it into ſubiection, leſt by any meanes after that I haue preached to other, I my ſelfe ſhould be reproued. Againe, in 2. Timot. 2. The husbandman muſt labor before he receiue ehe fruits. Conſider what I ſay, verſ. 6. And becauſe examples haue in them great force thorowly to moue mens mindes, I will adioyne vnto theſe ſayings a new or freſh example which declareth what a miſchiefe the diſſonancie of doctrine and life is. I knew a paſtor of the church, who for the ſinne of adultery was beheaded; he, when hee was carried to execution had alwayes in mind and mouth this ſentence of this Pſalme, When thou ſaweſt a theefe, thou ranneſt with him, and haſt bin partaker with the adulterers, ver. 18. But although hee was vehemently tormented with thinking vpon his offence, yet he rendered vnto God praiſe for his mercy, and in this conſolation at length ſo ended his life Rom. 5. 15. grace aboundeth abone ſinne. Theſe doe I recite, to the end, that all men may vnderſtand with how great ſtudy and care offences are to be eſchewed which defile the profeſſion of the goſpel. The ſame Sermon appertaineth vnto the vngodly, high Biſhops and other Biſhops, who when they profeſſe thēſelues to be the very chiefeſt lights of the church, are notwithſtanding filthily ſtained with madde worſhipping of Images, wandering luſts, and murdering of the holy ones. But in vaine do we preach to theſe deafe Adders. Therefore let vs turne our tongue to our churches, and let vs exhort the curable perſons, that they woulde ſpread their names before God and men, that is, not only

ſay, that is holy, but, do that is holy: for (as ſaint Auguſtine ſaieth) To teach well, and liue ill, is no otherBene dieere & male viuere, nihil aliud eſt quam ſua ſe voce damnare. thing, but a man to condemne himſelfe by his owne ſpeech. Finally, we muſt here refute the opinion of the Donatiſts, which faineth, that the miniſtery of the goſpel is not effectuall, except the perſon of the miniſter be holie and iuſt: for the perſon muſt needes be diſcerned from the office, and we muſt moſt firmely beleeue, that God is effectuall by his word and ſacraments: yea, though the miniſters life maruelouſly diſagree with the profeſſion: for
                        •
                      neither doth the efficacie of the miniſtery depend vpon th
                        •
                      worthines of the perſon, but vpon the prouidence of God▪ wherefore let vs ſo vnderſtand the ſermon of this pſalme, that nothing be derogated from the dignity and efficacie of the miniſterie, by reaſon of the perſons infirmitie.
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 21
                     Theſe things haſt thou done, and I helde my tongue, and thou thoughteſt wickedly, that I am euen ſuch a one as thy ſelfe: But I will reprooue thee, and ſet before thee the things that thou haſt done.
                     Verſe 22
                     O conſider this, ye that forget God, leſt I plucke you away, and there be none to deliuer you.
                  
                  This is a heauie threatning, denouncing vnto hypocrites inextricable puniſhments: for, the ſeruant knowing his maſter will & doing it not▪ ſhalbe beaten with double ſtripes, Luke 12. 47, 48. And there is a fearefull figure of the puniſhment of hypocrites ſet downe in the figgetrèe, which Chriſt did accurſe, Math. 21. 19.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 23
                     Whoſo offereth me thanks and praiſe, honoureth me: and to him that ordereth his conuerſation right will I ſhew the ſaluation of God.
                  
                  
                     In concluſion, he repeateth a principall propoſition touching true worſhippings of God: and promiſeth them that performe this obedience, both gouernement and helpe.
               
            
         
         
            PSAL. LI. Miſerere mei Deus.
            
            
               
                  To him that excelleth, a Pſalme of Dauid, when2. Sam. 12. 1. the Prophet Nathan came vnto him: after he had gone in to Ba
                           •
                        hſheba.
                  
               
            
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               
                  THis Pſalme ſhineth moſt brightly (as it were a notable precious ſtone) in the whole booke of Pſalmes. For firſt of all it conteineth moſt ample doctrine, which neither the eloquence of angell nor of man can conceiue touching ſinne, touching grace, touching the gift by grace, difference of worſhipings, cr touching the Croſſe: After that it diſpoſeth and chargeth great matters in moſt excellent order. For ſeeing the firſt and cheefeſt promiſe is, the promiſe of grace and life euerlaſting to be giuen freely for the Mediators ſake, who will denie this prayer is wiſely ordeined, wherein before all things he craueth forgiueneſſe of ſinne, reconcilation and life euerlaſting?

And becauſe without acknowledgment and confeſſion of ſinne, forgiueneſſe or abſolution of ſinne cannot be receiued according to that ſaying of I. Ioh. I. 9. If wee confeſſe our ſinnes, God is faithfull and iuſt, that he will forgiue vs our ſinnes, and clenſe vs from all our i niquity: he franckly and openly confeſſeth his ſinnes, and pointeth his finger vnto the ground of miſchiefe, namely originall ſinne: But as Saint Paul ioyneth together grace, and the Giftes of grace, ſo Dauid vn'o the petition the remisſion of ſinnes, next adioineth a petition of ſanctification, which is wrought by the holy ghoſt, the gouernour of the minde, will, and heart: finally becauſe it is an vſuall manner, in crauing any thing, to grant thankfulnes for the ſame, hee promiſeth that he will giue ſome recompences, which doth make for the glorie of God, and welfare of the church: And vnto his couenaunt wiſely he ioineth betweene both, the place, and difference of ſacrifices, whereof ſome are figuratiue, and others are morall, and the doctrine touching the croſſe. Theſe ſecret and greateſt matters he ſo adorneth with lights of wordes and ſentences, that therein nothing wanteth touching moſt profound eloquence. Seeing therefore this Pſalme aboundeth not onely with ſtore of moſt excellent matters, but is alſo notably diſpoſed and adorned no doubt there is, but it may and ought to be learned euery word thereof, and daily repeated when we doe pray. And let him knowe that he hath profited much, whom this right golden pſalme ſhall greatly delight.
            
            
               Pſal. LI. And expoſition thereof.
               
                  
                     Verſe 1
                     Haue mercy vppon me (O God) after thy great goodnes: according vnto the multitude of thy mercies, doe away mine offences.
                     
                        Verſe 2
                     Waſh me throwly from my wickednes: and clenſe me from mine ſinne.
                  
                  
                     IN the two and thirtieth Pſalme, before, he hath recited a definition of beatitude or cheefe felicity, in theſe wordes: Bleſſed are they whoſe iniquities are forgiuen and whoſe ſinnes are couered: Bleſſed is the man vnto whom the Lord imputeth no sinne. verſe 1. 2. For nothing is more wiſhfull in true ſorowes riſing from the wrath of God againſt ſinnes, then reconciliation with God. This benefit therefore with moſt feruent prayers, and with all his heart craneth he of God, ſaying. verſe 1. Haue mercy vppon me O God, according to thy mercy, as if he ſaid; I confeſſe vnto thee, that I haue ſinned horribly, as a moſt wretched ſinner, and I am ſory with all my heart, that I haue offended thee, forgiue mee my ſinnes, and couer my filthines, and for thy ſonnes ſake our Lord Jeſus Chriſt, (whom thou wouldeſt haue to be a ſacrifice, mediator and interceſſor for vs) doe not thou impute vnto mee my manifold diſobedience. For ſo oft as in the Pſalme mention is made of the mercie of God, wee muſt ſtraight way couſider of the promiſes touching grace, and of the mediator, for whoſe ſake the promiſe is ratified: Alſo let there be a difference in thy ſight betwene the lawe and the goſpell. 
                        〈…〉
                      lawe truely hath large and great promiſes, yet conſiſting vppon condition of full obedience: But the promiſes of the goſpell is vniuerſall and free, offering forgiuenes of ſinnes, for the mediator the ſonne of God his ſake, our Lord Jeſus Chriſt God and man, not for our owne worthines, nor for our owne vertues, nor for our owne works, or merits. This promiſe ought to be imbraced by fayth, becauſe it is the euerlaſting and immutable commaundement of God, that, in our conuerſion, (that is, in our vnfained ſorowes and feares) wee ſhould beleeue, we are receiued for his

ſonnes ſake, according to that ſaying, I liue (ſaith the Lord) I wil not the death of a ſinner, but that he wouldEzech. 33. 11 repent and liue. But to the end this true fayth may bee rightly vnderſtood, it is nedefull we alwayes haue in our ſight that admonition of Barnerd, wherein he ſaieth: Thou muſt, and oughteſt to beleue, that thy ſinnes are forgiuen thee. The deuill knoweth that ſinnes are forgiuen ſome men, and many men, as Saule and Iudas beleeue that ſinnes are forgiuen others. Wherefore let this neceſſarie admonition be faſt fixed in our mindes. Beleeue that thine owne ſinnes are forgiuen thee. Touching this fayth ſpeaketh Paul where he teacheth, that the promiſe is to be receiued by fayth. They receiue not the promiſe which beleeue that the ſame is offered vnto others, and not to themſelues, like as in the epiſtles of Saint Iohn it is written. He that beleueth not the Sonne accuſeth him oflying. When therefore thou reciteſt this article of the creed, I beleeue in the forgiuenes of ſinnes, vnderſtand thou, that ſinnes are not forgiuen others, but thee alſo. Touching this fayth it is ſaid, Being iuſtified by fayth we haue peace. Rom. 5. 1. Neither muſt we ſeeke for other conſolation, but we muſt ſettle our ſelues ſatiſfied with this fayth in God, for the mediator ſake. But ſeeing the doctrine touching iuſtification is in another place fully handled, I am nowe more breefe and I exhort the Reader that hee ſhould diligently conſider the weightineſſe of the words. Hee ſayth not in vaine nor raſhly, According to the multitude of thy mercy doe away mine offences. But this neceſſarie conſolation of the immenſe mercy of god doth he ſet before the greatnes and multitude of our ſinnes. And this forme of words agreeth with the moſt ſweete ſaying of Paul. Rom. 5. 15. Grace euer aboundeth aboue ſinne, that is, how great ſo euer our ſinnes be, yet is it aſſured that the ſonne of God is mightier. Therfore let vs not vnto other offences adde deſperation, but let vs beleeue that grace is more aboundant

then ſinne, and that the ſonne of God is more mighty then all the kingdome of the deuill: Like as in the firſt promiſe it is ſaid, Gen. 3. 15. The ſeede of the woman ſhall b
                           •
                        uſe the Serpents head. Alſo let vs conſider what ſweete reſemblences of forgiuenes of ſinnes are ſet downe in the words Doe away and Waſh. Saint Paul in 2. Coloſſ. deſcribing the benefits of Chriſt vſeth the ſame metaphore, Chriſt (ſaith hee) hath cancelled the hand-writing which was written againſt vs, which was contrarie to vs: he euen tooke it out of the way, and faſtned it to the croſſe. verſe 14. He alludeth this ſaying vnto trophees or pillers which were woont to be ſet vp, wherein things done were written for memoriall: For he ſaith, vpon the croſſe, as it were vpon a piller, the hand writing was hung vp, that is, the accuſation, whereby our conſcience (as touching the lawe) accuſeth vs. This accuſation as it were done away, hee ſayeth doth hang vpon the croſſe of Chriſt, who hath for vs payed the ranſome. Let vs looke vpon that trophey or piller with fayth, ſo often as wee call vppon God: For our vnworthines murmureth againſt vs, thus: why commeſt thou vnto God? why dareſt thou craue good things, when as for thy ſo many ſinnes thou haſt deſerued great puniſhment, wrath, and deſtruction, whileſt as yet thou feeleſt many vile motions in thee▪ Againſt this diſtruſt of minde fleeing away from God, doth hee ſet vs downe this trophey: Here (ſayth he) behold thou the accuſation hanging and blotted out, come thou vnto God in confidence of the mediator, and craue his holy ſpirit, and other benefits. The metaphor of Waſhing away, may be
                        •
                      vnderſtood out of the hiſtory extant in the 13. Iohn. verſ. 8. If I waſh thee not thou ſhalt haue no part with mee Againe 
                        ibidem verſe 10, Hee that is waſhed needeth not, to waſh his feete, but is cleane euery whit. Theſe ſayings without doubting do deſcribe iuſtification: Except he himſelfe waſh vs, that is, except

hee with his owne blood doe redeeme vs, and except wee beleeue that we are redemed by the blood of Chriſt, wee ſhall not be heires of eternall life. Hee that is waſhed needeth not to waſh his ſeete: that is, hee that is iuſt by fayth and is ſanctified, is cleane, that is, altogether pleaſing God. But yet in this life, our feete muſt be waſhed continually, that is, our motions. Weake nature in this life begetteth many wandring motions. Theſe filthie ſpottes ought continually to be waſhed: and the interpretations are knowen. The beleeuing perſon is cleane altogether, that is to ſay, by imputation. But in this life is begunne a newneſſe not yet altogether fulfilled. Theſe things are elſewhere largely ſpoken of. Now let the Reader gather the paraphraſticall parts of the firſt propoſition, thus: Eternall God, father of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt forgiue me my ſinnes paſt, wherein I am wicked and filthily defiled: By the mercy which is promiſed for thy ſonnes ſake our mediator, doe away both the moſt ſorowfull accuſation of my conſcience, as it were a hand-writing againſt me, and in the blood of thy ſonne, waſh away the remnants of ſinne ſticking in my weake nature, like as it is written. I Iohn 1. 7. The blood of Ieſus Chriſt clenſeth vs from all ſinne. That is, taketh away, not onely ſinnes formerly committed, but alſo couereth the remnants of ſinne, which as yet wee ſeely ſoules and weakelings do beare about with vs. Let therefore this propoſition be adioyned vnto other teſtimonies which confirme the article of Juſtification, and let it alwaies ſound in our eares, heart, and tongue: becauſe we haue euery moment neede of the free forgiueneſſe of our ſinnes.
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 3
                     For I knowledge my faults, and my ſinne is 
                           •
                        uer before me.
                  
                  This verſe pertaineth vnto confeſſion, wherewith man

ſoroweth in Gods preſence, that he hath ſinnes; and by faith craueth forgiueneſſe of his offence, and mitigation of puniſhments. And there is a great force in the worde,The acknowledgement of ſinne. 
                     The acknowledgement of ſinne.] The acknowledgement is not an idle or vaine conſideration, ſuch as was in Dauid before his adultery, (when he alſo knew that adultery was forbidden) but it is a feare and caſting downe of man acknowledging God to be angry; as Dauid did know his ſinne after the moſt greeuous rebuke which hee had. Furthermore, in the word Sinne, we muſt conſider a relation, namely, that man, by reaſon of ſinne, is guilty of Gods euerlaſting wrath and puniſhment, except hee haue forgiueneſſe for the Mediators ſake. Touching this guiltineſſe in the Lawe it is ſaide, Deuter. 27. Curſed be euery one which continueth not in al things, which are written in the Law ver. 26.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 4
                     Againſt thee onely haue I finned, and done this euill in thy ſight, that thou mighteſt be iuſtified in thy ſaying, and cleare when thou art iudged.
                  
                  He repeateth a confeſſion amplified with moſt ſorowfullThe confeſsiof ſinne. wordes, as if he ſhould ſay: I come vnto thee, not truſting in mine owne righteouſneſſe or worthineſſe, but onely bringing a confeſſion of ſinne. To thee only am I a ſinner, and do euil in thy ſight: for the particle (only) may not be referred vnto the pronowne, but is a debarring of his owne dignitie or worthineſſe to be referred vnto the word following, ſinner. So firſt hee teacheth vs to bring the confeſſion of our ſinne vnto God. This confeſſion of ſinne is more feruent, and more perceiued when God encloſeth vs euery where with ſignes of guiltineſſe in puniſhments, like as when Dauid was driuen into exilement. But it followeth in the verſe, [That ihou maieſt be iuſtified in thy ſayings, and ouercome when

thou art iudged.] Theſe wordes comprehend both a moſt graue doctrine, that God puniſheth iuſtly: and a moſt ſweete conſolation touching the promiſe of mercy which God performeth for his trueth, or, to witneſſe that he is true. Dauid going forth in his baniſhment ſaide, I acknowledge and confeſse that I am guiltie, and haue deſerued puniſhments, and I pronounce that thou art a iuſt God, ſeeing thou doeſt manifeſt thy moſt iuſt wrath or diſpleaſure againſt my ſinne, and doeſt puniſh me: And I pronounce that thou ouercommeſt, when hypocrites doe iudge thee. As Saul, Cato, and all the vngodly ones do thinke, that they haue not deſerued ſo great calamitiess or ſurely thinke, that God is too ſeuere, who hath burdened this our weake nature with ſuch a multitude of miſeries; ſo they accuſe and condemne God, and ſpeake euil of him: But let vs render the praiſe of righteouſnes vnto God, when he puniſheth, as Daniel ſaith cap. 9. 7. Vnto thee Lorde belongeth righteouſnes, but vnto vs ſhame. Furthermore, needeful it is, that an other meaning be added touching the promiſe of mercy, becauſe, when this conſolation commeth not hereunto, there remaineth a fretting and grudging of the heart, ſuch as was in Saul or Cato: wee muſt therefore adde this, I acknowledge my ſelfe to bee guiltie, and to haue deſerued puniſhments, I confeſſe, thy wrath is moſt iuſt, and I craue mercy, not truſting in my worthineſſe, but in thy promiſe. Heare mee, that thou maieſt be iuſtified, that is, to the end thy trueth may bee publiſhed, that thou keepeſt promiſes, and, in truth heareſt, receiueſt, and deliuereſt thoſe that call vppon thee: ſhew a teſtimonie and example, wherein it may be ſeene, that thou art the keeper of promiſes, when thou heareſt me an vnworthy perſon.
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 5
                     Behold, I was ſhapen in wickednes; and in ſinne hath my mother conceiued me.
                  
                  
                     He accuſeth not his parents, nor condemneth the ſelfe worke of generation, but he bewaileth this miſchiefe, the which with moſt ſorrowfull wordes is of S. Paul deſcribed, where hee ſaieth, Rom. 8. 7. the wiſedome of the fleſh is enmitie againſt God. For the ſubſtance by God, is one thing, and the diſorder which commeth afterwards is an other thing, and a deprauing of Gods worke, namely, darkeneſſe, and doubtings in minde towards God, the turning of our wil & heart from God, and burning flames of motions diuerſly wandering in the heart. But this is a deſcription of originall ſinne no doubt of it, taken out of Moſes, who in the eight chapter of Geneſis ſaith, The imagination of mans heart is euil, euen from his youth, ver. 2▪1. That is, men are not only corrupted by euil cuſtome, but in the very heart it ſelfe le
                        ••
                     d inclinations are in children now borne. Let therefore this verſe be eſteemed amongſt the ſpecial teſtimonies of original ſinne: that is, of the horrible corruption of humane nature which is full of blindneſſe, concupiſcence and ignorance of her ſelfe and of ſinne.
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 6
                     But lo, thou requireſt truth in the inward parts: and ſhalt make me to vnderſtand wiſedome ſecretly.
                  
                  Hee manifeſtly witneſſeth, that God requireth of vs a confeſſion of ſinne, and that it pleaſeth him, as it were a worſhip glorifing him, and that he hateth hypocriſie which ſeeth not, nor extenuateth the vncleanes of nature, Heither will be reproued with the word of God, but blaſphemeth and perſecuteth the true doctrine. For as Saint Auguſtine ſayth notably in theſe words cited by Proſperus, Melior eſt in malis factis humilis confeſsio, quam in bonis ſuperba gloriatio. Better is an humble confeſsion in euil deeds, then a pro
                           ••
                        d braging in good workes. Alſo he teacheth that this is ſecret wiſedome, namely truely to

accknowledge ſinne, and to take hald of mercy, 
                        •
                     nd to beleeue that God will not caſt vs away, although we be vnworthy and haue deſerued his wrath, but that he will haue mercy, according to his promiſes. This ſecret wiſedome is vnknowen vnto the world, and abhorreth from the iudgement of reaſon, neither is that reueiled in the doctrine of the lawe, but in the goſ
                        •
                     el onely, and is vnderſtood of them, who in extreme feares doe comfort themſelues with the conſolation of the goſpel,
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 7
                     Thou ſhalt purge me with Iſop, and I ſhall be cleane: Thou ſhalt waſh me, and I ſhall be whiter then ſnowe.
                     Verſe 8
                     Thou ſhalt make me heare of ioy and gladneſſe: that the bones which thou haſt broken may reioyce.
                     Verſe 9
                     Turne thy face from my ſinnes: and put out all my miſdeedes.
                  
                  He repeateth the firſt petition; touching remiſſion of ſinnes; and reconciliation, and adorneth the ſame with ſignes borowed from the ceremony of the lawe. For this was the ceremony, wherewith they were clenſed: They were ſprinckled with hiſop dipped in blood, whereby was ſignified the ſprinckling of the blood of Chriſt, who was to come, the ſacrifice for ſinne. Thou therefore (ſaith he) ſhalt purge me with hiſop, and make me cleane, that is, thou ſhalt pronounce me looſed from ſinne, and cleane, according to thy promiſes for the blood of thy ſonne. But he ſignifieth by that Leuiticall ceremony of ſprinckling, that ſinne is not taken away, but that ceremony of ſprinkling and waſhing were deſcriptions and ſignes of the future ſacrifices of Chriſt, through whoſe blood ſinne ſhould be aboliſhed and clenſed. Wherfore he oppoſeth this verſe againſt the 
                        •
                     euitical miniſterie, as if he ſaid: I craue that th
                           •
                        u wouldeſt purge me, that is, that thou woulde
                        ••
                     
                     
clenſe mee with ſuch ſprinckling wherewith ſinne may truely be taken away, and I may be made cleane indeede, that is, wherewith my conſcience may be deliuered from guiltineſſe. But the Prophet himſelfe interpreteth thoſe ceremonies without figure, what it is to be purged, and waſhed, where he ſayeth in the 8. verſe Thou ſhalt make me heare of ioy and gladnes: by which words he ſignifieth, that he ſpeaketh touching the conſolation, which is perceiued or felt by the promiſe: as if he ſaid, bring to paſſe, that in mee there may be conſolation, whereby I may be deliuered from the terrors of ſinne. And he excellently addeth a deſcription of true repentance or terrors, which the accknowledgement of ſinne worketh: That the bones which thou haſt broken may reioyce, which trembled for and by reaſon of the terrors of ſinne: To the ſame ſence pertaineth the litle verſe folowing Turne thy face from my ſinne. verſe 9. For hee craueth that Gods wrath may be taken away, that the lawe may not haue any right cauſe to accuſe and condemne his conſcience, yea though as yet hee had ſinne in him. So againe theſe verſes doe teach as touching the manner of iuſtification or reconciliation, namely that we are deliuered from terrors, and doe obteine forgiueneſſe of ſinnes: ſo as ſinne ſhall not be imputed vnto vs, which as yet ſticketh in nature, yea euen then when we are reconſiled.
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 10
                     Make me a cleane heart O God: and renew a right ſpirit within mee.
                     Verſe 11
                     Caſt me not away from thy preſence: and take not thy holy ſpirit from me.
                     Verſe 12
                     O giue mee the comfort of thy helpe againe: and ſtabliſh me with thy free ſpirit.
                  
                  Hitherto hath hee craued grace, that is, remiſſion of ſinnes, and reconciliation or free acceptation for the Son of God his ſake: Now craueth he the gift by grace, as

ſaint Paul ſpeaketh, that is, ſanctification, as the gift of the holy ghoſt, and a beginning of the life euerlaſting: andThree petitions of Dauid in theſe three verſes. A cleane hart. he vſeth diuers meanes or proper words; firſt, he craueth of God a cleane heart and a right ſpirit to be giuen him: a cleane heart ſignifieth a heart, by faith purified from ſinnes, or from guiltineſſe, and now rightly beleeuing of God, truely acknowledging God without hypocriſie and falſe opinions; not fleeing from God, nor careleſly contenming God, but truly fearing God, and beleeuing in God. Like vnto this is the other alſo, where hee craueth a right ſpirit, that is, not wauering in the word, not caried about with euery winde of doctrine, nor doubting in the will of God: But a heart ſtriuing againſt doubting, and ſurely and firmely ſetling it ſelfe in the promiſe, and which ſurely beleeueth that it hath God merciful, and that it is heard of God, and in this confidence calleth vppon God, and looketh for help from God: ſecondly, hee crauethThe holy ſpirit. the holy ſpirit, that is, ſanctifying and illumining in our hearts ſuch motions, as he himſelfe is: for, as the holy ghoſt is a ſubſtantiall loue, and coeternall ioy betwixt the Father and the Sonne; ſo is he ſent into the heartes of beleeuers, that hee may inflame in them loue and ioy ſetled in God, like as in 2. Timoth. 1. it is written, ForThree notable properties which Dauid attributeth to the holyghoſt. God hath not giuen to vs the ſpirite of feare, but of power, and of loue, and of a ſound minde. Hee calleth profoundly the holy ghoſt, the ſpirit of power, becauſe it helpeth our infirmity: the ſpirit of loue, becauſe he is a flame of mutuall loue, not onely betweene the father and the Sonne, but alſo betweene God and the church: the ſpirite of holineſſe or chaſticement, becauſe it brideleth wandering aſſaults of mindes, or as ſaint Paul ſaith, ItRom. 8. 13. mortifieth the deedes of the fleſh; and ingrafteth in vs better motions acceptable vnto God, and wholeſome for vs and the whole Church: thirdly, the pſalme namethComfort of the principal ſpirit. principall ſpirit, that is, the willing and obedient ſpirite, which may rule and gouerne vs in al our life and actions,

and in all our counſelles and dangers; and a ſpirit which may bring to paſſe, that we may willingly obey God, that we may boldely confeſſe the word of God, and that with a mighty courage we may be able to indure afflictions for the glory of God. Theſe are the effects of the holyghoſt in the reconciled ones, or in them which receiue forgiuenes of ſinnes. Seeing therefore without this grace there is nothing auaileable in any man, as the church godlily ſingeth. Abſque Dei numine nihil eſt in homine, &c. Let vs craue from God, this gouernour of our mind, wil, and heart, which giueth witnes vnto our ſpirit, that wee are the ſonnes of God, and cryeth vnto God with vnſpeakeable ſighings for vs, and finally, is a pledge and token of our inheritance vnto the laſt moſt ioyfull day of our redemtion.
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 13
                     Then ſhal I teach thy wayes vnto the wicked, and ſinners ſhalbe conuerted vnto thee.
                     Verſe 14
                     Deliuer mee from bloodguiltines O God, thou that art the God of my health: and my tongue ſhall ſing of thy righteouſnes.
                     Verſe 15
                     Thou ſhalt open my lippes, O God, and my mouth ſhall ſhew thy praiſe.
                  
                  I ſaide in the Argument, that the latter parte of this pſalme is a promiſe of rendering a due recompence, whervnto we are naturally bound: but ſeeing we are not able to giue any ſufficient recompence vnto God, for his benefites moſt great, beſides the propagation and confeſſion of the goſpel, he promiſeth that he wil performe theſe duties moſt holily; whereby both the glorie of God is made more excellent, and many men are called backe from error and Idolatry, vnto the true acknowledgement of God, and prayer vnto him. Theſe worſhips let vs alſo performe, that there may be diſcerned a difference betweene the true church of God and other nations. For other nations

may haue many other vertues, as there was a great glory of righteouſnes, chaſtitie, and modeſtie in Ariſtides and Scipio: yet the true calling vpon God, and aduancement of his doctrine were wanting in them. But the church alone both vnderſtandeth and performeth worſhippings, touching which I haue ſpoken before. Now as the rules of aſking any thing, and of thankeſgiuing are for the moſt part ioyned together, ſo in the Pſalmes theſe motions are mixed, whereof ſome craue from God for the Mediators ſake neceſſary benefits; others giue thanks to God or the Mediator for benefits receiued. In this place alſo let there be added vnto the verſe Euchariſticall, or that which concerneth thankeſgiuing, two petitions: one touching mitigation of puniſhments, the other, touching help in aduancing the doctrine, and touching confeſſion, I acknowledge (ſaith he) that I am iuſtly puniſhed, and that I haue deſerued more grieuous puniſhements; But deliuerme from bloodguiltineſse, O God, that is, O God deliuer me from guiltines or puniſhment of murder, which is an vniuerſall deſtruction, and mitigateth thy wrath for thy Mediators ſake, that I may be a witneſſe and an aduancer of thy doctrine. Touching this mitigation of puniſhments the Prophets moſt ſweetely preach, as Pſa. 77. 9. He will not ſhut vp his louing kindneſſe in diſpleaſure. And as Ioel 2. 13. The Lord is gratious and merciful, ſlowe to anger, and of great kindnes, and repenteth him of the euil. And he maketh his prayer as if he thus ſaid, I beſeech thee, O God, to helpe mee in a matter hard and difficult, namely, in teaching and confeſſing thy true doctrine: for mans weake nature is either ouercome with inticements, or quailed with threatnings, or with flatteries of friends is ſo enfeebled, that with vniuſt ſilence ſhee may diſſemble her true opinion. Thou therefore open my lippes, thou helpe my weakeneſſe, that I be not a hireling ſheepheard, which in the time of peace doeth teach meanely; but when as the wolfe commeth,

either runneth away, or holdeth his tongue.
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 16
                     Becauſe thou deſireſt no ſacrifice, elſe would I giue it thee: but thou delighteſt not in burnt offerings.
                  
                  He frameth in order vnto Thankeſgiuing a common place touching degrees of ſacrifices; and morall ſacrifices or morall obedience doth hee preferre before ceremonies. For, the vſuall diſtinction of ſacrifice is knowne, which is deliuered in the predicament of the deede, and in theologicall places. The only ſacrifice is, (Ilaſticon) propitiatorie, that is, the whole obedience of Chriſt. The ſacrifices of al other the godly ones are Thankſgiuings: and theſe are either figuratiue or morall. But although they ſeeme to bee called cōntraries: Thou delighteſt not in burnt offerings. Againe, Then ſhall they offer yong bullockes vpon thine altare: yet notwithſtanding there is an eaſie coniunction or affinitie betweene them. The firſt ſaying condemneth the perſwaſion touching the deede done, as they now vſe to ſay: Afterward he affirmeth, that ceremonies do pleaſe God, whē they are rightly vſed, that is, when repentance, the feare of God, & faith (which acknowledge the Mediator, and know that we are for his ſake receiued) do come hereunto alſo. But he noteth ceremonies thus, becauſe they are teſtimonies of promiſes and are ſignes of confeſſion, and doe inuite others thereunto.
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 17
                     The ſacrifice of God, is a troubled ſpirit: a contrite heart (O God) ſhalt thou not deſpiſe.
                  
                  A notable doctrine and conſolation is ſet downe in thisWhat exerciſes of faith calamities are. verſe: for firſt it teacheth, that calamities are not alwayes ſignes of any mans reiection, but exerciſes wholeſome

for the godly ones, and obedience which is performed in calamities, he calleth expreſly ſacrifices, that is, a worſhiping or worke, wherewith God is honoured: After that it comforteth vs, leſt wee ſhould thinke our ſelues to be forſaken of God, by reaſon of calamities, but that God rather promiſeth helpe, and mitigation, yea deliuerance of and from our miſeries. So in the 57. cap. and 15. verſe of Eſay it is ſaid, I dwell with him that is of a contrite and humble ſpirit, to reuiue the ſpirit of the humble, and to giue life to them that are of a contrite heart. And in the laſt chapter of Iſay. v. 2. To him will I looke, euen to him that is poore, and of a contrite ſpirit, and tremb
                           •
                        eth at my words. With this conſolation, Bernard (being brought low by a greeuous and deadly ſicknes) comforted himſelfe thus ſaying, 
                        Vapulem ſane quatenus miſeriaris afflicto, qui non inuenis in me bonum remuneres, tempus meum perdidi, quia perdite vixi, pro quo quid agam non habeo, niſi quod cor contritum & humiliatum non deſpicies. I may well be beaten truely, ſo farre forth as thou haſt mercy vppon the afflicted perſon, who findeſt not any good at all in mee which thou mayeſt rewarde: I haue loſt my time becauſe I haue liued graceleſſe, for the which what I my doe I haue not in mee; but that thou God wilt not deſpiſe an humble and contrite heart.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 18
                     O be fauourable vnto Sion, build thou the walles of Ieruſalem.
                     Verſe 19
                     Then ſhalt thou be pleaſed with the ſacrifice of righteouſnes, with the burnt offerings, and oblations: then ſhall they offer young bullocks vpon thine altare.
                  
                  In concluſion is added a common praier for the church, as if hee had ſayed: Be fauourable O Lord vnto thy church, that ſhe may be deliuered from corrupt doctrine,

and from offences, and that true doctrine touching forgiuenes of ſinnes may be made knowen, and true worſhippings be performed. For God will haue vs in our prayer to be moued with care for the whole church, and for others alſo, like as it is written, Pſal. 122. verſe. 6. O pray for the peace of Hieruſalem, &c.
                  
               
            
         
         
            PSAL. LII. Quid gloriaris in malicia?
            
            
               
                  To him that excelleth, A Pſalme of Dauid to giue instruction: when Doeg the Edomite came and ſhowed Saul, and ſaid to him; Dauid is come to the houſe of Ahimelech 1. Sam. 22. 9.
                  
               
            
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               
                  THe reading of this pſalme is not obſcure vnto them, which both knowe the hiſtorie of Dauid, and doe diligently conſider the dangers of theſe dayes: Doeg the conſpirator as 1 Sam. 21. and 22. declareth, When he was moſt ſubtilly aquainted with all harmefull ſlights, tolde Saul, that Dauid then baniſhed, was receiued into ſuccour by A
                        •
                     imilech the prieſt: And afterwards when the reſidue of the Kings

miniſters fled, and feared the moſt ſorowful ſlaughter of the prieſts houſehould: He, this ſame Doeg, cruelly raged againſt holy men, no otherwiſe then a Lion, which in much ſlaughter lyeth as conqueror preying vppon euery beaſt, his iawes al embrewed with blood, driuing away hunger, neuer reſts raging hither and thither caſting down bulles, threatens the ſeely calues, ſlow of foote, but wearie of tooth: And as Seneca ſaith in Thyeſte. Quis Colchus haec quis c
                        •
                     dis incertae Scythae commiſit? aut quae Caſpium tangens mare, Gens iuris expers auſ
                        •
                     ? In engliſh thus: What Colchian or what wandring Scythian did euer committe theſe things? or what lawleſſe nation bordering the Caſpian ſea durſt euer atempt the like enterpriſe? For I may well with tragicall wordes deſcribe ſuch beaſtly cruelty: So at this day many godly church men, are for matrimony only cruelly martired, when as neuer any barbarous nation hath ſlaughtered men for the like cauſe. Firſt of all then, in this pſalme, he doth exaggerate and ampliſie the wicked enterpriſe of Doeg and ſuch like 
                     •
                  ycophants which ſtirre vp and inflame the diſpleaſures of kings againſt honeſt and godly perſons. Next of all he denounceth moſt greeuous puniſhments vnto ſophiſters & Sycophants which ſharpen their tong, and frame their writings againſt that congregation which keepeth the true doctrine. Laſt of al, he ſetteth downe a conſolation for the church very neceſſarie: namely, that the whole body of the church cannot be vtterly ouerthrowen with cruel counſels and miſcheuous enterpriſes of the enemyes although by gods aſſured prouidence ſhe be perſecuted in ſome part of her. For wheras Dauid in this pſalme. verſe 8 thus ſpeaketh of himſelfe, As for me I am like a greene oliue tree in the houſe of God, that is aplyed in the 92. pſalme 11, 12, and 13. verſe, vnto the whole church and euery member therof, The righteous ſhall floriſh like a palme tree, and ſhall

ſpreade abrode like a cedar in Libanus. They that be planted in the houſe of the Lord, ſhall flouriſh in the courts of our God. They ſhall alſo bring forth more fruite in their age: and ſhall be fat and well liking. With this moſt ſweete conſolation let vs alſo then comfort our ſelues. The ſtate of our church & ſchools which by gods bene fits or bleſsing is now ordeined, ſemeth to vs, not long ſo to be ſetled by the light of the goſpell reſtored: But yet it ſhall remaine and continue yea though the whole world and all the deuills ſet themſelues againſt it, Like as Chriſt in an other place ſaith. Math. 16. 18. The gates of hel ſhall not preuaile againg the church.
               
            
            
               Pſal. LII. And expoſition thereof.
               
                  
                     Verſe 1
                     Why boaſteſt thou (thy ſelfe O tirant,) thou that canſt doe miſchiefe?
                     Verſe 2
                     Whereas the goodnes of God indureth yet daily.
                     Verſe 3
                     Thy t
                           •
                        ungue imagineth wickednes, and with lies thou cutteſt like a ſharpe raſour.
                     Verſe 4
                     Thou haſt loued vnrighteouſnes, more then goodnes, and to talke of lies more then righteouſnes.
                     Verſe 5
                     Thou haſt loued to ſpeake all words that may doe hurte, O thou falſe tongue.
                  
                  Like as Abim
                           •
                        lech that godly and holy man was foully abuſed by Doeg in this ſlaunder, that hee ſhould conſult together with Dauid about ſeditious enterpriſes, and practize all meanes to the deſtruction of Saul: So the Prophets, Apoſtles, and their ſcholers are always ouercharged with theſe two moſt heinous crimes, namely, blaſphemous hereſie, and mouing ſedition. The conſideration whereof more grieuouſly vexeth modeſt perſons, then all the cruell puniſhments wherewith the bodyes

are tormented: But as they ſpared not (for all their indangered eſtate by ſlaunders moued againſt them) to ſet forth and aduaunce the true and neceſſarie doctrine of God: So let not vs for the like euil occaſion or cauelings caſt away from vs our confeſſion. And although we ſhall want humane helpes to ſupport our cauſe, yet notwithſtanding let vs craue and looke for defence from God, the euerlaſting father of our Lord Jeſus Chriſt, who hath made himſelfe knowen by publiſhing ſo many promiſes. For as Iſayas moſt ſweetely ſaith, cap. 54. verſe 10. The mercy of God endureth for euer: The hilles ſhal be moued, and the litle hilles ſhall tremble for feare, but my mercie ſhall not depart from mee, neither ſhal the couenant of my peace fall away ſaith the Lord, that hath compaſsion ouer thee.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 6
                     Therefore ſhall God deſtroie thee for euer. He ſhall take thee, and pull thee out of thy dwelling: and roote thee out of the land of the liuing.
                     Verſe 7
                     The righteous alſo ſhall ſee this and feare: and ſhall laugh him to ſcorne.
                     Verſe 8
                     Lo this is the man that tooke not God for his ſtrength: But truſted vnto the multitude of his riches, and ſtrengthened himſelfe in his wickedneſſe.
                  
                  Of this moſt ſorowfull threatning here is ſet downe anIudas repreſenteth truelie all heretikes, reuoulters, & treacherous conſpirators. example in Iudas Iohn 13. 27. who horribly condemned himſelfe and wrought his owne death, that with great ſorrow he burſt aſunder in the middeſt: But ſeeing Iudas repreſenteth the heretikes of all ages, alſo reuoulters from the goſpel, and treacherous conſpirators, which with a crafty outward ſhew, eſtrange the minds of princes from the goſpel, or being eſtranged, doe confirme them and ſtirre vp mightily hatreds in them: thereby conſidering

Iudas his puniſhment, let al men feare gods indignation and eſchue the cauſes of ſo horrible a puniſhment, Arrius was deſtroyed with his guts but ſ
                        •
                     ing out of his belly, as Iudas had; Iulianus the apoſtata had his chiefeſt perſon in office ended his life with the very excrements of his body comming out at his mouth, and innumerable others had the like end. Neither lack there examples of our age. For many vngodly preachers haue beene in their very ſermons ſodenly deſtroied, let vs therfore feare the iudgement of God, and the true opinion of the goſpel, let vs be content, neither let vs ſuffer our ſelues to be corrupt with mony, or with diſſembling good willes of princes, or with hope of honors and authoritie, that we ſhould ſtickle on the furie of ſuch as hate the goſpel.
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 9
                     As for me I am like a green oliue tree in the houſe of God, my truſt is in the tender mercie of God, for euer and euer.
                     Verſe 10
                     I wil alwaies giue thanks vnto thee for that thou haſt done: And I will hope in thy name for thy Saints like it well.
                  
                  The deſcription of flouriſhing Oliues moſt pleſantlyThe Oliue liuely repreſenting the church of Chriſt in three ſimilitudes. painted out of the church in her liuely colours: For as the Oliues engrafted vppon the Uine brings forth both Oliues and Grapes: and age of the Oliue is longer, which they ſay is able to endure 200 yeares. So the true church is both preſent in this life, and afterwards ſhall be adorned with euerlaſting glorie. Againe, like as the oliue proſpereth not neither in the coldeſt nor in the hoteſt places: So the church eſcheweth both extreames, namely epecuriall contempt of God, and ſuperſtitions or idolatry, or as ſaint Peter faith 1. Pet. 2. 5. She giueth her diligence to ioyne vertue with her faith, and with vertue knowledge. Furthermore like as the Oliue is ſeaſoned and refreſhed with ſalt at the roote thereof caſt, for

auoiding corruption of fatneſſe: So the croſſe of afliction reformeth ſecuritie and many lewd motions in men.
                  The laſt verſe deſcribeth the end, whereunto Thankeſgiuing muſt be referred. For with this confeſſion other men muſt be inuited vnto the acknowledgement, and true calling vppon the true God: that they may alſo aſſuredly beleeue, that the godly ones are cared for and heard by God, and for that cauſe doe with all their hearts ſubmit themſelues vnto God, and worſhip him. But becauſe as touching this ende or purpoſe, moſt often I haue ſpoken in the Pſalme, I am now more breefe and come to the next pſalme.
               
            
         
         
            PSAL. LIII. Dixit inſipiens in corde ſuo.
            
            
               
                  To him that excelleth on * Mahalath: a PſalmeWhich was an inſtrument or kinde of no
                           •
                        e. of Dauid to giue instruction.
               
            
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               
                  IT is the beſt rule of teaching to ſpeake of the ſame matters, the ſame methods: For it may not be, that the doctrine can take any roote in our minde, except we daily ſpeake our ſelues, and both heare, and apply our life thereunto, wherefore it is not to bee marueiled that

                  Dauid repeateth in this place the ſame ſermon which he ſet downe in the 14. Pſalme: For nothing ought to be ſo ſounding in our eares, as the preaching of the lawe, accuſing the roote and fruit of ſinne, and calling vs vnto repentance, by ſhewing vs the wrath of God and horrible puniſhments, which in a moſt iuſt order doe accompany ſinne: But that there may be a difference betweene the church and other ſects, it is nedefull that vnto this ſermon there be annexed a promiſe of the goſpel for the Mediators ſake: vnto whom they that runne for ſuccour are deliuered from ſinne, death, the lawe condemning, and from the tirany of the deuil, and are receiued and rewarded of God with ſaluation and life euerlaſting, wherein being adorned with new light, wiſdome, and righteouſnes, they ſhall worſhip God and enioy his ſight for euermore. Seeing then this pſalme inſtructeth vs of ſo great matters, it is ſurely worthy to be learned by vs euery word of it: But I wil not ſpeake any thing more of the Argument becauſe moſt true is that ſaying of Plautus; That which is enough ſufficeth.
               
            
            
               Pſal. LIII. And expoſition thereof.
               
                  
                     Verſe 1
                     The fooliſh body hath ſaide in his heart, there is no God.
                     Verſe 2
                     Corrupt are they, and become abhominable in their wickednes: There is none that doth good.
                  
                  
                     LIke as the true acknowlegement of GodKnowledge of God the wellſpring of all vertues. is the well-ſpring of other vertues, as for example, of the feare of God, faith, loue, and true prayer, &c. ſo ignorance or contempt of God is the roote of all ſins, which rage in the nature of man: for, except

the true God be acknowledged, how can he be calledIgnorance & contempt of God the root of all ſinne. vpon, feared, or loued. The prophet Dauid therefore accuſeth the blindeneſſe of mans heart, in that he beareth about him either Epicuriall, or Stoicall, or Academicall opinions touching God. For the mindes of all men without heauenly light, either thinke al things by chance haue their ruine without Gods gouernement: like as Chorus in Hypolito of Seneca cryeth out:

                        Res humanas ordine nullo fortuna regit,
                        Spargitque manu munera caeca, pe
                              •
                           ora fouens,
                     
                     
                        Fortune deuoide of order rules
                        each thing, and blindly ſerues,
                        Rewardes with hand, maintaining oft
                        him that the worſt deſerues.
                     
                  
                  Or elſe they thinke, that God is bound vnto ſecond cauſes, and doeth no otherwiſe than as thoſe cauſes carrie him away or mooue him: either elſe they doubt whether God will receiue our prayers, and are ignorant why hee receiueth them, as the barbarous king in Virgil ſaieth:

                        Ante Genitor, cum fulmina torques,
                        Ne quicquam horremus, caecique in nubibus ignes▪
                        
                        Terrificant animos, & inania murmura miſcent?
                     
                  
                  Which is in Engliſh thus:

                        O Father, when thou thundereſt forth,
                        do not we quake for feare?
                        And when the lightnings in the clouds
                        at randon flaſh each-where,
                        Do not they terrifie our mindes
                        in murmuring vainely here?
                     
                  
                  But ſeeing our minde is full of darkeneſſe, and doubtings of God, there appeare in our will and heart manifold▪
                     
flames of wandering luſtes ſtriuing with God, yea, vniuſt loues, and vniuſt hatred. By theſe flames, ſomeSuch are the baſe people of vnbrideled ſenſualitie in theſe dayes. are ſtirred vp to confuſions of luſts, others vnto murders, and ſome others to other miſchefs: yea the verie deuills leape into the minds of the vngodly ones, and moke many to make horrible ſcattrings in mankinde, and infinit ſpoilings. Theſe ſo great miſchifs (which the pſalme calleth abhominable corruption) let vs looke vpon and with vnfained ſighes let vs deplore, and ſeeke deliuerance from theſe euills promiſed vs in the goſpel.
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 3
                     God looked downe from heauen vppon the children of men, to ſee if there were any that would vnderſtand and ſeeke after God.
                     Verſe 4
                     But they are al gone out of the way, they are altogether become abhominable: there is none that doth good, no not one.
                  
                  If we were not altogether iron-hearted, and more hard then the rocks of the mount Sinay, which trembled whenExod. 19. 18. God ſent forth the preaching of his commaundement, we would n
                        •
                     t only acknowledge our miſchefs, but we would alſo tremble with feare at the ſight of them, and with thinking vppon the wrath of God: For what elſe are the blaſing fires of the whole world, the downefalles of kingdomes, confuſion of religions, and domeſticall calamities infinit (which with great ſorow we behold) but teſtimonial admoniſhments touching ſinne and the wrath of God? Let vs then confeſſe our ſelues to be guilty, and to haue deſerued great puniſhments, and let vs craue of God both benefits, namely, forgiuenes of ſinnes, and mitigations of puniſhments. But I haue before ſpoken more in the expoſition of the 14. pſalme againſt this figure ſynecdoche, or pars pro toto, wherein ſome men haue a will to trifle out the whole matter handled in this point, All are

gone out of the way: For the ſaying of Saint Paul is moſt true, which no wiſe man can gaine-ſay Al men haue neede of the glorie of God: that is, of true acknowledgement of God, and of obedience agreeable with the decalogue or table of the commandements of God, which God eſteemeth for glorie doone vnto him, and wherewith he is glorified and worſhipped.
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 5
                     Are not they without vnderſtanding that worke wickednes, eating vp my people as if they would eate bread? they haue not called vpon God.
                     Verſe 6
                     They were afraide where no feare was: for God hath broken the bones of them that beſieged thee: thou haſt put them to confuſion, becauſe God hath deſpiſed them.
                  
                  Hitherto hath he ſpoken of the note, that is, of the ſorrowfullThe roote & branches of ſinne in mankinde. and lamentable corruption of mankinde: now reciteth he the fruits of the moſt wicked tree: whereof firſt is vniuerſall vnrighteouſnes, which filthily in diuers and ſundry maners breaketh the law of God; an other is, tyranny of gouernours, who (as Nazianzene ſaith) beſides their owne rightfull reuenues, that is, tributes and taxes, doe take with the hands of Briareus what themſelues lift from the poſſeſſions of their ſubiects. The third fruit is, either neglecting of prayer, or, a falſe kinde of prayer, which is the breach of the ſecond commaundement. The fourth and laſt fruit ſuperſtition, which feareth a fault where no fault is, and maketh more account of mans traditions then of Gods commandements, but leſt any man ſhould ſlide into ſuch opinion, that he ſhould thinke tirants and others do ſinne vnpuniſhed, hee addeth a threatning touching preſent and eternal puniſhment in the ſixt verſe, he hath broken the bones of them that beſieged thee, that is, the Lord ſcattreth, confoundeth, and abhorreth extortie▪
                     
tortioners, that is, all ſinners which turne not from grieuous ſinnes, but do go forwards in contempt of God and fall he adlong out of ſome miſchefs into others. And becauſe the puniſhments of Tirants are more heinous in ſight, I will recite certaine tragical ends of ſome enemies of the church, that others looke well into theſe examples may learne righteouſnes, and not to contemne or deſpiſe God. Nero who firſt practiſed perſecution againſt ChriſtAnno Chriſti procured his owne death and deſtruction. Domitian was70 ſlaine of his frends conſpiring againſt him, euen in his95 owne palace. Maximinus was ſlaine of Pupienus at Aquilia. Daetius was deſtroyed in the moriſh ground of252 
                     Miſia, when he fled from the Gothes. Valerian together257 with his brother, was ſlaine at Inſubres. Airelianus was276 ouerthrowen of his owne Notary at Heraclia. and Diocleſian, died poyſoned at Salonia.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 7
                     O that the ſaluation were giuen out of Sion vnto Hieruſalem! O that the Lord woulde deliuer his people out of captiuitie!
                     Verſe 8
                     Then ſhoulde Iaacob reioyce, and Iſrael ſhould be right glad.
                  
                  All the prayers and all the ſighes of the holy ghoſt haue their force and effects of promiſes, as elſewhere often I haue ſaide: This verſe then is a promiſe touching the Mediator, whome Simeon in his ſong Luke 2. 30. calleth, the ſaluation of God. From him, ſaith he, muſt we craue and looke for true libertie, that is, deliuerance from ſinne and from euerlaſting death, and reſtitution vnto righteouſnes and life euerlaſting. This Lord, as Simeon alſo ſaith ibid. verſ. 32. is a light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of the people of Iſrael. Therfore as S. Paul ſaith, 2. Cor. 10. 17. He that reioyceth let him reioyce in the Lord.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            PSAL. LIIII. Deus in nomine tuo ſaluum me fac.
            
            
               
                  To him that excelleth on Neginoth, a Pſalme of Dauid to giue instruction: when the Zephims came and ſaide vnto Saul, is not Dauid hid among vs? 1. Sam. 23. 19.
                  
               
            
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               
                  THe hiſtories are knowen, whoſe mention is made in the title. For the Ziphims twice betraied Dauid, as it is written in lib. 1. reg. 23. 26. But although the hiſtory of Dauid doth not admoniſh vs of many things: yet ſurely in this very place eſpecially, let vs conſider two examples, one of a marueilous deliuerance, the other of a rare and vnaccuſtomed patience. For not in all his hiſtories is there any like example which may be compared with Dauids moderation in this place. For other men do both vnderſtand, and in effect proue the ſaying of Pendaerus which is extant in the ſecond Ode or Song of the Pithians,

                     Amico volo eſſe amicus, hoſti autem vt hoſtis
                     
                        
                           ••
                        u lupus occurram, alias aliunde veniens obliquis viis.
                  
                  
                     
                     Vnto a friend, a friend, I will bee,
                     And an enemy vnto an enemy:
                     Or euen as a woolfe will I my ſelfe ſet,
                     By crooked wayes comming elſewhere him to let.
                  
               
               But firſt let vs ſpeake of Dauids wonderfull deliuerance,Saules two ſe
                     
                        •
                     erall aſſaults vpon Dauid. 1. Sa. 23. 27, 28. and almoſt incredible. Saul was by many means letted of his purpoſe that he could not kill Dauid: For at one time he was called away by the irruption of the Philiſtims; at an other time by a heauy and not indeede naturall ſleepe (but by Gods prouidence being ſo ouercome) hee could not hurt Dauid: for it is expreſly ſaide, The Lord had ſent a dead ſleepe vpon them.
                  1. Sa. 26. 7. 12. verſ. 12. Theſe things though Democritus and the epicure would ſay they hapned by chance, yet let vs know that Dauids ſoule was by God preſerued, as Abigael moſt ſweetely ſaid, Like as it were bound in the bundle of life with the Lord his God 1. Sam. 25. 29. For, according to the ſaying in 2. of Pet. 2. 9. The Lord knoweth to deliuer the godly out of temptation; ſeeing he doth that which is moſt lawfull, and is not tied to ſecond cauſes. So at this day in diuerſe maners the practiſes of the enemies of the goſpel and of the church are hindered & letted, and the ſeely litle flocke keeper of the heauenlySo in like maner are the practiſes of the enimies of the goſpel hindered at this day doctrine is ſo defended and preſerued, that theſe deliuerances may not be referred but vnto God onely. There followeth an example of Dauids patience farre exceeding the moderation of philoſophers. For reaſon, after a ſort, mooueth them vnto gouernement of moueable matters, or of externall gifts, that they doe not any thing againſt iuſtice or other vertues. But this Dauid doth the holyghoſt gouerne and guide, and as S. Paul ſaith, 5. Galat. 24. 3. Coloſſ. 5. mortifyeth the deedes of the fleſh in him. For though by great right he might haue put Saul to death, and eſpecially in the very beſt oportunity of all circumſtances, yet he ſpared his intrapping

enimy, and in that point obſerued the moſt graue rule of S. Paul 1. Cor. 10. 23. Al things are lawful for me, but all things are not expedient: as if he ſhould ſay, we muſt not alwayes looke for what we may do with great right, but much more what may bee more profitable by example. For if Dauid vſing the law of defence had ſlaine Saul, he ſhould haue blemiſhed an excellent cauſe which hee had; and ſhoulde haue beene the author of an euill example, in the people of God. For firſt, hee ſhould by his deede haue confirmedThree cauſe
                        •
                      why Dauid (when hee might) did ſpare to kill Saul. the ſlanders of thoſe ſycophants which cried out, that Dauid was a ſeditious perſon, and one that with force and armes would inuade Saules knigdome, and ſhould not be vnlike to that tyrant, which ſaieth in the tragedy:

                     Pro regno velim patriam, parentes, coniugem,
                     Flammis dare: Imperia pretio quolibet conſtant bene.
                  
               
               In engliſh thus:

                     So I might raigne, I would to 'th fire betake
                     my countrie, parents, and my wedded mate:
                     Kingdomes by any meanes obtained,
                     doe ſeeme to be kingdomes well gained.
                  
               
               Furthermore the Philiſtims and other enemies of the church taking offence at this example had cried out in this manner: In vaine may the people of Iſrael boaſt, that their kings are giuen them by or from God when the thing and euent thereof ſhewed, by what ſleights or pollicies ſome perſons had caſt others out of their kingdome.
               Laſt of all, others moe with a certeine miſcheuous practiſe would haue folowed him: euen as thoſe which blodely doe vſe to ſacrifice men, haue excuſed their outrage, by Abrahams example in ſacrifiſing his ſonne. To the end therefore he would refute the ſlaunders of the citizens and enemies, and ſtopp vp and make voyde that ſame welſpring of their miſcheuous

malice hee vſed not the lawe of defence wherof mans lawes doe make mention, but hee commended his way vnto the Lord, and expected from him a ioyfull end of his daungers.
               But ſeeing theſe are not written for Dauids ſake, but for our ſakes, let vs looking into Dauids example learne both ſilence and hope, that is, let vs wiſely iudge what iniuries are to be put away, and what are to bee ſuffered for the tranquilitie of the church and common wealth. For that is a wicked impatience when a man will not ſuffer ſorow to do the church good: Alſo as ſaint Peter ſaith, Let vs ioyne with patience godlynes. 2. Pet. 1. 6. That is, let vs call vppon the Lord in the day of tribulation, and let vs craue from him either deliueraunce or mitigation of euills which ouercharge and exerciſe vs. Let not our patience bee onely philoſophicall moderation, but let it behold the will of God, and let it bee ioyned with a certeine hope of a ioyfull end: Theſe exerciſes of fayth. hope, inuocation, and patience, in ſorow ſhall bring more light to the reading of the Pſalmes then large commentaries ſhall doe.
               Now this Pſalme is partely a Prayer, and partely aThe effects of the Pſalme. thankeſgiuei
                     •
                  g. For the church both craueth of God benefits, and giueth thankes for benefits receiued. Herein Dauid therefore craueth defence from God againſt the ſubtile ſnare of Saul, and he promiſeth that he will celebrate or reuerently commemorate this benefit both with word and writing. Let vs in like maner alſo craue, that God would reſtraine the cruell counſels and practiſes of the enimies of the goſpell, and after our deliuerance let vs not be vnthankful: but let vs acknowledge and celebrate the preſence of God in his church, and with greater zeale let vs aduaunce the doctrine of God.
            
            
               
               Pſal. LIIII. And expoſition thereof.
               
                  
                     Verſ 1
                     Saue me, O God, for thy names ſake, and auenge me in thy ſtrength.
                     Verſe 2
                     Heare my praier, O God, and hearken vnto the words of my mouth.
                  
                  
                     
                        NAme, (as I haue often times elſewhere 
                        •
                     aid) comprehendeth cauſes impulſiue and 
                        ••
                     all as touching God hearing vs. The mpulſiue is the promiſe of God, the finall 
                        •
                     s the acknowledgment and worſhipping of God. Hee therefore craueth that he may bee heard and helped, not for his righteouſnes, but for Gods promiſe ſake which is beliuered to the church. Therefore alſo craueth he to be deliuered, that teſ
                        •
                     imony of Gods preſence might appeare in the church, with conſideration whereof many might be ſtirred vp to the acknowledging and wor
                        ••
                     ipping of God. And let vs alſo when we areCauſes mo
                           •
                        
                        uing God to beſtow his benefites. praying alledge theſe cauſes, ſince it is moſt aſſured that God is ſpecialy moued to giue his benefits, partly with remembrance and memorie of his promiſe, and partly in reſpect of his glorie. But where he ſaith [auenge me in thy ſtrength] let it be vnderſtood according to the Hebrew phraſe thus, take o
                        •
                      thee the patronage of my cauſe, declare thou, that I was called by thy commaundement vnto the kingdome, and that I haue not ſought by ambition to aſpire vnto the gouernement of Gods people, as the ſyccp
                        •
                     a
                        ••
                     s doe crie out. But why addeth he, in thy ſtrength? euen to giue God the glory, not onely of goodneſſe and mercy, but alſo of immenſe and infinit power, as if he ſaid. Thou not onely wilt, but alſo art able to help and ſaue mee. For needefull it is that wee in our prayer make mention of Gods fatherly will and power, where▪
                     
with he created all things, and moſt freely gouerneth all things.
                  It followeth in the text; Heare my prayer O God, and harken vnto the words of my mouth. I haue oftenA two folde kind of prayer. aduertiſed the reader, that there is a twofold maner of invocation or prayer: one of the heart, the other of the mouth: For although prayer may be made with feruent ſighing of the heart, yet the recitall of a certeine forme of praying conceiued without ſuperſtition is profitable for many cauſes. For, firſt, hee admoniſheth them that pray, of many things; and it is a certeine confeſſion ſeperating vs from the vn godly and prophane ſects. After that, he ſtirreth vp godly motions in mens hearts according to Saint Pauls ſaying Rom. 10. 17. Faith commeth by hearing, and hearing by the worde. Laſt of all, an expreſſe recitall ſtriketh euen very deuilles with feare. For deuilles do not with any Gorgon or ſhield thruſt forth againſt them more tremble for feare then when they heare true prayers made vnto God. In reſpect of theſe commodities, let vs inure our ſelues vnto the expreſſe recitall of ſome forme of prayer, whether it be deliuered vs from Chriſt, or in the Pſalmes conceiued: and let vs not ſpare for labours in the reciting of our prayers as many ſlouthfull or negligent perſons doe.
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 3
                     For ſtrangers are riſen againſt mee: And tyrants (which haue not God before their eies) ſeeke after my ſoule.
                  
                  The reaſon of this prayer is borowed or taken from a heauie obiect which moueth God very much vnto deliuerance: For as the naturall tender hearted father is moued with the miſery of his young ſonne or daughter, ſo God, in whome is all fatherly loue, is moued with our miſeries, and feeleth thoſe motions of the heart, which are deſcribed in the II. of Oſeas, My heart is turned within mee, my

repentings are rowled together. verſe 8. And he amplifiethTwo ſpeciall points of miſchiefe in the enemy. Pride, the furies of the enimies of the church with notable words, to whome hee attributeth pride and tyranie. For like as deuils are moſt proud ſpirits, which are delighted in the deſtruction of Gods warkes. So the inſtruments of thoſe deuils are full of tyrannicall inſelency, which indeedeand Tyrannie riſeth of this ſpring, that they both neglect and contemne God, and haue this voice of Niobes in their mouth and minde: 
                        Maior ſum quam cui poſsit fortuna nocere. Greater I am, then whome fortune can hurt or any way conſume. For the originall of pride is ſecuritie, negelecting and contemning Gods iudgement: But let vs hold faſt that ſaying of Saint Iames 4. 6. God reſiſteth the proude and giueth grace to the humble. and likewiſe the ſentence by Chriſt pronounced. Luke 16. 15. That which is high eſteemed among men is abhomination in the ſight of God.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 4
                     Behold, God is my helper: the Lord is with them that vphold my ſoule.
                  
                  This conſideration is an argument which is brought from the things that go before, as if he ſayd, God hath often times before heard and ſaued mee: therefore no doubt of it he will ſtill helpe me, becauſe he will accompliſh the benefits he hath begun, and will finiſh the webbe wherevnto he firſt ſet his hand. This argument S. Paul vſeth in the 2. Phil. 13. For it is God which worketh in you both the will and the deed, euen of his good pleaſure: as if ſome acceptable things might be done vnto him: that is, whereas God hath before helped you in your conuerſion, and hath drawen you out of euerlaſting death, no doubt of it, he will gouerne and helpe you in your vocation & life, that you may performe the worſhippings which he requireth. And in the 2. Cer. 1. 9, 10. Yea, we receiued the ſentence of death in our ſelues, becauſe wee

ſhould not truſt in our ſelues, but in God which raiſeth the dead, who deliuered vs from ſo great a death, and doth deliuer vs, in whom we truſt, that yet hereafter he will deliuer vs. Let vs therefore learne to confirme and comfort our ſelues with remembrance of deliuerances before paſt, and by theſe, conceiue a moſt ſure hope of thoſe that are to come: becauſe God is not only the guide and giuer of his benefits, but alſo the worker of them in vs: as in Phil. 6. He that hath begun this good worke in you, will performe it vntill the day of leſus Chriſt.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 5
                     He ſhall reward euill vnto mine enemies: deſtroy thou them in thy truth.
                  
                  Albeit theſe prayers ſeeme to be contrary vnto the preceptTwo diſtinct prohibitions in praying or curſing for the enemies. of Chriſt, where he ſayth, Math. 5. 44. Bleſſe them that curſe you, and pray for them that perſecute you: yet if we conſider two diſtinctions, which are neither fained nor forged, there is an eaſie coniunction of theſe places, hauing an apparant reaſon in them: for firſt, the matter or cauſe muſt be diſcerned from the perſons: therfore we pray that God would vtterly deſtroy and extirpat the euill cauſe which our aduerſaries haue taken vpon them to defend. For the enemies counſels and miſchieuous enterpriſes with a malignant countenance, are altogether repugnant vnto the ſanctifying or glorifying of Gods name, alſo do ſtriue againſt the will and kingdome of God. The remoouing of theſe miſchiefs, without all doubting, muſt we craue and pray for vnto God. Afterwards we muſt diſcerne the degrees of the perſons: for ſome are curable or may be conuerted, others are blaſphemous and incurable. As therefore wee muſt make our prayers for them that are curable, ſo perſons blaſphemous and ſuch as ſtubburnly defend idolatry, are to be curſed of all men, euen as the very enemies of God and inſtruments of the deuils. Therefore S. Paul deſcribing

the enemies of the Goſpel, vſeth a grieuous word touching thoſe whoſe mindes are vncurable. If any man loue not the Lord Ieſus Chiiſt, let him be had in execration, yea, excommunicate to the death. 1. Cor. 16. 22. He calleth the enemies of Chriſt not onely wicked offenders, but alſo he prayeth, that the iudgement of God may light vpon them aud puniſh them.
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 6
                     An offering of a free heart will I giue thee, and praiſe thy name, O Lord, becauſe it is ſo comfortable.
                     Verſe 7
                     For he hath deliuered me out of all my trouble: and mine eye hath ſeene his deſire vpon mine enemies.
                  
                  The former part of the Pſalme, is a moſt feruent praier, wherein he craueth deliuerance: the latter part is a ſong of thankſgiuing. For although it be a thing vſuall in mans life, as Pindarus ſayth: 
                        Vetus gratia dormit, & homines ſunt immemores. The olde grace doeth ſleepe, and men litle in minde keepe. yet notwithſtanding, the godly ones in the Church are true and iuſt; for they acknowledge, and with a thankefull heart celebrate the authour of beneſits, and confeſſe, that they are bound to performe dueties, which are notable teſtimonies of thankefulneſſe. So Dauid in this place promiſeth a recompenſe, namely, Thankſgiuing, and aduancement of the true doctrine. Finally, the Reader muſt be admoniſhed touching the ſignification of this Hebrew word Raah: for it hath this emphaſis or meaning, that it ſignifieth not onely to ſee and leaſurely beholde, but with a certeine admiration and pleaſure to looke vpon ſome thing, as Eſay in his 9. cap. 2. verſ. ſaith: The people that walked in darkeneſſe ſaw a great light, &c. that is, The Church gathered from among the nations ſhall be amaſed with admiration at the wiſdome which in the Goſpel is reuealed. So Dauid ſaith here, his eye did ſee the fall and

deſtruction of his enemies; not without admiration at ye iudgement of God, touching which it is ſayd in another Pſalme, Righteous art thou, O Lord, and righteou, is thy iudgement. Pſal. 119. pars. 14. verſ. 1.
                  
               
            
         
         
            PSAL. LV. Exaudi Deus orationem meam.
            
            
               
                  To him that excelleth on Neginoth, a Pſalme of Dauid: to giue instruction.
               
            
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               
                  THis pſalme is a moſt feruent prayer, not indeede againſt enemies whoſe outrages are manifeſt, but againſt the falſhoode of fained frendes our ſociats & companions, which flatter vs to our faces, but behind our backe, if they take occaſion can lay a cold pad in the ſtrawe. ThisA prayer againſt fained friends. falſe frendſhip is moſt worthie of hatred, and to bee accurſed of all men. For as fayth is the moſt holy good property pertaining to the heart of man: ſo no plague greater floweth from the Stygian or helliſh lake then falſehoode of fayth which is couered with manie

ſleights of diſsimulation, and ouerſpred as it were with certaine ſailes. But therefore doth God ſuffer vs to be forſaken of frendes, or elſe alſo to bee oppugned by them, to the end hee may put away from vs vaine confidence in man, which leaneth either vppon the iudgements or the moſt vncerteine willes of our alies and ſociats. How often are lewd opinions of men ſpred in the church, or vnneceſſarie warres in the common welth by confidence in humane helpes? Wherefore that this miſcheefe may be remedied, and to the end fayth repoſed in God alone might increaſe in vs, God not onely forbiddeth confidence in man, as where hee ſaith, Iere. 13. 5. Curſed is hee that putteth his truſt in man, but alſo ſuffreth even our very companion of the ſame religion to ſtart backe from vs, forſake vs, and ſtriue againſt vs: In ſuch a caſe learne wee how much better and more ſafer it is to truſt in God alone, then for a man to put his truſt in a thouſand princes: And were it not a thing hatefull, I would here commemorate examples of the lightnes and lewd looſeneſſe of ſome which haue mu
                     •
                  ded and aſſaulted with hoſtilitie, euen their very colleges and companions of the ſame iourney by ſea: But theſe new examples I omit, and I beſeech God that he would vouchſafe to defend vs with the ſhadow of his hand, not onely againſt our enemies, but alſo againſt our vnfaythfull and vnconſtant companions or ſociates. Amen.
            
            
               Pſal. LV. And expoſition thereof.
               
                  
                     Verſe 1
                     Heare my prayer, O God, and hide not thy ſelfe from my petition.
                     Verſe 2
                     Take heed vnto me, and heare me, how I mourne in my prayer.
                  
                  
                     
                     THe Sonne of God ſaith, True worſhippersA difference betweene the prayer of the faithfull, and the prayer of hypocrites. do worſhip God in ſpirit & truth. Iohn 4. 23. as if he ſayd; Hypocrites do pray without vnderſtāding, without deuotion, and with a contradietion: without vnderſtanding, becauſe they conſider not the eſſence and will of God manifeſted in his commandements and promiſes; neither doe diſcerne things that are to be aſked of God. Finally, neither conſider they what a vertue true prayer is, but after the manner of prating Parots, doe ſound words which they vnderſtand not. Without deuotion, becauſe they feele not ſpirituall motions in time of prayer, as faith, hope, and patience: but they pray with wrath, and with doubting, that is, they do fret and fume in miſerie againſt God, and doe doubt of his hearing of them. Finally, they pray with contradiction, ſpeakingThe threefold praier of the hypocrites & wicked ones. one thing, and thinking another: for though they haue theſe words in their mouthes; Sanctified be thy name; Thy kingdome come; Thy will be done. Mat. 6. 9, 10: yet their heart diſagreeth from their tongue, foraſmuch as they vehemently deſire and earneſtly with for the deſtruetion of the true knowledge of God, and the ouerthrow of Chriſtes kingdome, and that many things may be vnthankfullyThe prayer of the faithful done againſt God. Such is the prayer, or rather much lippe labor, to little purpoſe, of all them which defend idolles and manifeſt errours: but the godly ones (as Dauid in this place) do worſhip the father in ſpiritIohn 4. 23. and trueth; that is, doe bring with their prayer true acknowledgement of the eſſence of God, and a conſideration of the commandements and promiſes wherein God made his will knowen: and they knowe what benefits God will giue vs without condition, and wherein he will require obedience. Furthermore, they acknowledge and bewaile their ſinnes, & yet with faith they vanquiſh doudtings, beleeuing, that though they be vnworthy of themſelues, yet for the Mediatours ſake, they are and ſhall be

heard. Finally, in the prayer of the godly ones, there is a conſonancy of the minde, will, heart, and tongue; then which harmony none can be thought more ſweet. Let this difference betweene true and hypocriticall prayer be often conſidered in the Pſalmes, when indeed it bringeth ſome light vnto the reading of the Pſalmes. Now thinke with your ſelfe how feruent Dauids prayer is, Heare (ſaith he) my prayer, O God, and with that, he addeth this, as it were, ſtriuing with doubting: Hide not thy ſelfe from my petition: yea, and he requireth God to take heed vnto him, Take heed vnto me, and heare me. And leaſt any man ſhould thinke that Dauid is colde, or goes about ſome other thing in time of his praying, he affirmeth expreſly, that he will rule his motions in the ſame prayer; that is, he will craue of God with moſt feruent deſires, and with all his heart, benefits neceſſary both for his ſoule and his body. But why doth he make mention of being vexed? berely becauſe he would ſignifie that he felt outward feares, inward fightings. 2. Cor. 7. and did not only ſtriue with externall dangers, wherein his body was exerciſed, but alſo with feares and deiections, riſing from acknowledgement of ſinne, and of the wrath of God: for moſt commonly the enemies threatnings and the conflicts of conſcience, ſtriuing with ſinne and with the wrath of God, doe come together in one obiect. But theſe things are often times repeated, and ſet foorth in the Pſalmes, therefore I am now more briefe herein.
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 3
                     The enemy crieth ſo, and the vngodly commeth on ſo faſt: for they are minded to doe me ſome miſchiefe, ſo maliciouſly are they ſet againſt me.
                     Verſe 4
                     My heart is diſquieted within me: and the feare of death is fallen vpon me.
                     Verſe 5
                     Fearefulnes & trembling are come vpon me: & an horrible dread hath ouerwhelmed me.
                  
                  
                     We need not long interpretation in theſe complaints, becauſe they are vnderſtood by conſidering our owne and others examples: for how much euery man ſuffereth, ſo much he knoweth, as one of the old writers ſaith notably. But contrarywiſe, he that is tempted, what things doeth he ſuffer? For there are three inſtruments or meanes to learne diuine things by; Meditation, Prayer, and Temptation: for the Scripture deliuered from God needeth noThree ſpeciall meanes to learn diuinitie Meditation, Praier, and Temptation. allegorie, but contemplation and vnderſtanding. Seeing then we ſuffer ſuch like things, ſuch complaints become more ſweet in taſte with vs, which are euery where extant in the Pſalmes.
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 6
                     And I ſayd, O that I had wings like a Doue, for then would I flee away and be at reſt.
                     Verſe 7
                     Lo, then would I get me away farre off, and remaine in the wilderneſſe.
                     Verſe 8
                     I would make haſte to eſcape, becauſe of the ſtormy winde and tempeſt.
                  
                  He addeth vnto the complaine, a prayer of fleeing away: Would to God (ſayth he) I might be ſeperated afarre off from my falſe and vnfaithfull friends, which lie in wait for me nights and dayes, and are bent vpon all occaſions whereby they may ouerthrow and oppreſſe mee. After the ſame maner all the holy ones deſire to be diſſolued and to be with Chriſt. Phil. 1. 23. that is, deſire a more ſincere beholding of God, and full and perfect deliuerance from ſinne: for like as a trauailer making his iourney in the darke, knowing neither the way nor the place where he goeth, reioyceth when the morning beginneth to waxe light; ſo all the godly ones feeling the burdens of ſinne, and ſtriuing with diuers dangers, do deſire to haue fellowſhip with God, and being called to the end of their life, doe willingly caſt aſide the grieuous burden of doubtings and the filthineſſe of ſinne, which is in this

our vncleane lumpe of fleſh remaining, and do wiſh themſelues altogether and alwayes feruently deſire to haue the loue of God, and gladneſſe in God. Theſe prayers are neither obſcure nor vnknowen to the godly ones: I paſſe on therefore vnto the verſes following.
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 9
                     Deſtroy their tongues, O Lord, and diuide them: for I haue ſpyed vnrighteouſneſle and ſtrife in the citie.
                     Verſe 10
                     Day and night they goe about within the walles thereof: miſchefe alſo and ſorow are in the middes of it.
                     Verſe 11
                     Wickednes is therein, deceit and guile goe not out of their ſtreetes.
                  
                  Seeing wee muſt needes be conuerſant in the world, as it were in Medeas boſome, euen vntill the very laſt end of our life and vocation, let vs bee content with our ſecond nauigation: and let vs pray vnto God, that hee would ſtopp and ſtay the cunning deceits and iuggling practiſes of the children of this world: and that he wouldAgainſt the open enemies of our time. caſt to them the apple of diſcord, for the which they may like vnto Chadmeis children fight one with an other: For although the firſt and moſt wiſhfull voiage is that, which with large ſpread ſayles and proſperous winds brings vs into the hauen of euerlaſting bleſſednes, yet if this bee not by and by graunted vs, let vs with a croked courſe quite forſake the windes ond tempeſts which indeede was wont to be doone, when God would reſtraine the fradulent 
                        •
                     ilchiuous enterpriſes of domeſticall and forreine enemyes.
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 12
                     For it is not an open enemy, that hath done mee this diſhonour: for then I could haue borne it.
                     Verſe 13
                     Neither was it 
                           •
                        ine aduerſarie that did

magnifie himſelfe againſt mee: for then peraduenture I would haue hid my ſelfe from him.
                     Verſe 14
                     But it was euen thou my companion, my guide, and mine owne familiar friend.
                     Verſe 15
                     Wee tooke ſweete counſell together, and walked in the houſe of God as frendes.
                     Verſe 16
                     Let death come haſtily vppon them, and let them goe downe quicke into hell: for wickednes is in their dwelings and amongſt them.
                  
                  The greatnes of ſorow (which the ſwaruing or re
                     
                        ••
                     sultingAgainſt the falſe friendſhip of our time. of our friend brings to vs with whome we haue liued publiquely and priuatly moſt familiarly and moſt frendly, and which was not onely our companion in counſels and the reſt of our affaires; but alſo of the ſelfe ſame religion) exceedeth all eloquence of ſpeech or vtterance. For this falſe friendſhip encreaſeth the enemies outrages, and vexeth the holy ſpirit of the godly ones: For indeede the weake perſons taking offence at the diuerſity or difference of mens iudgements, begin to doubt of the certeinty or truth of doctrine. But the enemyes they triumph at it, when the chiefeſt teachers are catcht away from the church. Finally ſo many and ſo great offences doe folow this ſwaruing or back-ſliding, that Dauid not vainely nor vnaduiſedly (being inflamed with the zeale of the holyghoſt) cried out here: Let death come haſtily vpon them, and let them go quick into hell. &c.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 17
                     As for mee I will call vpon God, and the Lord ſhall ſaue mee.
                     Verſe 18
                     In the euening and morning and at noone day wil I pray, and that inſtantly: and hee ſhall heare my voice.
                     Verſe 19
                     It is hee that hath redeemed my ſoule in

peace, from the battel that was againſt mee: for there were many with mee.
                     Verſe 20
                     Yea▪ euen God that endureth for euer, ſhal heare me, and bring them downe: for they wil not turne nor feare God.
                  
                  True prayer is a ſpeciall ſafegarde of the godly minde, in ſo great miſeries of this life: Let vs therefore runne for refuge vnto this tower, and in this hauen let vs ſettle our ſelues, and let vs not ſeeke for thoſe remedies of our ſorowes which are not graunted vs. This place alſo teacheth that wee muſt go forwards in fayth, in praier and hope for Gods helpe: For although by the aſſured prouidence of God, our deliuerance be deferred: yet this litle lingring hath great aduantages, becauſe it exerciſeth fayth and prayer, and ſheweth, that we are not preſerued and defended by mans helpe, but by Gods helpe: and many wayes adorneth and aduaunceth the glorie of God:Luk. 16. 20. Matth. 9. 8. Luk. 7. 12. As the raiſing of Lazarus from death to life, was more glorious, then the reuiuing of the daughter of Iairus, or the widowes ſonne of Naim.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 21
                     He laide his hand vpon ſuch as be at peace with him: and he brake his couenant.
                     Verſe 22
                     The words of his mouth were ſofter than butter, hauing warre in his heart: his words were ſmoother than oile, and yet bee they very ſwords.
                  
                  This moſt pleaſant deſcription painteth out the properties of falſe brethren and pointeth the finger vnto theAgainſt the falſe brethren of our time. wel-ſpring of diſſimulation, fraud, or guile ſubtile deceits and cruelty: for the originall of theſe miſchiefes is impietie, which neither feareth God, nor is not conuerted vnto God: from this wel-ſpring flow the ſleights of hurting,

which hipocrits moſt ſubti
                        •
                     ly are acquainted with, & the
                        ••
                      flattering ſpeech, touching which Cicero ſaieth: Frons, vultus, oculi perſaepe mentiuntur, oratio verò ſaepiſsime:
                     
                        The face, the countenance, and the eies,
                        very often deceiue men:
                        But the ſpeech of tongue
                        moſt often deceiue them.
                     
                  
                  And Eurypides ſaith: Dura molliter loquuntur, they ſpeake grieuous things ſmoothly.
                      Hitherto pertaineth the fable of the little Mowſe, to whome her mother gaue this commandement: Beware my little one (ſaith ſhe) not of the crowing cock, but of the ſilent Cat, whoſe maners and geſtures are altogether ful of craft and ſubtilty. And what ſay you to that which our learned ſchoolemaiſter D. Philip Melancthon was wont very merrily to recite in theſe verſes:

                        Annis mille i am peractis,
                        Nulla fides eſt in pactis,
                        Mel in ore verba lactis,
                        Fel in corde, nil in factis.
                     
                  
                  In Engliſh thus:

                        Theſe thouſand yeares now paſt and gone,
                        None keepe couenants, no not one:
                        Hony in mouth, wordes milke proceedes,
                        Gall's in the heart, and nought i'th deedes.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 23
                     O caſt thy burthen vpon the Lord: and he ſhall nouriſh thee, and ſhall not ſuffer the righteous to fall for euer.
                  
                  This is a notable and ſweete conſolation, which biddeth vs ſettle our ſelues in confidence of the preſence and helpe of God, and to craue and looke for from him either deliuerance or mitigation: This conſolation healeth not the ſcarres, but the woundes, as the experience of the godly ones witneſſeth. It is our part to doe the

workes of our vocation diligently and faithfully, and to eſchew the fauouring of offence in our ſelues. But the care touching the iſſue and euent of our labours muſt be commended vnto God, who will bring to paſſe that we ſhall not be oppreſſed with vaine contention, but that our care ſhould be profitable to the glorie of God, and to the ſaluation of many men. O Lord Jeſus Chriſt, I therefore beſeech thee, that thou wouldſt mercifully heare and preſerue vs wretched and weake ſoules repoſing vppon thy ſhoulders. So be it.
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 24
                     And as for them, thou (O God) ſhalt bring them into the pit of deſtruction.
                     Verſe 25
                     The bloodthirſty and deceitful men ſhal not liue out halfe their dayes: neuertheles, my truſt ſhalbe in thee, O Lord.
                  
                  He reciteth in concluſion of this pſalme, a curſe, theThe curſed end of the wicked. which is a prophecie of the holyghoſt touching the tragicall deſtruction of falſe brethren, which are not curable of their ſores: for in as much as God is a louer of trueth and righteouſneſſe, without all doubt he ſhal and wil deſtroy the crafteſ-maiſters of lyings and murders. And I will not be heere any longer tedious, but I beſeech God, that hee woulde heale our woundes, and turne the hearts of ſuch as are teachers in the Church vnto a godly and wholeſome agreement in doctrine and conuerſation.
               
            
         
         
            
            PSAL. LVI. Miſerere mei Deus.
            
            
               
                  
                     To him that excelleth, a Pſalme of Dauid, on Michtam; concerning the dumb Doue in a far Country: when the Philistims tooke him in Gath.
                  
               
               The Title.
               
                  THe history whereof mention is made in the Title is recited in the 1. li. Samuel. 29. cap. And though the declaration thereof be briefe, yet painteth it out the Image of thoſe Kings Courts, wherein Ambition,King Achis & his courtmaligning the eſtate of King Dauid. Emulation, Enuy, Hatred, Slaunder, and a thouſand ſleights do beare ſway: for the Gouernours in king Achis Court burned with very hatred at the glory of king Dauid, and could not rest in quiet till they had driuen this exile away, whoſe wiſdome and vertue was excellent. And how like one egge is vnto another, or milke like milke, ſo like is one Court vnto another. But why do I ſpeake of Courts, when euen in very ſchooles there are contentions for poore ſuperioritie. Let vs therefore be Doues, and indeede dumb Doues, without the caſe of our confeſsion, as in the old verſe is ſaid;

                     Melius est hoſpitem tacere quam clamare:
                  
                  
                     Better doth ſilence a ſtranger become,
                     Than for to be too too tatling of tongue.
                  
               
               
                  For there is difference betweene allow able ſilence and vniust ſilence, becauſe there are often probable cauſes why we must keep ſilence, according to the Pr. 25. 20. Like as vineger is poured vpon niter, ſo is he that ſingeth ſongs to an heauy heart. Alſo many things doth the thing it ſelfe refute when we hold our tongues.
               Here then a question is asked, when wee muſt keepe ſilence, or when we must ſpeake? Seeing theAn Apologie of the life and doctrine of true goſpellers. confeſsion of our Religion is knowen wee are able to paſſe ouer reproches: being accuſed of heinous crimes, let vs purge our ſelues modestly, and let vs beare with many more ſlender reproches, and ſtoppe their mouthes with ſilence: and let vs take heede that our aduerſaries may in our life and conuerſation be refuted, and not with words, as Cicero ſaieth: Male mecum agitur, ſi me oratio potius quam vita mea purgat. It goeth euil with me if my ſpeech rather than my life ſhould purge me. And Scipio ſaith in Liuius: Res non verba ad purgandum ſe paraſſe, he had addreſſed matters, not wordes to purge himſelfe withall:
               
               It is an vniust ſilence when eyther with feare or flattery a true opinion in caſe of Confeſsion is hidden or not reuealed: Of this vniust ſilence this our age affordeth vnto vs very many examples. Christ himſelfe both before Herod Luk. 23. 9. and againe when he vvas vppon the Croſſe ibid. 34. And vvhen Dauid heard Semey crying out againſt him 2. Sam. 16. 7. Come foorth, come foorth murtherer and wicked man. Let this be inough ſpoken as touching the Title.
            
            
               
               THE ARGVMENT.
               THere be three parts of this Pſalme; the firſt is a prayer, wherein he craueth defence againſt theThe tripartite diuiſion of this Pſalme. malapertnes of his enemies amongſt whome hee liued in exilement, the ſecond parte is a declaration of his calamitie: For although it be a great miſchief for a man to be pluckt away from the ſociety of his parents and friends, and to wander amongſt vnknowen perſons without honour, and to be caſt 
                     •
                  orth to al dangers of fortune, yet there are greater miſchefs not to bee conuerſant in the congregation of the true church, and not to haue or enioy the ſweete conferences with the godly ones, but to heare the blaſphemous ſpeeches of men againſt God. The greatnes of theſe miſchefs exceedeth all cogitations of minde and eloquence of tongue. The third parte is a thankeſgiuing for defence and deliuerance from God. For as Saint Peter ſaith. 2. 2. 9. The Lord knoweth to deliuer the godly out of temptation &c. and as Saint Paul ſaith 1. Cor. 10. 15. God is faithfull, which will not ſuffer you to be tempted aboue that you bee able, but will euen giue the iſſue with temptation, that ye may be able to beare it.
               
               But alwayes in the reading of the Pſalme let vs conſider of the application: ſeeing the church liues baniſhed in the world, and not vnlike to the Halcyan
                  The church like the Halcian bird. bird building in the ſea rocks, we muſt craue that God would mitigate theſe calamities in the whole bodie and all the members thereof, and now and then grant vs after teares gladnes. Alſo let vs be thankefull vnto God for the mitigation of thoſe calamities, and for his wonderfull defence of the church againſt the rage of the world and of the deuils.
            
            
               
               Pſal. LV I. And expoſition thereof.
               
                  
                     Verſe 1
                     Be mercifull vnto me O God, for man goeth about to deuoure me: He is daily fighting and troubling mee.
                     Verſe 2
                     Mine enemies are daily in hand to ſwallow me vp: for they be many that fight againſt mee, O thou moſt higheſt.
                  
                  The cruelty of hatred wherewith the enemies of the godly ones doe burne is in moſt ſorowfull words deſcribed of Saint Paul 1. Corint. 4. 9. The godly ones are made a gaſing ſtock vnto the world, alſo ibid. 13. the filth of the world, the of-ſcowring of all things. For, excrementum, ſignifieth an odious thing filthily defiled, accurſed, worthie of deſtruction, for which God puniſheth whole nations, except it be vtterly taken away. And as excrementum is a filthie thing vpon earth, ſo reiectamentum, ſignifieth a man, who with his contagion hurteth his companions of the ſame iournie by ſea: and whome it is needefull that wee caſt into the ſea, leaſt all that are in the ſhip and the ſhip it ſelfe be ouerwhelmed with the raging flouds. Now thinke what a heauie and ſorowfull thing it is, to be iudged a plague and deſtruction of mankinde, and to be nights and dayes laied open to all chaunces of ſodaine dangers. Wherefore we muſt ſufficiently well furniſh and arme our mindes with true doctrine, prayer, and teſtimonies of the true church that wee be not oppreſſed with the vniuſt iudgements of the world, or elſe doe ſtart back from the goſpel through feare of dangers.
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 3
                     Neuertheleſſe though I am ſometimes afraide, yet put I my truſt in thee.
                     
                        Verſe 4
                     I will praiſe God becauſe of his worde: I haue put my truſt in God and will not feare what fleſh can do vnto me.
                  
                  Unto the hiſtorie he addeth a conſolation which is taken not out of Philoſophie, but out of the worde of God: For moſt truly it is ſaid in the 119. Pſalme part  3. ver. 2. This is my comfort in my affliction, becauſe thyA refuge in ſorrowes. word hath quickned me. For in ſorow vnfained, when the minde ſeeketh euery where for comfort, and we find by experience wee are not helped by mans deuice or imaginations, at the length the godly minde running downe to the preaching of the goſpell, as it were vnto a fountaine of liuely water, beginneth to ſetle it ſelfe, and to feele Gods helpe and preſence, and the reſtoring of life euerlaſting. And here let the nature of faith be conſidered which (as Saint pauls epiſtle Heb. 11. cap. 1. verſe hath ſet fortth) is the ground of things which are hoped for, and the euidence of things which are not ſeene: For it is a matter important to beleeue thoſe things which wee ſee not, to hope well of things deferred, and to reſt at peace in God, yea, though he caſt a ſterne countenance at vs, and ſo to perſeuer euen vnto the very end. To this purpoſe Iob ſaith cap. 13. verſe 15. Yea, though hee ſhall kil me, yet will I truſt in him, and he ſhall be my Sauiour. So Dauid with a great reſpect or regarde of fayth ſaith, I haue put my truſt in God, and wil not feare what fleſh can doe vnto me: yea although all feares and all dangers euery where ariſe ouer mee: yet I hold it a thing both certaine and affirmed, to yeelde and obey to God calling mee, and not to ſtart aſide no not a naile bredth from his worde: For if God be on our ſide, who ſhall be againſt vs Rom. 8. 31. O that it would pleaſe God to giue vs in the great outrage of ſtormes and concourſe of calamities like ſtrength of faith vanquiſhing feares and doubtings: And without all doubtes he ſhall

be mightie in our infirmitie if we make our prayers vnto him, according to his promiſe. Math. 7. 11. How much more ſhal my heauenly father giue you his holy ſpirit, when you pray for it?
                  
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 5
                     They daily miſtake my words: al that they imagin is to doe me euil.
                     Verſe 6
                     They hold altogether, and keepe themſelues cloſe, and marke my ſteppes: when they lay waite for my ſoule.
                     Verſe 7
                     Shall they eſcape for their wickednes? thou O God in thy diſpleaſure ſhalt caſt them downe.
                  
                  Hee handleth at full the hiſtorie as touching his miſeries in time of his baniſhment. Like as in Eſops fables all beaſts conſpire together to ſpoile the poore Camel: So (as Tyrteus the muſitian ſaith)

                        Nemo curat vagos & ledere nemo veretur.
                        Non exul cur
                              •
                            ducitur eſſe Deo.
                     
                     
                        No man careth for the wandring wights,
                        to hurte them none doth feare:
                        Men thinke that God forgetteth quite
                        pore Exiles liuing here.
                     
                  
                  But vnto a moſt euident complaint wee neede not to adde any long declaration.
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 8
                     Thou telleſt my flittinges, putte my teares into thy bottell: are not theſe things noted in thy booke?
                  
                  O the vnſpeakable fatherly louing kindnes of God,The vnſpeakable fatherly louing kindenes of God towards his. numbring the very haires of our head, and gathering our teares! For I pray you thinke and conſider how great this gatherer is, namely, the Creator of all things, the King of kings and Lord of lords. Wee merueile at the

humanitie of Theſeus, who waſhed with his owne hands the dead carkaſes of his ſlaine ſouldiers at the water of Thebes: But much more let vs maruell, yea, and al amaſed wonder at this, when we reade and heare that God gathereth our teares. But whoſe teares I pray you gathereth he▪ not the teares of Angells but of ſinners, whoſe infirmitie and filthines is great. Surely I can ſcarſe tell whether any more notable deſcription bee extant of Gods prouidence either in the hiſtories of the Prophets or of the Apoſtles. Let this therefore be faſt fixed in our mindes, ſo that it may comfort vs, ſo often as wee are vehemently diſquieted touching the will of God, and are vexed with a certaine ſpeciall ſorow. God taketh care, not onely for our bodies and ſoules, but alſo euen for our very haires and ſeely teares, and keepe them as it were a matter of great importance and as a treaſure of great priſe. Therefore notably ſaid Saint Paul, that our light afliction which is but for a moment, cauſeth vnto vs a farre more excellent, and an eternall weight of glorie. 2. Cor. 4. 17.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 9
                     When ſoeuer I call vppon thee, then ſhall mine enemies be put to flight. This I know for God is on my ſide.
                  
                  In this verſe let there be conſidered a difference betweeneThe doutings of the Heathen. the doubting of the Ethnicks and the careful confidence of the church. Cato, although he beleeued thereThe faith of the church. was a God, yet hee doubted whether he might be hard and by litle and litle was plunged into deſperation: But the church which embraceth the worde deliuered from God, ſtriuing againſt doubting beleeueth aſſuredly, that ſhe is receiued and heard for the Mediators ſake, and the cauſe of his aſſuredneſſe is the worde of GOD, in which phraſe or ſpeech I comprehend the commaundement,

promiſe, oath, and truth of God: But theſe things are elſewhere often expounded.
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 10
                     In Gods word will I reioyce: in the Lords word will I comfort me.
                     Verſe 11
                     Yea in God haue I put my truſt: I will not be afrayd what man can do vnto me.
                     Verſe 12
                     Vnto thee, O God, will I pay my vowes: vnto thee will I giue thanks.
                     Verſe 13
                     For thou haſt deliuered my ſoule from death, and my feet from falling: that I mayA threefolde concluſion of thankſgiuing. walke before God in the light of the liuing.
                  
                  So often times as I haue now ſpoken of thankſgiuing vnto God, the ſame is to be referred vnto three concluſions; whereof the firſt is, that the glory of the power, liberty, and preſence of God in his Church might be attributed vnto God: and that Epicures, Stoicks, and other blaſphemous perſons (which crie out that God is either idle or blinde) might be refuted, &c. The ſecond concluſion is, that true acknowledgement of God might goe forwards in vs, and that God hencefoorth would vouchſafe to communicate himſelfe vnto vs: for God ceaſeth to communicate himſelfe vnto vnthankefull perſons, which are lyars and vniuſt: Lyars indeed, becauſe they acknowledge not from whence their benefit is receiued; and vniuſt, becauſe they render not due recompenſes whereunto they are bound. The laſt concluſion is, that others by our example might be aſſured or woon
                        •
                     e to the true acknowledging and inu
                        •
                     cating vpon God. Unto theſe finall effects, let vs referre our Euchariſt or thankſgiuing, and let vs declare our thankefulneſſe, not onely in ſpeech and preaching, but with all obedience, in our vocation, life, and calamities.
               
            
         
         
            
            PSAL. LVII. Miſerere mei Deus, miſerere mei, quoniam in te confidit anima mea, &c.
            
            
               
                  To him that excelleth (Destroy not) a Pſalme of Dauid on Michtam: vvhen he fled from Saul in the caue. 1. Sam. 24. 4.
                  
               
            
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               
                  
                     PLato in Protagora citeth the ſaying of Simonides: Uirum vere bonum naſci difficile
                  A conſtant perſon in goodnes. 
                  eſt, qui manibus, pedibus & mente ſit Tetragonos, that is, A hard matter it is to finde a right good man borne, which of his hands, feet, and minde is alwayes vpright and conſtant. Such a man was Dauid, who could more hardly be withdrawen from an honeſt or good purpoſe, then the ſhining Sunne may be driuen out of his courſe: for although by great right he might haue ſlaine Saul, yet neither would he vſe the law of defence, whereof politike lawes do make mention, nor yet take occaſions which miniſtred oportunity vnto him to ſlay Saul. For ſeeing he had altogether conſecrated himſelfe vnto God, and his country, that is, the Church, he would not be the authour of an

euill example amongſt Gods people, in putting kings to death, but in faith craued and looked for helpe from God: wherefore let vs maruaile at this humility and gentleneſſe in Dauid here ſet downe, and let vs vſe the like as we may vſe it. Let others maruaile at Dauids victories, wherein he tare in pieces both Lion and Beare, and ouerthrew the monſtrous fellow Golias before his owne eyes: let vs maruaile at and publiſh abroad the moſt excellent kinde of victory, wherein our domeſticall enemies, their ambition and deſire of reuenge, are ouerthrowen and deſtroyed. For in that part of man which is called Furious, namely, in the heart, there are two moſt trouble ſome and moſt cruell affections, wrath, and ambition: and theſe are eaſily inflamed in great perſonages; and being inflamed, do euery where trouble whole kingdomes and the common ſociety of men: therefore to vanquiſh theſe plagues is more glory then triumph. Let vs alſo conſider in the hiſtory of Dauid, a teſtimony of Gods preſence in the Church: for although Saul bent and practiſedGod deliuereth Dauid out of Sauls hands. all the whole indeuour of his kingdome to the deſtruction of Dauid, and that he neuer purpoſed any thing more earneſtly then to deſtroy Dauid by all meanes that he could, not by iudgement, nor by good aduiſement, but by violence and greedy aſſault: yet God tooke this ſilly mor
                     •
                  ell (if I may ſo ſay) out of Sauls iawes, and ſuffered not ſo much as a haire to fall from Dauids head. Let vs, being confirmed with this teſtimony, beleeue that God is alwayes preſent in his Church, and that the enemies can not be cruell againſt her, but when he himſelfe ſuffereth them.
            
            
               Pſal. LVII. And expoſition thereof.
               
                  
                     Verſe 1
                     Be mercifull vnto me (O God) be mercifull vnto me: for my ſoule truſteth in thee: and

vnder the ſhadow of thy wings ſhall be my refuge, vntill this tyranny be ouerpaſt.
                  
                  
                     IN reading of the Pſalmes, let not the foot goe one way, and the ſtring ſound another way, as it is ſayd of thoſe which daunce not right meaſure; but let our affections iumpe in one with Dauids harpe. Let euery man ſay therefore with true confidence in his dangers and calamities: My ſoule truſteth in thee, and in the ſhadowOur affections muſt iump with Dauids harpe. of thy wings will I truſt, vntill this tyranny be ouerpaſt. This application of the Pſalmes vnto our ſelues, bringeth more light to the Readers then long or large commentaries ſhall doe: but how hard a matter it is in a true heart to ſound theſe words, godly mindes doe by experience finde. For two temptations doe alwayes murmure againſt vs; the one of our vnworthineſſe, the other of particularity: but againſt our vnworthineſſe, let vs ſet downe and oppoſe free promiſe; and againſt particularity, vniuerſal promiſe, as elſwhere is often ſayd. Alſo before in the 17 Pſalme is a moſt excellent metaphor taken from Hennes, largely declared at full. I will not therefore ſing one and the ſame ſong ſo often times.
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 2
                     I will call vpon the moſt high God: euen vnto the God which ſhall perfourme the cauſe that I haue in hand.
                     Verſe 3
                     He ſhall ſend from heauen & ſaue me, from the reproofe of them that would eat me vp.
                     Verſe 4
                     God ſhall ſend foorth his mercy and trueth.
                  
                  He foreſheweth with notable words the preſence of God in his Church, that he may confirme vs with his example and teſtimony; that we ſhould not come fearefully vnto God, but truſting in the mercy and truth of God we ſhould crie, that is, as Chriſt ſayth, Math. 7. 7, 8. We

ſhould aske, knocke and ſeeke: for euery one that aſketh receiueth, and he that ſeeketh findeth, and to him that knocketh it is opened. But ſo often is mention made in the Pſalmes of the mercy and trueth of God, to the end we may know and acknowledge that we are preſerued and defended, not by humane helps or ſafegards, nor yet for our owne merits, but freely by mercy promiſed in the Goſpel, which is not a deuice of mans opinion, but an eu
                        ••
                     laſting and vnchangeable decree of Gods wiſdome and trueth. Therefore although we are vnworthy, yet muſt this glory or praiſe be attributed vnto God, that he is mercifull, and keepeth promiſe with moſt aſſured faith. Wherefore let vs crie out with Daniel 9. verſ. 17, 18. We powre out our prayers before thee, not in our righteouſneſſes, but in thy great mercy; heare vs for the Lords ſake.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 5
                     My ſoule is among Lions, and I lie euen among the children of men (that are ſet on fire) whoſe teeth are ſpeares and arrowes, and their tongue a ſharpe ſword.
                  
                  Let this deſcription of the Church be diligently lookedThe church is in the world like Daniele
                           ••
                         among the lions, &c. vpon; for the Church alwayes ſo liueth, euen as Daniel ſitting among the Lyons. Dan. 6 16. The deuils are alwayes intrapping vs. Ungodly perſons alwayes giue cruell threatnings vnto the church. So doth the prophet I ſay in his 11. cap. verſ. 11. compare the church vnto an infant playing vpon the hole of the aſpe, and to a weined childe playing vpon the cockatri
                           •
                        e hole. For like as the infant perceiueth not the greatneſſe of the danger, wherein hee is exerciſed, neither is furniſhed with any defence againſt the moſt hurtfull ſerpents: So the church looketh not ſo farre into the ſleights of the deuill and the world, wherewith ſhe is allured, neither hath ſhe viſible 
                        •
                     uc
                        •
                     ours whereunto ſhe may flee for refuge. Then

reſteth this one thing, that ſhee with her whole minde and heart be turned vnto God and from him looke for defence in ſo great ſnares of the deuill and in ſo great multitude of dangers. Furthermore, (ſeeing no weapon isThe deſcription of ſlaunderous tongs. more hurtfull then the tongue, if it be prepared to doe hurt) moſt elegantly doth hee compare ſlaunders vnto fire, arrowes, and ſharpe ſwords: For indeede ſlaunders doe not onely hurt thoſe whome they diffame, but alſo fooliſh light beleeuing hearers, in whoſe heartes and breaſtes they leaue the ſtings of ſuſpitions. For, moſt truely is it ſaide of a certaine ſlaunderer, 
                        Calumniare audactèr, quia ſemper aliquid haeret. Slaunder ſtil boldly. ſomething alway ſtickes in thee. Then what remedies muſt be adminiſtred to the poiſonfull bitings of Sycophants, the ſeuenth pſalme teacheth vs: namely, a deniall, or modeſt refutation and prayer. For, let vs when we are accuſed of heinous crimes, purge our ſelues modeſtly: Afterwards let vs commend our cauſes vnto God, and let neither our confeſſion nor patience ſtriue the one with the other, but let either vertue haue his due place.
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 6
                     Set vp thy ſelfe, O God, aboue the heauens, and thy glorie aboue all the earth.
                  
                  God is moued with nothing more, then with reſpect of his glorie: As in Eſay 48. verſe 11. For mine owne ſake, for mine owne ſake will I doe it. Therefore notably doth Dauid in his praying alleadge this cauſe: Bee thou a defender of thy glorie, refute the enemies ſlaunders, which exclame againſt vs that we are heretiks and Schiſmaticks and falſly lay in our diſh two moſt heinous crimes, Blaſphemie and Sedition, whereof the one violateth or tranſegreſſeth the firſt the other the ſecond of the commaundements. Theſe poiſonful reproches blemiſhing or defacing thy glory, thou thy ſelfe refute,

and ſhewe in purpoſe and euent that the confeſſion of truth pleaſeth thee.
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 7
                     They haue layed a net for my feet, and preſſed my ſoule, they haue digged a pit before mee, and are fallen into the middeſt of i
                           •
                         themſelues.
                  
                  Elder age long agoe made a moſt honeſt lawe for puniſhing of a ſlaunderer, for the cauſe beeing knowen theThe example of gods indgement aud iuſtice vppon ſlanderous perſons. ſlaunderer was ſcurged with the ſame puniſhment wherwith the other ſhoulde haue beene ſcurged if hee had bene conuinced. So they that ſlandered Daniel were caſt amongſt the lyons. Dan. 6. 24. And they that ſlaundered Suſanna were ſtoned to death, Daniel 13. 62. For not a more iuſt puniſhment is there then that murtherers ſhould be manqelled. Therefore ſaid Pithagoras viz. Iuſtum eſſe quiddam retaliatum, a 
                           •
                        uſt man was a certeine recompenced thing like for like. And as the verſe of Rhadamanthus ſaith. Iuſta malis haec admiſſo pro crimine poena eſt, Si quae fecerunt, eadem pat
                           •
                        antur et ipſe.
                     
                        A puniſhment iuſt to the wicked men,
                        This is for crime committed ſo by them:
                        That if they haue done any wickednes,
                        They therefore ſhould ſmart all remedile Te.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 8
                     My heart is fixed O God, my heart is fixed: I will ſing and giue praiſe.
                     Verſe 9
                     Awake vp my glorie, awake lute and harpe I my ſelfe will awake right early.
                     Verſe 10
                     I will giue thankes vnto thee O Lord, amongſt the people: And will ſing vnto thee among the nations.
                  
                  A great part of the Pſalme conſiſteth of prayer and thankſgiuing. Like as therefore heretofore hee craueth

defence againſt the violence and fraude of his enemies: So now with great alacritie or cheerefulnes of minde heDauids thankſgiuing vnto God for his goodneſſe. giueth thankes vnto God. And this comfortablenes in thankeſgiuing is ſtirred vp, not by mans helpe, but by the ſpirit of grace and of prayer. For without his ſpirit, the old grace ſleepeth, and man litle in mind keepeth as Pindarus ſaith. But men being maued with the holy ghoſt, are true and iuſt, that is, they acknowledge the ſocietie with God, and ſtudie according to their abilitie to render ſome recompence.
                  Hereof come thoſe ſayings, My hart is fixed, awake Lute and Harpe, and I will ſing vnto thee, &c. But, why addeth he that he will giue thnakes vnto the Lord among the people? Uerily to teach that Thankſgiuing is a publike, and not a priuate vertue. For Temperance and certain other vertues are mens priuate induments & ornaments. But Juſtice whoſe outward ſhew is Gratitude or thankfulnes reioyceth in communicating her ſelfeGods goodnes muſt be both acknowledged in ourſelues and made knowen vnto others. vnto others, and in that thing followeth large fountaines which ſend whole riuers out of them. Therefore it is not nough that wee priuately acknowledge the preſence of God, but we muſt celebrate gods benefits before others, that euen they alſo may be called vnto true acknowledgement and prayer vnto God.
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 11
                     For the greatneſſe of thy mercy reacheth vnto the heauens: and thy trueth vnto the cloudes.
                  
                  He amplifieth the mercy of God, not with vaine thetorike, but with true affirmation, ſuch as is extant in the epiſtle of S. Paul to the Romans the 5. chapter, and 2. verſe grace aboundeth aboue ſinne: for wee muſt moſt firmely beleeue, that the kingdome of God is moremighty, than the whole kingdome of the deuill: neither muſt we adde this defperation vnto other our offences; which

thing Caine added in committing that murder ſaying, Gen. 4. 13. My ſinne is greater than that it can be forgiuen. This blaſphemous ſpeech which accuſeth God of vntrueth, and derogateth from him the praiſe of immenſe mercy, doth Auguſtine moſt grauely reprehend, ſaying; Thou lieſt Cain, greater is Gods mercy than the miſery of all ſinners.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 12
                     Set vp thy ſelfe, O God, aboue the heauens: and thy glory aboue all the earth.
                  
                  Like as Rhetoritians in their epilogues or ſhuting vp of their tales will haue the cheefe arguments repeated: So Dauid repeateth this moſt ſweete litle verſe in the end of this Pſalme, wherewith hee as it were ſtirreth forth (if I may ſo ſay) God voluntarily running vppon his ſide: Let thy glorie floriſh, rule, and raigne, euen to the deſtruction of all epicures ond blaſpheimers. Amen.
                  
               
            
         
         
            PSAL. LVIII. Sivere vtique iustitiam loquimini.
            
            
               
                  To him that excelleth (Destroy not) a Pſalm
                        •
                      of Dauid on Michtam.
               
            
            
               The diſpoſition of the Pſalme.
               THere are foure parts of this Pſalme: the firſt is, a rebuking of the godly ones mightily amplified by degrees of miſchiefes, circumſtances, and familitudes:

The ſecond part is a prayer, that God would reſtraine and ſubdue tyrants and heretikes. The third part prophecieth of the puniſhments due to the vngodly ones, and of vaine contention, ſo farre as pertaineth to the effect of the matter. The fourth part promiſeth vnto the godly ones deliuerance. Theſe parts if it pleaſe you let vs 
                     •
                  unne through hereafter.
            
            
               Pſal. LVIII. And expoſition thereof.
               
                  
                     Verſe 1
                     Are your minds ſet vpon righteouſneſſe, O ye congregation? and do ye iudge the thing that is right, O ye ſonnes of mer?
                     Verſe 2
                     Yea, you imagine miſchiefe in your hearts vpon the earth: and your hands deale with wickednes.
                     Verſe 3
                     The vngodly are froward euen from their mothers wombe: as ſoone as they be borne they go aſtray and ſpeake lies.
                     Verſe 4
                     They are as venemous as the poyſon of a ſerpent: euen like a deafe adder that ſtoppeth her eares.
                     Verſe 5
                     Which refuſeth to heare the voyce of the Charmer, charme he neuer ſo wiſely.
                  
                  
                     ALthough mankinde wholly, without theContempt of God in heretikes and tyrants▪
                      ſight of the Goſpel, and without the holy ſpirit, be both dumme and deafe, becauſe nature not regenerate, either ſecurely contemneth Gods iudgement, or els is full of academicall doubtings, either elſe being aſtoniſhed with feare, fleeth from God and hateth him: yet in this place heretikes and tyrants of all ages are by name rebuked, when they become vncurable. For like as Aſpes doe ſtoppe and cloſe vp their eares that they might not heare the words of the charmers▪ euen ſo heretikes and

tyrants are ſo troubled out of their minde and whole body, that furiouſly they refuſe and deſpiſe all wholeſome counſels and all godly admonitions: but the cauſes of this furiouſneſſe are not onely mens willes, couered with an e
                        •
                     icuricall contempt of God, and moſt cruelly ſetting themſelues againſt the preſent ſtate, of what ſort ſoeuer it be, but much more doe deuils, leaping into the very hearts of the godly ones, and by their breathings extinguiſhing light, and naturall affection in men. Examples of this purpoſe are ſet downe in Pharaoh, Exod. 14. 8. Antiochus, 1. Mac. 1. 11. the Phariſes, and monks ofExamples of both. our time, which haue night and day bent and practiſed all their indeuours to the deſtruction of the true church. But theſe Aſpes at length by caſting a litle nightſhade or petimorell vnto them are therewith caſt aſleepe. And that I ſay nothing of tyrants, who euer read or heard that any authour of a lew
                        •
                      religion hath bene reuoked from his errour, and reſtored to a ſound or perfect opinion▪ For like as in the godly ones there increaſeth ſpirituall light, according to that ſaying in the Prouerbs cap. 4. verſ. 18, 19. The path of the righteous ſhineth as the light that is brighter and brighter, vnto the perfect day: but the way of the vngodly is as the darkeneſſe, they know not where they fall: ſo in heretikes doe increaſe darkneſſe, malepartneſſe and ſ
                        •
                     ubburnneſſe, which by no helpe may be healed. Therfore S. Paul biddeth vs, Titus 3. 16. To ſhunne an heretike after he hath bene once or twice admoniſhed. Which thing, ſith they ſo 
                        •
                     e, let vs feruently craue of God, that hee would not caſt vs away amongeſt thoſe veſſelles of wrath, ſuch as haue beene and are all heretikes and tyrants vncurable. But that he would make vs veſſelles of mercy, whoſe courſe in this life may edifie to Gods glory, and tend to the welfare of many men▪
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     Verſe 6
                     Breake their teeth, O God, in their mouths, ſmite the iaw bones of the lions, O Lord.
                  
                  Hitherto hath the Prophet painted out the image ofDauids prayer for defence againſt thoſe his enemies. the vngodly ones, which do all they can to oppreſſe the manifeſt trueth, and the church it ſelfe. Now he ſets againſt this fury, a moſt firme defence, namely true praier vnto God, whereof Salomon ſaith, Prouerb. 18. 10. The name of the Lord is a ſtrong defence, &c. For, like as Chriſt vanquiſhed the diuel in the wilderneſſe, not with braſen peeces, but partly with the word of God, and partly with prayer, Math. 4. So the ſpeciall weapons of our warrefare are Doctrine and Prayer. Let vs therfore craue of God that he himſelfe would ſubdue the practiſes of the enemies and vouchſafe to helpe vs in our ſo great infirmitie.
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 7
                     Let them fall away like water, that runneth apace: and when they ſhoot their arrowes, let them be rooted out.
                     Verſe 8
                     Let them conſume away like a ſnaile, and be like the vntimely fruit of a woman: and let them not ſee the Sunne.
                     Verſe 9
                     Or euer your p
                           •
                        tets bee made hote with thornes: ſo let indignation vexe him, euen as a thing that is rawe.
                  
                  In other pſalmes, the vngodly ones and their practiſesWhereunto Dauid compareth theſe his enemies in foure kinds. are compared vnto vaine chaffe which is carried or blowen hether and thether with the winde: againe, vnto ruſt and vnto graſſe growing vpon the houſe ſide, which before it be plucked vp, withereth away. Let there be adioyned vnto theſe moſt pleſant ſights of figures, fiue ſimilitudes recited in this place: whereof, in the firſt hee compareth the practiſe of his enemies vnto water running away. Which though now and then it beare great

ſubſtances, and ſeemeth to laſt alwaies, yet after a while, being heated of the ſunne, or blowne of the Eſterly winde runs away ſwiftly. Secondly he compareth the enemies miſcheuous enterpriſe vnto an arrow or weapon which is broken together with the bowe, out of the which it is ſent, or els miſſeth quite the mark whereat it is aimed. Thirdly hee deſcribeth the image of a ſnaile comming out of the ſhell preſaging ſome harme enſewing 
                        •
                     nto him that paſeth by, but ſhee within a while being reſolued into water leaueth her houſe without any thing in it. Fourthly hee ſetteth downe a ſigure of an vntimely lump or peece of fleſh, and which is brought forth with daunger of death: For as this wretched lumpe ſwelleth the wombe, and yet comes not to full ripenes or fulnes of time: So the contentions of the vngodly ones, are burſt off, or euer they haue halfe effect. Laſtly he compareth the cunning crafts and pleſant practiſes of the enemies vnto young thornes, which are quite plucked vp by the trauellers, before they come to their ful ſharpnes: But ſeeing the Hebrew word Sir, ſignifieth both, the thorne, and the pot, this ſimilitude may euen in this ſence be vnderſtood likewiſe. Before your pottes feele the thorne hotte, or fiery flame, the fleſh as yet rawe, together with the pottes ſhall be turned vp ſide downe. Now thinke what an Orator the holy ghoſt is, and with what notable words hee teacheth and comforteth vs▪ that wee ſhould not be diſcoraged nor enfeebled with the firſt, furious outſhew of our enemies: But let vs in ſilence and hope looke for preſeruation of the bodie, yea though by a ſure prouidence of God, ſome members are perſecuted or torne in peeces. Let vs therfore hold faſt this conſolation, and with this hope let vs reuerence the ſtudies of heauenly doctrine. For, as S. Paul ſaith 1. Cor. 15. 58. Our labour ſhall not be vaine in the Lord. but ſhall bring plentifull and permanent fruits vnto vs, and to the church.
               
               
                  
                  
                     Verſe 10
                     The righteous ſhal reioyce when he ſeeth the vengance. Hee ſhall waſh his footeſteppes in the blood of the vngodly.
                     Verſe 11
                     So that a man ſhall ſay verely, there is a reward for the righteous: Doubtles there is a God that Iudgeth the earth.
                  
                  Theſe laſt verſes conteine a perſpicuous affirmationAn affirmed difference of Gods iudgement in the behalfe of his church againſt her enemies. touching the iudgement of God, diſcerning the godly ones from the vngodly ones. This affirmation ſhall bee more notable, if in our mindes wee doe behold the vniuerſall iudgement, which after a while ſhall followe, wherein the mindes of all the vngodly ones ſhall be diſcouered and ſhall bee caſt away damned into eternall torments, but the godly ones ſhall attaine vnto the long deſired glorie and deliuerance. Then fully and wholly ſhall the church reioyce beeing deliuered from the guiltie and violence of the deuiles, and ſhall giue God the praiſe for his iuſt iudgement, yea, ſhal reape and receiue with great ioy, the fruits of their labours and ſorowes which they haue ſuſtained in this life. In meane time let vs remember, that the church is for many cauſes burdened with the croſſe, and that wee muſt not depart from God, no though deliuerance come not vnto vs by and by. But God ſometimes alſo in this life ouertaketh the tyrants with puniſhment to the end theſe aparant ſights ſhould be teſtimonies of the iudgement which ſhall folow this life, and that the church might haue ſome tranquilitie and truces like vnto the Ha
                        ••
                     ion dayes.
               
            
         
         
            
            PSAL. LIX. Eripe me de inimicis meis.
            
            
               
                  To him that excelleth (destroy not) a Dſalme of Dauid on Michtam: when Saul ſent, and they did watch the houſe to kill him.
               
            
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               
                  THe application of this Pſalme is afterThe application of this Pſalme two folde. two ſorts: One vnto the hiſtorie of Dauid, touching which the title ſpeaketh, an other vnto the paſsion of Chriſt, and perpetuall ſcattering of the Iewiſh nation. For the hiſtorie in the 1. lib. Sam. 19. ſaith that Saul beeing vexed and troubled with the flaming fittes or burning pangs of his furie, as one out of his wits and ſenſes ſent his meſsengers to catch, and kill Dauid his ſonne in lawe, and one beſt deſeruing in the gouernment of Iſrael: But Dauid by Gods helpeThe firſt ſignifieth the hiſtorie of Dauids troubles. was deliuered out of thoſe ſnares. Let vs knowe that this hiſtorie ſetting downe an example of Gods protection was written for vs, that wee (in dangers which for honeſt and iuſt cauſes doe hang ouer our heades) may craue and looke for helpe and defence from God, who indeede numbreth all the haires of our heade. Moreouer, ſeeing the compariſon of familiarity is great betweene the head and the ſpeciall members of

the bodie, let vs reade this Pſalme, as it were a prophecyThe ſecond, the hiſtorie of Chriſts paſſion. of the paſsion of Chriſt our Lord, and of the puniſhment of the Iewes. For like as Saul perſecuted Dauid with an implacable or vnpacifiable hatred: ſo the blind and furious Iewes raged with hatred againſt Chriſt. But as Dauid (when Saul and his familie was extinguiſht, & almoſt vtterly deſtroied) floriſhed and raigned king of the Iewes, ſo the politicall gouernment of Moyſes lawe beeing vtterly deſtroied, and the Iewes wandering in perpetuall baniſhment, Chriſt ſitteth at the right hand of his Father, and giueth moſt ample gifts or benefits vnto his church.
            
            
               Pſal. LIX. And expoſition thereof.
               
                  
                     Verſe 1
                     Deliuer mee from mine enemies O God, defend mee from them that riſe vp againſt mee.
                     Verſe 2
                     O deliuer mee from the wicked doers, and ſaue me from the blood thiſtie men.
                  
                  
                     THe ſame things which Dauid prayed for againſtThe Popes Nero-like crueltie. 
                     Sauls meſſengers, let vs pray for in like maner againſt the popes adherents, by whom many godly miniſters are for matrimony cruelly ſlaughtered, when neuer yet any barbarous nation killed men for the like cauſe. And neither onely doe they exerciſe Nero like cruelty againſt charchmen, but they kill and ſlay alſo other honeſt and godly perſons, when they tranſgreſſe any vngodly law. Theſe bloody perſons, let all godly men (with moſt feruent prayers) craue of God that he would either cal them backe to amendment, if they be amendable, either els euen at the firſt to deſtroy them.
               
               
                  
                  
                     Verſe 3
                     For loe, they lie waiting for my ſoule; the mighty men are gathered againſt me, without any offence or fault of me, O Lord.
                     Verſe 4
                     They runne and prepare themſelues without my fault: ariſe thou therefore to helpe me, and beholde.
                  
                  Some man peraduenture would aſke, what cauſe ſhould mooue Saul to lie in wait nights and dayes to ſlay Dauid? Againe, euen ſo, what cauſe ſhould mooue the pope and his confederates to ſet themſelues ſo cruelly againſt our churches▪ Touching this queſtion, Dauid heere anſwereth, that Saul had no grieuous nor iuſt cauſe which he might lay for excuſe of his fury: For although Saul burnt with hatred at the felicity of Dauid, and ſorrowed ſore to ſee this yongling to be eſteemed of all men before himſelfe and his ſome Ionathas, euen by Gods prouidence: yet with no right did he perſecute Dauid, whome to obey he muſt needes, when God of neceſſity would haue it ſo. Euen ſo our aduerſaries, although they are diſpleaſed with vs when they are reprooued of their vngodly opinions and worſhippings, yet can they not but with raſhneſſe and impudency obiect vnto vs any corruption of doctrine in vs▪ for thoſe things which weeThat which our Preachers do teach, is agreeable to the ſcriptures, Propheticall, Apoſtolicall, and Symbols. 
                     
                        •
                     eauch touching al the articles of the Chriſtian doctrine, moſt ſure it is, that the ſame doe agree with the Scriptures propheticall and apoſtolicall, and with the ſymbols or articles of the Chriſtian bel
                        •
                     efe. Therefore like as the Iewes for no iuſt cauſe hated Chriſt, ſo do papiſts practize (without any cauſe great and iuſt) to deſtroy churches or congregations religiouſly conſtituted. But touching two ſorts of iuſtice or righteouſneſſe in the ſeuenth pſalme before it is ſpoken largely: the one concerning our good conſcience, the other concerning our perſons. Concerning the righ
                        •
                     eou
                        •
                     neſſe of our perſon, the pſalme ſ
                        •••
                     h 143. 2. Enter not into iudgement with thy ſeruant,

becauſe in thy ſight ſhall no man liuing be iuſtified.
                     A two-fold kind of righteouſnes. Firſt, of our perſon. Second, of our cauſe. Againe Pfal. 130, 3. If thou, O Lord, ſhalt marke ſtreightly what is done amiſſe (O Lord) who ſhall abide it? Touching the righteouſneſſe of the cauſe, let vs holde that ſaying of Paul. 2. Cor. 1. 12. This is our rejoycing, euen the teſtimony of our conſcience, that we liue in this world in ſimplicity and godly purenes, and not in fleſhly wiſedome, but by the grace of God we haue had our conuerſation in this world. This reioycing is needfull before God, when we aſke or craue of God, that he would helpe a iuſt cauſe, and before men openly, becauſe he confirmeth the godly ones, and vanquiſheth the victories of the vngodly ones.
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 5
                     Stand vp (O Lord God of hoſts) thou God of Iſrael, to viſite all the heathen: and be not mercifull vnto them that offend of malicious wickedneſſe:
                     Verſe 6
                     They goe to and fro in the euening, they grinne like a dogge, and runne about thorow the city.
                     Verſe 7
                     Beholde they ſpeake with their mouth, and ſwordes are in their lippes: for who doeth heare?
                  
                  Often times in the pſalmes this queſtion is handled; whether we may curſe our enemies, yea or no? and although ſome men make anſwere otherwiſe, yet theſe three verſes are ſo manifeſt, that they require not long reaſoning of the matter. For firſt of all, blaſphemy is toA three-fold cauſe why the enemy may be curſed. be condemned, when immediatly it hurteth the glory of God. Next of all, blaſphemers are to be accurſed, becauſe they ſinne the ſinne vnto death. Thirdly, wee muſt craue that God would repreſſe errors and their fauourers. Theſe things being thus conſidered, the declaration of the precept deliuered from Chriſt is eaſily vnderſtoode

                     Luk. 6. 28. Bleſſe them that curſe you; namely, blaſphemers which are recouerable, for in the ſocietie of our enemies ſome perſons there be recouerable.
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 8
                     But thou, O Lord, ſhalt haue them in deriſion: and thou ſhalt laugh all the heathen to ſcorne.
                     Verſe 9
                     My ſtrength will I aſcribe vnto thee: For thou art the God of my refuge.
                     Verſe 10
                     God ſheweth me his goodnes plenteouſly, and God ſhall let me ſee my deſire vppon mine enemies.
                     Verſe 11
                     Slay them not leaſt they forget, but ſcatter them abroade, among the people, and put them downe O Lord our defence.
                  
                  No doubt of it theſe verſes do prophecie touching theFiue cauſes why Moſes law was aboliſhed. remnant of the Jewes people, which after the deſtruction of Hieruſalem, wandered amongſt the nations ſo many yeares. But here let vs conſider of the cauſes why the politicall lawe of Moſes was deſtroied, than which, there was none more excellent in al the world. And certs the firſt cauſe is, for that it pleaſed God to ſet downe1 an horrible or fearefull example of his wrath againſt the enemies of Chriſt: Touching this cauſe Chriſt ſaith Luke 19. 44. Becauſe thou kneweſt not the time of thy viſitation. &c. Therefore in theſe daies let them feare like puniſhments, which either deſpiſe the pure doctrine of the goſpel with an Epicuriall contempt, or endeour what they can to deſtroy the ſame with an vngodly wilfull ſtubbernes. The ſecond cauſe is, that the matter2 and euent may ſhew, that the promiſes touching the Meſſias are not to be vnderſtood conerning a politicall kingdome, but concerning euerlaſting benefits. The third, to manifeſt that the workes of the lawe are not righteouſnes3 before God. The fourth, that the Jewiſh prerogatiue4
                     
which they had in their owne nation might be taken away: For if Moiſes his policie, ſhould as vnto this day haue remained, no doubt of this theſe which were conuerted out of the Jewes would chalenge and take to themſelues a ſingular prerogatiue for their temple and ceremonies which they had. The fifth cauſe, that the deſtruction of the ſame policie might witneſſe that Chriſt hath beene preſent vpon earth. For it behaued that Chriſt ſhould be borne in Bethleem, and in very deede ſo was he when the policie of Moyſes ſtoode in force. But now more then a thouſand and foure hundred yeares, the city of Bethleem and the policie of Moyſes lie ouerhrowen and brought to none effect. Then needefull it was, that Chriſt ſhould come in the fleſh laug before: All theſe cauſes are moſt worthie of diligent conſideration.
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 12
                     For the ſinne of their mouth, and for the words of their lippes, they ſhal be taken in their pride: and why, their preaching is of u
                           •
                        ſing and lies.
                     Verſe 13
                     Conſume them in thy wrath, conſume them that they may periſh: and knowe that it is God that ruleth in Iacob, and vnto the end of the world.
                     Verſe 14
                     And in the euening they will returne, grin like a dog, and will go about the citie.
                     Verſe 15
                     They will runne heere and there: and grudge if they be not ſatiſfied.
                  
                  The cauſe of the perpetuall baniſhment of the Jewes is not any ciuil oſſence, but a high degree of ſinne, namelyThe cauſe of the perp
                           •
                        tuall deſtruction of the Iewes. Blaſphemie againſt Chriſt and his church: For they call Chriſt a deceiuer and a malefactor: moreouer they caſt vpp from their hatefull ſtomacks ſuch bitter railing againſt him, as one ſhippe cannot carrie away. And the church which embraceth the goſpel touching Chriſt they

call the people of Edom, that is crewell and full of blood. For theſe reuilings which they vſed againſt Chriſt and his church doe they ſuffer greeuous puniſhment and iuſt puniſhments: For in their baniſhment they wander abroade as it were dogges which when the wringing of their belie vexeth them, doe make a horrible howling. For although they require and looke for doubtfully, a Meſſias, & go about to ſet vp anew their kingdome; yet neither find they the Meſſias, no nor yet thogh they burſt themſelues: can they ſet vp againe their ancient gouernment. The hiſtories are knowen touching the ſcoms and out-caſts of the Jewiſh people, which now and then went about with all indeuor to recouer their countrie, & reſtore their temple, but their looked for harueſt hath diſappointed them with a vaine reaping: For other whiles with the Romane armies, and otherwhiles with horrible prodiges or wonders they were ouerthrowen and ſcattered abroad as in the 21. Pſalme is before declared.
                  And that the Jewiſh rabins are not onely blind, but the leaders of blinde, hereof it may be adiudged whereasThe Iewiſh Rabines, both blinde themſelues, and leaders of the blinde. with a moſt ſcuere decree they forbid, that no man ſhall deſpute of the time when the meſias ſhall come: whereof indeede God hath appointed almoſt the time▪ itſelfe in 9. of Daniels prophecie
                        •
                     . And how I pray you do they ſycophantically wreſt the moſt excellent prophecies, touching the natiuitie, paſſion, reſurection, and eternall kingdome of Chriſt the Meſſias from their natiue and proper vnto a ſtrange and improper meaning, and ſo all witting and willing do procure darkenes vnto themſelues and others? Therefore when we reade theſe and other innumerable ſuch like things, let vs partly bewaile the blinde ſtubbernneſſe of this moſt wretched nation, and partely tremble with feare in thinking vpon the wrath of God, whoſe moſt euident example is ſeene in this out-ſcowring or ſcumme of the Jewes. For, if God ſpared not the naturall branches (as ſaint Paul ſaith) what ſhall

become of the wilde graffe? Rom. 11. 21. that is, if God poure out his wrath vpon that people, from amongeſt whom Chriſt was borne, howe much leſſe will hee ſpare other enemies and contemners of the Goſpel? Let vs therefore liue in the feare of God the Lorde, and let vs keepe ſtill the excellent benefit of the goſpel by the holy ſpirit, leſt the ſame thing happen vnto vs, which hapned vnto thoſe ſame vnthankefull Iewes.
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 15
                     As for me I will ſing of thy power, and will praiſe thy mercy betimes in the morning: for thou haſt bin my defence and refuge in the day of my trouble.
                     Verſe 16
                     Vnto thee (my ſtrength) will I ſing: for thou (O God) art my refuge, and my mercifull God.
                  
                  Two ſacrifices, there are wherein God ſpecially takethTwo ſacrifices acceptable to God: The firſt, thankſgiuing. The ſecond, Mortification pleaſure and delight: the one is, Thankeſgiuing, the other Mortification, that is, of true contrition, and of obedience in miſeries, the one and fiftieth pſalm ſaith, A troubled ſpirite is a ſacrifice vnto God, a contrite and humble heart, O God, wilt thou not deſpiſe. Of the other kind of ſacrifice wee haue already often times ſpoken in the Pſalmes, ſo that it would be a thing vnpleaſant to ſing that ſong here againe.
               
            
         
         
            
            PSAL. LX. Deus repulisti nos, &c.
            
            
               
                  
                     To him that excelleth vpon * Shuſſhan, * Eduth,Theſe were certain ſongs, after the note whereof this pſalme was ſung. or * Michtam, a Pſalme of Dauid to teach: when he fought againſt Aram, Naharaim, and againſt Aram Zobah when Ioab returned and ſlew twelue thouſand Edomites in the ſalt valley.
                  
               
               The Title.
               
                  THere is a great difference betweene2. Sam. 8. 1. & 10. 1. 1. Chron. 18. 3. the gouernment of the kingdome of Iſrael and other gouernements: For though all good gouernements be ordained of God, yet this kingdom was by the expreſſe word of God ordained, and had a ſpeciall promiſe touching the preſeruation thereof vntill the time of the Meſsias ſent into the world. Such a promiſe hath not any nation now, but after a ſort we know, that God will giue ſome harbouring places for his church in exile, ſomewhere more, ſomwhere leſſe. Now think with your ſelf what a benefit it hath bin, that the church of the people of Iſrael for the ſpace of

1500: yeares and more hath (by Gods prouidence) bin preſerued and defended. How acceptable a thing were it for vs to know for certaine, & haue it by good proofe verified, that in theſe countries where the Goſpel is now preached, a mean ſtate of the church ſhuld continue 100. yeares togither? Againe alſo the ſpeciallA ſpeciall difference betweene the kingdome of Iſrael and other kingdomes. ornaments of other pollicies, wherein ſhineth not true knowledge of GOD, are laws agreeing with a right rule, iudgements, meane diſcipline, defence in peace, and wars, and wealth. But theſe things ſerue only for this life mortall, and do not deliuer a man from ſin and death: But the kingdome of Iſrael had far greater and more neceſſary and wholſome ornaments, namely, a law giuen from God, a promiſe of the Mediator (for which cauſe the truchurch of God was planted in this people) the ſending of Prophets, the gathering of the euerlasting Church, manifest testimonies of Gods preſence, ſtudies of the doctrine of God, and of other good things, true worſhipping of God, and modesty of diſcipline; theſe benefits exceed all cogitation and eloquence of man. Last of all we muſt conſider of the finall cauſe of this excellent pollicy or gouernment: for although all common-wealths ought to indeuor to this end, wherof Saint Paul moſt grauely exhorts 1. Timot. 2. 2. That we may liue a quiet and peaceable life, with all godlineſſe and honeſtie; yet this pollicie or gouernment vvas therfore ordained eſpecially, that there might be an Vni
                  
                     •
                  erſity and Library vvherein the promiſes touching the Mediator might be preſerued and aduanced, and that the Meſsias might haue a certain houſhold and

aſſured lodging place vvherein he might be borne, wherein he might teach, and being raiſed from death to life he might beginne a kingdome, whoſe proper benefits are to take away death and giue righteouſnes and life euerlasting. For theſe great prerogatiues, of right, and worthily is the gouernement of Iſrael compared vnto a most fragrant Roſe, and a bracelet of gold.
            
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               
                  LEt vs reading this Pſalme giue God thankes, that as yet, hee gathereth a church amongſt vs: and let vs craue that hee would preſerue and defend the harborers of the church. Let vs alſo learne out of this pſalme neceſſarie doctrine and conſolation: For it teacheth, that the wholeſome ſtate of the church and gouernement is not preſerued or kept in good order, by mans ſafegards, but by the helpe of God. It alſo promiſeth vnto godly ones, not onely helpe in great infirmitie, but alſo a ioyfull end of our conflicts and dangers: For touching theſe things, namely, the helpe of God, and the fruit of our labours, all the godly ones are vehemently troubled with cares. Againſt this carefulnes hee oppoſeth conſolation ſpecially and moſt congruent, where he ſaith verſe 12. Through God we ſhall do great Acts: That is, God ſhall helpe vs, and wil bring to paſſe that our labours ſhall not be in vaine.
            
            
               
               Pſal. LX. And expoſition thereof.
               
                  
                     Verſe 1
                     O God, thou haſt caſt vs out, and ſcatred vs abroade: Thou haſt alſo beene diſpleaſed, O turne thee vnto vs againe.
                     Verſe 2
                     Thou haſt moued the land and deuided it: heale the ſores thereof, for it ſhaketh.
                     Verſe 3
                     Thou haſt ſhewed the people heauie things: thou haſt giuen vs a drink of deadly wine.
                  
                  
                     THeſe verſes conteine a complaint of the croſſe, and dangers of the church: the church is alwayes like a Citie which being beſieged round about, is cruelly aſſaulted of enemies. Alſo oftentimes is it ſharply chaſtized by reaſon of ſinne, as it was in the Babilonicall ex
                        •
                     lement: But amongſt theſe floods and ſtormes God preſerueth the ſhippe which carrieth his church. Theſe calamities he here deploreth, and withal craueth and aduanceth the deliuerances.
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 4
                     Thou haſt giuen a token for ſuch as feare thee: that they may triumph becauſe of the truth.
                     Verſe 5
                     Therefore were thy beloued deliuered: helpe me with thy right hand, and heare me.
                  
                  The worde [Token] ſome doe interpret, as touchingA ſignificatiō of the word Token in triumphing. the Arke of the couenaunt which was a teſtimonie of Gods preſence: For God in that place put forth his oracles where the arke was, and thoſe not obſcure, doubtfull, wauering wordes, ſuch as were the anſwers of

                     Apollo: but Oracles aſſured, euident and nothing faileable touching the greateſt matters, and heard the prayers of thoſe that called vpon him. But other do apply the worde, Signe, vnto all notable victories and deliuerances, which doe witneſſe, that God hath charge of his church: For the finall cauſes of deliuerances are to the end the bodie of the church may be preſerued, yea thoughThe final cauſes and impulſiue cauſes of the deliuering of the church. ſome members, as ſouldiours fighting in the batle bee ſlaine: againe, that the preſence of God may be acknowledged, and that faith might be confirmed by ſuch examples. But the impulſiue cauſe in the wil of God is, why he may helpe: euen that hee may teſtifie of the truth, that is, leſt the light of the true doctrine ſhould be extinguiſhed, and that blaſphemous perſons might be vanquiſhed and ouercome, which crie out, that the doctrine of the church differeth nothing from the inuention of their ſects.
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 6
                     God hath ſpoken in his holines.
                  
                  The proper glorie of the church is in the preſeruation and propagation of the true doctrine of God: This marke diſcerneth the ſame from other ſects: For other ſects are carried about as children with diuers windes of doctrine, and deuiſe eftſoones newe gods and new worſhipings. But the church reteineth the true acknowledgement, and true prayer vnto God, and according to a certeine rule deliuered from God, directeth all her duties and worſhippings. Hee therefore that ſpeaketh in the church, let him ſpeake the worde of God, but if any man teach any other doctrine, let him be accurſed. For like as the rough arteries in mans body doe ſhunne all things ſauing aire, and doe feare the ſame, ſo the church with glowing eares abhorreth from all opinions and worſhippings that doe ſtriue with the doctrine deliuered from God: which onely ſhee heareth, learneth, embraceth, profeſſeth, and alſo ſtudieth to aduance.
               
               
                  
                  
                     Verſe 7
                     I wil reioyce and diuide Sichem: and mete out the valley of Sucoth.
                     Verſe 8
                     Gilead is mine, and Manaſſes is mine, Ephraim alſo is the ſtrength of my head.
                     Verſe 9
                     Moab is my waſhpot, ouer Edom will I caſt out my ſhooe: Philiſtia, be thou glad of mee.
                  
                  This thankeſgiuing and ſong of victorie, agreeth withA compariſon of Dauids verſes vnto two ancient prophecies of Iacob and Eſau. two prophecies, whereof the one is recited in the 25. of Geneſis, the other in the 49. of Geneſis. For when as Rebecca had conceiued two twinnes, Eſau and Iacob, God himſelfe did ſay, Geneſ. 26. 23. the elder ſhall ſerue the yonger. That is, Eſau the elder or firſt begotten ſhall ſerue and obey Iacob the younger: And in Gen. 49. The moſt holy man Iacob calling to him his ſonne Iuda ſaith verſe 8. Thou Iuda, thy brethren ſhall prayſe thee: Thy hand ſhall be in the neck of thine enemies: thy fathers ſonne ſhall bowe downe vnto thee, verſe 9. Iuda as a Lions whelpe ſhalt thou come vp from the ſpoile, my ſonne: Hee ſhall lie downe and couch like a Lion and as a Lioneſſe: who ſhall ſtirre him vp: But although theſe prophecies are approoued in purpoſe and euent, when Dauid ſate at the helme in the gouernment of his people, and ſubdued the Edomites which were the ſucceſſors of Eſau: yet, the godly ones doe ma
                        ••
                     ell, and are in loue with thoſe ſecret prouidences wherewith God gouerneth his church in this life. For as D. Luther ſaith notably, All the works of God are wrought in meane contraries. God indeede promiſed it ſhould come to paſſe, that the elder ſhould ſerue the younger, but a contrarie ſhewe now and then chanced before their eies. for truely Iacob without any certeine abiding place wandred abroade together with his wiues and children, and yet Eſau in meane time ſwelling with enuie, and carrying a loftie countenance,

ruled with great authoritie in the world: where then remaineth the euent anſwering vnto the promiſe: So theThe application of Saul and Dauid to the foreſaid Iſac and Iacob. firſt King that was ouer the people of God, was not choſen out of the poſterities of Iuda, but out of the family of Beniamin, and hee indeuoured with his whole heart and minde night and day to that end, euen to oppreſſe and deſtroie Dauid and his familie. Doubtleſſe both theſe ſeemed with a contrarie countenance to goe quite againſt the promiſe. Therefore let vs learne, that God by a certeine prouidence of his deferre
                        •
                     h now and then his promiſes, and at the length tho with an excellent fayth and moſt aboundant goodnes performeth the ſame, and yet for all that ought wee not to doubt of his promiſe, no albeit we ſee a manifeſt contrarie before our eies. For hee that will ſerue God, it behoueth him to looke for the Lords prouidence, that is, to beleeue things inuiſible, to hope for things deferred, and to loue God whether hee ſhew vs a gentle or ſterne countenance, and ſo to perſeuerExplication of theſe words to the end. It followeth that I now ſpeake a few words of the place whereof mention is made in the Pſalme. Sichem is ſituat not farre from the citie of Samaria, norSichem. vnto the hill Garizim, whoſe name before time was Salem,
                     Sucot. as it is written in the 33. chap of Geneſis. Sucot is a place beyond▪ 
                     Iordan, at the flood or riuer of Iaboc.Gilead. Gilead is a hill beyond Iordan towards Arabia Gen. 31. 21. Numb. 32. 1. But therefore maketh he mention of theſe places, that hee may admoniſh the reader touching the teſtimonie of Gods preſence in his church. For God in Sichem made himſelfe knowen vnto Abraham by rehearſing and manifeſting his promiſe touching the deliuerer which was to come. Ge. 12. 3. Iacob was comforted & defended at the riuer Iaboc againſt Eſau Ge. 33. 4. At the hil Gilead, whoſe proper name ſignifieth a heap of ſtones, Laban and Iacob laying a heap of ſtones together after the ancient faſhion, made a couenant together. Ge. 31. 44. Touching theſe dangers and deliuerāces of the church, the names of the places admoniſh vs.

                     Ephraim is the ſtrength of my head, that is, out of thisEphraim. Tribe, as out of the Troian horſe, came mighty warriours, fuch as haue fought great battelles. luda is myIuda. Law-giuer, that is, this ſtocke or generation ſendeth forth for my purpoſe moſt prudent counſellours and gouernors in thadminiſtration of a peaceable gouernement. Moab is my waſh-pot. Moab and Edom were countriesMoab. lying neere together in the rocky or mountainy Arabia, beyond the lake Aſphaltiten: and he nameth Moab
                     Gen. 19. 37 and 36. 36. to be his waſh-pot, by reaſon of the watery places: for there is the great flood Arnon, and certaine other flouds. And Edom that countrey, in the time when Achab raigned,Edom. again reuolted from God. But Iohannes Hucanus when he had conquered the Moabits or Jdumeans, compelled
                        
                           •
                        . Mac. 3. 11. them to imbrace circumciſion and other Jewiſh ceremonies, out of which nation Herod afterwards riſing, would be reputed for a very Jew. Theſe changes of ſeruitude and reuolting from God amongſt the Jdumeans, did the moſt holy patriarke Iſac prophecie of long before Gen. 27. 40. Eſau ſhall ſerue his brother, but at the time appointed he ſhall againe caſt off his yoke. O woonderfull conſonancy in the propheſies & their euents! which is a notable teſtimony of Gods prouidence, and a rule of the certeinty of that doctrine which the church imbraceth and profeſſeth. Philiſtia was a countrey on thePhiliſtia. Mediterrene ſea ſhore, wherin alſo both thoſe cities Tyrus and Sidon were. By this declaration may be vnderſtoodCen. 10. 4. and 21. 32. how farre the borders of Dauids kingdome ſtretched, and how truely he repreſenteth the image of Chriſt: for like as Dauid gaue lawes, not only vnto his people, but alſo compelled the nere adioyning nations to do that they were enioyned them; ſo the ſonne of God the eternal king gathereth his church from amongſt both Jewes and Gentiles.
               
               
                  
                  
                     Verſe 10
                     Who will leade me into the ſtrong city? who will leade me into Edom?
                     Verſe 11
                     Haſt thou not caſt vs out, O God? Wil
                           •
                         not thou, O God, go out with onr hoſts?
                     Verſe 12
                     O be thou our helpe in trouble: for vaine is the helpe of man.
                     Verſe 13
                     Through God ſhall we do great acts: for it is he that ſhall tread downe our enemies.
                  
                  He affirmeth clearely, that the cauſe of victory is notThe cauſes of victory in battels, Gods help, not humane exploits in weapons, nor hoſts of men, but in the helpe of God: Aiax of whom Sophocles maketh mention, ſayth, Sluggerds and daſterds haue need of Gods helpe, but I am able to ouercome, yea, euen without God. Such a Thraſo or boaſter is not here our prophet Dauid; but he acknowledgeth all humane helps to be far more vnable, then that they may defend the policies, or churches. For all wiſdome and vertue of man without God is vnhappy: and it is not enough to holde the negatiue meaning, touching the weakneſſe of mans ſtrength: but alſo two aſſirmatiue meanings are to be holden of vs; one touching the helpe of God, which we muſt oppoſe againſt our infirmity, the other, touching the wholeſome iſſue of our labors. As touching helpe, the ſonne of God ſaith, Mat. 10. 20 It is not you which ſpeake, but the Spirit of your father ſpeaketh in you. And Paul 2. Phil. 13. ſayth, God worketh in you to will, and to be able to performe: that is, ſeeing God hath before helped you in your conuerſion, no doubt of it, he will accompliſh and finiſh his worke begunne. Touching the euents of our labours, moſt ſweetly ſaith Paul 1. Cor. 15. 58. Your labor ſhal not be f
                           •
                        uſtrate in the Lord. And in the firſt Pſ
                           •
                        l
                           •
                        e it is ſaid, All things that they ſhall do, ſhall haue proſperous ſucceſſe. verſ. 4. And the ſonne of God comforteth vs ſaying, Iohn 15. I am the vine, you are the branches: he that abideth in me ſhall beare much fruit. verſ. 5. We

therfore being confirmed with theſe promiſes, let vs craue of God neceſſary gifts in our vocation, and let vs ſurely looke for the wholeſome fruits of our labours, both vnto our ſelues, and to the church.
               
            
         
         
            PSAL. LXI. Exaudi De
                     •
                   deprecationem, &c.
            
            
               
                  To him that excelleth on Neginoth; a Pſalme of Dauid; when he was in danger of the Ammonites, or being purſued by his ſon Abſolon: Here he 
                        •
                     rieth to be heard, deliuered, and confirmed, in his kingdome, and promiſeth perpetuall praiſe.
               
            
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               
                  THis pſalme is a prayer ful of faith, whichThis Pſalme containeth a prayer for the proſperitie of the ſupreme magiſtrate. the godly minde maketh for himſelfe and the magiſtrate: For although the godly ones doe feele inwardly feares, and outwardly fightings as ſaint Paul ſaith. 2. Cor. 7. 5. yet they being confirmed by confidence in Gods promiſes, doe craue and looke for benefits from God. And becauſe the church cannot in this life be without harbours or ſuccours the prophet here moſt feruently craueth of God, that hee would preſerue, and defend ſome policies or gouernments which doe harbour and ſuccour the church. And leſt any man ſhould ſwarue into that opinion, that hee ſhould thinke praier for the Magiſtrate to bee but a certeine thing indifferent, let vs ſet downe for vs, and

in our minde thorowly perſwade our ſelues touching the commandement which is of God extant in 1. Tim. 21. I exhort therefore, that firſt of al ſupplications, praiers, interceſsions and giuing of thanks be made for al men. verſ. 2. For kings and all that are in authoritie, that wee may leade a peaceable and quiet life in all godlines and honeſtie. Let vs then obeying this precept, make our praiers, that it would pleaſe God long to preſerue, protect, and proſper thoſe gouernours, in flouriſhing and ſound eſtate, which are ſuccourers and helpers of the church: and that he would gouern them in life, and vocation, vnto the glorie of his name, and to the publique benefit of his church. Seeing then God commaundeth ſo often times, prayer to be made for the Magiſtrate, that the gouernment may remaine firme, & be fully eſtabliſhed, and that we muſt not aske that ſinnes ſhould be eſtabliſhed, needeful it is, that politike order bee a good thing acceptable vnto God, and not to bee ſinne. But I now omit this diſputation of the inſtitution and approbation of the magiſtrate: Seing all men doe well knowe the good admonition which ſaint Paul gineth vs in the 13. cap. to the Romans form verſe 1. to verſe 7.
            
            
               Pſal. LXI. And expoſition thereof.
               
                  
                     Verſe 1
                     Heare my crying, O God; giue eare vnto my prayer.
                     Verſe 2
                     From the endes of the earth will I call vnto thee: when my heart is in heauineſſe.
                  
                  
                     LIke as phyſicians vſe to ſay, that a mans appetite or ſtomacke by tart or ſharp ſirrups is ſooneſt ſtirred vp or gotten; ſo the beſt inſtructer how to pray, is neceſſity: for in time of proſperity our prayer is colde, but when all feares and dangers

doe appeare imminent, we not onely prepare our ſeluesThe fleſh fea
                           •
                        full of the croſſe, but the ſpirit reapeth comfort therby. by all meanes to pray and deuote our ſelues, but we alſo do crie out. Although fleſh therefore eſchew and tremble with feare to feele the croſſe, yet the ſpirit reapeth of nothing greater profits, then of the croſſe and of calamities, as the 119. Pſalme 5. part and 7. verſe ſaith, It is good for me, O Lord, that I haue bene in trouble: that I may learne thy ſtatutes. And in this pſalme Dauid ſaith, When my heart is in heauineſſe, I will call vpon thee.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 3
                     O ſet me vp vpon the rocke that is higher then I: for thou haſt bene my hope, and a ſtrong tower for me againſt the enemy.
                     Verſe 4
                     I will dwell in thy tabernacle for euer: and my truſt ſhall be vnder the couering of thy wings.
                     Verſe 5
                     For thou, O Lorde, haſt heard my deſires: and haſt giuen an heritage to thoſe that feare thy name.
                  
                  Seeing nothing is more vncertaine, nor any thingDauids aſſured affiance in Gods alone defence. more deceiueable then humane helps, I (ſaith he) doe fully repoſe all the hope of my ſafety in thee the true and liuing God, for thou both wilt and canſt helpe me: vnto thee therefore, as it were vnto a tower of defence, doe I flee for refuge, and I doubt not, but dwelling in thy tabernacle, that is, remaining a member of the true church, I ſhall finde & obteine defence. Of this my carefull confidence there are two arguments, in no point failing: the one an inheritance, which thou haſt giuen to them that feare thee; that is, the poſſeſſion of the true doctrine, which to aduance and defend I chiefly deſire: the other, is, becauſe thou haſt often times heard my prayers at full. Let vs therefore learne out of this place, that wee ſhall neuer periſh, ſo long as we ſhall godlily and innsolably keepe ſtill the excellent inheritance or notable benefit

of the goſpell giuen from God, and hereunto adioyne our godly prayers, For like as the ſhippe which carried Paul as paſſenger in her, eſcaping a great wrecke and ouerwhelming, at length ſaw her wiſhed hauen; ſo no doubt of it, the congregation which receiueth and h
                        •
                     loeth faſt the true doctrine of God, ſhall yet remaine, yea though all the gates of hell grudge thereat, and, though they ſend foorth firie flame, and thunder flaſh.
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 6
                     Thou ſhalt grant the King a long life: that his yeres may endure thorowout all generations.
                     Verſe 7
                     He ſhall dwel before God for euer: O prepare thy louing mercy and faithfulneſſe, that they may preſerue him.
                  
                  Hitherto hath the godly minde commended his ſafetyA three fold prayer for the preſeruation of the ſupreme magiſtrate. vnto God▪ now craues he of God that the gouernment of the common wealth, for the churches ſake, might be happy, firme▪ and ſtable. For, moſt true it is, that the poet Euripides ſaid:

                        Republica male affecta, etiam Res diuinae fiunt languidiores.
                     
                     
                        The commonwealth once ſicke or ſore,
                        The churches ſtate doth quaile the more.
                     
                  
                  Firſt therefore let vs craue of God, that he would grantFor long life and proſperity vnto our preſent gouernours and rulers long time of life, and helpe them in gouernment: becauſe, what ſhall come hereafter is vncerteine, and kingdomes are ofttimes turned into a worſe and worſe eſtate. Againe, that our Gouernour may remaine in the ſight of God, both priuately and publikėly, for ſo farre as to his perſon apperteineth, let him liue in the feare of the Lord▪ and in faith, and let him call vpon God truely, let him ſet forth notable teſtimonies of confeſſion: and in the rule of his office, let him take away idolatry and blaſphemies, with godly duties,

let him further and help forwards the aduancement of the true doctrine of God: let him be carefull to ſee youth rightly trained vp and taught in churches and ſchooles, that there may alwayes remaine ſome holy ſeede. Thirdly, that he may be mercifull and true, becauſe his throneFor Gods mercifull and true protection. ſhall with mercy be eſtabliſhed, and not with tyranie. And Salamon ſaith: A diſſembling tongue beſeemeth not a king. But if any man had rather referre this mercy and truth vnto God, in this ſence, or to this purpoſe: preſerue, gouerne, and defend godly gouernours, which are alwayes exerciſed in great danger and diſtreſſe for thy mercy and truthes ſake; againſt this I will not diſdainfully contend: for both theſe meanings are godly and profitable.
               
               
                  
                     Verſe 8
                     So wil I alwaies ſing praiſes vnto thy name: That I may daily performe my vowes.
                  
                  Saint Paul willeth vs not onelie to make prayers,Prayer and thankeſgiuing but alſo to giue thankes to God for our magiſtrate: Wherefore here Dauid promiſeth vnto God, for proſperitie of gouernment, Thankeſgiuing. For ſo much welfare as in gouernment remaineth, that is, by God effectually preſerued according to the ſaying, Pſal. 127. ver. 2. Except the Lord keepe the citie, the watchman waketh but in vaine.
                  
                  Now vnto the King euerlaſting, incorruptible, inuiſible1. Tim. 1. 17. God, onely wiſe, be honor and glory for euer and euer. So be it.
                  FINIS.
                  
               
            
         
      
   