
      
         
            
            
            THE EPISTLE THAT IOHAN STVRmius, a man of great lerninge and iugement, sent to the Cardynalles and prelates, that were chosen and appointed by the Bysshop of Rome, to serche out the abuses of the churche, Translated into englysshe by Rychard Morysine.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
               IOHAN STVRMIVS
               TO THE Cardynalles and prelates appointed to serche oute the abusyons of the churche, sendeth gretyng.
            
            
               
                  YOVR BOKE wrytten at the commaundement of the byshop of Rome, cō
               teynyng suche thynges, as ye thynke make moste to the restauryng of religion, beinge brought vnto vs this laste moneth, styred dyuers men to speake dyuersely of you. And all be it I thinke you ought lytel to passe, what euery man sayth of these your deuyses, yet excepte men wyse and lerned do allowe them, I canne not thynke, that in any assemble of men mete to sytte in a councill, ye canne obteyne that you go aboute, that is to restore the churche vnto her olde

state and pristine dignitie. For al be it, all thynges are to be redressed by good counsell, whyche you, beinge men of suche prudencie, may, yf ye lyste, lyghtly inuent, yet excepte the lerned sorte do approue your inuencions, men woll not thynke, that ye haue founde suche ways as ar most mete for that pourpose. Wherfore for as moch as I am nowe in those places, and amonge suche men, as prudently iudge of your busynesse, & seing I wel perceyued, what men iuge of you, I thought it very conuenient, brefely in writing, to shewe you their sentences, that ye thereby maye perceyue, what they allowe, what they myslyke, and what they wolde haue handled after other sort than ye haue done. Many hope wel bothe in your lernynge and iudgement, whom also this new deuise of

the byshop of Rome, bryngeth into good opinion, that one day a better agrement may be made betwixt vs. For as longe as the bysshop of Romes eares were shytte agaynste all trouthe, and open to all flatterers, there was no place for medycine to worke in. But nowe sythe there is a byshop of Rome, whiche sekethe men, amonges whom some ar such as are not wont to flatter, some suche as woll not lye, many of greate lernynge: Certes eyther nowe remedyes shall be founde, to heale the great and longe disease of the sycke churche, or els it being beaten thus on euery syde, weakened, & decaied, woll vndoubtedly shortly all togyther falle. Those that were in your places before, wold acknowlege no faute. They styffely defended all to be wel done, that bishops of Rome

hadde ben authors of. This errour is nowe taken awey by you, whyche shewe, not onely moche hurt and open ruine of the church, but also cō
               fesse and acknowlege byshoppes of Rome to haue ben thautours of it, whyche beleuing in the sayinges of flatterers, thought them selfes lordes of lawes. This youre sentence was very pleasant vnto al our men here, bycause they hope, euen as ye do se, the calamities of religion, the ruine of honestie, and vtter distruction of the churche, except remedye be found, that so ye wol as moch as in you lieth, staye these grefes, that they go no furder. It is a rare thing and moch more than menne coulde hope for, that there shoulde come a bishop of Rome, whiche shulde require his prelates, vpon theyr othe, to open trouthe, to shewe abuses, to

seke remedies for thē: so that if any thing be otherwise agreed vpon by you, than right religion may beare, the faute shall be yours, the byshop of Rome hath lytell here to be charged withall. Wherfore you that are chosen to so godly and necessarie a thyng, ye ought with all mature diligence, to study & labour, that this that ye haue begonne, may come to a good ende. AND seing you haue the byshops assent and commandement also, ye ought in no case, to let so godly a thynge, to quayle at your handes. If this bishop continue aliue, and be styll of this mynde, if it be trewe that you saye, ye lacke nothinge, but your owne good wyl, to retourne many commodyties vnto all men of Christis relygion. If he shall chaunge his mynde, yet you se there is a waye opened for all men,

to enter into your dispraises, if ye be founde thoccasion, that suche hope as men are in, be nowe quite taken from them. For that that shulde be so cōmodious, so holsome vnto the hole world, ones power gyuē to you to brynge it to passe, yf ye lyste, can nat be neglected of you, withoute your great shame. Wherfore whyle it is his wyll, whiche beareth greattest strooke amonge you, ye muste whyle he lyueth, take the tyme, and let not suche occasyons slyppe. By this your industrie, fydelitie, prudence, and vertue, relygion, that is almost fallen, may be set vp agayn. If for age he be taken from you, yet ye muste nowe make suche foundations, that they whiche shalbe created after hym, may not let slyppe a mattier of suche weyght, withoute their gret shame. You must prouide

that as sone as it may be, good men and well lerned in dede, may studye for the redresse of the churche. In these your labours, ye shal haue many that wol be gladde to helpe you, many princis, many their subiectis, whiche may make a iuste conuocation, many many woll be gladde to helpe suche as frankely shewe theyr iudgementes, moche rather than those, that bynde theym selfe to the seruitude of flatterie.
            ¶ THE auctoritie of councils is decayed longe sythens, bycause they haue ben rather callyd for the satisfyeng of the bysshop of Romes appetites, auarice, and ambition, than for the setting forth of religion. And also suche men haue come to it, as wolde not plainly expresse such fautes as they knew, but rather serued his turne, vnto whom they aknowlege

them selfis greatly to be boūd. For howe can a byshoppe of Rome think to be corrected of them, whose lybertie he hath taken away? whose wylles and fauourable voyces, he hath wonne with greatte rewardes and promyses. Wherfore ye thinke as ye shulde, where ye say, that a bishop of Rome ought not to be lawles, vnder no law, neither that what him lusteth, is lawfulle, but rather that he shoulde luste those thynges that lawes allow. Here ye haue goten great praise amonge oure men, bicause ye are the fyrst of this your order, that durste pronounce it mete for a byshoppe of Rome, to kepe al suche lawes hym selfe, as he wolde haue obeyed of the churche.
            ¶ALSO that that you sayde nexte vnto this, was spoken of you very prudently, that no lordshyp is committed

to the bysshop of Rome, but rather a certayne cure, by the which he maye distrybute thynges in the churche, accordynge to good order: and so that he is rather a curate of suche thinges, than a lorde of them, and that men are committed to his faithfulnes and dilygence, he hym selfe hauynge neither dition ne power aboue lawes, no domynation, ne reigne, whereby he maye eyther chaunge or violate any lawe. If ye admitte this to be trewe, and wolle vtterly graunt vs this, a great part of our controuersie is taken away, grantynge vs also this, that we did not dissente from you without great and iuste causes. For yf ye wylle graunte it, to be onely a ministration, that the Bisshoppe of Rome is chargid with, must you not agree to this also, that all other magistrates

in the churche, be none other thyng, but minysters of dyuine cures: soo that yf their ministration be good, and for the welth of the church, and accordyng to the lawes, they shulde continue styll: if it be vnprofitable, hurtful, if it be ful agaynst ye lawes, such their honor shuld be takē away from them, lyke as it is cōmanded in many places of holy scripture.
            ¶ Wherfore ye added this vnto the other very wel, that lawes ought to contynue euer, and that they might not be takē away, either by any byshop of Romes priuilege, wresting, or indulgence. For if this were laufull, what shulde be lefte vntouched in any place, what shuld be safe and sure, if whan wyll wolde, luste may dyspense with lawe? We see, whyle bishops of Rome, now of late haue take vpon them such dispensations,

what windowes they opened for tiranny to crepe in at, for religion to crepe out at. Nowe where lawes be kepte, this also shall remayne, that they be made bishops, and teachers of the people of god, which ar knowen to be lerned, to be of great innocencie of life, to be of faithe and diligence in doing their duetie. For if we wol haue the world amended, we must haue the people good, well instructed and taught, they must be as a felde well tilled. Man is welle tilled, whan he hathe a good preacher, in whom is great knowledge, study, and pure mynd, without whiche prechers, neither the people can be well taught, nor the church flourishe, neither the teachers owne auctoritie be estemed.
            ¶Agayne, what a goodly thing is it, that ye write of suche as commit

simonie? which are so many, that if your sentence may haue place, and they remoued, as the law wil, which by force of frēdship or money, haue gotten promotions, ye shall scrape out many blottes, that nowe defyle religion, ye shal also with your ease come to that, that you seke, that is, that mete ministers be made in the church, ministers laufully created, which shuld haue both lerning and honest life, always presēt with their flocke, there doinge that that saynt Paule and generall councils, wold a sheparde shoulde do to his flocke.
            These be the thynges, that make many of vs hope well of you, and thinke that ye intend wel. It is very new & strange, a thing scase hard of, that mē of your order shuld iuge freely. In thassemble made at Nuremberge Adrian, than bishoppe of

Rome, dyd aknowlege many suche thinges as ye do now: and all be it they wolde his auctoritie shulde be highest, yet there were verye many of other astates, that coulde not abide, that he shulde aknowlege suche thinges to be true. I praye you is not this euen to graunt byshops of Rome impunitie of all that they lust? and yet whan they haue doone worst, to make thē thinke it a shame bishops of Rome to say they haue done euyl? Wherfore I must speke vnto you Contarene, and you Sadolete, and you Federike Salernitane, and you also whiche ar chosen to do this thing, I muste call vpon you, that you applie this mattier, & thinke that at this time it is put in your handis, to restore to the church both her helth and dignitie agayne. If you diligently and faithfully do

as it becommeth to you to doo, you shall see a flourysshynge common welthe of Christe. If contrary wise you do it negligentlye, and thynke rather vpon your owne gaynes, thā vppon the amendement of thinges amisse, men herafter wol neuer seke redresse of matters at your handes.
            But for as moche as I haue shewed you, wherin your boke pleseth many, nowe I woll alsoo telle you, what many thynke wanteth in it. And here I woll let certain thinges passe, whiche seme very nedefull to be decyded. yet seinge they are by noughty custome longe sythens receiued, I wol not now moche touch them. I can not see by what reason you can call the bishop of Rome vniuersall bysshop, for as moche as saynt Gregorie, a man vehement, and very desyrous to amplifie that

dignytie, refused this name, as a voyce of Antichriste. Lyke reason moued thother .xx. bishops, whiche were before Gregorie, to refuse that name, all be it the councill of Calcedonie gaue it them. But let vs passe ouer this disputation, and gyue for a season hym that nowe is, so to be callyd, we recke not so moche what he be callyd, as that he do such thinges as become him, that is, that his power and all his studyes maye be conuerted to the setting forth of the glorie of Christ. Tyranny is moche ageynst the setlyng of thinges, this title vniuersal bishop bringeth violēce with it, violēce bringeth distruction of honesti. Wherfore they that be of great wytte and honestie, and can foresee thynges, wolde this vsurped title, thoccasion of all these hurtis, were taken away, as a thing

verye pestilent. This cause moued Pelagius and Gregorie to refuse this name, all be it many good men beinge deceiued, frankely offered it to them.
            ¶Many men are sorie, that in this your deuise no mencion is made, De doctrina religionis, whiche moste specially ought to haue bene intreated of. For to speake somewhat of this, what people, what citie, what multitude of men, in especiall throughe your dominions, canne you fynde, that is welle instructed in poyntes of religion? God semeth neuer to be more alienate from vs, than whan we be ignoraunte in his gospelle, whyche ignoraunce hathe bene soo great, that not only the rude people haue not knowen, what is conteined in holye scripture, but also this ignorance hath bene founde in bysshops

and cardinals of your order. In soo moche that we in oure tyme haue sene bysshoppes of Rome vtterly ignoraunt of holye scripture, and all togither vntaughte in relygion. For to let passe Innocentius octauus, and manye other lyke, I pray you Sadolete, what lernynge or studie in holye Scripture was in Clement the .vii. whome you wonderfully prayse? Can you make any man beleue, that knewe hym, that he had any knowledge in holye scripture, naye, that he euer thoughte theron, to the ende he wolde eyther rede those thynges, whervpon oure religion is grounded, or here them declared to hym by anye other? I thynke that neyther you, nor any other of those, whyche knewe the facion of his lyfe, can remember, that euer Clemente for his knowledge,

caused at any tyme a boke of scripture to be caried about with hym. Thus whyle we cloke ignoraunce, while we say menne haue that they haue not, while we studye to please, oft tymes we assente to their vyces, & gyue very euyll example, by praisynge theym that deserue disprayse, and oft times cause those that folow their vices, to think, that their fautes maye be borne, bycause that by our lies and flatteringes, Clementes vices and suche other are couered. I woll not name other of your order, bothe men of filthy lyfe, and vtterly vnlerned. These examples that you haue had before your eies, might haue exhorted you to speake somewhat of doctrine. I doubt not but you knowe, howe necessarye a thynge the knowledge of Christis doctrine is. For if the mind be stired

vp with lyuely teachyng, to put ful confidence in Christe, and is after this confidence fulle inflamed with the loue of religion, honestie, and goodnes, it is almoste necessary all kyndes of vyces to reygne there, where no voice instructed with godly sentences is harde, Christe muste nedes be vnknowē there, where his benefites with all his actes lie vnspoken of, whiche is euen in euerye place, where you haue power & rule. What can be more folisher, than to take Erasmus colloquies, and scolastical disputations away, leauing vnto wycked fowle and inueterate custome, the rule of religion, and for holy thinges to teache trifles. I say not this, that I moche allowe the maner of our disputations, or that I thinke studies can nat be maynteined without Erasmus dialoges.

Scholes vse many thynges in our dayes, that are to be corrected, eloquence, wysedome, and knowledge in diuinitie, maye well be attayned without suche wayes as men nowe vse: but yet it greueth me, that ye omytte thynges of moste weight, ye and most necessary, whyle you embusy your selfes aboute smalle and tryfelynge matters. Howe be it we feare that Erasmus colloquies are not banysshed oute of the schooles by you, bycause they hurte good maners, but rather bycause they doo note manye thynges, whyche lawfullye maye be reprehended in you. As longe as Erasmus was alyue, ye coulde allowe his wrytynges, or atte the leaste ye coulde keepe your selues frome reprehendynge theym. But to lette these thynges passe, we must here stycke

with you, and saye that ye oughte, where as ye so ernestly touche suche trifles, somewhat to haue sayde of this, that in Fraunce and Italy the gospel is neglected, fansies and fables are taughte, and ignoraunce of relygyon taken for beste excuse. Who seethe not, howe all thynges are tourned frome trewe to false, from godlynes to lucre, from beste to worste? For what thynge can be taught sincerely there, where superstition is come into the place of relygion, mannes philosophie, into the place of diuine wisedome, Socrates for Christ, Aristotle and Plato in stede of holy wryters? And yet I wolde not these thynges so to be taken, as thowghe I dydde dysprayse phylosophie: for this kynde of lerning hath many commodities in it, but yet the thing standeth thus

that excepte mans minde be guided and ledde with diuine knowlege, it wandereth oute of the ryght waye, gadding hither and thither, vncertaine where it maye stande. For as longe as the minde is not constant, whiche is while ignoraunce ruleth, howe can men do their duetie?
            ¶It was meete, ye shoulde haue thought somwhat vpon these thinges, and that an amendement of abuses, is than lyke to be had, whan mens mindes are better instructed in religion. Blindnes of witte, and ignorance of goddis worde, hathe bothe brought in many euyll thynges, and driuen awaye many good. I see not howe this your way maye be defended, except ye thinke thus, by good ministers, being ones laufully instituted, true doctrine maye be easily restored. Wherof ye coulde

make no mēcion in this your deuise without great offence of thē, whom ye take for greattest. But if it be so, that you beinge sworne to vtter to the bishoppe suche thinges, as you thought metest to be reformed, can not without greate feare speake of thinges very necessarie, lest ye shuld alienate those frō you, which beare the greate stroke, what hope & trust may we haue, that the olde and true ecclesiasticall discipline shall be restored again by you? One of these thre thinges must be true, either ye hate the trouthe, and so doo dissemble, or els for feare ye dare nat vtter it, and so kepe it downe by your minysters, or elles ye mynded not the trouthe. If ye woll say, ye mynded not the trouthe, ye condempne your selfe, yf ye lay feare for your excuse, we wol be sorie, that the trouth may

not come into the lyght, for popishe power and cruell tyrannye. Certes eyther ye hate trouthe, or elles they be afrayde of it, whome ye haue in reuerence for their ample benefytes towardes you, and whome ye alsoo feare for the great power they may vse agaynst you. Ye can nat be ignorant in this, the hole worlde knoweth, that the gospelle of Christe is taken from your churches. Menne wolde this gospelle were restored agayn, and though ye saye nay, they woll haue it again. Your threttes auayle littell, your priuey watches ar not regarded, your turmentes, your fyre shall haue lyttel place herafter. The mischefes be openid on the one syde, the benefytes on the other, frō the whiche yf ye go aboute to kepe all men, ye must be at warre, not onlye with menne, but with god and

Christe also. Oure menne haue no greatter argument of your fal, than that they see, ye haue a vayne hope, vtterly to oppresse truthe: ye seke to doo youre lustes, by vyolence and strengthe, rather than by common counsell and lauful disceptation: ye seke to abuse kynges and their auctoritie, rather thā to mayntein your owne, accordynge to the olde dyscipline. Ye maye so stire vp mens stomakes agaynst you, that except you vse lesse proteruite and stubbernes, than ye haue heretofore, they wol by force of armes seke to oppresse this your power. I pray god I be deceiued in thus prophecienge. I praye god that concorde and conformitie of mindes may rather make a peas and tranquillitie, than men be dryuen to amende thinges by strengthe and manslaughter.
            
               ¶I pray the Contareyn, the Theatine, the Sadolete, the Friderike, I beseche you for the lernynge, prudencie, industrie, and vertue that is in you, loke vppon the calamities, whiche do afflict the common welth of Chrystendome, brynge equitie with you, vse indifferencie, whiche is verye necessarie in thinges thus troublyd. You Sadolete doo laye many thinges to our charge falsely in your dialogues. Surely but that I thinke ye do it rather vpon ignorance and fals persuasion, than by iudgement, I see not howe you can excuse this your facte, if good men be iudges betwixte you and vs. We do not aknowledge suche fautes to be in vs, as ye charge vs withal, we take all men to wytnes, that iudge truely. We doubt not but they wol say our doctrine lacketh suche fautes

as ye fynde in it. If you come to iudge with this opinion in youre heed, condemnynge our writynges before you se them, we can not giue you the prayse of equitie, of good doctrine, of faythfull handlynge of thynges, of godlynes, which al we wyshed to be in you. The vnworthy handlynge of thinges carieth me away, sorowe troubleth me, doloure causeth me to write somewhat more sharpely than myn entent was: and yet who lusteth truely to iudge, shal finde this to be an admonition of one that coueteth to shewe him selfe a citesin of Christis common welth, ennemie to no man, ennemye to nothing, vice only excepted. We striue not with you for any matter of our owne, We contende not with you for your possessions, whiche I and ours grant you without any enuie,

we doo not contende ne desyre, that you be put downe. We seke not, that your power vtterlye be taken frome you: My desyre is, with all the reste of our sorte, that the congregations auctoritie maye stande faste, we labour, that if we shall leese all, that yet we may kepe the doctrine of the gospell, for the teachinge of goddis people, that they being heyres with Christ, may know their fathers wyl by Christe. euery man wold his last wyll were knowen to his heyre, lette Christe haue suche libertie with vs, let his testament and last wyll, conteynynge in it nothyng but wordes of lyfe, sentēces declared by goddis own voice, left vnto vs as wytnesses of his assured promises, declarīg the iust title that we haue to our inheritaunce, let this be taught vnto all men. Wherfore good men do

require, that you take more hede of goddis doctrine, whiche as it hathe made them moche better than they were, or without it, coude haue ben, so they thynke it may and wol work lyke effecte in all other after this. If you woll kepe suche richesse, power, and possessions, as ye haue, our desyre is, that you so kepe theym, that men may perceyue, ye haue them to the amplifieng of religion, & setting forth of the glorie of Christe.
            ¶Nowe what saye ye of the sacramentes and ceremonies of the churche? Is not the vse of them al wonderfully defyled? and yet ye thynke noo remedy is to be inuented for the abolysshynge of their fylthy abuse. Noo, noo, you holde youre peace, as thoughe this parte of Relygyon were veray cleane, no faute to be founde in it. To speake somewhat

de Eucharistia, haue you not peruerted the vse of this sacramēt, with ye name also? For where as it was first instituted, as a thynge to lyft vppe mens hartes vnto hope and faythe, and profited none but suche as toke parte of it, you haue made it a solitarie and a priuate worke, or at the least ye haue yelded so moche to the couetousnes of priestes, that they haue of a franke and free communion, made it a faire marchandyse, and their praiers very salable by it, in so moche that we be come to that poynte nowe, that a greate sorte of men thinke, the masse can doo more for vs than Christis deathe. This also is taken for truthe, that though men do not correcte their lyfe, neyther absteyn from their wickednes, yet these holy and annoynted marchauntes may obteyne forgyuenes

of synnes for theym: And that the auctoritie of this institution shulde be counted the greatter, they thinke that euen the very heryng of masse is of greate momente to swage the anger of God, and to mitigate the peyne due for synne, not only paste, but also for those that they purpose in their mynde to do. And we bothe by holdynge our peace, and also in very dede do allow the same abuse, which is brought in against the institution of Christ, the vse of the apostels, contrarye to the custome of our forefathers, against the expresse wordes and mind also of the lawes. And that this abuse might cōtinue the longer, and not be perceyued, masse by the ennemie of god hathe ben brought into Italye, Fraunce, Germany, Spayne, to be said in latin, which ofte tymes is not vnderstande

of the priestes theym selfes, moche lesse of the poore menne that stande aboute it, beinge labourers, workemen, nothynge lesse than sene in latyn. Agayne the priestes eate alone that that many shulde eate of, the deathe of oure lorde, and verye lorde is not there declared nor shewed to the people. They bryng men into a certayne feare and consternation of mynde, they labour not, that men may haue a true confidence in Christis promyse, they studye not, that by the memorie of Christe, our hope shulde be encreased, oure charitie and loue towarde god and our neyghboure augmented, but endeuour theym selfe as though it were with certayne iugglynge castes, to brynge the people from ryghte Iugement.
            ¶Nowe as the solemne vse of this

sacrament is defourmed, soo many other ceremonies are peruerted. Images whiche at the beynnynge were set vp onely for to make vs remembre thynges absente, are nowe highly worshipped. At the fyrst men dyd but loke vpon them, nowe they fall vpon their knees before them, they pray to them, and are many solemne peticions of them, they trym vp theyr bones with golde, they set vp their sepulchres, they fynde stockes, before the whiche mens myndes, while they worshippe that they ought not to worshyp, are poluted. Scase the Egiptians were so folish in their religion, as we be in oures, whiche haue a certaine facyon prescribed vnto vs of god. We thinke god chaungethe his wylle, as the tyme is chaunged. We thynke we maye sette vp grauen Images,

caste images, and painted stockes, we haue imagined saint Christofer, to be moche holyer than Abraham or Iosue. The Iewes coulde not worshyp Moyses as a god, we may bowe and knele to saint Damyans image. We thinke we honour them verye lyttell, excepte we giue vnto theym, parte of our goodes and inheritaunce.
            What shuld I say of your indulgences and pardons? as their name is newe, so the thing is fainid, vain, and very foolyshe. What shal I say of your penance, that you are wont to enioyn such as confesse their fautes? are they not false, peruerse, inuēted rather for lucre & tyranny, thā for thamendement of his lyfe, that seketh remedy? Ye thynke all suche as in dede seke for salues to cure the diseases of sycke soules, worthye to

be hurlyd out of the church: ye condemne them of heresie, whiche doo what they can, to bringe in pure religion ageyne: ye saye they take away the lyghte of religion, whiche go aboute to purge ceremonies: ye say, that they ryfle thautoritie of the churche, which go about to cōfirme it. Wold god our intentes and your thoughtes, coulde be layde before mens eies: truly we shall not haue the assente of other nations, before your dedes be soo opened, that they may not only be perceiued, but also sene with mennes eies. For I pray you, what thinge els doo you, than vnder the colour of correctinge of a fewe thinges, go aboute to recouer your vsurped auctoritie, iustely taken from you by certayne nations? what coueit you more, than that you maye distroy them, whose industrie,

faith, constancie, and loue of religion hitherto withstand your appetites. Certes you might lightly bring this to passe, yf you coulde calle suche a councill, as the council of Cō
               stancie was. Men do not meruayl, that there be a fewe thinges in this your deliberation, whiche may seme to shewe a certayne simplicitie, and a good mynde towardes religion. For great myschiefes are to be shadowed, vnder the image of vertue: men that haue iudgementes be sory to se you so busye in maynteynynge vayne ceremonies, and to passe ouer trewe doctrine, as a thynge not worthy to be regarded. I pray you, howe greatte a thynge is hit, or to what pourpose, that you speake of relygiouse mennes apparayle? Our forefathers toke it for a great shame, that religion shulde be tried

by this cote, or that cote, by this colour or that coloure. Doo not those rules of monkes, whiche are ascribed to saynt Augustine, saint Francis, saynt Benedicte, forbidde notable facions of garmentes in a solitarie relygion, and counte religion to stande in good lyfe and honeste maners, nothyng lesse than in coules and kyrtelles? Your ceremonies be as acceptable vnto God, as the fastynges of the Iewes were vnto Christe. O cruel deuotions, in whiche whan people ar ones intanglid, therto allured, either by fals superstition or foly, there is noo hope to get out of that dungion, wherin bicause a man falleth without consyderation or aduysement, he loseth all lybertie, and can nat retourne to the state and dignitie that nature

set him in, to the whiche god calleth hym, where also he might doo more good to the common weale, than he nowe can, beynge in bondage and seruitude. What steppe of religion remayneth among monkes, sithens ye brought theym to certayne deuotions against their wyll, to certaine ceremonyes that can nat be ended, but whan lyfe departeth? How many of those poyntes shal ye fynde in monkes nowe adayes, that sayncte Augustine and Chrisostome doo require in monkes? Those that God calleth to teache his people, ye shut vp within cloyster walles, amonge an ydel sort of men. they that might do good in the common assembles of their coūtreye, after ye haue ones made them religious, may haue nothing to do with the cōmon welthe. suche as nature hath giuen quickenes

of wytte, loue towarde letters, study and time to attayn knowlege, those you ioyn with such as neither loue lernynge, nor them that be lerned. Our forefathers dyd institute this monkysshe lyfe, bycause they wolde haue men holy, lerned, fytte to serue their countrey, and not that they wolde them to tarie perpetually in a corner sole, doinge good to no body. Wold god you could bring monasteris to their right vse agein. Howe many flourishynge common weales shulde you than see? What plentie of goodly wyttes? what copie of good and lerned men? You lacke nothinge to thestablysshinge of high tranquillitie and welth, but a good wyll to gyue honest counsel. But there be two thynges, whyche beare a great stroke in all mattiers, and they bothe are agaynste you in

this contencion, Knowen trouthe, and Lyfe worthy commēdation, For the way that ye haue inuēted, in forbiddinge priestes mariages, can nat be commended in men that lyue so fleshly, as priestes nowe adayes doo. It is foolysshe, and moche agayne reason, that you wolde the decrees of a fewe later popes to be kepte, and the constitutions of the Apostelles, and also the decrees made in the coū
               cill at Nece to be broken. For all be it after this Councille, there were newe lawes made, whyche plucked frome the clergie their wyues: Yet were there some nacions that kepte theyr holde, and wolde not let thynges be taken from theym, that they sawe nature requyred, and oure forfathers allowed. At the last, Gregorie the .vii. came, whyche by violence stirring vp moche contention,

vtterly forbadde priestes to marye. But Pius the seconde spake moche more godly, whyche was wonte to say, that there were great causes to plucke wyues from priestes, but yet moch greatter causes to gyue them wyues agayne. If ye hadde folowed this mannes sayenge, as ye ought, ye shulde haue done moche better seruyce to the bysshoppe of Rome, than ye do now. For you se, what great hurte we haue thereby, & howe the churche is spotted with the wanton and fylthye pleasures of priestes: whych thynges we can not forgette, yet they maye, yf you woll, with the consent of good men, be taken away, and the old custome restored.
            ¶These be the thynges that make our men, whose special care is, to se religyon flourysshe, to thynke as

they do of you. For where as ye say the bysshop of Rome is not a lorde of thynges, but a dispenser: where ye wolde the canons and decrees to be perpetuall, not ones to be made, and after broken: where you take away simonie, where ye require mete ministers, they highly allowe it, and moche desire yt ye thinke as you say. For they that loke ernestely vppon your deuises, are affrayde, bycause they se you passe nothing of true doctrine, bycause you suffre the vse of sacramentis to be peruertid, bicause they see you occupyed in thynges partely lyghte, partly false, bycause they see you carefulle for relygiouse cotes, for priestes mariages, and litelle or nothynge to studye by what meanes the great sores of the churche maye be healyd, but rather to serche ways to dispatche al suche as

in any poynt go about to bryng you to the doinge of your duetie.
            ¶Furthermore as al these thingis that you write of, if they come oone by one, be either vayne, wycked, or fals, soo if they come all togyther, they be suche, as in our time can not be broughte to passe. For it can not be suffered, that ye most desire, that is, they may not be iudges, that are moste worthy to be accused. For seing you wol thauctorite to be theirs, that are nowe chiefe and principall in the churche, whiche if the ancient lawes might florishe & haue place, shulde haue littel or no power at al, what thinge shall we hope for, to be ryghtely decreed of you? There be many, which partly by succession of great inheritance, partly by the benefittes of kynges and princis, are so auaunced in welth and riches, so

corrupted in maners and lyfe, that they can in noo wyse susteyne your correction: they may disanull your sentence verye well, forasmoche as you woll all iugement and auctoritie to be in them. They wol not forsake the trade of their lyfe, vsed now a longe season, auarice woll not let them, ambition wil not suffer them, their other fantasies and pleasures can not abyde an honest reformatiō whiche fansies no man liuynge can take from them, nor redresse, except it be by death or vyolence.
            ¶Wherfore except you graunt vs to haue mete and conuenient iuges, that may brynge with theym to the councill, trouthe, and lybertie, to say as they shall thynke, ye shall neue
                  •
                amende thinges amisse in the churche. For lyke as CHRISTE dydde nat commytte the amendemente of

the Synagoge to the Priestes and Pharisees thereof, but to the Apostelles and his mynisters, as oure forefathers dyd not commytte Relygyon to the collegyate priestes of Grece, or of Rome, but vnto them, which were confyrmed by the goodnes and myght of god: so ye ought to commytte the common welthe of Christe, to suche as can be contente to vse their dignitie to the settynge forthe of honestie and relygion, and not to suche as abuse theyr offyce, to the defacyng of trouth, Relygyon, & all godlynes. Ye caste those out of youre Churche, whyche note youre vyces, and those that haue mooste nede of all to be corrected, ye make arbytrours and iuges. Is this any other thyng, than to let olde rotten bowes growe stylle, and to plucke

vppe the yonge plantes that nowe begyn to springe in groundes more fertile thā yours is? I say not this, that I wolde men shulde thinke, I iuged none amonges you to fauour the trouth, or that at leaste there be not some of your syde, whiche wold religion were redressed: but I speke it, bycause ye woll such to haue auctoritie, as shulde, if lawes myghte haue their places, if canons myght beare the stroke, if symonie were taken away, if fytte and true minysters were ordeined in the churche, not onely change their maners, but also leaue their astate and kynde of lyuynge.
            ¶The bysshoppe of Lege, a man of the same place that ye are of, very couetous, verye cruelle, and nothing lerned, is (as ye know) departed: ye haue manye suche monsters

with you at this present time, in the court of Rome. I wol not name thē that be alyue, I speake of that holy byshop, bycause it is well knowen, what he was: If ye gyue menne of his sorte lycence to iuge, and make suche decrees, as they wolde were made, you may be assured, they wol neuer admytte yours, neither any other, that shall be oughte worthe. Wherfore menne thynke, that you haue taken vppon you this consultation in vayne: They feare ye cast them in a vayne hope, you doo soo surely, except this kynde of iudges be reiected, and suche chosen as loue moche more the common welth, thā their priuate commodities.
            ¶But nowe lette vs come to this, that ye say of the byshop of Rome, you woll thre thinges to be in hym. First, that he be byshop vniuersall,

secōde, that he be byshop of Rome, Third, that he be a prince and lord of certaine franke cities and common welthes. Of these thre we graunte hym but one, that is, to be byshop of Rome: for this is his function, this is his office, & this alone appertained vnto hym as longe as Christis doctryne flouryshed: thother twain he hath & dothe vsurpe arrogantly, moche agaynste the worde of god, and farre contrary to the aunciente custome of the apostels. But where as many thynges oughte to be corrected amonges you in your owne consistorie, of what one I pray you, do you admonyshe the byshoppe of Rome? wherin do you rebuke him? Do you lay anything to his charge for the treadyng downe of Christis doctrine? Do you write any thinge of his ambition, any thynge of his

corrupte and vicyous maners, any thynge of suche shamefull and abhominable crimes, as can not withoute greatte greefe be named, nor thought vppon without moche offence of chaste myndes? ye speake of priestes garmentes, and of the horedome of Rome, here ye make a great complaynte, here ye be longe and very copious: but of the deprauate vse of the Sacramente, you speake neuer a worde. If ye suffre these abuses in Rome, What shall suche nations doo, as oonely feare your name, and can not here youre voyces, beinge farre from you, nor be taught, your neglygence beinge so greatte as it is? What shall we think you wol do in other matters, whan in a thyng most weighty and necessarie ye be soo negligent? For where as that sacrament was instituted

by god, not inuented of men, taken from aboue, not giuen vs for a season, lefte with vs from the begynnynge, halowed, not boughte, sent vs from god, not gotten by fauour of men: a thynge not to be other wise vsed, than it was fyrste ordeyned fore, a very gyft, and gyuen to a certayn ende: Do not we worse than yuel, by our craftes to change and conuerte it to disceytefull marchandise, to let no man be parttaker of it, but suche as pay, and such as beleue the spottes of the sowle, be washed away therwith, suche as beleue the grefe of conscience is taken awaye by it? It hath chaunced in this thynge, as it lyghtlye dothe in all other, Those that are beste, are soonest brought out of order. This, bicause it cometh not vnder the eye of man, but is comprehended alone

by thought and cogitation, may be lyghtly stayed, stopped, and altered, by false perswasion, whiche the rude multitude, dotynge age, and longe custome, ofte tymes bryng men vnto. If the wyl of god, were as sone perceyued in a mans harte, as the fyre is, whan it is put vnto any part of the body, we myght care the lesse to seke the right knowledge of god. No man crieth, but whan he is peined. But for as moche as we haue nede of quyckenesse of wytte, industrie, and diligence, we do very yuel to thynke no parte of the bodye of Christe diseased, where many partes are sore sycke: worse, to be negligent in redressynge and curynge of them, where good men haue openid their diseases vnto vs. In your coū
               sell ye disclose certayn lyttell soores, but the roote of them, whyche be in

those membres, without the whiche lyfe can not contynue in the bodye, you speake nothynge of, neyther ye do marke, that the very bloudde of the churche and body of Christe, is corrupted, the liuer infectid, the hart and the brayne diseased, and the lū
               ges tendynge to putrifaction. For as the body of man can not contynue without bloudde, without the lyuer, without the harte & the lounges: so the relygion of Christe is by and by lost, where as true doctrine, good intente, good mynisters, and the right vse of religion is not. If ye wol restore agayne the ryght vse of suche ceremonies, as be not contrary to Christis lawes, yf you woll suffre euery man to haue knowlege of the gospell, yf you woll graunt, that men may be laufully assembled togyther: yf you wolle make good

rulers in the churche: we wol ioyne with you, ye shall fynde nothyng in vs that ought to greue you, we wol forget all olde grudges.
            ¶You deeme wrongefully of vs, where you thynke, that we wolde haue all ceremonies taken awaye: For whan we sawe the moste parte of them very naughte, we reteyned styl the necessarie, and threwe away the naughtye: and yet we are in deuysinge, whiche of the reste we may kepe or amende. For this I knowe assuredly, more reuerence is borne among vs to the sacramentis of the Altare and Baptisme, thanne is in those places, where your customes are yet maynteined. Our holy days are so well appoynted, so bestowed in honest vacation, that they maye be more than comparid with yours. And seing that all these thynges be

foule out of order, not only in other places, but also in Rome at the bysshops nose, it were your dutie to set them forth to be amended.
            But thus farre we haue spoken of the byshop of Rome, why do you speke nothing to proue him a prince as ye call hym? where hath he right to vsurpe states in cōmon welthes? By what ryght hath he Rome, Rauenna, and other cities, by whatte ryght hath he mynished the emperours power? It is a holy poynt to take the charge and rule ouer wydowes, and fatherles chyldren, and to maynteyne their goodes in safetie: and yet the lawe woll not, that men of the clergie meddell with the one or thother, though it be a thyng very necessarie. Nowe if the lawe wol not suffre them, to meddel with the orderynge of pryuate mennes

goodes, wol you, that he take vpon him, to rule a hole comminalte, whiche is expressly forbidden, as a thing not lauful for him that rulith ye churche. And though it were not forbyd by the lawes: yet bycause it is not mete, that one manne shall rule in so many matters, in so many places so farre a sonder, you lyke prudente men shulde haue counsayled youre byshop, to haue imployed the most parte of his care, in the redressynge of Christis religyon amonges his people. It is yet freshe in memorie, what warres, what manslaughter, what ruine hath ensued, sithens bishops of Rome haue taken vppon theym, to be kinges and lordes of states. If ye wyll styll maynteyne and kepe his authoritie hoole and sounde, ye muste scrape oute these blottes, by holy gouernyng of goddis

people, and increasynge of true religion. It is not inoughe for you to haue kinges to fight in your quarel, that you may reigne continually, and reteyne stylle your myghte, strengthe, and power: excepte you fulfylle those thynges, that ye professe, except ye restore agayne Christis religion in those cities, where ye haue caste it out, except your lyfe be suche, as Christe requireth, excepte ye intende nothynge, but that that good menne allowe, excepte you can procure the fauour of god by other meanes than ye haue done hytherto, excepte ye do this, ye shall se shortly, that they, which now mainteyn you, wol endeuour them selues to plucke you downe to your confusyon. Ye can neuer make the name of Luther so hated, but that whan your falshod is knowen, the trouth

woll appere.
            ¶ Thus haue I brefely shewed, what men that can iudge of religion may allowe, and what they mislyke, in youre dyuysynge together: Now shal I shortly shew you, what men also se lackinge in you, to the gyuinge of good counsayle in thinges amysse. First to make a perfect worke, and to redresse that, that is amisse, the chiefe fundatiō and rote of all muste be, the true knowlege of scripture, of this ye shuld haue spoken and admonysshed the Bysshop of Rome. This knowlege is vtterly depraued and not had. For where so euer be no teachers of the gospel, there mans mynde can not be lyfte vp vnto God, nor haue no perfecte affiance in his promyses. And without this affiance, we haue no hope of saluation. Therfore for as moch

as amonges you, sainctes merites are more estemed, then the voyce of Christ: priestes disceytfull ceremonyes more than true prayer, popes pardons and absolution more than the promyse of god: temporal peyne of the body, more then the amendement of the lyfe: it shal wel appere, that neyther true religion is taught in your churches, neyther stedfaste affiaunce in Christe is, where you teache, neyther knowen, which way helthe of soule maye be goten. Lernynge entreth into the harte by the eares, and some thynges are taught (as saincte Austen iudgeth) by ceremonies, as well as by wordes. Bothe these are necessarie to be hadde in the churche: but where as your facion of teachyng is naught, and your ceremonies deprauate, ye shall neuer builde a stronge edifice

vpon so yuell and weake a fundation. For though there be some ceremonies almooste as necessarye as teachynge, yet if they be not wel vsed, they doo moche hurte, and ofte tymes hynder very moche trewe relygyon.
            ¶I see well inoughe, howe harde it were to make men of your syde to graunte this to be true, that I say. For whan the iudgemente is ones corrupted, & theyr maner of liuinge contrary to Christis teachyng: it is not possyble, that goddis doctryne and good lyuinge shulde be restored by theym, as longe as they loue to lyue as they do. They can not be intreated to be so moche ageynst them selfes: and yet seinge Chryste woll haue it so, force must extort of them, that they ought frely to graunt vs. For it can not be denyed (the mooste

part of men perceyue it al redy) that Christe neded not to haue come hyther and dyed for vs, if we myghte or may opteyne heuen by masses, by our good dedes, and other ceremonies. Adimantus, an hethen man, as PLATO recordeth, knewe well inoughe, that nothynge coulde opteyne the fauour of god, but onelye iustice and good lyuynge: and that no man coulde lyue wel, but he that knewe, that god is, and that god careth for vs, and is ryghtefull iudge ouer all our workes, and loketh not for Sacrifice, but for cleannesse of minde. And therfore, he refused and disalowed the opinion of them, that thought a man, whiche hadde done his neyghbour wronge, myghte by sacrifice apeise the wroth of god, no mendes made to the partie that had receyued the wronge.
            
               ¶In this ye se, that we, hauynge the lawes of god, perceyue scase so moche, as gentils dyd by the lyghte of nature: we scase se, that where as the harte is not truely fyxed in god, there is neither loue, ne reuerēce toward him: But truly where as these two be not, there auailith nother sacryfyce, ne none other ceremonye. Where as the knowledge of god is, there is loue, there god is honored, there the hart desyreth nothing contrarye to goddis wyll, but referreth all his actes and dedes, to his pleasure and commaundemente. For it can not be, that men be voyde of all affections, as the Stoikes mente, it can neuer be, excepte it be in a chrysten man, whose mynde beynge inspyred, and alwayes ruled by god, dothe nothynge, that may shew any affection to be in hym, nothing that

maye hurte hym, or anye other his neyghbour. These phylosophers sawe, that a man oughte to mayster all affections: yet they theym selfe coulde neuer atteyne to it. Why? bicause they knewe not god. For seing all thynge is corrupted in vs by nature, we beinge naturally inclyned to all maner of Concupyscence, if Christe be not shewed and preached vnto vs, by whom we receyue helth from god, all our thoughtes muste nedes be troublesom, daungerous, and naughte, all our endeuour tendeth to our own profyte, and seketh lyttell the knowlege and honour of god. Christ therfore must be taught, which giueth vs quietnesse of hart, and forgyuenesse of synne, whiche alone coud and hath delyuered mankynde frome the peyne dewe for his trespases.
            
               ¶Wherfore firste and formost, the Byshop of Rome shulde haue bene put in remembraunce herof. Secō
               daryly, bycause there be fewe, that teache well, they wolde be diligently sought oute, that are able to fake the office of a preacher vpon them. But nowe adayes, ye doo not onely not passe of them that preache well, and haue done so, longe sythens, ye do not onely not pulle them to you, but you flee frome them: ye do not onely not ayde theym, but you kepe them in chaynes: ye reteyne theym not in townes, but ye exile and banysshe them: ye delyuer theym not out of danger, but ye most iniustlye and cruelly slee theym. What other thing is taught in our churchis, but that all writinges, all ceremonies, shoulde tende to teache men knowledge, to shewe them, that all mens

nature is corrupted, and that by the deathe of Christe we are delyuered, and by hym haue we opteyned forgyuenes of synne and blysse euerlastynge. It is falsely reported of vs, that we discourage men frome doing good workes, falsely feyned, that we intende to breake all good order and ceremonies. And what a crueltie is this of you, whyle we go aboute to put downe all those thynges, that can not stande with Christis teachynge, whyles we studye to reyse and set vp agayne the true ceremonies, whiles we fetch in agein the true trade and olde fasshion of preachynge, what crueltie is it, to offer vs the galowes, burnyng, and suche other moste terrible peynes? Grekes of olde tyme were neuer so cruell (albe it they offered for sacrifice, to their fals goddis, men aliue)

as ye be to vs in your punishmētes. ¶This cruell maner of punysshement causeth vs to thynke, that it is impossible for you to iudge vprightly of our matters. And all be it that after so many bokes made by vs, ye myghte haue ben well satisfied, instructed, and taughte, what mynde we beare to Chrystis relygion: yet howe yuel so euer you thinke of vs, ye shoulde haue mynded a councill generall, and suche as good menne myghte haue ben called to, of whose good lyfe and good lernynge, there mighte appere sufficient testimony. And forasmoch as in a general concill, there ought to be no suspityon, eyther of cruelnes or of forcynge of any man, there wolde haue ben chosen suche a place, where as all men myght haue resorted to gether, and frely haue spoken their mindes, and

also where suche myghte haue bene kepte out, suche I saye, as for theyr naughtye lyfe, and ignoraunce of scripture, for theyr symonye and other vices, no lawe woll admytte to meddel with matters of the church. For if they maye not be suffered to speke in matters, that chaunce dayly, moche lesse they ought to be hard in suche a solemne assemble, specially at this tyme, where as al thinges are ruffled in the churche, and very fewe thynges are in good order. Amonge so many bishops as are in Almain, there is not one, that ought to be harde there, if the olde canons myghte be restored to theyr olde vigour & strength. In Fraunce there be but fewe, and yet more than be in Almayne. Of Italy I can saye nothynge. ENGLANDE is aloone perelesse, wonderfullye amended:

               ENGLANDE maye be a mirrour, a guyde, a teacher, an exaumple to all the reste.
            ¶There be manye amonges you, that crie and say, that no man ought to haue a voice in the generall coū
               cill, but they alone that are of the clergie: and of these ye take not the beste lerned, but woll that greattest in dignitie, haue the chiefe suffragies: whose sayinges if they be allowed, yf good lyuynge and good lerning be not regarded, what good can come of councils? Therfore in this poynte ye shulde haue moued the byshop of Rome, to opteyne of kynges, and of all nations, honest men, men well lerned, men of holy conuersation: that general councils therby might recouer agayne their olde auctoritie, in truely defyninge of matters, whiche thinge councils

of late haue lost with a gret shame. And this mooste specially muste be forseene, that theyr iudgemente be not allowed, whiche saye, that men of Luthers secte oughte therfore to haue no audience in the councill, bicause they haue broken the decrees of councilles: For hitherto no man coude proue that sayinge true. And I say more, No councilles are of any valure, or ought to be kepte, but they, wherin nothynge is decreed, contrary to the wrytynges of the apostels. Theyr bokes, that you call Lutherans, beare sufficient recorde, that they haue written nothing contrarye to the honour of Chryste, nor the mynde of thapostels, nor yet against auncient councilles: whiche oughte to be as a rule for vs, theyr after comers. If ye wolle, that the churche flouryshe, and the flocke of

Christe prospere and encrease plentuousely, Take away all gay, high, and honorable titles, set lower yuel gotten honour, let fraudes and gyles haue no place, let good lyuynge be preferred, haue respecte to ryght knowlege, put herevnto dilygence, thynges can nat but amende. Noo men may bringe this to passe better thā you, none shal haue more praise of wysedome, or greatter profytte therof, than ye. You shall than be in high reputation, if by your diligence and vertue, the worlde be broughte to lyue well and godlye. What honest life can there be, where as religion is distroyed, and where good ceremonies ar clean misvsed? What plesure, where as is so great debate and discorde? Here ones agayne Contarene, I beseche the for thy great lerninge, and so do I the

Frederike, byshop of Salerne, for the honour that thou haste had by refusyng to be a cardynal. I beseche and pray the also Sadolete, for the honor that thou hast had by lerning I beseche you all, whiche are deputed to debate these thynges, that through you the olde maner of lernynge may be restored, the olde Canons haue theyr place ageyne, and that the naughty & peruers vse of ceremonies by you may be amended. ¶You ought in no wyse to let this occasion slyp youre handes, if you be desirous to further Christis religion. For it is nothynge so, as you feare that it is: you thinke it impossible, that we shuld agree with you: you thinke, that no communication betwene you and vs, can brynge vs to an vnitie and concorde: bycause men of a long tyme haue sayd, that

we take awaye all ceremonies, and that we woll suffre you to haue nothynge, whiche hath ben instituted syth the apostels tyme. This report as touchynge the ceremonies, we say, is a false lye, and so we proue it by our dede. For where as there be thre sortes of ceremonies: one, whiche is necessarie, we mayntein most ernestly: an other, whiche is contrarie to goddis lawes, we can not abide: as for the thirde, our mynd is to vse a moderation. For if there be any good order at all, which saynte Paule commaundeth vs to haue, for the mayntenance and confirmation of that feyth, whiche we ought to yeld to god and Christ, this same must nedes remayne in ceremonies necessarie, and in those that are moderated. Surelye they that wolle maynteyn those ceremonies, that ar

falsely feyned, and contrary to goddis lawe: either they do not vnderstande, what the trouthe requireth, or els for their owne priuate weale, they wolle not suffre a necessarie reformation to be hadde. And for bycause Sadolete, ye do not perceyue the difference, that we put herein, ye accuse vs, and beare men in hande, that we wolde haue no man better than other, that we wolde no resorte of people shulde be to churches, no knelynge, no syngynge, no sensyng shuld be in the tēples, that we wold the vniuersall church were subuerted, so that if your authoritie were ones taken away, we myght do euery thynge at our pleasure withoute any reproche. We be contente with all ceremonies, that in any wyse be conformable and agreinge to oure religion. Yea this also we permytte,

that what soo euer dothe not defyle our religion, shoulde be lefte to the determination of a generall councill: They be noo trifles, that make vs to refuse your authoritie, vsurped power, and naughty censures. Sadolete, I wold haue you shewe, what councils toke vppon theym to talke of this popish and priestly apparayle, that you write of.
            ¶For holy days Sabbatiꝰ a Iew did his part, he caused strife & trouble: and for the same matter there was variance betwene Policrates and Uictor: But you knowe, that Irineus greatly mysliked their discorde, bycause that diuersitie either in holy dayes or fastyng days breaketh not the bonde of relygion, ne of Christis feithe. What dothe saynte Augustine in his letters to Ianuarie? Doth he not euen the same that

we require? He requireth a meane in ceremonies. Doth he not also lament, that the burdeyn of ceremonies be more heuye vnto vs, than euer were any to the Iewes? What wolde he do nowe, whan all thynge is done for the seruynge of mennes appetite, for ambition, and for desire of lucre?
            ¶Agaynste suche foolysshe trifles what I pray you saith Esaias, what Ieremias, what Amos the prophetes? Esaias forsawe these ceremonyes, and these yuell customes, he sawe, that vayne vanitie shulde folowe the destruction of the Iewes, whiche he sheweth expresselye: and yet we make as though we redde of no suche thynge.
            ¶Herein I se not what you canne laye agaynste vs, more than the authoritie of the canons, & the church,

whose auctoritie we wold were safe, and in ful strength. But this muste alwais be one special point in the lawes of the church, that prestes lyue wel and teache wel, that they be presente & abyde vpon theyr benefices, & that all they be deposed, whiche haue goten any thynge in the churche by moneye. Neyther he shoulde haue any benefice with cure, whom the courte carieth from it, or he that leaueth his flocke, and foloweth an hauke, prickynge to the partrige in stede of preachynge to his parysshe. For as longe as these thynges are suffered vnpunished, howe is it possible relygion to be kepte, and ceremonies vnabused? For let the leste parte be ones mysvsed, and the reste can not long continue safe. But you woll not touche the diseases, that ye were set to seke fore: nother ye woll

suffre the partis soore greued, to be healed. Ye esteme more the smooke of the sensars, bowynges and crouchynges, more the apparaylle that men go in, than ye do the knowlege of right religion, or the feare of god, or his honour: where as in deede, these thynges are of necessitie, and the other for the soule helth nothing at all. Neuer the lesse they maye in some case be suffered, and are tollerable: but these that I shal now reherse, can nother be wynked at, nother defended, as not to aknowlege the abuse of the sacrament of the altare: and the abuse of ceremonyes, as that monkes and pristes haue libertye to lyue vnchaste and vnclenly: and those that endeuour theym selfes to amende it, to be troubled, ye and iuged of you vnworthy to be in the company of good menne. We

ar careful and sory for this peruerse iugement: we go not about to breke the ceremonies, specially those, that may stande with Christis relygion, we promyse you to kepe them styll: onely do you this for your parte, see that those thniges be restored, without the whiche, neyther the dignitie of the churche, nother the auctoritie of Christis name can continue.
            ¶Nowe here I wol come vnto an other poynte, that moche letteth our agrement. Ye complayne greately, that we be ouer stubborne and rude, and that we intende to destroy al iurisdiction, and to take awaye all riches frome the churche. This you say, may not be suffred. For it is an aunciente custome, that noble men, that come of great stockes, be honorably promoted: from whom so gret cōmodities can not be taken away,

without high displesure, and great daunger. If this be the worste, we shall lyghtly be deliuered from gret grefe and trouble, & shortely be ioyned with you. For seynge there be thre sortis of men in the church, that rule: one of them mete to teache: an other, mete to mainteyne the power and ryches of the churche: the third, whiche sometymes hathe bothe the thynges aforesayde, and yet is mete for ner nother. If you wyl be content to reiecte the laste sorte, and suffer the other two to be seuered and diuided distinctly the one frome the other, I trust all stryfe and grudge betwene vs, shalbe by those meanes quite abolyshed, and cleane forgotten. For you requyre in the minysters of the churche good lyfe and lernynge. Let vs haue suche as be able bothe for theyr lernynge, and

for their liuing, to gouerne the people, put a difference betwene them, and the other that haue in their gouernance the goodes of the worlde, and of the cōmon weale: do this, & we trust sone to haue an ende of all matters, that we can nat now agree vpon, or at the least wise a greatter moderation of our grudges & stryfes. There be som mē of gret blode, whiche woll be ashamed of the gospel: and there be some, that faithfully woll kepe the goodes of the churche. No man can make tyrantes beleue, that it is more honour, to be loued and honored of theyr subiectes, than to be feared of theym. But it were a shame for any christen mā to think, that it were a higher dignite, to haue great power and might, thā to professe the gospell, in suche wise as may stād best with godly liuing.

We ar moued by authorite of many great wise men, to sette an order betwene these two sortes. To let passe saint Augustin,
                  
                     
                        •
                     omil. 98 
                     
                        •
                     n Matt.
                saint Ambrose, and other perfect bishops, did not Chrisostom, before a multitude of an hū
               dred .M. mē, in a sermon, greuously lament, that bishops were taken frō the cure of their church, and ocupied in money matters? Thapostels also put a difference betwene the office of bishops and decons. These two sortes had neuer bē sondred, but yt they inspired by god, did se before, that at one time or other, some wolde refuse to kepe these orders, taken by them. ¶But peraduenture some mē wol say, noble mē haue giuē gret riches to the church, it is conueniēt, yt theyr posteritie be sonest p̄ferred vnto the same. First noble men ar not forbid, neither to professe the gospel, nother

to haue the gouernance of money & cites. If there be of them, that be vnmete to haue ye one or the other, there be lawes, that wol such to be regarded, as come of those auncestours, that fyrst enriched this or that churche. Fynally al riches wold be so disposed, that none lack, and an order taken after euery persons degree & sorte, whiche order must so longe be kept, as religion take no hurt by it: an equal and a conuenient distribution shulde be made to men of euery degre. We may lacke riches in Christis churche, but if we be spoyled of true doctryne, than of necessytie we are destitute of all relygyon. Therfore we woll not stryue with you for riches: we require to haue Chrystis doctrine, we desyre to haue true ministers, we wyshe ernestly to haue a free councille in a safe place, where

mē may speke boldly, whither good men and wel lerned maye be called, where the naughty & ignorant persons shal not be admytted as iuges and chiefe doers. If you graunt vs these thinges, and wol also helpe vs in them, we woll not meddell with great men. And yet as we woll not willingely gyue them the ryches of the churche, that be of great power: so if they woll nedes haue them, we wol not gretly sticke therin. If they desyre to haue golde and riches, and the gouernance of common weales, we wol not stryue with them: for we seke not for suche thynges, noo no, whan al this that ye seke is taken a waye, the churche remaineth styl: so that Christis lernynge do remayne and the gospell florishe. Sacrilege is a shameful dede, and worthy gret punishement: and agaynst this many

lawes be made: certainely it is a kynde of Sacrilege, not to dispense the goodes of the church to thē that be nedy. And they that do not distribute them in this wyse, doo veraye naughtily. Trewe it is, that at this houre the goodes of the churche be meruaylous great and aboundant, we wolde haue them well dysposed, but we wold in especial haue the disposition & distribution of them committed to the prechers of the gospel, & ministers of the churche. If they that be rulers, rule the churche well, we ought to reioice at the cōmon ꝓfite of christen men: but if they rule not wel, and can not be amended by power, we ought to be sorie. Neuer the lesse, we may not take the matter so greuously, that men think, we wold rather haue our part of the riches, than se the gospel go forward.

Therfore let vs be at a point for the teaching of the gospel, for the sacramentes, and for the ceremonies: and we wol neuer striue with you for the riches, which we were better to lack than that for theym Christis glorie shuld be hindred. I se, there lacketh nothynge, to brynge vs to a perfect peace, if ye wol put a part al displesure and hatred. Ye, not redyng our bokes, haue withdrawen your hartes from vs, ruled by the reporte of them, that loue vs not. And so you beleue, that we intende to distroy al good ordinances. And on the other syde, bicause we are put in feare by many examples, we can not yet, but suspect and thinke, that you intende not a true and an ernest reformatiō of the church. If that, that we mean and go about could synke into your heedes, if we had some certayn assurance,

& good token of your diligēce & vnfeined faith, we shuld be, bothe out of moche trouble, and with one mynde we with you, wold endeuour our selues to do those thinges, that were best for the common welthe of Christendome.
            ¶I suppose ye be none of them, ye trust, by force of armes, to maintein your power, and by violence to kepe vnder your aduersaries. I remembre, whan poore Luther was alone, and at warre with all the worlde, no man being more hatid than he was: all his enemies coulde not take his life from him. These studies ar now so encreased within fewe yeres, soo many folowing him, that now they feare lytle your thretnynges. They haue many and great tokens, that god fauorith them: so that if you intende any thing against them, they

surely truste, that no battayle shall preuaylle, nor haue any successe ageinst them, beinge in daunger only for the loue they beare to Christis religion. Wherfore while you haue tyme, thynke vppon this mattier, loke well about you. If you wolle be ruled by reason, we shall easilye defende our parte, so that our iuges be indifferent and iuste. If the matter muste be tried by force of armes, Fyrste this were a cruel waye, to put so many common weales of Cristendome in hasarde: Secondarylye, There is gret danger in this thing, by reson your aduersaries strength is waxen puissant and mighty: And it maye chaunce, that when menne shall se, that ye intende to vse crueltye, many moo woll take our parte, thanne yet are knowen to be of our syde. Fynally, admyt that ye might

haue the vpper hande, and opteyne your pourpose, eyther by vniuste iudgemente, or elles by force and vyolence: yet where crueltye, vnrightous dealynge, and grudge of conscience is, there can ye not leade your lyfe in honour, moche lesse in pleasure. Ye can neuer soo destroye vs, but the fundations and rootes woll remayne, wherof alwaye some shall sprynge, that woll be able to iuge truely of our matters. Againe, althoughe you shulde destroy vs all to gether: yet there is a GOD, that seeth all thynges, and is hable to reuenge oure quarell: there is a CHRISTE, in whose tuition and defence we are all, whyche as he was cause of helthe in the worlde, soo is he able, to restore agayne his religion, thoughe it were vtterlye distroyed.
            
               ¶I speake not this Contarene, by cause I iudge you by these your deuises, to intende myschiefe, but bycause there be many amonges you, which if they might haue their mindes, wold cause more mischiefes in Christis churche, than euer we sawe hitherto. But I iudge this of you, that god maye rule your hartes, I knowe that ye lacke neither lerning nor wysedom, it may be that ye wol loue his honour, and beare a zele to his trouthe, ye may forsee that, whiche shall bothe please god, and be moche to your honour. You amonges all men ar chosen for great causes, your honour is to restore Christis doctrine, and to appoynt suche as woll and shall be able to teache the gospelle, to amende the ceremonies, and to put a differēce betwene the mynysters of the churche. By

these meanes you may bring in vse ageyne the olde maner of lerninge, the olde disciplyne of the churche: without the which neyther your dignitie can be cōmendable, nor your authoritie continue any longer, nor religion flourishe at any time. For there is no honour, where as is noo good gouernāce: where gouernors liue not wel, they can haue but smal commendation. Men can neither be obedient, nother loue you that do not your dutie. men wold be taught & holpen out of ignorance, for many mens hartis be wonne this way, and authorititie lyghtly opteyned. But when subiectes be not set by, & officers doo not their duetyes, then authoritie wasteth a pase, noo man obeyeth them, but either for feare or flaterie. Whereby it foloweth, that with authoritie, honour decreaseth:

and so religion is moche hyndered. ¶Wherfore I praye you, put your helpynge hande to the relygyon of Christe, nowe beinge in decaye and redye to falle: heale you those olde greate and almoste desperate diseases, with whiche the churche is sore vexed, and pyneth dayelye awaye. And for as moche as you your selfe acknowledge manye and greuous fautes to be in the churche, befydes many mo, that you speke nothynge of: be you content, that our men restore the foundation and grounde of relygyon amonges them selfes, hyndre them not, suffre them to accomplysshe the worke, whiche they fortunately haue begunne. If there be any thynge, as ye saye there is, that is not to be allowed amonge vs, let there be appoynted a councille, where frely, and without feare

of punysshemente, men maye saye theyr myndes, in all mattiers. Let all affections be layde aparte, which maye hyndre the trouthe: and vse suche as shall hurte no manne, as shall breake noo lawes, but rather reteyne equitie. For who canne approue, excuse, or allowe any council, wherin mennes priuate commodytyes are onelye regarded, wherein occasyons are soughte, for to put men to deathe, wherin cornars are serched, to couer and hyde vyce? All maner of generall Councilles oughte alonelye to be kepte, to the furtheraunce of common weales, and in them oughte to be vsed no crueltie. In them must reigne feith and dylygence, to cure all dyseases. Wherfore lette there be noo encrochynge couetousnes in you,

put away al crueltie: let none come there, that fauour vice, or at the lest let them be no iuges there. Let them be sought out, which rather seke the welthe of the hole, than of a fewe, which are glad of iustice and equitie. If euer there were or can be any tyme, wherin it was, or can be nedefull to seke such remedies, to vse suche industrie and dilygence, as we requyre in you, truly it is euen now in our tyme, wher in dede no medicine canne be ministred, to diseases, that haue of a longe season bene roted in the churche without great perill and danger. For where as vices haue their defense of longe custome▪ a cloker of errour and naughtynes▪ ayded by barbarous ignorāce, that hath ruled religion, and all other thinges, these many yeres, where as councils haue ben callyd, not for reformation

of thinges out of order, but rather to maynteyne ambityon and pride, where as there hath bene no man that wolde or coulde without perill open the diseases, & shew remedies for the same, thinke that it is nowe your parte, in this lyght of trouthe, you hauynge also power nowe in your handes, by the cōsent of your byshoppe, to swage and appease all oure troubles, to make a peace and concorde betwene vs, to delyuer the worlde frome miserye, whiche dayly encreaseth, to plante and set forthe newe rotes of trewe religion, fansies remoued, and olde doctrine established agayn. Thinke that he is aboue you, that made this worlde and ruleth it. Remembre he seeth, and is iudge of al that you go aboute, and that you can not swage his ire, moche lesse haue his fauour,

excepte ye do wel and meane truely. ¶Consider, that there haue benne and euer shal be men in this worlde, whiche can truely iuge of your lyfe and maners. If they disalowe your actes and deedes, they woll here after grudge to gyue you that auctoritie, whiche were necessarye for you to haue. Thus fare you wel.
            
                At Argent. The .29. of Marche. Anno domini. 1538.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            LONDINI IN AEDIBVS THOMAS BERTHELETI REGII IMPRESSORIS. EXCVS.
            ANNO. M. D. XXXVIII.
            CVM PRIVILEGIO.
            
         
      
   