
      
         
            
            
            1582. Ianuarij decimus.
            
            THE Pathwaie to Martiall Diſcipline. Now newly Imprinted, and deuided into three bookes. Wherevnto is added the order and vſe of the Spaniards in their Martiall affaires: which Copie was lately found in the Fort in Ireland, where the Spaniards and Italians had fortified themſelues.
            
            
               THE FIRST BOOKE: ENTREATETH OF THE OFFICES from the higheſt to the loweſt, with the lawes of the Field, arming, muſtering, and training of Souldiers.
            
            
               THE SECOND BOORE: ENTREATETH OF SVNDRIE PROportions and training of Caleeuers, and how to bring Bowes to a great perfection of ſeruice: alſo how to march with a Campe royall: with diuers Tables annexed for the preſent making of your battells, as otherwiſe to know how many paces they require in their march & battels from 500. to 10000.
            
               THE THIRD BOOKE: COMPREHENDETH THE VERY RIGHT order of the Spaniards, how to traine, March, and Encampe, with diuers Tables therein contained.
            
            ¶ Londini excudebat T.E. Impenſis Milonis Ienyngs.
         
         
            
            
               
                  Sr. Richard Nervdigate of Arbury in the County of Warwick Baronet 1709
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
               
               
                  ❧Of the electing of the Generall.
               
                  IF any Prince doe minde to erect his gouernement in the field: he muſt ſéeke out a ſufficient and able man, each waies as well for the reputation and nobilitie of his Predeceſſors, as for his minde, bodie, vertue, and experience, to be his chiefe and high gouernour generall of the fielde, who ſhall by the Prince or ſome other of the Priuie Counſell before the Prince or els where, being authoriſed by the Princes commiſſion, take his oth, in the which hee ſhall bee ſworne to ſerue his Prince truelie and faithfullie, and to eſchew and foreſee all daungers and inconueniences, which may happen to the Prince his mayſter to the vttermoſt of his power, and to be ruled by the determinate counſell in all needfull and profitable cauſes to the greateſt furthering of his Prince any wayes, as well in marching, incamping, approch, eſkirmiſh camiſado, or retraite, or what other ſeruice with deepe care to iudge and foreſee whether their deuiſes may redound to the beſt accompliſhing of any exploite, or otherwiſe for the remedie of the Princes great charge. Alſo, not to leuie or take vp any ſouldiers in his owne name, but in his Princes. Such a one ſhould be choſen to be generall vnto whom the Staffe ſhould bee deliuered, binding him with a ſolempne oth that he carrie the ſayd ſtaffe and deale vprightlie with each man, all affection ſet a part, in cauſes of iudgement dooing alwaies according to equitie and iuſtice.
            
            
               
               Of the Generals office.
               
                  THe General principallie ought to bee a man that liueth in the feare of God, who muſt prouide that there bee Preachers and Miniſters appoynted, for the daily miniſtration of Gods ſacred and diuine worde, the which Preachers are to teach them their dueties towards God, and their obedience towards their Prince, Generall, and Captaines, and to perſwade them in all enterpriſes valiauntlie, and manfullie to perſiſt, in all ſuch attemptes, as by the Generall and principall officers ſhall be thought meete, yeelding them an aſſured hope through their daily praier and ſeruing of GOD, to haue moſt happie ſucceſſe in all their enterpriſes, for no doubt although it pleaſeth the almightie to ſuffer the faithfull manie times to receiue puniſhment, yet the faithfull ſeruing of him yéeldeth an aſſured hope of victorie.
            
            
               Of the office of a Generall.
               
                  A Generall ought to bee temperate, continent, and not exceſſiue in eating and drinking: Patient in trauaile, of witte prompt, whereby in the night time by quietneſſe of minde the counſailes of Captaines examined, maie more perfectlie bee confirmed. Hee ought to be content with ſimple fare: For the preparing of diſhes full of delicateneſſe and the too much thoughts and diligence about

meates, corrupteth and drowneth the minde in ſuch ſort, that the time that ought to bee ſpent in the buſineſſe that is to bee done, by the delicateneſſe of the Captaines is moſt vainely conſumed. Hee ought too bee painefull, for that princiapllie it doth apperteine too a Generall that hee in the time of turmoyles of the Warre, may bee the laſt that is wearie. Hee muſt bee quicke witted, forſomuch as Homere ſayth, flying to the ende: that with his thought hee maie moſt quicklie diſcuſſe euerie thing, and with his minde make iudgement, and as it were deuine a farre of and foreſee that which is to come: leaſt when there happen chaunces neyther foreſeene nor looked for, the Generall be conſtrayned ſodeinly and vnprouided for to take counſaile, and the ſafegarde of things to commit moſt fearefully to fortune. It behooueth him to be liberall, and not to bee couetous and deſirous of gayne. For ſurelie of this vice he ought moſt principally to take héede, foraſmuch as he that is not giuen to paſſe much of giftes of Siluer and Gold, may moſt honorably haue the charge of ſuch dooings, whereas thoſe bee moſt wicked that will be drawne with the vnſatiableneſſe of Golde, the which is ſuch a weapon of ſo much might, and as it were with liuelie force to deliuer the weapon out of his owne handes and to giue to others. He ought to be a faire ſpeaker, for that conſidering the thinges that are to be intreated of for the Warre, I iudge there will followe much vtilitie, conſidering that eyther hauing occaſion to ſet men in araie to the battaile, the Generall comforting the ſouldiers eaſilie maie perſwade euerie one of them to deſpiſe all perils, and to attend to the glorious enterpriſe. For the ſound of the Trumpet cannot ſo much inflame the mindes of men to take their weapons; and conſtraine them more valiantlie to fight, then the conuenient and according to the time the ſugred taſke of the Generall, which maie moue them, both vnto great actes for the loue of vertue, and encourage them for the deſire of glorie, or els if neede bee, to comfort

the mindes afflicted for ſome ouerthrow had, his wordes ſhall be a medicine. Wherefore for the benefit of the hoaſt and to lighten heauineſſe of accidents the accommodate ſpeaking of the Generall by moſt reaſon is more to be deſired then the induſtrie of Surgeons, which follow the Campe onelie to the ende to heale woundes, for that they take no care or charge but to heale the hurtes: but hee with ſweete and curteous maner of ſpeaking comforteth and moſt highlie maketh glad, the mindes of the weake and afflicted. Beſides this, hee confirmeth the mindes of them that bee whole, and retaines them that bee boldened, then how much more difficult it is to heale the infirmities that is hid, then thoſe which maie bee both felt and ſeene, euerie man knoweth: and like as no Prince will erect an armie to ſend them without a Generall and determinate Gouernour: euen ſo the Generall ought not to bee choſen that knoweth not, nor hath the grace in ſpeaking, and that lacketh the facilitie and vtteraunce of ſpeache. Likewiſe the Generall beeing confirmed in his degree, ſhould bee pleaſant, gentle, and cheerefull too them that will come to him, gladlie and willing to recompence the valiant and good, both with the liberalitie of the purſſe, and dignitie of office, and with ſharpe puniſhment to puniſh the ſlouthfull, malefactors, and offendors. Alſo hee ought not in euerie place and too euerie man ſhowe himſelfe ſo benigne and gentle, leaſt he happen to be deſpiſed, neither ſo proud and ſtoute that he moue other to beare him hatred.
               And that hee doe this to the intent that with to much licenſe and benignitie hee cauſe not the armie to bee diſſolute, or with ſharpneſſe and ſeueritie make them alienate their mindes and beecome enimies. Likewiſe the liberalitie of a Prince or Generall although it bee but little: if with benignitie liberallie at time conuenient it bee vſed, it maie get moſt greate beneuolence of the multitude; and from thence foorth the moſt aſſured fidelitie of the ſouldiers

gotten, it doth adde vnto it ſecuritie and conſtantneſſe in anie enterpriſe, ſeeing indeede euerie man hopes to obtaine greater things, bearing themſelues valiantlie in fight, when they knowe that in little things the liberalitie of the Generall commeth of the proper benignite of his owne minde. It is neceſſarie that the Generall with his warrelike counſaile doe deliberate vppon euerie matter, and they beeing partakers of the counſailes are ſworne in time and place to tell their iudgements, the which together with him of euerie thing ought to debate, forſomuch as all thoſe things not anie man of himſelfe hath found: hee maie alone by ſtudie with himſelfe examine, but hee ought not ſtraightwaies to approue and confirme it, for that our thoughts and counſailes as a thing, vnto the which wee haue a naturall affection, if of others faithfull counſaile it be not holpen, eaſilie it maie beeguile vs, and manie times it is found full of errours, contrariwiſe thoſe things that by iudgement and opinion of others bee approued, doe aſſure the minde and keepe things ſtable and ſure. Notwithſtanding no man ought ſo little to truſt to himſelfe that alwaies he be of opinion weake and doubtfull, nor of himſelfe ſo much too preſume that hee thinke other cannot finde counſaile better then his: for that it ſhall bee neceſſarie that hee which is alwaies ſubiect too the counſaile of others, hauing altogether diſtruſt of himſelfe, came to chaunge infinit things whereby in weightie matters both hurt and incommoditie doth follow, as likewiſe he muſt needes either alwaies or oftentimes commit error, that not hearing the aduiſe of other, euerie thing doth attribute to himſelfe alone. The Generall ſhall often and vnlooked for reſort vnto the Captaines tents and places of aboade to ſee in what towardlie readineſſe they are or maie be in of a ſodain, that hee cauſe the Captaines often to make like reſort vnto the vnder officers and ſouldiers to ſee if they bee in the like orderlie readineſſe for anie ſodeine ſeruice. Hee muſt receiue into his handes the order

of all offices in writing, whereby hee maie the better vnderſtand and iudge of them. Likewiſe the names of all the ſouldiers of the bands, to ſee whether they haue their iuſt number.
            
            
               The office of the Maiſter of the Campe.
               
                  SInce it ſtandeth with the office of him that will gouerne well to be as forward in mainteining the good, and rewarding thoſe that deſerue well, as in ſinceritie of iudgement to puniſh the wicked and offenders: the maiſter of the campe, bearing the entire and full authoritie of the office of a Generall, is to haue a regard, that iuſtice beare as great ſwaie in his armie as in anie the beſt ordered citie that can bee. And therefore hee muſt prouide Iuſtices ſufficientlie practiſed and ſtudied, that they maie bee able to ſee what iuſtice will aforde in euerie caſe, alwaies prouided, notwithſtanding that the lawes of armes be not broken, then the caſe vnderſtood, let them decide the matter, and giue ſentence brieflie. For in the Campe they are bound to obſerue nothing but that which the Captaine Generall ſhall appoynt, and that which naturall reaſon ſhall chieflie allowe of, admitting herein the Canons of the holie lawe of Chriſtendome, to which all the good ſouldiers, as euerie faithfull Chriſtian is bounde to be obedient vnto. Next the maiſter of a campe hath to appoynt an Agozzino, Arcaldo, or a Proueſt, who beſides that he muſt be well ſeene in his Arte, muſt haue regard that hee entertaine a conuenient retinue of aſſiſtauntes, and amongeſt the reſt a Pretor or maiſter of iuſtice. Hee muſt ordeine alſo that this Proueſt

with his ſeruauntes, and the Maiſter of iuſtice goe apparelled ciuiltie, and not as the cuſtome is in manie cities like abiectes, that thereby they maie haue credite in their office, and be obeied as they ought, and this muſt bee proclaimed through the armie generall: namelie, that they obeie theſe officers vppon paine of death. Hee muſt forbid all ſouldiers except Sergeants who in diuers cauſes ought to haue their weapons about them to reſtrict all others of what fort ſo euer, by that meanes to preuent thoſe theftes and murthers which are commonlie committed in ſuch places of men giuen to the ſpoyle. Hee muſt cauſe by all meanes poſſible all priuie mutinies to be abandoned, and all priuie grudges and enmities to bee forgotten, during the time of Warre, which otherwiſe will bring greate hurte to the Campe, conſidering that manie doe leaue houſe and home to goe to Warre, not ſo much to doe their Countreie ſeruice or winne to themſelues practiſe in battaile, thereby to become equall in value to couragius mindes, eyther els to deſerue paie with the recompence of his doutie deedes, but rather ſome are pulled into the field to kill villanouſlie ſome foe of their owne, or their fathers, or their friendes, men truelie moſt worthie of a thouſand deaths, in that they ſeeke by treaſon to murder, in that place where they ought to looke to nothing els then to vphoulde iuſtice, and to procure that ſhe maie haue hir due execution, and in iuſtice the puniſhment ſhe deſerueth. He muſt care moreouer that reſpect bee had that merchauntes and puruaiers and other artificers that are too furniſh the Campe with apparell, victuales, and other neſſaries, that ſuch maie haue traficke freelie, to the ende they maie doe it willinglie, and that they bée paied with good and lawfull Money for that they ſell, enterteining them courteouſlie, and too make them ſafe conduct as well too departe from thence, as too come thether, that they maie haue a deſire too retourne: that by theſe the Armye maye

haue ſtore of things as well commodious for their helpe, as otherwiſe neceſſarie for their vſe. Hee muſt rate the victuals at a reaſonable price, that the ſouldiers bée not ouercharged in buying, and that the merchuunt may haue an honeſt gaine. And as this care muſt bée had, ſo thoſe things as leſſe neceſſarie maie bée left to bée ſould, as the buier and the ſeller can agrée, as houſeholde ſtuffe, ſaddles, and all other furniture for horſe, ſpiceries, weapons, and ſuch merchandies. Alſo hee muſt with greate counſaile and deliberation beſtowe the lodgings, as next the trenches to beſtowe the artilerie, and other munitions, and the ordinarie victuals giuing charge that none come néere the pouder with anie fire, neither gonner nor other ſouldier. He ſhall aſſigne the quarters of the campe, to euerie companie his ſeuerall charge of the artilerie, which muſt bée kept vnoccupied for what néede ſo euer there ſhall bée, appoynting watch and ward continuallie, and that verie ſtrong, whereby the ſouldiers maie bée the better conueied at pleaſure, and the frontes the readier to bée defended againſt the enimie. There muſt by him bée appoynted as it were a ſtreate for Merchaunts, ſafe for themſelfes, and commodious for all the Campe. Then muſt there in euerie quarter bée appoynted places of eaſe as for their owne vſe, and likewiſe for killing and dreſſing Cattell for foode, that by this meanes their lodgings maie bée kept cleane and the infection of the ayre auoyded for the benefit of health. Then ſhall hée appoynt the footmen to bée diſtinctlie deuided from the Horſemen. Hée muſt appoynt them ſo that euerie quarter haue his ſere place for victuals: and after they bée lodged it ought to bée his greateſt care to ſée them well defenced: alſo that they maie ſo incampe as they maie haue the benefit of woode and water, eſpeciallie in Winter. Theſe conditions hée muſt looke too with eyes well opened, viewing them diligentlie and oftentimes: and well conſidering them. And alſo hée muſt foreſée that the waie be commodious

and readie, by which the armie may march and ſafelie be brought to the place of incamping. Moreouer, it behooueth neceſſarilie to diſpoſe both horſemen and footemen toward by daye, and watch by night, in places moſt daungerous, that the campe may remayne without feare of ſodaine aſſaults, which otherwiſe brings great trouble. And when the armie ſhall by anie accident eyther by daye or night, be forced to come to battaile, he muſt diligentlie prouide, that the artilerie, the munition and victuals, maie be ſafelie garded. Likewiſe the diſcipline of Warre doth require at his handes in his owne perſon a certeine ſharpe behauiour, that thereby he maye winne obedience of his ſouldiers, which is of as greate importance, as anie thing els he can haue. Thus he ſhall verie well diſcharge his duty towards his Prince, as otherwiſe preſerue the ſafety of him and his. Alſo conſidering that in an armie there is a greate multitude of men, diuerſe in nation, differing in maners, not equall in yeares, in nature not altogether agreeing, wherefore they which for pride and inſolencie, wil not ſubmit themſelues to the martiall ordinaunces, maie bee conſtrayned through feare of puniſhment: it apperteyneth to ſuch, to prouide ſuch ſufficient garde, as anie repairing for reliefe, cariages, or otherwiſe eyther for horſemen or footmen, or other beaſtes which are continuallie in the hoaſt to be occupied. In this office the Lord Iohn Baptiſt Marques of Caſſano, the Commender of Saint Iames greatlie deſerued comendation being great mayſter of the campe in the two iourneys too Germanie in the time of the renowmed Emperour Charles the fift, againſt the Launcegraue, the Duke of Saxony, the countie Palatine, and diuers other Princes then in confederacie with the Almaines.
               
            
            
               
               Of the Treaſurers office.
               
                  THis offcer is of greate reputation, and hath to his charge committed, the payments of Colonelles, Captaynes, and all other officers, he ought in the beginning to receiue from the Generall, the true number, both of Horſe and footemen, within the campe or army, and by perfect computation, to make a booke how much is due euerie moneth to euerie Colonell Captaine, and other officers, as well for themſelues as other bands.
               He ought to make his proportion of paie well knowne to the Generall, whereby the Generall might accordinglie make his prouiſion, that money be not wanting to paie the ſouldiers.
               Hee ought to conferre with the mayſter of the victuals to ſee how hee is furniſhed, and accordinglie, to diſburſe vnto him that hee bee not deſtitute of prouiſion.
               Hee ought in like ſort to make alowaunce when neede ſhall bee, to the mayſter of the ordinaunce, for ſupplying his ſtore of munition, as hee ſhall ſee cauſe, by reaſon of the conſuming of the olde, or anie importaunt ſeruice to be done.
               Hee muſt conferre with the muſter mayſter to ſee how the bands be furniſhed; and what ſouldiers bee ſlaine, when and howe maine, and when newe ſupplie is made, deliuering paie to euerie Colonell, and Captaine accordinglie, keeping their warraunts for his diſcharge.
               He ought alſo at the pay day to conferre with the mayſter of the ordinaunce, and mayſter of the victuals too ſee

what is due vnto the Prince by the Colonell and Captaines for munition and victuals, and to deduct ſo much in their wages.
               This officer ought to bee a man of greate wiſdome, and well experienced in martiall affaires: becauſe hee is vſed in counſell, where hee is to ſpeake his opinion in all exploites of importaunce, although they concerne not directlie his office.
            
            
               Of the Mayſter of the ordinaunce.
               
                  THis officer being one of the chiefe officers, for that charge of all the artilerie and munition for the warres is committed vnto him, would be a man of learning and experience, whereby hee ſhall the better conceiue anie exploite, wherein a very good wit without experience ſhall be amazed.
               He ought to bee ſtudied in hiſtories, the better to conſider of ſuch ſtrategems as heeretofore by other noble Souldiers hath beene vſed, the ſundrie ſortes of ingennes too aſſault and defende, alſo howe too paſſe Bridges and Waters, with other inuentions for conueying of greate ordinaunce ouer marſhes.
               Hee ought to bee ſtudied in the mathameticalles, conſidering hee ſhall bee the better able to ſhoote at anie randons, to conueye mines vnder the earth, to anie curtayne, Bulwarke, or other place that ſhall be determined to be torne a peeces.
               Hee ought to fore-caſt what quantitie of ſhot, powder, &c. ſhall be requiſite for anie batterie or other exploite, and to ſet out in due proportion euerie particular fortification of Campe, towne, or fort, whether ordinaunce is to

be vſed without the knowledge of thoſe ſciences, cannot ſufficientlie be diſcharged, and that mayſter of ordinaunce through ignoraunce ſhall commit his truſt to the bould preſumptious perſons, whoſe want of experience will but ſhame themſelues, diſhonour him and ouerthrowe their enterpriſe.
               He ought at the receite of his charge to make an inuentorie of all ſuch things committed to his charge, as wel to render an account, as to conſider the want of euerie ſort of munition for the warres.
               To this officer apperteyneth to haue a Liuetenaunt, and certeyne clarkes in wages, who are to attend inferiour cauſes, rendering an account of all their dooings too the mayſter of the ordinaunce.
               It apperteyneth too the mayſter of the ordinaunce too prouide all ſuch neceſſaries as too the artilerie apperteyneth, as Wheeles, Exeltrees, Ladles, ſpunges, Bullets, Chayneſhot, Croſbarres, Corne-powder, Serpnetine powder, Mattockes, ſhouels crowes of yron, handaxes, engins for the mounting of ordinaunce, graundmaundes or gabions, little handbaſkets, ropes, and all other cart-ware.
               Item, to haue ſuch gouernours as are not onelie ſkillfull in the readie managing of their peeces, but alſo in the making of trunkes, bawles, arrowes, and all other ſortes of wilde fire, and for the continuall ſupplie of them, they ought to haue in a readineſſe greate ſtore of Sulphur, Salt-peter, Roſin, Calx viue, Lint ſeede Oyle, and comcom Lampe Oyle, Pitch, Tarre, Campher, Waxe, Tucia, Arſ-nicke, quicke ſiluer, and Aquauite: hereof to frame bals to burne in the water, creſſets, and torches, that ſtormes and winde cannot extinguiſh, murdering bullets to ſhoot out of morter peeces, and ſuch like.
               Item, euerie peece of ordinaunce to haue his conuenient number of horſe or Oxen too drawe, and carters too guide and keepe theſe beaſtes, and euerie peece to haue his

gunner or two, to attend thereon to charge, diſcharge, and mount the peece, alſo to wade, ram, cleanſe, ſcoure, and coole the peeces, when they are ouer heated, and for this purpoſe they ſhall haue in a readineſſe, ſpunges, vineger, and colde water, &c. For theſe gunners, there muſt be one maiſter gunner ouer all.
               Item, if anie band want pouder, or ſhotte, the maiſter of the ordinaunce vpon requeſt of the Captaine, is to giue order to his clarkes, to deliuer the ſame, and to take a bill of the Captaines for their diſcharge, the which at the paie daye muſt bee deliuered to the treaſurer, who is to ſtaie ſo much of the Captaine and his band.
               To this officer apperteineth to haue in a readineſſe certein boates made for the purpoſe with flat couers of ſawed planks whiche chained together maie make ſodeinlie a bridge to paſſe an armie ouer anie water, who muſt haue cables, and ankers to let fall in a violent ſtreame.
               The Maiſter of the ordinaunce is to haue attend vpon his charge a ſufficient band for the gard of his charge, and alſo pioners to make plaine the waie for his carriages, and to entrench the place in the camp, appointed by the Prouoſt for the atilerie.
               That there bee whéele-writes, carpenters, Copper-ſmiths, Bowyers, Fletchers, Maſons, and ſuch ſkilfull artizans, with all tooles neceſſarie and néedfull too preſerue, repaire, and make all things appertaining to artilerie.
               When the daie of ſeruice is, the Maiſter of the ordinaunce is too ſelect a place conuenient too plante his ordinaunce as well to noye the enimie, as alſo to be in ſuch ſort garded and fortified, as by no waies it be not ſurpriſed by the enimie.
               Alſo in the camp, towne, or fort, he onelie is to giue order for the planting of the artilerie, and fortifications of the flankers to the beſt aduantage, and alſo to forſée that the Maiſter gunner and other gunners doe their duties which

appertaines to their office, alſo in beſieging to haue no leſſe care in placing his Batterie for the cutting of the flankers before the aſſault be giuen.
               Alſo the Maiſter of the ordinance is to giue order for the accompliſhing of anie plat by mynes, and the Captaine of the mynes and Pioners, are to followe his direction. Finallie, this office is of great reputation in the field, and manie exploites dependeth therevpon: but for that he cannot well performe all himſelfe, he maie refer the ſmall to thoſe that ſerue vnder him, and to execute the great himſelfe.
            
            
               The office of the Lieuetenaunt or Generall of horſemen.
               
                  VNto this officer apperteineth too haue the charge of all the horſmen of the field, as of Hargulaters, Lighthorſmen, Lances, and men at armes, who immediatelie after entring into his charge, muſt view the election of the Captaines appointed, whether they bee meete for ſuch a charge, or appointed by fauour: and to make report vnto the Generall, whereby ſuch maie be appointed, as haue bene brought vp in militare profeſſion. He muſt kéepe a booke of all the bandes committed too his gouernement, with the names of the Captaines, and to peruſe whether the bands be furniſhed with horſe, armor, péeces, lances, and all ſuch neceſſaries, for that warlike profeſſion, as vnto ſuch apperteineth. He muſt giue great charge, to all the Captaines for the training of their bands, and to giue order in what ſort, in what place and time, they ſhall exerciſe their bands: and if default be either of furniture and otherwiſe, to make certificate to the Generall or high Marſhall, that

defaults maie be amended. He muſt diſpoſe euerie ſort of weapons in ſeuerall troupes by themſelues, who muſt appoint them in ſeruice, as hee ſhall be directed by the Generall, or Lord high marſhall. Hee is to appoint what bands ſhal watch and what vancorriers, prouiding that they which watch the night, may reſt the daie, and others to ſupplie their places, that conuenient reſt maie be had, wherby man and horſe maie the better continue in ſeruice. Alſo at the ſound of the trumpet in the morning hee ſhall with all the troupes of horſemen repaire to the Generalls Tent, to knowe his pleaſure, and then immediatelie to ſette forth the Generalls ſtanderd, cauſing all the troupes with their guydions to place themſelues in rankes after the Generall, that hee maie at euerie ſodaine, drawe foorth ſuch numbers that ſhall be required by the Marſhall, or Generall. Hee ought to giue warning to ſuch horſemen as ſhall watch the night enſuing, that they maie bee the better able to doe ſuche ſeruice as they ſhall bee enioined too doe.
               When the Lord Marſhall pretendeth to incampe, the Lieuetenant is to appoint a conuenient band to attend vpon his perſon, and to appoint a companie to take their reſt, which ſhall feede their horſes, till ſuch time as he ſhall deliuer them to the ſcowte Maiſter at night, who ſhall inioine them what to doe all the night after, and ſhall alſo deliuer them their watch word.
               And at ſuch time as they enter into the campe, the Lieuetenant ſhall cauſe thr horſemen to kéepe the field, till all the footmen be encamped, cauſing firſt one band to enter, and the reſt to keepe the field, and ſo orderlie to followe, placing themſelues as the laſt bands maie bee as wel lodged, as the firſt.
               He muſt giue order that the coziers come not out of the field, till the trumpet ſound to the watch, and ſentinel come from the campe to take their places in the field.
               Hee muſt appoint a ſufficient number of horſe to attend

vpon the forage maiſter, to gard and defend the foringers which muſt not returne out of the field til the forering maiſter with the reſt be returned to the camp, theſe muſt reſt all that night, and the next day.
               Hee is to appoint a reaſonable conuey of horſemen for the ſafe bringing of victuals to the campe, to ſee that no violence be offered vnto them, and ſo to order the chaunge of his horſe in theſe ſeuerall ſeruices, that ſome bee not ouerburdened, and others ſpared to much, but all things ſo ordered as none haue cauſe to repine.
               Hee is in the daie of battell to appoint the hargubeters the which are the firſt to ſeruice, the light horſemen Lancis, men at armes in ſeuerall troupes with ſuch diſtaunce as one maie reſcue an other, who with the Lorde marſhall is not onelie to giue his aduiſe, but in thoſe actions to bee a leader.
               He muſt haue regard that hee chargeth not in the front of his footmen, for being repulſed he maie be the ouerthrow of them, but let them charge vpon the flanke, and diligently attend if they can perceiue if anie breaking or opening of the ſide in the enimies battell be, and ſodeinly to charge that breach. For as horſemen are inferiours to well ordered footmen, ſo vpon euerie little occaſion they carie victorie with them.
               The offences committed by theſe regiments are to bee reformed by the Lord marſhall, who ſhould haue the Captaine of that band by whom offences are committed, to ſitte in iuſtice with him, with ſuch other of the ſaid band as maie be thought meet by the Lord marſhall, and the ſouldier condemned to be executed with the ſame weapons of the offenders, vſed by his owne company.
            
            
               
               The office of a Coronell.
               
                  THe valiant Coronell after his lawfull diſpatch from the Generall, and the obteining of his letters patents from the Generall, and monie for the conduction of that number of ſouldiers, appointed to his gouernement, hee muſt with all diligence chooſe and appoynt ſo manie Captaines as hée ſhall haue neede of, appointing iii.C. men for a company, which is a conuenient number: For if the number were diuided into ſmaller companies, the more money would be ſpent vpon the officers. And beſides, where many diuiſions are: there happens the ſooner diſcord and diſorder. Thoſe Captaines would bee choſen of yeares and good experience, whereby they may the better execute their office, as otherwiſe too obtaine the loue of the ſouldiers, graunting vnto them ſufficient authoritie for the executing of al things apperteining to their charge. He muſt then deliuer vnto them equally ſo much mony as he hath receiued for the companies by preſt, foreſeeing that it be ſufficient for ſuch an effect, that the Captaines and officers may not be hindered by extraordinarie expenſes, and the ſouldiers to haue better liking of the Coronell, as otherwiſe to winne them to obedience, which is moſt cōuenient for men of yt calling. He muſt haue ſpeciall regard, that the Lords or principall officers, whoſe minds are addicted to auarice by their vnſatiable deſire of gaine, the good ſouldier be not anie waies hindered of his paie, which would do ſo much hurt to his good nature, without whom the Coronell can auaile little or nothing: and that he giue ſtraight charge that ſuch money as they receiue be laied out and ſpent with aduiſement and diſcretion. Hee muſt chooſe a Liuetenant of good experience, qualities, and behauiour, that hée maie the better attend on the charge of his owne companie: and beſides, too haue care of all the

bands apperteining to the Coronell. Then muſt he chooſe an enſigne bearer, who muſt be a worthy ſouldier, a Gentleman of noble parentage, as otherwiſe gentle of behauior, who of all the reſt of the officers muſt be ſuperior. Alſo he muſt chooſe the Sergeants, the maſters of the ſquares, droms and other officers, who muſt be of honeſt behauior and of great experience in their offices. He muſt appoint to his armed pikes his moſt valiant ſouldiers, who muſt bee gentlie vſed, ſhewing vnto them a chéerfull and good countenance, which to them is moſt acceptable. Then muſt he chuſe a ſergeant maior who muſt bée a tried ſouldier and of great experience, and one who hath executed and profeſſeth the office: There belongeth to his office great aduertiſement, as to alter or remoue the armie, as ſometimes the ſtraightnes of time doth require, ſometimes the diſcommoditie of the place doth inforce, ſometimes the order in which the enimie is placed doth compell, yea and ſomtime ſome practiſe of his owne, or ſome deuiſe of his Coronell doth put into his head, whervpon great aduiſement would be taken, minding not further to ſpeake of it, but to refer it vntill I come vnto his owne office, where I will more amplie ſpeake of it. There muſt by him be appointed, a furrior or harbinger, who ſhall without rewards or corruption lodge the whole companie of the Coronell, vſing his office honeſtlie and indifferentlie, without pleaſing of anie particular man. He muſt appoynt a generall Drum, which ſhall take care of the reſt of the Drums, who muſt be authoriſed to command the reſt of the Drums, hauing a care that they vſe obedience: and that euerie one do his part that belongeth to his office, as in ſounding the march, a call, the charge, the batteile, the retrait, &c. Hee ought to prouide himſelf the beſt munition, fit for a coronels charge, as corſelets, pikes, caleuers, murrians, holberds, bils, gon-pouder, lead, match, and of al manner of victuals, the which ſhall be deliuered by the Sergeant maior. He muſt alſo examin the election yt the Captaines haue made, & of al their

officers throughout the companies, and if they be ſuch as ought to be, or not much worie, he may allow them and not otherwiſe. And it is to be vnderſtood that theſe and the like aduertiſements do make to appeare the very inſight of the conductor, whereas not being narrowlie looked vnto, the contrarie happens: It ſéemes not out of purpoſe that euery company haue 12. hargubuſiers too ſerue on horſeback, who being honeſt men, may do great ſeruice both on foot and horſ back, as often hath ben ſéene, as well in carefull following. kéeping or recouering of paſſages, as for the diſcouering the watch word of the enimies, and to caſt downe and leuell places the eaſier to make roods to diſcouer in manner of lighthorſmen: and for to conclude, following theſe precepts by exerciſing thy ſouldiers often, ſhall bring them ſoone to experience the better to bée guided. He muſt procure that his officers diligently performe his commiſſions, and that faithfullie they make relation of euery particular thing that he may be enformed of all, and in eſpeciall that happens in wards, as well by daie as by night: for they going in circuite as apertaines vnto them, may wel perceiue what chanceth of any great importance. He ought carefullie and courteouſlie to exhibite to the generall Captaine great reuerence to honor him, obey him and faithfully counſel him: and for the performance of this, he muſt refuſe no trauaile, ſith that taking paines in cauſes of ſuch importance is very méet for men of his calling an office: for gaines and delicate pleaſures rather appertein
                     •
                   to women or thoſe that more eſtéeme riches then vertue, and more accounpt of the body, then the ſoule.
            
            
               Of the office of the great Sergeant or Sergeant maior.
               INaſmuch as good order is neceſſarie in all humane actions, the waightie office of the Sergeant maior, muſt néeds be exellent and of great importance as vnto whoſe charge and authoritie apperteineth, not only to gouern,

but alſo to bring into forme, and to execute the greateſt part of the chiefeſt affaires which require any ſpeciall ſeruice in the army. Wherefore it behoueth him to haue 4. expert and worthy ſoldiers, whoſe aide at al times he muſt vſe, which he muſt erect as principall Corporals, who in his abſence are to ſucceed him both in office and authoritie. He muſt after he hath receiued his charge of his Lord and Generall vſe al diligence and warineſſe, not onely to mainteine it, but alſo to increaſe it in the minds of ye Captaines and other head officers, as alſo of ye common ſouldiers, in whatſoeuer apperteineth to his charge, to the intent, that both thoſe which of themſelues knowe their duetie, and of other which are bound to their indeauour to him wards: he maie haue that ready obedience ſhewed him that is required, for if that be denied him, no diligence that he can vſe, may auaile any iot to giue any hope of good ſucceſſe in his great office, as by many examples heeretofo
                     •
                  e hath bene ſhewed. It is neceſſary for him that is in this office, to forecaſt with himſelfe, to conſider and foreſée all chaunces before they happen, and to foretell euery one what he hath to doe, for that very often he ſhall be taken at vnwares, and the time that he hath for the diſpatch of his buſineſſe is very ſhort, howbeit the ſtraightneſſe of time muſt no whit appall them, or any waies hinder him from executing his buſineſſe wiſelie and readilie, as hauing his wits at commaundement euen in this brunt, otherwiſe if he haue not before caſt in his owne minde, and inſtructed others how to behaue themſelues, he cannot looke for any proſperous ende of his buſineſſe, ſéeing at the very inſtant when they are to ioyne with the enimies, there can be no great heed giuen vnto that which hee commaundeth, for that their eares wil be otherwiſe occupied, and full of rumours, hurliburlies,To vnderſtand the number of weapons as well as of men. and confuſion, which by their noyſe will riſe on the ſodeine. Moreouer, it behooueth him to know to how many armed pikes and to how many holbards he hath to giue charge, and to how many vnarmed of both ſorts: beſides,

to haue many hargubuſeires on foot, and how many on horſebacke, and to be ſhort, hee muſt knowe the whole number of able ſouldiers he can make, to the end when occaſion ſhall be, he may the readier place in the voward or rereward ſome in one wing, and ſome in another to defend the carriage, or to inuiron the enimie, him to guide his band, and the reſt to like offices, and he muſt commaund the Captaines, that they repaire with their companies when any rumour is made, to the place where the artilery and the munition is kept, charging them that they come neither ſtraieng in ſunder nor vpon heapes (as in like caſes men vſe with great diſorder, but to bee carefull to keepe themſelues with their enſignes, that thereby they may bee in a readineſſe too giue a valiaunt onſet in places where moſt neede ſhallbe. For it is often ſéene that the munition of the artilerie is very hotlie aſſalted by the enimies, the more to diſcipate and deceiue the force of the army, and to breake in vpon them with more eaſe after they come to the place aforeſaid, of the munition. Euery band with the enſigne muſt attend to follow the Sergeant Maior, or the Corporals, who ſhall in ſilent manner, and with all obedience, follow the appointment of the Sergeant Maior, or his Corporals, placing their companies in ſuch order as by them ſhall be thought good, hauing regard that the moſt valiant and beſt armed pikes be alwaies appoynted in the fronts, and rereward, ſo many rankes as may impale the bils and enſignes in the wings, whereof the battaile will come, called the quadrant of people and ground,Of the battell quadrant of people and grounds. and not that of people: this battaile is of great force to ſhoulder and beate downe the enimie, for that there are more ſouldiers placed in ranked then are in any other forme, and yet they occupie a leſſe plat. The ſhot muſt bee placed as ſleeues or wings to the battaile, the which muſt flanke the battaile, as a curteine doth a fort. He hath to cauſe them dayly to remoue and exerciſe themſelues, to the end when neede requireth, neither the wings ſhould be diſſolued by

                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
                  
and faire ſpeach as much as hee maie, and that hee indeauour to guide them by a ſigne, rather then by wordes: who in this the Lorde Chappinuittello deſerued great praiſe. If vpon any alarum a ſodayne noyſe or rumour be raiſed whereby he ſhal haue chauſe to gather his armie together in the night time, hee muſt ſtrſt commaund all the Captaines, that their Quarries and their Creſſets being light euery one by it ſelfe, the Captaines muſt bring their companies in troupe, placing their Shot in the Uoward and Rereward, the Pikes and Billes next the Enſignes into the maket place, and ſo conueied to any place of ſeruice whereas neede ſhall require, euery one beſturring him in ſuch ſort, that in a moment as it were, and out of hand they may bee armed and readie, in that place to bee receiued of the Sergeant Generall,Of a baltell for the night the Moone. when of him they muſt be ordered in battaile, the which for the night is the Battaile called the halfe Moone, who muſt within the compaſſe of the two hornes place all the Enſigne-bearers with their Enſignes in their handes, then behinde them the armed Holbards, next vnto theſe the vnarmed Pikes, and without the greate Circle betwéene both the Hornes of the Moone, muſt bee placed the the armed Pikes, and the one halfe of the Sergeants and Liuetenaunts muſt attend on this greate charge without, but the reſt of the Captaines with the Sergeant Generall muſt attend on the companie of armed Pikes, and moſt of the Drummes and the Lights muſt be in the voyde ſpace betweene both the hornes and before the Enſignes, where ſitting to giue hearing of the Imbaſſage and Meſſengers which come and goe in ſuch caſes, they muſt deliberate and take counſayle what is beſt to bee done. The enteraunce of this place muſt bee turned to the moſt ſafetie that the ſituation of the place ſhall offer. Beſides, they may for the ſurer, place ſome part of the Artillery of the field, nowe the Hargubuſiers muſt be beſtowed by the Sergeant Maior, ſo farre diſtaunt from the Square in ſo many Troupes,

and ſo many formes as the condition of the place ſhall require, which maie ſoone be perceiued by the expert, thereby to fortifie the maine battaile, prouided with al, that euerie companie of hargubuſers thus placed, haue his cōpanie of officers appointed ouer them, with their droms, as if be néedful with their lights that they may be readie and ſeruiceable in euerie chaunce that may befall, & in my iudgement, in theſe ſkirmiſhes by night neither meſure of Geometrie, nor the nūbers of Arethmetike are ſo neceſſarie as the diligence of the valiant and diſcréet captaines is expedient, who haue to ſtir vp the minds of their companies, remēbring alwaies their obedience vdto the greate Sergeant, whoſe will they are onelie to execute. I haue the rather ſet downe this ſquare, for that it hath bene oftentimes well ordered of manie valiant captaines of Italie, and eſpeciall of the L. Alexander Vitellie. Concerning the other formes of battailes which are to be vſed in the night, I minde to omit thinking this to be ſufficient, and eaſie to be ordered and beſides not commonly knowen, except a battaile repreſenting full croſſe, to which there are ſo good rules that they may ſerue any number by day or night to be ordered, and I the rather doe it, becauſe I ſpeake not ſufficiently in their places in the ſecond book, yet as well as I can, not ſo well as would, ioining to them certain others, to the end, that if in nothing els I haue pleaſured the valiant & expert, yet at the leaſt the proportions of theſe formes maie giue them ſome ſmall helpe. Then when as vpon any doubt the armie ſhal remoue to march,Of ordering this armie in the march. he ſhal place ye armed pikes & vnarmed with their bils & enſignes, in ſuch ſort, that when néede ſhal be to double the ranks to make the armie greater, and yet the armie maie kéepe his former proportions: that is to ſaie, that the voward & rereward deuide betwéene themſelues al the armed corſlets and vnarmed pikes, ſo that the flankes in long wiſe be not vnarmed.

So ſhal it come co paſſe that the ſhort weapons ſhal gather together, & in the midſt of them the enſignes. The vnarmed pikes are not to be reiected in the plaine field ſeing it is verie hard, and peraduenture not altogether m
                     ••
                  t that any ſhould be armed pikemen, as it is trulie ſaid, they with the armed are the whole ſtrength of the footmen, ſo the hargubuſers muſt onely ſerue to flanke to eaſe the defences, to lie in ambuſhment, to ſkirmiſh, to approch, and in all other functions, and at a word, to incumber the enimie, either in defending the enimie, or to aſſalt any fort. He muſt haue a care in the making of this battaile quadrant, the which of all other I holde ye beſt that for Corporals or Sergeants do perfectly vnderſtand, how many ranks are in a companie, aduertiſing them with all, that euery companie be agréeable together in the number of the ranks, which be of many called maniples.Of 
                        〈…〉
                     . Then muſt he cauſe thē to march one hard after another, ſeing euery cōpanie guided by their officers, and being come to the place to contain them of eaſe, commaund the firſt companie to march from the reſt, to make ſpace, willing the ſecond to ioine vnto the firſt as a flanke, then the third likewiſe vnto the ſecond and the fourth to the third, and ſo from hand to hand. Hée ſhal frame a valiant battaile to encounter the enimie howbeit it is very hard to kéepe a iuſt in order of ſo many men in ranke, and of ſo many rankes as the rule of the Theorikes oth doth teach, for that very often the companies are vnlike, either in nūber or weapons then marching thus together on this order, hee muſt commaund that all the enſignes vnder one Coronell march together, not mingling themſelues with the enſignes of other Coronels Now the cōpanies being thus doubled & the battailes ingroſed, as is ſaid before, euery enſigne may ſeeke out his owne band, & ſtand with it both for ye greater encouragmēt of them, & the more ſafety to himſelf but if they return to march at length euery enſign

ſhall place himſelfe amongſt the reſt as his lot fals out, the hargubuſires ſeuered from the battaile muſt march half of thē by the Uoward, & the other halfe by ye Rereward, either a little towards the right hand or towards the left, either as the commoditie of ye place, or doubt of any danger ſhall require. Then doubting the rankes of theſe hargubuſires, as much as ſhall be néedefull, they muſt be ingroſſed, & then vex is carefully placed for the flanking of ye main battail, vnderſtanding with all, that it behoueth very much aſwell theſe two wings of hargubuſires, with the voward & rereward of the chief battaile, & the ordinance ſhould be cōmitted to the guide of worthie Captains, of officers of credit, & of expert ſouldiers, yt they may be able to help in all extremities, and to reſolue thēſelues in any doubt, knowing what is to be done without waiting for the counſaile of others, in cauſe where ſuch coūſail is neither preſent nor at hand.Of a battaile called 
                        〈…〉
                      ſaw or ſheeres. The bodie of the ſquare like a wedge muſt haue in the firſt rank one man, in the ſecond thrée men, in the third fiue men, ſo till euerie ranke increaſing by two ſouldieiers, which rule is very perfect, & kéepeth iuſt in proceeding to infinite numbers, & of two wedges ioined together, a battaile may be well called the ſhéeres, & thrée or foure ioined together a battaile called ye ſaw,Of a batail for the night called a croſſe. with manie others, the which were much vſed amongſt the Romans and other nations, the battaile in full forme of a croſſe, hauing foure fronts containing all ſorts of weapons belonging to footemen is verie profitable, as may be vnderſtood by the rules of the Theoriks, as otherwiſe in the proper place of the battail appeareth in the ſecond-booke. And although all theſe battailes be not in vſe, yet all theſe formes ſeeme verie profitable if they might be ordred and diſpoſed in place conuenient, howbeit all are not very 
                     〈◊〉
                   to march: and as in my iudgement it is not very eaſie to ſhewe by wordes the manner that muſt bee kept in giuing the aſſault to the enimies,

either by day or by night, conſidering that a man hath alwayes to applie himſelfe to the warlike policies and deuiſes of his Lord that gouerneth him. For it hath béen often ſéen that the onſet hath béen giuen by the coriers on horſebacke, manie times by ambuſhes well placed in couert hauing aduantage of ſuch as lie in ſcowt, who wait their time to aſſail them at vnawares, when they may moſt endamage them. I might here ſpeak alſo (as appertaining to the Sergeants office) of the prouiding the principall munition, the armour and victuals & other things neceſſarie for the armie, and the beſtowing of them: beſides that, hée hath a part in the buſineſſe which belongs to the great maſter of the camp, as to place the wards within the camp, and to appoint the watch worde by which the ſame wardes are gouerned and the whole campe. I might ſpeak of theſe things if they were to bee done alwaies after one ſort, or had one ordinarie manner. But for that they bee variable according to the nature and diſpoſition of him that gouerneth, and very often, as place and time ſhal require, I will omit them.How the great Sergeants charge ſhould bee giuen him in writing. It may ſuffice to ſhew in part what appertaineth to the office, that thereby he may the redilier diſpatch what ſhall bee appointed of his Lorde. Thoſe things which ſhall bee giuen him in charge of anie importance, ſhalbe giuen him in writing, reſeruing beſides a copie thereof, that if he either miſſe in his obedience, or otherwiſe by his default anie miſchance ſhall happen in matters of waight, he may not ſay but that hee was forewarned, that whatſoeuer is to be done by them may be done in their courſe and order: thereby to auoyde all brawles and iarres which myght happen amongeſt Officers euerie man knowing what appertaineth to his charge. When the face of the Battaile, muſt bée turned, hee muſte giue warning that euerie manne turne his face, and not his Weapons, that there doe no noiſe ariſe in ſuch caſes. And

this may be done beſt and moſt readilie, if euerie ſouldier kéepe the point of his weapon in his hande,How ſouldiers ſhould behaue themſelues the battell is turned. which doth giue a glorious ſhew, and beſides that doth make them readie to lay on their ſhoulders againe, if they haue cauſe to march againe at length▪ and he ſhall giue order whē the army remouing, do come to any ſtraight paſſage or other diſcommodious place which may break their order, that euerie ranke doe paſſe after another, and when they he beyond ye ſtraight, that then they place them in order againe, which being obſerued in euerie rank, they may preſently be in ſome order, as they were before the readier to be brought to the formes & ſquares before rehearſed. And when anie charge or commandement is to be giuen, ſee it ſet and ordeined in the Rereward, and when there is nothing to bee done, hee ſhall raiſe the armie, Hée ſhal likewiſe commaund that euerie Enſigne march with his owne companie to the end when they come to be incamped, they may the eaſiliar be brought to their lodging appointed for them.
            
            
               Of the electing and office of the foure Corporals of the fields.
               GReat regard woulde be had to the chooſing of theſe, as well for their calling, yeares and valiantneſſe, as otherwiſe for their experience, lenitie, and wiſedome. Whereby theſe Warlike affaires may be the readier and ſooner executed, otherwiſe it may be preiudiciall to the whole Armie. Theſe be vnder the Sergeant generall to appoint, ſet, order, and make battaile and battailes, and and to guide euerie particular perſonne therein, according to their degree and office, and as the neceſſitie of the ſame ſhall require, to inſtruct and reforme, whoſe commaundementes all Captaines and Souldiers with their Officers muſt obeie. But in march,

approch, camizado, ſkirmiſh, retraite, watch, warde, or what other ſeruice by them ſhal be commanded, whoſe authoritie likewiſe is ſuch, as if any reſiſt, they ſhall by the Prouoſt matiall be puniſhed as rebels, of what calling or degrée ſoeuer they be. Two of theſe are appointed to the placing and ordering of ſhot, and the other two for the embatteling of the pikes and bile, who according to their worthineſſe, if death happeneth, are to ſucceed the great Sergeant or Sergeant maior.
            
            
               Of the warlike counſell and their oathes.
               SUch muſt by the Generall of the armie be appointed and choſen twelue honeſt, wiſe, & graue men, the which ſaide twelue he ſhall appoint to bee his iudges and determiners in all martiall diſcipline and correction. His choiſe is to bee made of Captaines or otherwiſe at his pleaſure, ſo hee bee of ſtaied iudgement and of honeſt ſobrietie The which ſaid iudges being is elected and choſen ſhall haue their wages accordingly appointed them, who except in great extremitie ſhall bee watch frée. Theſe ſhall ſweare and proteſt ſolemnitie by the almightie God vnto the ſaide Generall, that they will ſerue the Prince by the moneth in that p
                     ••••
                   which they are choſen and called to, that they wil ſeriuſly, faithful, obedient, and dutiful vnto the Generall in all néedfull and lawfull affaires, and at al times vprightly & indifferently to iudge all cauſes comming before them, & to bée obedient to the commandements of the Generall ſtanding with equitie and the lawes of the fielde, that they will to the vttermoſt power indeuour them ſelues to giue counſaile and aduiſe to ſee Generall to the well-fare and commoditie of the Prince and his ſubiects, and iuſtly to iudge the rich as

the póore not regarding friendſhip, kindred, or any other corrupting cauſe which may lead affection to the hinderance of Iuſtice: but to their knowledge to miniſter equitie according to the tenour of the lawes, as they wil that God helpe them at the laſt & dreadful day of iudgement. Alſo that in muſtering they doe diligently foreſée to their vttermoſt power that the prince their maiſter be not deceiued in giuing double paie to ſuch as are not worthie, and that they ſhall alſo deliuer the names of the ſouldiers vnto the Generall as they muſtered them with a note of their aloweance and wages vnder their hands and ſeales faithfully without anie deceipt.
            
            
               Of the othes that euerie officer ought to take, of what Office ſo euer he be. Of the Pretor,
               THe Pretor ſhall take his oath giuen him by the Generall, who ſhall ſweare by almightie God that whatſoeuer he ſhall iudge, ordaine, or determine in court, or out of court, that he ſhall kéepe it cloſe and ſecret to his liues end, and that he ſhall bee true and iuſt to the Lords, and that he ſhall execute iuſtice to his vttermoſt power, and that he ſhall not during the warres take anie gift of any man for any matter in controuerſie to be tried before him, but ſhall vſe indifferent iuſtice to all men, without reſpect of perſons friendſhip or malice, as God ſhal help him at the dredfull daie of iudgement.
            
            
               Of the Prouoſt Martiall.
               HIs oath is likewiſe giuen by the Generall, that theſe points whereof doe conſiſt herein, that hée ſhall ſée all faultes duelie and according to the lawes puniſhed in al offenders, without regard or reſpectt of perſons.
               
                  That hée ſhall in the market place ſet vp a paire of gallowes both for the terrour of the wicked, as for execution vpon them that offend the lawes. Alſo that he ſhall ſet on all victuals brought to the market a reaſonable price, that the ſeller and the buier may reaſonably liue by it. And that he exact nothing beyond his duetie of anie man, that he neither vſe extortion or briberie, that hee let no priſoner taken of the enemie or offendour otherwiſe to his witting eſcape, with other Articles conteined in his office, at the diſcretion of ye Generall, the which he muſt bée ſworne vnto.
            
            
               Of the maſter of the watch.
               HIS oath is to be true and iuſt in his office, and nightly to attende vpon the Generall to receiue the watch word, the which at the ſetting of the watch, hee ſhall ſecretly deliuer vnto the Captaines. Hée ſhall diuers times proue the watch, as well to ſee if they ſleepe not, and ſuch as hee findeth in fault to accuſe them to the higher officers, who ought to appoint their puniſhment according to the tenour of the Articles: otherwiſe appertaineth vnto his office at the diſcretion of the Generall of the armie.
            
            
               Of the chiefe Purueiour of the victuals.
               HIS oath is to bee true and iuſt in his office, and not to bee ſlacke anie time in procuring in his office good, fit, and wholeſome victualles, as well for thoſe ſouldiers in extraordinarie, as for thoſe which are in ordinary ſeruice preſt, not to werie or driue away from the victualing of ye Campe anie

victualer by giuing him a more or leſſe ſumme then they are wel worthie, to procure as many to ſerue the campe with good victuals as he can, both in giuing of them good and faire language: as alſo now and then to giue them ſome piece of money to encourage the ſaide victuallers to take paines with the like. And that hee ſhall with diligence faythfully ſhun all things that ſhall anie wayes be vnprofitable vnto the Prince and the ſouldiers. And to deuiſe as farre as his wit and iudgement will ſerue him to profit his Lord and Maiſter and his ſouldiers, as well for wholeſome victuals, béere and wine, for their bodies, as for good ſwéet and wholeſome meate for their horſes, as well for ſuch as ſerue in the fielde, as ſuch as trauaile & worke in the wagon, cart, or otherwiſe, which followe for the reliefe of the campe, and that of all theſe their doings, he kéepe a true & perfect booke of accountes, and reckonings for the Generall, when and as often as it ſhall pleaſe him to call for it, that the reſt of the counſell may be priuie to it, if ſo it ſhall bee thought good of the Generall of the fielde, for the better tryall of all his dealings.
            
            
               Of the fire Maiſter.
               HIs oth is, to be true and iuſt in his office, & that without ſpeciall commaundement of the Generall, not to aduenture to ſet anie thing on fire, vnleſſe that the enemie bée encountred withall, and then without delay all mattters laide aparte to annoy the enemie by his ſkill what hee may. And that hée doe not burne or waſte anie cornehouſes, or other thing that maye anie waies profite the campe, and that to his knowledge. Hée ſhall not hurt or hinder any poore creature, or aged perſon that he may well ſpare, but extend mercie and pitie on them.
            
            
               
               Of the Clarke or Notarie of the Court.
               
                  THe Notarie ſhal be ſworne before the xii. Iudges of the Court, that he ſhall trulie & without fraude exerciſe his office, not adding or diminiſhing, for friendſhip, malice, or bribery, any thing deliuered to him in Court, or els where, to the hinderance of equitie and iuſtice. And that he preciſely kéepe vndefaced and vncanceled all the recordes, & the whole actes & dealings of all men hanging in the Court, whether they be tried or vntried in controuerſie & not determined, and that he kéepe & conceale all things that he heareth in the court, either ſaid or done, as ended & determined, ſecrete & cloſe to his liues end, and if he doe otherwiſe, he ſhall haue the lawe prouided for ſuch an offender.
            
            
               Of the common crier of the Court.
               
                  HEe ſhall take the like oth before the Iudge, to doe trulie and faithfully in his office at all times and places as the Iudge ſhal command him, ſo that through his diligence there bée no fault found in him at the court day, & that hee kéepe cloſe and ſecret all ſuch matters as he ſhall heare handled by the Iudges vntill his liues end, as God helpe him.
            
            
               Certeine neceſſarie points concerning the Captaines charge.
               THe noble cuſtome of Engliſh warriours is to chooſe & appoint to the leading of men,Of electing and chooſing of Captaines. ſuch Captaines as bée circumſpect, ſkilfull, & expert in the noble art of martiall affaires: alſo hardie, & valiant of courage, painfull & ingenious: liberall in rewarding: iuſt in ſeruice to their powers, aboue all thinges on the earth, ouer mindfull to render a iuſt account of that charge, daily regarding that their numbers bee furniſhed with men, armour,

weapons, and munitions to them apperteining, with all other things to them néedfull to be vſed, diſtributed in times conuenient: oft calling foorth their numbers to muſter, march, and traine the ſame in all ſuch neceſſarie points of warre, as to ſuch apperteineth. They may not ſuffer any to continue and ſpend their time in idleneſſe, leauing their armour, weapons, and other furniture, vnreadie to ſeruice at néede, but giue commaundement vnto their officers in their abſence, circumſpectly to looke vnto the ſame. They may not ſuffer their ſouldiers to liue in too much libertie, neither to be outragious as ſome haue done in other countries in times paſt, as in whoorehunting, dronkenneſſe, common ſwearing, quarrelling, fighting, defrauding, or any other thing contrarie to the lawes of God and our Prince, and the order of the field: but vpon approuing any ſuch offence, ſhall reforme, correct, and amend the ſame immediatly. Good Captaines will haue ſpeciall regard that ſuch prouiſion be made for his ſouldiers in due time as vnto their numbers ſhall be néedfull and neceſſarie,How Captaines ought to haue great regard to prouide all things for their numbers. as wel for victuals as for armour, and munitions, the ſame to be diſcretly vſed and in due time, by vitlers appointed, and to be diſtributed to their ſouldiers, to pay their wages truly, alſo to ſée the vitlers and other artificers lending vnto ſoldiers vpon their credit at néed, vntill the pay day to be ſatiſfied & paied: alſo if any of their ſouldiers be taken priſoners, be raunſomed home in due time, that their bands be not long vnfurniſhed of men to the hinderance of ſeruice. Captaines haue oft times committed to their charge and leading, ſoldiers of great honeſtie, ſubſtance, & credit, ſo haue they others of ſmall regard, both ignorant and wilfull, whom through their worthy and prudent gouernment may be ſo trained and inſtructed by word and déed, courteouſly gratifying the good, and ſharply correcting the euill, that in ſhort time all be brought to one ciuilitie of ſeruice.
            
            
               
               The Captaines charge.
               
                  CAptaines haue alſo oftentimes certeine exploits and points of ſeruice committed vnto them, wherein they muſt be very ſecret, vſing therein great diſcretion & knowledge,Of ſecre
                        •
                     
                     
                     
                        •••
                      to be vſed in ſeruice. as occaſion of ſeruice ſhall require, as to vſe to cownuoie, camiſado, ambuſh, eſkermiſh, approch, aſſault, retraite, &c. The which ſometimes requireth counſaile of the ſkilfull and expert ſouldiers, whoſe opinion they will diligently obſerue and learne, gratifieng and rewarding according to the value of their counſaile: ſo ſhal they ſometime proue & circumſpectly trie by fained pretenſes, ſaying: they mind exploits, & wil trauaile to ſome place, nothing pretending the ſame, but finding ſuch raſh buſy bodies & vnſecret to counſaile, preſuming without knowledge or experience, afterward reuealing the ſame, will trie the truth & puniſh the offenders, as to their demerits is méet.The regard of Captaines in choſing their officers. Captains muſt be verie circumſpect in chooſing of ſouldiers to their officers of their bands, placing auncient, trauailed and ſkilful men, to charge according to their experiences, as lieuetenants, enſigne-berers, ſergeants of bands, and other whoſe duties are hereafter mentioned. Many other noble points vnto good captaines do apperteine, the which for tediouſneſſe in this I omit, wiſhing that ſuch be choſen, painful in trauaile, circumſpect in wit, hardie of courage, liberall of hart in rewarding of ſeruice. Thus truſting this briefe remembrance may ſignifie vnto the noble and expert, alſo to the vnperfect auaileable.
            
            
               Certeine points to the Lieuetenants charge.
               
                  LIeuetenants of euery band ought to be men of great experience and ripeneſſe of ſeruice, whoſe authoritie in ye abſence of the capteine extendeth to examine, trie, reforme, correct & amend any offence within the band cōmitted, & alſo day

and night to bring the companie with the enſigne to the place of aſſemblie, there in order, traine and exerciſe the ſame, as to the neceſſitie of ſeruice doth apperteine, and béeing commaunded by the higher powers to march towards the enimies, muſt encounter and fight with the ſame, as if the Captaine were in preſence, who vpon impediment muſt ſometimes bée abſent, otherwiſe to the Liuetenants charge apperteineth to watch, warde, approch, conduct, aduance againſt the enimie, & to encounter, animate, comfort, and alſo to encourage the companies by word and déede, and as néede ſerueth to retire, continually mainteyning ſkirmiſh vntill he haue recouered ſome place of ſafegard.
            
            
               The Enſigne bearers charge.
               
                  THe Enſigne bearer muſt be a man ſkilfull, hardie, and couragious, of able courage to aduance & beare dp the Enſigne, in all extremities ſecret, ſilent & zelous, able often to comfort, animate, & encourage the companie to take in hand and mainteine ſuch enterpriſes as they are appointed vnto, neuer to retire, but when of noble pollicie the higher officers commaund the ſame, at ſuch time as the Enſigne is committed vnto him, he muſt vowe and profeſſe the ſame rather to be his winding ſhéete, and therein to looſe his life, then through his defalt looſe the ſame, of his diſcretion & authoritie, eſpying the companie, trauell, or follow enimies to their diſcommoditie and peril, looſing the winde, hill, or ground of aduantage, diſordering the araie, may ſtand ſtill and commaund the drums & fifes to ſtand & ſound the retraite, that the companie may reſort & come to the enſigne & order the aray by aduantage of the ground, rather then abide the comming of the enimie, or follow as is aforeſaid in time of approch, aſſault,

or entering, imbrech he with his enſigne aduaunceth with the formoſt, giuing occaſion that ſouldiers the rather follow the ſame. Other points to his charge apperteineth, which ſhalbe hereafter more amplie declared.
            
            
               Of the Sergeant of the bands charge.
               
                  SVch ought to be men ſober, diſcret, and ſkilfull in the dutie of a ſouldier, able to bring the companie in order of aray, as to the ground and number ſhall be méet and conuenient, if the ſame be broken, immediatly place the ſame in order againe, alwaies readie day and night to ſeruice by the Captaine or by his Lieutenant commaunded oft times to inſtruct the companie, to march, traine, and trauaile as well by ſignes from him framed, as otherwiſe by wordes ſpoken, he muſt haue very great regard to the companie, to ſée that their armour and weapons be in a readineſſe alwaies to ſeruice. None may reſiſt his authoritie, but obſerue as the Captaine in perſon: he may not heare any mutenous or rebellious wordes among the companie, but immediatlie reueale the ſame, that ſpéedie reformation may be had, and faults amended.
            
            
               The Corporals charge.
               
                  SUch muſt be choſen to euery hundred & two honeſt & ſkilful ſouldiers, either of them leading ſouldiers, of whoſe weapons they haue ſkill, & muſt often call foorth their numbers, view their furniture, that nothing be lacking to thē apperteining in time of ſeruice. Alſo if any be ſicke, hurt, or abſent, by way of impriſonment or death: immediatlie

they ought to make report of the ſame, and finding any cauſe worthie of relation, they muſt ſpare for no mā to report the truth to the Sergeant from him the Lieuetenant, ſo to the Captaine, and further vnto the higher powers if néede ſhall require. Thus ſhall dignitie of offices be maintained, and faultes amended to the comfort of the reſt.
            
            
               The Diſners charge.
               
                  THe Diſners charge: foure ſuch of the ſkilfulleſt ſouldiers béeing truſtie and honeſt men muſt vnder the gouernaunce of the other officers bee appointed to euerie hundred, to diuers pointes of neceſſaries auaileable, two of them to haue charge of the ſhot, the other two of the pikes. The band béeing deuided into 4. parts, they muſt haue to traine 24. a péece, the which 24. they are to traine and exerciſe according to their experience. Alſo they muſt be lodged in the middeſt of their charge, wherby when any ſecret ſeruice is to bée done, they may cal numbers without the drum. They be alſo a great reliefe in watch and ward.
            
            
               The drummes and fiftes charge.
               SVch muſt be choſen of able ſort and perſonage, ſecrete, and ingenious, ſkilful in the ſounds and vſing of their inſtrumentes, which warneth as the mouth of a man to all intentes of ſeruice, diligent in times conuenient to inſtruct ſouldiers in the ſame, that none by ignoraunce neglect their duties. Such be oftentimes ſent on meſſages, importing charge, which of neceſſitie require languages, ſomtimes to ſummon or commaund the enimies to render, ſometimes carrie raunſomes or redéeme, conduct priſoners. Manie other thinges, to them doe apperteine, as héereafter ſhall appeare.
            
            
               
               The Surgeons charge.
               
                  NEedefull it is that euerie companie haue one Surgeon, a man honeſt, ſober, and of good counſaile, ſkilfull in that ſcience, able to heale and cure all kindes of ſores, woundes, and griefes, to take a pellet out of the fleſh and bone, and to flake the fire of the ſame, and that hée haue all his tooles and inſtrumentes, with other neceſſarie ſtuffe, as oyles, balmes, ſalues, ſtepres, roulers, boulſters, ſplenters, and al other things to the ſcience belonging, which alſo ought to haue courage for his patient and allowed ſtuffe. He ſhall readily employ his induſtrie vppon the ſore and wounded, not intermedling with others to his owne charge noyſome, ſuch bée placed with the enſigne, and lodged néere to the Captaine, and weare their baldricks in time of fight, which by lawe of the field is their charter.
            
            
               The office of the Clarke of a Band.
               
                  A Clarke of a Band would bée a man choſen of a diſcréete behauiour, ſuch a one as hath the vſe of his penne, and is ſkilfull in Arithmetike, who muſt haue a booke in the which hee muſt write all the names of the ſouldiers appertaining to ye band, diuiding euery weapon by themſelues, yt they may be the readier to be muſtred, as otherwiſe to be placed. In order of march againe the Clarke at watch & ward, muſt be attentiue with his booke to call euerie mannes name to ſée who is abſent, and that certificate thereof be made vnto the Captaine, who muſt without ſickneſſe or ſome ſpeciall licenſe of the head officers ſée him or them

puniſhed to the example of all others. Alſo the Clarke is to take charge of the Captaines munition, who ſéeing it deliuered vnto the ſouldiers, muſt take note how much is deliuered, vnto whom and what day of the moneth it is deliuered, with the price: likewiſe he muſt repaire to the Clarke of the victuals, and by the Captaines warrant to receiue ſuch bread, béere, and other victualls as is to be had, and to deliuer it to thoſe that ſhalbe thought by the Captaine to be of credit to vittell the band by the Princes price, and to take ticates of them as well for that it is deliuered vnto them, as what they doe deliuer vnto the ſouldiers. Alſo he muſt in the Captaines name and by his warrant repaire vnto the marchants & other artificers, and take ſuch wares, as the officers and ſouldiers haue néede of, who muſt at the pay day by the Captaine be anſwered. Alſo prouided that the vitler alloweth to the ſouldiers but vj. pence a daie, the ouerplus goeth to the payment of their furniture & apparell. The Clarke muſt alſo peruſe the ticates to ſée that no more be deliuered then their wages come to, that the Captaines thereby receiue no loſſe. The Clarke ought to enquire when any be departed this world, alſo whē any be ſlaine or diſcharged the band, and to make a iuſt note thereof, wherby certificate be made to the muſter maiſter, that ye Prince in no waies may be hindered, neither the Captaine by the vitlers receiue any detriment or loſſe.
            
            
               The Miniſters charge.
               
                  IT is conuenient that euerie band, haue one honeſt and ſober man appointed to vſe daily praier among the ſouldiers, and in time conuenient to communicate with them, and to teach the companies their duties towards God & their Prince, & to giue good counſaile vnto the ſicke, wounded, and weake

in bodie or in conſcience, and that ſuch be well armed with ſpirituall armour, that is with good knowledge, & good liuing, readie to perſwade them manfully to withſtand their enimies, the fleſh, the diuell, and deſperation, putting them in ſure hope through faith in Chriſt to enter into the campe of euerlaſting life, where they ſhal ride amongſt the ſouldiers on white horſes, clothed in white and pure ſilke, as witneſſeth the holie Scripture of the almightie God of hoſts, who of his mercie bring all ſouldiers vnto the Hoſt of them.
               
                  THe noble cuſtome of England is to furniſh their numbers with manuall weapons to battaile appertaining, as with Caliuers, Courriers, Archers, or long Bowes, Pikes, Halberds or Billmen, which be hereafter ſignified by letters placed in order of aray, as men bearing ſuch weapons may be placed the like to ſeruice conuenient, as hereafter by proportions ſhall more plainly appeare.
               
               
                  
                  
                     The ſignification of the Letters.
                     C for Captaine
                     L for Lieutenant
                     S for Sergeaunt
                     D for Drums
                     F for Fiftei
                     s for Caliuers.
                     a for Archers.
                     b for Billes.
                     p for Pikes,
                     h for Horſemen.
                  
               
               AS there is a great alteration of weapons, and alſo deuiſion of the ſame, I purpoſe to note vnto you the iuſt numbers to euerie hundred at this preſent vſed: which ſhall greatlie profit to the making of your battailes from 1. C. to 15. C.
               
                  
                     
                        Two
                        i.C.
                        Mē
                        
                        40
                        pi.
                        10
                        bil.
                        50
                        ſhot.
                     
                     
                        ii.C.
                        80
                        20
                        100
                     
                     
                        iii.C.
                        120
                        30
                        150
                     
                     
                        iiii.C.
                        160
                        40
                        200
                     
                     
                        v.C.
                        200
                        50
                        250
                     
                     
                        vi.C.
                        240
                        60
                        300
                     
                     
                        vii.C.
                        280
                        70
                        350
                     
                     
                        viii.C
                        320
                        80
                        400
                     
                     
                        ix.C.
                        340
                        90
                        450
                     
                     
                        x.C
                        400
                        100
                        500 ſhot.
                     
                     
                        xi.C
                        440
                        110
                        550
                     
                     
                        xii.C.
                        480
                        120
                        600
                     
                     
                        xiii.C.
                        520
                        130
                        650
                     
                     
                        xiiii.C
                        560
                        140
                        700
                     
                     
                        xv.C.
                        600
                        150
                        750
                     
                     
                        Men.
                        Pik.
                        Bils
                        ſhot.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               Heere followeth orders which are to be obſerued for the furniſhing of the weapons.
               
                  The Caleuers or Coriers.
                  
                     SVch muſt haue either of them a good and ſufficient péece, flaſke, touch boxe, powder, ſhot, fier, yron, mould, ramor, ſworde, & dagger, a murrion, in raine, miſtes, and winds, their péeces charged & primed. They muſt carrie the touch hole vnder their armeholes, mach light in their handes couertly and drie, their péeces faire and cleane within and without: ſo bee they ſeruiſeable at all times, hauing regard, they kéepe their mach and pouder verie drie, oft charged and diſcharged, march and retire of good diſtaunce a ſunder, garding other, as hereafter ſhal plainly appeare by diuers examples.
               
               
                  Archers or long Bowes.
                  
                     NEceſſarie it is that euerie man haue a good and méete Bowe according to his draught and ſtrength, light and eaſie: a Iacke with a ſkull, ſword and dagger, nothing vpon his armes, whereby in time of ſeruice he maye eaſily draw the arrow to the head, that they may deliuer the ſame with ſtrength an arte as Engliſhmen be accuſtomed. They muſt haue alſo braſer and ſhooting glooue, their ſtrings whipped and waxed ouer with glew, their feathers drie: ſo bee they ſeruiſeable in any weather to ſerue againſt the enemie to ſlaughter and execution.
               
               
                  Pykes.
                  
                     THoſe bearing that warlike weapons eſpecially the frontes which ſerue in the place of Gentlemen, muſt haue a faire Corſlet, with all the péeces appertaining to ye ſame, that is the curats, the collers, the poldrens with the Uambraces: alſo the long taces & the burganet,

with Swoord and Dagger, their Pykes of the vſuall length (for the ſtrength of the battaile doth conſiſt in the ſame) bearing the pykes on their ſhoulders, ſetting their thombs vnder the ſame, whereby it is ruled. They muſt oftentimes practiſe to traile, puſh, warde, couch, croſſe, &c. as for the neceſſitie of the ſkirmiſh or battaile appertaineth.
               
               
                  Billes.
                  
                     THeſe be gards vnto Captaines and Enſignes, which bée moſt times choſen Gentlemen of experience, who as occaſion ſerueth, giue order to the numbers in aray, & approching the enimie to the aſſault, certeine of them bee oft appointed to aduaunce and maintaine the ſame: whoſe diſcrete leading and valiaunt courage dooth much comforte the reſt to followe the ſame. Theſe bee armed with Corſlettes, and bée placed in the heart of the battaile, vſually called the ſlaughter of the field, or execution of the ſame, who commonly doe not fight but in verie great extremitie.
               
               Thus bee the Souldiers, with the great foure weapons armed and furniſhed to ſeruice conuenient to be trained and exerciſed, as heereafter followeth.
            
            
               Of muſtering and training.
               
                  CAptaines hauing their bands furniſhed with officers, ſouldiers, armour, weapons, & munitions, as aforeſaid in times conuenient, reſorte wholie together to ſome ground neceſſary to muſter, march, and traine, exerciſe, and inſtruct ſuch as are not perfect in the feates of warre, which bée ordered

ſometimes by wordes and déedes, as by ſignes from the officers framed, that ſouldiers may learne and obſerue the meaning of the ſame, as héereafter ſhall more plainlie appeare. At ſuch times of aſſemblie, as at watch or warde, the Clarke ought to read the bill, and to call euerie ſouldier by his name, that euerie man may anſwere for himſelfe, and none to be abſent vpon paine without ſickneſſe or licenſe. The Sergeant as they be called, putteth them in araie that euery man follow his lodſeman, kéeping his ranke fellowes iuſtly on both ſides, placing the ſhot in voward and rereward, the enſigne and billes in the middeſt of the pikes: So be they placed in beautie and ſtrength, as is accuſtomed, ſometimes to ſtande and aduaunce their weapons, turne their faces, & march any waie aſſigned: ſometimes to receiue a worde that ſhall paſſe from man to man from the one ende to the other, with ſuch ſilence that none heare the ſame, but thoſe in araie aſſembled.
            
            
               Sixe principal points belonging to the ſouldiers of all eſtates, as heereafter doe followe in order.
               
                  
                     Silence.
                     IN all places of ſeruice ſuch ſilence muſt be vſed, that ſoldiers may heare friends, & not be heard, as well in watch, warde, ambuſh, camiſado, or elſe where: in which pointe conſiſteth oftentimes the ſafetie or perdition of the whole Campe.
                  
                     Obedience.
2 Such obedience muſt bée vſed, that none regard the perſons, but the office to them appointed, diligentlie obſeruing the ſame, anie offending to the contrarie runneth into daunger of the Lawe: for longer then

obedience is vſed and mainteined, there is no hope of good ſucceſſe.
                  
                     Secretneſſe.
3 Souldiers muſt be ſecret and haue regard that they diſcloſe nothing, though ſometimes they vnderſtand the pretence of the higher powers. The diſcloſers of ſuch meriteth moſt cruell puniſhment.
                  
                     Sobrietie.
4 In ſobrietie conſiſteth great praiſe to the ſouldiers, who vſing the ſame, are euer in ſtate of preferment. Such regard their duties, and reproue the raſh buſie bodies. Drunkardes, &c. are euer in danger of puniſhment.
                  
                     Hardineſſe.
5 The Captaines and Souldiers of courage hardie, be to ſeruice much auaileable, ſpecially ſuch as will ponder what may be the end of their enterpriſe. Some in times paſt haue hardly giuen the onſet, and after repented the ſame, but the praiſe of the aduiſed cannot be expreſſed.
                  
                     Truth.
6 The vertue of goodneſſe and truth is farre excéeding my capacitie to write, the practiſers of the contrarie, are not worthy of life, but to bée ſoone adiudged. Subtile enimies approue to corrupt ſouldiers with gifts: but ſith the reward of truth is euerlaſting life, and the vntrue looſeth the fruitiō of the ſame in continuall darkeneſſe, I truſt none of our countriemen will learne the one for the other: from the which God kéepe all good ſouldiers. (⸫)
               
            
            
               
               ¶ The lawes and conſtitutions of the field.
               
                  Heere begin the Articles wherevnto all ſouldiers which ſerue vnder Emperour, or any other King or Prince, ought to be ſworne vnto, and them to keepe and maintaine inuiolated at all times, and in all places, vpon ſuch paines as follow.
               
                  FIrſt, yée ſhall be ſworne to be true, iuſt, and dutifull to his Lord and ſouereigne, and his graund Generall or chiefe Captaine of the field, to be tractable and obedient vnto euerie officer placed and appointed to rule ouer him, and to be readie both day and night to ſerue, whether it be by land or by water, as occaſion of ſeruice shall fall out and require. And whoſoeuer doth repine or ſheweth diſobedience herein, of what degrée or condition ſo euer he be, he muſt be dulie puniſhed by the iudgement of the ſuperiours appointed for that purpoſe.
               2 Item, if there be any which ſhall blaſpheme the almightie God or his diuine word: let ſuch a blaſphemer be puniſhed with the loſſe of his life openlie, and to the terrour of the reſt let it be executed. For no doubt the plague of the higheſt will not depart from the houſe or tent of the blaſphemer. For how ſhould wée vſe iuſtice indifferently vnto men, when we are content with ſilence to ſuffer ſuch iniurie to be committed againſt God? Therefore firſt ſtraightly puniſh the offences done againſt the liuing God, and hée will ſend thée wiſdome better to iudge the cauſes betwéene man and man.
               
                  3 Item, whenſoeuer any chieftaine or Captaine of any band, ſhall vpon vrgent cauſes appoint in his abſence any other whome hée ſhall thinke good, to ſupplie and execute his roome of Captaineſhip, euery man ought to follow and obey the ſaid deputie, with no leſſe care and diligence then they would the Captaine himſelfe, vpon paine of ſuch puniſhment as the Generall or his aſſignes ſhall appoint.
               4 Item, that all ſouldiers muſt content themſelues with their places appointed, béeing ioyned togither in bandes, or ſeuerall without reſiſtance, whether it bée in marching, watching, incamping, or beſieging, béeing alſo commaunded therevnto by the Captaine or other officers, vpon ſuch paine as ſhall bée thought good by the Captaine.
               5 Item, that euery ſouldier ſhall for his honour ſake, gladly fauour, and mercifully forbeare vnto the vttermoſt of his power, all women lying in childe bed, or béeing with childe, or lately deliuered from childe, to defend and ſuccour them from the rage of the cruell and rude ſouldiers or others, which followe the campe for ſpoile. Alſo it behooueth all Souldiers to defend all Miniſters, Prieſtes of godly calling, and all ſpirituall perſons. But now a daies they be the firſt to whome abuſe is offered, of what opinion or religion ſo euer they bée: but God no doubt, will iuſtly plague all ſuch before they bée aware, and when they leaſt ſuſpect it. Alſo they ſhall defend all aged men and women: neither ſhall any moleſt and hinder them: if otherwiſe, vpon paine of loſſe of his or their liues.
               6 Item, that euery ſouldier ſhall ſerue, and is by the lawe of armes bound by long cuſtome to ſerue thirtie daies for euery moneth, and after that rate hée ſhall

receiue his moneths wages.
               7 Item, if that any ſouldier haue receiued his moneths wages afore hand, or any part thereof, and departeth without leaue or paſport from his Captaine, & hath not ſerued for it, he or they apprehended, ſhall for the ſaid offence be iudged to die.
               8 Item, if there be any ſouldier or ſouldiers in marching breake his or their raie without iuſt occaſion enforcing them, then the Prouoſt marſhall, Lieuetenant of the band or Sergeant ſhall compell him or them with violence to kéepe his or their rankes in order: and if ſo bée that he or they ſo diſordered, do chaunce in this caſe to be ſlaine, there ſhall no man be blamed by his or their deaths by the law of the field, for by ſuch diſordered people the whole armie may be in daunger of ruinating by the enimie.
               9 Item if that by the appointment of the chiefe rulers of the hoaſt there be a battaile fought, and that by the mightie power of God, the victorie be obteined on your ſide, the lawe of armes is ſuch, that if any ſouldier hath receiued his moneths wages afore hand, he ſhall be diſcharged of the ſame, neither ſhall he ſerue any longer for the ſaid wages, after the day of victorie, neither ſhall owe any thing for it, but he ſhall be ſet frée from that moneths ſeruice.
               10 Item, if it chaunce that in time of ſkirmiſh or in any other conflict with the enimie, ſome one do aduenture to flie and runne away from his fellowes, if in the flying, his Captaine or any other ſouldier by ſhooting at him, or by ſtriking at him chaunce to kill him, they ſhall incurre no daunger for ſo dooing. And if ſuch a flier chaunce to eſcape at that time, and afterwardes bée taken, let him according to the lawe of armes ſuffer

death for the ſame: for one ſuch a recreant may bee the ouerthrowing of a great multitude.
               11 Item, it ſtandeth with the lawe of armes that each common ſouldier ſhall bée ſworne that they wil not haue amongſt themſelues anie priuate counſels, aſſemblies or conuenticles, vpon paine of the loſſe of their liues.
               12 Item, there ſhall no ſouldier neither in time of marching, nor during the time of their incamping holde or kéepe anie whiſpering or talke, or ſecretlie conuey anie letters vnto their aduerſaries, without licenſe from the chiefe Captaine vpon paine of the loſſe of his life.
               13 Item, if there be anie one or a more number that ſhall goe about anie treaſon or anie other conſpiracie to be committed againſt the campe or garriſon, ſuch a traitour or conſpirator ſhalbe accuſed vnto the Knight marſhall, and he that bewraieth and accuſeth ſuch an offendor ſhall haue for his reward a moneth wages or more: as the facte is hainous, ſo the rewarde is to be increaſed vnto the partie that reuealeth the ſame, and the offender to receiue the reward of a falſe traitour.
               14 Item, that no ſouldier ſhall bée ſuffered to bée of a ruffinlike behauiour, either to prouoke or to giue anie blowe or thruſt, or otherwiſe wilfullie ſtrike with his daggar, to iniurie anie his fellowe ſouldiers with anie weapon, whereby mutines manie times enſueth, vppon paine of the loſſe of his life.
               15 Item, if anie one beareth hatred or malice, or anie euill will for anie occaſion done vnto him, & ſo ſtriketh him, he looſeth his hande, if otherwiſe he ſéeketh reuenge, then by lawe he looſeth his life.
               
                  16 Item, if anie ſouldier bee warned to watch or warde, and he doe not come, hee ſhall bée puniſhed at the diſcretion of the Captaine, but if anie ſouldier bee ſummoned to watch, and hée appeare, and after the watch woord giuen, and the watch ſet, he departeth, and leaueth the watch, ſuch a one ſhall without mercie bée puniſhed with the loſſe of his life, neither ſhall anie man ſet an other to watch in his place without the leaue of the Captaine vpon paine of his life.
               17 Item, that no ſouldier or ſouldiers draw his or their ſword or ſwoordes, or vſe anie other kinde of weapon with violence to doe hurte within or without the campe, during the time of the warres, vppon paine of death. It hath lately béene vſed with more fauour of life, as ſuch an offender to looſe his hande, but it is the diſcretion of the Lord chiefe Generall, in whoſe handes lyeth both life and death of offenders, after their arraignment and iuſt condemnation.
               18 Item, the like lawe is againſt the officer and officers of anie band in the campe, if he ſtrike anie ſouldier without ſuch occaſion as is permitted him in the articles to doe.
               19 Item, that no perſon or perſons preſume to be muſtered or to take wages before hée be ſworne to be faithfull, and trulie to ſerue his Prince in thoſe warres preſent, vpon paine of death.
               20 Item, that the Harold at armes ſhall proclaime & publiſh all that the Generall ſhall giue him in charge in the place and places where hee is commaunded, and not to adde or diminiſh anie part or parcell thereof vpon paine of death.
               
                  21 Item, there ſhall no ſouldiers or other men, procure or ſtirre vp anie quarrell with anie ſtraunger, that is of anie other nation and ſuch as ſerue vnder one head and Lord with them neither in their gaming or otherwiſe vpon paine of the loſſe of his life.
               22 Item, there ſhall no ſouldiers or other perſon, béeing in campe or march, take away anie thing from anie man béeing their friend by violence or by deceipt, as their victuals or other neceſſaries vpon pain of the loſſe of his life.
               23 Item, when that there are anie victualls carried or brought vnto the campe no man ſhall run out to take anie part of them before they bée brought to ye appointed place for the purpoſe: no though they offer for thē more then they be worth, vpon paine of the loſſe of his life.
               24 Item, if that the Prouoſt martiall, haue at anie time taken an offender, and according to his office he carrieth him to bee puniſhed, and if that one or more ſouldiers ſéeke to reſcue the ſaide malefactor, and in this ſturre the offender eſcape, hée or they that are the occaſion of this eſcape ſhall be puniſhed with the like puniſhment as the malefactor ſhould haue béene, whether it bée by life or otherwiſe according as the waight of the crime requireth.
               25 Item, if there bée anie founde, that hath entered his name vnder two Captaines, and hath taken wages, armour and weapons before hand, ſuch a perſon ſhall bée taken for a periured man, and ſhall by the law of armes for the ſame looſe his life.
               26 Item, if anie that hath a place appointed him by the harbinger or officers for his tent or lodging, hée

muſt hold himſelfe content withall, neither ſhall he moleſt anie man lodging within his tent, or other lodging at anie time for anie occaſion vppon paine of the chiefe Captaines diſpleaſure, and ſuch puniſhment as hée ſhall thinke moſt fit for the offence.
               27 Item, that no man ſhall ſound and make anie allarum, except it be néede or vpon commaundement, from the higher officers vpon paine of the loſſe of his life.
               28 Item, when of neceſſitie the alarum is made, each man muſt beſturre him to bee readie for battaile vppon paine of the loſſe of his life.
               29 Item, at the firſt warning of the drum or ſecretly, all ſouldiers muſt bee in a readineſſe and reſort to the place appointed, which commonly is the market place, & from thence in order of araie to the enimies, as they bée commaunded vpon paine of the loſſe of his life.
               30 Item, al ſouldiers being horſmen or footmen, muſt diligently in order of aray by ſound of drum or trumpet, accompanie the Enſigne to watch, ward, or reliefe of the ſame, being the ſilentlie in a readineſſe to the enimies, & as occaſion ſhall ſerue to brute the alarum with the vſuall woord, Arme, Arme, or Bowes, Bowes, vppon paine of the loſſe of their liues.
               31 Item, all ſouldiers muſt kéepe their armour and weapons faire, cleane and ſeruiceable in a readineſſe at euerie ſodaine, none intermedling but with his owne, euerie one to helpe other to arme and diligently to reſort to the place of ſeruice at ſcrie and larum vpon paine.
               32 Item, all ſouldiers muſt honeſtlie intreate, and trulie paie vitlers & artificers allowed for their reliefe, being friends or enimies, and with curteous words encourage ſuch to vittell & relieue the companies or campe vpon paine.
               33 Item all ſouldiers, in watch, ward, march, or otherwiſe ſhall haue ſpeciall regard, that if there be man or woman deſirous to ſpeake with the ſuperiours, or being

thine enimies for feare do forſake his owne power and reſort to thée, let ſuch ſecretly be conueied to the Lord chiefe Generall, regarding that they viewe no ſecrets, leaſt they be double ſpies vpon paine of the loſſe of their liues.
               34 Item, Captaines and officers muſt oft frequent & reſort vnto the ſouldiers lodgings, to ſée in what ſtate their armour and munition be in, & to giue great charge that their furniture be alwaies in a readineſſe, their corſlets with all péeces belonging to the ſame, and their caléeuers be made cleane and oiled, to haue match and pouder drie, the ſtringes whipped for their bowes, their billes and halberds to be kept ſharpe. Thus oft they ought to viewe the ſame vpon paine.
               35 Item, that no man of what degrée ſoeuer he be of, ſhall commit adulterie with maried wiues, nor inforce widdowes, maids or virgins: & by violence defile them, ſhall without mercie be puniſhed with death.
               36 Item, he that ſhall depart out of the place where he ſhalbe put, by his head, or any officer, whatſoeuer, for a ſpie, watchman, ſcowte, or warder, aſwell by daie as by night, as it often hapneth, to diſcouer ſome dealings of the enimie, without attending and ſtaying for him that placed him there, to take him away, except he ſhould remoue in haſt to aduertiſe his head of the ſucceſſe of the enimies aſſaulting or dooing any outrage ſhall be puniſhed with death.
               37 Item, whoſoeuer ſhould raſhlie offende or hurt either in words or déedes any man belonging to the deputies or head officers of iuſtice or Captaine, they being in paye for Sergeants, and they béeing appointed to carie no other weapons with ſteales or ſtaues but billes, they may be knowne for men of iuſtice, and not for ſouldiers.
               
                  38 Item, whoſoeuer ſtanding within or without the campe or barres to watch or ſcowt, and doth his dutie ſo euill, that through his negligence, the enimie ſetteth vpon the campe at vnwares he ſhall die.
               39 Item, he that vnder colour of dooing the dutie of a ſcowte or ſpie, perceiuing the enimies haue aſſaulted the campe and he with ſuch fayning lieth ſtill, ſhall die for it.
               40 Item, he that ſhall forſake the defence, in generall, or in particular, of the batterie, of the trench, of the paſſage, of a bridge, or other like, to him committed, but lightly, not forced, goeth away ſhalbe for ſo offending, puniſhed with death.
               41 Item, whoſoeuer entering into a Citie taken by force, followeth not his enſigne whether ſoeuer it ſhall go, vntill the generall make proclamation, that euery man ſhall take booties, and if the generall cauſe no ſuch proclamation to be made, and that ſouldier make ſpoile, he ſhall incurre the paine of death, and if proclamation be made that they ſhal ceaſe from taking praies and booties, and after licenſe giuen if they giue not ouer, they ſhall fall into the ſame puniſhment.
               42 Item, whoſoeuer ſéeing the Enſigne, vnder the which he warreth in fraies or fight, by chaunce to be fallen into the hands of the enimies if he be there preſent, and do not his indeuour to recouer it, and when it is cowardly loſt, to puniſh the ſouldiers which haue ſuffered it to be cowardly loſt with death.
               43 Item, he that ſhall flie from the battaile being in the face and front of the enimies, or ſhall go ſlowly and ſlackly to ioyne and affront with them, in caſe it be to

fight a field battell, or in any ſkirmiſh whatſoeuer, ſhall be puniſhed with death.
               44 Item, he that ſhall faine himſelfe ſicke, to auoid the fighting with the enimies, or becauſe he would not go to any other enterpriſe to vſe his hands, but I meane therefore to robbe, for to ſuch affaires they will be readie inough, ſhall be cruelly puniſhed.
               45 Item, whoſoeuer ſéeing his Generall, or his Captaine, or other Colonell, and officer of the campe, in the hand of the enimies, and ſuccoureth him not with al his power, and may doo it, not reſpecting any daunger, ſhall ſuffer death.
               46 Item, he that ſhall robbe or ſpoile the people of the countrie, or ſubiects or vaſſals of the Prince he ſerueth, ſhall die.
               47 Item, he that by theft ſhould ſteale or robbe the armour, weapons, or horſes, or other thing from any others, ſeruing againſt the enimies, ſhall die.
               48 Item, he that ſhould raunſome or taxe or otherwiſe miſuſe the people of the countrie, except they ſhuld be enimies or Rebells to the Prince, ſhall be greatlie puniſhed.
               49 Item, he that ſhall play at any game for his armour, weapons or horſes, which are written vpon the role, or through his negligence ſhall looſe them, or lend, giue away, or lay them to pawne, let him fall into the ſame paine of death.
               50 Item, he that goeth further then two hundreth ſteps or paces from his quarter, without licenſe of his

Captaine ſpecially when the campe looketh or ſtraieth to be aſſaulted by the enimies, except he ſhould be ſent for by his heads, ſhall be puniſhed with death.
               51 Item, he that ſhall go longer then the houre appointed in the night abroad, in the campe wandring, except he ſhould be ſent by his ſuperiours for a matter of waight, from head Captaine to head captaine, by a counter token ſhall be cruelly puniſhed.
               52 Item, he that ſhall lodge ſtraungers, whether he be of the campe or not, without licenſe of the Generall, or of his Captaine, either in his lodging or vnder a tent, except he be of his chamber, or by the Captaine appointed to ſeruice foorth of the campe, ſhall be puniſhed. But euery one ought to be in the night with their chamber-fellowes, and not to be deuided from their lodgings, that occaſion ſeruing they may be ready with their weapons in their hands, neither ought they to lodge watch or ſcowts, or of the ſearch, for that the ſpies hauing no lodging any excuſe being found out, may the better be apprehended, alſo if the ſcowte watch, be taken from their quarter, faining to be a ſoldier of the Campe when they are to ſpie in the night, they for ſo offending ſhall be cruelly puniſhed with death.
               53 Item, whoſoeuer ſhall make any words, déeds, or queſtions in the ward or in an ambush, or in other place where reſpect and ſilence is néedfull ſhall be puniſhed.
               54 Item, he that ſhould be reuenged of any iniurie receiued, either newly or before time doone, by an indirect way, that is, traiterouſly, and not by way of reaſon, or by waie of combat bodie to bodie, by the licenſe of his Generall ſhall ſuffer death.
               
                  55 Item, he that ſhould be ſo bold as to plaie with falſe cardes and dice, or ſhould dare to vſe in plaie anie priuie falſhoode, thefte or deceipt in anie wiſe ſhall bée puniſhed.
               56 Item, hée that of preſumption ſhould paſſe out of his place into another either before the battaile or in marching, ſhould out of order make haſt to goe before to be the firſt that ſhould come to the lodging of the campe, or in marching ſhould goe out of his Ranke from one battaile to another, or he that doth not obſerue the order of marching ſhall die.
               57 Item, he that ſhall taſke or ranſome vpon his hoſt or Lodger, or vppon anie other that is not his lawfull priſoner by good order of warre, and that when he is lawfullie taken, the ranſome excell not the articles and orders of the field, and in caſe there were no articles of agréement, that there be a iuſt ranſome ſet vppon paine of puniſhment.
               58 Item, he that ſhall enter in or goe foorth by any other gate, ſtréete, or waie, then that which ſhal be accuſtomed into the citie, pales or liſt, or fort where ye campe is lodged, that is going ouer the walles or vnder ſome breach, and not by the ordinarie gate, let him fal into the paine of death.
               59 Item, whoſoeuer doth not immediatelie retire when he ſhall heare the trumpet or drumme ſounde the retreat, either of a ſet battel, or of a ſkirmiſh or battery, or of anie other fight, or ſhould goe in or come foorth of the Citie when the aſſault is giuen to the walles thereof ſhall die.
               60 Item, hee that ſpeaketh or calleth or crieth alowd

amongſt the ordinaunce, or in the battell, or in any place where ſilence néedeth, except he were a heade, or other Officer or Sergeaunt, commaunding ſome new order, ſhall die.
               61 Item, he that ſhall commit anie thing whatſoeuer it be, wherby it may be coniectured that it is againſt the Prince, and damageable to the General & the campe ſhall die.
               62 Item, drums and fiftes muſt oft ſound and exerciſe their inſtruments, warning as the mouth of man, to all pointes of ſeruice, ſo muſt ſouldiers diligentlie learne and obſerue the meaning of the ſame, that none plead ignoraunce, neglecting their duties to ſeruice apperteining. Alſo ſometimes they ſhall receiue from the higher officers or Captaines, ſecret commandements by word of mouth, the which muſt with all diligence be obſerued and trulie executed vpon the loſſe of their liues.
               63 Item, it is againſt the lawe of armes that anie man ſhould breake down anie mill or water works perteining to mils, vpon paine of the loſſe of his life.
               64 Item, no man in their marching through what place ſoeuer they ſhall paſſe ſhall ſet anie thing on fire, no not their incamped place at their departing, without commandement from the chiefe Captaine, vpon the pain of the loſſe of their liues.
               65 Item, if at anie time anie man ſhall in the time of his dronkenneſſe quarrell and fight with his fellowe, and in ſo dooing chaunce to kill him, he ſhall in ſo dooing receiue as great puniſhment by death, as if he had béene ſober.
               
                  66 Item, thou ſhalt note that ſouldiers ſhall ſweare at their firſt entering into ſeruice that they will faithfullie and truelie ſerue their Captaine for ſixe moneths together, and when the ſixe moneths are expired, they ſhall ſweare to ſerue him ſixe moneths more if hee néede them. And if the Captaine néedeth them not ſo long, but mindes to diſcharge his band, the Captaine ſhall allowe each of them halfe a moneths wages at the departing, & ſo diſcharge them.
               67 Item, there ſhall no man make anie ſhoute or other ſtirring noiſe in anie corner or open place of citie, towne, caſtle, fort, or campe, whereby anie danger or inconuenience may growe vnto the companie anie maner of waies, on paine of the loſſe of his life.
               68 Item, he that ſhall diſcloſe the watch woorde to enemies or to friendes, except it bée to ſuch a one as hée ſhall be appointed by his gouernour: or ſhall be found aſléepe in the watch, ſcowte, or ward, ſhall bée puniſhed with death.
               69 Item, if anie Captaine for corruption ſake, ſhall giue licenſe to his owne ſouldier or to anie other ſouldier without the licenſe of the Generall to departe the Campe, ſhall receiue the ſame puniſhment that the ſouldier ſhould receiue.
               70 Item, that no ſouldier ſhall goe out of the campe in the night time without the watch worde, in daunger of his life, for if he be ſlaine ſo by the watch, there is no blame to be laid vpon them that kill him.
               71 Item, there ſhall no ſouldier go out of the campe without his armour and other weapons, vpon the paine of the loſſe of his life.
               
                  72 Item, euerie Captaine ſhall be ſworne, that he ſhall charge euerie decurion or Captaine of ten men, vppon their othes that he ſhall denounce euerie ſouldier that is vnder his charge, and that is not able and méet to ſerue.
               73 Item, in like caſe if the ſaid decurion ſhall receiue anie newe or ſtraunge ſouldier into his band, his part and dutie is, that he giue vnto the higher Captaine knowledge thereof.
               74 Item, no man of what condition ſoeuer he bée, ſhall be ſo bolde as to conueie or attempt to conueie any offender vpon paine of the loſſe of his life.
               75 Item, that euerie ſouldier ſhall haue vppon his outermoſt garment ſome ſpeciall ſigne or token whereby hée maie bée knowne, ſuch a one as the higher Captaines ſhall agrée vppon. As for example, hée ſhall haue on his garment a red croſſe, and vppon his armour a red lace or ſuch like, whereby he may the better be knowne of his fellowes, and if there ſhall be anie found without the ſaid ſignes and tokens, he ſhall bee vſed as an aduerſarie or enimie.
               76 Item, if anie Captaine or other officers ſhall procure ſkirmiſh or fight the battaile, without commandement from the higher officers, for ſo offending they ſhall receiue death.
               77 Item, if that anie number of ſouldiers bee commaunded and placed by the head Captaines to defend or kéepe anie citie, tower, caſtle or fort, or anie other place, and they béeing ſharplie aſſaulted by the enimie, once, twiſe, or oftner, in this caſe the lawe of armes is, that the Lord Generall ſhall allowe and paie vnto ſuch a

number of ſouldiers but ordinarie wages, neither is there by the lawe of armes any thing more due vnto them, and if the ſaid Caſtles, Towers, or Fortes ſhall be ſold or bée betraied by the ſaid Captaine, officers, or ſouldiers, or otherwiſe yéelded without the commaundement of the Prince, or at the appointment of the Generall: ſhall be as falſe traitours vſed.
               78 Item, if there be any Citie, Caſtell, or other Fort, yéelded vp by the enimie without expugnation, there ſhall no man be ſo bold to enter into the ſaid place to ſpoile, or otherwiſe to kill, or do any outrage without leaue of the Generall vpon paine of the loſſe of his life.
               79 Item, there ſhall no man depart out from the precinct of the campe with any bootie or ſpoile, without leaue of the chiefe officers or head Captaine, vpon the paine of the loſſe of his life.
               80 Item, if any man for feare forſaketh the place appointed him to fight in and for feare throweth downe his weapon, the officers or ſouldiers may kil him without any daunger.
               81 Item, if any man ſaying that he hath done ſome worthie thing in fight, and be proued contrarie, ſhould be puniſhed with death.
               82 Item, if a legion, cohort, or band, ſhall by mutines, or otherwiſe incurre the lawes of the field, it is requiſite and neceſſarie, for that all ſhall not be put to death, that euerie mans name be taken and put into a bagge, and that the tenth lot ſhould be executed. The which although euery man do not feele, yet neuertheleſſe he ſhall feare the euent.
               
                  83 Item, if there ſhall be any man that ſhall infringe and not maintaine, confirme, and to his power diligently and dutifully kéepe and obſerue theſe articles aforeſaid, ſuch ſhall as periured perſons with all ſeueritie be puniſhed: and if any ſouldier or ſouldiers ſhall offend in any manner of thing that dooth belong and appertaine to the dutie of a ſouldier, whereof there is no mention made in theſe articles, ſuch an offender ſhall bée puniſhed at the diſcretion of the chiefe Captaine.
               
                  THeſe Articles muſt bée openly read in the preſence of the chiefe Captaines by the notarie or ſcribe of the court, and after that it is read, the oth ſhall be miniſtred vnto euery man by the pretor in this wiſe, or the like wordes, to the ſame end and purpoſe, ſpeaking vnto the whole companie, and ſaying. My brethren and friends that are héere preſent, ye haue héere heard the articles of the Quéene our ſouereigne, conteining the chiefe & principall points of our rights and lawes of the field, and of the oth, and the manner thereof, which euery ſouldier ought to take. All you therefore that doo meane faithfully and valiantly to obſerue, mainteine, fulfill, confirme, and kéepe the aforeſaid articles: let him héere now either openly refuſe to be a ſouldier, or with me hold vp his finger and ſay after me.
               ALl theſe Articles which haue béene openly read vnto vs, we hold & allow as ſacred and good, and thoſe will we truly and ſtoutly confirme, fulfill, mainteine, and kéepe, ſo helpe vs God and his diuine word. Amen.
               Theſe Articles with others, which for tediouſneſſe I omit, would be publiſhed, ſome vpon paine of death,

ſome greater, and ſome with leſſer puniſhment, to euery one that doth offend, without any remiſſion or forgiueneſſe, or regard of bloud, degrée, kindred, or frendſhip, ſpecially at the beginning to lye in Campe, whereby the army may the better be ſet in good order, and to make it fearefull of God, of iuſtice, and of the Generall, with loue and feare.
               The execution héereof onely apperteineth to the Maiſter of the Campe, for the hearing, ordering, and determyning of cauſes of iuſtice vnder the Generall, as the Liuetenant of a Citie or Towne, Deputie for the Prince.
               For the Maiſter of the campe is the chiefe of the orders, who hath place in the Field in many things, as principall next to the Generall, who hath the chiefe gouernement in pitching the Campe, and diſlodging: briefly, from the Generall downeward, it is the greateſt charge and burden that is in the Armie, and therefore it is requiſite, that hée haue good knowledge and remembrance of all the orders whereby the warres is to be gouerned, and that he be of good practiſe and experience.
               But ſuch caſes as are capitall and of great importance, ſhould bee heard and determined by the Generall and his Iudges, it ſufficeth that God is the knower and determiner, and next vnto him his miniſters on earth, who failing to doe iuſtice, either for zeale, loue, or hatred, ſhall yéeld account thereof before the diuine Iudge, and this law cannot be auoyded by vs, but we ſhall be cited and called by way of appeale.
            
            
               How Captaines according to their worthineſſe are preferred to great charge.
               
                  SOme Enſignes haue in times paſt ben accompanied with one hundred, ſome with two, ſome with thrée, ſome with foure, ſome with fiue hundred men, according to the worthineſſe and experience of Captaines, of which all were

not throughly except at the firſt, the better to traine, exerciſe, and order ſuch numbers to ſeruice appertayning. Here followe certeine perticular practiſes in proportion by letters, ſignifying men, from one hundred, vnto fiue hundred, in quadrant or two-folde battaile, to the greateſt ſtrength for defence of enimies, ſhewing euery weapon particularly in their place and order, to march any waies to ſeruice conuenient, or els to kéepe the ground of aduantage, as winde, Hill, and Sunne will permitte, in which conſiſteth great profit.
            
            
               Certaine words to be vſed of the Captaine, in time of trayning.
               
                  AT ſuch times as the Captaine or any other officer determine to exerciſe their company to traine them, they muſt caſt them into a Ring, or ſuch like neceſſary, and to vſe theſe words vnto the ſouldiers, ſaying, as after followeth. My louing friends and fellowes, we be gathered together, being alſo appointed to ſerue God and our Prince, and to defend our countrie to the death, and for that none through ignorance ſhall periſh or runne in daunger of the lawes of the field, ye ſhall from time to time by mée or the officers of my band, be inſtructed by words or déedes in ſuch pointes as to our calling and the neceſſitie of Seruice ſhal require, the which you muſt diligently obſerue and followe, though ſuch to you many times ſéeme both daungerous and painfull. Alſo if any of you my fellowes ſhall find an occaſion conuenient to declare to mée his minde and opinion in any thing, touching ſeruice, I will diligently heare, and gratifie the partie the double value thereof, and God willing I will vſe equitie and iuſtice with the ſame. Alſo regard, that all Souldiers knowe and obeye their Officers in their place, according to their calling.
            
            
               
               Heere are ſet foorth certeine points, to traine, exerciſe, and in order to place one hundreth men, three in a ranke: alſo how to bring them into a Ring, an Eſſe, or a Snaile, very profitable for young Souldiers.
               
                  AS before I haue ſet foorth what number of weapons apperteineth to euery band frō one hundred vnto fiftéene hū
                  dred men: euen ſo to march thrée in a ranke, thrée & thirty rankes containe one hundred men, ſuting your weapons in this order following, that is, in the front or voward .25. ſhot, next your ſhot .20. pikes, then 10. Billes to gard the Enſigne, and next your Bils your other twentie pikes, and then your other .25. ſhot, the which béeing thus placed, may by your Officers be brought to theſe proportions and orders as followeth, greatly auaileable to diuers Seruices.
               
                  The Voward,
                  The rereward.
               
               
                  
                  FIrſt, for that a C. is the leaſt number that a Captaine hath in charge, I will therefore begin with one hundred, the which after you haue taught to march .3. in a ranke, right foorth, you ſhall bring them in this proportion of a ring, otherwiſe called a limaſſon: And although it is not of any force, it is neceſſary to traine the vnperfect, alſo by bringing them in cloſe cōpaſſe together, they may better heare and vnderſtand any precepts touching their charge ſpoken by the Captaine, or any other officers as oft as is méete. This is not of force, bicauſe the Enſigne lyeth open to the enimies, without gard of Pikes.
               
                  A Ring.
               
               
                  
                  SOmetimes vpon good occaſion you ſhall bring your pikes in order of an eſſe, your billes placed in the midſt with the Enſigne, whereby it may bee enuironed with Pikes for defence of horſe, your ſhot placed betwéene euery ranke of Pikes, ſo that they may ſerue to the ſkirmiſh either reſcuing other within gard, the which retiring into the voyd place, the Pikes couched euery way for defence, the ouerplus of ſhot with the Captaine and Liuetenaunt with other officers to be placed in the midſt of the Eſſe, with the Enſigne.
               
                  An Eſſe.
                  the Vowarde
                  the rerewarde
               
               
                  
                  SOmetimes vppon the ſodaine, bring them into this order of a D, otherwiſe called a Snaile. Place your billes and Enſigne, in the rereward of your Pikes, and caſt your ſelfe round, ſo that you may enuiron your Enſigne, place your ranke of Pikes, the Shot betwixt euery Captaine, Liuetenant, and other officers, with the ouerplus of ſhot to be placed within the weapons. This is a ſtrength at néede, but in this order they can not march or retire.
               
                  A D, or, a Snaile.
                  the rerewarde
                  the Voward
                        •
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               How to traine your men and bring them to the vſe of their weapons.
               
                  AFter that you haue taught your company to march 3. in a ranke right forth: likewiſe to kéepe their order in limitation or ring, you ſhall commaund your officers to teach them how to vſe their weapons. Firſt deuide your ſhot from your Pikes and Bils: cauſing a marke to be ſet vpon the water, whereby you ſhall the better perceiue where the Pellet falleth. Then cauſe your Drum to goe before, and your ſhot to follow ſingle, teaching them how to hold their péeces, and to put pouder into the Pan, the Match into the Cocke, the better to bolden them, and thoſe that haue experience to diſcharge at the marke, euerie one for to follow his lodeſman. This done, caſt them all about round, and bring them to the place where they began, then afterward teach them to diſcharge with pellet. Then muſt you deuide your pikes and billes in two parts, commaunding your officers, that they turne their broade ſides, as if they ſhould encounter the enimie, cauſing your drums to ſound. Then charge your officers to goe in the front of your pikes, to ſhowe them howe that they ſhould vſe their weapons, as firſt, to cauſe your pikes to ſarie cloſe together, then to traile their pikes with the ſharpe ende toward the enemie, two yards from the ende of the blade, and to offer the puſh one at an other. This being done, cauſe your Drums to ſound the retrait, that is, to retire with your faces vpon the enimie. Then muſt you teach them to warde with their pikes, when the puſh is offered againſt them, alſo to couch and croſſe, for defence of horſe: likewiſe to aduaunce, as hereafter ſhall more plainly appeare.
            
            
               
               
                  ¶ Here beginne certaine orders and practiſes to traine or place an hundred men.
               
                  The firſt 
                  THis ſhoweth howe the hundred men before mentioned, caſt in a ring, may march thrée in a Ranke, the whiche may bee brought vnto theſe proportions of ſtrength following.
               
                  The ſecond. SOmetimes marching in the Raie aforeſaid you ſhall deuide the ſame into thrée parts by 11. rankes in each part, deuiding your ſhot into foure partes, and your Pikes into foure parts alſo, placing your Billes to gard the Enſigne, ſo be they ready at the ſodaine in quadrant as appeareth.
               
                  The third. LIkewiſe you muſt inſtruct the ſame from 3. to march 5. in ranke, to the intent when néede ſerueth to ioyne vnto other bands. In thus marching, place halfe your ſhot before, the other in the rereward.
               
                  The fourth ALſo you may practiſe them to march 7. in ranke, placing your Bils in the rereward, with your Enſigne, the which maketh a iuſt quadrant, placing your Shotte in the wings and rereward, as appeareth.
               
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           The firſt. The Voward. The Rereward.
                           The ſecond.
                           The third. The Voward. The Rereward. To augment from three vnto fiue.
                           The fourth. The Rereward.
                            Theſe foure containe one hundred men a peece.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  The fift. YOu may likewiſe by placing 7. in ranke the which is the greateſt force that a hundred men may bee brought into, place 21. Shot in the front and 15. in each wing, the which ſeruice very aptly to ſkirmiſh, is greatly vnto the anoying of the enemie, alſo readie to retire to ſerue round about the battaile, the Pikes as before.
               
                  The ſixt. IF in marching you vnderſtand or perceiue that horſmen will aſſault you, then place 5. Pikes in ranke, and betwixt euerie Pike a ſhot, ſo marching forward, they fall to be 10. ranke quadrant, placing your billes and Enſigne in the midſt.
               
                  The ſeauenth. LIkewiſe you may for the defence of Horſemen, place 10. rankes of Pikes euerie waie, your Shot next vnto them, your Billes and Enſigne in the midſt, the Pikes endes couched on the ground, the better to defend the enimie.
               
                  The eight. THis proportion ſheweth the March or Quadrant order at large of a C. men, verie neceſſarie to bee vſed. In ſhowe to the Enimies, when thou vnderſtandeſt their numbers to exceede thyne, placing ſeauen Pikes in the Voward, alſo 7. Pikes in the Rereward, next vnto them 6. Pikes in the ſecond Rankes, your Billes and Enſigne in the midſt, with the Dromme and Fiffe as is before mentioned, the which nomber when thou perceiueſt the Enimie, to take vewe of thyne, thou ſhalt cauſe the ſecond Rankes of the Voward and Rereward to ſteppe forwarde to furniſh the voyd ſpaces, the which ſhall make of ſeauen thirteene in Ranke. Alſo if thou perceiueſt the enimie pretending to encounter thee, hauing no place of refuge, ſhalt cauſe the Rankes that ſtepped forwarde to retire to their places, and to ſarrie cloſe together, remoouing out of the ſecond Rankes into the wings the Bills, to ſtep forwards in their places, will bee ſeauen euery waie quadrant, as

in the order before is mentioned, your Shot to bee placed in the Voward and Rereward, may ſkirmiſh and retire as occaſion ſerueth.
               
                  The fifth.
               
               
                  
                  
                     A quadrant mixed with ſhot.
                     the ſixte
                  
                  
                     A quadrant defending the ſhot.
                     the Seuenthe
                  
                  
                     The eight Battaile.
                     the Vowarde
                     the rerewarde
                     The March at large.
                  
               
            
            
               
               Certaine practiſes for them that haue charge of two hundred men to ſeruice conuenient.
               
                  The firſt. 
                  FIrſt marching fiue in ranke .40. Rankes conteine two hundred men ſueting their weapons as before: may be brought to theſe orders following, to diuers intents auaileable, although the ſame for a time ſéeme painefull, and although Archers be not as heretofore they haue bene, yet it is good to ſhowe you, that hauing Archers you muſt place them as afterward to you is mentioned.
               
                  The ſecond SOmetimes diuide the Pikes and the Billes into three parts, by fiftéene rankes, ſeauen to a ranke, placing your Enſigne in the midſt, ſo ioyning them together, maketh a herſe battaile, readie at the ſodeine againſt the enimie, placing fortie Caliuers in the voward, and twentie Archers and ten Caliuers in the rereward with thirtie Archers.
               
                  The third. LIkewiſe according to your ground you ſhall place your outtermoſt rankes with your beſt and faireſt Corſlets, the which ſerue not onely to the ſhow, but otherwiſe for the ſtrength of the battaile, commanding your officers to place ten in a ranke, the reſt to march ten in a ranke, likewiſe your Billes and Enſigne in the midſt, falleth to be ten euery way quadrant, the which is a iuſt hundred, your Caliuers placed in the voward and rereward, and your Archers in the flankes which is a iuſt hundred alſo.
               
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           The firſt. The Voward. The Rereward.
                           The ſecond. The Voward. The Rereward.
                           The third. The Voward. The Rereward
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               Orders of trayning two hundred men.
               
                  The fourth SOmetimes by commaundement of the Generall or head Officers, you ſhall be commaunded to doe ſome exploite by night, the which beeing lead by your Guides through ſtraites, wrong grounds, woods, &c. it is needefull that euery Pike man and Bill man take holde of his Lodſemans weapon, placing your ſhot betwixt your Pikes and your Enſigne in the midſt, your Pikes to march fiue in Ranke, ſixteene rankes is iuſt eightie pikes beſide your Bils, the ouerplus of your ſhot to be placed in the rereward.
               
                  The ſixt. SOmetimes occaſion ſerueth to marche through long Brome, Corne, or Ferne, ſo that Souldiers muſt traile their pikes frō the ground cloſe together at the halfe pikes, in the Voward the ſharpe ends of the pikes forward, and in the rereward the ſharpe ends of the pikes to the ground, who may of the ſodaine being aſſailed with horſemen, muſt preſently aduance and couch their pikes euerie way for defence of Horſe, your Caliuers in the front and Rereward, the archers in the flanks.
               
                  The fift. ALſo when you ſhall bee called to the aſſalts of Towne, Fort, or any ſuch like, you muſt endure the great ſhot if it bee not diſmounted, wherefore your officers muſt cauſe them to march a good diſtaunce a ſunder, and euerie man cloſe to his Lodſeman, march with expedition, and manfully employ themſelues vnto victorie, your Caliuers in the Voward, your Archers next to your Pikes.
               
                  
                  
                     The fourth. The Voward. The Rereward.
                     The fifth. The Voward. The Rereward.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     The ſixt Battell.
                     The Voward.
                  
               
            
            
               
               Certaine points to exerciſe and traine three hundred men vnto ſeruice conuenient.
               
                  
                     A Captaine hauing charge of 300. men that be expert in ſeruice, may oft times victoriouſly accompliſh Exploits and points of ſeruice to them committed, which great numbers vnperfect may not attaine vnto. The better to inſtruct the ſame, here followe certaine orders and ſtrengths in araie, which practiſed in time conuenient, may bring perfection of ſeruice at neede.
               
                  The firſt Sometime placing ſuch numbers by 5. in Ranke, may be brought to diuers points of ſeruice conuenient .60. rāks conteine .300. men, fiue in ranke.
               
                  The ſecond To bring this number into a quadrant proportion, you muſt diuide your long weapons into three partes, placing foure in ranke, your Billes and Enſigne in the midſt, and ioyned cloſe together fall out to be 12. quadrāt euery way, your ſhot placed in the wings ready to ſkirmiſh, in the body of your battell are ſixe ſcore Pikes, thirtie billes, and in the wings ſeuen ſcore and ten ſhot, in the rerewarde thirtie ſhot, thus is this number at the ſodeine brought to ſtrength againſt the enimie.
               
                  The third Sometime augment your Ranks from 5. to 7. ſo 44. Ranks conteine 100. men, which are to be ioyned vnto other numbers, and to be brought to force.
               
                  The fourth Sometime from 7. to 9. in ranke the long weapons of the ſame conteine 18. ranks, your ſhotte placed in the Voward and Rereward as the ground may ſerue, is a herſe or broade ſquare.
               By theſe exerciſes of augmenting ranks as do appeare, Souldiers may bee brought to perfection of order in aray, and by the ſame bee brought to perfection in quadrant or hearſe, according as numbers and ground will ſerue.
            
            
               
               Here followeth the fift and ſixt order of trayning .300. men.
               
                  The fift. 
                  SOmetimes the Captaines with your bands aforeſaid, be appointed to ſome exploits with ſuch ſilence that Drums ſound not, nor clap Weapons, neither vſe any noyſe vntill they haue recouered the place conuenient for their enterpriſes, yet ſometimes the officers in the rereward ſendeth a word paſſing from man to man, vntill it come to the voward onely, from one ranke vnto an other, which may bee ſaid (Sarre aduance) or ſuch like, appointed two or three ranks of gentlemen ſkilfull Souldiers to leade the voward, knowing the encounter to ioyne, that waie by order of the officers, the ſhot doth iſſue to ſkirmiſh betwixt the leders aforeſaid. The Battaile may ioyne cloſe together if occaſion requireth, alſo the reſt of the ſhot may wade through to helpe the voward.
               
                  The ſixt. As before is placed 12. in ranke, with your Billes and Enſigne in the midſt, ſo it falleth out to be 12. in ranke in breadth, and 13. in length, placing your ſhot in the front and rereward, the which as occaſion ſerueth, may be brought to ſkirmiſh any waies. This ſame Battell as the ground ſerueth, is verie ſtrong againſt the enimie.
               
                  
                  
                     The fift. Orders of trayning three hundred men. The Voward.
                     The S Rereward. S 
                     The ſixt.
                     The Vorward.
                     The Reward.
                  
               
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           The firſt. I. The Voward C The Rereward
                           The ſecond. L The Voward L
                           The third. L The Voward C The Rereward.
                           The fourth. L The Voward. C The Rereward.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
               
                  
                  
                     The viij. Battalle.
                     The Voward.
                     The S Rereward.
                  
               
               Sometime marching in ſtraights, & eſpecially hauing ſome gard in Rereward for the ſafetie of the Enſigne, you may ſend certaine Rankes or Pikes vnto the Front towards the enimie, which ſhall wade through to ſtrengthen the battaile, placing the one halfe of your ſhot to the ſkirmiſh in the front, the other halfe in the Rereward.
               
                  
                  
                     The eight Battaile.
                  
               
               
                  The viij. SOmetime hauing ſcope of Grounde, ſtanding in doubt of Horſemen, cauſe the numbers to march .12. in a Ranke at large, a good diſtaunce aſunder, and ſo to ſtand ſtill, euerie man towards their quarters, placing

their Shot on all the ſides betwixt the Pikes which after they haue diſcharged, being charged with horſe, may retire to the Billes, and your outward Fronts ſerue cloſe together, vntill the Shot haue charged, and at the repulſe of the Horſe, to open your Pikes at large, and the Shot to be cō
                  maunded to ſkirmiſh as they were in the fronts. This battaile is of great force.
            
            
               To order and imbattaile 4. hundred in quadrant proportion.
               
                  The firſt TWo Enſignes accompanied with 4. C. men may be brought to this quadrant proportion againſt the defence of the enimie by placing .15. in the front, ioyning 4. ranks of Pikes, in the Voward, and 4. in the Rereward, 4. in the Flankes, your Billes and Enſigne in the midſt, placing your Shot in ſixe wings for the reſcuing of each other, the reſt of your ſhot in the Vowarde and Rereward in Diamond wiſe. This Battaile for ſo ſmall a number is of great force. (⸫)
               
                  
                  
                     To order and imbattaile 4. hundred in quadrant proportion.

The firſt Battaile.
                  
                  
                  
                     The like number placed in manner of an hearſe or twofold Battaile.

The ſecond.
                  
               
               
                  
                  The ſecond. THe ground may be ſuch as it ſhall be neceſſarie to place the ſame number in maner of a Hearſe, or twofold battaile, placing 10. in ranke to length, and 20. in breadth, placing your Bils and Enſigne in the midſt, encountring the enimy on your broade ſide, ſo ſhall you occupie more handes, then the quadrant battaile doth, occupying leſſe ground in marching, then the other battaile. You muſt cauſe them to tarrie cloſe together, trayling their Pikes on the ground, beeing ready to offer the puſh to the footemen, and to croſſe for the defence of the horſe, your ſhot to be placed, as before you appeareth. This is of great ſtrength, ſo that the Enimie cannot enuiron you.
            
            
               To imbattaile fiue hundred men in a quadrant proportion.
               ACcording to the worthineſſe of the Captaine, the greater charge is committed, as one Captaine to haue charge of 5. C. men vnder one Enſigne, the which to bring into quadrant Battaile, you muſt place 16. pikes in front, making 4. rankes quadrant, placing your Bils in the middeſt with your enſigne, ſo haue you lift the body of your battaile .250. men, your ſhot to be placed in the front and rereward .110. in the flankes of the battell 140. in the 8. wings, the which being charged, may diſchage and retire whereby to be reſcued by the leſt: they may in this proporiton march any way vnto them needfull, be it either to trauaile, or els for to winne grounds by any aduantage.
               
                  
                  
                     To imbattaile 500. men in a quadrant proportion.
                  
                  
                  
                     To place the like number in an hearſe or ſquare Battaile.
                  
               
               
                  SOme time by reaſon of the ground it is neceſſarie to bring ſuch a number into an hearſe or twofolde battaile, which may bee more auailable then the quadrant battaile. To bring them into this preſent proportion, you muſt place 13. pikes in breadth, and 21. in length, your Bils and Enſigne in the middeſt, your ſhot in the Fronts and Wings. Thus in order they may turne their faces, and march any way to them needefull, which practiſe may greatly auaile at neede, as vnto great numbers apperteineth.
               
                  Thus leauing to treate any further of priuate bands, here following I will ſhew ſome points, and neceſſarie practiſes to great numbers, conuenient to order, ioine, and imbattaile.
               
            
            
               Laudata virtus creſcit.
            
            The end of the firſt booke.
         
         
            
            ¶In this booke is conteined certeine neceſſarie practiſes to bee exerciſed with ſuch handes and regiments, as vnto Coronels or Chieftaines, to be committed, to many exploites of ſeruice greatly auaileable.
            SVch appointed to the leading and gouenment of numbers aforeſaid (with their bands ſuted) weapons as accuſtomed The Captaines and Companies bee vnto them obedient and obſerue their commaundements to all intents, as if the Lord Lieutenant Generall were preſent. And for that Captaines with their bands the better and more eaſily may bring their numbers into ſuch order or battelles, as the Sergeant maior, by the Coronels or Chieftaines commaunded muſt do, hereafter enſuing doth follow proportions to the aſsiſtance of the ſame. And for Caliuers, whoſe practiſe in the Skirmiſh be the firſt in the field, and beginneth the fight, the letters following in diuers proportions ſignifie ſuch, and ſhew to march, skirmiſh, inuade or retire in politike maner, as to ſuch doth apperteine, as well by bands diuided in ſundry parcels diſtantly in ſunder, as either may reſcue other, as alſo to retire by ranks reſcewing as aforeſaid. And conſidering how by inuentions dayly deuiſed, the exerciſes and ſubtelties of the ſame doe daily increaſe, to the great perill of the vnexpert, as we may dayly ſee, theſe ſundrie proportions following vnto ſome vnknowne, may in times conuenient be exerciſed to bring to perfection ſuch ſmal numbers, ſo to profit in greater numbers, which the vnperfect cannot accompliſh.
            
               
               
                  Certeine neceſſarie points for to be exerciſed with numbers of Caleeuers and Archers to diuers intents of ſeruice in the field.
               
               
                  The firſt.
THis number vppon the ſight of the Enimies muſt march three in a ranke, caſting themſelues in proportion of a Ring, ſo to abide there, appointing themſelues to approche ſtill in araie, there to diſcharge by Rankes, ſo in the Rereward to charge readie to ſeruice againe, marching round.
               
                  
                  
                     The voward.
                     The rereward.
                  
               
               
                  The ſecond.
THis nomber encountering the ring muſt diſcharge by rankes, and after the firſt ranke hath diſcharged, to retire betwixt the Rankes vntill they come to the rereward, there to charge and followe his looſeman to ſeruice againe. Thus may you continually mainteine ſkirmiſh how little or great ſo euer your number be, it giueth great incouragement to the ſouldiers ſtanding but one ſhot and retireth.
               
                  
                  
                     Orders of ſhot verie neceſſarie for diuers intents of ſeruice in the fielde.
                     The Voward.
The third.
                     
                     Theſwo bands change tanks, and place on their broad ſides.
                  
                  
                     
                        The fourth.
Theſe bands of Archers be brought to ſeruice by the Caleeuers afore them.
                  
               
               THeſe two bands of calleuers ſet to recounter the enimie on their broad ſides, the frōts diſcharge and turn their faces, retiring betwixt the other,The third. which aduance in like maner to ye reſeue of the ſame. Thoſe retire & charge againe to ſeruice, thus practiſing the ſkirmiſh may bring the bands of archers to ſeruice, to the great anoying and diſcomfiting of the enemie.
               Theſe bands of archers being brought to ſeruice by the calleuers,The fourth. although that the calleuers be counted to be of greater force thē they be of, & the archers be not vſed in the field ſo much as they haue bene, yet hauing light ſhafts made to ſhoot 12, or 14, ſcore, may kepe their place ſhooting altogither ouer the heads of the caleeuers, to the blemiſhing and very great anoie of the enemie.
               
                  
                  
                     Orders of ſhot verie necceſſarie for diuers intents of ſeruice in the fielde.
                  
               
               Theſe two bands diſcharged by rankes, and return to the rereward, and charge againe.
               Theſe two bands placed 5. in ranks like two hornes are to be brought to ſkirmiſh in proportion, like as doth appeare, the fronts or voward diſchargeth, the one retiring on the left hand, the other on the right hand vnto therereward, and there to charge againe, euery one to follow his lodeſman vnto ſeruice againe. (⸫)
               
                  
                  
                     Orders for ſhot verie neceſſarie for diuers intents of ſeruice auaileable,
                     The ſeauenth.
                  
               
               According to the number of the Enemies you muſt aunſwere them with like proportion and numbers,The vij. hauing great regard to obtaine hill, winde, water, wood, &c the which greatly auaileth, ſometimes the aduantage of grounds is ſuch that ſmall numbers way repulſe greater numbers. The grounds large and plain, make your maineward of ſhot larg & ſtrong, the better to aunſwer the enemie, the frōts to diſcharge and retire to the rereward, there to charge againe, and being thus ioyned in ſkirmiſh with the enemie, the Captaine and officers muſt foreſee the beſt waye to repulſe and ouerthrowe the enemy, ſending two winges to flanke the enemies & to encounter them the which being wiſely foreſéene will greatly profit.
               
                  
                  
                     Orders of ſhot verie neceſſarie for diuers intents of ſeruice auailable.
                  
               
               Theſe three bands marching at large maie wade through in ſkirmiſh, or retire betwixt the rankes as occaſion ſerueth either band reſcewing other, to charge in the Rereward, and to aduance to ſeruice againe. This may you continually maintain ſkirmiſh.
               Theſe practiſes and ſuch like exerciſes in times conuenient may bring perfection to ſeruice with ſhot at need, the rather through the good induſtrie and painefull trauaile of officers and the ſouldiers by whoſe gentle patience it is ſooner obtained.
               
                  
                  
                     An order to imbattaile 600. men at the ſodaine againſt horſemen and footmen.
                  
               
               IT is appointed vnto two Captaines to bring 600. men to conuey, charge or doe exploits, as the commandement of the higher Officers ſhall appoint them.
               The captaines aduertiſed of ſtraightes, paſſages, and ſcituations of the countries: alſo on what parte the Enimies be moſt like to aſſault. them, muſt giue order vnto your Officers to place 13. in front, as before you is mentioned, your Enſigne in the middeſt with the Billes, your Shotte placed in the Winges as appeareth. At ſuch times as the Eenmie ſhall aſſault you, ioyne both your Bandes, and become one ſtrengh, as the ground doth ſerue. This order is verie neceſſarie to doe many exploits.
               
                  
                  
                     The like number brought in maner of a Hearſe, to defend horſmen.
                  
               
               SOmetimes marching by 10. in ranke, vppon the fighte of the Enemies deuide into two partes and ioyne their broad ſides deuided togither, and become in one ſtrength, which being thus placed, is in length 24. and in breapth 10. Againſt horſemen they muſt pitch their pikes on thn ground and croſſe them, and againſt footemen beare aboue hande. They muſt ſarrie cloſe together, and not diſſeuer to followe or flie, leaſt their diſorders make place for Enimies to enter, as by this proportion doth appeare. Sometimes for the ſafetie of & our ſhot you muſt receiue thē within the gard of your

Pikes. This .h. ſignifieth horſmen galloping the field to breake vppon you, where they may beſt enter, and moſt eaſely, as by the void ſpace arpeareth, the ouerplus of your ſhot to be placed in the 4. wings without the battaile. This number to diſſeuer is very perillous.
            
            
               An order to imbattaile 900. men at the ſodeine.
               CAptaines marching with 900, men vnderſtanding by ſcout or ſpie that the enemie pretendeth to ſkirmiſh with them or otherwiſe to ioine baitaile, you may deuide your bands in three parts, marching 9. in a rāke placing Officers betwixt euery band, that being aſſaulted may ioine the Voward and the Rereward to the middle ward, ſo fall they out to be an hearſe battaile, placing your ſhotte in the winges, that they may the better reſorte to the ſkirmiſh, likewiſe to retire as occaſion ſerueth. This is a ſingular good order for the obtayning ef any groūds or doing of exploits. (⸫)
               
                  
                  
                     ¶ An order to imbattaile 900. men at the ſodaine.
                     The Voward.
                     The Rereward.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     An order to imbattaile the like number in quadrant proportion at the ſodaine as if the Sergeant Maior were there preſent.
                     The Voward.
                     The Rereward.
                  
               
               WHen battails are to be made, the Sergeant maior giueth commaundement vnto the Sergeants of the bands to bring their companies ſeueral and to ioyne your bandes the broad ſides togeather, as your

numbers ſerue, The Captaines, Droms & Fiffes, with your Enſigne placed in the midſt of the execution, as well for the ſafetie of the ſame as for the comforting of the ſouldiers? neuertheleſſe, ſuch order is taken, that Lieuetenants and Sergeants of bands with other ſeruiceable Gentlemen, bée placed to lead the Voward and Rereward of the battaile, where onſets be vncertaine, whoſe beautifull armours, politike and couragious onſet is to the enemie a terrour, to their owne companies great comfort. The ſhot to be placed in foure Troupes with two Wings in the Rereward, for that they may eaſier maintaine ſkirmiſh round about the battaile, on which ſide ſoeuer they be aſſaulted.
               THeſe foure quarters ioyned in one, ſéem to bée 12. hundred men vnder four Enſignes euerie wayes, who at the enemies ſight muſt place thirteen in ranke, which fall to be a quadrant euerie way, which ſodainly may ioyne their long weapons togeather making one quadrant of foure. Your Droms and Fiffes with the Captaine placed next to the Enſigne, the Lieftenants in the Wings, and the Sergeant in the Vowarde and Rereward, whereby they may the better giue intelligence by ſigne or word what is beſt to bée done. Three hundred men bearing Caléeuers in the Wings, & thrée hundred in Demie Diamonde wiſe, after the Alm aine maner in the midſt, the which being diſcharged, the Caléeuers will greatlie preuaile. This way they may march wholie togeather, or retire any waies to ſeruice néedfull, readie with their ſhot to encounter the enemy any wayes in ſkirmiſh, either wing reſcuing other as need ſhall require. And although the Sergeants Maior appointeth order for the ſame, yet the Sergeants of euerie Band hauing experience, only ruleth and giueth order to their owne charge, and appoint and place ſuch in the fronts, Rereward and wings, as to them ſéeme moſt conuenient.
               
                  THis proportion is after the Almaine maner of imbattailing, much like vnto the order of the Romanes who deuided their Legions into diuers cohorts to this intent, that when the Fronts were wearied the Maineward and Rereward ſucceeded, hauing by late experience in Fraunce tried, that the deuiding of the Battaile in many Bandes, ſo that they haue Pikes ſufficient to impsle the Billes, and to euerie Bande their number of ſhotte and horſe, is more auaileable then anie battaile being made of a whole bodie, or as the Gréekes tearme it, a Phalange: for they are to be out of length or breadth as the grounde or occaſion ſerueth, to charge and encounter the enimie placed in one battaile, of euerie quarter to their great detriment, and ouerthrowing of anie ſo placed, being of ſufficient ſtrength for defence of horſe: and though the firſt or ſecond, or third, ſhould be ouerthrowen, yet the reſt kéeping their order are to ſucceede. Whereas the battaile being one, after the Fronts be ouerthrowne, the rereward is readie to run, the which being diſordred, can hardly recouer to place them in order againe.
               
                  
                  
                     And order to imbattell 12. C. men quadrantlie at the ſodaine.
                     This waies you may march or retire anle waies that ſhoulde bee thought needfull to the doings of anie exploits.
                  
               
               
               
                  
                  
                     A Coronels charge in twofolde wiſe, the pikes croſt for defence of horſe.
                  
               
               
            
            
               
               ¶ An order to imbattaile a Coronels charge.
               COronels or Chieftains who oft times according to their experience and worthineſſe of ſeruice haue the charge and leading of fifteene hundred men more or leſſe, to whom is committed diuers ſundrie exploits and points of ſeruice in the field, wherof they diſcrie anie multitude of horſemen, pretending for to charge them and to inuiron your battail, hauing no Wagon. Borough, or pale of carriages, water, hedge ditch, or other ſuccours, but onelie the ſtrength of their manuall weapons and pollice of defence vpon ſight of the enemies, muſt caſt the Voward and Rereward to become one ſtrength, and to ſerue cloſe togeather, to touch croſſe, and defend, as by this order may appeare. The thrée o
                     ••
                  moſt ranks faire armed, and ſkilfull gentlemen and others, doe pitch their pikes on the ground couching and croſſing the ſame, the two ranks next giuing the puſh at the length of the pikes, the ſhot placed within the pikes for ſafegard, ſhoote and charge ſtill in their places. This order to encounter with footmen if it bée poſſible will recouer the aduantage of winde, hill, and Sunne, in good order, on the one ſide of the hill to ioyne in fight, where God giueth the victorie before theſe ſame encounters.
               
                  Reuiue your ſouldiers with meate, drinke, and good counſaile, and with comfortable wordes to animate and encourage the ſame.
               
            
            
               
               How to imbattaile .150. men in quadrant proportion.
               AS before I haue ſet foorth the order or imbatteling of 150 mē in two fold wiſe, yt which in ſome groūd is much auaileable, for yt it occupieth more hands thē yt iuſt ſquare in fiight at one inſtāt, notwithſtanding ſuch muſt be aſſured yt the enimy can approch but one way, which els may be preiudicial therefore in the plain field the iuſt ſqare or quadrant is, the ſtrongeſt order yt may be, neuertheles cōuenient it is at ſuch time as you purpoſe to ioin battaile with the enemie, hauing ordinance & other cariage to ye ſame in the wings of the rereward, thereby to impale the ſame yt the enemie enter not but in the fronts. Alſo the expert captaines muſt foreſée to obteine hill, winde, Sun, or anie other aduantage, the which diuers waies greatly profiteth. If your battail be aſſaulted with horſe, then couch & croſſe your pikes, and againſt footmen ſarrie cloſe, trailing your pikes vntill the encounter, & then to offer the puſh till repulſe be giuen, and God giue the victory. In the fronts you muſt place your beſt armed & moſt valiant men, aſwel to encourage the reſt, as to bee a terror to the enemies, your ſhot to be placed in the wings & rereward, for being placed in the fronts, they cannot well retire, but vpō their own pikes, or els vpō ye ſhot in ye wings. To be brought to this proportiō you muſt place 6. ranks of pikes 19 in ranke euery waies which comes to 512. the ſhot to bée placed in 4. troups in the wings, 10, in rank which is 400. & 310 in rank, & 3. in bredth in the Rereward, the which are to ſuccéede the other troupes after they haue diſcharged, the 50. ſhot & 48. pikes are to bee placed aabout ye artillery, or otherwiſe at ye diſcretion of ye Coronell, ye captaines & lieftenants with the ſergeants to be placed about the battaile, to giue ſuch order as may beſt preuaile. The Chieftaines & Coronell to be placed within the battaile, as appeareth in the figure.
               
                  
                  
                     Howe to imbattaile 150. men in Quadrant proportion.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     A Table to diſcouer numbers by hundreds, placed by. 3.5.7.9, &c. in ranke and raie aſſembled, from one. C. vnto one thouſand fiue hundred, that is to ſaie, marching by 3, in rranke, 34. rankes containe. 102. men, by which example following, you may plainlie diſcouer the numbers.
                     
                         
                        Ranks.
                         
                        Men.
                         
                     
                     
                        3. in ranke
                        34
                        
                           is
                        
                        102
                     
                     
                        67
                        201
                     
                     
                        100
                        300
                     
                     
                        5. in ranke
                        20
                        
                           is
                        
                        100
                     
                     
                        40
                        200
                     
                     
                        60
                        300
                     
                     
                        80
                        400
                     
                     
                        100
                        500
                     
                     
                        7. in ranke
                        15
                        
                           is
                        
                        105
                     
                     
                        29
                        203
                     
                     
                        43
                        301
                     
                     
                        57
                        399
                     
                     
                        72
                        504
                     
                     
                        86
                        600
                     
                     
                        100
                        700
                     
                     
                        9. in ranke
                        11
                        
                           is
                        
                        99
                     
                     
                        22
                        198
                     
                     
                        33
                        296
                     
                     
                        45
                        405
                     
                     
                        56
                        504
                     
                     
                        67
                        603
                     
                     
                        78
                        702
                     
                     
                        89
                        801
                     
                     
                        100
                        900
                     
                     
                        11. in rank
                        9
                        
                           is
                        
                        99
                     
                     
                        18
                        198
                     
                     
                        17
                        297
                     
                     
                        37
                        406
                     
                     
                        46
                        506
                     
                     
                        56
                        616
                     
                     
                        64
                        715
                     
                     
                        74
                        820
                     
                     
                        81
                        897
                     
                     
                        91
                        1017
                     
                     
                        100
                        1100
                     
                     
                        13. in rank,
                        8
                        
                           is
                        
                        104
                        Mē
                        
                     
                     
                        16
                        208
                     
                     
                        23
                        299
                     
                     
                        31
                        404
                     
                     
                        39
                        507
                     
                     
                        46
                        702
                     
                     
                        54
                        806
                     
                     
                        62
                        897
                     
                     
                        69
                        1014
                     
                     
                        78
                        1105
                     
                     
                        85
                        1196
                     
                     
                        92
                        1230
                     
                     
                        100
                        1300
                     
                     
                        15. in rank
                        7
                        
                           is
                        
                        105
                        Mē
                        
                     
                     
                        14
                        210
                     
                     
                        20
                        300
                     
                     
                        27
                        404
                     
                     
                        34
                        510
                     
                     
                        40
                        600
                     
                     
                        47
                        707
                     
                     
                        54
                        810
                     
                     
                        60
                        900
                     
                     
                        67
                        1005
                     
                     
                        74
                        1110
                     
                     
                        80
                        1200
                     
                     
                        87
                        1305
                     
                     
                        94
                        1410
                     
                     
                        100
                        1500
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        ❧A two-folde Battell of 2000 men.
                  
               
               
               
                  
                     THIS TABLE SERVETH TO PVT IN ORDER OF BATTAILE LONG OR SOVARE, ON HORSEBACKE OR ON FOOTE, OR TO NVMBER Enimies ſo placed: alſo to tile or pa
                           •
                        e or meaſure ground of like portion: alſo what ground ſerueth to encampe euery one of the long or ſquare Battailes.
                  
               
               
               
               
                  A quadrant or two-fold battaile of 2000. men.
               
                  THis preſent fourme of battaile, which repreſents a quadrant, hath bene often vſed as very profitable of many Italians, well experienced, and of great credite in the field: it is as it doth appeare, flanked and enuironed with twoo greate bodies or ſléeues of Hargubuſiers, the which containe in number for each flanke 380. men, and in the Voward 100. and in the Rereward 140. Which ſhot are to bee carried about the battaile very commodiouſly for ſeruice, and as they ſhall ſeeme otherwiſe to bee imployed by the Sergeant maior. In the bodie of the battaile, are 800. Pikes, 200. Billes, and 10. Enſignes, hauing to euery Enſigne 200. men, the which to be brought to this forme, you muſt place 45. in ranke for the bredth, and 22. in ranke for the length, the Captaines, Lieutenaunts and Sergeants, as before you is mentioned, and the Chieftaines in the heart of the battaile. And although this manner or forme giueth ſcope to moue which way they liſt, yet I hold it beſt, not to ſuffer them to ſtirre much. And that little mouing which is to bee graunted to them, muſt not bee ouer haſtie but in pace flowe, ſober, and well meaſured, vnleſſe he hath to ſet againſt the like battaile of the enemie, for then the laſt rankes muſt be ſomewhat quicker in ſtirring, and to bring 10000. or 20000. to this order readily, they muſt in ſetting forward, march with maniples well ſeuered and deuided, which manner is very readie to be compaſſed with eaſe. But to place them in length, dubling the ranks, bringeth them likewiſe to a very formall order of battaile: of which I haue ſufficiently ſpoken, in the office of the Sergeant maior, in the firſt booke.
            
            
               
               A Battaile in forme of a Croſſe, very neceſſarie to be vſed, as well in the night as by day, becauſe all the weapons are deuided by themſelues.
               
                  THis Battaile in forme of a full Croſſe, conſiſteth of 10. Enſignes, euery Enſigne hauing vnder it 200. ſouldiers, ſo that the whole number contayneth 2000. men. It hath 4. fronts or faces, whereof euery one is accompanied with Hargubuſiers, which may in tyme of neceſſitie bée couered and defended by the armed Pikes, ſo that the formoſt rankes be moued by the flankes and ſides. This forme hath bene vſed of Spanyards and Italians. It is a gallant battaile, and of force ſufficient to reſiſt the enemie in open field, albeit ſetting vnwares, and beſides ſuperior both againſt horſemen and footmen, the Hargubuſiers are 1000. the which are the halfe of the number. Theſe Hargubuſiers being deuided into fower parts, muſt be in euery flanke 200. placing 14. in ranke euery way, the Billes and Enſignes placed in the midſt of the Croſſe, are 200. and the whole number of Pikes, are 800. the which are to be placed on euery quarter of the Billes 200. placing 14. euery waies, the which make a iuſt quadrant of people, ſo that there remaine to bee placed by the Sergeant maior 16. Pikes and 4. Billes, and of ſhot 200. This rule may ſerue in proportion for any number being very excellent for the night, becauſe each weapon being deuided by themſelues, may be readie at the ſodaine for any ſeruice, either to giue battaile, or for defence of the Campe, the horſmen and the field péeces to bee placed as ſhall ſeeme beſt by the Chieftaines or the Sergeant maior.
               
                  
                  
                  
                     The Battell called a Croſſe, verie excellent both for day and night.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     THE BATTELL IN FORME OF A MOONE, BEING OF GREAT FORCE FOR THE NIGHT.
                  
               
               
            
            
               
               An excellent order of incamping, if thou ſtandeſt in doubt of the enemie.
               
                  THis ſquare battaile in forme of a Moone is very cōuenient and fit to be executed in the night tyme, for yt there being appoynted any Chieftaine whatſoeuer, which may place the firſt companies that come to him, at the Enſigne in order before aſſigned, and the great Sergeant thē receiuing them, and from hand to hand parting them into ſeuerall companies, in maner as this forme ſhall require, it is ordered very eaſily, and it is no great matter to deuide the weapons without confuſion: either to march, or otherwiſe to vſe themſelues ſeuerally from the reſt, more or leſſe as it ſhall be néedfull, for that euery weapon doth ſtand at his owne defence by it ſelf, as firſt the Artillerie, next the Enſignes, then the Billes, or Holbards, and in the outtermoſt circle, the armed Pikes, which may vpō the ſodaine hy the Sergeant or the Corporalles of the fielde, be brought to any other forme of battell: alſo the great Sergeant may place the Hargubuſiers in ſo many companies and ſo many formes, and ſo much diſtance one from another, as the ſituation of the place doth either bind him to, or may ſeeme to require, to the end that the principall ſquare may be beſt defended and flanked. And for that the purpoſe of this forme is eaſie enough of it ſelfe to be vnderſtood: & alſo for that I haue more largely ſpoken of it in the firſt booke in the office of the great Sergeant, I will no further intreate thereof, aduertiſing withall, that euery battaile in ſquare forme, this or other, that muſt bee ordered in the night, aboue al muſt prouide that it haue placed euery ſort of weapons by themſelues, that thereby confuſion may be auoyded, and beſides they may call foorth to ſeruice any companie preſently vppon any neceſſitie that may befall, aduertiſing that good watch and ſcoute be kept on horſebacke and on foote, as néere the enemie as is poſſible, and to giue aduertiſement

whereby you may knowe what is beſt of you to be done.
            
            
               A way to march and to conduct foorth the Armie.
               
                  IF any Generall or Maiſter of a Campe, Coronell, or Sergeant Generall that hath charge to conduct an Hoſte to march from one place to another, it is requiſit, that if he haue not experience of ye countrie himſelfe, that he carrie ſuch as haue experience, that he with them may conſider well of the ſcituation and place, whether he is to goe with his Hoaſt, as through Plaines, or néere a Hill, or by Hilles, or on Vallies that haue Hilles on both the ſides, or by Woods, or néere to a Wood, or els where a Riuer is néere. It is alſo requiſite that ſome of the light horſe, as well for diſcouering the enemie, as otherwiſe to take the breadth of the ſtraights and paſſages goe before, and to make certificate that according to the breadth the Hoaſt may march. And put caſe, that one part of the way be fiftéene foote broade, the Hoaſt ſhalbe made to march by fiue in a ranke, becauſe euery footman will haue three foote in breadth from ſhoulder to ſhoulder, & ſixe foote in length betwixt ranke and ranke, and one foote for euery perſon, ſo that 21. foote in breadth, and two myles in length, wil containe an Armie of ten thouſand men. After the ſame reaſon whether there be twentie or thirtie thouſand footmen, according to the meaſuring of ground by the foote they may bee ſet in order very eaſily, neither can the leader bee deceiued when he knoweth how many armed men euery place can containe. And after the ſame order as the place doth inlarge, he muſt enlarge the rankes, cauſing part of

thy Shot to goe before the aray, and part behinde, and other to goe in ſuccour of thy Horſemen that goe in viewing the paſſages, and the Ambuſhments, with the whole doings of the enemie: and let an other part be for a vauntgard and retrogard to the ray, to bee able to ſerue them at néede, and an other part to go alwaies at the flankes of the ray, the which if there bee Ditches, ſhall ſerue as a Counter-mure againſt the Horſemen of the enemie, and if they be men at armes, they muſt march on both the ſides of the Battaile, and alſo of the Hargubuſiers that doe march by the flanks of the Battaile, and the Lighthorſmen to ſerue for Scowtes both before and behinde the ray. Alſo there be abundaunce of Labourers to make places plaine, and to caſt downe Ditches and Bridges, and to make defences and other neceſſarie things that are required in marching, the which muſt bée garded by your Lighthorſe and Shot, and when you depart to fayne to goe to ſome other place then that you go to, and if there bée no men at armes to appoynt to euery Regiment certaine Hargubuſiers to ſerue on Horſebacke, the which may ſerue in ſtead of men at armes, and when occaſion ſerues to ſerue on foote agayne. It is requiſite that all Souldiers followe their Conſtables and leaders, and haue great care and diligence in marching, to the end, that by ſodaine aſſaults they bee not at euery ſteppe to riſe in a rumour, and confuſedly to runne here and there, and the one to goe contrary to the other, and finally comming about them, not to be able to do any thing of any profite. For which cauſe thou oughteſt to march with thyne Armie through euery place in battaile ray, whereby the Souldiers may bee made more apt and ſpéedie to make a voyage, and quicke and readie to reſiſt if néede ſhall be. They hauing learned to followe the Enſignes and attend to the commaundements, and to behaue themſelues valiantly, according to their place and order, if thou march in a plaine Countrey, it is requiſite that thy Pikes march in battaile ray, retyring thyne Armie into

a little ſpace, ſo that by the ſtraightneſſe and facilitie of inlarging, thou be not conſtrayned to extend thy ſelfe into too much length, which faſhion of marchings ſeemes to giue power to the enemie to aſſault commoudiouſly their aduerſaries, and according to the occaſion to hurt them, he knowing to bee taken from them the commoditie to defend themſelues, foraſmuch either with more largeneſſe comming againſt thee, the which is wont to happen both the hornes being compaſſed, it is like that he ſhall eaſilie diſorder and put thee to flight, or els giuing charge on the flanke in the midſt of thy battaile, hauing alreadie broken thine order, ſodeinly ſtop thy men from being able to goe forward, being cloſed in the araies of their enemies: wherfore mynding to retyre in a mayne battaile, and to turne to reſiſt, they ſhall bee able to doe little good, as thoſe that haue vſed ſuch a maine battaile, which for want of thickneſſe is nothing ſtrong, but altogether weake. Alſo if the enemie ſhould charge thee on the Rereward, thou ſhalt be brought to the very ſame neceſſitie, becauſe thou ſhalt bee ſo compaſſed as thy fronts ſhall not be able to ſuccour the laſt, or the laſt to ſuccour the firſt. For the which thing it is alwaies better and more ſure and eaſier, to gouerne the bands that march, cloſe and ſquare, then thinne and long, eſpecially, foraſmuch as to an armie that marcheth long, oft tymes happens that of ſome thing ſeene doubtfull and vncertaine, there groweth ſodeinly feare and terrour, becauſe ſometymes it hath chaunced that men deſcending from high and hillie places, into the plaine, to places expedite and open, and the formoſt ſeeing the laſt of the ſame band by a great diſtaunce to come after, ſuppoſing themſelues to bée aſſaulted of ſome Ambuſh of enemies, it hath bene ſeene, they haue ſodeinly turned to fight, and afterwards no otherwiſe then enemies, with their owne companyons, gone together by the eares. The victualles, the cariages, and all the reſt of prouiſion, I iudge ſhould bée placed in the midſt of the armie, that without great daunger

ſuch things may bee caried and conducted after the armie: but if it ſhall be otherwiſe the hindmoſt part would be garded and defended of the moſt valiant Souldiers, as in the fronts, becauſe that at vnwares may happen many things, thy Lighthorſmen going before inueſtigating and ſpying where they may paſſe, hauing occaſion to paſſe by Mountaines, Woods, places cloſed with Hilles and moſt great Deſarts, becauſe the enemie many tymes by oportunitie will lay an Ambuſh priuely by the paſſage to aſſault his aduerſarie, which little thereof taking heede, hath eaſily broken and brought them to vtter decay, the which Ambuſhments if the conductor by way of explorators ſhal foreſee with a little paine, hauing preuented the counſaile of the enemie, may get him a moſt great name of prudēce, and likewiſe ſaue his Armie. And as for the Plaines thou with thyne owne eyes maiſt ſee a farre off, foraſmuch as in the day duſt moued and lifted vp into the aire, doth ſhew the mouing and ſtirring of the enemie, and in the night the fires and flames ſignifieth their Camp to be nere. When thy men are to be conducted and not to fight, thou oughteſt to remoue by day, if peraduenture ſome thing do not conſtraine thée, for the which thou thinkeſt it good to goe in haſt to come before thyne enemie, where in déede for ſuch occaſion thou mayſt remoue by night; ſo that thou knowe it may ſafely bee done to fight with the enemie. Leade thy men not in haſte but ſoftly, and inforce them not to make too long a iourney, foraſmuch as labour taken before men doe come to fight, is ſeene moſt oftentimes vaynly to conſume and waſt the ſtrength of their bodies. And marching in the Countrey of thy frends, it is néedfull to commaund thy ſouldiers that in no maner of wiſe they touch or marre any thing, but rather altogether to refraine, conſidering that Souldiers hauing weapons and libertie to doe what ſhall pleaſe them, will fauour nothing, eſpecially, for that the ſight of things that pleaſe men, out of doubt is woone moſt daungerouſly to leade ignoraunt and vnwarie men

to deſire them, and with the ſwéetneſſe of robbing to entice them to all manner of miſchiefe, whereunto if thou prouide not, thy friends and thy confederates for verie ſmall occaſion will become enemies. Notwithſtanding, the Countrey of thyne enemies, thou ſhalt ſuffer thy ſouldiers openly to deſtroye, burne, and conſume, becauſe by the dearth of victualles and lacke of money, Warres are woont to diminiſh, and bee extinguiſhed: and contrarywiſe through abundance and riches they are nouriſhed & mainteyned, but firſt before thou ſuffer thyne enemies Countrey to be deſtroyed, thou ſhouldeſt giue aduice to thyne enemies, threatning them what thou wilt doe, if they will not yéeld vnto thée: for that the perill of the miſerie prepared, and the feare of ruyne looked for, ofttymes conſtraines men to graunt many things, the which at the firſt by no maner of meanes had bene poſſible to haue brought them to paſſe, but after they haue once receiued the hurt, they will make little account of thée, and deſpiſe al other things as though thou couldeſt doe them no more harme. Albeit if thou knoweſt ſurely that in the Countrey of thyne enemies thou muſt tarrie long with thyne Armie, ſuffer to be taken and ſpoyled thoſe things onely which thou ſeeſt not to bee greatly profitable vnto thee: but the ſame which is to bée thought may bée preſerued for thy commoditie, commaund openly to thy Souldiers that they forbeare. Hauing made readie and ſet in order thy men, tarrie not long in thyne owne Countrey, nor yet in thy confederats, leaſt that conſuming all thy prouiſion, it ſeeme not that thou art of greater hurt to thy friends then to thyne enemies, but rather conduct quickly thyne Armie into thyne aduerſaries countrey, whereby it be fertile and abundant, there may bee taken at thy neede moſt plenteouſly thoſe things that thou liſt: but if it be otherwiſe, thou ſhalt cauſe to be knowne, yt thou ſéekeſt to prouide moſt louingly both for the wealth & profite of thy friends. Beſides this, thou oughteſt to care with al diligence that marching or incamping

by ſea or land, victuals maie ſafelie be brought, foraſmuch as by ſuch meanes the marchants with all dilligence will bring all things, whiche for the vſe of an armie ſhalbe neceſſarie. Moreouer, when thou muſt paſſe by ſtraights, or march through rough and hillie waies, then is it cōuenient principallie for the preſeruation of thy things, to ſend before ſhot on horſbacke and on foote, for the kéeping of thoſe places, rocks, or incloſed waies, leaſt the enimie taking it before thee, maie both let thy paſſage to thy great hinderance and loſſe: the contrarie thou oughteſt to inforce thy ſelfe to do, when thou vnderſtandeſt the enimie to paſſe, the like thou haſt not onelie to take heede for receiuing harme, but to enforce thy ſelfe to turne againſt the enimie, thoſe deceits whereby he thought to deceiue thee. And when thou purpoſeſt to goe againſt him, it is requiſite to prouide before him, and at vnwares oppreſſe him. So diligentlie thou oughteſt to prouide to lette him euerie waie if thou vnderſtandeſt that he intendes to purſue thee. (⸫)
            
            
               
               Of the order of the march in figure, and of the placing of the weapons.
               
                  FOr ſomuch as there are diuerſe formes of marching, ſoo I thinke it good to note this onely one ſet downe in figure, as verie neceſſarie and of greate force for an armie with his whole carriages to march with all: wherein I partilie imitate the antiquitie, as otherwiſe the order now vſed, as for example, let there bee an armie of. 40000. footmen, and 14000. horſemen, according to the proportion ſet downe, there is allowed to euerie hundred footemen, fortie pikes, fiftie ſhotte, ten billes, the which falles out to be 20000. ſhotte .16000. pikes and .4000. holberdes, the which with the horſemen are to be diuided into three battailes: the Voward, the Maineward, and the Rereward battaile: In the Voward ſhall be placed .10000. footmen, whereof .4000. pikes .1000. bils .5000. ſhat. In the front of the Voward battaile are to be placed. 2000 piſtolaters on horſebacke .1000. Launces, then there are to bee placed thy piners who are to be garded with .500. ſhotte of each wing, the Sergeaunt maior muſt giue in charge that theſe Piners beate downe and make plaine the ground before them in their march, in ſuch breadth as occaſion ſhall ſerue to make your battailes, or neceſſitie procure, or the ſtraightneſſe of the place permit, alſo the Sergeant hath to appoint theſe Piners that if they be charged by the enimies, hauing their weapons to defend themſelues amongſt the ſhotte: or otherwiſe to retire themſelues by the winges of the battaile, and to be placed at the diſcreation of the Sergeant maior in the battaile, next after the Piners ſhal followe .2000. ſhotte, next vnto the ſhotte the carriages of


                  
                  
                     
                        ❧The order of march in figure.
                  
                  
                  
the firſt battaile with al the impedimentes, then followeth. 2000. pikes: and 1000. Billes with the Chieftaine in the middeſt, then followeth the other. 2000. Pikes, after the Pikes the carriages of the merchaunts, and puruaiers, who muſt by the appointment of the Generall march armed for the defence of their charge, then followeth the other 2000. ſhotte, and if you paſſe through any daungerous places, it is requiſite ſo to march as you may ſodeinly bring them to a quadrant battaile, ſending alwaies before. 100. Hargulaters on Horſebacke, and an hundred light Horſemen for vancurriers: to diſcouer and viewe the ſtraightes and paſſages: as otherwiſe to take the breadth and to giue certificate to the officers whereby they maie make their march thereafter, and to viewe that all places be free from ambuſhes and traines of the enimie, whereby the armie maie the more ſafelier and quietlier paſſe, ſending from the frontes as neceſſitie require aide to aſſiſt the curriars, then muſt followe your maine battaile of footemen, the which is 20000. Foote-men, whereof .10000. Shotte, eight thouſand Pikes. 2000. Holhardes, the which are to be diuided in this manner, next vnto the ſhotte of the Voward battaile muſt bee placed the carriages of the maine battaile, with bagge and baggage, who muſt bee placed by quarter, then foure thouſand Pikes, next the Pikes. 2000. Holberdes with the Generall in the middeſt, then the other foure thouſand Pikes, after the Pikes the carriages of the merchauntes, the weaponnes of the Rereward battaile to bee diuided as in the Voward, who muſt ſend foorth corriers from the Rerewarde, to eſpie whether the enimie doth proſecute thee to take aduauntage to thy hinderaunce or no, and you muſt place next your ſhotte in the Rereward one thouſande Launces, and two thouſande piſtolaters, your. 15000. ſhotte of the maine battel are to be placed as wings to al your battailes, who muſt be plaſt a ſixtéene paces from the ſides of the battels. Next vnto the ſhot muſt goe the artilerie of the field with their carriages, with like diſtance

on both the ſides of the battailes, then muſt bee placed. 1000. men at armes of each ſide of the battels. Likewiſe. 1000. Launces of each ſide, and .2000. hargulaters, as appeareth in the figure. The Generall muſt giue in charge that in all daungers till the footmen maie bee brought to forme of battaile, that the ordinance and artilerie maie bee redilie and equallie diuided in the two hornes of the battaile, to terrifie the enimie to the vttermoſt, and if ſo be that the enimie will attempt the battaile on the wings, lette the hargulaters with the reſt of the horſe and ſhot in the wings make the like defence, thus euery part ſhall be of like ſorte defended vntill thou haſt made thy battels as pleaſeth thée: if this order cannot pleaſe thee, to march withall, through a ſuſpected place, you maie practiſe that whiche the wiſe Captaine maie beſt like of: or according to him that ſhall haue the authoritie of the field, not thinking it amiſſe in noting this order in figure, with the diuiſion of the weapons, for that beeing well conſidered, and with aduiſe well ordered, you, maie make preſentlie as many battels as you will, and in what order you pleaſe, euen by hand, without anie greate trouble, or buſineſſe of braine. ❀❀
            
            
               
               The ordering of the lodginges.
               
                  NOow when the wiſe Captaine ſhall bée come into his enimies land, and that by his politicke gouernment he ſhall haue eſcaped all the traines of deceipt which were laid to entrap him, inſomuch that he is come to the Walles of anie Citie, there to laie ſiege: his firſt care muſt be, that he be ſettled there, where he may haue either at their backs ſome great fenne, ſome large riuer, or ſome deepe dale, hauing high pendles ouer it, either caſt there by Art, or fortified by nature, or els hee muſt prouide that hee place them where they maie be defended by ſome other meanes, as in the top of ſome hill or vnder ſome mountaine. But for the greater ſafetie of the armie, he ſhal ſend before faithfull ſpies, which ſhall diſcouer the coaſt, and make true report of all they ſee, in ſuch ſort as he doth, which is ſette in ſome promontorie, to watch and giue warning, of whatſoeuer enimies hee ſhall ſee to appeare by ſea. But if ſo bee that theſe places of ſtrength bee wanting in any place where he ſhall come, hee muſt in anie caſe prouide that hee encampe there, where he maie both hinder all paſſage, and eſpeciallie of victualls to his enimies beſieged: and yet haue free conueiaunce of prouiſion for his owne armie. He muſt vſe eſpeciallie in the choice of the Plat, the wiſe aduiſe of his companie, as namely of the Maiſter of the campe, the Sergeant Maior,The choiſe of the plat ought to be by the conſent of the chiefe Officers. and other experienced heads of his armie. And particularly for the Plat it ſelfe he may follow the counſaile of the Maiſter of the Campe, the Sergeant Maior: whether it bee commodious for the victualling of the Campe, hee muſt learne of the chieefe Purueier: and

whether it be fit to fight in, he maie take the counſaile of other beaten ſouldiers: ſo that all hauing the election of the place both by the benefit of the The
                     •
                  riks, and the helpe of practiſe they ſhalbe lodged in places well defenced, wholeſome in aire, plentie in Water and Wood and Meddowe, free of paſſage for victualls ſo that the armie bee diſquieted by no want. If in that place in which they are determined to giue the ſiege, as conuenient to compaſſe the Citie with the armie, there be anie Pallaice or place of commoditie it muſt be allotted for the Liuetenaunt generall. If there bee none, let there be made a ſquare vale of cunning men, well trenched and caſt into this forme following, which I haue reſembled partlie too that of former time, or anie other forme, as the Platte will beſt beare, or the counſaile of thoſe which are of greater experience herein then I, can better deuiſe. But of what ſort ſoeuer it be, it muſt be ſuch, that the men at armes maie lodge about the Generall, and the Launces about the men at armes, the pikemen about the Light horſe, and the hargubuſiers about the pikes, according to the manner and forme mentioned in the ende, that when by anie ſodaine chaunce either by daie or night, the campe ſhall bee ſette on by the mightie multitude and force of the enimie, eſpecially by night, the hargubuſiers and the pikes maie for a while make reſiſtaunce in the head, till the Light horſemen and the Launces with the men at armes haue leaſure to arme themſelues, and come with the Launces in the front one foote, in manner of pikemen to the Pauilion of the greate Generall, & ſo armed as they they are to trie the vttermoſt of their ſtrength and courage be, to ſaue their General and their armie, to their owne honour: which they maie doe verie well, if ſo be that they wil not ſticke to ruſh vpon their enimies, and with their Launces ſeruing for armed men, maie encounter with the pikemen, whereby they maie both defend their owne valiantlie, and beat backe their footmen, mauger their force, conſidering that they ſhall bee in complet armour and freſht,

and their enimies but armed in part, and alredie tired with the hot onſet they haue had in the fronts, and beeſides the footemen beeing newlie ſupplied and ſomewhat refreſhed may breake in by the flanke and backes of the enimie, ſo that they maie repent themſelues that they euer attempted an onſet to their ſo great loſſe, and greater ſhame, as enforced to flie and forſake their enterpriſe, onelie by the might and worthineſſe of the armed men, wherevppon the armed men, as well bard as light, ſhall at all times for their great honour, and for the aforenamed neceſſitie, lodge about their Generall. I haue ſeene the armed men, and the light horſemen lodged, ſome at the entraunce of the trench within the banke, and other without, not farre from the ditch of the ſaide trench: howbeit I haue alwaies thought ſome ouerſight to be therein. But I ſubmitte my ſelfe ſtill to better iudgement, for that if by night as I haue ſaide they ſhall bee aſſailed, they muſt needes bee taken vnprouided and vnarmed, then will they not bee able to make anie long reſiſtance, ſo that the enimie breaking in vppon them, ſhall finde the footemen with the Generall, deſtitute of the defence of the bard and light horſe: wherevppon without all doubt, they ſhall bee killed without reſpect, or taken priſoners, or otherwiſe flie from their tents, with their greate diſhonour. The forme of the Campe I haue ſet downe at the ende of this diſcourſe in figure, partlie ſhewing how the ditch ſhould be caſt about the Plat. The ſpace of the plat muſt bee agreeable to the quantitie of the armie, which is to bee determined vp the Maiſter of the Campe, the Sergeant Maior, and the whole counſell. Wherevpon the greater armie muſt haue the greater plat, and the leſſe armie the leſſe plat. Alwaies prouiding, that the ſtreets for the inner lodgings be made wide inough, aſwel for ye eaſe of the ſouldier, as for the vſe of the merchant and purueier, as alſo for whatſoeuer ſodain chaunce may happen: ſeeing that if not in order of battell, yet in this double ordred forme, one man may take anothers place, and

by that meanes help one another, The ditches ſhall be 80, paces broad and as deepe as maie be, if the ſt
                     •
                   nineſſe of the ground, or ſome hard rocks doe not hinder as it doth about the Trapanian on Sicile. For about two miles from the citie, there, rowes a huge rocke. This largeneſſe of the ditch is neceſſarie during the time of anie ſiege; but eſpeciallie if the armie be incounted in a Plat not well defenced of it ſelfe, thereby to be ſafe from al 
                     •
                  ines and ſleights of the enimie, both by daie and night. But marching by the waie, there is no ſuch depth nor largneſſe required, eſpecially if the aduerſaries armie be not in waite too ſet vppon you. Howbeit it is good alwaies to lodge ſafelie, beeing in your enimies land or otherwiſe in place of daunger and I perſwade my ſelfe, that this is a varie profitable forme of lodging, for that if the enimie ſet vppon them in their lodgings, hée ſhall finde them ariued and ordered in a quadrant battaile, and flanked on euerie ſide with hargu
                     •
                  uſiers and artillerie. And béeſides the horſemen beeing in the midſt, the enimie will ſuppoſe that all the ſtrength lieth in the head, whereas the horſemen maie come forth armed and ſet vppon them by the flankes and béehinde, through the benefite and ſcope of the large ſtreats which are from the North too the South, and from the Eaſt too the Weſt, and breaking vppon the enimie thus at vnawares by the flankes and behind them, maie endamage them to their ſhame and confuſion. It is to bee noted, that the Coronels, the Captaines and other head Officers muſt lodge about their charge of footmen, to the ende that the ſouldier in ſight of his Captaine dare not doe the thing which honeſtie will not brooke. And moreouer there muſt bee care had that the watch and ward and ſcouts bee not raiſed before morning, not that the gates of the Campe, be opened to any, before the Sunne be a good height and the ſpialls bée ſent to view if there be no priuie ambuſhments appointed by the enimie too endamage thee and doe thee outrage. There muſt bee therefore gre
                     ••
                   foreſight in the

                  
                  
                     THE PLAT FOR INCAMPING.
                  
                  
                  
Generall to cut off all ſuch places, as be fit to harbour anie ſcouts or ambuſhments of the enimie. This forme of encamping is partlie borrowed of antiquitie, and partlie imitated of the Turkiſh manner of encamping, in the aſſiege of anie citie, tieng my ſelfe alwaies to the memorie of the auncients of former time. If there bee anie who miſliketh this, I leaue him to the libertie of his owne iudgement to deuiſe ſome other of his owne, and I promiſe him that I wil be content there with to do him pleaſure, and not in this alone, but in all other things aboue ſhewed in this worke. But if this forme like he ſhall place the footmen, the horſemen, the Merchaunts, the Purueiors, the crafteſmen, ſouldier to ſouldier, backe to backe, and ridge to ridge, making the lodgings double. Vppon the banke of the ditch, and in the Curtaines hee maie place artillerie round about and before it for ſafetie, or els with the carriage of the munition, and the carriage of the whole armie enuiron it for his defence. In which he ſhal imitate the Turke, who with the carriage, with the Cammells, and the Artillerie, both inchaine and fortifie the Campe. Néere vnto the artillerie, he ſhall appoint the Gunners to lodge, who haue the charge thereof, and after the Hargubuſters, and ſo foorth from hand to hand as I haue ſaid. And further he ſhall cauſe the Captaines, and Officers to lodge at the backe of the Hargubuſters, hauing his Captaine before him, and the Pikes at the flankes, that euerie kinde of ſouldiers may be conioined, and not diſmembred as it were in their ſeruice, and from their Captaines: which otherwiſe will be a cauſe of greater diſorder, and manie diſcommodities. (⸫)
            
            
               
               An Oration to be made by the Generall, before the Battell be fought.
               
                  VAliant Knights and Companions in Warre, moſt thankfullie I accept your ſeruice, for that you doe offer your liues as true ſubiects, to accompanie me the Kings high General in the warres: wherein you greatlie ſhow your duties. For of right you ought too looſe your goods, and to venture your liues at the commaundement of the King, and for the defence and ſuretie of your Countreye, giuing vnto you, not onelie thanks for your companie, but much more for your good counſell, which dailie you giue me. For in great conflicts, ſeldome is found together both good counſell and ſtoute hearts, minding not too enterpriſe this battell in hope of mans power, for then had you reaſon wee ſhould not giue battell, ſeeing the great multitude in reſpect of vs. For as you ſaie, the waightie affaires, of a publike weale, ſhould not bee vnaduiſedlie committed too the vncerteine of Fortune: the which hath cauſed the King my Maiſter to apoint me in this daungerous and perilous warres. Firſt, truſting that on our part there remaineth Iuſtice, and ſith God is the ſame onelie Iuſtice, I truſt aſſuredlie he will giue mee the victorie in this perillous conflicts, for Iuſtice auaileth princes more that they haue, then the men of Warre doe which they lead. Wherefore ſith our cauſe is iuſt, and that we haue God the onelie Iudge thereof on our ſides, mee thinks no worldlie feare ſhould make vs ceaſe to giue the battell: for I ſhould ſhow my ſelfe to be of ſmall faith, and alſo blaſpheme God, ſaying, hee were of ſmall Iuſtice, for

God ſheweth his power there, where the fraileneſſe of man hath leaſt hope. Then ſince by the King our Maiſter and Gouernour, we are appointed and procured to come to this warre, I haue determined my moſt louing Companions and fellow Souldiers to enter in battell, and valiantlie to aduenture my life with you: and if I periſh therein, I ſhall be ſure it ſhall be for the ſaluation of my ſoule, and the memorie of my perſon, for to die through Iuſtice is not to die, but to change death for life: and thus doing, if I looſe my life, yet I looſe not my honour, and all this conſidered, I doe that which to my Prince and the Common-wealth I am bound. For to a Prince it were great infamie and diſhonour, the quarrell being his owne, ſhould by the bloud of others ſéeke reuenge, minding this daie to trie in battel, whether the pleaſure or will of the liuing God bee to giue vs victorie, the which maie bee a warning to others of the great wrong offered vs: if otherwiſe he ſuffer vs to periſh, the ende of the ſword of the enimie, is but the ſcourge of our offences. The beſt I ſee therefore in this matter to be done, is that we confeſſe our ſelues vnto the celeſtial God, preparing our ſelues to receiue our redéemer, euery man to pardon and forgiue his brother, if hee haue done wrong or iniurie vnto him, for oftentimes though the demaund of the warres be iuſt, yet many miſhaps befal therin, through the offences of thoſe which purſue and follow the ſame.
               Now each thing accompliſhed as behooueth according too my ſaying, then let God diſpoſe things as hee ſhall ſeeme good. Wherefore my louing, valiant and ſtout Souldiers, doubt not at all, for this daie I muſt either vanquiſh mine enimies, or els ſuffer death: and if I die I do that which I néeds muſt. Wherefore I will now ceaſe to exhort you any more, deſiring you moſt louingly to conſider that, wherevnto your dutie leadeth you, remembring that you are come as Knights, and in the defence of your Countrie to wage battell, beeing now come to that pinch, that deedes muſt more auaile vs then words: for peace ought too bee

maintained by the tongue, but warres ought to be atchiued by the ſword.
            
            
               Of the ordering of the battailes before they fight.
               
                  THe oration being made by the Generall, and praiers finiſhed to the immortall God, it is requiſite that thou haue care too bringe forth thy armie to the field with bright and ſhining armour, which eaſilie maie bee done, by giuing charge in time to the Captaiues, and ſo to the officers, that their burgonets, corſlets, enleeuers, holberds and euerie other peece of armour: foraſmuch as the cleannes and brightnes of the weapons, maketh the armie ſéeme terrible, and putteth feare and trauell in the minds of the enimies. Then call forth thy bands, the which being ſet in araie, the Generall beeing expert, hauing ſeene the preparation of the enimies, giueth in charge too the Sergeant maior and the principall corporalls too accommodate and ordaine his ſouldiers in battaile according to the armie, the men, and the manners of them. And if the enimie bee more puiſſant of horſemen: thou hauing the commoditie, chooſe thee ſtraight and difficult places, or at the foote of mountaines, and where the horſe cannot eaſilie ſerue. If in footmen hee exceedeth, then it is requiſite to get the hills and places of aduauntage, as the Sunne and winde, &c. and that with diligence to chooſe ſuch fit places, whiche either bee neere Rockes or Riuers: and aboue all things, where thou maiſt put in araie thy battailes, and by the qualitie of thy place be able to let thy enimes, that they neither compaſſe

thee about nor incloſe thee, the which requires not onelie the counſaile and prudence of a wiſe Captaine, but the counſaile of the moſt expert in the camp, becauſe oftentimes an Armie hapneth vpon ſuch places. And notwithſtanding the Captaine ignorant how to chooſe ſuch ſituation of ground as is beſt for him, but of thoſe that are preſent it is good to chooſe the beſt, and to foreſee which maie bee moſt profitable, is ſurely a ſigne of a wiſe Captaine: Caius Sulpitius,
                  Of the policie of Caius Sulpitius, whereby he ouercame the Frenchmen. The po
                        •••••
                      of the Spaniards ouercame Amilcar. to feare his enimies got a great manie of mules and other beaſts vnprofitable for the warres, cauſing a greate number of ſackes to bee gotten, which were ſo ordered vppon the backes of the beaſts as they ſeemed men at armes, giuing in charge whiles he was a fighting they ſhould appeare vppon a hill, whereby grew his victorie againſt the Frenchmen. The Spaniards to ouercome Amilcar, ſet in the fronts of their battels, cartes ful of towe, drawen with Oxen, that béeing readie for the encounter, they ſet it on fire, cauſing the Oxen behementlie to thruſt forwards into the armie of the enimie deuiding the ſame. Thy number ſmall, and the fields large and open,How the cutting of trenches maie be the ouerthrow of the enimie. it is good to make ditches, the which being filled with bowghes and ſlightlie couered with earth, leauing voide ſpaces for thy horſe and ſhot to procure ſkirmiſh, the which being of the enimie encountered maie faine a running awaie, and béeing proſecuted by the enimie, ſhal be ouerthrown in the ditches, where they are eaſilie ſlaine, manie ſuch notable diuiſes by wiſe Captaines hath beene practiſed, the which vppon the ſodeine put in vſe, will greatlie profit. Thy battels beeing made and ſet in order, it is requiſite that thou leaue the ward within the trenches of the Campe for the defence of thy lodginges, munition, and carriages, leaſt the enimie vnderſtanding the place to be left voide, ſend his ſouldiers to take the campe, and ſo to ſpoile all: vppon occaſion ſome Captaines will deſtroie their owne lodgings, or els paſſe riuers, or leaue beehinde them hils and deepe places, to the end that the ſouldiers ſtanding conſtantlie maie ouercome

the aduerſarie and obtaine the victorie, or otherwiſe altogether to periſh, for that if they ſhould thinke to ſaue themſelues by running awaie, they ſhall ſee by all manner of meanes taken from the poſſibilitie to eſcape.How the flouriſhing of the Weapons before the battel againſt the Sun, cauſeth a feare in the enimie. Now beeing come to ioine battaile, with thy enimie, cauſe thy ſouldiers ſomewhat before, to flouriſh oft their naked ſwords and holberds againſt the Sunne, for that yt gliſtering of the weapons, and their ſhining poynts, through the brightneſſe now of the one and now of the other, againſt the reſplendant beames of the Sunne, doth ſhew a certeine horrible terrour of warre, the which will ſtrike a dreade and feare into the mindes of the enimies. Likewiſe it is ſometimes requiſite that thy battailes goe forwardes with rumours and ſhowtings, ſometimes running with violence, foraſmuch as the ſemblaunce of ſuch things with the noiſe of trumpettes, drummes, and greate ordinaunce, wonderfullie troubleth and feareth the heartes of the aduerſaries, alſo it is greate wiſedome in a Captaine, not with deſire to be drawne to be the firſt to giue the onſet, but to ſtaie thee neere thy trench till thou haſt viewed thy ſelfe and the remedies of the enimies: that is, how manie battailes, how they are placed, of what condition, and where they are diſpoſed too fight, for after this manner thou maiſt more commodiouſlie ſee to thine affaires: conſidering whiche of thine thou haſt too ſette againſt thoſe of thy enimies, and in what manner thy men are to bee ordeined and placed, dooing in like ſort too a good Phiſition, the whiche conſidering firſt the infirmitie, and knowing the cauſe, commeth afterwardes too giue remedie, therefore ordeine thy men ſo as maie tourne moſte vtilitie too thy buſineſſe. The manner of ordering of battailes latelie vſed. I cannot greatlie commend, for the armie beeing .20.30. or .40. M. they are diuided but into 3. battailes, whereby enſueth manie perilles and diſcommodities, becauſe the Pike beeing but 5. yards three quarters long, euerie man occupying a yarde and

halfe a quarter of Pike, can occupie but foure or fiue rankes at the moſt, ſo that the reſt are ſuperfluous, and loſt, beſides, they are eaſilie too bee compaſſed, and too bee charged on euerie ſide: wherefore I haue ſet downe an order of one of the battailes in figure, according to my opinion, the which if it may turne profit to my countreie, I woulde be moſt gladde.How the good ordering of the Romaine Legions made them victors. The occaſion of the proſperous ſucceſſe of the Romaines, was onelye through their good orders, by diuiding their Legions into cohortes, the whiche were bandes of .400. and .50. the .50. were ſhotte. the .400. were armed, their weapons, Pikes, Swoordes and Targets, the which were placed in quadrant manner .20. euerie waies beeing .10. battailes in front, leauing a certeine ſpace betweene euerie battaile for their retraite vpon occaſion vnto the next order, which were but ſixe battailes, and the rereward foure battailes, all in like number, keeping one breadth, the voward were called Haſtatie, their battailes thicke and cloſe, the Maineward were called Principie, who had ſuch ſpace beetweene the rankes as they might receiue the Haſtatie, the Rereward were called Triarij, whoſe ſpaces betweene their ranks, were ſuch, as they might receiue the Principie and Haſtatie: on the wings were placed ſeauen rankes of Pikes, of ſtraungers, whiche did diſtend in length from the voward to the Rereward, through theſe good orders they became conquerours of manie countries.Of the making of the battels to be fought. Now becauſe of the diuerſitie of the weapons hauing, 20000. footemen, I woulde diuide them into tenne battailes, too euerie one of the battailes ſhall bee according to my proportion ſette dawne .1000. ſhotte .800. Pikes, and .200. Billes, the which placed in two-folde wiſe according to my proportion ſet downe in figure will bee in breadth .45. and in length .22. and .10. ouerplus, the whiche are to be placed at the diſcreation of the Sergiant Maior, the ſhotte placed in the winges and rereward in maniples for their readier ſeruice, who muſt be place a good diſtāce from thy battaile, thy men at armes vpon the wings of the

ſhot, thy Launces as two hornes in the front of thy battaile the light horſe in the fronts of thy Launces, the hargulater, in the frontes of thy light horſe, who with the piſtolaters are the firſt that begins the battaile: thy great Ordinaunces to be placed in the fronts of the battailes, or in ſuch conuenient place as maie moſt terrifie the enimie: there would be appointed certeine troupes of Launces, whoſe guidons would bee contrarie to the reſt, the whiche the Germaine calls, their Eorlorne hoope, the French Infans perdus, who muſt at ſuch time and inſtant as ſhall be thought good by the General, giue the charge vpon the enimies battails, whatſoeuer ſhall happen, who are for the ſame too receiue double paie. The ſecond battaile not too bee placed in the front with the firſt battaile, as the Romaines did, but in the rereward of the firſt ſo farre wide and with ſuch diſtaunce, as the horſemen and ſhotte a foote giuing the firſt charge, may retire themſelues without diſturbaunce to the battells, hauing thy ſhot placed as in the voward with the launces and ſhot on horſbacke, the third battel to be placed in the rereward of the ſecond, with like diſtance with ſhotte and horſe, and ſo to the fourth, fift, and the tenth, in the rereward of the which, if occaſion ſhall require, thou maiſt as in the Rereward of the battaile, place for thy defence certeine of thy carriages, thy battailes beeing thus ordered, thou ſhalt be ſure no waies to be compaſſed by the enimies, whereas thou maiſt eaſilie compaſſe in him, not ordered in the like maner, and thy battailes beeing but little, yet as ſtrong as the greater, being ſtronglie fortified euerie waies with Pikes, and when a ſigne is giuen, your hargulaters, piſtolaters and launces, may at the ſodeine be with the formoſt, or readie for anie other place of ſeruice. Alſo your ſecond battaile maie ioyne with the firſt, and the third with the ſecond, and ſo to ſtrengthen your battailes at pleaſure, as otherwiſe two or thrée of thy battailes to giue the charge to one of his battailes, and if it ſhould ſo hapen that thy firſt and ſecond battailes ſhould bee ouer throwne, 
                     •
                  hy battaile


                  
                  
                     
                        ❧The Battell in Figure, ſhewing how euery Weapon ſhould be placed to fight.
                  
                  

                  
plaſt in this order thou maiſt retire thy ſelfe and leaue of the field, mawger the head of thy enimie, who in proſecuting thee, diſorder themſelues, as manie times happens, maie be eaſilie conquered, vſing thy battailes in this order, I holde to be of greateſt and moſt auailable.
            
            
               Of the office of a Generall, when the battaile is a fighting
               
                  THy battaile ſet in order, the horſe and ſhot beeing encountred, it is requiſite that the General vſeth ſome ſpeach vnto the whole armie, without the which many times a whole armie ruinateth, for that his ſpeaking taketh awaie feare, incourageth the mindes, increaſeth the obſtinants to fight, diſcouereth the deceipts, promiſeth rewardes, ſheweth the perills, and how to auoide them: reprehending, praieng, threatening, filling with hope, praiſe, ſhame dooing thoſe things by the which the humaine paſſions are extinct:How the fighting of the Generall cannot benefite ſo much a common weale, as his wiſe counſell. vnto the Generall it apperteineth rather with wiſdome circumſpectly to forſée them boldlie to fight, becauſe that his fighting cannot ſo much benefit the common weale, although he ſhould ſhew force inuincible, as the looſing of his life ſhould endamage the ſame, neither that in diſtreſſe to refraine from fight, by the which the ſouldiers maie doe ſome exploite, but the beſt is, with prudence to foreſee things, and deliberating in times conuenient to counſell the common weale: principallie to the Generall, and to no other is requiſite, for as the maiſter of a ſhippe forſaking his charge dooing that apperteineth to a marriner,

giueth great occaſion to the loſſe of the Shippe. Euen ſo the Generall, who ſetting a part his office of counſelling and prouiding of euerie thing to deſcend ſo lowe, as to take vpon him the charge of a ſouldier, ſhould commit the like errour: for through the negligence of ſuperiours becommeth vaine all aid to whome ſuch affaires is committed, the Generall being ſlaine putteth the commonweale in hazard of decaie, the which beeing aliue, hauing through his counſaile and diſcreation atchieued felicitie by meane of foreſight with reaſon, hee maie lawfullie glorie: and contrariwiſe he that is ſo ignoraunt, arrogant, and couetous, that beleeueth not to doe anie thing honourablie, except he fighteth himſelfe is not to be thought, but rather preſumptuous and fooliſh hardie, and hee that will hazard his life to gette him a name of the multitude, whereby to putte thoſe waightie affaires in peril, is very vnméete for ſuch a charge. But if neceſſitie conſtraines thee to fight, it behooueth thee to fight warilie, and not to feare death: chooſing rather to be depriued of lyfe, hauing anie ouerthrowe, then to liue with ſhame, but the armie beeing in ſafetie, hee ought to haue regarde to his life, for ſurelie where the death of the Captaine chaunceth, there the happie ſucceſſe is diminiſhed: for as much as they who haue had the worſe vnderſtanding their enimies to bee depriued of their Captaine, taketh boldeneſſe, charging their enimies afflicted with melancholie, for the loſſe of their Captaine, haue giuen them the ouerthrowe. Vnto the General apperteineth whileſt his men fight, to goe riding about the battaile, and to ſhewe himſelf to the fighters, praiſing thoſe that doe valiauntlye, to threaten the fearefull, to comfort thoſe that bee doubtfull and flowe, to ſuccour them that are repulſed, to ſupplie the lackes: and if it ſhall bee needefull to leade men from one place to an other, to obſerue times, to take occaſions, to make coniecture of thinges to come, and when neceſſitie procures to giue the ſigne to retyre. The clemencie of the General increaſeth the loue of the Souldier. Armour, good

order, or late victorie cauſeth Souldiers to haue a good opinion and ſure confidence in the General, and as the loue of the Countreye is increaſed through a certeine inſtinct of Nature, euen ſo the loue of the Generall through vertue more then through anie other benefite. The neceſſities bee manie, but that is ſtrongeſt which conſtraineth thee eyther to ouercome, or elſe to die.
            
            
               Of making ſpoile after the victorie obteined.
               
                  THe ſpoile ought to bee made with great diſcreation, and that ſpeciall commaundement be giuen, and proclaimed vppon paine of death, that no priſoner be taken except he bée of greate authoritie vntill thou haſt vanquiſhed and beecome victor, for oftentimes through the greedineſſe and deſire of gaine, the order of battayle being broken and diſpearſed, the Conquered hath broughte themſelues in order agayne and become Conquerours, for vndoubtedlye many times when the enimie flieng ſeeing his adurſaries, comming vppon him without anie order, bringeth his men againe in araie, and turning backeward with ſtanding them with violence, cruellie ouercommeth them, wherefore men muſt thinke

that nothing is better, nothing more ſafer, nothing more ſurer, then obſeruing order, to proſecute in order, and retire in order, and the contrarie nothing more daungerous, as appeareth by Brennus and Belinus, who beeing enriched by the plentifull ſpoiles of Italy, returned in diſorder and ſecuritie, whereby Camillus and a few of his people beefore conquered, beereft them of the fruites of their conqueſt.
               Likewiſe Cyrus inuading Scithia, faining himſelfe to bee afraide of his enterpriſe, left his tentes ſtanding, and ſtored with good cheere and delicate Wines, the Scithians being greedie thereof, hee returned and ſlewe euerie mothers ſonne: the like policie vſed by Thomeris a Queene of that countrie, who withdrew hir ſelfe into hir land, faining feare vntill ſhe had got them into ſtraightes, where beeing diſordered, ſhee priuilie had planted ambuſhes, whiche ſodeinlie inuaded Cyrus and his hoaſt, ſlew them all whiche were. 20000. thouſand. The like examples in Fraunce and other places I could recite, but I will not waſt time in declaring the miſchiefs and deſtructions chaunced through raſh and ouer haſtie reconning of vnripe victorie, and vnſure ſafetie, truſting this maie ſuffice to warne thee from raſhneſſe and vncircumſpect foreſight, to tomble vppon the enimies ſword. Hauing obteined the victorie, humanitie requireth, and chriſtianitie commaundeth, to ſhew mercie, following the Cannons of the field, hauing ſpecial regard that no Princes,Of the clemē
                     cie of Alexander the great. Princes wiues or Virginnes, be by filthie luſt polluted, for God will ſee it puniſhed, but imitate the curteſie of noble Alexander the greate, vſed towardes his captiues Darius wife and his daughters, whiche greatlye enlarged and ſpread abroad his honour, to the furthering of his Conqueſtes.How Scipios chaſt hands was cauſe of his victories. Likewiſe what fortunate ſucceſſe had Scipio, by his chaſt hands, in deliuering of Luceius his wife, and honourable vſage of Maſiniſſaes nephew with his great liberalitie, which afterwards bred him continuall ſeruice of thoſe Princes, before his captiues, with infinite examples which for tediouſneſſe I leaue off. Graunt not licenſe

to thy Souldiers to put al to ſacke: hauing regard to the time, and to the ſtate of things, whether thou haſt neede to retaine all the pray, or part of the ſame, or els none at al. And it is not conuenient if neede require for the common profite, that making warre, the common Treaſurie be left without money, for that more amply and largely things may be ſolde, and with benignitie diſtributed to them that haue beſt deſerued, hauing regard to the hurt and ſicke: but thoſe that haue bene ſlacke and ſlouthfull, let him puniſh moſt ſhamefully: and vnto valiaunt men graunt thoſe honours the which of right they ought to haue. The gifts which the Captaines ought to giue, be Offices, Auncients Armours and Spoyles, and to thoſe that be in authoritie, there would bee greater honours giuen, the which with benignitie and gentleneſſe liberally giuen according to the deſeruings of euery man, it ſhall cauſe encouragement and vertue, for the good to ſhewe valor, and for the euill through feare, to imbrace vertue.
            
            
               
               Of that is to be done after the deedes of armes, and of burying the dead.
               
                  HAuing withdrawne thy Souldiers frō the field, it is moſt requiſite with al humilitie to render thankes to the immortall God in moſt ſolemne maner, the which being done with penitencie and deuotion from the heart: he will vndoubtedly the better proſper thee in all thy affayres, as he did Moſes, Dauid, Manaſſes, with infinite others that put their truſt in him: then prouide and with great diligence procure, that the Obſequies be made moſt worſhipfully to them which haue bene ſlaine in the deede of Armes, for thou ſhouldeſt not make excuſe, neither of tyme, nor of hower, nor of place, nor of perrill, whether thou ouercome or be ouercomed. For like as it is a godly thing to performe the Obſequies, and according to the rights to ſee the dead buryed, euen ſo it is very profitable for them that remaine aliue, and rather altogether neceſſarie to ſhewe to the liuing this thy pitie towards the dead: for ſurely when euery man ſeeth the dead bodies as it were for fearefulneſſe left in the fieldes, or els for deſpite left vnburied, they iudge and preſuppoſe the very ſame of themſelues, taking diſpleaſure of ſuch thinges, cauſing hatred and a vnwillingneſſe in the minds of the Souldiers to aduenture their liues, knowing that if they happen to fight for their Countrey and to be ſlaine, they are not like to be buried. Wherfore the Generall and principall Officers muſt with eyes open, ſee to preuent thoſe miſchifes that may inſue, as otherwiſe to render vnto the dead, that of right they ought to haue.
            
            
               
               Of the taking of priſoners, and of the vſage of them.
               
                  ALthough ye antiquitie hath dealt hardly with their priſoners, putting many to death, yet Chriſtianitie requireth, to ſhewe mercie, and conſidering that fortune is vncerteine and doubtfull: and chaunce variable and mutable, the which oftentimes beareth enuie to the happie ſucceſſe, to miniſter ſhame to glorie attained: ſo during the warres aboue all things, although great occaſion giuen by the enemies, extend thy mercie, eſpecially to thoſe that be of authoritie, and bearing office: the which will procure the enemie to miniſter the like pittie vnto thee: except thou hauing taken many and ſtande doubtfull of the field, or ſuch as haue dye ſhot, Onyons, Bakon, Gre
                     •••
                   or ſuch like, caried to the deſtruction of than, contrarie to the Cannons and lawes of the field, thoſe thou mayſt lawfully kill. It behoueth thee likewiſe, if the enemie ſendeth not vnto thee, to ſend vnto him, to know if thy priſoners taken may be raunſomed according to the auncient order of the field, the which is, euery Officer and Souldier vnder the degree of a Captaine, to be ruſomed for his moneths wages, and thoſe of fame & authoritie render them for ſome towne or Hold, or els for ſome ſuch of thy friends being taken, as thou greatly deſireſt to haue againe.
               Good Captaines ought not to let their bands goe long vnfurniſhed of Souldiers being taken, to their weakning and detriment of the Armie, whom by raunſome and way of exchaunge or other meanes they may redeeme. Captaines alſo ought to enquire whether any being taken, and ſent home vppon their faith and honour, that at the day expyred, they either pay the money, or els ſende them againe vnto their takers, vntill better remedie be found, the which

otherwiſe will breede great diſhonour to the Captaine, giuing occaſion to the enemie to kill and ſpoyle ſo many of his band, as by them afterwards may be takē. The warres being ended, then with wiſedome and deliberation leaſurely at thy commoditie, al perill taken away, determine what thou wilt doe with the enemie thou haſt conquered.
            
            
               Of Feaſts and Tryumphes, after the Victorie.
               
                  THE Romaines order and maner, was after Victorie obtayned, and all daungers paſt and ouercome: that preparation ſhould be made to feaſt yt whole Armie, and that Tryumphes and Playes ſhould bee made to lighten and reioyce the hearts of the Souldiers, giuing them the better occaſion to abide the paines and turmoyle of the warres, and with greater courage to withſtande the enemies force: then of ſuch ſpoyles as the Treaſurie haue no neede of, there ſhould be imparted, not only to thoſe of Office, but particularly to euery Souldier throughout the Campe, the which with benignitie would be deliuered as fruits of their labors, gotten with the hazard of their liues, giuing vnto them great thankes for their paynes, true hearts, and valiaunt courage, promiſing greater recompence. The warres being once finiſhed, to thoſe in Office and authoritie, there would bee greater rewardes and honours giuen.
            
            
               
               Hauing receiued an ouerthrow how to ſeeke reuenge.
               
                  IN fighting if thou happen to receiue ye worſe, it behoueth vs with great of ligence and policie to finde occaſion of reuenge to take away yt ſhame receiued, as otherwiſe to put feare out of thy ſoldiours minds, it is good policy to retaine ſpies giuing vnto thē great rewards yt which by politique vſage may be learned ye ſtate, the ſtrength, the order, manners, & determination of ye enimies: by which meanes with ſecret vſage, thou maiſt many waies haue due reuenge: for that to thoſe that haue newly obtained the victory, haue the leſſer care of the enimie, becomming ſlothfull and rechleſſe ſtragling héere & there, kéeping their thinges without forecaſt, leauing their wards naked, and their watches ſlender, may with ſecret approch in the day time, or by camiſado in the night time, with valiant couragious hearts be quite ouer throwne, otherwiſe by a fewe trained out to the ſkirmiſh retiring thy ſelfe faining to run through feare till thou come to ſuch place of aduantage as before thou haſt plaſt ambuſhes of horſemen, the which ſhall ſodainly approch the enimie diſordered and ſcattered, to their great detriment, as otherwiſe with thy hands of footmen placed in order of battell, maieſt approch thy enimie, yt which ſéeing thy pollicy, not hauing time to order themſelues in the like, will come foorth on heapes, the which being then valiantly charged, may put their ſtate in hazard, through the whych negligence the happie ſucceſſe before obtained by this pollicie wyll turne thy enimie to great ruine.
            
            
               
               Of truce and intermiſſion of warres.
               
                  POlicy willeth thée not to ſéeke truce or delaie, but by conſtraint of neceſſitie, or for ſome aduauntage to bée taken: as ſome aide looked for, or in the meane time to growe into the ſecréetes of the Enemie, to fifte his purpoſe, by conference had with hym to vndermine hys dooinges, and if he be not verie wel aduiſed, to ſearch the ſtate of his force and gouernment, being moſt ſecrete and vigilant in theſe affaires. Now if feare, enforſeth the enimie to take truce, learne by all poſſible meanes whether it maie turne to thy profit or diſcommoditie, if otherwiſe it maie little auaile them, then it may much encourage thy own ſouldiours The truce being once made, doo not at any time aſſault thy enimy, nor yet ſtande vnprouided: although thou ſtādeſt in ſuch quiet, as if thou hadſt peace, but haue as great regard as may be, to the hidden hatred of thy enimie, and wily ſleights, that being vnprouided, he aſſalts thée not vnwares: for aſmuch as the mindes of them with whom thou haſt made warre withall, be ſecret & vncertaine. Wherfore make the watches and wardes, as ſtrong as if thou lookedſt euery houre to be aſſalted, & giue ſpeciall commandement to al thy ſouldiours that during the truce no iniury to be offered by them to ye enimy

vpon paine of death, by reaſon of the oath y• thou haſt made in thy couenants to the enimie, the which by no meanes thou ſhouldeſt breake or inuiolate, conſidering that the fruits of falſehood (beſides the puniſhment of almightie God) is euerlaſting ſhame. When thou ſendeſt to thy enemie, ſend the moſt valiant, and noble men of thy armie, the which be in the flower of theyr age, tall, luſtie and of goodlie perſonage, the which in al pointes ſhould bee verie well armed, becauſe manye times it happeneth that the enimy ſéeing ſuch men as commeth with the Captaine, hath iudged the Armie to be the lyke, beléeuing ſooner that they ſée, then by reporte.
            
            
               
               Precepts and rules of warre neceſſarie to bee obſerued as well for Generall, Captayne, as Souldiour.
               
                  A 
                  Generall ought not to bée cruell vppon victorie, nor inſolent vpon good ſucceſſe, nor timerous of an ouerthrow, but with moſt moderate magnanimity vpon the reſpect of occaſion to ſhew mercie to the humble, and to ſubdue the proude.
               2 Cicero preſcribeth foure thinges to be in a gouernour or General, which is experience, valiance, authoritie & felicitie, to ye which adde theſe 4, iuſtice, fortitude, pollicie and temperaunce, firſt Iuſtice to reuenge, fortitude, to execute reuengment, policy to prepare ye meane whereby to reuenge, and temperance to limit and meaſure out how farre they ought to reuenge.
               3 That Captaine that with ſuch righteouſneſſe can ſo rule his ſouldyers, ye he wil ſuffer them neither to do wrong nor receiue iniury, but with wiſdom wil maintaine them in that which is right, that Captaine muſt néedes be loued & feared of his ſouldiours, of the whych procéedeth true and vnfained obedeience.
               4 Alexander Seuerus ſaith, the ſtrength of wars lieth in the Souldiours: whoſe great vertue conſiſteth in obedience towards their Captaine.
               5 Obedience in ſoudiours is nouriſhed by feare and loue, feare is kept by true iuſtice and equity, & looue is gotten by wiſdome ioyned with liberalitie.
               6 Xenephon declareth, that the ſouldiour which firſt ſerueth God & then obaieth hys Captaine, may boldlie with all courage hope to ouerthrow his enimie.
               7 Thrée neceſſarie pointes appertaining to ſouldiours, the one to hearden the bodie to make it apte to paine, the other to teach them to handle their weapons

the third to learne them to kéepe theyr orders in marching, as well in ye armie as in fighting or in camping.
               8 As it is neceſſarie to retaine citizens for horſemen, the country for footmen, ſo it is perilous to receiue ſtraungers to ſerue in a cittie, becauſe thou ſhalt dread two enimies.
               9 Nature hath bread few ſtrong men, but induſtrie and exerciſe hath made many.
               10 And armie with labour and exerciſe dooth profite and preuaile, whereas idleneſſe doth hinder and decay.
               11 The choiſe of ground doth more preuaile then manhoode, and manhoode doth more preuaile then multitude.
               12 He is hardlie ouercome the whych can truelye iudge of his owne and his enimies.
               13 No Counſelles better then thoſe which the enymies know not before thou accompliſh them.
               14 Bring not foorth thy ſouldiours to fight the field before thou trieſt what they can doo.
               15 It is better to ſubdue the enimie through ſcarcitie and want of neceſſarie things, then through many aſſaults to decay thy armie.
               16 If thou wilt know if anie ſpie be in thy campe or no, ſend all thy ſouldiours to their lodginges.
               17 God Captaines will neuer fight the fielde but when neceſſitie conſtraines them.
               18 The aduiſed valiant ſouldiours auaileth more then the multitude.
               19 Aduertyſe thy ſouldiours to deſpiſe delicate lyuing.
               20 He that diſordereth his armie, to followe the enimie, becommeth of a conquerer, conquered.
               21 Sodaine things doo make enimies afraide, where things common are nothing ſet by.
               22 Offer not to fight the field, except thou perceiue thy ſouldiours hope of victory.
               
                  23 Alwaies with thy footemen couet to get the hils or high places, ſo ſhalt thou accompliſh thy exploites the better.
               24 If thou vnderſtanding thy counſels are bewraied to thy enimies, then chaunge thy intent and purpoſe.
               25 Let not thy enimies knowe after what manner you intend to fight, leaſt they goe about to preuent the ſame by one meanes or other.
               26 That gouernour that prepareth not neceſſarie victuals is already conquered.
               27 Men, monie, Iron, and Bread, is the ſtrength of the warres.
               28 Practiſe to knowe a new enimie by ſkirmiſe before thou fight the field with him.
               29 When any mercinary ſouldiours wil leaue the enimy to ſerue thée, retaine them ſo they become faythfull, for theyr departure ſhall both weaken the enimy, and make them fearefull.
               30 In pitching the field, it is better to make many battels then few, for that in making many the enimie cannot imcōpaſſe thée, likewiſe thou maiſt make of one 2, of 2, thrée as occaſiō ſhal ſerue, & otherwiſe thou maiſt charge a battel of ye enemies with two or thrée of thine, the which will be to thy great aduauntage.
               31 New and ſodayne things makes armies afraide, ſlowe and accuſtomed thinges are a little regarded of them.
               32 The ſame that helpeth the enimie hurteth thée, and that that helpeth thée, hurteth the enemie.
               33 Conſult with manie of thoſe thinges which thou oughteſt to doo, and when thou determineſt any exploit conferre with fewe.
               34 With puniſhments there would be rewardes, wherby at one inſtant to make the ſouldiers to feare & to hope, as according to the worthineſſe of the act, ſo the reward ſhould be.
               
                  35 As he that fighting ſaued his Captaine or other ſouldiours, reſcewing them wold be well recompenſed.
               36 Alſo he that firſt leapt vpon the walls of the enimy, or firſt entered the campe of the enimie would bée well recompenſed.
               37 He that killeth the firſt enimie, or ſtriketh the firſt enimie from his horſe, conſideration would bee vſed.
               38 Euerie acte to the counſell knowne perfectlie, would be openly puniſhed, and openly rewarded.
               39 Thus ſhall good gouernement bée amongeſt all ſoldiours and officers, whereby any exploite to bée executed, by this feare and hope ſhall bée the better doone, and of all men to bée comemnded.
            
            
               
               
                  
                     A Table to konwe from 500. men vnto 10000. howe many paces they do containe both in length and breadth in their march, from 5. to 11, in ranke very neceſſarie both for Chieftaine and Captaines,
                     
                        500.
                        5 in breadth
                        3, paces
                        500.
                        7 in breadth
                        4 paces a fo,
                     
                     
                        containes
                         
                        containes.
                        3 ouerplus
                     
                     
                        200. in lengt.
                        140 pa.
                        71, in length,
                        99 pa 2 foote
                     
                     
                        1000
                        5 in breadth
                        3, pa,
                        1000
                        7 in breadth
                        4, pa, a foot 
                     
                     
                        containes
                         
                        containes,
                        6 ouerplus
                     
                     
                        200 in length
                        280, paces,
                        142 in length
                        198 paces 4 fo
                     
                     
                        2000
                        5 in breadth
                        3, paces,
                        2000
                        7 in breadth
                        4 pac a foot 
                     
                     
                        containes
                         
                        containes
                        5 ouerplus
                     
                     
                        400 in lengt,
                        260 paces,
                        285 in length
                        399 paces a fo
                     
                     
                        3000
                        5 in breadth
                        3, paces,
                        3000
                        7 in breadth
                        4 paces a foot 
                     
                     
                        containes
                         
                        containes
                        4 ouerplus
                     
                     
                        600 in lengt
                        840 pace.
                        428 in length
                        599 pa a foot
                     
                     
                        4000
                        5 in breadth
                        3 paces
                        4000
                        7 in breadth
                        4 paces a foot 
                     
                     
                        containes
                         
                        containes
                        3 ouerplus
                     
                     
                        800 in length
                        1120, paces,
                        571 in length
                        799, pac a, foo
                     
                     
                        5000
                        5 in breadth
                        3 paces
                        5000
                        7 in breadth
                        4 pa a foote 
                     
                     
                        containes
                         
                        containes
                        2 ouerplus
                     
                     
                        1000 in lengt
                        1400, paces
                        719 in length
                        999 pac 3, foo
                     
                     
                        6000
                        5 in breadth
                        3 paces
                        6000
                        7 in breadth,
                        4 paces a foot
                     
                     
                        containes
                         
                        containes
                        1, ouerplus
                     
                     
                        1200 in lengt,
                        1680 paces
                        857 in length
                        1199 pa 4 foot
                     
                     
                        7000
                        5 in breadth
                        3, paces,
                        7000
                        7, in breadth,
                        4 paces a foote
                     
                     
                        containes
                         
                        containes
                         
                     
                     
                        1400, in leng
                        1960 paces
                        1000 in leng
                        1400, paces
                     
                     
                        8000
                        5 in breadth
                        3 paces
                        8000
                        7 in breadth
                        4 paces a fo, 
                     
                     
                        containes
                         
                        containes
                        6 ouerplus
                     
                     
                        1600 in lengt
                        2240 paces
                        1142 in lengt
                        1598 pa 4 fo,
                     
                     
                        9000
                        5 in breadth
                        3 paces
                        9000
                        7 in breadth
                        4 pa a foote 
                     
                     
                        containes
                         
                        containes
                        5 ouerplus
                     
                     
                        1800 in leng
                        2520, paces
                        1285 in lengt
                        1799 paces
                     
                     
                        10000
                        5 in breadth.
                        3 paces,
                        10000
                        7 in breadth
                        4 pa a foote, 
                     
                     
                        containes
                         
                        containes
                        4 ouerplus
                     
                     
                        2000 in lengt
                        2800, paces.
                        1428 in leng
                        2999 pa a foot
                     
                     
                     
                        500.
                        9 in breadth
                        5, pa, 2. foote,
                        500.
                        11 in breadth
                        6 paces 3 foot
                     
                     
                        containes
                        9 ouerplus
                        containes.
                        5 ouerplus
                     
                     
                        55. in length.
                        77 paces,
                        45, in length,
                        63 paces
                     
                     
                        1000
                        9 in breadth
                        5, pa 2, foote,
                        1000
                        11 in breadth
                        6, pace 3 foot 1
                     
                     
                        containes
                        1, ouerplus
                        containes,
                        0 ouerplus
                     
                     
                        111 in length
                        155, pa, 2, fo,
                        90 in length
                        136 paces
                     
                     
                        2000
                        9 in breadth
                        5, pa, 2, foote,
                        2000
                        11 in breadth
                        6 paces 3 foot 
                     
                     
                        containes
                        2, ouerplus
                        containes
                        9 ouerplus
                     
                     
                        222 in lengt,
                        310 pa, 4. fo,
                        181 in length
                        253 paces 1 fo,
                     
                     
                        3000
                        9 in breadth
                        5, pa, 2, foote,
                        3000
                        11 in breadth
                        6 paces 3 foot 
                     
                     
                        containes
                        3 ouerplus
                        containes
                        8 ouerplus
                     
                     
                        333 in lengt,
                        466 pa 1 fo,
                        272 in length
                        380 pa 4 foot
                     
                     
                        4000
                        9 in breadth
                        5 pa 2, foote,
                        4000
                        11 in breadth
                        6 paces 3 foot 
                     
                     
                        containes
                        4 ouerplus
                        containes
                        7 ouerplus
                     
                     
                        444 in length
                        622, pa, 3 foot
                        363 in length
                        508, pac 1, foot
                     
                     
                        5000
                        9 in breadth
                        5 pa 2. foote,
                        5000
                        11 in breadth
                        6 paces 3 foot 
                     
                     
                        containes
                        5 ouerplus,
                        containes
                        6 ouerplus
                     
                     
                        555 in length
                        777, paces
                        454 in lēgth
                        635 pac 3, foot
                     
                     
                        6000
                        9 in breadth
                        5 pa 2, foote,
                        6000
                        11 in breadth
                        6 paces 3 foot 
                     
                     
                        containes
                        6 ouerplus
                        containes
                        4 ouerplus
                     
                     
                        666 in lengt.
                        932. pa 2, fo.
                        545 in lenth
                        763 paces
                     
                     
                        7000
                        6 in breadth
                        5, pa, 2, foote,
                        7000
                        11, in breadth
                        6 paces 3 foot
                     
                     
                        containes
                        7 ouerplus
                        containes
                        4 ouerplus
                     
                     
                        772, in leng
                         
                        626 in lengt.
                        890, pa 2 foot
                     
                     
                        8000
                        9 in breadth
                        5 pa 2, foote,
                        8000
                        11 in breadt, containes
                        6 paces 3 foot
                     
                     
                        containes
                        8 ouerplus
                        containes
                        3 ouerplus
                     
                     
                        888 in length
                        1087 pa, 4, fo,
                        727 in length
                        1015 pa 4 fo,
                     
                     
                        9000
                        6 in breadth
                        5 pa 2 foote,
                        9000
                        11 in breadth
                        6 paces 3 foot 
                     
                     
                        containes
                        1 ouerplus
                        containes
                        3 ouerplus
                     
                     
                        1000 in leng
                        1400, paces
                        818 in length
                         
                     
                     
                        10000
                        9 in breadth
                        5 pa, 2, foote.
                        10000
                        11 in breadth
                        6, paces 3 foot
                     
                     
                        containes
                         
                        containes
                        1, ouerplus
                     
                     
                        1111 in length
                        1555, pa, 2, fo
                        909. in lengt.
                        1145 pa 1 fo.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     A TABLE TO KNOWE HOW MVCH GROVND WILL containe a quadrant battaile of people, of people and ground, and twofold, and how many paces they require in their battailes from 500, to 10000, very neceſſary for the Sergeant Maior or the Captaines,
                     
                         
                        Quadrant Battels,
                         
                        Battels of people and ground,
                     
                     
                        500.
                        22. in length.
                        30, pa 4,. foot, 
                        500.
                        14. in length,
                        19 paces 3 fo,
                     
                     
                        containes
                        16 men ouer
                        containes.
                        10 ouerplus
                     
                     
                        22 in breadth
                        13 pa 2 fo.
                        35 in breadth
                        21 paces
                     
                     
                        1000
                        31 in length
                        43, pa 2, foot,
                        1000
                        22 in length
                        30, pa, 4 foot
                     
                     
                        containes
                        8, men ouer
                        containes,
                         
                     
                     
                        32 in breadth
                        19, pa, 1, fo,
                        50 in breadth
                        30 paces
                     
                     
                        2000
                        44 in length,
                        61, pa, 3, foot,
                        2000
                        29 in length
                        40 pac 3 foot
                     
                     
                        containes
                        20, men ouer
                        containes
                        28 ouerplus
                     
                     
                        45 in breadth.
                        27 paces,
                        68 in breadth
                        40 paces 4 fo,
                     
                     
                        3000
                        54 in length,
                        71, pa, 3, foot,
                        3000
                        36 in length
                        50 paces 2 foo
                     
                     
                        containes
                        30 men ouer
                        containes
                        12 ouerplus
                     
                     
                        55 in breadth
                        33 pace.
                        83 in breadth
                        49 pa 4 foot
                     
                     
                        4000
                        63 in length
                        88 pa 1 foot
                        4000
                        41 in length
                        57 pace 2 foot
                     
                     
                        containes
                        31 men ouer
                        containes
                        23 ouerplus
                     
                     
                        63 in breadth
                        37, pa, 4 foote
                        97 in breadt.
                        58, pac 1, foot
                     
                     
                        5000
                        70 in length
                        98 paces
                        5000
                        46 in length
                        64 pa 2 foote
                     
                     
                        containes
                        30 men ouer
                        containes
                        32 ouerplus
                     
                     
                        71 in breadth
                        42, pa 3 foot
                        108 in bread,
                        64 pac 4, foot
                     
                     
                        6000
                        77 in length.
                        170 pa 1, foot
                        6000
                        50 in length
                        70 paces
                     
                     
                        containes
                        71 men ouer
                        containes
                         
                     
                     
                        77 in breadth
                        46. pa 1, fo.
                        120 in breadt
                        72 paces
                     
                     
                        7000
                        83, in length
                        110, pa, 1, fo,
                        7000
                        55 in length.
                        77 paces
                     
                     
                        containes
                        28 men ouer
                        containes
                        15 ouerplus
                     
                     
                        89 in breadth
                        50 pa 1 foot,
                        127, in bread,
                        76, pa 1 foote,
                     
                     
                        8000
                        89 in length
                        124 pa 3. foo
                        8000
                        58 in length
                        81 paces 1 fo,
                     
                     
                        containes
                        79 ouerplus
                        containes
                        57 ouerplus
                     
                     
                        89 in breadth
                        53 pa, 2, fo,
                        137 in bread,
                        89 pa 1 foot,
                     
                     
                        9000
                        94 in length
                        131 pa 3 foot
                        9000
                        62 in length
                        86 pa 4 foote
                     
                     
                        containes
                        70 men ouer
                        containes
                        10 ouerplus
                     
                     
                        95 in breadth
                        55, paces
                        145 in bread
                        87 paces
                     
                     
                        10000
                        100 in length
                        140 pa,
                        10000
                        65. in length.
                        91, paces
                     
                     
                        containes
                         
                        containes
                        55, ouerplus
                     
                     
                        100 in bread
                        60, paces.
                        153 in breadt
                        91 pa 4 fo.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     Twofolde battailes.
                     
                        500
                        16 in length
                        22 pa, 2, foot.
                        6000
                        55 in length
                        77 paces
                     
                     
                        containes
                        4 ouerplus
                        containes
                        5 ouerplus
                     
                     
                        31 in breadth
                        18 pa, 3 foote
                        190 in bread.
                        65 pa 2 foote
                     
                     
                        1000
                        22 in length
                        30 paces 4 fo
                        7000
                        59 in length
                        82 pa 3 foote
                     
                     
                        containes
                        10 ouerplus.
                        containes
                        38 ouerplus
                     
                     
                        45 in breath
                        27 paces,
                        118 in breadth
                        70 pac 4 foot
                     
                     
                        2000
                        31 in length
                        43 pa 2, foot,
                        8000
                        63 in length
                        88 pac 1 foote
                     
                     
                        containes
                        16 ouerplus
                        containes
                        62 ouerplus
                     
                     
                        64 in breadt,
                        38 pa 2 foote
                        126 in bread.
                        75 pa 3 foote
                     
                     
                        3000
                        38 in length
                        53 pa, 1 foote
                        9000
                        67 in length
                        93 pa 4 foote
                     
                     
                        containes
                        36 ouerplus
                        containes
                        22 ouerplus
                     
                     
                        78 in breadth
                        46 pa 4 foot.
                        134 in bradth
                        80 pa 2 foote
                     
                     
                        4000
                        44 in length
                        61 pa 3 foote
                        100000
                        69 in length
                        96 pa 3 foote
                     
                     
                        containes
                        36 ouerplus
                        containes
                        64 ouerplus
                     
                     
                        90 in breadt,
                        44 paces
                        144 in bread,
                        68 pa 2 foote
                     
                     
                        5000
                        50 in length
                        70 paces
                         
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        containes
                         
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        100 in bread
                        60 paces
                         
                         
                         
                     
                  
               
               
            
            
               
               A diſcourſe of the Author, with a concluſion and end of the profeſſion of Armes.
               
                  AS for beſieging of a Citty or Towne, fortifications, and placing of battery, I haue not intreated of, becauſe ye dailie practiſe and execution of the ſame, beſides the publication therof by many excellent writers, by whome thou mayeſt receiue profitte ſufficient, neither haue I written of the offices or training of horſemen, becauſe there is little alteration from the ſeruice vſed in antiquity, ſauing the hargulaters on horſeback, the which at the diſcrecion of the Generall are to ſkirmiſh or diſorder a battell: onelie their places of ſeruice in ye field with the battels I haue noted & not otherwiſe the varietie of weaponnes and alteration of ſeruice is onely in footmē: of the which for the great deſire I haue to the profiting of my country, I haue boldly intreated of, truſting that thoſe errors that may happen through default of my writing may bée without harme to any man corrected, the whych are the onelie ſtrength and bulwarke of the fielde, the defence both of horſe and ſhotte,The Swizers the firſt inuenters of ſquadrons, as appeareth by the poore Swizers, who not béeing able to furniſhe themſelues with Horſe, were the firſt deuiſers of the pike and the Squadronnes, who ſea red not after they founde the ſtrength and aduauntage thereof to encounter with 20000. footemen, any number of horſemen, whoſe victories hath cauſed dyuerſe nations to imitate them. The Romanes what multitudes of horſemen ſo euer they were to fight againſt, neuer vſed more then their accuſtomed number,

the which was to 1000, footemen, a 100. horſemen, putting their whole confidence in theyr footemen, as appeared, when they fought againſt Tigrane King of Armenia, who inuading their Countrey,Tigrane ouerthrone by the Romās hauing 150000. horſemen with 25000 footmen & 6000 horſemen. with 150000 horſemen, were encountered of the Romanes wyth 250000, footmen, and 6000. horſemen: being of them vtterly ſubuerted, with many other notable victories, the which the Romanes did, as in Titus Liuius thou mayſt plainly ſée. Wherefore horſemen art to be accompted as ſeconde, and not as ſuperiour or principall of the fielde, becauſe horſemen cannot goe as footemen in euerie place, being ſlower then the footemen to obey, when it is requiſite to alter the order: foraſmuch, as if it bée néedefull either going forward, to turne backeward, or turning backwarde, to goe forwarde, or to moue themſelues, ſtanding ſtill, or going to ſtande ſtill, without doubt, the Horſe can not doo it ſo readelie as the footemen.
               The horſemen can not béeing with violence diſordered, returne in their orders, but with great, difficulty, the which the footemen doo moſt eaſelie and quicklie.
               Beſides this it happeneth manie times that a valiant man ſhall be vpon a vile horſe, and a coward vppon a good, whereby it followeth that theſe euill matching of ſtomakes, makes diſorder.
               Neither is it to be meruailed at, that a bande of footmen ſuſteineth al violence of horſes, for that a horſe is a beaſt, and knoweth the perils, and with an ill will, will enter vpon the Pike: & if you conſider what force maketh them goe forwarde, and what holdeth them backwarde, you ſhall perceiue the ſame to be greater which kéepeth them back, then that which maketh them goe forwards: for that the ſpurre maketh them goe forward, and the Pike and Sword kéepeth them backe, ſo that it muſt néedes be, that footemen are moſt inuincible, and ſuperiour to horſes.
               
                  And if you ſhould argue with mee, that the heate which they come withall, maketh them more furious, regarding the ſpurre more then the Pike: I ſay, the Horſe perceiuing himſelfe to runne vpon the point of the Pike, eyther of himſelfe, he will refraine the courſe, turning on the right hand or lefte: or els féeling hymſelfe pricked or gawled, will ſtande ſtill. As for example, prooue a Horſe, and runne him againſt a wall, and you ſhall finde fewe with what furie ſoeuer they come withall, will ſtrike againſt it.
               
                  
                     Caeſar with his horſe feared to encounter the ſquadrons of the poore Swizers.
                     The policy of Henry the 5. at Egincourt,
                  
                  Caeſar hauing in Faunce to fight with the Swizers, cauſed all his horſemen to alight a foote, to auoide from the Squadrons, as a thing more méeter to flie then to fight.
               Footemen being politique hath manie other helpes as by making of Trenches, and as King Henrie at Egin-court vſed ſharpe ſtakes, whereby hée gotte the Chiualrie of Fraunce. Or to cauſe of Iron to be made Galtropes a handfull long, and to be made ſharpe like a Triangle, euerie man to haue one of theſe to throwe vppon the ground at the encounter of the horſe.
               Beſides, the wiſe Captayne will chooſe groundes of great aduantage. And as for the Piſtolate is not ſo much in vſe as they haue bene: vſing chéeflie the Caléeuer on horſebacke, the which is nothing comparable to the footeman with the Caléeuer, who will from euery little Moll-hill gall him at his pleaſure, beſides more readier for anie ſeruice.
               
                  Horſes neceſſar
                        •
                     e in the fielde,Horſes notwithſtanding are verie neceſſarie in the fielde for diſcouering the Enimies Countrey, and to deſtroie their forrage, and to burne and waſt, all that is not within the fortified Townes, and to kéepe troubled and diſquieted the Armie of the Enimies, whereby not onelie to lette them of their reſt, but to kéepe them troubled and wearied in the ir Armour. Alſo to

let them of theyr victualles. Lykewiſe, neceſſarie for Vancurriers, or for Scowte: and when the Battaile is fought, and Victory obtained they are to ouertake, runne downe, and ruerthrowe the Enimie expulſed. Wiſhing thée not to to be drawne with deſire to imitat euerie newe ſeruice, but to obſerue the order of the Romanes, vſing thy footemen as thy force, and to euerie Regiment or Battell, a certaine number of horſe, wher by thou maieſt the better be able to ſerue againſt anie Nation, howe, or in what ſorte ſoeuer their ſeruice bée.
               Now hauing finiſhed the Warres,Of the retraite out of thy enemies countrie, and a full determination of peace concluded: béeing in thy late enimies Countrie, it behooueth thée to haue great care, and with great diligence to retire thy ſouldiours, from the Enimies countrie, kéeping ſo good order as if the Enimie would falſifie his vowe made, to take anie aduauntage of thee: yet that hee maie finde thée ſo prepared and in ſo good order: as hys wyles ſhall lyttle endamage thée, giuing great charge vnto thy Captaynes, and ſo to the Officers, that thy Souldiours ſtraggle not from thy Campe to doo anie outrage, or by violence ſéeke to take anie thing away, but as they paſſe the Countrie, honeſtlie and truelie to paye for that they take, whereby thou maiſt bée the better thought off of the Enemie, as otherwyſe to auoyde all inconueniences, that maie followe. This woulde bée publiſhed vppon paine of death.
               And if thou art to paſſe the Countrie of thy fréend, haue the lyke regarde of thy Souldiours, that through theyr dyſorder, they make not of a Freende an Enimie.
               Being come to the water ſide, ſée yt with all expedition

ſuch preparation bée made, for the conuaying ouer of the Souldiours as the Prince ſo ſhortlie as maie, bée vnburdened of her great charge. And againſt their arriuall ſée that monie bée prepared for the preſent payment of the poore ſouldiours that they to their detryment, and hinderaunce doo not long remaine vnpaied, whereby theyr heartes may bée hardened and through this default mutinies ariſe, and many inconueniences growe, conſidering that at the commaundement of the Prince as true ſubiects they haue aduentured theyr liues, and in the defence of their Countrie: but it is great pitty, yt fauour dooth ſo much preuaile, and experience ſo little eſtéemed, that ſo manie be ſuffered to beare the Office and authoritie of Captaines, whoſe going to the warres, is rather to bribe and hinder the poore Souldiours, to the diſhonour of their Countrie and theyr owne ſhame, then to merite any thing in the Warres to the profitting of the ſame. Truſting that great and wyſe Officers in tyme by trying the cauſe, will ſée it reformed.
               
                  An exhortation neceſſarie for all Captaines at the diſcharge of theyr ſouldiours,The Souldiours being paide, it were verie requiſite that euerie Captaine ſhoulde call their companie together, or a little before theyr wages payde: yéeldinge thankes vnto them for theyr dilligence and paines in the Princeſſe affaires, certefying them that the almightie God no doubt, will proſper them the better in all their affaires.
               And where as euerie ſubiect by GODS lawe in conſcience, and by the lawe of Nature, are to be at the commaundement of their Prince and Gouernour, their trauailes and paines in the turmoile of warres hath de clared the ſame, letting them to vnderſtand the warres being ended: the Prince is not further to vſe them, exhorting euerie man, quietly to depart into his Country from whence he was preſt, or to the place of his longeſt abode, not looking to make an Art or exerciſes of armes

for that it is not to bee vſed, but when the Prince through conſtraint ſhall be inforced to the ſame. And when they are come into their Countrey, require euery man to frame him ſelf to ſuch Science, Occupations, Trades or Traffickes, as they haue chiefly bene brought vp with all, accompting themſelues moſt happie that GOD hath deliuered them from the bloodie warres to liue in peace & quiet: the which bringeth ſo many commodities, ſo many vertues, and ſo much good as I am not able to expreſſe. For to make warres to haue peace is Chriſtianitie, and to trouble the peace by making warres vniuſtly, is Tyrannie. Now the fruites of the ydle, the which ſcornes their occupations, through neceſſitie are nothing els but robberies, thefts and murders, and then Iuſtice enforced to extinguiſh them.
               Moſt louingly deſiring them not to forget the great daungers that almightie God hath deliuered them from, through the which they were men prepared to dye, hauing the ſame printed alwaies in their minds, by which meanes they ſhalbe the better able to ſee Iuſtice mainteyned, peace preſerued, Magiſtrates and Officers obayed, and they the better as true Chriſtians, to liue in the feare of God: thus doing, they ſhall not onely ſhewe themſelues as true and duetiful Souldiers to their Prince, but like the Souldiers and ſeruants of Ieſus Chriſt, who of his infinite mercie, bring all Souldiers to the hoaſt of Heauen. Amen.
               The Generall, principall Officers and Captaines are in conſcience bound,How the Generall and Chieftaines are in conſcience bound to be Mediators vnto the Prince, for the reliefe of the hurt and lame Souldiers. to be moſt earneſt ſuiters and Mediators vnto the King and Prince, for the reliefe, helpe, and maintenaunce of the hurt, lame and ſicke Souldiers: being a part of Chriſtianitie to ſee them comforted, who in the Princes affayres and vnder their conduct, haue receiued their hurts: and that thoſe that haue ſerued in the warres vntill they be aged, and the maimed, might haue yerely ſtipends for their maintenaunce, during their liues, and the hurt and ſicke to be holpen, at the charges of the Countrey from whence they were preſt.
               
                  
                  An example of Alexander Seuerus.
                  Alexander Seuerus thought that Souldier worthie of his keeping in the tyme of peace, that had truely ſerued his Countrey in the tyme of warre.
               
                  Ieſus the ſonne of Siracke pitied in his heart the ſcarſeneſſe or pouertie of an expert man of warre.
               
                  An excellent act made by Octauian Auguſtus for the maintenaunce of Souldiers.
                  Octauian Auguſtus erected a Law for Souldiers, that if he had ſerued ten yéeres in the warres, and being fortie yéeres of age, that he ſhould haue wages appoynted out of the common Treaſurie for the maintenaunce of him and his familie, and that the lawfull wife of a Souldier, ſhould bee preferred before other women: and beeing Heroes, it was lawfull for him to beare Armes, and that they ſhould not be chaſtiſed, but by Caeſar.
               
               
                  
                     How Policrates appoynted liuings for the wiues & children of Souldiers ſlaine in the warres.
                     Solon decreed the ſame.
                  
                  Policrates of Samos appoynted liuing for the wiues and children of the ſouldiers ſlaine in the warres, ſtraightly commaunding that no man ſhould offer them any wrong.
               
                  Solon made this Lawe, that thoſe children, whoſe fathers were ſlaine in the defence of their Countrey, ſhould bee brought vp at the charges of the Common Treaſurie.
               What Nation but England but cheriſheth Souldiers, and prouideth for men of ſeruice, truſting that ſome noble mindes at the next Parliament may haue in remembrance ſome of theſe good Lawes decréed by Emperous, Kings and Princes, whereby ſome Act may paſſe for the reliefe and maintenaunce of Souldiers, the which would cauſe ſuch a willingneſſe & priſtinate valour in Engliſh mindes, that no Nation ſhould be comparable vnto vs.
               And as there is al diligence vſed for to make men faithfull, peaceable, and to liue in the feare of God, by the Gouernours of warre was doubled: for in what man ought the Countrey to ſeeke greater faith, then in him who muſt promiſe to dye for the ſame? In whom ought there to bée more loue of peace, then in him which onely by the warre may bee hurt? In whom ought there to hee more feare of

God, then in him which euery day committeth himſelfe to infinite perilles.
               Therefore to ſuch as hath truely and valiauntly ſerued in the Field with authoritie,How dignitie of office ſhold be appoynted to ſuch as haue ſerued truely and aduentured their liues in the defence of their Countrey. would great rewards and dignitie of Offices be appointed, as men moſt méete for counſelling, and the miniſtration of Iuſtice. For as the Poets haue fayned Minerua to bee armed: ſignifying, that Captaines ſhould bee as wiſe in counſelling, as couragious in conquering: as politicke in keeping, as valiaunt in getting.
               And Tullie in his firſt booke of Offices ſpeaketh of a double commoditie theſe men doe yéeld to their Countrie: who making warres goe armed, and roabed doe gouerne the Commonwealth.
               And as in Geneſis it is mentioned, before euer King was, that thoſe were appoynted to gouerne, in whom valiauntneſſe and vertue did moſt abound.
               
                  Charles the Great gaue this honour to his Captaines,
                     How Charles the great called his Captaines companyons of kings and appointed them Iudges of offences.
                     How the chief of euery Shiere ſhould be in their warlike attyre at the trayning day.
                  
ſaying, you ſhall bee called Heroes, the Companyons of Kings and Iudges of offences. Wherfore hereafter counſell Kings in the publicke authoritie, and if any doe you iniurie: let him knowe he hath offended the Emperours Maieſtie: and if offences be by you committed, we ordaine puniſhment to bee giuen by vs and our ſucceſſours Emperours of Rome, as often as you ſhall tranſgreſſe.
               And as the vſe of warres ought to bee applyed for the defence of right to ſhield vs from iniuries wherby to plant a commodious ſtate of life, ſo the ſtudies thereof are to bee vſed in time of peace, for exerciſe, and in the time of warre, for neceſſitie and for glorie, and to ſuffer onely the Commonweale to vſe it for an Arte: ſo likewiſe as peace is the nourſe of ſtore and increaſe of things, if reſpect in tyme bee not had for the prouiſion of Munition, money, weapons and men prepared both in mynds and by exerciſe trayned for the warres, it wil cauſe in neceſſities but faynt warres, beſeeching the liuing GOD, that this careleſſe liuing in

ſecuritie, be not ſo pernicious vnto the Commonweale, as the detracting of tyme ſhall enforce vs to take counſaile when it is to late.
               The Quéenes Maieſtie with her wiſe Counſell hath made ſo good prouiſion of Munition for the Land, likewiſe of Shippus for the Sea, as no Realme for the quantitie better prouided: but if men be not trayned and exerciſed for the vſe thereof, it will ſerue to no other purpoſe, then men taken from the Land, to bee Pylates of Shippes well appoynted in the daungerous Seas. Beſides, her Maieſties prouiſion vpon euery occaſion is not to bee broken, neither vppon a ſodaine inuaſion eaſily to bee tranſported to the hands of her ſubiects, for defence of her Maieſties Countrey, the which yt Counſell hath wiſely foreſeene, but their Commiſſions are ſo ſimply executed, as I greatly doubt, when neceſſitie ſhall enforce to the vſe of the ſame, they ſhal altogether be deceiued.
               The reaſon is, the Commiſſions are directed vnto the chiefe of euery Shiere, and by them are appoynted, ſuch Muſter maiſters as hath good ſkill in the Law, the flying of a Hawke, or experience in chooſing of a fat Bullocke or Shéepe: ſuppoſing becauſe we haue liued a tyme in peace, that wee ſhall alwaies liue in this ſecuritie:How thoſe that hath experience in Martiall affayres ſhould be appoynted for Muſter maiſters. deſpiſing to craue the aſſiſtance of the Souldier, who hath aduentured his life for his Countrie, being neuer ſo expert or of ſo good behauiour, becauſe he is poore, and for that a Souldier will not ſee his Countrey deceiued by their Muſter bookes, as to put in ſo many able Caliuers, ſo many able Corſtets, ſo many able Billes, and ſo many able Bowes, the which wil prooue when occaſion ſhall ſerue to vſe them, to bee halfe lame. I meane, becauſe ſuch as are appoynted to haue a Caléeuer furniſhed, ſhall paſſe the booke with an olde ruſtie Peece without a Flaſke, Touchboxe, Martion, Match, Powder, Sword, or Rapier and Dagger: and ſuch as are appoynted to haue Corſſets furniſhed, that is, to haue good Curates for their bodies, Taces for their thighes, Poldrones

and Vambraſes for their ſhoulders & armes, Burgonites for their heads, good Pikes, and Swordes, and Daggers, theſe ſhall paſſe the Muſters with a little olde broken yron of their backs, or if he haue an old Almon Riuet on his backe, although he lacke his Taces, and many other péeces, ſo he haue a Pike he ſhall be very wel armed, and yet men of that abilitie as they are, are able ſome to furniſh 1.2. or 3. men, and keepe them continually in pay: And the Bill men who are appoynted for execution and ſlaughter of the field, the which of neceſſitie muſt be armed at all poynts, theſe ſhal paſſe as men had in no eſtimation, with a Skull on his head, and a Pikeſtaffe on his ſhoulders. Likewiſe the Bowmen without Iackes, Skulles, or ſufficient Bowes, according to their ſtrengths, with two or three Shaftes by their ſides in their doublets and hoſe, ſhal paſſe for able Bowmen: through the ſufferance wherof, not only the Queenes Maieſtie but the Countrey ſhall bee deceiued, if it bee not preſently looked vnto, truſting the wiſe Counſell will ſee it reformed, by aſſiſting the chiefe of the Shiere, with ſuch Souldiers whome experience hath made to knowe what is méeteſt for men to apparell themſelues withal for the warres: and for that none are appointed but ſuch as are of great abilitie for the prouiſion of the ſame, ſo after ſufficient warning giuen by the Muſter maiſters, as is appoynted for their Furniture, not well oyled and kept for the preſent vſe, if default bee founde either in lacke of ſuch Furniture, they to haue a fine ſet vppon their heads, the which they ſhould truely pay, and that money to bee beſtowed vpon Match and Powder, the which ſhould be ſpent vpon the trayning day, and that ſuch might be appoynted for the trayning of Souldiers as are knowne to haue experience to inſtruct and teach them that, that they may profite themſelues and their Countrie, and not by fauour to chooſe ſuch Captaines as are to bee taught by the poore Souldiers, and that conſideration by the Countrey for their paines might be vſed: and at the daies appoynted

for trayning, the chiefe of the Shiere to be preſent in their warre-like attyre, and to exerciſe themſelues and their horſes, with running at the Ring, and ſuch poynts of ſeruice as is meeteſt for Horſemen, as otherwiſe to ſee the trayning of Pikes and Shot, whereby if election bee made of Captaines not able to inſtruct like a Captaine, that others might bee appoynted that hath experience. And if Noblemen and Gentlemen would ſee theſe exerciſes honourably frequented, we ſhould not feare the wicked practiſes of forreine Princes, to be in hoſtile oppreſſion, for that thoſe Nations ſeeing the diſcipline and martiall proweſſe of a ſtate ſo well gouerned, prouided, and defended, may feare to offer vs iniuries, being glad to deſire fauour and league, when things in this good ſtay and ſafetie are confirmed and eſtabliſhed through this courſe of life, we ſhall be moſt happie, and do our Lord God beſt ſeruice, ſo that our felicitie may hereafter endure for euer.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   