
      
         
            
            
            A PARADOXE, Prouing by reason and example, that Baldnesse is much better than bushie haire, &c.
            Written by that excellent Philosopher Synesius, Bishop of Thebes, or (as some say) Cyren.
            
            A Prettie pamphlet, to pervse, and replenished with recreation.
            Englished by Abraham Fleming.
            Herevnto is annexed the pleasant tale of Hemetes the Heremite, pronounced before the Queenes Maiestie.
            Newly recognised both in Latine and Englishe, by the said A. F.
            
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
               The badge of wisedome is baldnesse.
            
            Printed by H. Denham. 1579.
         
         
            
               
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
            
            
               The life of Synesius drawen out of Suydas his gatherings.
               
                  SYnesius borne at Ptolemais a Citie in Pentapolis, Bishop of Thebes in Aphrica, being a Philosopher, and a Churchman, wrote sundrie bookes, both of Grammar, and of Philosophie: he wrote also Orations of commendation, or demonstration, to Princes and Great men; as the praise of Baldnesse: and a meruellous notable treatise concerning Prouidence, and that in the Greeke tongue. Furthermore, he made manie other bookes, and Epistles, full of wonderfull witte, learning, and iudgement.
               Thus much for the credite of the Author.
            
         
         
            
            The Epistle Apologeticall to the lettered Reader.
            
               
                  IT might be demed dotage in the Deuiser, and madnesse in the Translator, that they both by consent, would publish and disperse a toie so ridiculous, as this appeareth to be, penned in the praise of Baldnesse. But the Deuisers setled iudgment dischargeth him of dotage, the Translators aduisement cleereth him of madnes, & the worke it selfe consideratiuelie

perused, doeth answer for them both.
            VVhosoeuer therefore, at some euening vacation from their necessarie affaires, shall pleasantlie passe ouer this prettie Pamphlet (being but an houres reading) marking how the whole discourse is knit together by iointes and sinews: the reasons naturall, pithie, and ponderous: the examples historicall, short, sweete, and ancient: I thinke they wil vouchsafe it such fauourable sentence, as a certaine Philosopher gaue in the like respect.
            "Namelie, Sapientiam, quae

splendore suo semper circumfunditur, in minutulis rebus sese exerere: fautorés
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   suos, vel in leuiusculis conatibus, nobilitare. That in matters of small moment, Ladie wisdome, alwais compassed with her owne brightnesse, aduaunceth her selfe: and such as loue her, though the trade wherin they trauell be not weightie, she maketh famous."
            VVhich saieng to be true, the euentes themselues geue in euidence. For, such is the nature of wisdom, that where she dealeth, she leaueth beautie: yea, euen in so base a thing as Baldnes is, though it seme

but a fable at the first blush.
            This being well weighed of our ancients, (men, for their ornaments of minde, matchlesse: & singularitie of praise, peerelesse:) they might well enough, without controllment, make their knowledge knowen: poudering trifles with grauitie, vnlikelihoodes with probabilities, and follies with wisedome.
            This hath bene a common practise of our Predecessors, men furnished with sundrie gifts of excellencie, as by examples of particularities, as well in Orators, as also Poets, both foraine & domesticall,

may be proued.
            "For, Lucian, and Apuleius vvrote of an Asse, Themison in praise of the herbe Plantaine, Homere in commendation of VVine, Ephren in dispraise of Laughing, Orpheus & Hesiodus of Fumigations, or Perfumes, Chrysippus of Colevvortes, Phanias of Nettles, Messala made for euerie seuerall letter of the A B C, a seuerall booke, Virgil of a Gnat, Ouid of a Nut, & Erasmus but latelie of the praise of follie, and Heywood yet later, of the Spider and the Flie."
            Shall vve geue rashe and vnseasoned sentence against

these learned men, naming them brainlesse & brainsicke: or othervvise prescribing vnto them matters more meete whereon to meditate? No.
            "But as the vvorkemanship of Myrmecides vvas vvonderfull, vvho made foure horses dravving a cart, & their driuer with his vvhip, in such curious compasse, that they were hidden vnder the wings of a flie: and Callicrates a shippe, the vvhole bodie vvhereof a little bird couerd vvith his fethers:"
euen so these, & the like vvriters, in small matters bevvraieng great vvisedome, deserue no lesse praise for their trauel,

than others desire pleasure and profite of their toile.
            And therefore, well aduised and prudent Reader, vouchsafe Synesius, a most lerned and ancient Bishop, the reading: vvhom although some vnskilfully (I feare) shal condemne, yet you discreetlie (I hope) vvill commend.
            "Vera nam
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   & germana laus eorum ab ore manat, qui omnia suo modulo metiri norunt: spuria verò & adulterina, quae rerū vmbellas sectatur. For, that is true & perfect praise, which proceedeth from the mouth of them, that haue skil to skan all things in their ovvne kind:

as for such praise as seketh after shadovves and fansies, it is false and counterfeit."
            VVith vvhich sentence I conclude, in the behalfe of mine Author, submitting his trauell to the censure of the sage, among whome, as all wise heades deserue inrollment, so I wish them vviselie to vveigh his vvordes, vvho hath vvritten this vvorke vpon the vvarrant of vvisedome.
            
               Thine for thy pleasure and profite Abraham Fleming.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A pretie Paradoxe pleasantlie painting out the praise, profite, and preferment of Baldnesse, &c.
            
               
                  DION 
               
                  This Dion, sirnamed Golden tongue, was both a Rhetorician, and a Philosopher: his wonted fashion was to go abroad with a Lions skin ouer him, to the ende that he might be the more reuerenced among men. In processe of time he became so familiar wt Traian Caesar the Emperour, that he rode in the chariot of royaltie with the Emperour as his companion.
                with the Golden tongue, wrote a Booke in the praise and commendation of frisled and shocked haire, a Booke so wel stored with plentie of good matter & gaie words, that euerie balde pate must néedes be ashamed of him selfe, in consideration of ye worthinesse of that mans worke. For whie, his whole discourse agréed with Nature: because all and euerie one of vs, euen by the inclination and drawing on of Nature, couet to be faire, handsome, and well fauoured: to the atteining wherof, haire wel growen, is no slender helpe, which euen Nature her selfe hath appointed to spring and increase

with vs, as we our selues rise in age. When this ornament of haire decaieth and falleth away, it striketh sore torments into the heart. Héerevpon I thought, that my lucke was to suffer farre more gréeuous inconueniences, than the Atheniens did at the hands of Archidamus, in the cutting downe of the 
                  Among all other discommodities, which Archidamas did to ye Atheniens, it appeareth that he hewed downe their goodly woods and groues, least by them they might any way be succoured.
                trées of Acarnania. Presently vpon that conceit, I fell in opinion, that I was one of the vnséemelie Euboeans, of whom Homer reporteth, that being balde before, and hairie behinde, they marched vnto Troie. Thus doubtfull of minde, and at defiance with destinie, as a fauourer of 
                  This Epicurus denied Gods prouidence, affirming that the worlde was not gouerned there by, &c.
                
               Epicurus, I saide: What place is there left vnto diuine prouidence, séeing that all things fall out and happen to all men otherwise than they deserue, considering that their worthinesse would be well rewarded? And what offence haue I committed, that I should become so vnsauourie and vnswéete a morsell vnto women kinde? If I were onely contemned and set light by of such

women, as are neighbours and borderers hereaboutes, I should be neuer a whit gréeued, considering that I kéepe my concupiscences in such subiection, and my ranging lustes in such bondage, that I dare, for continencie & honestie, make challenge euen to 
                  Antëa the wife of king Praetus, laie sore at Bellerophon, and vsed all alluring meanes, that she might, to haue carnall knowledge wt him: but he hauing regard to his owne honestie, & to the kings honor, wt stoode her incontinencie by his chastitie.
                
               Bellerophon. But my mother which bare me, and my sisters which sucked of ye same milke, what say they? Their wordes are these, that beautie and well fauourednesse standeth much vpon the haire. This is confirmed by the doing of Quéene Parysatis, who restrained her kindnesse and loue from king Artaxerxes, when shée sawe before her the amiable personage of Cyrus. But whiles I mused vpon this mischiefe, I began to take stomach, and put reason in armes against my fighting affection, which giuing place by litle & litle, as vnable to encounter, I became well appeased. For against two, no not Hercules himself had strength sufficient, who when he was violently set vpon of 
                  These were the sonnes of Neptunus and Moliona, whom Hercules ouerthrew in a combate at Olympus, a hill in Thessalia.
                
               Cteaton, and Eurytus,
               
by priuie assaults wanted abilitie and force to withstand them: and had not Iolaus assisted him against Hydra, a fowle water Serpent, aided with the sea Crabbe, Hercules had not escaped death. As for me, in so much as I haue not 
                  This Iolaus was Hercules nephue, by whose helpe the heads of Hydra were cut off, & consumed in fire.
                
               Iolaus to take my part, I am commanded to giue ouer all vnto Dion. But yet, when I enter league with reason, and deliberate with my selfe in this manner: O! of al bald pates thou art the most excellent, & worthiest to weare the golden spurres: thou art valiant and victorious in déede, which makest no account of calamities, but at great banquets and solemne feastes, when baldnesse is called in question, and demaundes made concerning high forheads, steppest out & shewest thy selfe to the companie, as dooing thy diligence to maintaine an honest séemelinesse: I forbare Dion in his foolishe fansie, and in 
                  A citie in Greece, where such as should trie masteries at Olympus, were admitted.
                
               Pisa (as the Prouerbe is) I prepared my selfe for this present purpose. And as 
                  Vlysses, notwithstanding that he felt in himselfe a disposition to wrath and vengeaunce, brideled him selfe with patience, saieng to him selfe: 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , &c. Heart hold out, for thou hast endured farre greater greefes than this, &c. Homer Odyss. 20.
                
               Vlysses continued constant and patient,

not storming at the wantonnesse and lasciuiousnesse of his maidens, nor violently rushing vpō them, as gréedie of reuengement, notwithstanding they were merrie and pleasant with their Paramours: euen so will I behaue my selfe towardes Dion, and all his affections. To the intent therefore that I may not forget his long and gallant spéeche, which is continually before mine eies, I will rehearse part therof, and so procéede.
            When I was risen vp earely in the morning, and (after my common manner) had made my praiers to the gods, the next thing that I had to do, was to bestow some time and trauel in trimming of my haire. For, in the yeares of my minoritie, being vnder age, and but weake of bodie, I was not so wise as to haue regard vnto it, but let it growe disordered and intangled, like wooll vpon weathers backes: yea more fowle and filthie, than it is now fine and frisled. It appeared therefore wilde and rough to the eie, and could not be sundered in

locks, nor parted for comlines, without tearing & renting from the scalp. Moued herevpon, I vndertooke to disperse the praise and commendation of such, as were delicate and nice about wearing of their haire, whereof, whosoeuer be not carefull, in kéeping it in suche sort, I can terme them no better than dolts & dissards.
            He procéedeth to enter discourse of womanlike gallants, such as carrie in their bushie haire 
                  It should seeme yt their haire was meruellously curled, yt it could kepe the bodkin fast whersoeuer it did sticke.
                an Iuorie bodkine, that when leasure and time serued, they might busie themselues in trimming the same: and of such also, as sléeping vpon the ground, bolster vp their heades in such sort, as they may at no hande touch the earth, hauing greater regard to the neatnesse of their haire, than to the swéetenesse of their sléepe. For sléepe maketh men clubbish and carelesse, but haire maketh them amiable and terrible. The 
                  It is a custome among the Lacedaemonians, in aduē
                     tures of life and death to combe and trimme their haire.
                
               Lacedaemonians (as it should séeme) were not negligent in this behalfe, of whome but poore thrée hundred being assembled in armes, and

looking for the comming of king Darius to a fearce and furious conflict, set them selues a worke in the meane time about their haire, trimming and making the same handsome. Homer in this case vseth no small diligence and commendation, so often as he nameth the 
                  Homer calleth them 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , Blacke eied Graecians.
                
               Graecians. For he doeth not so often praise the eies, as though the beautie and well fauourednes of Gallants consisted therein, as he doeth the haire. And though he commendeth Agamemnon for his black eies: yet notwtstanding he imparteth the same praise indifferently to other Graecians as well as him. But he commendeth Agamemnon by name for his hairie lockes, euen as he doeth all other noble Gentlemen for the same propertie specially. He praiseth Achilles for his yellowe lockes, Menelaus for his Orenge coloured haire, & Hector for his bright graie bush. Againe, what doeth he most commend: naie, what other thing doeth he praise in Euphorbus the Troiane, whome Menelaus slue,

but onely his haire, vsing this kinde of spéeche for the setting foorth of that necessarie séemelinesse:

                  His ladie locks like to the Nymphes,
                  with bloud seemd rustie red,
                  With gold and siluer knotted vp,
                  to beautifie his hed.
               
The same Poet speaking of Vlysses, whome Pallas made honourable, saieth thus:

                  Of her he did receiue long haire,
                  of iron colour verie faire.
               
            
            
               Homer therefore is of opinion, that the ornament of the haire, doeth better beséeme men than women. For, in extolling the Goddesses, and ascribing vnto euerie one of them their particular praise, he medleth not with their haire, but buildeth their commendation vpon other groundes: namelie, the partes and members of their bodie, aiming at their proportion and making. He calleth Uenus, 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . 
               Golden Venus, Iuno, 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . 
               Buleied Iuno, Thetis, 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Homer Iliad. 
                        •
                     .
                
               Siluerfooted Thetis. And setting out Iupiter in his maiestie, he beginneth

with his haire, and calleth it heauenlie, vsing these wordes:

                  
                     
                        Homer in his Iliads. lib. α
                      Th'immortal king God Iupiter,
                  his heauenlie haire did shake,
                  Which made the starrie firmament,
                  to quiuer and to quake.
               
But I hearing this harmonie of Dions tuning, became a Prophet to my selfe, gathering by coniecturall reasons before hande, that it would fare with me, as with 
                  The allusion is to one Thrasymachus, who mainteined, more impudently than learnedlie, that iustice is to be counted among euill things, and iniustice among good: which opinion of his, Socrates made him, with shame enough, to recant.
                
               Thrasymachus, namely to be put to shame & silence. Howbeit, this passion of minde hath but slender holde, when I trie Dions discourse by the touchstone of truth: whose whole oration consisteth vpon smooth words full of grauitie, but in effect it is nothing, for it wanteth pith and substance. If he had vndertaken to commend baldnesse, as he hath attempted the contrarie, he had (no doubt) gotten him selfe greater credite, and purchased more praise. For, if so be that in a trifling thing, he be so well furnished, what shall a man thinke of him, if he had a weightie matter in handling? For he hauing

haire inough to make him comlie, and learning likewise to shewe himself cunning, presumed to speake his minde in the praise of shocked haire. It maie be, he is one of those which carrie about them an instrument of their vanitie, namely a bodkine, therewith at due leasure to trimme their flagging lockes.
            Forsomuch therefore as I haue the more excellent cause to defend, notwithstanding my cunning be not counteruaileable vnto Dions, whie should I not make readie my selfe, according to the equitie of my cause, to praise Baldpates, and to dispraise such as are loaden with hairie locks? And for entrance into my matter, I néede no curious or vehement beginning, which I am content to leaue vnto 
                  Whose manner it is to vse some plausible praeamble, or praeface thereby to wind them selues into the admiration of their auditors.
                Oratours, as properly pertinent to their earnest cases, wherwith they geue strength to their present purpose, arming it (as it were) against the aduersarie, as the shippes (called men of warre) are prepared against the enimie. Neither will I

take vnto me for a president, Musicians or Minstrels, whose manner is in trial of excellencie, either for praise or pension, nimblie to finger, and run ouer to and fro, the strings of their Lute, Citerne, Harpe, or other melodious instrument whatsoeuer: as though there rested not a further proofe of cunning.
            
               Dion thus beginneth. When I was risen vp earlie in the morning, &c. He doth not commend such bushe hairie fellowes, as in déede he ought. It is the point of an Orator, one while to delight his hearers, another while to amaze them, and set them a wondering, which things although 
                  This 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , or modestie of minde, when a man doeth not thinke too well of himselfe, is a most commendable vertue.
                I cannot compasse, as wanting that measure of knowledge (and yet not vtterlie destitute:) with that litle which I haue neuerthelesse, I will doe mine endeuour, as one not trained vp, nor practised in the Art of Rhetorike, but as a husbandman, or rude countrie clowne, brought vp at home, and exercised at plough & cart, digging and deluing, grafting and

planting, kéeping of cattel. &c, so that with the spade & hedge bill, the pitchforke and plough handle, in sted of penne, inke, and paper, my hands are growne hard, & my fingers worne. For we will not varie from the custome of our countrie. 
                  Not that he wanted cunning or knowledge: but note rather herein his humilitie.
                Neither wil I begin with smooth and delicate words, but according to my countrie fashion, as plaine as a packstaffe: for that doeth like me best. Assisted therfore with the goodnesse of the cause, I wil set foote in féeld, and enter combate: framing my tongue rather to reuenging than reasoning: that is to saie, not vttering my words after the 
                  For the Phrygian fashion of sounding their wordes, is more stirring, wherwith Timotheus the musician moued king Alexander oftentimes to make warre: as for the Dorian sounding of wordes, that is more milde▪
                  
                
               Dorian manner, but after the Phrygian fashion. For the matter which I haue in hand requireth earnestnesse, & must haue a good heart, and a full mouth.
            We therefore thus determine and saie: That a balde pate, of all other, hath least cause to be ashamed. For whie, hauing a smooth head, and a thinne: he hath wisedome enoughe both for him selfe & his fréend. Such

a one doth Homer report Achilles to be: who tare his haire from his head, as estéeming it naughtes worth, because he was content to part from it him selfe, to bestow it vpon a 
                  Howe deuouty Achilles dealt with the dead bodie of Patroclus, cutting off his owne haire, & burning it in the fire, Homer reporteth in the last boke saue one of his Iliads.
                dead corsse: and to burie it with the bodie of his fréend. For, what is the haire, but a certeine thing voide of life, yea a dead thing, belonging to the partes of the bodie indued with sense and féeling? Beastes therefore which are farre from vnderstanding and reason, haue all their bodie ouergrowne with haire: but man, for that he is partaker of a more excellent estate of life, appeareth more naked and bare, but lesse hairie. And to the ende he might not kéepe companie with other creatures, his haire groweth not euerie where: but scatteringlie here and there. Wherby it commeth to passe, that howe much the lesse haire any one hath about his bodie: so much the more doeth he excell other, euen as farre as a man is to be preferred before a beast.
            And as man of all other liuing

creatures is the smoothest, and the wisest: euen so 
                  Hereof commeth the common Prouerbe, As simple as a sheepe, when we will note anie one that wanteth wit & discretion, or other wise an innocent.
                a shéepe of all liuing things, is the foolishest, because there is no part of her bodie without haire. For what haire is to other beastes, that is woll to the shéepe. Herevpon it followeth, that the hauing of haire biddeth battell vnto wisedome and discretion. For they will not be together at any hand. Such dogs as haue smooth eares and bellies, are most fit for ye game: but rough curres, which haue more haire than heart, as they are rashe and hastie, so they are soone dashed: it is greater vantage to the huntesman, that such houndes were kept awaie, than appointed for the game, least in medling they marre all.
            
               
                  Plato (as I take it) meaneth by these two horses, Reason and Affection, which drawe the mindes of men contrariwaies, euen as they are of force one aboue the other. Reade him in Phaedro suo, touching this matter.
                
               Plato speaking of the two horses, which the soule (as a waineman) driueth and directeth, calleth that a craftie, a stoute, and a stubberne stallion, which by reason of haire ouergrowing his eares, waxeth dumbe, and hath lost his hearing. Which must néedes be so, as he in processe of

time shall become blind, who is full of haire about that part, which preserueth the sight. Nature cannot awaie with this, that vile & contemptible things should be ioyned in fellowship with precious and excellent things. The fiue senses are precious things, and those partes whereby all liuing creatures haue life and féeling, are excellent things: among all which, the sight is the quickest, the liueliest, the most necessarie, and (you knowe) the eies haue their smoothnesse and baldnesse. That therefore which in man is of this kinde, deserueth most honour. So it followeth in conclusion, that the verie best things are bald. For we shewed a little before, that man is so much more excellent than anie other creature, by how much he hath the lesse haire.
            Séeing therefore man is a liuing soule, and a most excellent creature: I saie that such as by Fortune haue lost their haire, and are become bald, must and ought to haue preferment aboue the rest. Herevpon Diogenes,

Socrates, Plato, and a world of wise men, incomparable for knowledge, learning, vtterance and iudgement, are painted with balde pates. Let not 
                  This Apollonius let his haire growe about his shoulders in length, & he was such a seducer of men, that among other honours done to him vnmeete for a mortall man, Alexander the Emperour, and sonne of Mammea, worshipped him for a God, placing his image betweene the image of Abraham and Christ, in his closset.
                
               Apollonius Tyanaeus with his hairie lockes scoffe at our spéeche, neither let anie other seducer, whatsoeuer he be, contemne our saiengs. For, vnlesse this kind of coggers had not shocked haire, the ignorant multitude could not so lightlie be blinded with their iugglings. The black art or science (as they terme it) is no wisedome, but a wilie working of wonders: it is no knowledge, but a certein counterfet shew of cunning. For prudent lawemakers counte wisedome most honourable, and against witches, sorcerers, coniurers, and such like, they maintaine executioners. We saie therfore in trueth, turne it as you list, he that is wise, the verie same is bald: and if he be not bald, surelie he is not wise.
            In like manner it falleth out in diuine affaires, that is, in things belonging to the supernall Gods.

               
                  These festiualles were kept and holden at Athens, when winter wore awaie, and the weather waxed warme.
                For in celebrating of Bacchus solemnities, they to whom the charge therof was committed, were al ouer growne with haire: but the yonger Satires, who had about their heads, garlands of Pine trée leaues, were most reuelling & outragious. Now, in such a hurlie burlie as it were of dronkards and Bedlems, bald
                  This Silenus, being an ancient Satire, was tutor and guide to Bacchus, and was ring leader to all the rest of the Satires.
                
               Silenus bare principall rule: which was done, not without the great care of Iupiter: that a Baldpate, endued with wisdome and sobernesse, should be fosterfather vnto Bacchus, least through his naturall inclination to wine bibbing, he become madde, and so falling into an extremitie of lunacie, outface his father Iupiter, and denie him all dutifull obedience.
            
               Socrates, among all other good properties, being possessed with the spirit of modestie, and maruellous sparing to spread his owne praise: reioyced notwithstanding, and boasted of himselfe, that he was like to balde 
                  To whose images, Alcibiades compared Socrates, for that as the grauers of thē cut them cunningly, in out ward shew homelie: but inwardli, their cases, wherein they were kept, being opened, they semed diuine and heauenly: euē so Socrates outwardly appearing but a simple man, inwardly notwithstanding, was another manner of fellowe than he was taken to be.
                
               Silenus. For the head is the castell of knowledge, and wisedome. This

comparison is not perceiueable to the vnskilful. Bushie haire is a beautie vnto youth, in whome wisedome is not yet growne to her flowre: but when age is come vpon vs, which bréedeth in vs vnderstanding and experience: what meane we (olde doting fooles) to be proud of our hairie lockes? If an old fellowe be curious & delicate in trimming of his haire: surelie he is brainesicke.
            The case therefore standeth thus, that haire and witte will not drawe vnder one yoke: but are like affected one to another, as light and darkenesse, whereof the ones departure, is the cause of the others succession: that is, the one must néedes be absent, or else the other cannot be present. Will you haue the cause of this contrarietie laide open before your eies? Of all things, haire, as it is simplie the basest, & of least account: so is it most subiect vnto change and alteration. In vnperfect creatures it doeth ouercome, and beare a certein swaie: but in perfect and excellent

bodies, it hath no such force, but falleth off and consumeth awaie. Doe but call to your consideration the trées of the earth, whose ende is to yéelde and bring foorth fruite. In the Spring time what gaie shewes doe they make, what variable colours doe they beare in their blossomes, with what beautifull brauenesse are they garnished? They haue their blossoms, their buds, their leaues, &c. all which (when the fruite commeth to ripenesse, whereof those are but certeine foretokens) waxe drie, wither awaie, and turne to nothing. For that which is perfect in it selfe, néedeth no beautifieng: and a thing is then said to be perfect, when there is to be séene in it, the appearance of another séede.
            Moreouer, 
                  A citie in Greece, the people wherof, in celebrating the festiuals of Ceres, called Anacalypteria, which are kept at such time as the frutes of the earth appeare in their ripenesse, are bald & bareheaded.
                
               Eleusis doeth celebrate the solemnities of Ceres, called Anacalypteria. Againe, the minde of man, forsomuch as it is the most excellent of all séedes, which descend from aboue, and hath his mansion or dwelling house in the head, the fruite

whereof is substantiall vnderstanding, it comforteth and reuiueth the head to haue faire haire, which is (as a man would saie) but buddes and blossomes. And as before the fall of the leafe, the fruite is not come to full perfection: no more is vnderstanding setled in the head, vntill suche time as all superfluities are fanned awaie. When therefore you see a baldpate, suppose streight way that the fruite there hath attained perfect ripenesse, and made the head a garner to preserue it: yea, you maie boldlie gesse, that such a head is the Temple of God. The festiualles therfore of Ceres, as wisemen would haue them named, were also called 
                  In english, Ascendings: because the mindes of them that were occupied therein, were lifted vp aloft.
                
               Epibateria, because of the ascending of the minde vp to the contemplation of heauenlie things. Which festiuals, contrariwise, are termed of the simpler sort Anacalypteria, because that in celebrating of the same, the assemblie were bald & bareheaded: thus imagined the multitude. For he which beginneth to be bald,

hath entred holie orders, and is instructed and taught from aboue the mysteries of the highest God.
            And as Pomegranates, and walnuttes are naught which die in their shels: so are al heads starke naught, which want the heauenlie fruite of witte, being ouergrowne with the superfluous mosse of a dead thing. 
                  The Aegyptians shaue their bodies all ouer, to th'ende that no vermine or other filthinesse maie breede about them, when they are busie about the seruice of their Gods.
                The Priests of Aegypt vsed of custome to kéepe their eie liddes voide from haire. Whereby although they séemed in shew to be but fooles: yet notwithstanding they were the wisest men in the world. For it is a common Prouerb, that The Aegyptians excell in wisedome. For there ought to be no agréement betwéene things euerlasting, and things corruptible. The bald pate hath a kinde of naturall acquaintance with God. Now Sir, whether God be bald, or not: that is counsell to vs. Of this I am assured, that the things which are next vnto God, are the Spheres of the heauens, and they are balde: in like manner are the starres. The

Heauen it selfe appeareth balde in our sight: in the praise whereof what so euer we can saie, the same maie well serue to commend baldnesse.
            And although Homer the Poet, & Phidias the Painter, giue Iupiter such 
                  He alludeth to the wordes of Homer, in the first of his Iliads, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , that is to saie, Iupiter shooke heauen.
                long shocked haire flagging about his shoulders, as that with the wagging thereof he maketh the verie firmament to quake and tremble: yet notwithstanding what a Iupiter is in heauen, we are not nowe to learne. Whether there be besides him, another visible Iupiter, consisting of soule and bodie, members and limmes, &c. it passeth my skill to conceiue. But if there be such a one, let him be so good as to stoupe: for there is one aboue, whose maiestie is vnexpresseable. But yt there is such a Iupiter, whose hairie lockes make him so wonderfull, who affirmes it, but the Poet, and the Painter, men so farre from setting out trueth in her nakednesse, that they delight wholie in the flattering colours of falshood and lies? 
                  Poets and painters haue a quicker eie to their owne priuate praise than to the setting out of trueth in her kind.
                They are phantasticall

bragging fellowes, & what soeuer they doe, they doe it for their owne vaine glorie, & not for truthes sake.
            The ignorant sort imagine that bushie haire maketh men honourable: and at all externall or outward things, if they be gaie and rare, the rude multitude doe wonder. Creatures hauing outward haire, it is to them in sted of outward goodes. In place of the Mind: Nature, yea variable Fortune hath the haire at commandement. The giftes therefore of Nature and Fortune, are supposed of the vnskilfull commonaltie, to be (as it were) bridges to blessednesse. He which either writeth or speaketh to the vnlearned people, necessarie it is, that he get their good opinion: yea, he must inuent and deuise, reason and discourse of such matters, as the people like well of, and allow. The vnlearned and vntaught multitude are fauourers of absurd opinions: whereby it commeth to passe, that if anie one presume

to bring in a thing contrarie to common custome, he must néedes 
                  He alludeth to Socrates, who was condemned to drink poison, when he was accused of Anytus, and Melytus, that he thought scarse well of the Atheniens Gods.
                drinke poison: this punishment cannot be auoided. Unto what torments (thinke you) would the Graecians haue condemned Homer, if those things which he spake of Iupiter had bene consonant and answerable to the trueth?
            The Aegyptians, and speciallie the Wise men and Prophetes, put not men of occupation in trust with the making of the images of their Gods: but looke what baggage chanceth to fall from the gréedie Hawke and rauennous 
                  A bird in Aegypt cole black, which deuoureth much noisome and venomous vermine. Cicero speaketh of them somewhat largely, lib. 2. De natura Deorum.
                
               Ibis billes, therwith they deceiue the people in the Churche porch, whiles they themselues being in the Chauncell, hide their sacrifices, and procéede in their solemnities in the clossettes of their Gods, where certeine round boxes are kept shutte, whereof if the people shoulde haue but a glimpse, it were as much as the Sacrificers liues were worth: or else they shew vnto them Aesculapius with his bald pate, although the

               Graecians haue him hairie lockt in 
                  Epidaurus, a citie in Peloponnesus, wherin was built the famous temple of Aesculapius.
                
               Epidaurus, but they neglected the searching out of the truth. The Aegyptians maintaine the art of inchantment towards their Gods, and they speake by certeine signes and figures in their tongue.
            Now, if you saie that a blasing starre is a hairie starre, it resteth to be proued first that it is a starre in déede: but doubtlesse it is no starre, although it be termed so amisse: neither doeth it continue aboue foure daies, and then consumeth awaie by litle and litle. But suppose it were a starre, and consider what a mischéeuous and euill thing the haire thereof is, which bringeth decaie euen to the starre it selfe (if it be a starre:) besides innumerable miseries whereof it is a foretoken, all which I passe ouer in this place. Haue we euer read that anie good starre wasted to nothing? But this starre with crisped haire vanisheth, and the substance thereof dieth.
            Séeing then that all celestiall bodies

are blessed, and therewith also 
                  The round figure which keepeth in it selfe an euen proportion: of this figure is the Heauen, &c. His meaning is, that if the outgrowings of the haire were shauen awaie, the head woulde haue a resemblance of that perfect figure.
                the sphericall figure: I woulde wish that both I my selfe, & all my frendes, were indued with that good thing, that we maie be like Gods. Looke what things are like the true God, we maie boldlie cal them faire, beautifull, & amiable. But you will saie, it is a fond thing, yea repugnant to reason, that we should attribute vnto baldnes such honour, as to giue it diuine names, and heauenlie praises: considering that it hath no likenesse or agréement with things celestiall. But we being disposed to speake well by, & to please baldpates, say, they are certeine litle Moones: neither know I what may be applied vnto them more deseruedly, or more peculiarly. For first of all it appeareth with two hornes, then it entreth into the quarter, afterwards it sheweth more than halfe, and lastly ariseth the full Moone. So it fareth with baldpates, who are (as it were) full Moones, or rather Sunnes, because they diminish not, but kéeping

continually their full compasse of roundnesse, giue light vnto other starres in the skies.
            We reade of the 
                  Among the rest, Melanthus is mentioned in this manner, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , &c. They flie vpon him, they catch him by the cocks comb, and holde him fast by the hairie lockes. Hom. Odyss.
                wanton wooers with whome Vlysses had to deale, after his returne from his long trauel, how he being a baldpate, made a slaughter of aboue a hundred hairie lockt yonkers with his owne hands, hauing none other helpe. Baldnesse therefore is an excellent thing: for it hath light in it selfe, & it giueth light vnto others. The cause of this brightnesse is baldnesse and smoothnesse. At what time we goe to the better, at the same time we depart from the worsser. Life and light being two of the best companions, are contrarie to death and darknesse. And if so be that brightnesse haue nakednesse, & yet beautifieth: darknesse vndoubtedlie hauing hairmesse, of necessitie beséemeth. But you saie that haire is a natural shadow, such as the praises whereof the Poet Archilochus describeth in the person of an harlot, saying:

                  
                  Her neck & shoulders darkened were
                  with shadow of her brodered here.
               
And as for shadow, what is it else but darknesse? The night is the greatest shadow of all shadowes, procéeding from the earth, which in déede stoppeth the Sunne beames. Woodes & Groues, because they are dimme and darke, notwithstanding their pleasantnesse, are destitute of light, euen at noone daie. Light, for so much as it is the proper goods of the Gods, is heauenlie, and therefore is to be ascribed vnto heauenlie thinges. Wherevpon when manie yeld their heads to the Barbars scissers & raisor, to be shorne and shauen, yt thereby they might recouer and preserue their health, which of al things is the most excellent, being in déede heauenlie, it falleth out, that they are no sooner bald, but by and by they are safe from sicknesse, which otherwise they might haue sustained. 
                  A reason drawne from health, whereby Synesius persuadeth baldnesse to be verie commodious and good.
                The rheume leaueth them, deafnesse forsaketh them, bléeriednesse biddeth farewell vnto them: and a multitude

of other maladies, which procéede & issue from the head, vanish awaie: all which proue sufficientlie, what a worthie and notable thing it is, to be bald and without haire.
            To the heade, as to a Castell or Tower, the strings or ropes of diseased are tied, & hang downe through the rest of the bodie. If anie be bald, then is he healthfull: yea, he beareth about with him, the image of bald 
                  This Aesculapius was the first finder out of Physicke, and was bald: whome diuers people adored & honoured as a God.
                
               Aesculapius of Aegypt, of whome he is liuelie representation and paterne. He that intendeth to recouer and preserue health, let him addresse him selfe to be like the first finder and inuenter of Physicke. The skull abiding bare, and suffering the heate of the Sunne, & the rage of tempestes, in short time changeth from bone to iron: and thereby is set frée from the assault or daunger of anie sicknesse. And as the speares of the mountain, are much more excellent than those of the fennes: euen so a bald & smooth skonse, is to be preferred by manie degrées, before a shocking frisled hairie

head.
            
               
                  Chiron was Achilles Maister, and made him a speare of Ash, which grew vpō the mountaine Pelius, this speare none coulde handle but on he Achilles, as Homer saith, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , &c. Achilles onelie had skill to handle it, &c.
                
               Chiron, not without good cause, cut Achilles speare out of the mountaine Pelius, where it grew, and not out of anie lowe lande or downe. A hairie head maie be cōpared to trées growing in fennes: for as they, so this is nourished and fostered in the shadow, and therefore vnfit to come in place, where there is anie warre or daungerous tumult. About Arabia towardes Aegypt, in a conflict betwéene Cambyses and Psammenitus, there was a sore slaughter made of both their souldiers: for the putting apart of whose carcases, (the dead bodies lieng mingled one with another) they had none other marke whereby to knowe them, than their heads: and where they were slaine, there they were buried. Now they were discerned by this token. The heads of the Medes are thinne, tender, and not able to abide the bitter brunts of warre, yea so soft they are, that a stones cast is able to bruse and breake them. Contrariwise, ye heads

of the Aegyptians and Aethiopians are thicke, hard, and tough: so that it had néede be a sharpe & shreud stone that must make them smart. What was the cause of this difference? The Medes doe weare thicke couerings vpon their heads: but the Aegyptians are brought and trained vp in the scortching Sunne shine. 
                  Synesius proueth his reason by example of experience and triall.
                If this will not bréede in you beléefe, then heare what I shall tell you. Giue a Scythian a hard blow on the head, he dieth by and by therevpon: strike the Mede, he complaineth not of paine.
            
               Dion telleth a tale of certeine games called 
                  Which were solemnlie kept ye first day of euerie moneth, or of euerie newe moone. They may be called in English▪ The feastes of the newe moones.
                
               Hieromenia, at the celebrating whereof, an odde fellow hauing a bald pate, suffered a Ram to runne full butte against it with his hornes. This fellowes vse was, to get him day by day to the Barbars, and after his shauing, to haue hotte pitche powred vpon his pate. The Megarenses would stand in néede of flaggons, if they should hitte them against such a stonie skonse, where vnto potshardes oftentimes sticke fast,

and make it harder. 
                  Synesius answereth ye objection of Dion, affirming (as Pindarus ye Poet saith) that need and hunger will make a man do that which is against honestie: againe, he saith that the deede of one priuate man, ought not to turne to the blame of a whole companie.
                This was Pindarus wish or request, yt hauing enough to serue our turne at home, we might sit in the Theatre, beholding & hearing such things as were said and done. And if so be that this failed, yet desireth he thus much, namely, the suffering of many miseries, rather than to fal into the extremitie of all euilles, euen impouerishment and famishment. For they that are driuen to distresse, being destitute of succour, are compelled to lead the life of Plaiers, to strippe themselues naked vpon a stage, to bewray their excéeding follie and madnesse, to iuggle them selues into sundrie shapes, and to become gazing stocks to the whole multitude, &c.
            
               Dion supposing haire more handsome for men, than for women, speaketh against him selfe, and tumbleth out flat contraries. For how shoulde we attribute that to strong men, which when they haue, maketh them weake? Furthermore, it was decreed by lawe, that men shoulde not alwaies

haue haire. For the 
                  This field fell to ye Lacedaemonians by law of armes: after which time the Argiues sustaining the losse, vowed baldnesse, till they had recouered Thyreae fielde againe. The Lacedaemonians contrariwise, enacted by law, the wearing of long haire, which before they neglected.
                
               Lacedemonians, after ye strife about a parcel of land, called Thyrea field, which they, being on the surer side, had in possession: and the Argiues before the same variance, both of them suffered their haire to growe. As for women of all ages, and all quarters of the world, because it hath bene, and is a great ornament vnto them, they make much of their hairie lockes, they combe, they sponge, and they trimme them with no smal care and diligence: neither hath it bene heard, that any woman hath suffered her head to be shauen with a raisor: and as for any of that sexe, there hath not bene séene any one, time out of mind, hauing a bald pate. But if they chance to be bald, or otherwise to haue scant of haire, that is to be imputed vnto sicknesse: for sicknesse is a cause of baldnesse. Name me anie one man, that hauing liued out his full age, hath not bene bald. Baldnesse therefore is the end of nature, which end euery one hath not ye gift to attaine.
            
               The 
                  Herodotus in his seuenth booke of histories, called Polynmia, setteth out this Stratageme at large.
                
               Lacedemonians incamping in Thermopyle, and looking for the comming of the enimie, exercised themselues, in the meane space, in trimming and dressing their haire: but though in this they thought them selues iollie fellowes, yet notwithstanding not one of them was partaker of victorie. The haire is a dead and senselesse superfluitie, & in dead things they haue their nourishment. The Aegyptians shauing off the hair of their dead bodies, euen to the very stumpes: founde notwithstanding their haire growne againe, and their beardes shot out in length the yeare next following. Dion passeth ouer with silence, those valiant Graecians, which got the conquest. He maketh no mention of those that went on warrefare with 
                  Reade Quintus Curtius, writing of the feates of armes, which Alexander & Darius did.
                
               Alexander, and fealt ye force of Darius to their smart, the Lacedaemonians alone plaging them: in which skirmish or encounter they perceiued what a fowle discommoditie and inconuenience, the souldiers at 
                  A countrie in Persia, where the mightie power of Darius was vanquished.
                
               Arbela, in a battell

there fought, sustained: who when they were shauen, and disburthened of that combersome superfluitie, Fortune was so fauourable vnto them, that they endured the furie of the conflict.
            
               Ptolomeus the Sonne of Lagus, was present at a combate fought betwéene a Macedonian, and a Persian, wherein, at the beginning of the encounter, the Macedonian laie so sore at the Persian, that he went to the worst. But the Persian, casting his weapon one way, and his target another, got within the reach of his enimie, and catching fast holde of his beard and haire, laide him along vpon the ground, and slue him. 
                  The example of one priuate man followed of a mightie and populous armie, to their great aduantage, fame, & renowme.
                The Persians séeing this, as their Countrieman had done before, so did they, not neglecting so good an aduantage. For it grewe to be common through out all the Persian armie, yea it was to them all an infallible rule, that if they might come within the Macedonians, and laie holde vpon their haire, it was as much as they required

towardes the obteining of the conquest. Herevpon it came to passe, that such souldiers in Alexanders hoast, as were bald, endured the whole force of the conflict, and bare the burthen of the battell: Alexander himselfe, being glad to put off his armour, and warrelike furniture, fled with shame enough out of Cilicia. Afterwards when he had caused his hoast to be conducted out of the enimies reach, and had paused a space, he persuaded the Macedonians to shaue off their haire, of which hinderance when they were eased, he returned with a fresh power, tooke courage, gaue assault to the Persians, encountered with them valiantly, and triumphed ouer them victoriously. 
                  If not terrible to their enimies, then amiable to their louers: such will seldome proue stout soldiers.
                A bushie beard therfore, & shocked haire, make not men séeme terrible, vnlesse peraduenture vnto fearefull infants, in whose sight they appéere like Robin good fellowes, or Hobgoblins.
            How then are the enimies terrified? When there is a strong bright

helmet vpon the heade, which (to speake plainely and to the purpose) is nothing else but an armed skull: it is that wherewith the enimie is terrified. And if it so fall out, that for ornamentes sake, any one, or more, beautifie their headpéece, with the haire of a horsemaine, considering that vsually it hangeth behinde, this is no hinderance at all vnto baldnesse. If Achilles (as Dion reporteth) had long haire, it was in the heat and flower of his youth, when his minde was prone and inclinable to anger. 
                  Of such speaketh the common prouerbe, More hair than wit.
                His head was wilde with haire, and his minde was wood with wrath. But as (for Achilles sake) we commende not anger in the minde: so doe we not (for his sake) praise bushie haire vpon the heade: and yet Achilles did set so little store by his louelie lockes, that he was content to let 
                  For he cut them off, and cast them into the fire, to be burnt with the bodie of Patroclus.
                
               Patroclus father them. Dion doth not rehearse the wordes of Homer truely, but applieng the verse to his purpose, falsifieth the Poet. Whose saieng is this.

                  
                  Behinde Achilles backe did stand
                  A Goddesse passing faire,
                  And plucked with hir heauenly hand
                  his yellowe coloured haire.
               
Wheras indéede the Poets wordes lie in this order.

                  Downe Pallas came, in nothing slack,
                  that Iunos grace beesought,
                  And standing at Achilles back,
                  his haire behinde she caught.
               
Out of which spéech of the Poet, his meaning may be coniectured to be this, that Achilles baldnesse 
                  Because his haire failed before, and grew all behinde: as it should seeme by the Poets manner of speaking.
                at that time tooke beginning. Aristoxenus reporteth of Socrates, that he was quicklie kindled to anger, euen by nature: and not onely to anger, but also to other euill and lewd vices: but marke this by the way, he was not then bald. Afterwardes, when he grewe to be fiue and twentie yeares of age, Zeno and Parmenides the Philosophers comming to Athens, to sée the festiuall solemnities of fiue daies continuance, called 
                  The Festiualles of Minerua, which lasted fiue whole daies, with great solemnitie: these festiuals in Latine are called Quinquatria.
                
               Panathaenea, kept in the honour of the Goddesse Pallas, he turned ouer a

newe leafe, and learned another lesson.
            
               
                  As is to be seene in Homers Iliads, lib. 7. To whose worde
                        •
                     , Philostratus assenting saith: 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     : That is, He chid and tooke vp Paris, as one fearefull and too much giuen to nicenesse.
                
               Hector vpbraided his Brother Paris, for the womanly triming of his haire: whereby it appeareth, what resemblance, or rather aliance there is betwixt baldnesse, and wisedome. Moreouer, the verse of Homer, which Dion repeateth concerning Hector, is mangled: neither is any such verse founde in that Poet. For I thinke that Iupiter himselfe, shoulde hardlie haue a place in his workes, in that respect. If Menelaus had yellowe haire, yet notwithstanding we gather not thereby, that he had bushie locks, neither did his commendation depend vpon his haire: but the Poet described the whole personage of Menelaus, by naming one part. Dion lacking matter to whet his wits withall, supposeth that the praise of his haire, and the praise of his person are all one, without difference.
            When Iuno desired the carnall companie of Iupiter, and longed to lie with him, among all other light allurements

to make her self amiable, 
                  Homer affirmeth it in his Iliads, Lib. 14. where he shewing the shiftes that Iuno vsed, to flatter Iupiter, saith of her: 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      that is to saie: VVhen she combed her haire, she folded vp her lockes very cunninglie.
                the trimming of her haire was a principall. I confirme not my matter with lies, as Dion doth. I allowe not, that anie hairie thing shoulde haue a dwelling place in heauen. In the Starres there is nothing to be founde that smelleth of Venus. As for Iupiters haire, I saie the Poet spake after that sort, for the capacitie of the people, whose ignorance must be helped by demonstrations. Dion, in all his discourse, concludeth not that haire is a good thing to them that haue it: nor that it is an euill thing to them that haue it not. Our treatise contrariwise searcheth out the verie secret properties of thinges, and findeth by reason, that baldnesse is excellent, that it is heauenlie, that it is the ende of Nature, that it is the thing whereby we attaine heauenlie wisedome, and that it purchaseth to them, which haue it, the possession of innumerable benefits, as well of the bodie as of the minde. Whereas indéede bushie haire, in stéede of commodities,

bringeth inconueniences, and namelie, likenesse vnto beastes. For haire, being but an excrement, or néedelesse thing, the toies of Nature, and reliques of an vnperfect stuffe: besides that, being common to beastes, putteth them in minde, whose lot is to haue it, of their brutish nature, and of all thinges contrarie to that which is diuine.
            Of this stampe are adulterers, and lasciuious liuers. Homer was of opinion, 
                  The mischiefes which followe that vanitie, in either sexe, are like: for thervpon insueth shipwracke of honestie, and other villanies.
                that violatours, or rauishers of Uirgins, were semblablie giuen to haue their haire delicatelie trimmed, as wanton women to the colouring, counterfaiting, fri
                  •
               ling, and laieng out of their locks, which is a readie helpe to make them harlots. And surely the Poet spake but the truth. For take me such a one, whose delight is in this vaine nicenesse, and it is a hazard if he or shée be not lewd of life. These are the ringleaders to all villanie, who haue laide their honestie to pledge, neuer minding to redéeme it: a kinde of people

giuen to the spoile, voide of hope, without grace, destitute of trueth, &c. Some lustie yonker, whose beautie hath bred in him extreame boldnesse, hath the face to entice and carie whither he will, both by sea and by land, mens wiues, and daughters, without remorse of conscience: they haue the cast to conuey them to this corner & to that, there is no darknesse to faile them in their knauerie. The sillie weake soule, thus kept like a captiue, doing seruice with her bodie to a whoorehunter, hath her minde perhappes vpon her husbande. The whoorehunter with his harlots haire, & minionlike maners, inchaunteth the womans wits, whereby it falleth out, that the husband looseth his wife foreuer, hauing no hope of recouerie. This bushie haire, with the like yoke fellowes, haue béene the ouerthrowe of manie a populous Citie. What other cause was there that Asia and Europa were in armes, but adulterie? What other thing set the Graecians on fire, to destroie the

               
                  He meaneth Troie, whereof Priamus was king: who
                        •
                     e Sonne Paris, through the helpe of V
                        •
                     nus, with whom he was in fauour, for preferring her in beautie, before Pall
                        •
                     s, & Iuno, stale awaie Helena, ye faire Ladie of Greece, whervpon followed a bloudie battell of ten yeares continuance.
                Citie of Priamus, but adulterie?
            There is yet a mischiefe much woorse than that of Paris, wherewith 
                  This Clisthen
                        •
                     s being giuen to lewdnes and wantonnes, would be sure euerie da
                        ••
                      to be 
                        •••
                     
                     med at ye barbars, that he 
                        〈◊〉
                      alwaies 
                        〈…〉
                      yong.
                
               Clisthenes, 
               
                  This Timar
                        •••
                     s was so 
                        ••••
                     tinent and filthie that he made it 
                        〈◊〉
                      matter of conscience to deale with his own 
                        ••••
                     e and na
                        ••
                     rall mother.
                
               Timarchus, and all those are impoisoned, which blasoning their beautie, solde themselues for salarie & wages to commit filthie lewdnesse: & if they all, at all times, did not for mony, make an exchange of their honestie: yet they spared not to doe it, for the satisfieng of their abhominable pleasure. To be at a worde, such as so deintilie doe dresse their crisped skonse: what are they but effeminate fellowes, womanlike wantons, and hucksters of their owne honestie? For what doe they else but traine customers vnto them? And he thinketh best of himselfe, that can come nerest to women in nicenesse, whereby fauour is obteined. Now Sir, they that are of the Goddesse Cotys religion, other iudgment than this shall not preuaile against them. Let them counterfaite their haire often, let them frisle and crispe it often, let them tie it vp in

locks often, let them perfume it with swéete ointments often, and this report they shall haue for their labour, namelie, that they offer vnto
                  This Cotys was the Goddesse of filthie bawderie, and was highlie honoured at Corinth. Priapus the God of Gardens a medler in the same merchandize. Horat. Satyr. 8. Lib. 1.
                
               Cotys and Priapus, sacrifices fit & séemelie for their personages.
            
               Pherecydes méeting a youth with frisled bushie haire, hid his eies with his cloake, pointing as it were with his finger, at the disease wherewith he was infected. For he declared by his bodie, what was in his minde: whereby Pherecydes iudged, that he was of the right stampe of stallions. Againe, if Proverbes haue in them anie smacke of wisdome, as Aristotle is of opinion. For he saith that Prouerbes are certaine auncient remnants of Philosophie, left vnharmed after a great slaughter of people, and that for their shortnesse, and wittinesse, they are kept and vsed. A Prouerbe therefore is a speach hauing in it a kinde of excellencie, and bearing a badge of his auncientnesse, that it was taken out of the treasurie of Philosophie. For our fore-liuers

were much more bent to the contemplation of the truth, (called Philosophie) than we are in these daies. If Prouerbs therefore haue in them anie smacke of wisedome, what then is the meaning of this Prouerbe? There is no bush hairie fellowe, but, 
               
                  But he is baudie. For so Beatus Rhenaenus supplieth the rest of the Prouerbe, in his comment vpon this place.
                
               &c. The end of this Prouerbe I will suppresse with silence, referring it to the sounde of the Eccho: for I make it a matter of conscience, to expresse that in plaine speach, which is filthie in nature and in name. Good Lorde, haue you founde it? How thinke you? Is it not truth it selfe? Surely I take it for an oracle. Thus you may sée, what pith there is in Prouerbs. Furthermore, Prouerbs are warranted and authorized aswell by the testimonie of those that haue them now in their mouth, as by the witnesse of them which liued long ago. For nothing maketh Prouerbs immortall, that is, alwaies to continue in memorie, but the tongues of such as dailie and accustomablie do vse them, who by their speach kéepe

that thing aliue, and as it were in doing, which is ment and signified by the wordes. For Prouerbs springing from particular déedes, and grounded vpon speciall examples, do not onely purchase to themselues the more credit, but also by their testimonie confirme examples. To what purpose serueth Platoes disproofe? 
                  He reiecteth the testimonie of Rhetorike, as not indifferent in this case: because like loueth like. For a flourishing tongue, and a fri
                        ••
                     ed head haue some agreement.
                He being an Orator, manifestlie sheweth, that Rhetorike is a smooth, a painted, and a pausible science: and therefore more addicted to flatterie, than to truth and equitie.
            They are much bound to Dion, (and no men in the worlde more) which betake themselues to woods, caues, and dennes, choosing rather there sauagelie to liue, than in places of ciuil societie: that with an vniust eie, they might long after that which is not theirs: and with the handes of violence plucke vnto them that which belongeth vnto others. Whatsoeuer is cōmended by common consent, that must néedes be imbraced and followed, if it be

with credit and beléefe receiued. Wherevpon it commeth to passe, that Dion woulde choose rather to aduance a rable of outragious rioters in our Citie, than contrariwise. Such as we set against these hairie heades, are men of all other most praiseworthie, in whose number are to be reckoned the 
                  Officers, who had the ministration of all holie rites and ceremonies in their hands: as our Bishops, Persons, and Curates, &c.
                
               Flamines, the Prophets, the Aedites, &c. Reuerend officers in the temples of the Gods: Teachers and instructers of youth in Schooles, and places of learning: Generals, Captaines, and Lieuetenants, in armies: Gouernours of housholdes and families: with diuerse more, which excell each other in dignitie. 
                  Agamemnō woulde neuer commit faire Ladie Chrysis to the credit and keping of him that was bush hairie. And it is wisdome in men, that they will not haue nere their wiues, to serue them such nice and effeminat fellowes: with whome to see howe women are pleased, & delighted, it is a worlds wonder.
                
               Agamemnon neuer put a bushe hairie fellowe in trust with a Gentlewoman noblie borne. When Painters delineate and portrait out in colours any yonker bawdilie bent, or an adulterer, they will be sure to remember his bushie hair. But in setting out ye image of a Philosopher, or other graue, and wise honest man, they make him bald: noting

in the one a youthlie wild lightnesse, and in the other an auncient sobernesse. I am of beléefe, that Philosophers, Gouernors of Commonwealthes, discréet Citizens, & all modest men, will take in good part this discourse of ours. And although the common people will not (peraduenture) altogether allow it, let them notwithstanding, that are 
                  Which haue curled pates, whose haire hangeth about their heades, as mosse vpon trees, &c.
                mossie headed learne this lesson: that if they meane to be sober, honest, and prudent, the next way for them so to be, is often to be shorne and shauen. And let them furthermore estéeme such happie and fortunate, as 
                  Because of their baldnesse.
                néede not the edge of the scissers or rasour.
            It is not I that deserue thanks for that which I haue written, but the equitie of the cause, which hath offered me this discourse: wherby, he that is neuer so babish in knowledge & vtterance, shall be sufficiently furnished to reason with the wisest head in the worlde. My wishe and desire is, that this trauell of ours, may turne to the benefite of manie, whereby we also hope to haue commendation.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
               
               The tale of Hemetes the Heremite pronounced before the Queenes Maiestie.
               
                  NO more, most valiant Knightes.
                     He speaketh vnto two knights that fought there.
                   Uiolence must yéeld to vertue: and the doubtfull hazarde you be in, by a most noble helpe must be ended. Thus the immortall Goddes by vnmoueable destinie haue decréed: therfore cease your fight, and follow me: so shall you heare that, which you would little beléeue: and shall haue with me that, which will most behooue you.
                     He speaketh to a Ladie present.
                   And you (faire Ladie) fall into this companie, where it shall appeare Sibylla said true, and your misfortunes shall haue end.
               Most excellent Princesse,
                     He speaketh to her Maiestie.
                   appointed from aboue, with your presence to please, and your vertue to profit, more than you are ware of: how much you are bound to the immortall Gods, and mortall men bound to you: our present case will partlie

proue. But before you vnderstande the worth of your vertue, it may please you to heare the variablenesse of our aduentures.
               Not long since, in the countrie of Cambaia, which is situate néere the mouth of the rich riuer Indus, where a mightie Duke bare dominion, called Occanon, who had heire to his estate but one onlie daughter, named Gandina. This Ladie then, more faire than fortunate, liued most déere to her father, and most beloued of his people. But to proue that beautie is not euer a benefite, nor high estates be alwaies the happiest: it chaunced within a while, Gandina (sought by manie that were great, and serued by manie that were worthie) had more competitors of her beautie, than did either wel content her, or proue it commodious vnto her. For loue, which is not led by order, nor chooseth by appointment, limed her affection vnmoueably, with the liking of a knight of estate but meane, but of value verie great, called

                  Contarenus, who excéedingly loued her. So the desires of manie other was somewhat for her glorie, but nothing for her gaine. In small processe of time, the secret fires of their fansies discouering the smoke of their desires, bewraied this matter to her father, long before they would.
               The Duke dissembling what hée saw, determining to disappoint that which he most misliked, nether made challenge to the knight, nor charged his daughter for any loue that was betwixt them: but deuised a way (as he thought) most sure, but (as it proued) most sorrowfull, to set these louers in sunder, by the worke of an Enchauntresse most cunning in her kind: who had caused Contarenus to be caught vp, and caried in the aire, from the coast of Cambaia, to the verie bounds of the Ocean sea, which cost Occanon twentie M. Crownes: a déere price of repentance.
               But it is no noueltie to Princes, to make their wils verie costlie: and somtime to paie déere for their owne

displeasure. Contarenus thus strangly diuided from his ioie, & perplexed aboue measure, was charged by this Enchauntresse, to weare his punishment with patience, which necessitie did put on, and destinie would put off. And ere seuen yeres came about, she trulie assured him, that he should haue, for his reward, the height of his desires: but first he should fight with the worthiest knight, and sée the worthiest Ladie in the whole world. Now, the whilest, she told him, that he must take the gard of a blind Heremit, who should recouer his sight, and he his satisfaction: both at one time. So she left him on the earth, and went her waie againe into the aire.
               
                  Gandina now lacking long that she looked for: namely, the sight and seruice of her knight, fel soone into those diseases that accompanie such desires, as she was accumbred with, to wit, distrust, curiositie, and excéeding troublesome thoughtes. At last, (as Princes do few things so priuily, but

they haue partakers of their counsell: and heires of crownes lacke neuer seruants of hope, which be curious to please them: the deuise and dealing of Occanon came to the eares of his daughter.
               The which being told her: And is it euen so? (quoth Gandina.) "Care kinges for no right?
And right cares for no kingdome. It is neither the court of Occanon, nor the countrie of Cambaia, that I can account of, if Contarenus be gon. Farwell vnhappie countrie, and most cruell father, that turnes me to this fortune, to followe my faith: which neither greatnesse of estate, nor hazard of mine aduenture, shall make me forsake. But if I loose not my life, I will find Contarenus, if he be in the world."
               This saide, she pursued her most hard determination, and taking only a damsell with her, in simple habite, with such things as were necessarie, she straight conueied her selfe most closly from the borders of Cambaia,
                  
and with toile (too long to tell) passed perils past beléefe, till at last she arriued at the den of Sibylla, where (by chaunce) she met with a most noble knight icleped Loricus, by loue likewise drawne thither, to learne what should betide him.
               This Loricus loued a Ladie that was matchlesse, in such manner as was strange. For after much deuise, and diligence, to attaine to this fauour, that she would be pleased he might loue her, not looking for reward, seing no glimpse of her liking, his vttermost deuotion to find surely out her fansie, which she caried most closely, he made a strange assay with all semblance that might be shewed, to set by her but little, that was so sought for of all. And the better to colour the passion, which he was not able to conquer, he made a shew of choise of a new mistresse, that liued euery day in her eie (a péece surely of price, but far from such a perle as his hart onely estéemed:) and to this idol he séemed to offer all his loue, and

his seruice, leauing no maner of obseruance that to loue appertaineth, as wearing her colours vpon his backe, and her picture in his bosome, kéeping her cōpanie before all other, & continuing most at her commandement. Which déede espied by the Ladie, (whose péere and equall, for any naturall qualitie, either of bodie or minde, was no where to be found) though she cared not for his choice, yet she shewed scorne of his change, and disclosed by gelousie that which loue could not discouer.
               
                  Loricus this perceiuing, fell by and by to consider, that it was the want of his worth that made his seruice vnacceptable, & no impossibilitie in her will to receiue them to serue her, that merited the honor of such fauour. Therefore he left his owne countrie, and betooke himselfe altogether to trauell, and to armes, desiring with most endeuor to deserue that reputation, as this great and noble Mistres would but thinke him worthie to be hers, though she would

neuer be his. So thinking no toile too tough, and no attempt too hard to attaine to renowme, he wandered through the worlde, till by painefull waies he came to Sibyllas denne, where he met with Gandina.
               
               There these two louers hauing occasion to vnfold all their fortunes, the Ladie séeking to knowe the ende of her trauell, and the Knight some aduise for the ease of his hope: they both receiued this answere of Sibylla:
"That as they were now coupled by fortune, so they shoulde neuer parte fellowship, till they had found out a place, where men were most strong, women most faire, the countrie most fertile, the people most welthie, the gouernement most iust, and the Princesse most worthie. So should the Ladie sée what would content her, so shoulde the Knight heare what woulde comfort him."
               Now (most déere and best deseruing Ladie) it fals to my purpose, & your praise, to say somwhat of my selfe. And though you sée me here old,

wrinkled, and cast into a corner, yet once haue I bin otherwise a Knight knowne, and accepted, euen with the best in the worlde. And liuing in a Court of most fame, amongest a swarme of Knights and Ladies of great woorth, and rare vertue, where beautie bad the base, and desire sought the goale: it chanced me to loue a Ladie, to be beloued of 
                     He meaneth Cupido, who is feigned to be blind.
                   Loue himselfe, if he coulde haue but séene her. But as shée was such as did excell, so was shée of woonderfull condition, without disdaine to be desired, but most deintie to be dealt withall. For touch her, and shée would turne to twentie diuers shapes, yet to none but to content me as I thought, who supposed still to touch her was a heauen. And so it séemed by my holde, that was most loath to let her go, till shée liked (alas) at the last to put on the shape of a Tygresse so terrible to beholde, that I durst holde her no longer. And being so escaped, I could neuer more set eie vpon her
               Madam, thus began my paine: but

you heare not yet my punishment. Being shifted from the sight of that I sought aboue all things in the worlde, and then little delighting to looke vpon anie thing else: I tooke by and by a pilgrimage to Paphos in Cyprus, trusting to heare of my Mistres there, where Venus was most honored: whither when I was come, I began to steppe in at the doores of her temple, and was sodainely stricken blinde. Astonied at my mischance, and vnderstanding no cause, I fell on my knées, and saide:
"O fairest of the Goddesses, and furthest frō crueltie, what hath bin my fault, that you are thus offended? Thy folie & presumption, (quoth Venus Chapleine) as I gesse. From my youth vp (quoth I) I haue bin an honorer of vertue, a delighter in learning, and a seruant of loue. But it is no parted affection (quoth he) that Venus will be honored with. Bookes and beautie make no match, and it is a whole man, or no man, that this Goddesse will haue serue her. And therwithall

taking me by the shoulders, he thrust me out of the temple."
               So with sighes and sorrowes I sate downe in the porch, making intercession to Apollo, the particular God I honored, to haue compassion of mine estate. Now faithfull praiers being hearde, ere they be ended, Mercurius commes vnto me, & bids me be of good comfort.
"The Gods (quoth he) be iust, though women be angrie. The Goddesses be all found to haue this fault. Diana with Acteon, Pallas with Arachne, Iuno with Teresias, were angrie without measure: so is Venus now with thée. The cause with thy remedie shall be tolde thée at Delphos, whither straight I must carrie thée."
Which he had no sooner spoken, but by and by I was set in the temple of Apollo, where first demaunding my fault, the Oracle made answere,
"Thy feare, and not thy faith. And what (quoth I) may be my remedie? The best besides the beautifullest", the Oracle straight answered.
               
                  With this, Apollos Priest tooke me by the hande, recounting vnto me the whole course of my life, whom I loued, and how I lost her.
And when I tolde him of the faithfulnesse of my seruice, and the faultlesnesse of my meaning: of the variablenesse of her condition, and at last, of the fearefulnes of her apperance: "Ah good Hemetes (quoth he:) it is not the kinde of women to be cruell, it is but their countenance. And as for their variablenes, who so will not applie himself thereto, shall not much please them, nor long hold them. Neither is it to be founde fault withall. Nature herselfe loueth varietie, so it be without deceit. Now for thy faultlesnesse, it sufficeth not. The seruant of Venus must not onely haue faith, but also lacke feare. Feare lost thée thy Mistres, and thy boldnesse to enter into Venus temple, being vnacceptable, made her strike thée blinde. But Apollo biddes me tell thée, the Gods accept whom women forsake. The eies shut from delight, haue mindes

more open to vnderstanding. This punishment shall be thy profite. Venus can barre thée but from her felicitie of loue, but for the deuotion thou bearest to Apollo, he giueth thée this gift: to be able to decipher the destinie of euerie one in loue, & better to aduise them than the best of her dearlings: and further now doth promise thée, in reuolution of yeares, thou shalt recouer thy sight. But this shall not betide thée, till at one time, in one place, and in a countrie of most peace, two of the most valiaunt Knights shall fight, two of the most constant louers shall méete, and the most vertuous Ladie in the worlde shall be there to looke on. And when thine eies may beholde that thy hart delighteth in, a Ladie in whom inhabiteth such learning and beautie, as neuer was in any creature, then shal they be opened, and that shall be thy warrant. All Apollo saith is sooth. The whilest it is determined, thou shalt dwell in an Heremitage, where nothing that longes to natures vse

shall be lacking vnto thée."
               So sodainely I was shifted to this hill hard by, where I haue wintered many a yeare, far from the woes and wrongs which the world besides is full of. And now (best Ladie and most beautifull) so termed of the Oracle, and so thought of in the world, what the Enchauntresse told Contarenus, Sibylla shewed Gandina and Loricus, and what Apollo saide to me, by your most happie comming is verified. "The most hardie Knights Contarenus and Loricus here haue fought: the most constant louers Loricus and Gandina here be mette, and I poore Hemetes (as this Knight knoweth) full long blinde, haue receiued againe my sight. All which happened by ye grace of your vertue, which the best so much doe honour, & we are now most bounde vnto."
               And so I present these noble persons to please you with their seruice, and my selfe to serue you with my praiers. And leauing the louers to their delight, I must leaue Loricus
                  
this aduise▪ Knight, prosecute thy purpose, it is noble (learning by me) not to feare, and of thy selfe to take paine, remembring that nothing notable is wonne without difficultie. Hercules had by his labour his renowne, & his ruine by his loue. Loricus, thine end wil be reward: at least, most reputation, which noblest women most estéeme. But I feare I haue too long tired your most noble eares, and therefore onely now I besech your Maiestie, with your happie presence to honor my poore home, whither I meane straight to guide you.
               
                  This tale ended, he led her to his Heremitage, where when he was come, hee vsed these wordes following, and so did leaue her.
                  Here (most noble Ladie) haue I brought you to this most simple Heremitage, where as you shall sée small cunning, but of nature: and no cost, but of good will. Mine houres

approching for my Orisons, which according to my vowe I must neuer breake, I must heare leaue your Maiestie, promising to praie as for my soule, that whosoeuer wisheth you best, may neuer wish in waste.
                  FINIS.
               
            
            
               
               Fabula ab Hemete Eremita coram Maiestate Regia prolata.
               
                  SAtis iam (milites inuictissimi) satis decertatum est.
                     Alloquitur Equites duos, qui tunc temporis ibidem pugnam inibant.
                   Virtuti vim cedere oportet, ancéps
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   martis alea nobilissimo auxilio dirimenda est. Sic dij immortales, ineuitabili fato decreuerunt; absistite itaque pugna, mé
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   sequimini; sic audietis ea, quae minimè credituri estis; mecúmque eo fruemini,
                     Alloquitur Heroinam quandam ibi praesentem.
                   quod vestri permagni intererit. Tu autem (Virgo venustissima) ad hanc te societatem adiunge, vbi facilè constabit ea vera esse omnia, quae fatidico ore cecinit futuri praesaga Sibylla, tuis iam tandem aduentare finem aerumnis.
               Illustrissima Princeps,
                     Alloquitur Reginam.
                   diuinitùs dimissa, vt esses quae & praesentia nos oblectares, & virtute opinione magis prodesses tua; quantum dijs debeas immortalibus, mortales autem tibi; huius nostri acerbissimi casus recordatio demonstrabit. Sed priùs quàm tantae virtutis tam admirabilem (excellentissima Princeps) dignitatem despicias, placeat (quaeso) Maiestati tuae varios casus, & crebras fortunae nostrae commutationes intueri. Non ita multis abhinc diebus, in terra Cambaiae, quae sita est ad ostiū Indi fluminis praediuitis; Occanon dux quidam, magni nominis, & fama percelebri, rerum potiebatur, vnicam, quam duntaxat habebat filiam Gandinā (sic enim appellabatur) principatus sui

relicturus haeredem. Haec, à forma, magis quàm fortuna foelix, vt chara pàtri, sic omni grata populo, & periucunda fuit. Caeterùm, non semper formae decus possessores beat suos; nec sublimis semper fortuna foelix: exemplo erit Gandina, (ad quam nobiles proci, nec pauciores haud mediocri dignitate serui confluxissent) longè plures formae riuales habuit, quàm aut ipsa percuperet, aut rationibus suis magnoperè expediret. Siquidem amor, qui nullius ad vota consilio directis vestigijs insistit, sed caeco semper preceps impetu ruit, sese huic dulcissimae virgini, in venas at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   medullas sensim infudit; mentèm
                  
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   illius Contareni cuiusdam desyderio, qui eam quo
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   miserè deperibat, haud magni sanè loci militis, sed maximae virtutis, incendit. Vnde adeò factū est, vt ille tantus nobilium amatorum concursus, plus ad formae famam, quàm ad mentis tranquillitatem delectationis attulerit. Etenim, non ita multis interiectis diebus, igneus ille ardor, qui secreto intùs exaestuabat incendio, se prodit; &, longè antequam illi volebant, ex fumo flammas incensis subesse pectoribus persensit pater. Veruntamé dux, quae vidisset dissimulanda ratus; atque id, quod tantoperè displicebat, nouo at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   inaudito commento auertere cogitans; neque equitem, neque filiam, vllius vnquam insimulandum amoris existimabat. Caeterùm, quò infoelices quamprimùm disiungeret amantes, firmssimum ad id ipse (opinionis errore) consilium suscepit; sed (vt exitus docuit) infaustum nimis, & perlugubre.

Veneficae cuiusdam artificio, quae in suo genere, scientia longè caeteris omnibus antecellebat, Contarenum in aërem magno miraculo sublimem rapi fecit, at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   Cambaiae in vltimas Oceani oras transferri; quod vt fieret, viginti aureorum millia veneficae dederat. Magna (herclè) poenitentiae merces.
               Verùm illud principibus in viris né
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   nouum, né
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   inusitatum videri debet; quorum plerúm
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   desyderia, immanibus solent condiri sumptibus; magní
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   maxima interdum emuntur incommoda. Contarenus interea tam admirablli modo ab amore diuulsus suo, consternatus, atque animo (supra quàm dici potest) anxius, à venefica admonebatur, vti eam, quam fatum inflixerat, eandém
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   breui depulsura foret necessitas, calamitatem, aequo & recto animo perferret. Futurum nam
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   (ídque persanctè recepit) vt nondum peracto septennio, patientiae praemium obtineret suae; votíque compos fieret: antè tamen cum perstrenuo sibi milite depugnandum, & Heroinam etiam videndum, vnam omnium, quas sustinet terrarum orbis, praecellentissimam. Interea verò, caeci Heremitae curam susciperet; & quo is tempore amissum recuperaret lumen, eodem illum idipsum, quod tantoperè cupiebat, consequuturum. His quidem dictis, pertristi & lamentabili fato eum relinquens, in aërem denuò subuolauit.
               At Gandina, dum nusquam Contarenum videt suum, nusquámque eum, quem ante à quotidie, incredibili cum voluptate, suis irradiantem

ocellulis intueri consueuer at, aegra animi, ijs morbis conflictari coepit, qui inseparabiles talium plerùmque cupiditatum comites existunt; suspicionibus nimirùm, & crebris curiosarum querelarum procellis, tum anxiferis vndique cogitationibus, & acerbissimis cruciamentis diuexari. Tandem (néque enim magnorum Principum negotia ita clam tractantur, vt non multos habeant consiliorum participes: Regúmque haeredibus nunquam desunt spei satellites, qui futurae foelicitatis spe illecti, quoduis facinus suscipere non recusant) ad aures infoelicis siliae, paternae crudelitatis fama peruenit.
Quae à luctu in rabiem versa (tantas perbibit medullas amor,) Itane verò? (inquit.) "Nullane Regibus iustitiae cura? Nec igitur regnandi iustitiae. Neque enim Occanonis aulam, neque Cambaiae regnum tanti aestimo; si sine meo mihi Contareno contabescendum fuerit. Infoelix ô patria! tú
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ô crudelissime pater! valete; qui me hanc huius nefandae tempestatis calamitatem subire cogitis: te vt sequar (alma fides) quam vtique vt violem, neque celsae fortunae meae dignitas effecerit, neque periculi magnitudo. Etenim, si non squallore priùs & lachrymis confecta, hanc miserabilem & aerumnosissimam animulam dimisero; nunquam desistam, donec te, te mi Contarene, vbicun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   terrarum es, inuenero."
               Haec fata, instituti itineris consilium prosequitur; vnáque duntaxat pedissequa adhibita, vilibus induta vestibus, rebúsque omnibus ad vitam pertenuem & lugubrem sustentandam

compositis, at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   comparatis; clàm Cambaia proficiscitur. In itinere verò, quas quantásque molestias pertulerit; quibúsque fuerat iactata casibus, commemorare vt longum foret, & auditu certè incredibile. Nihilominùs tandem, post anxios ancipitésque labores, ad Sibyllae antrum deuenit. Ibi Loricum, quendam equitem perillustrem, qui eò quoque saeuo compulsus amore, fati eruendi causa concesserat, offendit.
               Heroinam amabat Loricus iste, tam naturae, quàm fortunae dotibus planè incomparabilem; sed amore mirabili inusitató
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  . Nam cùm omnem operam, omnésque ingenij ac industriae machinas adhibuisset, eam vti se apud illam in gratia poneret; nullo vt quamuis alio proposito premio, permitteret tamen semetipsam ab illo duntaxat amari: illa autem immitem se semper atque inexorabilem praeberet; & nihilo p
                     •
                  orsus illius inflecti vel sedulitate, vel obseruantia cōmoueri videretur; statuit miro quodam artificio arcana mentis consilia, quae illa tam cautè contexerat, expiscari. Eam itaque, cuius amore omnium inflammarentur animi, (tanta erat vultus venustas) vili se pendere prae se tulit. Et quo meliùs cordis, quod restinguere nequierat, dissimularet incendium; nouam sibi Heroinam delegit, quae quotidié repudiatae oculis obuersaretur; pulchram illam quidem, & peramabilem; sed nihil ad hanc, quam animo medullitùs adamarat. Huic se diuae totum dederat, huic sacra quotidiè faciebat, omníque obsequio, cultu, & obseruantia, sese ad illius finxit arbitrium. Nihil omisit eorum,

quae à percuriosis amantibus fieri consuescunt; adeò vt humeris colores ipsius gestarit (obsequij & amoris insignia:) in sinu autem expressam imaginis formam, à perito artifice eleganter depictam, circumtulerit. Accedit praeterea, quòd caeteris omnibus fastiditis, in illius se penitùs consuetudinem immerserit: seséque totum ad illius nutum voluntatém
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   conuertit. Haec cùm animaduertisset praestans illa, (quae parem, omnibus corporis atque animi, quae conferri à natura possent, muneribus, nullam vnquam inuenit) quáuis de delectu magnoperè non laboraret; immutati tamen amoris contumeliam, indigniùs ferre visa est. Vnde factum est, vt quod amor nequierat; zelotypia detexerit.
               Loricus hoc animaduertens, planè perspexit indignitatem illius; non autem vllam Heroinae implacabilem importunitatem facere, ne grata viderentur ea, quae ab illo proficiscerentur officia: facilem quippe ipsam, pérque benignam videri; talémqne prorsùs, quae tanto dignos honore protinùs susceptura foret, meritósque meritis affectura praemijs. Itaque relicta patria, labori, atque armis totum se deuouit; omníque conatu in hanc duntaxat cogitationem incubuit: eam vt demum, meritorum fama, consequeretur gratiam; vti ab hac nobilissima, omníque laudis splendore circumfluente Heroina, dignior censeretur, qui ipsius esset; quamuis ipsa illius nunquam futura foret. Proin, deserta patria, nullos non experiundos subcundós
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   labores; nullum non audendum, quamuis

perarduum facinus existimans; miseris actus erroribus; omnem terrarum orbem itineribus asperrimis difficillimísque peragrauit: donec tandem ad Sibyllae antrum, vbi Gandinae obuiam dederat, peruenit.
               Ibi verò, duo amantes isti, omnem fortunae suae acerbitatem, omnésque, quas perpessi fuerant aerumnas, exponunt. Gandina enim praelongi laboris finem praenoscere auebat; Loricus autem curarum & spei solamen exoptabat; vtri
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   tandem Sibylla hanc in sententiam respondit:
"Quod quemadmodum iam societate coniuncti erant, ita à consortio non se abstraherent; donec eò tandem peruenissent, vbi homines strenuissimi, terra fertilissima, foeminae pulcherrimae, populus ditissimus, regimen iustissimum, Princépsque dignissima inuenirentur. Sic autem Heroina, quod magis optaret, videret; milésque solamen animi sui exaudiret."
               Iam verò (praestantissima Princeps, omní
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   virtutis decore circumfusa,) cùm huius instituti sermonis ratio, tum laudum tuarum praecellens splendor, & dignitas admirabilis, postulare videntur; vt de me ipso nonnihil dicam. Senem quamuis me (Regina) videas effoetum, squalidum, rugis deformem, & velut mortalium omnium exclusissimum, hanc in solitudinem & tenebras detrusumitamen fui (Regina) fui inclyti nominis eques, summó
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   in honore habebar abijs, qui fortitudinis tum fama perinsignes, totum penè terrarum orbem, rerum gestarum gloria compleuerant▪ Versanti autem mihi quotidie in Aula celebri,

atque pernobili; fortissimis vndique Equitibus, ac Heroinis, excellenti venustate ac virtute praeditis, affluentibus; vbi pulchritudo formá
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   palmam, meritis autem praemia cessere: euenit vt cuiusdam Heroinae amore miser implicarer, cuius in ore tantus fluxit honos, tantáqeu maiestas Veneris, v
                     •
                  ipse 
                     Nempe Cupido, qui cassus l
                           ••
                        nine fingitur.
                   filius (si eam conspexisset) eodem (proculdubio) flagrasset incendio. Verùm enimuerò, quemadmodum illius in ore Venus omnes suauitates atque delicias illigarat suas; ita natura fluctuoso illam ingenio finxit, plané
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   mirabili. Siquidem amantes illa non est aspernata suos: sed inexpiabilem se semper praebuit ac difficilem; omniū
                  
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , quae vnquam vixerunt, mulierum maximè intractabilem. Etenim, si quando tetigissem, in centum se protinùs verteret formas; nullam autem speciem vnquā suscipere visa est, quae non oculos meos incredibili voluptate perfunderet. Sic nimirū (Regina) eo contactu afficiebar, vt quoties is mihi contigit, in coelo cum dijs immortalibus versari viderer. Facilè autem id quiuis intelligere potuisset; quandoquidem semel si apprehendissem, denuò dimittere, mortis erat instar; donec se tandem in tygridem conuertit. Tum verò monstro conterritus, ampliùs contueri non audebam. Itaque mihi è manibus elapsa, nunquam se posteà conspiciendam praebuit.
               Ex hoc fonte (Regina) initio dolores redundarunt mei. Nondum tamen audis, quae poena hanc tantam acerbitatem excerpserit. Nam cùm hunc in modum eius rei priuarer

aspectu, quam supra terrena omnia concupiueram; adeò vt assiduè eam intuens, in eámque oculis semper & cogitatione defixus, nullam prorsùs caeteris in rebus contemplandis, voluptatem perceperim; Cyprum versus, ad insulam Paphos peregrinari coepi: mé
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   hac spe miser consolabar; fore, vt illic aliquid certi de mea cognoscerem: quandoquidem Venus ibidem religiosissimè coleretur.
               Eò cùm venissem, atque templi iam limen institissem; illicò me oculis captum sensi. Tam horrendo obstupefactus casu, neque vllius mihi conscius sceleris; in genua prouolutus, haec (lamentabili voce) profudi:
"Alma Venus, dearum omnium pulcherrima, quaeque ab omni prorsùs crudelitate abhorres; quod in te tantum facinus admisi; quo numen mihi tuum tam infestum reddiderim? Stultitia & temeritas tua, respondit (vti reor) Veneris antistes. At (inquam) à teneris vnguiculis virtutis amator fui, doctrinae cliens, captiuus amoris. Imò verò (inquit ille) non dispartitus debet esse is, qui Veneri defertur honos. Inuigilare studijs, non adeò Veneri conuenit; totum nempe dea hominem, aut omninò nullum requirit. His dictis, continuò per humeros violenter arreptum, templo me praecipitem eiecit."
               Tum verò acri percitus dolore, aegrísque imo ductis pectore suspirijs; in porticu, vbi moestus consederam, Apollinem peculiarem meum, quem prae caeteris semper colui, deum obsecrabam
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   vt supplicis sui sortem commiseresceret.

Enimuerò, quae fide concupiuntur vota, ijs vix dum finitis protinùs occurrunt coelites.
"Astitit namque mihi precanti Mercurius, (&) Bono sis (inquit) animo. Quā
                  uis enim mulieres ira & indignatione acriùs interdum efferuescant; dij tamen aequi semper & placabiles esse consueuerunt. Hoc morbo laborant pleraeque omnes. Sic Diana Acteoni, Arachnae Pallas, Teresiae Iuno; praeter modum omnes aduersae infestae que fuerant; veluti iam tibi quoque Venus. Tantarum autem irarum causae, vna cum remedio, Delphis tibi postmodum aperientur, quò transferri te confestim oportebit. Haec fatus, in templo Apollinis protinùs me constituit; vbi primùm cùm ab Apolline sciscitarer, qua in re deliquissem; aeditum est oraculum huiusmodi: Formido, non tua fides. (&) Quod igitur (inquam) remedium? Praeter (inquit) pulcherrimam, praestantissima."
Exinde verò Apollinis sacerdos manu me prehendit; omnesque anteactae vitae meae miserias atque aerumnas enumerauit; cuius amori me dederam, ac quibus eam modis perdideram. Atque hîc cùm ego constantiam mentis, integritatem herae meae; varios volubilésque mores, speciem deni
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   in quam se induerat, terribilem indicassem:
"Ah bone Hemetes (inquit.) Non ita mediùs fidiùs naturâ mulieres implacabiles sunt atque immites; vultu duntaxat ita se componunt, vt quamuis non sint crudeles, videantur tamen. At varietatem quis in foemina reprehendit? Quin potiùs tempestati obsequeris; té
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ad earum

voluntates atque ingenia accommodes: secùs enim qui fecerit, is certè neque placere multùm poterit, neqe expetitis diu perfruetur voluptatibus. Quanquam quid est quòd eo nomine mulieres in crimen voces? Ipsa Natura nam
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , quàm non insidiosae varietatis amans? De innocentia verò quid attinet dicere? Innocentem esse, non hoc quidem ad id quod quaeritur satis est. Veneris enim clientes, non fide solùm praeditos esse oportebit; sed omnis etiam formidinis expertes. Nam, quòd desyderium amiseris tuum, timoris erat id quidem tui; quod oculos, audaciae; quippe qui Veneris templum alienissimo etiam tempore inuisus intrare non dubitares. Veruntamen haec vti renuntiarem mandauit Apollo; consuescere deos immortales eos in fidem suscipere, quos à se mulieres ablegarunt: & clausis ad libidinem oculis, praeclaro tamen scientiae lumine saepenumerò collustrari. Et quidem haec poenae calamitas, plus tibi, ad vitam rectè instituendam, momenti attulerit; quàm oculorum tuorum caecitas damni aut dedecoris inflixerit. Oculis enim te duntaxat & amoris foelicitate priuauit Venus. Apollo verò (tanti est apud ipsum is, quo eum prosequeris honos) hoc tibi concessit; futurum, vt praescius, quo quiuis fato amet praenoseeres; magísque consilio tuto, quàm qui sit ex Veneris delicijs, valeres. Pollicetur deinceps; fore, vt post aliquot annos, amislum lumen recuperes. Sed hoc non antè tibi contigerit, quàm vno eodèm
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   & loco & tempore, in regione pacis atque

otij gloria florentissima, duo inter se equites strenuissimi conflixerint, totidém
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   amantes constantissimi obuij ibidem erunt, intererít
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   huic spectaculo praestabili insigní
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   virtute Heroina, vna omnium, quas orbis terrarum sustinet, amplissima. Cùm itaque oculis tuis contrà tueri licebitid, quod tibi maximè cordi futurum scio, praecellenti virtute Principem, & eruditione incomparabili redundantem; naturae verô ipsius habitu tam diuino, nullo vt vnquam mortali in corpore par decus ac pulchritudo extiterit: tum demùm (nam id tibi signi instar erit) oculi confestim aperientur. Nihil Apollinis oraculo certius. Tibi autem interea, ista dum eueniant, solitaria quadam in cellula manendum est, vbi omnia ad vsum naturae necessaria suppeditabuntur."
               His dictis, hoc in colle, quem iuxtà vides, protinùs constitutus sum; quo in loco multos iam annos incultam quidem & sordidam, sed tranquillam vitam extraxi; aerumnarum earum omnium at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   iniuriarum expers, quibus impurus at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   lachrymabilis mundus vndique scatet. Nunc igitur (Princeps augustissima) mortalium & optima omnium, & pulcherrima, sic Apollinis oraculo dicta; sic vniuersi terrarū orbis consensu celebrata; quicquid Contareno venefica, Gandinae & Lorico Sibylla, mihi autem Apollo praedixerunt: ea omnia tuo foelicissimo illustrantur aduentu.
"Contarenus & Loricus, milites impigerrimi depugnarunt; Loricus & Gandina, amatores fidelissimi conuenerunt; ego autem

pauper Hemetes; qui perdiu (quemadmodū scit miles iste) in hisce syluosis latebris caecus delitui, nunc tandem te (Regina) sexus tui lumen, & totius orbis stellam, intueor." Haec, excellenti & peradmirabili tuae virtutis magnitudine, confecta sunt; quae vt optimi cuiúsque mentem sacra veneratione perfundit, sic nos sibi deuotos aeternùm obstrinxit.
               Quapropter, hos nobilissimos, & perillustri praeditos virtute viros, tuae Maiestati (Regina) commendo; obsequio proculdubiò, & obseruantia, magno tibi semper vsui ac voluptati futuros: me autem ipsum, qui ardentissimis apud Deum Opt. Max. votis pro incolumitate tua susceptis, Amplitudini tuae perpetuò deseruiam. Priùs tamen, quám amatores hos expetitis desyderijs reliquero, Loricus paucis admonendus mihi videtur. Macte itaque virtute miles, disce ex me (siquidem apprimè tibi vtile fuerit) nihil timere; à te autem ipso, dura pati. Amat ardua virtus; nihílque praeclarum, quod non difficile. Labor Herculi famam attulit, mortem autem amor. Lorice, ne dubita; hic exitus erit virtutis tuae praemium; saltem nominis gloriam consequêre, quam nobilissimae foeminae caeteris omnibus rebus anteponunt. Sed vereor ne cèlsitudinis tuae auribus, nimis diu submolesta, & iniucunda fuerit oratio mea. Quapropter, hoc vnum deprecor, vt humilem hanc meam & subagrestem casulam, quò te confestim deducturus sum, claris & praefulgentibus Maiestatis tuae radijs illustrare digneris.
               
                  
                  His dictis, atque peractis, Maiestatem Regiam in cellulam deduxit suam; vbi his verbis veniam ab eadem petijt.
                  Iam iam (Regina) omnibus modis semper dignissima, Maiestatem tuam in hanc cellulam agrestem conducere prae me tuli; vbi non artem, sed naturae dona; neque sumptus inofficiosos, aut conditioni meae dissimiles, videre dignabere. Hora enim orationibus meis assignata appropinquante, (vota namque maximis occasionibus obstantibus perimplenda sunt) Maiestatem tuam ibidem derelicturus, veniam peto. Deum tamen ipsum obtestor, me clementiam misericordiámque 
                        •
                     uam, non secùs quàm pro anima mea, deprecaturum; vt qui optimè celsitudini tuae voluerint, id nusquam, nunquámue frustrà deprecari valeant.
                  FINIS.
                  
               
            
         
      
   