
      
         
            
            
            ALL THE SMAL
                  •
                Workes OF THAT FAMOVS Poet
            
               
                  •
                OSVAH SILVESTER.
            Gathered into one Volume
            
            LONDON Printed. Anno 1620.
            
         
      
      
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  
                     THE PARLIAMENT of Vertues Royal: (Summoned in France; but aſſembled in England) for Nomination, Creation, and Confirmation of The moſt Excellent Prince PANARETVS
                     
                        A Praeſage of Pr. DOLPHIN:
                        A Pourtrait of Pr. — HENRY:
                        A Promiſe of Pr. CHARLES.
                     
                  
                  
                     Translated & Dedicated To His Highnes, by IOSVAH SYLVESTER.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                  To the Honourable, Sir Robert Carie: Sir Iames Fullarton: Sir Robert Carr: Sir Dauid Foulis: Mr. Thomas Murray.
                  
                  GRaue Guides & Guards of Hopeful CHARLES his Wayn,
                  
                  Leaſt I incurr the leaſt of Your Diſdaigne;
                  If, without Leaue, I (ouer-raſhly rude)
                  Vſurp Your Rooms, or on Your Rights intrude;
                  I humbly craue Your Licence; and Your Loues,
                  
                  For My Addreſs, When My Acceſs behoves.
                  I know, the Field of His Yong HIGHnes heart
                  So duly till'd by Your deep Care and Art
                  
                  (Adding His Fathers Royall golden Writt;
                  And goodly Practize, to demonſtrate it:
                  His (late) rare Brother's Pattern, of Renowne:
                  With Honeſt Quin's new-caſt Prince-Worthy Crown:
                  And holy Promptings of that reuerend Payre,
                  
                     Milborn and Hakwill, from the ſacred Chaire)
                  That little needs Hee the Stagyrian's ſtore,
                  The Corduban's, or th' Attik-Muſe his Lore:
                  Much leſſe (alas!) My ſilly Muſes Myte,
                  With borrowed Feathers to aduance his Flight.
                  Yet, ſith, too-often, to a tender Eare,
                  Too-ſerious Lectures ſound but too-ſevere;
                  
                     Eſpecially, to Princes dainty Taſte,
                  They ſeem but harſh, and will not down in haſte
                  (As holeſom'ſt Diſhes, if but homely dreſt,
                  Some queaſie Stomachs hardly can digeſt):
                  Let me preſume (with your good leaues) a while
                  To imitate Phyſicians honeſt Guile;
                  Who, oft, in Sugar ſheathe their bitter Pills,
                  
                  The better ſo to Cure vnwilling Ills,
                  
                  When wayward Patients, for the Sugars ſake,
                  Take-in their Health, which elſe they would not take,
                  Sad Rules of Patience, Abſtinence, Auſteritie,
                  
                  
                     Humility, Frugality, Sincerity,
                  
                  
                     Religion, Labour, Care of Common-Wealth,
                  
                  And Manie, meet for Prince and Peoples Health;
                  Which hardly can, in their Owne Likenes, ſinke
                  In Youth-ful Mindes (ſcarce in their Eares, I think)
                  How grauely oft, with greateſt Diligence
                  Preſt; and impreſt with Tullian Eloquence:
                  Sweetly diſguis'd, in artificiall Sutes,
                  Dancing the Meaſures after Delphian Lutes,
                  Waſhed in Nectar, wrapt in ſugred Verſe,
                  
                  Enter more eaſily, and more deeply perce.
                  This I endevour: and to This Intent
                  I ſummon CHARLES to Vertues PARLAMENT▪
                  
               
               
                  
                  TO The High-Hopeful CHARLES, Prince of Great-Britanne.
                  WHere witty Bertault (in his Fancy) meant
                  But a faint Praeſage of His Pr. of France;
                  
                  Our Hopes of Ours the better to aduance,
                  
                     We haue preſum'd to cal a PARLAMENT
                  Where Royal Vertues, from Olympus ſent,
                  By ſeueral ACTS of ſacred Ordinance,
                  Conform, confirm Your future Gouernance;
                  
                  So pleaſe it Heav'n Yor hart & hand conſent.
                  O! pleaſe it Heavn, You may be pleaſed Thus,
                  Theſe Works to imitate, Theſe Acts to act;
                  To proue yor ſelf, This ſame PANARETVS,
                  When future Age ſhal ſee our Hopes in Fact.
                  
                  Wch, while I pray; ſweet Prince, in humbleſt ſort
                  I cite Yor HIGHnes to This Soverain Court.
                  
                  
                     
                        To Yor Highnes Seruice humbly-devoted, Ioſuah Sylueſter.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     TO The right Honourable Lords Spirituall & Temporall: The Knights and Burgeſſes of the Lower-Houſe: & To all generous and ingenuous Readers.
                     PReſuming all Your Lordſhips will appear,
                     Not by your Proxies, but in Perſon, Heer;
                     And in your Turnes, ſay (Every-one) Content,
                     
                     To Every Act, in Vertues PARLAMENT:
                     I humbly bring You Every-one A Briefe
                     
                     Of every Bill; or, at the leaſt, the Chiefe.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           An Act againſt Duels, deſperate Combats, and Roaring Boyes. Page 7
                        
                           An Act for better Execution of the former Act. Page 13
                        
                           An Act againſt Hypocriſie. Page 15
                        
                           An Act againſt Superſtition. Page16
                        
                           An Act againſt Abuſes in the Courts of Iuſtice. Page 18
                        
                           An Act for ſome Mitigation of the former Act. Page 21
                        
                           An Act for due Execution of Iuſtice in generall. Page 52
                        
                           An Act againſt Perſian State, in proud Retirednes. Page 59
                        
                           An Act againſt profuſe Prodigality. Page 59
                        
                           An Act of exceeding Loue and excellent Reſolution. Page 60
                        
                           An Act of rareſt Pietie in a Prince. 60
                        
                           
                           An Act for Imitation and continuance of the former Act. Page 61
                        
                           An Act for right Imployment of Publike and Priuate Treaſure. Page 61
                        
                           An Act against Ingratitude. Page 63
                        
                           An Act againſt King-Killers, Powder-Traitors, and their Abettors. Page 64
                        
                           An Act for Clemency, and againſt Impunity. Page 65
                        
                           An Act for Propagation of Princely Piety. Page 66
                        
                           An Act againſt the Mitred-Monarchy. Page 66
                        
                           An Act of Admiration. Page 67
                        
                           An Act for Reading of Hiſtories. Page 68
                        
                           An Act againſt ignorant and ignominious Chroniclers. Page 68
                     
                  
                  
                     THeſe All are Publike Acts: Priuate, This Sesſion
                     
                     Hath paſſed None: but in the next Impresſion,
                     
                     Your Acts of Bounty, and the reſt of Mark,
                     
                     Shall be recorded,
By Your Vnder-Clark,
                     
                     
                        Ioſuah Sylueſter.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Names of the Nobles in This Parliament, Interpreted.
                  
                     PANARETVS:
                     
                        AL-VERTVOVS.
                     
                     Andria:
                     
                        Proweſſe.
                     
                     Phroneſia:
                     
                        Prudence.
                     
                     Piſtia:
                     
                        Fidelitie.
                     
                     Eumenia:
                     
                        Clemencie.
                     
                     Euergeſia:
                     
                        Liberalitie.
                     
                     Hypomoné:
                     
                        Patience.
                     
                     Cateria:
                     
                        Conſtancie.
                     
                     Aletheia:
                     
                        Truth.
                     
                     Dicea:
                     
                        Iustice.
                     
                     Euſebia:
                     
                        Pietie.
                     
                  
                  
                     Interpretation of other tearmes vſed in This Parliament.
                     
                        Dyſidaimoné:
                        Superſtition.
                        Eridea:
                        Contention.
                        Merimné:
                        Careful-vexation.
                        Dapania:
                        Charge or Coſt.
                        Adicia:
                        Iniuſtice.
                        Oval:
                        Crowncs for vnbloudy Victors.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  PANARETVS.
                  
                     YEERES timely Turns, vnto a Luſtre run,
                     Brought forth at laſt the long-long wiſhed Sun,
                     Whereon our Hopes our iuſt Deſires purſewd,
                     To ſee our PRINCELING with a Name indewd
                     (Which, Since WEE ſawe, or heard that Happie ſound,
                     
                     
                        Saturn's ſlowe Teem had trotted twice the Round)
                     When, lo, Th'Etern All-Maker's Maieſtie,
                     Quick-darting downe his All-diſcerning Eye,
                     Whereby his Goodnes all his Works dooth guide;
                     And ſeeing preſt the ſacred Pomp and Pride
                     (As in ſo ſolemne Myſteries is wont)
                     T'adorn the Altars and the hallowed Font;
                     In th'inſtant ſummons with a gratious beck
                     
                        Nine nimble Scouts, which ſcudding light and quick,
                     Diſpatch more ſpeedy then a Thought the things
                     Aboue inioind them by the King of Kings,
                     Who, with a moſt-mildly-maieſtike geſt,
                     In heauenly words, his pleaſure thus expreſt:
                     The yong french DOLPHIN is euen ready Now
                     To take the Name my fore-Decrees allow:
                     
                        A frequent Name of Kings, and famous farre;
                     Wonders in Peace, Thunders in dreadfull Warre;
                     And, One of them, more excellent in Grace,
                     
                     Among my Saincts hath iuſtly held a place.
                     But yet, beſides that Name, which France affects
                     For one Man's vertue, and for due Reſpects;
                     Beſides that Name, which onely Men haue giuen,
                     I'll giue him one my Selfe, as ſent from Heauen:
                     And ſuch a one as one-day, by Euents
                     Shall proue it a true Praeſage of that Prince;
                     And, in One Word, myſteriouſly contracts
                     The Hiſtorie of His ſucceeding Acts.
                     
                     Go therefore, quickly from all Quarters cite
                     The rareſt Vertues, and moſt requiſite
                     For Royall boſomes, that did euer reſt
                     Within the Cloſet of a Kingly breſt.
                     Tell them it is Our pleaſure and Decree,
                     
                     That to This Prince they All God-mothers bee:
                     And Shee among them that is found moſt fit,
                     And beſt behoues in Crowned ſoules to ſit,
                     Shall at the Font, Her ſacred Name impoſe;
                     And from thence-forth inſpire him, as he growes,
                     With all her Powers, to correſpond the ſcope
                     And full Extent of that great Empires Hope,
                     
                        Whoſe Limits yet vnlimited appeare,
                     Where Sire and Sonne to mee are equal deare.
                     I ſee th'Aegean ſtreames, and Thracian ſtrand,
                     Already trembling vnder his Command:
                     And th' horned Creſcent (which hath ſcornd to vale)
                     Before the Beams of This new Sun growes pale.
                     To greateſt Ships (as Guides of all the Fleet)
                     The cunning'ſt Pilots euermore are meet:
                     Mine, moſt Immediate, ſeems the ſouuerain care
                     Of Soueraign Kings (who but My Subiects are);
                     And therefore, I, that haue behight This Lad
                     
                     An ampler Rule then euer Monarch had,
                     As, of the WORLD to make him Emperour,
                     
                     I'll haue his Vertues equall to his Power:
                     I'll make them ſo: and to approue it, all
                     The Earths foure Corners I to witneſſe call.
                     This publiſht thus: eft-ſoones the winged Poſts
                     Addreſſe them quick to theſe inferiour Coaſts,
                     And (ſwift as Arrow) hee that tooke to finde,
                     Faire Andria, of great and goodlie mynde,
                     Among the manie Idols of our Dayes
                     That counterfeit her faſhion and her phraze,
                     Spy'd her at laſt, for her heere ſlight account,
                     Ready to leaue vs, and about to mount
                     
                        A winged horſe in hope elſ-where to gett
                     A new Renowne, 'mid ſtranger Nations yet.
                     Her Helmet (euer as her head ſhe ſtirrs)
                     Seemed to twinkle with a thouſand Starrs;
                     A ſtately groue of azure Plumes did waue,
                     And proudly ſhadowed her gilt Armour braue:
                     The bright keen Blade that by her ſide ſhe wore,
                     Inur'd to blood in Battaills long before,
                     As it were, weary of that ruſting reſt,
                     And greedy longing for his wonted feaſt,
                     Seem'd malcontent and his proud Sheath-diſdaind,
                     (The golden Priſon that him ſtill detaind)
                     Whereon were grauen (with Arts Art-paſſing ſtrife)
                     By ſuch a hand as could giue Metall life,
                     The nobleſt feares of Valour (moſt extolld)
                     In later Times, and in the Dayes of old,
                     Of greateſt Monarchs that yet euer were,
                     Whoſe marks the World (vnto this day) doth bear.
                     There, by the Banks of Granic dy'd in graine,
                     (As then: no Banks, but rather Hills of Slain)
                     
                        Philips Great Sonne (inſpite of Multitude)
                     To his ſole Scepter the whole World ſubdewd.
                     There, valiant CAESAR (Rome's firſt Emperour)
                     Quaſhing the Senats and the Peoples power,
                     
                        And ſtooping all their Lawes to his Sword's lawe,
                     Tramples the Tropheis of his Son in Lawe;
                     Who pale without, and all appalld within,
                     Flyes from Pharſalia, and his Hoaſt, vnſeen.
                     Why flyes Great Pompey? ſo (at once) to loſe
                     Th' Honors ſo oft wonn from ſo many foes?
                     Becauſe Thine fainted, muſt Thou faulter too?
                     O yes! with Caeſar thou hadſt heer to doo.
                     Thear's thy Excuſe: & though Thou loſt the Game,
                     Thy Victor yet ſome-what abates Thy Shame.
                     Thear (on the Chape of maſſie gold, vnmixt
                     With other Metall plain or wrought, betwixt)
                     Our own, great HENRY, ſmear'd with blood & duſt,
                     Purſues th'Iberians with keen fauchin iuſt;
                     And iuſtlie keening his couragious ſp'rite
                     Againſt thoſe daring Demi-Moores deſpight,
                     Beats out of breath the braueſt of their Troupe,
                     Who bleak for feare, begin to faint and droupe:
                     The gold there looſe, ſeems euen to fly and (more)
                     Looks pale in faces full of pride before.
                     But Hee (well marked by his milk-white Plume)
                     With Kinglie ſcorne, diſdaining th' odious fume
                     Of vulgar blood, in valiant furie runns
                     Vpon the proud Commanders Dukes and Donns,
                     
                     
                        Who (either proud of Port, or rich Attire)
                     Had by his hand a ſuddaine death for hire.
                     Their royall Patterne all his Troopes take-after,
                     And of the reſt they make a glorious Slaughter:
                     Whence ſtreams of gore that to their Center ſeud,
                     Met in a Rubie, make a Lake of Blood.
                     Such coſtly Sheath ſheath'd in ſuch workmanſhip
                     The ſheen-keen Blade on Valour's brawnie hip,
                     (Hung in an azure Scarf, all ouer ſow'n
                     
                     
                        With Crowned-Swords, and Septres ouer-throw'n.)
                     A thouſand other famous Battailes, fought
                     At ſundry times, with Cunning-coſt were wrought
                     Within her Crimſin Baſes, waving lowe
                     About her Calues, in Buskins white as ſnowe.
                     Shee ſeem'd like Pallas, gainſt the Giants preſt;
                     Or (on Mount Ida) againſt Mars addreſt.
                     At ſuddaine ſight of Heau'ns bright Meſſenger,
                     In mylder port ſhe ſtraight compoſed her;
                     And when He briefely to her heedfull thought
                     Had done the ſacred Arrand that he brought,
                     And (by the way) had queſtion'd her (beſide)
                     Whether her Haſte was bent, ſhe thus replyde:
                     Celeſtiall Herald, While th'heroïck Prince,
                     Whoſe gentle Yoak his Celticks ſo contents,
                     
                        Caru'd with his Sword a Statue to my Name,
                     To ſtand triumphant in the Houſe of Fame,
                     
                     Nothing could hold me from his ſteps, a-part;
                     My hand did guide his hand, my hart his hart:
                     Yea, I was with him, nay, within him, preſt,
                     His ſpirit's familiar, and perpetuall gueſt.
                     But ſithens Peace Him now hath quight diſarm'd,
                     And keepeth Mars within her Temple charm'd;
                     I did giue way to my keen Swords Requeſt,
                     (Which can no longer lie and ruſt in Reſt)
                     And, while his hart, now all in loue with Peace,
                     
                     Hath left His hand, for mee, no buſineſſe,
                     I meant to ſeeke ſome other Strand for Stage
                     To act my Wonders, in Warrs dreadfull rage;
                     That in braue Battaills I againe might reap
                     The Palms Hee wonted on my head to heap.
                     For, with the ſparkles of my glorious fire,
                     Th'incenſed breſts of Younglings to inſpire,
                     I can no more find in my hart; ſith they
                     So raſhly ruſh to caſt themſelues away,
                     So oft, for Trifles (bred of idle breath)
                     So madly run to an vntimely death;
                     So daily ſacrifice their Life and Soule,
                     In ſome ſo fooliſh Quarrells, ſome ſo foule,
                     
                        That, in the iſſue (fatal for the moſt)
                     The Victors ſelf may rather bluſh then boaſt;
                     And ſuch, as for ſuch to vſurp the Sword
                     (Beſides the Conqueſt's euen to be deplor'd)
                     Is nothing elſe but to profane the ſame,
                     And to blaſpheme myne honour and my Name.
                     Not that I blame (where Blood & Nature bindes)
                     In point of Honor (Idol of braue mindes)
                     A Caualier, ſo ſenſible of wrongs,
                     To hazard Life and all that him belongs;
                     Sith, void of Honour, hee is voide of ſenſe,
                     That houlds not Life a deadlie Peſtilence.
                     But I would haue them rightly learne before
                     (Not, of a heart meer valiant and no more;
                     But, of a heart valiant at-once and wiſe)
                     Wherein that Point of pretious Honour lyes,
                     For which, hee's happie that his Life ſhall loſe;
                     And curſed hee that care-leſſe it forgoes.
                     For ſuch a cup-fume ouerflowes the braine
                     Of ſuch whoſe Soules this Error entertaine;
                     That One will weene his Honour intereſs't
                     To bear a Word, though ſpoken but in ieſt;
                     Who neuer thinks it tainted with a Lye,
                     Nor toucht with baſe and will-full Periurie:
                     
                        Nor with his Treaſon, when for ſome pretence,
                     Hee hath betrayd his Countrye or his Prince,
                     Or yielded-vp ſome vn-diſtreſſed Place,
                     Or fled the firſt to ſaue a Cowards caſe.
                     So th'Hypocrite, through Superſtitious Error,
                     Thinks he hath don ſome Sinn of haynous horror,
                     When, by miſ-heed, or by miſ-hap, hee comes
                     
                        Vn-hallow-waſht, into the Sacred Roomes;
                     Yet, makes no Conſcience, yet hath no Remorſe
                     To haue vndonne, or donne to death, by force
                     Of vniuſt Doom, or fraude of Euidence,
                     A many poore and harme-les Innocents:
                     Nay, laughes at Widowes and at Orphanes teares,
                     By his deceipt, diſpoild of all was Theirs.
                     Thoſe valiant Romans, Victors of all Lands,
                     They plac't not Honour there where now it ſtands;
                     Nor thought it lay, in making of the Sword
                     Interpreter of euerie Priuate word;
                     Nor ſtood vpon Puntillios, for Repute,
                     As now-adayes your Duellers purſew't.
                     But from their Cradle, traind in Rules more fitt,
                     They nether knew th'abuſe nor vſe (as yet)
                     
                        Of Challenges, Appells, and Seconds-ayde.
                     But, when the Lawes their Bridle looſe had layd,
                     
                        For Publique Glory, gainſt a Publique Foe,
                     There Honors point, there Valors proofe to ſhow.
                     But, when behoou'd, brauely and firſt to front
                     An Armies force, or beare their ſuddaine Brunt;
                     Or, larded thick with darts, victorious, die
                     Vpon a Breach, or on a Rampire high;
                     Or, leap aliue into a yawning Hell,
                     To ſaue their Citie, from Infection fell;
                     Liu'd neuer Men that leſſer feared death,
                     More-daring Valor neuer yet had breath.
                     Witnes (vnto this day) th'vndaunted harts
                     In Curtius, Decius, and Horatius Parts:
                     With many Worthies more, Immortaliz'd,
                     Which for their Countries haue Selues ſacrifiz'd;
                     And whoſe braue deeds, whoſe honors, whoſe deſerts
                     Moue more Deſpaire then Enuy in Mens harts:
                     For, dying ſo, Garlands & glorious Verſe,
                     Not Cries & Teares, honord their happy Herſe;
                     Their Flower of Fame ſhall neuer, neuer ſhed,
                     Becauſe their Death, their Country profited:
                     Wheras the death which brings now brainſick Youth
                     Vnto their Graue, deſerues but Tears and Ruth;
                     Their Courage caſts them euen away, for nought;
                     Without Memoriall, ſaue a Mournfull Thought,
                     
                        Which, banning but the furie that inflam'd-them,
                     Honors enough, if that it haue not blam'd-them.
                     O what a number of Couragious Knights,
                     Abortiuely, haue in Theſe Single Fights,
                     
                     Loſt the faire Hope the World conceiu'd of them,
                     Haue idlely fruſtred, of their Valors gem,
                     Their gratious Prince, who iuſtly might expect,
                     Againſt his Foes, their forward Worths effect;
                     And, ſacrilegious, to their Wrath haue giuen
                     And headdy Rage (whereby they haue been driuen)
                     The Sacrifice which (with more ſacred zeale)
                     They ought to God, their King, their Cōmonweale!
                     Ynow to make (could they return from death,
                     Such as they were, when heer they loſt their breath)
                     Not a ſole Squadron, but an Hoaſt of Men
                     Whoſe Acts alone would furniſh euery Pen;
                     An Hoaſt of Hectors, and Achilleſes,
                     
                     
                        Caeſars and Scipios, who, by Land and Seas,
                     Following Great HENRY for their Generall,
                     Mought (if he wold) haue made him Lord of ALL.
                     Where, now, they lie in an inglorious Toombe,
                     Longing for Light vntill the Day of Doome:
                     Or lower, in eternall Dungeons dwell,
                     With Ghoſts & Shadowes skirmiſhing in Hell.
                     
                        This miſchief therefore, ſpringing day by day,
                     And ſpreading ſo, as nought his courſe can ſtay;
                     And ſeeing (too) mine Honour blurr'd with Blame,
                     When theſe raſh Mad-caps doo vſurpe my Name;
                     To be, from henceforth, from the Rage exempt
                     Of ſuch as turn my glorie to contempt,
                     And thus deface my Vertues grace with Vice,
                     I hop't elſ-whear ſome holier Exerciſe:
                     And rather would, hearts ſo intemperous
                     Should not inioy mee, then imploy mee thus.
                     Here Andria ceaſt: The Angell, gracefully,
                     Humours her Anger with this milde Reply;
                     Certes, faire Nymph, your Plaint hath Right & Truth,
                     But yet, excuſe the boyling heat of Youth;
                     Perhaps 'tis harder then you ween (preciſe)
                     To be at-once a French-man, Yong, and Wiſe.
                     
                     This Euill from This inborn Error ſprings,
                     That a Braue Mynde, when wrongd in any things
                     Hee weens himſelfe (if ſo hee Armes profeſſe)
                     Muſt no-whear ſeek but in his Sword redreſſe:
                     And that an Eye, a No, a Nod, a Nick,
                     's Ynough t'offend a Noble ſenſe and quick.
                     Permitious Error, which dooth vndermine
                     Both Martial Thrones and Ciuill, and Diuine!
                     
                        For, to no end the Publique Sword ſhall ſerue
                     If euerie man may with his Priuate carue.
                     And then, in vain are Souueraine Princes Lawes,
                     When Subiects dare Themſelues decide their Cauſe.
                     But I beleue This Madnes will no more
                     Praecipitate their courage, as before.
                     The curb of Law which by their prudent Prince,
                     Is now new made againſt This Inſolence
                     Will barr their Boldnes, and (directing meane
                     How (This deer Honour ſaued whole and clean)
                     A gallant Spirit, wronged in any kinde,
                     May lawfully his Satisfaction finde)
                     Will bind their hands, & euen glew-in their blades,
                     Till, when ſome Foe the Common Right invades,
                     In forward Zeal of their deere Countries good,
                     It ſhalbe honour (euen) to dyue in blood.
                     Diſpoſed therefore to expect Amends,
                     Diſpatch the Order which Heauens Monarch ſends;
                     And goe not hence whear thou art ſo renown'd,
                     Till all the world be but This Empires bound:
                     Were it for nothing but That Riſing Sunne
                     
                     Whereon all Eyes already haue begunne
                     (Both Friends & Foes) to fixe their Hopes and Fears,
                     That braue Yong Prince, who from his cradle bears
                     
                        Thine Image in his eyes, and in his armes,
                     Thine Exerciſe in euery kind of Armes.
                     Surely, ſaid Andria, 'thad been hard to find
                     A ſtronger Charm heere to arreſt my mind,
                     (Chiefly, heere liuing my Soules Sympathie,
                     
                     His Father; rather, that ſame other I)
                     For, as in th'one I am a Miracle,
                     So will I be a match-leſſe Spectacle
                     In th'other too, when to his Ancient Right
                     His daring Sword ſhall make his Claime by Fight:
                     Whether his Armies royall Front aſpire.
                     Thoſe craggy Hills whoſe Name is taen from Fire;
                     Or tend vnto thoſe fruitfull Plaines which ſpred
                     Toward Böotes, and Hyperions Bed,
                     Whoſe Princes in their Fables Antique-fram'd,
                     
                        Counts among Kings, Kings among Counts are nam'd.
                     After theſe words, pronounc't with voice & geſt,
                     As Oracles are wont to be expreſt,
                     Both took their flight throgh the thin chryſtall Aire,
                     Towards the Place appointed for Repaire
                     Of all the reſt of Royall Vertues Band,
                     Which were conuented by Heauens high Cōmand.
                     Royall Eumenia was already come,
                     And ſimple-mannerd (Piſtia, thought by ſome
                     
                        Long-ſince exiled from the World); and Shee
                     Who from afarre doth all Euents fore-ſee.
                     There was (apparant by illuſtrious things)
                     Faire Euergeſia, Ornament of Kings,
                     And firme Hypomonè, with her Twin-ſiſter
                     
                        Cartéria, and She whoſe Patrone and Aſſiſter
                     Are often ſhent, Alethia, little know'n
                     To mortall men (no ſcarce among her owne)
                     With vailes and cloaks they doe be-clowd her ſo,
                     Whoſe ſpotleſſe Selfe ſhould rather naked goe.
                     In briefe, of all the Vertues ſummon'd heere,
                     There wanted none but Dicea to appeare,
                     And St. Euſebia, in her Shadowes hid,
                     That long it was yer Her the Angell ſpid.
                     For heer among vs a queint Idol haunts,
                     Whoſe ſimple habite, whoſe ſad countenance,
                     Whoſe lowely look, whoſe language mildly meek,
                     Whoſe zeale-like geſtures, & whoſe poſtures like,
                     So counterfeit Her, with the Maske it makes,
                     That many times the wiſeſt it miſ-takes.
                     You'ld think, her hart had onely God for Ioy,
                     Her Exerciſe onely to faſt and pray;
                     That ſhe abhorrs the World, and lodg'd therein,
                     Liues as the Fiſh that out of waterbin;
                     
                        That burning Zeal of Heauen conſumes her ſo,
                     That all ſeemes bitter that ſhee taſtes belowe.
                     Yet all the while, This hollow Holy-Tricks
                     
                     Doats but of Honours, dreames of Biſhopriks,
                     Thirſts for Promotion, thruſts for Primacie,
                     Hunts glorie ſtill, yet ſeemes it to defie,
                     Neuer does good, but for ſome great applauſe,
                     Nor euer did good, for meer Goodnes cauſe.
                     This Baen of Soules, and that ſame Fopperie
                     (Of old) ſirnamed Dyſidaimonié,
                     
                     Whoſe hart, deiect with Terrors ouer-ſtrong,
                     To feare God's Iuſtice, doth his Mercie wrong
                     (Right Seruile Feare, with Errors foolify'd)
                     Haue driuen Euſebia hence, els wheare to bide.
                     Becauſe th' one loues not, th' other miſſ-beloues
                     What beſt to fear and leaſt preſume behoues.
                     The Angell therefore ferrets euerie nook,
                     And narrowly her wonted haunts dooth looke,
                     In euerie Cloiſter and in euerie Cell,
                     Where Folk belieu'd that She did euer dwell:
                     Yet nothing findes hee of her, anie-wheare,
                     Saue ſome old track or footing heer and there;
                     No, though he viſite the auſterities
                     Of famous Abbayes and faire Nunneries:
                     
                        But, in Her ſtead, he meeteth euermore,
                     One of Theſe Haggs in euerie Couent Doore,
                     Dreſſt in a habite of ſo humble ſhowe,
                     That hard it was the difference to knowe.
                     Yet, at the laſt, prying on euerie ſide,
                     Her (as conceald) in a by-place hee ſpi'd,
                     Where, with inceſſant teares ſhee ſtayd to rew
                     And to bewaile our Errours old and new;
                     Amid an humble Troupe, whom like Deſire
                     To loath the VVorld, and from it to retire,
                     Had made preferre a poore and meane eſtate,
                     Yea Want itſelf, in place ſo ſeparate,
                     Before the Wealth, the Honours and Delights,
                     Where-with the World inueigles, as inuites:
                     As chooſing rather heer to loſe all Theſe,
                     Then loſe thereby, their Soules eternall Eaſe.
                     In this ſequeſtred place, proſtrate in Prayer
                     (Beſt Antidote gainſt Hopes-pride and Deſpaire;
                     The Two grand Poiſons of Soules Faculties)
                     The Angell found Euſebia on her knees.
                     Their Talk was ſhort, the Time inportun'd ſo:
                     In brief therefore hee doth his Meſſage ſhowe,
                     Acquaints her quickly VVhence, and Why he came
                     Then She eftſoones conſenting to the ſame,
                     
                        Away they poſt in a ſwift Aierie Coach
                     Towards the place where all the reſt approach,
                     The generall Rendez-vous for all This Act:
                     VVhere yet (alas!) the Ladie Dice a lackt.
                     For, th' Angell tasked to goe ſeek her forth,
                     Sees her no more conuerſing on the Earth,
                     Nor findes her ſitting (as ſhe wont of-old)
                     On Princes Thrones, and Prelats, vncontrould;
                     Nor among Magiſtrates, which are the Tongue
                     And Life of Lawe, t'interpret Right and Wrong.
                     Where-at amazed, and deſiring more
                     To ſound what reaſon Men could yield therefore,
                     Aſſumes a Bodie, bearing in his hands
                     A bagg of VVritings and ſeem-Deeds for Lands:
                     Comes to a Hall, all full of Murmuring
                     Of people pricked with the angrie ſting
                     Of fel Eridea, who her Venome ſheds
                     Euen into Boores and Paiſants harts and heads,
                     By Her keen furie (as wiith Brizes) ſtung;
                     And by Merimnè and Dapania wrung:
                     In This great Hall, vnknow'n vnto Repoſe,
                     Stalks that ſtern Furie, either among thoſe
                     Of her owne Frye, or 'mong the wretched Crew
                     VVhom Her hard Gripes had made (in vain) to rew.
                     
                        A Rank of Seats, each vnto other fixt,
                     And euery-one a ſundrie Name affixt,
                     Bordred the Walls, ſmoakie with age'and foule;
                     Perches of manie plumie-pownced Fowle,
                     Whoſe nimble Quills haue learnd to flye for that
                     Rich Minerall, which makes men peace and prate.
                     There was no Order: a lowd-buzzing Preſſe
                     VVith whirling Eddies hurry'd without ceaſe,
                     Full of all Sorts; of Prieſts, of Gentlemen,
                     Merchants, Mechaniks, Grooms and Husbandmen:
                     Each iuſtled other, crowding to and fro,
                     As heer and there the ſtream did ebb and flowe.
                     This yauld, that brauld, another beat the Barr;
                     One woo'd the Iudge, another vrg'd him farr;
                     This proues Default, That pleads a Warrantie;
                     This auoides Witnes; That, appeals more high;
                     Another, fleering dooth his Aduerſe flowte.
                     With Rod in hand the Vſhers trudge about:
                     A world of Lawyers ſwarm'd; yet ſome had leaſure
                     (As leaſt imploy'd) the Places length to meaſure.
                     All boyld with Diſcords; one no ſooner don,
                     But inſtantly another New begun;
                     With ſuch a Noiſe as ſoundeth neer the Shoare
                     When, towards a Storm, the Sea beginns to roare.
                     
                        Hard-by this Ocean, which Night only ſtilld,
                     Appeerd an Old-man (as one deeplie illd,
                     And inly galled for ſome grieuous Loſſe)
                     With eyes lift-vp, pale cheeks, and armes acroſſe;
                     Whom th'Angell ſpying, towards him he ſpeeds:
                     And (ſeeming Mortall by his Shape and weeds)
                     Good Father, ſayd hee (ſo to ſound his minde)
                     Where might I (think you) Lady Dicea finde,
                     VVhom I haue ſought already far and neer,
                     And ſurely thought now to haue found her heer?
                     
                        Dicea, my ſonne, ſaid the Old-man (well-nigh
                     Guſhing out Teares which ſtood in either eye;
                     And ſending forth a deep-fet Sigh, before)
                     
                        Dicea, alas! is in the World no more.
                     That Fire which only Death hath power to quench,
                     That fel Deſire no Deluge elſe can ſtanch;
                     The burning Thirſt of Worldly Goods and Gold;
                     And all Sinns, taught to warr againſt her, bold;
                     Haue forc't her to forſake this wretched Frame,
                     And fly again to Heauen whence firſt ſhe came.
                     Or, if in Earth ſhe yet haue anie Stance,
                     'Tis with the Chinois, Turkes, or Scythians:
                     
                     But in This Climat hardlie dooth appeer
                     Anie ſmall ſigne, to ſhowe ſhe hath bin heer.
                     
                        Cruell Adicea in her Roome is ſett:
                     
                        Hate Fauour, Fraude, and Madame Counterfait,
                     
                     (Out of all Courts hunting all Conſcience quight)
                     Make of Right crooked, and of Crooked Right.
                     
                        Art and Deceipt keep thear their open Schooles:
                     
                        Reaſon and Lawe are but the phraze of Fooles,
                     For Law and Reaſon are now waigh'd (by Sleight)
                     In golden Scales; where, only GOLD is waight.
                     Thus, the Old-man proceeding ſtill complaind;
                     Till th'Angell, thus his Blaſphemies reſtraind:
                     Alas! good Father, your freſh Grief (I ſee)
                     For ſome great Suite, late loſt vnhappily,
                     From your ſad lipps this bitter language drawes;
                     Excuſable (perhaps) for your Grief's Cauſe:
                     But th'eye of Paſſion ill diſcernes the truth.
                     This hauing ſpoken; the Celeſtiall youth
                     Turns to another, leſſe diſturb'd in minde;
                     And likewiſe askes, Where he might Dicea finde.
                     Hee, more diſcreet, and milder-ſpoken, farr,
                     Replyes: My Sonne, ſure verie few there are
                     (Yea of the wiſeſt, who beſt vnderſtand)
                     That eaſily can anſwer thy demand.
                     For One perhaps will think her to be there,
                     Whereas, another (ſeeming wrongd) will ſwear
                     
                        By Heau'n, and all that in it Heau'n containes,
                     That not a ſpark nor mark of her remaines:
                     Each holding her, preſent or abſent, ſtill
                     As his owne Cauſe hath thryued well or ill.
                     But I'll aſſure thee (and paſt all Appeal)
                     That in this Place ſhee dooth not alwayes dwell.
                     Sometimes ſhee comes, and brings for Companie,
                     
                        Honor, and Faith, and old Integritie:
                     But the ſtrange Tricks of a bold babbling Dame
                     Call'd Quiddi-quirk, as barbarous as her Name,
                     Moleſt her ſo, that ſoon they driue her hence;
                     For, Both at-once haue no-where Reſidence:
                     And Plutus too, her many-times diſmaies.
                     With that ſweet Power whereby the world he ſwaies;
                     Cauſing her oft return with heauie cheer:
                     And that's the Cauſe ſhe ſtayes ſo ſeldom heer.
                     Oft haue I ſeen her on the ſouverain Seat
                     In that high Senate, whoſe Edicts compleat
                     Sway all the Kingdome; and (if anie-where)
                     I ſure belieue, you yet ſhall find her There,
                     If thoſe Abuſes whoſe bold Tyrannie
                     From other Thrones hath driuen her openly,
                     Haue not crept-in by ſome cloſe Golden Port:
                     But, farr bee That from ſuch a reuerend Court.
                     
                        Heer ceaſed Hee: and inſtantly, withall
                     Loſing his ſight, the Angell leaues the Hall;
                     His aicrie Bodie to the Aier repayes.
                     And while he takes to other Courts his wayes,
                     Hee happily the wiſhed Lady meets:
                     Who, inly ioyd (which outward geſture ſweets)
                     Becauſe in Iudgement ſhee had ouerthrow'n
                     Wrōgs proud Support, & giuen poor Right his own,
                     Came from deciding of a Cauſe of waight,
                     Before the Peers and Councel of Eſtate.
                     But, her Content was doubled when ſhe heard
                     Heav'ns ſacred will (as th'Angell had auerrd)
                     And His high pleaſure (whoſe Omnipotence
                     The Heav'ns adore) for Surname of the Prince:
                     With him therefore Her ſpeedie ſhe directs
                     Towards the Troupe which only her expects.
                     Now all theſe Nymphs aſſembled, ſeemed preſt
                     (All diverſly with Ioy and Hope poſſeſt)
                     To take their Flight to that King-fauourd Place
                     Where (pre-ordained for this VVork of grace)
                     They ſhould impoſe the Royal Infants Name,
                     The Worlds main Hope (as moſt conceiue the ſame)
                     When ſoudainly there did among them breed
                     A noble ſtrife, which ſtayd their forward ſpeed:
                     
                        Though great deſire to ſee the radiance
                     Of that yong Sunne which ſhould enlighten France,
                     
                     Haſted their haſte: and though on euerie ſide
                     As well the ſacred Pomp as ciuill Pride,
                     The King himſelf, Princes and Princely Dames
                     Glittring in gold, ſparkling in pretious Flames,
                     And all the Court adornd in rich Array,
                     Seem as offended at the leaſt Delay.
                     But yet, becauſe Heauens Monarch had decreed,
                     That of the Vertues Shee which ſhould exceed,
                     As moſt conducing to Kings happie ſtate,
                     Should with her Name this Princeling nominate;
                     When one of thoſe high Hearlds vrg'd them on,
                     Among them ſelues This to conſult vpon:
                     Conſult? ſaid Andria: Why conſult about
                     A Point, whereof (I think) was neuer doubt?
                     Mine, Mine's this Honour: for among vs all
                     Who more adorns a Kings Memoriall,
                     Or better keeps a Sceptres Maieſtie
                     At his full Height in Royall hands, then I?
                     I fill his Name with glorie and Renowne;
                     I make him feard abroad of euerie Crowne.
                     I with the terror of his Arms deterr
                     Ambitious Tyrants that they dare not ſtir
                     
                        Offenſiue Warre againſt Himſelf or His,
                     How euer ſpurrd by Spight or Auarice;
                     His famous Valour gaining This, for Meed,
                     That at the laſt hee ſeemes it not to need:
                     Vnleſſe hee liſt his Conqueſts to extend
                     Through-out the World; then is it I that bend
                     The prowdeſt Mountaines vnder his Command,
                     The ſtrongeſt Holds, I render to his hand;
                     I fill with fear, I chill with trembling Ice
                     The boldeſt harts of oldeſt Companies
                     That dare reſiſt his quick and thick Alarmes,
                     VVith th'only luſtre of his glittering Armes.
                     I often only with his Trumpets ſound
                     (VVithout a ſtroak) his Enimies confound;
                     And dreadfull, make the moſt redoubted heer
                     Think it no ſhame to flye his fierce Career,
                     As if (no Steel, of proof toward his blowes)
                     'Twere Raſhnes more then Valour to oppoſe.
                     Such were of-old thoſe hardie Heròes found,
                     For Proweſſe, Then for Demi-gods renownd:
                     Such, Hee whoſe ſhowlders ſhor'd Olympus walles:
                     Such, Hee who conquer'd th'Empire of the Gaules:
                     Such, that Great Macedon, and ſuch (again)
                     Thoſe famous Paladines, whoſe Fables vaine,
                     
                        (Yet vſe-full Tales) tho'ld Romants fain ſo fitt,
                     That euen they ſeeme by Mórpheus fingers writt.
                     But what they had Idéally from Art,
                     That Réally I to a Prince impart.
                     Who knowes not, that I, only vs'd in Field,
                     Serue all the Vertues both for Sword and Shield?
                     Your Selues, indeed, ſeeme to agnize no leſſe;
                     Although, in words, you ſhame it to confeſſe.
                     For, when the furie of Warrs dreadfull Stowres
                     Beginns to thunder neer Your daintie Bowers,
                     All pale for Feare, all trembling, all diſmayd,
                     To Mee yee flye, to Mee yee crye for Aide;
                     Vnder my wings yee creep, to keep you ſure:
                     Where (and but there) you think your ſelues ſecure.
                     And, rather I, then Any (who expoſe
                     My Self alone againſt the Haile of Blowes)
                     Begin Eſtates, begett, and bring them forth,
                     And plant (in blood) the Empires of the Earth.
                     Th'admired height of Romes great Sceptre yerſt
                     (As that of Greece) was but My work, at firſt;
                     And that ſame Other, famous, glorious Throne,
                     Whoſe Greatnes, Yet, doth in it's Cinders grone.
                     For, though by Warr, with Fire and Sword, I waſte
                     What Heav'ns Decree hath doom'd to be defac't;
                     
                        Euen while I raze, I raiſe; and of the Rubble
                     Of pettie States, I build One hundred double;
                     As horrid Dragons growe ſo hugely great
                     Of manie Serpents that alyue they eat.
                     You are indeed extold (and worthylie)
                     For knowing well, to vſe a Victorie:
                     But without Mee, You can haue none to vſe;
                     Without Mee then, your Knowledge nought accrues.
                     Therefore, your Honor's leſſe; at leaſt 'tis ſuch,
                     As (at the beſt) on Mine dependeth much.
                     In brief, in all the ſacred Works wee doo,
                     Our Merit's diuers, and our Honor too:
                     You rule the humble, I the proudeſt tame:
                     You adorn Kingdomes, and I conquer them:
                     You can direct, and I protect a Crowne:
                     You doo beſiege, I dare aſſault a Towne:
                     You ſhowe the vtmoſt of Mans Witt and Art;
                     I act your aimes with valiant hand and hart:
                     You (laſtly) plott, in ſhadie Chambers ſield,
                     What I performe, abroad, in bloodie Field.
                     But, in all Theſe, I paſſe you All, as farr,
                     As to ſubdue the ſtouteſt Foes in Warr;
                     To ſee about one (Lightning-like) to flaſh
                     Millions of Shott, Millions of Swords to claſh;
                     
                        To hear no noiſe but Canons roaring Thunder,
                     Diuorcing Soules from Bodies paſht in ſunder;
                     To march in blood euen to the Knees; and yet
                     In all vndaunted, not diſmaid a whitt,
                     Is both more painfull and more Princelie too,
                     Then, cleering of a clowdie Fraude, or two;
                     To ſhield by counſail Equitie oppreſſt;
                     To gaine the Fame of Wiſedome with the beſt;
                     To faſt and pray, or giue abundantly;
                     Or get the name of gratious Clemencie.
                     
                     Then well fare Valour: and long liue the Storie
                     Of valiant Princes in the Phane of Glorie:
                     No humane Virtue hides ſo well as I,
                     Obnoxious ſtaines when Ptinces ſtep awry;
                     An ALEXANDER ARISTIDES ſeemes,
                     Becauſe the ſplendor of my ſpreading beames
                     With radiant luſtre dazles ſo the ſight,
                     That nought is ſeen but Great and glorious Light.
                     Whear, if he lack my Raies, or my Renowne;
                     Boaſt he of double or of trebble Crowne,
                     Bee hee benign, be he munificent,
                     Iuſt, wiſe, religous, learned, eloquent,
                     Preciſe of Promiſe (both to Frend and Foe)
                     Princes abroad little regard him though;
                     
                        Yea, might hee iuſtlie all (els) Vertues vaunt;
                     Yet wanting mee hee ſeemeth all to want.
                     His Hare-like hart, at Wars leaſt noiſe doth quake,
                     And to his Beads hee dooth him all betake;
                     His Fear ſtrikes Fear in his beſt Refuges,
                     And his no-courage doth diſcourage His.
                     In brief, as bleſſt with Peaceful Vertues rare,
                     Hee ſeemes far fitter (in a time of Warr)
                     With Keyes and Croſiers a POPE's Part to play,
                     Then Sword and Sceptre, as a KING, to ſway.
                     As Andria had ended here her Part;
                     Shee, in whoſe Schoole wee learn the heedfull Art
                     Of neuer fondlie Vndertaking ought;
                     Soft, ſoft, ſaid ſhee: To boaſt our Selues, we ought
                     Not blame our Equalls; nor (with proud Exchange)
                     To our owne Praiſes their Diſpraiſes change:
                     
                        Andria, I grant, Thy merit's great; but Mine
                     Is, if not greater, full as great as Thine:
                     Sithens, to raign in Soule of Maieſtie,
                     
                     There is no Vertue to bee matcht with Mee.
                     For, let a King be full of High-deſeigns,
                     Let him be Valiant, as your Paladines;
                     Let him be gratious, iuſt and liberall,
                     True of his word, and ſo deuoute withall,
                     
                        That at his Feet all Vices proſtrately;
                     If Mee he lack that am all Vertues Eye,
                     Blindfold hee vſes (nay, wel-neer abuſes)
                     Theſe diuine Gifts, which bountious Heav'n infuſes:
                     And right reſembles a faire Ship, for Sea
                     All ready rigd, and furniſht euerie way
                     With everie Needfull; Men, Munition, Beef,
                     Beer, Biſcuit, all: only ſhee wants (the Chief,
                     The Life and Soule; the Senſe, the Lawe, the Light
                     Wherby ſhe liues, moues, ſtirrs, and ſteers aright)
                     A skillfull Pilot, with Diſcretions hand
                     Her winged Manedge rightlie to command
                     VVith hempen Raines, and woodden Bridle, ſo
                     That neuer wry ſhe ſaile, nor wrong ſhe rowe:
                     Without whoſe guidance, if the puffing gales
                     Into the Deep tranſport her huffing ſailes,
                     She runns at randon, and with ruefull Knock,
                     Soon ſplitts her ſelf vpon ſom Shelf or Rock.
                     Euen ſo it fares with Princes, when they make
                     Or Peace, or Warr, and not My Counſaile take;
                     Or, without Mee, as it were blindefold, vſe
                     Their other Gifts the gracious Heav'ns infuſe.
                     They thryue ſo little, that (as in a Wrack)
                     Their owne rich Burthen often breaks their back.
                     
                        Their forward Valour but ſad Fruit doth yield
                     They Winn the Victorie, yet loſe the Field;
                     They brauely fight, and yet are brauely foild:
                     Some Error ſtill hath all-their Actions ſpoild.
                     Their Bountie bindes not, but vnbindeth harts:
                     Their Clemencie much more then Rigor ſmarts:
                     Their Zeal it ſelf, proues to them ſelues pernitious;
                     And vnto others blind and ſuperſtitious:
                     Their Vice and Vertues them ſo inter-nex,
                     That ſcarce can one diſtinguiſh their Effects.
                     Not that Ill ſtill is not Good's Oppoſite;
                     But that, They wanting Mee, their only Light,
                     Doo (euen) Good euill; or doo, out of ſeaſon,
                     A Good, which is not good, done without Reaſon;
                     And, of faire Vertues, fruitefull Seeds of Glorie,
                     Reap blaſted Buds, which ſtain their goodly Story,
                     What famous Conqueſt euer yet was gott
                     Which to the Victor I prepared not?
                     Thou fighteſt bravely, and in Victories
                     Of bloodie blades, gettſt the firſt Crown, for prize;
                     But I, by th'art of Prouidence, diſpoſe
                     To glorious iſſue thy couragious blowes.
                     I wiſely take the fitt aduantages
                     Of Time and Place, to ſecond Courages:
                     
                        I, skillfully the Squadrons range and rank;
                     I marſhall them to ſhowe their Front or Flank
                     As beſt befitts (by warrlike Stratagem)
                     T'incloſe their Foes, to clip, or curtall them;
                     Or, breſt to breſt (as angrie Lyons wont)
                     With braue incounter, charge them full afront:
                     I by an Ambuſh, layd with luckie ſpeed,
                     Oppreſt with number, help thee at thy need.
                     I manie-times preuent thy like miſſ-hap,
                     When ſeem-fly Foes would traine thee to the trap:
                     I, to bee brief, with euer watchfull brain
                     Aſſiſt, to make thy Valour neuer vain.
                     But, if a Prince muſt needs want one of vs,
                     And mought not bee both Wiſe and Valourous;
                     Sure Reaſon would our glorious Parts aſſign,
                     Thine to braue Soldiers, to great Captaines Mine;
                     Becauſe, my Powers are proper to Command,
                     As Thine to Execute with hardie hand.
                     But though our humors ſo farr diuers bee,
                     Yet may wee Both, in one braue Spirit, agree;
                     And, for This Age, wee need no Witnes els
                     But famous HENRY, who in both excells;
                     With ſo great Wiſedome ruling on the Throne
                     Which with ſuch Valour hee hath made his Owne:
                     
                        His Victories, yet, making Men diſpute,
                     To which of Vs, they ſhould them beſt impute.
                     Yet hundred Laurells neuer widow-curſt,
                     And hundred Ovals, which no skin haue burſt,
                     Proue I haue often Conquer'd without Thee:
                     But neuer wert Thou Victor without Mee.
                     For, I haue oft ſeene Armies diſsiped,
                     And proud, ſtrong Cities often rendered,
                     (Well mur'd, well manned, & well ſtord with food)
                     Without the ſpilling of a drop of blood;
                     Vſing no other then the ancient Wile
                     Of waſting fields, where Publique loſſe (the while)
                     Returnd This Gaine, to ſtoope by Famine Thoſe
                     Which could not elſe haue been ſubdu'd by Blowes.
                     Beſides, th'off-cutting of all Paſſages,
                     As well of Succours, as of Forrages;
                     Is euen to conquer by vncaſuall courſe,
                     Fight-leſſe to fight, and without force to force.
                     Great Captaines therefore did Vs neuer part:
                     Sith either, ſole, is as a head-leſſe Dart;
                     Or (if not head-leſſe) heed-leſſe thrown (as ill)
                     From feeble caſter, without aime, or skill.
                     'Tis ſaid of Pallas, in the Troiane Broyle,
                     That Shee in fight ſtern Mars himſelfe did foyle;
                     
                        To ſhowe how farre Wiſe-Valour doth excell
                     A raſh Exceſſe of Courage boiling fell;
                     Whoſe fume-blind force, wanting Diſcretions beam,
                     Reſembles right a ſight-leſs Polyphem.
                     
                     But, whether ioynt or ſeuerd be our Powers,
                     My Cunning ſtill yields fairer fruits and flowers,
                     Then doth Thy Violence (though oft it ſpread
                     Bright vertuous rayes about Thy glorious head).
                     For, onely then are Thy ſtiffe armes imploid,
                     When ſtubborn War dares to haue all deſtroid.
                     But, when ſweet Peace fills Crownes with Coronets,
                     Thou art lockt vp in Princes Cabinets;
                     Among the Corſelets, which, now wariefied
                     Through loue of Peace, they haue new layd aſide;
                     Or thoſe, which idlely (through Times alteration)
                     Hang by the Walls, both out of Vſe and Faſhion.
                     But I, indifferent, ſerue in War and Peace;
                     I breed her, feed her, and her yeeres increaſe,
                     By prudent Counſailes, prouident Decrees,
                     Kind turns, calme Treaties (fitting all degrees);
                     In briefe, by all means meet to render Kings
                     Mutually friends; and rule their Vnderlings:
                     Whence to their States if happy fruits accrew,
                     Th'honour of all to Mee alone is due.
                     
                        But, in the World, what State hath euer thriuen;
                     Or rather, which hath not to Wrack been driuen,
                     Where lackt My Conduct, and where onely Chance
                     
                     Hath ſteerd the courſe of Publique Gouernance?
                     What humane Action, what Deſign, what Thought,
                     Without Mine aide hath euer com'n to ought?
                     What Priuat ſtock, what Publique ſtem of Blood,
                     Without my Rules hath ſprung, or long hath ſtood?
                     All nobleſt Arts, all nimbleſt Works of worth,
                     Which humane brains cōceiue, & hands bring forth,
                     Hold they not Mee for rich and fruitful Wombe,
                     Frō whence their births (both firſt & ſecond) come?
                     The kindeſt Counſailes, without Mine among,
                     May wee not call them Treaſons of the Tongue,
                     When blind and bad Aduiſe (though malice-leſs)
                     Ruins the Friend to whom it meant Redreſs?
                     Nay nothing, nothing vnder Heavn, may miſſe
                     The Minds guide rayes of my Reſplendencies:
                     I am the true Sun of all humane acts;
                     Without Mee, Fortune all their praiſe exacts.
                     If ought I leaue to Fortunes doubtfull deed,
                     It ſhall appeare well ſet, though ill ſucceed:
                     But where My Sceptre hath a ſoueraine ſway,
                     
                        Fortunes falſe Die hath little power to play.
                     
                        Then, bee't on Cedar, with a Pen of Gold,
                     For Memorie and Glorie too, inrold,
                     That Of all Soule-adorning Gifts diuine,
                     
                     
                        The Maieſtie, the Monarchie is Mine:
                     
                     
                        That I, Their Queene, life of Their lawes and ſpring,
                     
                     
                        Am, of all VERTVES worthieſt of a KING.
                     To whom, I ſeem ſo much more requiſite
                     (Being both his Guide & Eye to giue him Light)
                     As hath a Guide (ſo iudge the moſt diſcreet)
                     More need of Eyes, then either hands or feet.
                     Heere ceaſt Phronéſia: Andria inſtantly,
                     Weening her wrong'd, ſeemes willing to reply,
                     And to her Selfe already ſoft ſhee ſayes,
                     Shee hath leſſe skill in Phraſes then in Frayes;
                     But, to maintaine the honour of her Cauſe,
                     Where need requires, not words but ſwords ſhe draws
                     Then St. Euſebia, ioyntly raiſing faire
                     Her Soules pure Zeale, and her ſweet Voices aire,
                     See, ſee (ſaid Shee) how proudly inſolent,
                     Vaine Men, admiring and too confident
                     Of Their fond Wiſedome, and fraile Fortitude,
                     
                     (Forgetting Heavns quick Eye and Arm) conclude
                     That their own ſtrength, or their own Prouidence,
                     Hath foyld their foes, or giuen their own defence:
                     
                        As ſilly children (ſet on fourm or ſtoole)
                     Whoſe hands are (firſt) held at the Writing-Schoole,
                     
                     Forming ſome Letter, vaunt it for their Owne,
                     And think their Art-leſs fingers skilfull growne.
                     But, ô fond Mortalls! Neither is't your Art
                     Of myſtique State, nor your high hand and hart,
                     Which in your Borders Peace and Plenty brings,
                     Or ends your Battailes in your Tryumphings:
                     But Heavns Right-hand inviſibly addreſt,
                     To reskue You, hath death it ſelfe repreſt;
                     Repell'd all Perills, put-by all Miſs-haps
                     Ready to quell you with tempeſtuous claps):
                     And then retorting all vpon your Foes,
                     In lieu of Laurels (which They did propoſe)
                     Sends Terrors, Errors, or Diſorders rife,
                     Or Mutinies, or other Ciuill ſtrife,
                     Or other Miſchiefe, which confounds their powrs
                     With their own Swords, or makes thē fall on yours:
                     So that your hands, victorious Thus, doe beare
                     Right glorious Palmes, and Olyues euery-where
                     Adorne your Coaſts with their rich oylie treſſe:
                     And all with you is Victory, or Peace.
                     
                     Yet you, ingrate the-while, throgh blind Self-loue,
                     Not ſeeing that theſe Gifts come from aboue,
                     
                        Sacrifice to your Selues, conferre the honor
                     Of all, to all, ſaue to their own right Owner.
                     O curſed Soile! ô barren Sand and dry!
                     Not betterd ought by any husbandry;
                     Hardned with heavnly deawes, the more the worſe:
                     More worthy nothing then a heauy Curſe.
                     O vvretch! refer, refer aright, and bring
                     Theſe ſacred Streams birth to their ſacred Spring,
                     That perfect Good, which can no more deſiſt
                     To doe thee good, then Thou Him to reſiſt.
                     Through all thy Prouince let his Name be praiſd;
                     If to a Crowne his fauour haue thee raiſd,
                     Reare Him an Altar in thy Soule anon,
                     And for Burnt-Offring lay thy hart thereon:
                     His power (alone) adore, implore and truſt;
                     And in thy Selfe kill euery kind of luſt:
                     So ſhalt thou not, what euer Hap ſucceed,
                     Neither ſo much Courage, nor Counſaile need.
                     For, couering thee with his protecting hand,
                     Did all the World in Arms againſt thee band,
                     Beſiege thee round, aſſault thee in ſuch ſort,
                     That nought could ſaue thee; neither force, nor Fort:
                     Amid all dangers which might fright thee there,
                     He, he would free thee from all cauſe of feare;
                     
                        And Thine, preſeru'd from death and deadly Foes,
                     Would be amaz'd to conquer without blowes.
                     Thy Prayers would put a hundred Hoſts to flight:
                     Had each a Caeſar to commaund them right,
                     Yet fighting on thy knees, with armes acroſſe,
                     Thou, thou (alone) ſhouldſt conquer, without loſſe.
                     Againe, His Angell would aſſume the ſword
                     Where-with ſom-times th'Aſſyrian ſwarms he gor'd;
                     Again, Senacherib's brauing Blaſphemies,
                     Should find a King, with water in his eyes,
                     To vanquiſh him with vowes: and as with charms,
                     Thou ſhold'ſt do more with tears, thē he with Arms.
                     Why then, thus vainly dare We heere conſult
                     Of others Right? or of our Owne inſult?
                     Shee, ſhee that giues to God (nay, giueth God)
                     On Her of right this Crown ſhould be beſtow'd;
                     Sith her poſſeſſing, they All Good poſſeſſe:
                     But wanting her, All elſe is emptineſſe.
                     Let neither Proweſs then, nor Prudence, ween
                     Her Selfe Kings glory, neither Vertues Queen:
                     I haue ſeene Valiant Kings, and Prudent too;
                     And ſuch as knew in all turns what to doo,
                     And ſuch whoſe Conſtance was incomparable,
                     Liue wretchedly, and die as miſerable:
                     
                        But, neuer ſaw I but a happy End
                     Of Pious Princes, which on God depend;
                     And in all doubts, all dangers (from their Birth)
                     Haue (ſacring vnto Heavn the thoughts of Earth)
                     With eyes ay-fixt on That Sunn's ſunnie ſide,
                     Belieu'd his Loue their Guard, his Law their Guide.
                     Not that I would a Prince ſecure and idle,
                     Should ſo let-go his Empires Rains and Bridle;
                     To caſt on God the Cares, the Managings,
                     And glorious labours that belong to Kings:
                     Nay, rather would I, that with Vigilance,
                     Conſtancie, Iuſtice, Wiſedome, Valiance,
                     And all elſe Vertues which his God hath giuen,
                     He ſecond ſtill th'aſſiſting hand of Heaven;
                     Aye well aſſurd that God will not neglect
                     Iuſt-armed Prayers of his own Elect.
                     But, to His onely Bountie muſt they giue
                     Th'honor of all the fruits they ſhall atchieue
                     By their moſt noble Cares, moſt Royall Paines:
                     Not to the depth of Machiauilian Brains,
                     Not to the vaine Effort of humane force,
                     Nor Martiall Courage, mowing Men and Horſe,
                     Which in effect (how glorious Name it beare)
                     Is but a Publique, (lawfull) Maſſacre.
                     
                        In briefe, what Worth, or Wit in King may bee,
                     Heavns King cōmands he make Them wait on Mee:
                     Make That, the Spur; Me, Raine of each Intent;
                     This, of his Counſaile; Me, the Preſident:
                     Credit Them often, Me continually:
                     That They inſpire his Hart, his Iudgement, I.
                     And, that in nothing They with Mee compare;
                     Nor any elſe (how Royall) Vertues rare:
                     But make Mee ſit in Honors fourm the firſt;
                     Yea, without Mee, eſteeme his State accurſt:
                     Hold Them for helpfull, Mee for neceſſary:
                     And firme belieue, when Times are aduerſary,
                     Rather to faile, with Prowes and Policy,
                     
                     Nay fall, with All; then flouriſh without Mee.
                  
                  
                     Throgh ſuch a Faith, that great King-Prophet yerſt,
                     With litle force, ſo many Foes reverſt:
                     So oft eſcap't ſo many Snares of Death,
                     Which Envies hand had ſet to ſtop his breath:
                     So fortunate, in euerie ieopardie,
                     Hee almoſt ſeemd t'haue wedded Victorie.
                     
                     What Monarch would not gladly be the Heire
                     Of theſe high fortunes of His Vertues faire?
                     Who would not purchaſe at the deereſt rate
                     Of all his Paines, the glorious Praiſe He gate?
                     
                        And yet, the Vertue which aduaunc't Him ſo,
                     And on his Acts ſuch honors did beſtow;
                     Was not his Proweſs (though he durſt enough)
                     Neither his Prudence (though of famous proofe);
                     But his religious Pietie and Zeale
                     
                     To ſerue the Lord, the God of Iſrael:
                     
                     
                        Zeale, which conſuming Him with heauenly flame,
                     Made him to conſecrate his Facts, his Fame,
                     Himſelfe, his Sword, his Sceptre, and his Song,
                     At the Authors feet, to whom they All belong:
                     As ſtill eſteeming that hee held his Crown,
                     By his ſupport who had it firſt beſtow'n;
                     Not by the Proweſs, or the Policy,
                     Of his owne darefull hand, or carefull Eye.
                     Let nobleſt Princes imitate this Part,
                     This pious zeale of his religious hart:
                     And let them know, that nor their Heed in ſway,
                     Nor their Good-hap (which ſeem's t'attend them ay)
                     Their Knowledge, Courage, nor Victorious fame,
                     About their heads ſo glorious Garlands frame,
                     Neither from heavn ſo many bleſſings bring,
                     Neither ſo much doe magnifie a King,
                     Nor dignifie the Sceptre in his hand
                     So manie millions iuſtly to command;
                     
                        As I, who, after this worlds Diadem,
                     
                     Find them a-new, in New Ieruſalem:
                     
                     That God himſelf-vouchſafes to watch Their ſtate,
                     Becoms Their Counſaile, Their Confederate,
                     
                     Their Rock, their Refuge from their Enemies,
                     And gets them daily glorious victories:
                     That, without Mee, no Vertue is compleat;
                     And that, in That which maketh truly Great,
                     I paſſe the reſt, and all the beſt They can,
                     As farre as God in Greatnes paſſeth Man.
                     
                        Euſebia heer concluding her diſcourſe,
                     
                        Dicea began her Title to enforce:
                     I haue (ſaid ſhee) long lent you eare a-like,
                     Yet from your Reaſons, and your Rhetorike
                     I gather nothing, from the moſt of you,
                     But Vſurpations of Mine honors due;
                     While mine own Nourſling from my ſide you ſteale,
                     Wherein, with Iuſtice, you ſcarce iuſtly deale.
                     For, if of Vertues any worthy bee
                     To raign, as Kings eternall Companie;
                     And with more luſtre their great Names do grace,
                     I, I am Shee may iuſtly claime that Place;
                     As ſhee alone, who, by One duety, doo
                     Make happy Kings, & happy Subiects too:
                     
                        Shee, that of all the Graces from aboue,
                     Acquire them moſt their Peoples hate or loue:
                     Shee that the Stock of Traytors doth extinguiſh,
                     She that good Kings from Tyrants doth diſtinguiſh:
                     Shee that to Each due Recompence imparts
                     According to their good, or bad Deſarts:
                     Shee, without whom, the rife-full ſtrife-full ſound
                     Of Mine and Thine, would all the World confound.
                     Not that I am ſo inly blunt, or blind,
                     As not to value Valours valiant mind;
                     Or not to ſee, What Benefits to Kings
                     Sacred Euſebia, and Phronéſia brings:
                     But ſaue Euſebia (whom I honour more
                     Then all the Greatnes Worldlings moſt adore)
                     Not one of you produceth her effects
                     So fortunate and free from all defects,
                     But oftentimes ſome euill them ſucceeds
                     Which equalls oft their Good, ſomtimes exceeds:
                     Much like ſome Herbs, of doubtful fame and force,
                     Which cure one Griefe, and cauſe perhaps a worſe.
                     'T's a glorious Work tryumphing worthily,
                     To win by force a famous Victory,
                     To flowre a field with dead, to ſwim in blood,
                     To glaſſe ones Valor in a Crimſin flood:
                     
                        
                        
                           •
                        ut, what's all This, but a meer Maſſacre
                     Of furious Lions (not a humane War)
                     Vnleſs the Right of the bright Sword victorious
                     Make the Cauſe iuſt, & the Effect as glorious?
                     And are not thoſe ſo bloody Palmes, (the while)
                     Gathered in Countries, ruin'd with the ſpoile
                     Of Warrs dire fire, flaming on euery ſide
                     Of thoſe ſad fields, forſaken far and wide?
                     O bloudy Vertue, for Warre onely fit,
                     And for the Miſchiefes that doe waite on it!
                     Yet leaſt (alas!) her thirſtie Steele ſhould ruſt
                     Within her Sheath, too-long reſtrained; muſt,
                     Muſt men with Tears ſee their deer Countries ſpoild,
                     Their fields with heaps of ſlaughtred bodies pyl'd,
                     Their Cities ſackt, their Houſes all inflam'd,
                     Their treaſurs ſhar'd, their wiues & daughters ſham'd
                     Their tender babes (which haue no help, but cryes)
                     Brain'd, broached, broyl'd, in horrid Sacrifice?
                     Sure, Noble furie of heroïck harts,
                     The hideous Stage wheron thou act'ſt thy Parts,
                     Is too-too-coſtly to a State; too-deer
                     Are all thy Palms; thy Glory walks too-neer
                     Deep Miſeries, Pains, Perills, Dolors, Deaths,
                     And dire Euents; which not alone the breaths
                     
                        Of Foes bereaue, and Foraine States vndoo;
                     But wrack withall thine own Domeſticks too.
                     For, what Effects, but ſuch nefarious things,
                     Haue been the fruits of thouſand valiant Kings;
                     Whoſe memories ſo ring of Battailes yet,
                     That euen with bloud their Stories may be writ:
                     Leauing their Names, iuſt Arguments of terror,
                     Loading the Earth with Monuments of horror,
                     Filling both Land and Sea, with Gore, with Gall,
                     And, to no purpoſe, topſie-turning All:
                     Sith all the gaine of all their Victories,
                     Is but a fame of Valiant Robberies;
                     Reproachfull praiſe to Souerain Potentates,
                     To Supreme Paſtors, to high Magiſtrates:
                     Yet, moſt of Theſe haue reapt no other fruit,
                     From bloudy labors, but This odious Bruit:
                     Wheras They ſhould (only) their Powers imploy,
                     To ſalue, to ſaue; and neuer to deſtroy.
                     One onely King (no further Name is need)
                     Iuſtly conſtraind to arme, & mount his ſteed,
                     By force to enter to his Own by Right;
                     Hath ſacred all his Art, his Hart, his Might,
                     To's Empires good: and chaſing War away,
                     Makes Peace approu'd his Valors daughter ay.
                     
                        The reſt, ſtill greedy of new Iſles, new Indes,
                     
                     Haue raiſd ſuch ſtorms with their Ambitious windes,
                     As in their own Seas haue nigh ſunk Themſelues,
                     And caſt their Subiects vpon Rocks and Shelues,
                     Where (through more woes) they, euen with tears, behold
                     How ill it is to haue a King too Bold.
                     Now, for your Prudēt (but, meer Prudent) Kings,
                     Too-much Diſcourſe, wch frō their iudgmēt ſprings,
                     Oft makes them timerous, loth to take-in-hand;
                     To loſe their time, while waiting Time they ſtand;
                     And, daring nothing, but Diſcourſing ſtill,
                     To Err as much as Thoſe that dared ill:
                     Or, makes them, more (in Worldly matters, heer)
                     Subtile and ſharp, then loyall and ſincere.
                     So that as They, of dangers heedfull are;
                     Of Them, no leſſe behoues it to beware.
                     I will not ſay, that many times the grounds
                     Whereon the worlds, blind, fooliſh wiſdom founds,
                     Are Contrarie vnto the ſolid Baſe
                     Which heavns true wiſdom euery where doth place.
                     So that, one Thought neuer it ſelfe extends
                     (Nor can) at once, to two ſo diuers Ends:
                     No more then can the ſight of mortall eyes
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         one ſame inſtant, Heav'n and Earth compriſe.
                     
                        What ſhall I ſay of Thee (and doe thee right)
                     Sweet St. Euſebia, Gods own deere Delight?
                     Thou filleſt Kings, indu'd with Thy deſires,
                     With ſacred feruour of Celeſtiall fiers;
                     Thou mak'ſt their Liues a liuely ſpeaking Lawe,
                     To rule their Subiects more by Loue then Awe:
                     But yet, thou mak'ſt (if Thou alone be Theirs)
                     Them too-too-ſlack in other Kingly Cares;
                     Too-mew'd in Peace, in War too-ſcrupulous;
                     And think ſo much of Heavn, that Earth they loſe.
                  
                  
                     And, Euergéſia, praiſing Thine Effects,
                     Amid the beſt well may we doubt defects:
                     For, what in Kings more Heavn-like ſeems to all,
                     Or God-like more, then to be liberal?
                     
                     Yea, liberal Princes ſeeme euen Gods on Earth,
                     Com'n-down frō Heavn to hunt Deſpaire & Dearth
                     Care, Indigence, Incomber, and the reſt,
                     Where-with poore Vertue often is oppreſt.
                     Yea, euen as Gods, Their Names are honord heer,
                     And, for their Seruice, nothing is too-deer.
                     (The ground of which ſo great beneuolence,
                     In ſome, is Hope; in ſome, Experience);
                     So that all Vowes, all Voices end in Them,
                     And, as the Sun, Their Sceptres brightly beam.
                     
                        Yet, oftentimes, thoſe Bounties of thy hand
                     Proue publique Burdens, bitter to a Land;
                     When fluent Princes (leaſt their Fauors ſource
                     Should be exhauſted) haue too-oft recourſe
                     To Tributes, Impoſts; and ſome worſe withall;
                     Whence Flowers to few, to many Thornes befall:
                     And Avarice her ſelfe vniuſtly fills
                     With what Profuſion ouer-fondly ſpills.
                     Nor Thou, Eumenia, though extold ſo high
                     As liuelieſt Type of Heauenly Clemencie;
                     And onely Shield of ſuch as dare infrenge
                     My ſacred Rules, to ſaue them from Reuenge:
                     Thou canſt not cleere thee from the confluence
                     Of Euills vs'd to follow Indulgence.
                     
                     For, by too-ſparing, Thou dooſt Vices ſpread;
                     Thou loſeſt ſound, to ſaue corrupt and dead:
                     And filling Cities with home-Enemies,
                     Thy Pardons turne to publique Iniuries.
                     
                     But I, by practiſe of vnpartiall Rigor,
                     Maintain good Orders, keep the Lawes in vigor:
                     Make Kings at-once belou'd and feared too
                     (Feared, alone of thoſe that euill doo).
                     Their Subiects (ſet on happy Plenties knee,
                     In their poſſeſſions from Oppreſſions free)
                     
                        Bleſſe them, adore them, hold them (euer deer)
                     Their Countries Fathers, nay their Gods wel-neer.
                     In briefe, no Bleſſing can befall a Realm,
                     But Theirs inioy, from, by, or vnder Them.
                     For, as it is, of the Wilde-Aſh-tree, ſaid,
                     That th'onely ſauour, nay the onely ſhade,
                     Inſtantly kills (by ſtrong Antipathie)
                     What euer Serpents vnderneath it lye:
                     Such, to the Snakes of Vice, thoſe Princes are
                     Which gainſt Iniuſtice haue proclaimed War,
                     With no leſſe Care to make My Rules to raigne,
                     Then their owne Sceptres in their hands ſuſtaine.
                     Can no Rebellion ſpring (at leaſt) none ſpeed
                     In their Dominions, neither Factions breed;
                     Sith gracious Heauens vouchſafe them this Accord
                     For hauing vs'd ſo equally My Sword
                     (To all Degrees, in Citie, Field, and Towne)
                     In Ciuill Warre they ſhall not weare their Owne.
                     Their People, feeling in Their happy Sway,
                     What Hap, what Reſt, what Freedom they inioy,
                     Deeming them as their Gods, and meting (rife)
                     Their length of Bliſſe by Their deer length of life,
                     Watch for Their Safeties; and can ſuffer nought
                     Gainſt them to be miſ-done, miſ-ſaid, miſ-thought
                     
                        No more then 'gainſt their Publique's Proſpering,
                     Whereof they hold Their Iuſtice only Spring.
                     For, of all rareſt Vertues that may meet
                     In a iuſt Prince, They onely taſte the ſweet
                     Of Mine Effects; and of that Equall Care
                     
                     Of not ſurcharging more then they may beare.
                     What boots it that their Maieſties be meeke,
                     
                     
                        Magnanimous, franke, pious, politique,
                     
                     And of a ſpirit ſurpaſſing each Extrem;
                     Miſſe they but Mee, They little reck of them:
                     They loue them not, they liſten farre and near,
                     Some welcom newes of their wiſht death to hear.
                     When, if they vſe My ſacred Exerciſes,
                     Though they be ſtaind (perhaps) with other Vices,
                     They hold them perfect; and, in ſpight of Fate,
                     Euen after death, their Names they celebrate;
                     As liuing Reliques, ſtill preſeru'd aboue
                     
                        
                           •
                        n Fames faire boſome, and their Peoples loue.
                     Witnes, vnto this day, that Norman Prince,
                     Braue Rollo, ſtill belou'd (though dead long ſince)
                     Still calld vpon (as for His iuſt Revenge)
                     When ſome new Wrong doth their old Right infrenge.
                     Henceforth therefore, ô Princes, that deſire
                     To haue your Names to higheſt Fames aſpire,
                     
                        To leaue behind you Monuments of Worth,
                     To giue your Glories, after death, new Birth;
                     Endeuour not to dazle proudeſt eyes
                     With Towers of Marble mounted to the skies;
                     Neither by War (whoſe Train is Plague & Dearth)
                     With fire and bloud to mingle Heauen & Earth;
                     To thouſand Perills to expoſe your liues,
                     Wherby your Greatnes, not your Goodnes, thriues.
                     Onely, loue Mee; let Mee be reuerenc't
                     Through all your lands, by all your hands defenc't:
                     Let Mee ſit by you on an Awefull Throne,
                     To daunt the Lewdeſt with my looks alone;
                     And with my Sword ſtill drawn to prune-away
                     Luxuriant Twigs that break my iuſt Array:
                     Let My Tribunals be the Poores Refuges;
                     Let there-on ſit no Mercenary Iudges:
                     Let Innocence finde there her ſureſt Fort;
                     And who wants Right, there let him want Support:
                     There let My Balance be impawn'd to none;
                     But, as his Right is, let Each haue his Owne:
                     In briefe, with You let Mee be ſet ſo high,
                     That abſolute as you doe Raigne, may I:
                     And I ſhall more enrich your laſting Stories,
                     Then all your golden Towers, your Cōquering glories
                     
                        Your precious Gifts that with full hand you giue,
                     Or ought beſides, whereby your Names can liue.
                     
                        Dicea as yet did her Diſcourſe purſue,
                     Though milde Eumenia, loth to loſe her due,
                     
                        
                           •
                        oth longer to endure her Vaunts ſo high,
                     With open mouth was ready to reply;
                     
                        
                           •
                        nd ſo her Siſter Euergeſia eek,
                     
                        
                           •
                        ome little choler colouring her cheek)
                     When from th'Empyreall (right Imperiall) Court,
                     
                        
                           •
                        ame a new Nuntio with a new Report,
                     
                        
                           •
                         truſtie Truch-man of ſupernall Pleas,
                     Their gentle Iarres thus gently to appeaſe.
                     Immortall Beauties of paſt-humane Soules,
                     
                        
                           •
                        e that both Globes in his one hand-gripe holds,
                     
                        
                           •
                        ooes you to weet, that His high pleaſure is
                     To quench for euer all your Differences)
                     
                        
                           •
                        ou All haue th'honour to impoſe the Name,
                     
                     To Whom he means ſuch fauor & ſuch Fame,
                     ANARETVS (for an auſpicious Signe
                     
                        
                           •
                        'haue markt him All with all your Tipes diuine)
                     That, All transformd into that reuerend Clark,
                     
                        
                           •
                        eav'ns hallowed Organ, for this ſacred wark;
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           uſebia, Thou (whom Hee reſembles beſt)
                     
                        
                           •
                        halt Name the Child, in name of all the reſt;
                     
                        After that He hath ſix times ſounded tho
                     That other Name his Nation fancies ſo.
                     Hy, hy ye then, Time calls you; for the throng,
                     Theſe Rites expecting, thinks each minute long.
                     And I, the while, with no leſſe ſpeed muſt ſpy
                     Th'vnholſome Den where Peſtilence doth ly,
                     And in Heav'ns name, her ſtraitly countermand,
                     That Shee preſume not once to lift her hand,
                     Nor from her Quiuer ſhoote one Arrow out
                     At any of the Royall Courtly Rout
                     Aſſembled for the ſacred Mysterie,
                     
                     During the Pompe of That Solemnity.
                     
                     Heer-with the Angell hence't, & bent his flight
                     Tow'rds Our ſad Citie, which then deeply ſigh't
                     Vnder the fury of that Monſter fell.
                     Hee found her out in a hot-humid Cell,
                     About to Arm her, & to ſcout abroad,
                     Euen towards the Place which now the Heav'ns forbode.
                     Foule ſeam-rent rags (whch ſom old Robe had bin)
                     Cas't heer and there her yellow-ſallow skin,
                     Where-in hot fierie Carbuncles were fixt,
                     With poiſonie Rubies, heere and there betwixt:
                     A quench-leſſe Thirſt, with a continuall Feauer,
                     Broild in her breſt, boild in her body euer;
                     
                        Her verie Breath was as a deadly ſtroak:
                     Her curſed Stance ready with ſtink to choak:
                     
                        
                           •
                        o cloſe it was, that neuer Wind could fan,
                     
                        
                           •
                        aue th'vnrefin'd autumnall Affrican,
                     
                     Whoſe noiſome aire a ſtuffing fogge did pen
                     With muſtie Vapours of a moiſtie Fen.
                     All round about her, by her ſide did ly
                     All ſorts of Fruits that ſooneſt putrifie,
                     Millions of Milions; Peares, Plums (paſſing nūbers)
                     Moſt-humor-poyſoning, crudie-cold Cucumbers;
                     Green Grapes; & that ſoft Perſian fruit (ſo deer)
                     
                        
                           •
                        anefull at home, & little better heer.
                     The Angel, wonted to Heav'ns Bliſs-full Hall,
                     Made little ſtay in this vnholeſome Stall;
                     But, loathing ſoone that thick contagious aire,
                     He ſpeedily diſpatcht his Meſſage there:
                     And Heav'n-ward quickly from the Furie flew,
                     Whoſe horror yet ſo ſeemd him to purſue,
                     That he had fainted to haue bin ſo nigh-her,
                     Had he not felt him of th'immortall Quier,
                     Th'immortall Siſters, in one troope, the while
                     Which from their Owners euery Vice exile)
                     Tranſported ſwift vpon a winged Clowde,
                     By their Arrivall made the Palace proude.
                     
                        The pompous Scaffold, for this purpoſe reard,
                     Seemd at their ſight to tremble (as afeard):
                     The ſtately Towers of th'antique Edifice,
                     The maſſie Porch, and Arch, and Frontiſpice,
                     Seem'd round about to lighten ſmiling flames,
                     As at their Entrance to adore theſe Dames.
                     They, ſhuffling them (vnſeen) amid the throng
                     Of thoſe Good Great, whom (as they paſt along)
                     A ſoft ſweet Murmur, for their Vertues, bleſt;
                     Serued with Them (each in her office preſt)
                     That goodly Riſing Sunne, whoſe Rayes, new ſpred,
                     So rathe a Spring of flowring Hopes haue bred:
                     And, after both his fauourd Names were giuen,
                     The humane firſt, then that they brought frō Heauen,
                     All, in a ring, about him did appeer
                     (Vnder the form of ſome faire Princeſſe neer,
                     Or ſome great Prince then preſent there in view)
                     To doe his Name the Honors iuſtly due;
                     Each cheering Him to follow for direction
                     The Propertie Shee brings to Kings perfection.
                     Maiſt Thou (ſaid one, as his ſweet Eyes ſhe kiſt)
                     Great-little Prince, be of the Heav'ns ſo bliſt,
                     That, though Auguſtus fortunes Thine ſurpaſſe,
                     Thy Fortunes yet may giue thy Prudence place:
                     
                        Mayſt Thou abound in royall Bountie ſo
                     Another ſaid) that Traiane thou out-go:
                     May (ſaid another: how my Hopes aſpire!)
                     Thy Valour, one-day euen excell thy Sire:
                     May there (ſaid one) one-day appear in Thee,
                     Thy Martiall Fathers match-leſſe Clemencie:
                     And, maiſt Thou, frō thy Child-hood (ſaid another)
                     Exceed in Zeale thy Mother and God-mother.
                     
                        
                           •
                        n briefe (Pandora-like) Each offered there
                     Their precious Gifts, in Praeſage (as it were)
                     Till with aduantage gracious Heav'ns produce
                     Their wiſhed-Counſails into Act and Vſe.
                     Grant, God Almighty, King of Kings, that Hee
                     When on Theſe Thrones his royall Turn ſhall bee,
                     Hee may haue care t'accompliſh euery-where
                     What all our Hopes haue for him dar'd to ſwear,
                     And what his Looks, Words, Maners, Motions, ſeem
                     
                        
                           •
                        n euery part, to promiſe ſtill for Him.
                     May Hee, his People tender, loue, protect;
                     Delight in Iuſtice, yield them her Effect:
                     May hee forbeare to over-charge their backs
                     With novel Tributs, or with need-leſs Taxe:
                     And let them ſee that of all Titles giuen
                     To all the Kings that haue been vnder Heav'n,
                     
                        Hee holdeth Good the beſt; better then glorious,
                     
                     
                        Warrs-thunderbolt, Earths-Terror, Great, Victorious;
                     
                     Whoſe loftie ſound makes Princes oft become
                     Abroad more feared then belou'd at home.
                     High ſwells the Ocean, when the Moon's at full,
                     And with proud Billowes threats both Hill & Hull;
                     But ſinks againe, and ſhrinks into his Bed,
                     When Cynthia mues her neuer-conſtant Head:
                     So (ſwelling proud; ſo, ſurly browd the while;
                     So, temper-leſſe; tempted with Fortunes ſmile)
                     Ignoble Natures are too-lightly pufft;
                     And with her Frowne as baſely counterbufft.
                     Farre other be His firm and generous Mind,
                     Whether his Fate be curſt, or be ſhe kinde;
                     Yea, fawn-ſhee, frown-ſhee, (firm indeed to none)
                     Be He ſtill like him Selfe, The ſame, ſtill one;
                     Still bountifull, ſtill milde-maieſticall,
                     And ſtill vouchſafing free Acceſſe to all:
                     So that no Barre (a Barbarous deuice)
                     But due Reſpect doo ſeuer Him from His.
                     For, be a Prince neuer ſo mighty Great,
                     
                     If betwixt Him and His a Bar He ſet;
                     At length he ſets one (which ſcarce ought repaires)
                     Twixt their Affections & his own Affaires.
                     
                        
                        
                           •
                        eaue He, to th'idle Pomp of Preſter-Ians,
                     
                     To miſſ-proud Sophyes, and ſoft Aſians,
                     
                     That Care, to keep their tawny Maieſties,
                     
                        
                           •
                        rom Subiects ſight (ſaue once a yeere, or twice)
                     And let Him daily (like the Sunne) goe out
                     To cleer and cheer the clowdie World about;
                     To doo the poore oppreſſed Widow right,
                     To help the Orphan, ouer-born by might;
                     To eaſe the iuſt ſighes of ſad Labourers:
                     And alwaies (like that beſt of Emperors)
                     Think That no Day, or think it loſt (for nought)
                     Wherein he hath not ſome ſuch Action wrought;
                     Or that he liues not then, or liues in vaine;
                     Or as a Subiect, not a Soueraine.
                     Conſume not Hee in frivolous Expence,
                     What gold a iuſt Loue's gentle violence
                     Shall for his Succour (in extream Affaire)
                     Force his poore People from their hands to ſpare,
                     Nay, frō their mouthes, nay rather frō their bellies)
                     Perhaps, drawn-dry with Pump of former Tallies.
                     But rather, counting it (with ſome Remorſe)
                     Not Gold, but Bloud; may He with greater force
                     Abhor to lauiſh vpon idle Vaines,
                     His Subiects ſoule, & th'humor of their Veines.
                     
                        That great King-Prophet (ſo renownd for Song)
                     Once for the water of a Well did long,
                     Which at the Poſtern of a Citie roſe,
                     Amid an Hoſt of his moſt deadly Foes:
                     Three of his Worthies (in deſpight of death)
                     Brake through their Armie, euen to vnderneath
                     The very vvall whereas the Well did ſpring;
                     Whereof they drew a portion for the King.
                     Then, off againe they brauely come their waies
                     (Couer'd with wounds, but more with worthy Praiſe)
                     And re-arriu'd in their owne Camp, their Prize
                     Vnto their Prince preſent in humble wiſe.
                     But He, bethinking through how many deaths
                     Thoſe dreadleſs Champions had then fetcht their breaths,
                     In fetching of that wiſhed Water ſo;
                     For all his thirſt, hee would not drink it tho:
                     For, what is This (ſaid he) but the hart-bloud
                     Of Theſe that Thus haue ventur'd for my good.
                     So, to Gods will, His, willing to accord,
                     Hee offers it on th'Altar of the Lord.
                  
                  
                     So, may Our Prince another-day imploy
                     The publique Treaſure, which with carefull Ioy,
                     His louing Subiects ſhall (as ought the loyall)
                     Yield to ſupport his Port and Charges royall.
                     
                        
                        
                           •
                        ay Hee preſent to th'in-ſight of his Thought,
                     With how much Sweat & Sorrow it is bought:
                     What Rigor (vſed in his Name perhaps)
                     
                        
                           •
                        xtorts it from oppreſſed Widowes laps,
                     
                        
                           •
                        rom wretched Crafts-men, frō hard-racked Swains,
                     Whom Pouerty at her owne Meſs maintains:
                     And, in Compaſſion ſay (with tender griefe)
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           his is my Subiects bloud, my Peoples Life:
                     
                     
                        This muſt not then in idle Pomp and Play
                     
                     
                        As vvater ſpilt) be ſpent and caſt away.
                     
                     Then doubting leſſe the damage then th'abuſe)
                     Vow it to God, as to the rightfull Vſe.
                     And, 'tis to conſecrate, and vow it right,
                     And in a faſhion pleaſing in Gods ſight)
                     To poure it out in Royall (right) Expence;
                     Either in War-works for his Realms defence,
                     Or for his Honor; to all Times to ſeale
                     His King-like Bounty, Prouidence, and Zeale.
                     Cloſe-fiſted therefore may He neuer be
                     To the true Seed of ſacred Memorie;
                     To Thoſe whoſe luſtre doth adorne Renowne,
                     And honors Kings more then their orient Crown:
                     To ſtately Structures, ſpeaking Eminence,
                     So as their Vſe match their Magnificence:
                     
                        To wall High-waies; to heaw-down harmfull Ridges,
                     To paralel Eld's Aquae ducts and Bridges:
                     Found Hoſpitals, or to endow them founded:
                     To ſtop Sea-Breaches where they haue ſurrounded:
                     To fence with Peers & Piles of ſundry ſorts
                     From Neptunes furie his importing Ports:
                     To build faire Shops for th'Helyconian Loomes,
                     T'advance Their Arts, and giue chiefe Parts chiefe Rooms;
                     And (as with liuing Nets) by Benefits,
                     To catch both Valiant Spirits & Learned Wits.
                     Millions of Verſe haue ſounded loftily
                     The Prudence, Proweſſe, Pitie, Pietie,
                     And ſacred Iuſtice of our Souerain Sir,
                     As diuerſe gales their diuers Sailes did ſtir:
                     But not a Voice, in low or loftie vaine,
                     Hath of his Bountie euer ſung a ſtraine:
                     Yet yeerly from his liberal hand hath come
                     A million (a more then Royall Sum)
                     Among thoſe (happy) whom his Goodnes graces,
                     Or whom their owne in his opinion places.
                     Which of his Predeceſſors (firſt or laſt)
                     In Gifts or Guerdons theſe 
                           •
                        a
                           •
                        e limits paſt?
                     Not one of them did euer reach ſo high:
                     Yet Vulgar bruit (halfe falſe, halfe flattery)
                     
                        Giues ſome of them the great and glorious Name
                     Of Liberal Princes, of illuſtrious fame.
                     And ſhall not wee then, beare through th' Vniuerſe
                     
                        
                           •
                        is worthy Praiſe vpon the wings of Verſe?
                     
                        
                           •
                        hall not wee ſay that his renowned hand,
                     
                        
                           •
                        s worthily (in Peace) with Bounties band
                     Can binde vnto him whom he worthy knowes,
                     
                        
                           •
                        s brauely conquer (in the Field) his Foes.
                     Be mute that liſt, and muzzle they their ſtile,
                     On whom his Bounty neuer daign'd to ſmile
                     Were't through their own miſ-fate, in hauing none,
                     Or hauing Vertues, not to haue them known.)
                     But I, whoſe hap hath been to march with thoſe
                     Towards whoſe laps This golden Riuer flowes,
                     My Voice and Verſe ſhall tromp-it farre and nigh
                     To modern eares, and to Poſteritie.
                     And (without Flattery) ſay, that all the ſcope
                     Of Wiſhes wayting on our future Hope,
                     And all our Prayers for a Compleat Prince
                     (As in the reſt of Royall Ornaments)
                     Need of the Heav'ns no greater Hap require,
                     But that in This, the Son be like the Sire;
                     And that he may (obſeruing Golden mean)
                     Giue like a King that means to giue againe;
                     
                        Yet, with ſuch feruour to This glorious Part,
                     That ſtill he giue leſſe with his hand, then hart.
                     Vouchſafe th'Eternall Deſtinies-diſpoſer,
                     Kings ſole Advancer, & Kings ſole Depoſer,
                     That maugre Tyrants wrath, and Traytors wile
                     (Whoſe Maiſter-peece we Heer haue ſeen yer-while)
                     Hee may wex old (after his aged Sire)
                     In Peacefull Raign, vntill his Raign expire:
                     And neuer but at Tilt, or Tourney, feele
                     The combrous burthen of a Caſe of ſteele;
                     Or, when iuſt furie ſhall inflame his ſp'rite
                     Againſt Vſurpers of His ancient Right.
                     But, whether law-leſſe Need, or Glories loue,
                     Him driue, or draw, his Force in Field to proue,
                     May He in Counſail, Courage, and Succeſſe,
                     Match his great Parents conſtant Happineſſe,
                     So as there be no need to ſpur Him forth,
                     With braue Remembrance of His match-leſs worth.
                     But, Laurell burnt crackles in vain; and of-it
                     Champing the Leafe alone, makes not a Prophet,
                     If that his Tutors haue not more to do,
                     To hold him from, then to incite him to;
                     To coole, then kindle, that courageous heat,
                     Which makes men feare no death, no dangers threat
                     
                        But, as once Theſeus, ready to be kild,
                     Was known to be the Kings ſonne, that ſo wild;
                     By his gilt Sword & ſign engrav'n thereon:
                     He ſhall be known to be His Fathers Son,
                     By the Exploits of His, in ſuch a Rank,
                     As would haue made the two firſt Caeſars blank.
                     Be He Benign, ſo as his Indulgences
                     Breed not Bad-Boldnes, Feed not Inſolences:
                     Like to ſome Winters, ouer-milde and warm,
                     Which neither kill the Weed, nor chill the Worm;
                     But breed the Plague, Pox, Murrain & the reſt,
                     That rotten Humors may, in Man and Beaſt.
                     Not, but I know it farre more honorable
                     To ſaue then ſpill (in Caſes tollerable)
                     
                        
                           •
                        ith heer a World of Duſt-bred Creatures liue,
                     Can reaue-Mans life, which onely God can giue:
                     But too-oft Pardoning oft too-many drawes
                     T'haue need of Pardon, throgh contempt of Lawes
                     And Magiſtrates; whom the Audacious reak
                     But Bugs, & Bridles to baſe minds & weake.
                     In Mildnes then, be Hee ſo moderate
                     For His owne ſafety and the publique State)
                     That neither Horror taint his Executions;
                     Neither his Fauours harbour Diſſolutions,
                     
                        And, too-remiſſe, by His too-oft Repriues,
                     Turn Pitties Temple to a Den of Thieues.
                     May He fear God, loue, worſhip, ſeek, & ſerue him,
                     Know, it's He ſole doth ſtabliſh & preſerue him:
                     That Kings, as his Annointed, haue Regard:
                     That but He guard them, little boots their Guard.
                     May hee belieue His Word, honor, obey;
                     Take it, for Compaſſe in this Worldly Sea,
                     Make it the Meaſure of Kings Power, in all,
                     And counting That of Lawes the principall,
                     Haue it ay written in his harts deep rooms,
                     But, as a Prince, not as a Prieſt becoms.
                     Vnder th'old Law (now abrogat long ſince)
                     One might be both a Pontife and a Prince,
                     For nothing ſeemed then to hinder them
                     From matching ſo Mitre and Diadem:
                     But now their Functions are diuided far,
                     And Monkiſh Kings, now but contemned are:
                     There Man and Maiſter but Hail-fellow is;
                     And ſubiects play the kings, where Kings play Prieſts.
                     May He be loyall, conſtant in ſinceritie;
                     In ſoule, abhorring lyes, and louing veritie:
                     That as his Deeds ſhal (for the moſt) be Miracles,
                     So may his Words be altogether Oracles.
                     
                        Th'Almighty grant, that during all His daies,
                     All ſparks be quencht which Factions wont to raiſe;
                     For, for the moſt (to double Miſerie)
                     There be Two Kings where two great Factions be.
                     But, if there ſhould (which God forbid) ſucceed
                     Such Miſchiefs heer (as heer-to-fore there did)
                     May Hee not want ſound Counſailes happy Light,
                     To guide him in his Fathers ſteps aright:
                     Who, reauing th'eldeſt Emperors their Palmes,
                     Suddainly turnd ſuch Tempeſts into Calmes,
                     By Means ſo milde, that it was rather thought
                     By heav'nly Hap, then humane Wiſedom wrought.
                     But, were it Wiſedome, were it Happineſs,
                     Match He our Wiſhes, and His Wiſe ſucceſs:
                     Th'one of Himſelfe, th'other from Heav'nly hand,
                     That Peace may proſper ouer all his Land.
                     I know that Princes beeing born for th'Arts
                     Which Coūſails, Camps, & Dangers ſchoole imparts,
                     The Books moſt needfull and peculiar Theirs,
                     Are Politiques, of State, & State-affaires.
                     But, ſith ſo few yeers doe our Age compriſe,
                     That euen the greateſt of the greedy-Wiſe,
                     Should know but little, if no more they knew
                     Then from Experience of one Age they drew:
                     
                        That He, at once, may ſee all Accidents
                     Of all paſt Ages, with his own's Euents;
                     May Hee propoſe & ſet before his eyes
                     The goodly Tables of all Hiſtories;
                     And there contempling all the true Records
                     Of other Monarchs, mighty States, and Lords,
                     Obſerue their Acts, their Counſails, their Diſcourſe,
                     All (notable, or rare) in all their Courſe;
                     Both what to follow there, and what to ſhun,
                     And whether Fame or Shame their liues haue won:
                     May He there glaſſe himſelfe, & mark it brim,
                     Whether the ſame ſhall not be ſaid of Him.
                     For heer, Our Verſes ſmoothly ſing and ſmile,
                     But Hiſtory will hiſſe, in other ſtile:
                     And Kings that heer haue been compar'd to Gods,
                     Entombed once, though vnder golden Clods,
                     If in their Liues they haue deſeru'd it, firſt;
                     Shall hear their Names torn, and their Fames accurſt▪
                     
                     
                        What may I add vnto Theſe Wiſhes more?
                     
                     
                        No more but This; that All heere wiſht before,
                     
                     
                        And All preſaged of the DOLPHIN heere,
                     
                     
                        Concur in CHARLES: that all His Parts appeer
                     
                     
                        A liuing Picture of all Parts of Worth
                     
                     
                        Of all thoſe Worthies whence Hee takes his Birth:
                     
                     
                        
                        That gracious Heau'ns (which promiſe euen as much)
                     
                     
                        In all Theſe Vertues daign to make Him ſuch,
                     
                     
                        That really hee giue royall Aſſent
                     
                     
                        To all the Acts of Vertues PARLIAMENT:
                     
                        That in his Turn, the Ages after Vs,
                     
                     
                        May finde, and know him for PANARETVS:
                     
                        And, ſith That Name muſt needs Immortall bee,
                     
                     
                        That no prophane hand blurr His Hiſtory:
                     
                        But ſome ſweet Daniell, or ſome ſacred Hall,
                     
                        Or ciuill Hayward, (milde-maieſtike, all)
                     
                        With pureſt faith, in a peculiar ſtile,
                     
                        A glorious Work of His great Works compile:
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           r, if that Any of more worthy Skill-is,
                     
                     
                        Bee He the HOMER to This new ACHILLES,
                     GREAT BRITANS great Hope of Great Hap to-come;
                     
                        Phoenix ariſing from a Phoenix Duſt:
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            whom the Heav'ns (as mercifull, as iuſt)
                     
                     
                        Restore our great loſſe, in Great HENRIE's Toomb.
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                            Long, long and Happy (in thy Brother's roome)
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           ucceed Thou CHARLES, euer as Good as Great:
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           eriving, old, to Thy old Fathers Seat,
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           iſe, Great, Good STVARTS, till the Day of Doome.
                     
                     
                        Which while I pray, ſweet Prince, vouchſafe a ſpace
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            read and rue Your humble Bead-mans Caſe.
                     
                     
                        HEer (like LEANDER in the Helleſpont)
                     Toſt in a Tempeſt, in the darkeſt Night,
                     Diſtract with Feares, divorced from the ſight
                     Of My High Pharus which to guide me wont:
                     Spying Böotes in your HIGHNES Front,
                     For life I labour towards your hopefull Light
                     (May neuer Care beclowd that Beam ſo bright,
                     Come neuer Point of leaſt Eclipſe vpon't)
                     Yet, though (alas) your gracious Rayes haue ſhow'
                           •
                        
                     
                     My wracked limbes a likely way to land:
                     Vnleſſe (by Others Help, or by your Own)
                     The tender Pitty of your Princely hand
                     Quick hale mee out, I periſh inſtantly,
                     Hal'd-in againe by Sixe that hang on Mee.
                     
                     
                        SIxe-times already, ready euen to faint,
                     With grievous Waight of guiltleſs Want oppreſt,
                     
                        
                           •
                        ARTAS and I haue bow'd, and vow'd our beſt
                     
                        
                           •
                        efore the Altar of our Souerain Saint:
                     
                        
                           •
                        nd yet, the Eare that heareth euery Plaint;
                     
                        
                           •
                        he Heart that pitties euery poore Diſtreſt;
                     
                        
                           •
                        one (alas!) ſeems Deafe to My Requeſt;
                     
                        
                           •
                        nd only, is not moou'd with My Complaint.
                     
                        
                           •
                        et muſt I needs (NEED ſtill importunes ſo)
                     
                        
                           ••
                        portune ſtill, till ſome milde Soule relent:
                     
                        
                           •
                        ut (vnder Heav'n) no Help, no Hope, I know,
                     
                        
                           •
                        ue YOV alone, my Ruine to preuent:
                     YOV onely may, Novv onely, if at all:
                     Paſt Help, paſt Hope, If Now YOV faile, I fall.
                  
                  
                     Your Highnes's moſt humbly deuoted, and obſeruant Seruant, Ioſuah Sylueſter.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  BETHVLIANS Reſcue.
                  THE

                        Wonder of Widowes:
                        Honor of Wiues:
                        Mirror of Mayds.
                     
Tranſlated, & Dedicated To The Soveraine of Women, ANNE Queene of Great-Britan.
                  By IOSVAH SYLVESTER. 1614.
               
               
                  
                  
                  TO The right-right Honorable LADIES, 

                        Lucie, Mar 
                                 •
                              hioneſs of Wincheſter.
                        Lucie, Counteſs of Bedford.
                        Anne, Counteſs of Dorſet.
                        Frances, Counteſs of Exeter.
                        Frances, Counteſs of Hartford.
                        Katherin Counteſs of Salisbury.
                        Suſan, Counteſs of Montgō.
                        Barbara. Vi-Counteſs Liſle.
                        Elizabeth, Vi-Counteſs Haddington.
                        Elizabeth, Vi-Counteſs Fenton.
                        Sara, Baroneſs Zouch.
                        Margaret, Baroneſs Wotton.
                        Honoria, Baroneſs Hay.
                        Eliza. Baroneſs Knowlis.
                        Eliza. Baroneſs Cavendiſh.
                        Iane, Baroneſs Roxborough.
                     
                  
                  MIrrors of HONOR, Models of Perfection,
                  Lowe, to You all, bowes the BETHVLIAN Dame;
                  
                  Beſeeching All, but chiefly, You, by Name,
                  To daign her grace and place in your Affection:
                  You Nobleſt Lights, whoſe Vertues bright reflection,
                  Rare-richly ſparkles euery-way ſome flame
                  (Diuerſe in Form; in Vertue ſtill the Same)
                  On Obiects vvorthy of your Worth's Election:
                  Your kinde Addreſs Shee craues, your ſweet Direction
                  
                  Towards the Preſence of Your Souerain DAME,
                  
                  Whoſe High Endowments, by the Trump of Fame,
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     nvite All Vertuous vnder Her Protection;
                  
                  Which, IVDITH humbly prayes You, pray, for Her:
                  And, milde interpret Her Interpreter.
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  BETHVLIANS Reſcue.
                  THE FIRST BOOKE.
                  I Sing the Vertues and the valiant Deed
                  Of th' Hebrew Widow, that ſo brauely freed
                  
                     Bethulian Doores from Babylonians Dread;
                  And with iuſt Fauchin did behead their Head.
                  Thou, that to ſaue from Pagans ſeruile Rigor,
                  Thine Iſaac's Heires, didſt ſteele with manly vigor
                  Weake IVDITH'S hart, my feeble hart advance;
                  Raiſe, raiſe my Thoughts in high & holy Trance:
                  Vpon my Spirit, ô! let thy Spirit reflect:
                  Grant I may handle in a ſtile ſelect
                  So ſacred Stuff; that whoſo reads This Story,
                  
                  May Profit reap, I Comfort, and Thou Glory.
                  
                     
                     And You, great Comfort of Great-Britan's King,
                  
                     Whoſe Vertues heere I vnder IVDITH ſing;
                  
                     Thrice-royall ANNE, vouchſafe auſpicious Rayes
                  
                  
                     Of Princely Fauour on Theſe Pious Layes
                  
                  (Compoſed firſt vpon a Queen's Command,
                  
                  
                     Diſpoſed next into a Queen's owne hand,
                  
                  
                     Tranſpoſed now to a more Queen's Protection:
                  
                     As most peculiar to all Queen's Perfection.)
                  
                     Great-gracious Lady, let it not diſtaſte,
                  
                  
                     That IVDITH made not (as ſhe ought) more haſte
                  
                  
                     To kiſſe Your Hands; nor deeme, nor doubt, the worſt,
                  
                  
                     Though Shee haue ſeen Your Royall Spouſe the firſt:
                  
                     It was her Truch-man, much againſt Her minde,
                  
                  
                     Betrayd her ſo, to goe againſt Her Kinde.
                  
                  
                     For which Offence, with other mo, to Her,
                  
                  
                     Sh' hath got her now a new Interpreter;
                  
                     Shee hopes, more faithfull (wiſhes, more diſcreet)
                  
                  
                     To ſay and lay Her Seruice at Your Feet:
                  
                     To giue DU BARTAS (at the laſt) His Due,
                  
                  
                     In Her behalfe; and in Her, honour You.
                  While Iſrael a happy Peace inioyd,
                  And, dangerleſſe, with diligence imployd
                  The fruitfull Soile, which 70. yeeres vnſow'n
                  Had ly'n before, with Thiſtles over-grow'n;
                  
                     The Lord, Who often, by ſome Stroak ſeuere
                  Of iuſt Correction, vvakes his Owne (for feare
                  Leaſt too-long Reſting make them like the Horſe,
                  Which ſtanding ſtill too-long, doth loſe his Force,
                  
                     
                        •
                     orgets to manege; and too-pampred, growes
                  Vnruly, reſtiue; and his Rider throwes)
                  Covers their Country with ſo huge an Hoſte,
                  That clowds of Arrowes darkned all the Coaſt,
                  
                     Pikes, Bills, and Darts, ſeem'd, as they ſtirr'd, or ſtood,
                  A moouing Foreſt, or a mighty Wood:
                  And, of all ſorts of Souldiers, rankly-rude,
                  Vnder their Enſignes marcht ſuch multitude,
                  As euen drew dry the Rivers where they paſt
                  Through rich Iudea; ſo that, at the laſt,
                  Cleer Iordan's Selfe, in his dry oazie Bed,
                  Bluſhing for ſhame, was fain to hide his head;
                  Becauſe (flat Bankrupt) hee no more could pay
                  One Tribute-ſtream, of all hee ought the Sea.
                  The ſun-burnt Reaper had yet ſcarcely rid
                  The ridged Acres of their richeſt Weed:
                  The needie Gleaner had ſcarce gatherd clean
                  The ſcatterd Ears the Binder leſt, to glean:
                  And ſcarce, as yet, the Flayls vpon the Floors
                  Began to groan: When Iacob at his Doors,
                  
                     Sees HOLOFERNES his weak Frontires ſpoile;
                  In bloudy Rivers drowne his fertile Soile;
                  Not ſparing fel the tender Female-kind,
                  Nor hoarie haires (already ſhort confin'd)
                  Nor Sucklings, ſwaddled in their Mothers arms,
                  From inſolence of his inſulting Arms.
                  Then, as a Flock of Sheep, which ſees their Foe
                  Come forth a Wood (who oft hath ſcar'd them ſo)
                  Minds no Defence; but ſcudding to be gone,
                  Makes, in an inſtant, hundred Flocks of one:
                  Th'Iſaacians ſeazed with a ſuddain Feare,
                  Thinking his Hoaſt behind them euery where,
                  Diſperſt and ſcatterd (like thoſe ſilly Sheep)
                  Fly into Woods, in Rocks & Caues they creep.
                  Th'affrighted Swains, neglecting Fields & Flocks,
                  To ſaue their liues, clime ſteepeſt Hills & Rocks:
                  Artificers, leauing their Tooles to play,
                  Gain-greedy Chap-men, laying Trades away,
                  Hie them to hide them, in ſecurer ſort
                  In moſſie Caues, then in a martiall Fort.
                  And greateſt Lords hold Denns of Wolues & Bears
                  A ſafer Hold, then Gold-lyn'd Walls of theirs.
                  Feare, lending wings to th'Aged, makes them ply
                  With luſtie ſpeed vp to the Mountains nigh:
                  
                     Feare makes the Mothers, all forlorn and loſt,
                  Lug their deer Cradles to the Clowds almoſt:
                  Fear makes the Children (like ſo many Lambs)
                  Craule on all foure after their dabbled Dams:
                  Ther's nothing heard but hideous Cryes & Plaints,
                  Sad Lamentations, pitifull Complaints.
                  O Lord! (ſay they) wilt thou, for euer, Thus
                  Thrill down the Darts of thy fierce Wrath on vs?
                  Shall the Chaldéan Idoliſts again
                  Thy Choſen Flock in ſeruile Yoak enchain?
                  Shall our ſad Houſes, turnd to Heaps of ſtone,
                  With Weeds & Thorns again be ouer-grow'n?
                  Shall ſacrilegious Fire again preſume
                  Thy ſacred Houſe, thine Altar, to conſume?
                  But Ioachim, High-Prieſt of God, that tide,
                  And of the Hebrews then the chiefeſt Guide,
                  Followes the ſtout and expert Pilots guiſe,
                  Who, when hee ſees a ſuddain Storm ariſe,
                  Adds not more Fear, with His Fear, to his fellowes,
                  Nor leaues his Ship to mercy of the Billowes;
                  But, hiding his diſtruſt, oppoſes braue
                  His Arm and Art againſt the Winde and Waue:
                  For, quick diſpatching (hourely) Poſt on Poſt,
                  To all the Coverts of the Able-moſt
                  
                     For Pate, Prowes, Purſe; commands, prayes, preſſes them
                  To come with ſpeed vnto IERVSALEM.
                  Since firſt th'Eternall gaue his ſacred Law,
                  Vpon Mount Sinai (in ſo dreadfull Awe)
                  Th'Ark, which contained, in Two leaues of ſtone,
                  
                  Much more ſound Wiſdom, in it ſelfe alone;
                  Then ſubtile Greece, or Rome (renownd for Wiſe)
                  In Worlds of Volumes euer could compriſe;
                  Wandred from Tribe to Tribe, from Race to Race,
                  Throughout all Iury, without Reſting-place,
                  Yea, ſomtimes too (ô too audacious Theft!)
                  The ſacrilegious Philiſtins it reft:
                  Till th'happy day when Ieſſe's holy Stem
                  Lodg'd it for euer, in IERVSALEM.
                  But, ſith as yet, great Dauids hands were red
                  With bloud of Thouſands he had ſlaughtered;
                  The King of Peace would haue a peacefull Prince
                  In Peacefull dayes, with all Magnificence
                  To build his TEMPLE; whoſe high Battlement
                  Seemd Earth to ſcorn, & threat the Firmament,
                  Till th'hapleſs Day wherein a hatefull King,
                  (In name and nature, iuſt reſembeling
                  This Tyrant's Lord) with execrable Blaze,
                  Did burne it downe, & the Foundation raze.
                  
                     A long-while after, Abr'ham's ſacred Stems,
                  Returnd from Shores of Tyrant Tygris ſtreams;
                  Beſet with Fears, with Perill, and with Pain,
                  Re-builded Heer God's glorious Houſe again.
                  Which, though (alas!) That firſt no more it matcht,
                  Then a Kings Palace a poore Cottage thatcht;
                  In Bignes yet, Beauty, and Height, obſcur'd
                  All Pagan Wonders which moſt Fame procur'd:
                  Th' Aſſyrian Queen-king's (ſometime) ſumptuous Bowers,
                  
                  Th'Epheſian Temple, the Egyptian Towers,
                  
                  The Pharians Pharus, Carians coſtly Toomb,
                  
                  
                     Rhodes high Coloſſus, the huge Heaps of Rome.
                  
                  For, for admired Art, This glorious TEMPLE
                  Seru'd Cteſyphon for Model and Example;
                  Lent rare Apelles curious Penſill Light,
                  And led Lycippus cunning Chizel right.
                  Thither, by Troops, th'Iſaacian Tribes deuout,
                  Returnd to Salem, flock from all about:
                  As, when the Heav'ns, opening their Sluces wide,
                  Poure ſuddain Showers, ſurrounding euery ſide;
                  The gurgling Rills with rapid Courſe deſcend
                  From ſundry Hills, and to ſome Riuer tend.
                  But, ſad-ſweet IVDITH in the midſt (almoſt)
                  Shined as Cynthia 'mid the Nightly Hoaſt:
                  
                     For, God (it ſeem'd) her Beauties Form had caſt
                  In rareſt Mould of Nature (firſt or laſt).
                  Th'High Primate then, aſſiſted with the Ligne
                  Of Eleazar (Prieſts, whoſe ſacred Crine
                  Felt neuer Razor) on his oyled head
                  A pearly Mitre ſadly ſettelled;
                  His ſacred Body alſo ſoon hee heals
                  With ſacred Veſture, fring'd with golden Bells:
                  Then burns for Offring, ſlayes for Sacrifice,
                  
                  Kidds, Lambs, Calues, Heifers, in abundant wiſe:
                  Th'horns of the Altar with their blood bedying,
                  And lowely-lowd, thus to th' Almighty crying:
                  Wee come not heer, ô dreadfull Lord of Hoaſts,
                  To plead a Roule of Meritorious Boaſts;
                  Nor to proteſt, that, in theſe Puniſhments,
                  Thou wrongſt thy Iuſtice, and our Innocence:
                  No; wee confeſſe, our foule and frequent Crimes
                  Worthy worſe Plagues then Theſe, a thouſand times;
                  Could'ſt thou forget Thy deer authentik Pact
                  
                  With Abraham, or would'ſt thou (ſo exact)
                  Forcing thy Mercy in thy Iuſtice Scale,
                  Our Waight of Sins with Iudgements countervaile.
                  Remoue our Cauſe, wee therefore (Lord) intreat,
                  From Iuſtice Barr, vnto thy Mercy-Seat:
                  
                     O! holy Father, pardon vs (wee pray)
                  
                     
                        •
                     nd turn from vs this fearfull Storm away.
                  Alas! vvhat boots vs, that thy mighty hand
                  
                     
                        •
                     ath brought vs home from Tigris hatefull ſtrand,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ree from the Yoak, which wee ſo long (before)
                  
                     
                        •
                     nder th'Aſſyrian cruell Tyrants bore;
                  
                     
                        ••
                      theſe fat Fields, we haue but new re-tild,
                  
                     
                        ••
                      theſe faire Frames, we doe but now re-build,
                  
                     
                        ••
                      theſe (ô Dolor!) our deer louing Wiues,
                  Our Babes, Sons, Daughters (deerer then our liues)
                  
                     
                        •
                     uſt ſerue the Chaldés, Ammonites for Pay,
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     nd be the Perſians, and fel Parthians Prey;
                  
                     
                        •
                     f This thine Altar, if theſe hallowed rooms,
                  
                     
                        •
                     e re-profan'd with Heathen Hecatombs?
                  
                  O! if thou wilt not pittie Vs, abhord;
                  At leaſt, be Iealous of Thy Glory, Lord:
                  At leaſt, haue pitty on This Holy Place,
                  
                  Where, to no God, but to IEHOVA'S Grace,
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     s Incenſe burnt, nor any Sacrifice,
                  
                  But to thy Selfe, of all the Deities.
                  Lord! therefore turn, ô turn the Chaldean Torches
                  From theſe rich Cedar Roofs, theſe ſtately Porches:
                  Preſerue theſe Plates, this pretious Furniture,
                  
                  From ſacrilegious Pilferers impure.
                  
                     And let our Sorrow, and our Sacrifice,
                  Vnto thy Iuſtice, for our Sinnes ſuffice.
                  The Seruice done, Each doth his way depart,
                  And Ioachim inſtantly calls apart
                  The States of Iuda, and thus, ſadly-ſweet,
                  Conſults with Them, how with this Storm to meet.
                  Graue Peers (ſaid he) if your braue Zeale, of old,
                  Be not quight quenched, be not yet key-cold:
                  If Care of Wiues, if tender Childrens loue,
                  Had euer Power Your Soules deer Soules to moue:
                  If in your Breſts reſts any noble Worth,
                  Now, now or neuer, bring it brauely forth:
                  For, but God aide, and your auſpicious Speed,
                  Wee are vndone, Wee & our wretched Seed:
                  And neuer more ſhall the Immortall ſee
                  This Altar Smoaking to His Maieſtie.
                  
                  While th' Aire is mute, ſo that it ſcarce can make,
                  In Summer dayes, an Aſpen leafe to ſhake:
                  While Seas be calm, ſo that, with Streamers braue,
                  A thouſand Saile ſlide on the ſleeping Waue:
                  While all the Winds be mew'd vp in their Cell;
                  'Tis hard to ſay, which Pilot doth excell.
                  But, when a Tempeſt, one-while ſinks a Ship
                  Down to the Bottom of th'infernall Deep;
                  
                     
                     
                        •
                     nother-while, with ſwelling Fury driuen,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ilts with her Tops againſt the Stars of Heav'n;
                  
                     
                        •
                     aking a Shelfe now, and a Rock anon;
                  
                     
                        •
                     hen, and but then, is a Good Maiſter know'n.
                  Therefore (alas!) let now no carnall Care,
                  Of goods, liues, honors (for your priuate Share)
                  Make you forget your Common-Country's Loue,
                  This Sacred Place, th'Honor of GOD aboue:
                  
                     
                        •
                     ut humbly all into His hands reſigning
                  Your Soules whole Sway, & all your Spirits refining
                  
                     
                        •
                     n ſacred Flame, from Droſſe & Miſts impure,
                  Which too-too-oft the cleereſt Eyes obſcure;
                  
                     
                        •
                     dviſe (I pray) the beſt, in likely-hood,
                  Moſt pleaſing God, moſt for the Publique Good.
                  An aged Traytor then, whoſe breath diſtill'd
                  
                     
                        •
                     weet Hony Words, whoſe breſt with Gall was filld,
                  Wringing falſe Tears from his diſſembling Eyes,
                  His curſed Drift did in Theſe Terms diſguiſe:
                  My Spirits faint, my Speech doth faile me quight,
                  My froſtie haires for horror ſtand vpright,
                  When I conſider how This Tyrant fel,
                  With Bloud-floods drowning where he coms to quel,
                  Drawes neer Vs; threatning to our Houſes Flames,
                  Death to our Selues, dishonor to our Dames:
                  
                     But, when (on th'other ſide) to minde I call
                  This mighty Princes milde Receipt of All
                  (Not only ſuch, as, rude and Reaſon-leſs,
                  Serue (like him Self) dumb Idols, Blocks, & Beaſts:
                  But ſuch, as, matching our Zeal's holy Heighth,
                  Are Abrah'ms Seed, both in their Fleſh and Faith;
                  Which wiſely haue (and timely) turn'd (ſubmiſs)
                  The deadly Edge of his drad Vengeances:
                  I praiſe the Lord for ſuch a Foe; ſo meek
                  To yielding Lambes, to Lyons Lyon-like;
                  As flexible to humble Tears, as fel
                  To Reſolutions that (in vain) rebell.
                  Sith therefore, yet we may haue Choiſe (for Iurie)
                  Of War, or Peace; his Fauor, or his Furie;
                  Winking in Dangers, let's not Wilfully
                  Follow our Fathers ſtubborn Sur-
                        •
                     uidry:
                  But, ſtriking Saile in ſuch Storms violence,
                  Let's liue ſecure vnder ſo good a Prince.
                  Yet, None miſs-take, that I this Counſaile giue,
                  To ſaue My Stake, as one too-fain to liue:
                  Alas! my Years are of them Selues of age
                  To dye alone, without Aſſyrians Rage;
                  Without the help of their keen Dart or Pole,
                  To launce my Hart, or to let out my Soule:
                  
                     Where, were my Youth's Spring now re-flowr'd again
                  
                     
                        •
                     nd heateful blood boyling in euery vein,
                  
                     
                        •
                     y Zeale to GOD, and to my Country's Good
                  
                     
                        •
                     hould ſhew me well no Niggard of my Blood,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ight (Samſon-like) My Death bring Death to all
                  
                     
                        •
                     he Pagan Hoaſt and their proud General.
                  
                     
                        •
                     ut, more I feare, leaſt, with a Zeal too-Yong,
                  We, fighting for the Law, the Law impugne;
                  
                     
                        •
                     nciting ſo the Soldiers Inſolence,
                  
                     
                        •
                     cenſing ſo the Fury of the Prince,
                  
                     
                        •
                     hat they by Conqueſt of one Day vndoo
                  
                     
                        •
                     eer Izrael, and drown GOD's Glory too.
                  
                     
                        •
                     or, Wee bereft, What People, in This Place,
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     ruely-religious, ſhal implore His grace;
                  Who, of all Nations that diſperſed Wun
                  
                     
                        •
                     rom Shores of Indus, to the Setting Sun;
                  
                     
                        •
                     nd from the fartheſt Hyperborean Coaſts,
                  
                     
                        •
                     o thoſe whoſe Clime continual Summer roaſts,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ath choſen only Iacob for his Owne,
                  
                     
                        •
                     nd on This Mount His drad-deer Glory ſhowne?
                  But, good old Cambris (elſe the mildeſt Prince)
                  
                     
                        •
                     roanes, griev'd and pale with Pasſions vehemence;
                  
                     
                        •
                     nd, interrupting That, with This Diſcourſe
                  
                     
                        •
                     artens the heartleſs Peers and Counſellors:
                  
                     Rather, ô Earth (for which our Earthlings ſtrive)
                  Gape vnder me, and ſwallow Me alive:
                  Rather, iuſt Heav'ns, with ſulphury Fire and Fume
                  (As Sodom yerſt) Meſodainly conſume,
                  Then I ſhould (Saint with-out, within Malitious)
                  Give Izrael a Counſail ſo pernicious.
                  Were it, the Head of this inhumane Band
                  Meant but our Bodies only to command,
                  Though with our Birth, to this faire Light we brought
                  Sweet Liberty (ſo ſweet and deer, that nought,
                  No Hopes, no Heaps may be compar'd to it:)
                  The TEMPLE ſav'd, I might perhaps ſubmit.
                  But, ſith this Tyrant, puft with fooliſh Pride,
                  With heavier Gyves to load our Soules (beſide)
                  Which (only Vaſſals of the Thunder-Thrower)
                  Nor knowe, nor owe, to Any Sceptres lower;
                  Would that (forgetting Him who made vs All,
                  And of all People choſe vs principall,
                  And fatherly provides vs every thing,
                  And ſhields vs ay with Shadow of his wing)
                  We take for GOD, His proud ambitious Prince,
                  Who Nimrod-like, with helliſh Inſolence,
                  Would climbe to Heav'n, although his life be ſuch,
                  As merits not the Name of Man, by much.
                  
                     
                     
                        •
                     s beard him boldly, bravely frand we to't,
                  
                     
                        ••
                     s againſt Arms, Man to Man, Foot to Foot.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        tory lies not in vain-glorious hearts,
                  
                     
                        •
                     mber of Horſes, nor of Pikes, and Darts:
                  
                     
                        •
                     eſe be but Inſtruments th'Eternal moves,
                  crown with Conqueſt whom his Goodnes loves.
                  Yet, ſhould the Lord now ſuffer Heathen's rage
                  
                     
                        •
                      over-run his ſacred Heritage,
                  
                     
                        •
                     auſe in life his Name we ſo diſhonor;
                  Death, at leaſt, in Death, let's doo him Honor:
                  
                     
                        •
                     d, if we cannot Aſſur over-come,
                  
                     
                        •
                     's win, by Patience, Crowns of Martyrdom.
                  
                  And, could our Foes (as fel as Leſtrygons)
                  
                     
                        •
                     m off the Earth extirp our Tribes at-once;
                  
                     
                        •
                     cy could not though GOD's glorious Name interr
                  
                     
                        •
                     s theſe Apoſtates falſly would inferr).
                  
                     
                        •
                     , He that with ſo ſundry Nations ſtor'd
                  
                     
                        •
                     vnpeopled World, from one Man; and reſtor'd
                  
                     
                        •••
                     g after that) by one ſmal Bark, the waſte
                  
                     
                        •
                     e Flood had made, when it had All defac't;
                  
                     
                        •
                     ot He able even of ſtones to raiſe
                  People Zealous of his glorious Praiſe?
                  
                     
                        •
                     ot He able once again to ope
                  
                     
                        •
                     d Sara's Wombe, and giue her Spouſe (paſt hope)
                  
                     More Sonnes, then Sands on Lybian ſhores be caſt,
                  By ruffling Boreas, lowd, Cloud-chaſing Blaſt;
                  Or twinkling Spangles nightly brightly roule
                  On ſabled Circles of the whirling Pole:
                  Which, with more ſacred Voice, more humble Awe,
                  Shall ſound his Praiſes, and obſerve his Law?
                  Then rather, Fathers (foule befall You elſe)
                  Let vs die Hebrews, then live Infidels.
                  
                  Let's not preferre, too-baſe, and too-too-blame,
                  Profit to Duty, idle Feare to Shame.
                  
                     Cambr
                           •
                        s Oration was no ſooner done,
                  But all th' Aſſembly (as all ioyn'd in one)
                  Confirm'd His Counſail both with voice & geſt:
                  And Ioachim, (Ioy-rapt, above the reſt)
                  Lifting to Heav'n-ward reverent hands and face,
                  Said, Lord wee thank thee, that thy ſpeciall grace
                  Hath ſteeld our hearts, and linkt our Wils no leſs:
                  A hopefull Signe of happy good Succeſſe.
                  Then, to the Princes he the Charge commits
                  Of Townes and Provinces, as Each befits:
                  Leaſt any, ſpurr'd by Envie or Ambition,
                  In Izrael ſhould kindle new Sedition.
                  So, Each with-drawes, and bravely-bold prepares
                  To front the worſt that martial Fury dares.
                  
                     Who th'Ariſtaean buſie Swarmes hath ſeen
                  
                     
                        •
                     n Hybla's Top; Whether, with Launcets keen,
                  
                     
                        •
                     arging the Drones which over-neer their homes
                  
                     
                        •
                     ome humming out to rob their fragrant Combes:
                  
                     
                        •
                     hether, collecting their delicious Deaw
                  
                     
                        •
                     om various Thyme, and other Flowers not few:
                  
                     
                        •
                     hether, extending, in rare Symmetrie,
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     ith wondrous Art, their Waxen Canapey;
                  
                     
                        •
                     nd arching even, ſo many Thouſand Cells,
                  
                     
                        •
                      quick, ſo thick; ſo like, as Nothing elſe:
                  
                     
                        •
                     hether, conducting their too-ful Supplies
                  
                     
                        •
                     -where, to plant their goodly Colonies;
                  
                     
                        •
                     hich keep, ſtill conſtant, in their new Plantation,
                  
                     
                        •
                     heir Mother Citie's Manners, Lawes, and Faſhion:
                  
                     
                        ••
                     th ſeen the Iewes as buſie Diligence,
                  
                     
                        •
                     nd quick Deſire to put them in Defence.
                  Some ſtop the Breaches made by Art or Age;
                  
                     
                        •
                      the Heav'ns anger, or the Heathens rage:
                  
                     
                        •
                     me, leaſt the Ram, butting with boiſterous Fals,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ould paſh to powder their too-feeble Wals,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ith Baſtions, Bulwarks, Rampiers, Ravelins, Forts,
                  
                     
                        •
                     nk on all ſides their Cities where imports:
                  
                     
                        •
                     me to and fro trudging with Baskets fill'd,
                  
                     
                        •
                      places needfull ſodain Sconces build:
                  
                     Some wanting time, or meanes their Town to wall,
                  With broad deep Trenches ſoon begirt it all:
                  And from a River neer they cut a Rill
                  The hollow boſome of their Dike to fill.
                  While Armorers, in order, beating quick
                  Hot ſparkling Steel on Anvils hard and thick,
                  Transform it ſoon to Corſlets, Curtellaxes,
                  Helms, Gorgets, Gantlets, Bills and Battail-axes;
                  And ſome, for need (to furniſh and ſet-out
                  Th'vntrained Shepheard, Neatheard, and the Lowt)
                  Ground the ground-ſlycing Coultar to a Blade,
                  And of the Sickle a ſtraight Weapon made:
                  None Yong and healthy took Repaſt or Reſt:
                  One on his back, another on his Beaſt,
                  Others in Waggons carryed-in apace
                  Corn, Wine, and Food to ſome importing Place:
                  Even ſo, in Summer (as the Wiſe-man tels)
                  Th'Emmets by Troupes haſte frō their hollow Cels
                  To get-in Harveſt, graving where they gone
                  Their Diligence even in a path of Stone:
                  The luſtieſt Swarmes for their Proviſion range,
                  The ſick and old wait at their thrifty Grange
                  T'vnloade the Burthens, and lay-vp their Store
                  In their great Garnier, byting yet before
                  
                     Of every Graine, leaſt kept ſo warme belowe
                  Amid the Molde, it after ſprout and growe.
                  The end of the firſt Booke.
               
               
                  
                  BETHVLIANS Reſcue. THE SECOND BOOKE.
                  NOw Holefernes, in the Scythik Fort
                  Had pight his Standards; and in various Sport
                  His Youthfull Pagans did them ſtill delight;
                  Nought leſs expecting then Affront, or Fight:
                  When he had newes, The Iewes ſtood brauely out,
                  Defy'd his Pride, and fortifi'd about.
                  Shall then (ſaid He) ſhall then a ſort of Slaves,
                  A ſort of Clownes & Shepheards, arm'd with Staves,
                  With Slings and Stones, preſume to ſtop the Courſe
                  Of Mine exploits: Which, nor the roaring ſource
                  Of rapid Tigris and ſwift Euphratés,
                  
                  Nor ſnowie Tops of Taure and Niphatés,
                  
                  Conſpir'd, could ſtay? You Chiefs of Moabites,
                  
                  Of valiant Ephraim and fierce Ammonites;
                  You that as Neighbours (having long converſt)
                  Knowe all the Nations on theſe Hills diſperſt,
                  Say, from what People had they their Deſcent?
                  What lies their Strength in? What's their Gouernmēt?
                  For, He that wiſely knowes his Foe (they ſay)
                  Hath, in a manner gotten half the Day.
                  
                     Then Ammon's Prince, bending his humble knee,
                  Thus to the Duke reply'd right prudently
                  (For though in hart a Pagan, born and bred;
                  Againſt his Minde, his Tongue diuinely led
                  By that ſame Spirit which did the Seer compell,
                  Which came to curſe, to bleſſe his Izrael;
                  Of th'Hebrewes State did ſuch Relation make,
                  As if in Him Moſes and Eſdras ſpake;)
                  My Lord, I ſhall, ſith You ſo pleaſe, recite
                  Th'Iſacians Story; and will follow right
                  Th' ingenious Bees, which wont not to devoure
                  All Sweet they meet, nor ſuck of every Flower;
                  But even of thoſe they chuſe, take but the Crops.
                  This People (Sir) vpon the Mountaine Tops
                  Encamped heer, originally came
                  From forth the Loines of famous ABRAHAM,
                  Who, to obey the GOD of Gods, moſt High
                  Maker of All; of All Support, Supply;
                  Came to This Countrey (then, in Occupation
                  Of Cananites, the rich and native Nation)
                  Where that ſame GOD not only heaps with Gold
                  And Goods, his Houſe; but alſo (though He old
                  An hundred years; a third part leſſe, his Wife;
                  And, till that ſeaſon, barren all her life)
                  
                     Sent him a Son: ſwearing, His ſeed ſhould ſway
                  Trivmphant Sceptres many, many-a-day:
                  But, when good Abraham's old-old Age expects
                  This happy Promiſe in the ſweet effects,
                  Th'Immortal Voice (ô pitious Myſteries!)
                  Commands that He his ISAAC ſacrifice.
                  Euen as a Ship vpon the raging Sea
                  Between Two Windes Croſs-toſſed every-way,
                  Vncertain, knowes not in what Courſe to ſet-her,
                  Till one of them, ſtriving to get the better,
                  Doubles his bellowes, and with boiſterous blaſt
                  Driues her (at random) where he liſt, at laſt:
                  So, th'Hebrew, feeling in-ward War (that ſeaſon)
                  T'wixt Loue and Duty, betwixt Faith and Reaſon;
                  Doubts what to doo; and his Perplexities
                  Leane now to that hand, and anon to this:
                  Til th'heav'nly love he ought his GOD had won
                  The earthly love he bore his only Son.
                  Then, having ready Fire and Fagot laid,
                  And on the Altar his deer Son diſplayd;
                  The knife he drawes with trembling hand, and had
                  Even heav'd his arme about to ſtrike the Lad,
                  When GOD, in th'inſtant ſtaies the Inſtrument
                  Ready to fall on th'humble Innocent:
                  
                     As ſatisfied with ſo ſufficient Trial
                  Of Abraham's Faith; to Him his GOD ſo loyal.
                  From ISAAC, IACOB; & from IACOB ſprung
                  
                     Twelue ſturdy Sons; who, with ſore Famine wrung,
                  Forſaking Canaan, for a great-good-while
                  Had happy Biding by the Banks of Nile:
                  
                  Where their bleſt Iſſue multiply'd ſo faſt,
                  That they became th'Egyptian's Feare, at laſt:
                  Yea, though (alas!) their bodies had no reſt,
                  And though their backs with burthens were oppreſt;
                  Like noble Palm-Trees, mounting ſtiflly-ſtrait,
                  The more, the more they be ſurcharg'd with waight.
                  Therfore the Tyrant which then held the Raines
                  Of that rich Soile where ſad Heav'n never raines,
                  Commands that all male Hebrew Infants found
                  (Poore Innocents!) be quickly kill'd, or drown'd,
                  As ſoon as Wombes had them delivered;
                  That one ſame day might ſee them born and dead.
                  O Tigre! thinkſt thou? thinks that Rage of thine
                  To cut-off quite Iſaac's Immortall Ligne?
                  Well may it reave the ſcarce-born Life of thoſe
                  New-hatched Babes, and them of Light fore-cloſe:
                  But notwith-ſtanding, Iacob's ſwarming Race
                  Within few Years ſhall cover Canaan's Face;
                  
                     And, thine owne Iſſue even the firſt ſhall be
                  To break (and iuſtly) thine vniuſt Decree.
                  
                     Pharao's faire Daughter, with a noble Train,
                  For Blood and Beauty rarely matcht again,
                  One Evening, bathing in the Cryſtall Brook
                  Which thorough Goſſen crawls with many a Crook,
                  Heares in the reeds a ruefull Infants voyce;
                  But thinking it ſome of the Hebrewes Boyes
                  (As'twas indeed) her Fathers bloody Law
                  Stopt for a while her tender cares with Awe.
                  But, at the laſt, marking the Infants face
                  (I woat not what vnvſuall Tracts of Grace
                  And Types of Greatnes ſweetly ſhining there)
                  Love vanquiſht Duty, Pity conquer'd Feare:
                  For, She not only takes him vp from thence,
                  But brings him vp, and breeds him as a Prince,
                  Yea, as Her owne. O Babe belov'd of God!
                  O Babe ordain'd to lighten th'Hebrew's Load!
                  To lead their Bodies, to direct their Mindes:
                  Firſt, beſt, moſt, Wrighter, in all ſacred Kindes:
                  Thou hadſt but now no Mother (to be ſeen)
                  And now for Mother, Thou haſt found a Queen.
                  Lo, thus (my Lord) could their wiſe God extract
                  Good out of Euill, and convert the act
                  
                     Of Perſecution (bent againſt the blood
                  And Life of His) vnto their greater good.
                  So Ioſeph's Brethren, by their Envious Drift
                  To over-throwe him, to a Throne him lift:
                  So did proud Haman's deadly Hatred lend
                  Sad Mordechay a Ladder to aſcend
                  To Honors Top, and trimd his neck (paſt Hope)
                  With gracefull Chain, in ſteed of ſhamefull Rope.
                  One day, this Hebrew, driving Iethro's Sheep
                  Vpon Mount Horeb (where he vs'd to keep)
                  Sawe on the ſodaine a bright blazing Flame
                  Burne in a Buſh, and yet not burne the ſame;
                  From whence, anon he heard (with Fear & Wonder)
                  A Voice, might ſhake both Heav'n & Earth in ſunder.
                  I, I that (only) AM-WAS-SHAL-BE, Who
                  Made All of Nothing; and can All vn-doo,
                  When pleaſeth Me: I-AM, The Holy-One.
                  
                  
                     The Great, The Good, The Iuſt; Whoſe hand alone
                  Suſtaines, maintaines, and rules the World: I-AM,
                  
                     Th' Omni-potent, The GOD of Abraham;
                  
                     Fierce to my Foes with my Revenging Rod,
                  But vnto Thoſe that worſhip Me for GOD,
                  Me ſole, and whole in Thought, in Word, & Deed,
                  Moſt Mercifull; to Them and all their Seed.
                  
                     Then doo my Will: diſpatch thee ſpeedy hence;
                  Go, ſay from Mee, to that vnhallowed Prince
                  Which ruleth Memphis, and the fertile Plaine
                  Where ſwelling Nelus ſerves in ſteed of Rain,
                  That he diſmiſſe my People: and leaſt He,
                  Incredulous, diſtruſt thine Embaſſie;
                  Caſt-down thy Rod, thy Meſſage to confirm,
                  It to a Serpent ſhall eft-ſoons transform.
                  He throwes it down, and inſtantly withall
                  Sees it begin to live, to move, to craule,
                  With hideous head before, and tail behinde,
                  And body wriggling (after Creepers kinde).
                  Re-take it vp, his GOD commands him then;
                  Which, taken, takes the former Form agen:
                  And, paſt Mans Reaſon (by the power of GOD)
                  Of Rod turns Serpent, and of Serpent Rod.
                  Arm'd with this Wand, wherewith he was to quel
                  The ſceptred Pride of many an Infidel,
                  He many a time importunes Pharao,
                  
                  In GOD's great Name, to let the Hebrews go
                  Into the Deſart, at their liberties
                  To ſerve the Lord, and offer Sacrifice.
                  But Pharao, deaf vnto his ſacred Word,
                  Stifly withſtands the Meſſage of the Lord:
                  
                     Who then, by Moſes working many Miracles,
                  
                     
                        •
                     uthorized His Orator and Oracles.
                  Firſt, He not only turned into Blood
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        ile's ſeav'n-fold Waves, and every other Flood
                  
                     
                        •
                     hat fa
                        •
                     tens Egypt; but even every Spring,
                  Whoſe captive Cryſtal, golden Pipes do bring
                  
                     
                        •
                     o ſerve the Court: ſo that the King is forc't
                  With that red liquor to allay his Thirſt.
                  Then, from the Fens, frō puddly Ponds & Lakes,
                  Millions of Millions of foule Frogges he makes
                  
                     
                        •
                     o cover Memphis with their ougly Frie,
                  
                     
                        •
                     nd not forbeare the Kings owne Canapy.
                  Then, of all Ages, of all ſorts, and ſexes,
                  With burning Vlcers, and hot Biles he vexes;
                  
                     
                        •
                     o that th'Egyptians, in vnceſſant anguiſh,
                  Of vnknow'n Poyſon, on their Couches languiſh:
                  Nor can their Leaches their owne Leaches be,
                  
                     
                        •
                     n their vnheard-of, hidden Malady.
                  Then on their Cattle; Flocks, & Heards, & Droves
                  
                     
                        •
                     n Downes & Dales, Fens, Forreſts, Fields & Groves,
                  
                     
                        •
                      ſtrong Contagion ſuddainly he ſpred;
                  Which took ſo quickly both their heart and head,
                  
                     
                        •
                     hat ſilly Shepheards neer the Rivers ſide,
                  Their Cattle dead, ſooner then ſicke, eſpi'd.
                  
                     Then turns the Earths Duſt into Swarmes of Lice:
                  Then dims the Aier with dusky Clouds of Flies,
                  
                  Of Drones, Waſps, Hornets, humming day & night
                  In every place, with every face to fight,
                  And fixing deep in every Pagans skin
                  Th'vnvſual anger of their ſteeled Pin.
                  Then (when appeer'd no Threat of troubled Aier,
                  No ſigne of Tempeſt) at his Servants Prayer
                  Th'Eternal thundred down ſuch Storms of Hail,
                  
                  As with the noiſe and ſtroak did ſtouteſt quail:
                  Heer falls a Bul, brain'd with a Hail-ſtones rap;
                  There ſprawles a Childe, ſplit with a Thunder-Clap:
                  Heer a huge Forreſt, lately all a Clowd
                  Of tufted Armes, hath neither Shade nor Shrowd:
                  And, if the native Sap again re-ſuit
                  The naked Trees with comely Leaues and Fruit,
                  Again (alas!) the Caterpiller crops,
                  Within few houres, the Husbands yearely hopes.
                  Then, with groſs Darknes vailing cloſe the Skies,
                  He ſo field-vp ſtubborn Egyptians eyes,
                  That for three dayes with fearefull foot and hand
                  They groapt their way (except in Goſſe
                           •
                        
                     -Land):
                  And Titan, tir'd in his long Courſe, for eaſe,
                  Se
                        •
                     m'd then to reſt him with th'Antipodes.
                  
                  
                     But, as the ſame Sun, the ſame inſtant, makes
                  The Mud to harden; and to melt, the Wax:
                  So had Theſe Works, ſo full of admiration,
                  On diuerſe Subiects, diuerſe Operation.
                  The humble Hebrews, GOD'S great hand adore;
                  But wilfull Pharao ſpurns it more and more:
                  Euen as a Corſelet, when 'tis cold enough,
                  The more 'tis beaten growes the harder Proofe.
                  Yet, at the ſad Newes of the Prince, His Son,
                  And all their Heires, all in one Night vndone;
                  Hee was ſo daunted, that he early bod
                  The Hebrews goe to ſerue the Lord their GOD:
                  Who, in a Piller of a Clowd, by Day,
                  Of Fire, by Night; directed right their Way.
                  But, ſoon retracting his extorted Grant,
                  The ſtubborn Tyrant ſtrangely arrogant,
                  Arms all his Egypt, and in poſt purſews
                  The Arm-leſſe Legions of the harm-leſſe Iews,
                  
                  Then lodg'd ſecure along the ſandy ſhore,
                  Where th'Erythrean ruddy Billowes rore.
                  Was not ſuch Noiſe, when, tearing Gibaltar,
                  
                  Th'Herculean Sea came firſt to ſpred ſo far
                  Twixt Calpe and Abyle; nor when Oenotrie
                  
                  Sad-ſighing loſt her deer neer Trinacrie;
                  
                     As in both Armies: Th'one inſulting proud;
                  Th'other in skriches, & ſad cryes, as lowd,
                  Deafned the Shores: while Fifes, Horns, furious Horſe,
                  With Noiſe & Neighes, did euen the Welkin force.
                  Curſed Seducer (cry'd the Iewes) what Spight
                  Moou'd thee to alter our Liues happy plight?
                  What! are we Fiſhes, that we heere ſhould ſwim
                  Through theſe deep Seas? Or, are we Fowls to skim
                  Ouer the ſteepeſt of theſe Mountains tall?
                  Were there not Graues in Egypt for vs all?
                  In our deere Goſſen? but wee needs muſt come
                  In this Red-Sea to ſeeke our rewfull Tombe?
                  Yet, mildeſt Moſes, with his dead-liue Wand
                  Strikes th'awfull Streams: which, yielding to his hand,
                  Diſcouer Sands the Sun had neuer ſpy'd;
                  And Walld the ſame with Waues on either ſide:
                  Between the which (dread-leſs & danger-leſs)
                  The Hebrews dry-ſhod paſt the Crimſin Seas.
                  
                  But, when the Tyrant raſhly them purſues,
                  Marching the Way was made but for the Iewes;
                  The Sea returns, & over-turns his Force,
                  Him Selfe, his Men, his Chariots, & his Horſe.
                  O happy People, for whom GOD (ſo kind)
                  Arms Fire, & Aire, & Clowds, & Waues, & Wind!
                  
                     Whō All things ſerue: which haſt All things in Pay.
                  O! neuer let Time's File to fret away
                  So rare a Fauour? rather let the Tongue
                  Of All thine Aged tell it to Their Yong;
                  They to their Seed, & They to theirs again;
                  Eternally Theſe Wonders to retaine.
                  Them, forty yeeres, GOD in the Deſart fed
                  With Angells Food, with a celeſtiall Bread;
                  And from a Rock (as dry as Pumice firſt)
                  Made Riuers guſh, to ſatisfie their Thirſt:
                  Kept (euen) their Shooes, & all their Garments there,
                  As good, the laſt, as the firſt day they were:
                  And, ſith our Soules will faint for want of Food,
                  Moſt liberall in All, for all their Good,
                  Gaue (on Mount Sinai) in his Sacred Lawe,
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     oule to their Soules, through ſharp-ſweet filial Awe:
                  Teaching them all (as dutie All doth binde)
                  To loue Him firſt, & next to Him, Man-kinde;
                  That We might neuer break That ſacred Twine
                  Which Man to Man, & Man to GOD doth ioyne.
                  Graue Moſes dead, braue Ioſuah's rule began;
                  Whoſe happy Sword ſoon conquered Canaan;
                  And in few yeers vnto ſubiection brings
                  The Liues and States of one and thirty Kings.
                  
                     At His cōmand, more powerfull then the Thunder,
                  The firmeſt Rocks & Rampires fall in-ſunder;
                  Without the Shock of Tortoiſe or of Ram,
                  To batter Breaches where his Armie came:
                  For, but with bellowing of hoarſe Trumps of Horn,
                  As with an Engine, prowdeſt Towers are torn:
                  As at his Beck, the Heav'ns obey his will;
                  The Fire-foot Courſers of the Sun ſtand ſtill,
                  To lengthen Day, leaſt vnder wings of Night,
                  His Heathen Foes ſhould ſaue themſelues by Flight.
                  This ſcourge of Pagans, in a good old age,
                  (To liue in Heav'n) leauing this Earthly Stage,
                  
                     Iſrael had many Magiſtrates of Name,
                  Whoſe Memories liue euer freſh in Fame.
                  Who knowes not Ahud, Sangar, Samuel,
                  
                  
                     Debora, Barac, and Othoniel?
                  
                  Who hath not heard of mighty Samſons Coile,
                  Who, ſole, and Arm-leſs, did an Army foile?
                  What Praiſe with Iephthe's might haue wel compar'd
                  Had but his Raſhnes his deer Daughter ſpar'd?
                  What Clime, what Time, what Riuer, Dale, or Down
                  But rings of Gedeon, and his high Renown?
                  After the Iudges; Kings (ſome good, ſome bad)
                  The ſacred Helm of th'Hebrew Veſſell had:
                  
                     
                     
                        •
                     ad I their Dauid's holy Harp and Skill,
                  
                     
                        •
                     othing but Dauid would I warble ſtill:
                  
                     
                        •
                     ut as (my Lord) great Dauid's Deeds, could none
                  Yer-while) atchieue, but Dauid's Selfe alone;
                  Can none but Dauid's Harp, & Dauid's Hymne
                  Reſound aright the Honors due to Him:
                  will not therefore, with vnworthy Layes,
                  
                     
                        •
                     eeming to praiſe him, derogate his Praiſe.
                  But, ſhall I balk his Son, whom Heau'n adorn
                  With Health, Wealth, Wiſdom, & All-Plenties horn:
                  Whoſe prudent Problems, touching euery Theam,
                  
                     
                        •
                     raw thouſand Sophyſts to IERVSALEM,
                  
                     Arabians, Indians, Africans, among;
                  
                     
                        •
                     hain'd by the Charms of his All-Skilfull Tongue?
                  
                     
                        •
                     r Him, whoſe Zeale the Idols ſo defac't;
                  
                     
                        •
                     e-purg'd GOD'S TEMPLE, & his Rites re-plac't?
                  
                     
                        •
                     r Him, that ſawe a heau'nly Hoaſt deſcend
                  
                     
                        •
                     o ſuccour Sion, and his Foes offend?
                  
                     
                        •
                     r Him, whoſe Army, neer to Gerar, yerſt,
                  
                     
                        •
                     roud Ethyopians ſwarming Troops diſperſt?
                  
                     
                        •
                     r Him, who praying for Heav'ns aide, to fight
                  Gainſt Ammon, Moab, and Mount-Sëirite;
                  
                     
                        •
                     aw, by Them-ſelues, his ſad Requeſt ful-filld,
                  When, Self-incenſt, Them-Selues they enter-killd?
                  
                     But Chaldei's King, by Their's Captiuity,
                  
                  Put (late) an End vnto That Monarchy.
                  
                  Yet did Great Cyrus Them again reſtore
                  To Liberty; and gaue them furthermore
                  Leaue to elect Two Rulers of their Race:
                  Whereof the One (who yet ſupplies the place)
                  Was Ioachim; who, for his holy Life,
                  Proweſſe, and Prudence, is reſpected riſe,
                  Not ſole in Sion; but with Ammonites,
                  
                  
                     Syrians, Sydonians, Madians, Moabites,
                  
                  Thus was (my Lord) the Prime, this the Progreſsiō,
                  
                  Of ISRAEL, through euery Times ſucceſſion:
                  And Thus the Lord hath lift them (nigh) to Heau'n
                  Som-times; ſom-times, them (euē) to Hel hath driv'n
                  But, whether Princely-Prieſt, or Iudge, or King,
                  
                  Of th'Hebrew Tribes haue had the Gouerning;
                  So long as They obſeru'd the ſacred Pact
                  
                  GOD with their Fathers did by Oath contract;
                  Ay proſperous, tryumphantly they troad
                  On proudeſt Foes: and all the World abroad,
                  Conſpir'd in Spight, could nothing Them annoy,
                  Much leſſe diſtract them; leaſt of all, deſtroy:
                  On th'other ſide, ſoon as they haue infreng'd
                  His Ordinance, their GOD (to be aveng'd)
                  
                     Hath thrall'd them, now, to cruell Moabites,
                  
                  Anon to Edom then to Ammonites,
                  
                  Then Philistins: and ay his Wrath hath bin
                  Heauy vpon them, when they hapt to ſin.
                  If ſo be therefore, any their Offence
                  The iealous Iuſtice of their GOD incenſe;
                  Mine not their Mounts, nor vndermine their Bowers,
                  Nor bring thy Rams againſt their rampir'd Towers,
                  Nor ſcale their Walls, nor lead thy Legions,
                  (With Reſolution) to aſſault them once:
                  For, let them heap, on Carmel Libanus;
                  On Liban, Niphate; there-on Emmaus:
                  
                  Yea, in one Chanel let them muſter hither
                  
                     Indus and Rhone, Nilus and Rhine togither,
                  
                     Tiber and Iber too, to fence their Coaſt:
                  They cannot ſcape from thy victorious Hoaſt.
                  But, if they haue not broke the Covenant
                  
                  Which GOD to Abraham & his Seed did grant:
                  Beware (my Lord) beware how you come neer
                  This holy Nation, to their GOD ſo deer.
                  For ſhould ſwart Auſter him diſpeople quight
                  To furniſh Thee with all His fit to fight:
                  Should ſwarming Boreas from His vtmoſt end
                  All His tall Souldiers to Thy ſeruice ſend:
                  
                     Should Zephyrus add to Thy dreadfull Power
                  His martiall Legions, all Heſperians Flower:
                  Should (laſtly) Eurus ſend Thee for Supplyes
                  His Troops which firſt ſee Phoebus Rayes ariſe:
                  All Theſe, all-daring, all-devouring Swarms,
                  This armed World, or all This World of Arms,
                  Could neuer conquer (in a thouſand yeere)
                  The leaſt worſt, weakeſt, of theſe Cities heer;
                  Becauſe Their GOD will be Their ſure Defence:
                  That GOD almighty, whoſe Omnipotence
                  Can with a breath confound all Kings that dare
                  (As Thou dooſt now) 'gainſt Him make open War,
                  As th'Oceans Billowes ſwell not by and by,
                  When (firſt) the Winds begin to bellow high;
                  But, firſt begin to foam, & then to fume,
                  Higher, and higher, till their Rage preſume
                  To chide the Earth, & check the Welkins Front,
                  And bandy Hills againſt the Heav'nly Mount:
                  Euen ſo, the Princes of this Pagan Rout,
                  Hearing GOD's prayſes, forth-with break not out
                  In ragefull Furie; but as th' Ammonite
                  
                  Growes in Diſcourſe, ſo grow they in Deſpight;
                  Till at the laſt, with lowd, proud murmurings,
                  They euen blaſpheme the glorious King of Kings.
                  
                     Kill (cry they) kill; let's heaw & hale in peeces
                  The ſubtile Traytor, that with wylie Speeches,
                  To ſaue his Hebrews from Rhamnuſias Rod,
                  Would fright vs with a falſe and idle God.
                  Renowned Generall, ſend but out a ſcore
                  Of All thy Troops, & they ſhall ſoon run-o're
                  Thoſe raſcall Rebells, and reduce them all
                  Proſtrate and humble at Thy feet to fall:
                  Ah Coward, Villain. But, the Vice-Roy then,
                  Stopping their lowd outrageous Storms again,
                  Began him Selfe Thus to the Ammonite;
                  O, impudent Impoſtor! Tell Mee (right)
                  What Fiend, what Fury hath inſpir'd theſe Spels:
                  What Trevet told thee, or what Sybel elſe
                  Made thee belieue the Syrians ſhall not quell
                  Th' Iſaacian Troop, but ſtoope to Iſrael,
                  
                  Whoſe GOD is but their Dream, or Fanſie vain,
                  Or meer Deuiſe of MOSES ſubtile brain;
                  Neither, of power to giue them Victorie,
                  Nor, from Our hands to reſcue Them nor Thee.
                  What GOD haue we, but the great King of Kings,
                  NABVCHADNEZZAR? whoſe drad puiſſance rings
                  O're all the Earth: who couering far & nigh,
                  The Plains with Horſe, Hills with Infanterie,
                  
                     Shall raze theſe Runnagates; which, fled from Nile,
                  
                  Haue heer vſurped Others Right, yer-while.
                  Die therefore, Vilain, die; take the deſert
                  Of thy falſe Tongue, & of thy treacherous heart.
                  What ſaid I, fond? No, Daſtard, I diſdain
                  My valiant Blade in Thy baſe bloud to ſtain:
                  Thou ſhalt ſo quickly not receiue the meed
                  Of thy diſloyall and deteſted Deed
                  (For, a quick Death is Wretches bliſſe, wee know;
                  Them quickly ridding both of Life and Woe)
                  But, with thy Dayes thy Dolors to protrack,
                  Thou ſhalt from hence vnto Bethulia pack,
                  Where ſtill thou ſhalt, through infinite diſmay,
                  Vndying, die a thouſand times a day;
                  Vntill, with Thoſe invincible (thou ſaiſt)
                  With thouſand wounds a wretched End thou haſt.
                  Why trembleſt Thou? why doth thy colour faile?
                  Why ſeems thy heart for horror ſo to quaile?
                  If ſo Their GOD be GOD (as thou haſt vanted)
                  Now, by thy Face witneſſe thy faith, vndanted.
                  Then, the Lord Marſhall, in Authoritie
                  Vnder the Vice-Roy, not in crueltie,
                  Tranſporteth ſpeedy, neer Bethulians ſide
                  Th'vn-pagan Pagan, hand and foot faſt ty'd;
                  
                     Leauing His Troops wounded with wondrous griefe
                  To be depriued of ſo braue a Chiefe:
                  Euen ſo the Puttock in his crooked Serrs
                  The peeping Chicken through the Welkin bears;
                  While the poore Dam, below cluk-clucking thick,
                  Cryes, but in vain, and calls her rapted Chick.
                  The Citizens, ſeeing th'approach of Foes,
                  Soon in alarm, them all to Arm diſpoſe;
                  And, with meet Number of their Men of worth,
                  And choice Commanders, brauely ſally forth;
                  Faſter then Torrents, guſhing from the Hills,
                  Run hopping downe into the lower Fields.
                  The Foe, retiring to their mightier Bands,
                  Leaues captiue Ammon in the Hebrews hands;
                  Whom with a forced foot, though free in thought,
                  And Will right willing, to their Town they brought.
                  Where, round-environd with a curious Crowde,
                  Lifting to Heau'n his hands and eyes, aloude
                  Thus hee began: O Thou great GOD, the Guide
                  Of Heau'n and Earth, and All that is beſide;
                  Whoſe liuing Spirit (ſpred in, and over All)
                  Giues All things Life, Breath, Growth, Originall,
                  I giue Thee, Lord, a thouſand Thanks deuout,
                  That thou haſt daign'd, yer death, to take me out
                  
                     Of my wilde Stock, to graft me in the Stem
                  Of th'happy Tree, deaw'd with thy Gracious ſtream;
                  Which (maugre Blaſts, and Blaſtings, rough & rife)
                  Of All the Trees, bears onely Fruit of Life.
                  And, good Iſacians, for GOD'S ſake, I pray
                  Miſs-doubt me not, as comming to betray,
                  Or vnder-mine by wylie Stratagem,
                  Your Strength or State; or wrong IERVSALEM.
                  No: GOD doth knowe, I ſuffer This, for You,
                  For witneſſing before you wicked Crew,
                  GOD'S mighty Arm for Your Fore-Fathers ſhown;
                  As ready ſtill, to ſaue and ſhield his Own:
                  Feare not therefore Their mighty multitude,
                  Whoſe ſight (almoſt) ſo many hath ſubdewd.
                  Nor let their Boaſts, nor brauing Menaces,
                  Kill, quaile, or coole, your holy Courages:
                  For, ſhould the whole Earth ſend her Sonnes, in
                  Againſt you onely, all to carry Arms;
                  So that your Truſt be fixt in GOD alone, ſwarms,
                  Not in an Arme of Fleſh, not in your Own:
                  You ſhall, no doubt, make ruddy, Mocmur's Flood,
                  With Idoliſt Aſſyrian Armies blood:
                  You ſhall, no doubt, of Fearfull, Fierce become,
                  Your ſtrong Aſſailants ſtoutly over-come.
                  
                     Th'Almighties hand, ſo ready bent to ſmight,
                  
                     
                        •
                     s, but to humble, not deſtroy you quight;
                  And, but to ſhew you, that in all Diſtreſſe,
                  Hee, onely Hee, can giue you quick Redreſſe.
                  As from a Bramble ſprings the ſweeteſt Roſe;
                  As from a Weed the whiteſt Lilly growes:
                  Euen ſo, diuineſt Sighes, deuouteſt Teares,
                  Demureſt Life, are Fruits Affliction beares.
                  For, heere the Faithfull are much like the Earth,
                  Which, of it Selfe (alas!) brings nothing forth
                  But Thorns and Thiſtles, if the Plough ſhe lack,
                  With daily wounds to launce her bunchie back.
                  But yet the Lord (who alwaies doth relent,
                  So ſoon as Sinners earneſtly repent,
                  And, in his time, his ſharp hand doth retire,
                  And caſt, at laſt, his Rods into the Fire)
                  Will rid your dangers, and reſtore you reſt,
                  Euen in an hour, when you can hope it leaſt.
                  Then, courage, Friends: let's vanquiſh GOD with Tears;
                  And then Our Arms ſhall quickly conquer Theirs,
                  Their World of Men. And, if as yet in Mee
                  Reſt any Strength; if any Courage bee;
                  If mine Experience may in ought availe:
                  If with mine Age, all be not old & fraile:
                  
                     I vow it all, and All that elſe is Mine,
                  To your Defence, and for the Law diuine.
                  
                  The end of the ſecond Booke.
               
               
                  
                  BETHVLIANS Reſcue. THE THIRD BOOKE.
                  FLame-ſnorting Phlegon's ruddy breath began,
                  Reducing Day, to gild the Indian;
                  When early wakened with their ratling Drums,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ach Heathen Souldier from his Caban comes,
                  Takes-vp his Arms, and marching in Array,
                  Towards Bethulia tends the ready way.
                  In May, the Meads are not ſo py'd with Flowers,
                  Of ſundry Figures, Colours, Sauors, Powers;
                  
                     
                        •
                     s was this Hoaſt, with Squadrons, different
                  
                     
                        •
                     n Language, Maners, Arms, and Ornament:
                  
                     
                        •
                     o that th'old Châos (Wombe of th'VNIVERSE)
                  Was neuer made of Members more diuerſe.
                  Yet, heer-in All agreed, for all their Ods,
                  To warre againſt th'Eternall GOD of Gods,
                  Whoſe breath, whoſe beck, makes both the Poles to ſhake,
                  And Caucaſus and Libanus to quake.
                  Heer, cold Hyrcania's bold & brauing Seed,
                  Mixt with (Their neighbors) both Armenias Breed,
                  Waue wanton Creſts. There Parthian Archers try
                  Backward to ſhoot, the while they forward fly.
                  
                     The Perſian, there, proud of th'Imperiall ſtate,
                  With golden ſcales ſcalops his Armed plate.
                  Heer woul
                        •
                      the Mede ſhow, that for want of Hap,
                  Not Heart, He loſt His (late) Imperiall Cap.
                  
                  And that, nor Pomp of his too ſumptuous Suits;
                  His painted Cheeks, his Phrygik Layes & Lutes;
                  His criſped Buſh, nor his long, borrowed Lock,
                  Had euer power his Manly mind to ſmock:
                  
                     Happy-Arabians, who their Fern-thatcht Townes
                  Tumble in Tumbrels vp & downe the Downes:
                  The ſubtle Tyrians, who did firſt invent,
                  Our winged words, in Barks of Trees to print:
                  The men of Moab, and the Ammonites,
                  
                  The Iduméans, and the Elamites,
                  
                  Learned Egyptians: Thoſe that neer confine
                  The ſwel
                        •
                     ng Coaſts of ſwarteſt Abyſsine:
                  In brie
                        •
                     e; All ASIA was immur'd almoſt
                  Within the Trenches of This mighsy Hoaſt;
                  Wherein, almoſt as many Nations cluſtred,
                  As th'Hebrews Armie ſingle Souldiers muſtred.
                  But, of all Theſe, none plagu'd the Iſraelites,
                  
                  More, then their own Apoſtate Ephraimites;
                  Who, not to ſeem of kinne to Iſrael,
                  
                  Rag'd with more fury, fought more deadly fel.
                  
                     As, in the Spring time, while a Poole is ſtill,
                  And ſmooth aloft, the Froggs lye croaking ſhrill;
                  But if the leaſt Stone that a Child can fling
                  
                     
                        •
                     ut ſtir the water, ſtraight they ceaſe to ſing:
                  
                     
                        •
                     o, while a happy Peace IVDEA bleſt,
                  The Conſtancy of Theſe ſtood with the beſt
                  
                     
                        •
                     mong the Saints; and the Lord's ſacred Praiſe
                  Was in their mouthes daily and many waies;
                  
                     
                        •
                     o that they ſeem'd like burning Lamps to ſhine
                  Amid the Flock, devoutly-moſt-divine:
                  
                     
                        •
                     ut, at the Noiſe of Holofernes Name,
                  Their famous Faith nothing but aire became;
                  Their Mouth is ſtopt, the Zeale they did preſume
                  
                     
                        •
                     o highly hot, is vaniſht into Fume.
                  Nay, turned Pagans (for ſome Profits ſake)
                  They, worſe then Pagans, their poor Brethren rake.
                  O! what a Number of ſuch Ephraimites
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     re now-adayes (Deceitful Hypocrites!)
                  With-in the Church, the while a proſperous winde,
                  With gentle Gales, blowes faire and full behinde;
                  Which ſeem with Zeale the Goſpel to imbrace,
                  While that it yeelds them either Gain, or Grace:
                  
                     
                        •
                     ut, if the Chance change; if it hap to puffe
                  
                     
                        •
                     ut half afront; if Shee be faine to luffe;
                  
                     Faint-hearted, then forth-with they caſt about:
                  And, with th'Almighty playing banque-rout,
                  With greater Rage his Law they perſecute,
                  Then yerſt with Zeal they did it proſecute;
                  And in their Malice growe more fierce and furious,
                  Then Iuliaen yerſt, or Celſus, or Porphyrius.
                  
                  Soon as the Hebrews from their Turrets ſpie
                  So many Enſignes waving in the Skie;
                  And ſuch an Hoaſt, marching in ſuch Array,
                  Begirt afarre their Citie everie way:
                  They faint for dread; not having where to run,
                  Save to the GOD their Grandſires truſted on.
                  O Father (cry they) Father of Compaſſion,
                  Whoſe wing is wont to be our ſtrong Salvation;
                  Sith now againſt vs all the World doth ſwarm,
                  O! Cover vs with thine Almighty arm.
                  Thus having pray'd, the Careful Gouernour
                  To Charge his Watches doth him quick beſtirre;
                  And when the Sun in his moiſt Cabin dives,
                  With hundred Fires the Day again revives;
                  Watches himſelfe amid the Court of Guard;
                  Walks oft the Round: and weens, that over-hard
                  
                     Phoebe's black Coachman drives his ſable Steeds,
                  
                     Hebrews neer Ruine haſting more then needs.
                  
                     While, oppoſite, the Pagans think her faſt
                  With her Emdymion, in a ſlumber caſt:
                  
                     
                        •
                     ut, Mens fraile wiſhes have (alas!) no force,
                  To hold, or haſten, the Heav'ns ſettled Courſe.
                  Soon as they ſaw Aurora's ſaffron ray
                  On their Horizon to renew the Day;
                  The Vice-Roy makes a thouſand Trumpets ſound,
                  T'aſſemble all his ſcatter'd Troops around;
                  Which from all parts with ſpeedy paſes went
                  
                     
                        •
                     nvironing their Chief-Commanders Tent:
                  
                     
                        •
                     s round about a Huntſman, in a morn,
                  The Hounds do throng whē once they hear his horn
                  Having, in vain, ſummon'd the Town; he tries
                  A hundred wayes, it (wrathfull) to ſurpriſe:
                  
                     
                        •
                     eer, th'Enginer begins his Ram to rear;
                  
                     
                        •
                     eer mounts his Trepan, and his Scorpion there;
                  
                     
                        •
                     ends heer his Bricol, there his boyſterous Bowe;
                  
                     
                        •
                     rings heer his Fly-Bridge, there his batt'ring Crowe:
                  
                     
                        •
                     eſides high Timber-Towers, on rowling Feet
                  
                     
                        •
                     ov'd and remov'd; controlling every Street.
                  Heer, Pioners are put the Ditch to fill;
                  
                     
                        •
                     o level Mounts, to make a Hole a Hill:
                  To play the Moules, to dig a ſecret way,
                  
                     
                        •
                     nto the Town their Soldiers to convay.
                  
                     Heer, others muſt their Ladders raiſe the while,
                  And quick ſurpriſe the Sentinels, by wile:
                  Others muſt vnder-mine: others a
                        •
                     pire,
                  With matter fitting, every Gate to fier.
                  But the moſt part ſtand ready in Array
                  To give Aſſault, ſoon as they ſee their Way
                  Made meet and eaſie by the batterring Thunder
                  Of all their Engines paſhing Wals in ſunder.
                  Tower-tearing Mars, Bellona thirſting-blood,
                  Fill there the fainteſt with their Furious-mood:
                  There fierie Steeds, ſtamping & neighing loud;
                  There Pagans fell, braving and 
                        •
                     aving provd,
                  With hideous noiſe make th'Heav'nly Vault reſound,
                  The Earth to eccho; and even Hell aſtound.
                  But He that keeps eternall Sentinel
                  
                  On Heav'ns high Watch-Tower, for His Iſrael;
                  Pitying his People, alters, in a trice,
                  The Tyrants purpoſe, by a new Adviſe;
                  Cauſing the Captaines of brave Moabites,
                  
                  Strong Iduméans, and ſtout Ammonites,
                  
                  Thus to adviſe: Moſt noble General,
                  
                  Terror of Kings, redoubted Scourge of All;
                  We would not wiſh (my Lord) in any ſort,
                  You bring Your brave Bands to aſſault this Fort:
                  
                     For, neither Pike, Dart, Sling, Bow, Sword, nor Shield,
                  So back the Foe, or make them ſlack to yeeld;
                  As theſe proud Rocks, which, by wiſe Natures grace,
                  Rampire the Rampires of this wretched Place:
                  Which yer You ſcale, vndoubtedly will coſt
                  Ladders of Bodies; and even Tythe your Hoaſt.
                  The Victor is no Victor, if his Gain
                  Paſſe not his Loſſe; nor th'Honor drown the Stain:
                  Wiſe-valiant Prince, that Fiſher, Fool we hold,
                  Who for a Gull, venters a Line of Gold:
                  And, ill doth th'Honor of a Crown beſeem
                  Th'inhumane, bloody, barbarous, Head of Him
                  Who rather would the Death of many Foes,
                  Then Life and Safety of one Friend, to choſe.
                  You may (my Lord) you may, with-out Aſſault,
                  Or Loſſe of Man, reduce them all to nought,
                  
                     
                        •
                     f in you Hillocks you but ſeize the Springs,
                  Whence hollow Lead the Hebrews Water brings;
                  Who, ſo by Thirſt diſtreſt, and ſo put to't,
                  Will come and caſt them haltred at your Foot.
                  The noble Lion never ſets-vpon
                  Baſe fearful Beaſts, but on the nobleſt one:
                  
                     
                        •
                     OVE'S ſulphury Darts He ſeld or never thrils
                  But on Mount Atlas, or the Ryphean Hils:
                  
                     And ſtormfull Auster, ever rather ſmote
                  Clowd-cleaving Turrets then a lowly Cote:
                  No more, no more let your drad Arms aſſail
                  So faint a Foe as of himſelf will quail.
                  It is not Fear (my Lord) and much leſs Pittie
                  (Fear of our Selves, or Favour to the Cittie)
                  Makes vs oppoſe vs to Thy Purpoſe yet:
                  For, yer that We Thy happy Standards quitt:
                  For Thee will We defie th'immortal Gods:
                  For Thee Wee'll breake their Altars all to Clods:
                  For Thee will We march with vnweary ſoles,
                  Beyond the Arctik and Antarctik Poles:
                  
                  For Thee will We with winged Arms go fetch
                  IOVE's Aigle down; and Neptun's Trident ſnatch:
                  For Thee, the Sonne ſhall not his Sire forbear,
                  Nor Sier the Sonne, nor Brother, Brother ſpare.
                  The General, who for Avail revolves,
                  Peizes this Counſail; and re-peiz'd, reſolves:
                  Diſpatching ſpeedy a ſelected Force,
                  To ſeize the Waters, and divert their Courſe.
                  Th'Hebrews, Their Drift, & their Own Danger ſee
                  In that Attempt: ſo, ſally inſtantly
                  To ſtop the Foe from ſtopping of the Stream
                  Which ſhould derive Liquor and Life to Them.
                  
                     Then Pagans fighting for ambitious Fame;
                  
                     Iewes, not to die with vn-revenged Shame;
                  Bravely incounter with ſo fel Diſdaine,
                  That now the Pagan flyes, now fights againe;
                  Followes his flying Foe: and now the Iew,
                  
                  Nigh foiled, faints; now doth the Fight renew:
                  So that faire Victory ſeems long to waver,
                  As it were, doubtfull whether ſide to favour:
                  Till (at the laſt) th'Hebrews, all over ſpread
                  With Clowds of Shot, back to their Bulwark fled:
                  Even as a Pilgrim, in the naked Plain
                  Meeting a Storm of mighty Hail or Rain,
                  Runs dropping wett ſome hollow Rock to find,
                  Or other Covert built by Nature kinde.
                  
                     Pagans purſue them, and pel-mel among
                  Enter almoſt the City in the Throng.
                  Then every where did dreadfull Noiſe ariſe:
                  From ſtreet to ſtreet th'amazed Vulgar flyes;
                  Tearing their haire, beating their breſt and face:
                  As if the Foe had even poſſeſt the Place.
                  Why flie ye Cowards? Whether? Do you knowe?
                  What Fortreſs have you, if you This forgoe?
                  Or, in this Citie ſeek you for a ſtronger,
                  To gard you better, or preſerve you longer?
                  
                     If now (alas!) you dare not beare you ſtout
                  Againſt the Foe, while he is yet with-out;
                  How will you dare reſiſt his violence,
                  Were he once Maiſter of your weak Defence?
                  The People, chi
                        •
                      thus by their prudent Chief,
                  Somewhat re-heart'ned, reſcue with relief
                  
                     Cambris and Carmis; who, the while, like Towers,
                  Had in the Gate withſtood th'Aſſalting Stowers
                  Of almoſt all the furious Infidels.
                  For Lance, a long Maſt, either ſtrongly welds,
                  For Arms an Anvile; each a maſſie Targe
                  Of ſteel about his neck, as long as large:
                  Adown their ſhoulders from their Helms did wave
                  Thick Plumy Clowds of Colours brightly-brave:
                  Both like, in age, in Courage, Name, and Nature;
                  Both like, in bulke, both like in Strength & Stature.
                  Both, like Two Popplars which (on either ſide
                  Some ſilver Brook) their treſſie Tops do hide
                  Amid the Clowds; and ſhaken by the Winde,
                  Oft kiſs each other, like Two Brethren kinde.
                  The Heathen, ſeeing ſtill freſh Troops deſcend
                  From every ſide, the City to defend;
                  Leave-off their On-ſett: and, welnigh disbanded,
                  Gladly retreat whether their Heads commanded.
                  
                     When I conſider the extreame Diſtreſs
                  Which thirty Dayes did the Bethulians preſs;
                  
                     
                        •
                     ong ſad enough I hardly can invent,
                  
                     
                        •
                     o deadly Plight lively to repreſent:
                  
                     
                        •
                     y hand for horror ſhakes, and can no more
                  
                     
                        •
                     uide on this page my Pen as heertofore:
                  
                     
                        •
                     et doo mine Eyes with Teares be deaw it ſo,
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      well appears a ſubiect full of Woe.
                  Thou Spirit which dooſt all Spirits vivifie;
                  
                     
                        •
                     hich didſt vnlooſe the Tongue of Zachary;
                  
                     
                        •
                     nd, through the World thy ſacred Name to preach,
                  
                     
                        •
                     hy Meſſengers ſo ſundry Tongues didſt teach:
                  
                     
                        •
                     rect my weary Quil, my Courage raiſe,
                  
                     
                        •
                     hat I, This Work may finiſh to Thy Praiſe.
                  Though th'Hebrews ſaw their Town, on every part,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ot with an Hoaſt, but with a World begirt,
                  
                     
                        •
                     et had they Hope the long Siege would no leſs
                  
                     
                        •
                     onſume th'Aſſyrians, then themſelues diſtreſs:
                  
                     
                        •
                     t when the Foe had all the Pipes depriv'd,
                  
                     
                        •
                     hence, Water yerſt the ſacred Town deriv'd,
                  
                     
                        •
                     as! their Hope and even their heart did ſhrink,
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      quite cut-off, and dry'd vp with their Drink.
                  The Rulers though (yer Bondage, Death to take)
                  
                     
                        •
                     ive to the People what Themſelves did lack:
                  
                     To wit, a hope, Water enough to keep
                  In private Troughs, and publick Ceſterns deep;
                  Both Citizens and Soldiers to ſuffice,
                  So that they would be moderate and wiſe.
                  So th' Officers divide in ſilver meaſures,
                  To all, of all ſorts, of theſe liquid Treaſures,
                  This welcome Liquor; which might ſerve (at firſt)
                  To keep their life a while, not quench their Thirſt.
                  Their Ceſterns dry'd, they ſeek in every ſink:
                  Of every Gutter greedily they drink;
                  T'appeaſe their Thirſt awhile, not pleaſe their taſte,
                  With Drink whoſe ſtink was oft the Drinkers laſt.
                  O wretched Men! O wondrous Miſery!
                  Little, or much; drink, or drink not; they dy.
                  Plenty and Lack of Liquor, in extreme
                  Though Contraries, concurt to murder them:
                  With-in whoſe Bodies warreth Thirſt, as fell
                  As outwardly th'outrageous Infidell.
                  Street, Lane, nor Ally had this wofull City,
                  Where-in the Siſters, Enemies to Pitie,
                  Invented not ſome new and vncouth guiſe
                  To murder Hebrews; and from firmeſt eyes
                  (In ſigne of Sorrow) ſhowers to extract
                  Of pearly Tears, of bitter brine compact;
                  
                     Mid all Degrees; if reſted any-where
                  But ſo much moiſture as could make a Teare.
                  There, an Old man complaineth that a Lad
                  Hath new ſnatcht from him all the Drink he had;
                  But Thirſt contracts his Throat, his voice, & vains;
                  And ends at once his Life, his Plaint, and Pains:
                  A Soldier heer re-ſwils again (and gladder)
                  Th'vnſavory Water which had ſwelld his bladder:
                  There th'woefull Mother, on her Couching-Settle,
                  Her half-dead Childe reviveth with her Spettle:
                  
                     
                        •
                     eer the ſad Lover ſighes her lateſt breath
                  
                     
                        •
                     ith the laſt Sighes of her deer Love, in Death.
                  
                     
                        •
                     or, cruell Thirſt, com'n from Cyrenian Strand
                  Where ay Shee lives amid the burning Sand,
                  
                     
                        •
                     erpetual panting for continuall Drouth,
                  
                     
                        •
                     anging her Tongue a foot without her Mouth,
                  
                     
                        •
                     er Face all wrinkled, both her Eyes deep ſunk,
                  
                     
                        •
                     er Body leane and light, her Bowels ſhrunk,
                  
                     
                        •
                     er Breſt tranſparent, and her Veins repleat
                  With Brimſtone, all, in ſteed of Blood's moiſt Heat)
                  
                     
                        •
                     owes from her rotten Lungs a loathſome breath
                  Through all the Town; infuſing Fumes of Death
                  
                     
                        •
                     n th' Hebrews Artires: cauſing every Porch
                  Obſcurely ſhine with ſome Funereall Torch.
                  
                     So that the Heav'ns, ſeeing ſo many Woes,
                  Could hold no longer; but would faine with thoſe
                  Sad-weeping Hebrews Their ſad Tears haue melld,
                  Save that their Tears the Lord of Hoaſts with-held.
                  And, I my Self, that drown mine Eyes with Theirs,
                  Vnable though well to expreſs thoſe Tears,
                  Will with my Silence vaile their Countenance;
                  Following that Painters learned Ignorance,
                  Who well conceiving that his live-leſs Colours
                  Could not to life expreſs the deadly Dolours
                  Of Agamemnon at his Daughters End,
                  Cover'd his ſad Face with a ſable Bend.
                  Mean-while, the few that of this Wrack remain;
                  Againſt their ſad Chiefs murmur and complain:
                  The Lord, ſay they, in Iuſtice recompence
                  Your wilfull Malice, and Our Innocence:
                  The Lord look down vpon the wretched Teen
                  Your wicked Counſails have heer plung'd vs in:
                  For, had you yeelded to the Foes demand,
                  Yet he had entred on the Holy Land,
                  
                  We, happy we, had never ſeen our Friends
                  So h
                        •
                     p-leſs brought to ſo vntimely Ends.
                  Alas! What Comfort reſts? O wretched City!
                  Thoſe that beſiege thee round wold ſhow thee Pity;
                  
                     Thine Own are Cruel: Foes wold fain preſerve-thee:
                  Thy Frends deſtroy thee: Thoſe wold fain reſerv thee,
                  Would ſaue thy Children; thine own Children rather
                  Run headlong all on wilfull Death together.
                  Lord, well we know, our wicked Deeds haue made
                  Thee (iuſt diſpleas'd) to drawe the keeneſt Blade
                  Of thy fierce-kindled ire, which iuſtly ſheads
                  Thy deadlieſt Darts on our diſloyal heads.
                  Yet, Thou, which doſt not long thy Wrath retain,
                  Againſt thine Owne) O turn to Vs again:
                  Lord, change the purpoſe of our wilfull Lords,
                  Who 'gainſt our Boſomes whet the Pagan Swords:
                  Or grant (at leaſt) with thouſand Arrowes thrill'd,
                  We rather may by Heathen hands be kill'd;
                  Then longer Langnor of this banefull Thirſt
                  To linger vs in living Death accurſt.
                  Deer Brethren, 'tis our only Duty bindes,
                  Their Rulers ſaid (not our ſiniſter mindes
                  Of vndermining, or of pyning Ours)
                  Thus to hold out againſt theſe Heathen Powers.
                  If You haue Pain, We have our Portion too;
                  We are imbarkt in the ſame Ship with You:
                  On the ſame Deep we the ſame Danger run;
                  Our Croſs is common, and our Loſs is one:
                  
                     As common ſhall our comfort be when GOD
                  Shall pleaſe to eaſe vs of th'Aſſyrians Rod:
                  As ſure he will, if Your Impatiency
                  Stop not the Courſe of his kinde Clemency.
                  Then, ſtrive not with th'All-Perfect; but depend
                  On God alone: Whoſe Actions all do tend
                  To profit His: Who, in his Seaſon, ever
                  (Almighty) can and will His Church deliver.
                  Sometimes the Archer lets his Bowe, vnbent,
                  Hang idly by; that, when it is re-bent
                  With boiſterous Armes, it may the farther caſt
                  His winged ſhafts, and fix them far more faſt:
                  So, oft the Lord ſeems, in his Boſome, long
                  To hold his hand; and after (as more ſtrong)
                  To hammer Thoſe whoſe impious Impudence
                  Miſs-ſpends the Treaſure of his Patience,
                  Which (at firſt ſight) gives all Impunity
                  (As think the Lewd) to all Iniquity.
                  But, at the laſt, his heavie Vengeance payes
                  Them home, for all his Iuſtice long Delayes:
                  As th'Vſurer, forbearing of his poore
                  And needy Debtors, makes his Debt the more.
                  What though th'high Thunderer, in his Fury dread,
                  Strike not in th'inſtant this proud Vice-Roy dead?
                  
                     
                     
                        •
                     an all th'Amaſſe of Waters which he pent
                  
                     
                        •
                     bove and vnder th'ample Firmament,
                  
                     
                        •
                     editious, ſo ſhake-off his Soueraigne Power,
                  
                     
                        •
                     s not to ſend the thirſty Earth a Shower?
                  
                     
                        •
                     o, no: though Heav'ns, on every ſide ſo cleer,
                  
                     
                        •
                     o
                        •
                     d nothing leſſe then Rain, or moiſture neer:
                  They with their Tears ſhall ſhortly ſoak the Plain,
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      on the Day when Saul began to raign:
                  
                     
                        •
                     or all the Heav'ns, the Starres, and Elements,
                  Muſt execute his high Commandements.
                  But ſtill the Plebe, with Thirſt and Fury preſt,
                  Thus roaring, raving, gainſt their Chiefs conteſt:
                  O, holy Nation! ſhall we, ſhall We die,
                  Their Elderſhips grave Sights to ſatisfie?
                  O! ſhall we die to pleaſe Theſe fooliſh-wiſe,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ho make themſelues rich by our Miſeries;
                  And with our Bloods would purchaſe them a Name,
                  
                     
                        •
                     o live for ever in the Role of Fame?
                  No, no: Let's rather break their ſervile bands
                  Which hold vs in: let's take into our hands
                  Our Cities Helm; that freeing it from Sack,
                  We wiſely ſo may free our Selves from Wrack.
                  As the Phyſician, by the Patient Preſt,
                  Who, on his Bed (vnruly) will not reſt;
                  
                     Permits ſometimes what Art prohibiteth:
                  
                     Oſias ſo, importun'd, promiſeth
                  To yeeld the Town, if in five Dayes appear
                  No certain Signe of divine Succour neer.
                  The People then, their woeful paſt eſtate,
                  Their preſent paine, and future Fears, forgate:
                  Sith though it ſhould not hap as moſt they thirſt;
                  At leaſt, they ſhould of Evils ſcape the worſt.
                  But IVDITH (who the while inceſſant Showres
                  From her ſad eyes, in ſigne of Sorrow poures)
                  With mourneful voice now cals vpon the Lord;
                  Anon, her ſad Soule comforts in his Word:
                  
                     Praiers, were her Staires, the higheſt Heav'ns to clime
                  
                     GOD's Word, a Garden, where (in needful time)
                  She found her Simples (in Examples pure)
                  The Careful Pasſion of her Heart to cure.
                  There, IVDITH reading (then not caſually,
                  But by GOD's will, which ſtill works certainly)
                  Light on the place where the left handed Prince,
                  Who, griev'd for Iſraels grieuous Languiſhments
                  Vnder the Heathen; to deliver them
                  Slew Moab's Eglon, by a Stratagem.
                  The more ſhe reads, ſhe marks it, and admires
                  That Act of Ahud; and in Zeale deſires
                  
                     To imitate his valour. But fraile fleſh
                  With thouſand Reaſons would her purpoſe daſh;
                  Propoſing, now, the Facts foule odiouſnes;
                  Then, Feare of Death; then, Dangers numberleſs,
                  Where-to ſhe puts her Honor: and that (though,
                  
                     
                        •
                     or Iſraels ſake, God ſhould the Act allow)
                  
                     
                        •
                     choues a Man's hand, not a Woman's (there)
                  Much fitter for a Spindle then a Speare.
                  While IVDITH thus with IVDITH doubts doth wage,
                  
                     
                        •
                      ſuddain Puff turns-ouer that ſame Page:
                  
                     
                        •
                     nd, that which followes ſhowes, how Iahel yerſt
                  
                     
                        •
                     ourageouſly the ſleeping temples perc't
                  Of that fel Pagan, who from th' Hebrews flying,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ccurſed found in his Defence his dying:
                  
                     
                        •
                     o teach all Tyrants in all Times to-come,
                  
                     
                        •
                     hat they may fly, but not out-fly their Doome.
                  This laſt Example did ſo fortifie
                  
                     
                        •
                     he fearfull Widow, that euen by and by
                  
                     
                        •
                     e would with Engine of Reuenge endeuour
                  
                     
                        •
                      wicked Soule's and Bodie's knot to ſeuer.
                  But while apart Shee plots and plots anew,
                  
                     
                        •
                     me wylie way her purpoſe to purſue;
                  
                     
                        •
                     e hears reported, by a neighbour Dame,
                  
                     
                        •
                     he Townes Decree, much grieued at the ſame:
                  
                     So: to preuent Miſchiefs ſo neere at hand,
                  She ſends forth-with for Thoſe of Chiefe Cōmand,
                  Whom ſharply ſweet She thus begins to chide:
                  Why! How-now, Lordings, ſhal the Lord be ty'd
                  Vnto your Terms? Wil you th' Almighty's Arms
                  Chain with your Coūſails? limit with your Charms?
                  O! vniudicious Iudges, will you Thus
                  Giue law to GOD, who giues it Heau'n & Vs?
                  Will you ſubiect, to Times confined Stayes,
                  Th'Author of Times, Months, Moments, Yeeres and Daies
                  Be not deceiu'd; The ſacred Power Diuine
                  No Circumſtance can compaſie or confine:
                  God can do, what he will; will, what he ought:
                  Ought loue his righteous (whō his loue hath boght)
                  This (Fathers) This my dead Hopes moſt reviues;
                  That, in our Citie not a ma
                        •
                      ſurviues
                  Who lifts his hands (after the Heathen faſhions)
                  Vnto the dumb, dead Idols of the Nations.
                  All Sins are Sins: but that foule Sinne, alone
                  Exceeds all blinde or bold tranſgreſſion
                  That we haue heapt'gainſt ſacred Heav'n: for, that
                  Seems to degrade GOD of his Souerain State;
                  To giue his Glory to a Wedge of Gold,
                  Or Block, or Stock, or Stone of curious mold.
                  
                     Sith then That Sin doth not our Conſcience taint,
                  Of GOD's deere Succour let vs neuer faint:
                  Let's think (alas!) how now all Iuda's Eyes,
                  Agaſt, are caſt vpon Our Conſtancies:
                  Let's think, that All will (ouer all the Land)
                  By our Example, either ſtoope or ſtand:
                  Let's think, that All theſe Altars, Houſes, Goods,
                  
                     
                        ••
                     and (after GOD) on our couragious-Moods:
                  
                     
                        •
                     et's think, Wee keepe the Gate of Iſrael;
                  And that, ſo ſoon opening to th'Infidel
                  Who hates ſo deadly all our Abramides)
                  Wee ſhall be held Traytors and Paricides.
                  We cannot, neither will we now deny
                  
                     
                        •
                     ut that our Counſaile (Thus the Chiefe reply)
                  Was fooliſh, and offenſiue to the Lord:
                  
                     
                        •
                     ut now (alas!) wee cannot break our word.
                  
                     
                        •
                     ut, if Thou rew our Common miſeries;
                  
                     
                        •
                     nd canſt not ſee our Tears with tear-leſſe Eyes;
                  
                     
                        •
                     eep night and day: ô! weep & ſigh ſo much,
                  
                     
                        •
                     hat thy ſad Sighs & Tears with Ruth may touch
                  
                     
                        •
                     h'Eternall Iudge; whoſe gentle Eare is ay
                  
                     
                        •
                     pen to All that to Him humbly pray.
                  I ſhall, ſaid Shee, and (if GOD ſay Amen)
                  
                     
                        •
                     ſ-ſiedge this Citie, yer we meet again.
                  
                     Sound me no further, but expect th'Euent
                  Of Mine (I hope) happy as high Intent:
                  And, ſoon as Night hath ſpred her dusky Damp,
                  Let Mee go forth into the Heathen Camp.
                  
                  Go on, in GOD's Name: & where ere thou art,
                  GOD guide (ſay They) thy Foot, thy Hand, thy Hart.
                  The end of the third Booke.
               
               
                  
                  BETHVLIANS Reſcue. THE FOVRTH BOOKE.
                  
                     
                        •
                     VDITH, the while, trills Rivers from her Eyes,
                  Atterrs her knees, tends toward th'arched Skyes
                  
                     
                        •
                     er harm-leſs hands: then Thus, with voice devour,
                  
                     
                        •
                     er very Soule to GOD ſhe poureth out:
                  Lord! that didſt once my Grandſire Simeon arme
                  With Iuſtice Sword, t'avenge his Siſters harme;
                  
                     
                        •
                     ign Me that Sword, that I may puniſh (iuſt)
                  
                     
                        •
                     his Tyrant fel, farr paſſing Sichem's Luſt:
                  
                     
                        •
                     ho, not ſuffis'd with Virgins Raviſhment,
                  
                     
                        •
                     nd Rape of Wiues; is execrably bent
                  
                     
                        •
                     o root Thy Name out from the Earth around;
                  
                     
                        •
                     d raze Thy Temple, level with the ground.
                  
                     
                        •
                     eſumptuous Prince! whoſe whole Affiance ſtands
                  Hundred-thouſand Souldiers He commands,
                  Hundred-thouſand Horſe, which (thirſting-fight)
                  
                     
                        •
                     th lofty Bounds the lowely Earth doe ſmight:
                  
                     
                        •
                     thout Beliefe, that Thou alone (ô Lord)
                  
                     
                        •
                     d'ſt Heads or Hands; with either Crown or Cord:
                  
                     
                        •
                     engthneſt the Feeble, quickly foylſt the Strong;
                  
                     
                        •
                     d lay'ſt the Power of prowdeſt Kings along.
                  
                     Grant therefore, grant, good GOD, his charmed brain
                  The curious tramels of my Treſs may chain:
                  Let euery looke of mine be as a Dart
                  With amorous Breach to wound his willing hart:
                  O! let the little grace of Face and Form
                  Thou haſt vouchſaft mee, calm his furious ſtorm:
                  Let the ſmooth cunning of my ſoothing Lips
                  Surpriſe the fel Fox in his Suttleſhips:
                  But, chiefely, Lord, let my victorious hand
                  Be Scourge & Hammer of this Heathen Band:
                  That all this All may knowe, that Abram's Race
                  Is euer couered with thy Shield of Grace;
                  And that no Tyrant euer toucht thy Iury,
                  
                  But felt in fine the Rigor of thy Furie.
                  Let not, good Lord, ô let not one of Theſe
                  Return to taſte Hytane or Euphrates.
                  
                  Thus IVDITH prayes: & in the ſted of ſtops,
                  With thouſand Sighs her words She interrupts.
                  Then, from her ſad ſole Chamber, late ſhe packs,
                  Adornd with Ophir, Gold, and Serean knacks.
                  O! ſiluer-browd Diana, Queen of Night,
                  Dar'ſt thou appear, while heer below, ſo bright
                  Shines ſuch a ſacred Star, whoſe radiant flame
                  Would euen at Noon thy Brothers ſplendor ſhame?
                  
                     Though, as vnknown, to paſſe vnſhown ſhe ween,
                  
                     
                        •
                     er Odors made herſmelt, her Iewels ſeen;
                  Musk, Ambergris, and Civet, where ſhe went,
                  
                     
                        •
                     eft all along an odoriferous Sent:
                  
                     
                        •
                      Carbuncle ſhin'd on her Brow ſo bright,
                  
                     
                        •
                     hat with the Raies it clarified the Night:
                  
                     
                        •
                      ſilver Tincel wauing in the winde,
                  
                     
                        •
                     own from her head hung light & looſe behind:
                  
                     
                        •
                     old bound her golden Treſs; her Ivory Neck
                  
                     
                        •
                     ubies and Saphires, counter-chang'd in check:
                  
                     
                        •
                     t either Eare, a richer Pearle then yerſt
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        gypts proud Princeſſe in her Cup diſperſt:
                  
                     
                        •
                     er ſoft white Boſome (as with Curtains drawn)
                  
                     
                        •
                     ranſparent coverd vnder Cob-web Lawne:
                  
                     
                        •
                     er Robe, Sky-colour'd Silk, with curious Caule
                  
                     
                        •
                     f golden Twiſt, benetted ouer all.
                  
                     
                        •
                     he reſt ſhe wore, might haue beſeem'd for Tires
                  
                     
                        •
                     he ſtately Foundreſſe of th'Euphratean Spires.
                  For, though her Selfe were Modeſtie it ſelfe;
                  
                     
                        •
                     intice this Pagan to the wrackfull Shelfe,
                  
                     
                        •
                     eſides her Own, ſh'had borrowed Ornaments
                  
                     
                        •
                     f other Ladies of moſt Eminence.
                  
                     Achior, watching in the Court of Guard,
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     ing her paſſe ſo late, and ſo prepar'd;
                  
                     Enquires of Carmis (who then watched too)
                  What, Whence, She was, & what ſhe went to doo:
                  So braue a Gallant, trickt and trimmed ſo;
                  In ſuch a Time, in ſuch a Place of Woe.
                  Yer-while, ſaid Carmis, in our Citie dwell'd
                  
                     Merari; a man heere high in Honor held:
                  To whom, for Seed GOD but this Daughter ſent;
                  His Houſe's Ioy, This Citie's Ornament.
                  Gain-greedy Fathers, now-adayes turmoyle
                  Bodies & Soules, Heap vpon Heap to pile:
                  But, haue no care with the Mind's Goods to grace
                  Th'heires of their Goods (which after melt apace):
                  Much like a Man that keepeth in his Cheſt
                  His coſtly Garment, folded faire and preſt,
                  But lets his Body, it was made to ſerue,
                  Naked the while, in Wet & Cold to ſtarue.
                  But, as the Farmer ſpares no pains, nor coſt,
                  In husbanding his Land; but carefull moſt,
                  Now rids the ſtones, anon rips-vp the Ridges,
                  Heer caſts a Ditch, there plants, there plaſhes hedges;
                  And neuer is his hand or toole there-fro:
                  But chiefely careth there good Seed to ſowe,
                  That when the Summer ſhal haue ryp't his Plains,
                  His Crop may pay him for his Coſt and Pains:
                  
                     Or, as ſome Damſel, hauing ſpeciall Care
                  Of ſome faire Flower, which puts-out earely-rare
                  Th'Incarnat Bud; weeds, waters euery-houre
                  The fertile Plot that feeds her Gilli-flower;
                  That, one-day blown, it may ſome Sunday-morn
                  Her Iilly Boſome, or her head adorne:
                  So wiſe Merari did endeuour faire
                  To form the Maners of his tender Heire;
                  That, in his Age, he thence again might gather
                  Th'Honor and Comfort worthy ſuch a Father.
                  
                     
                        •
                     or ſoone as euer, ſtutting yet and weak,
                  
                     
                        •
                     er tender Tongue did but begin to ſpeak;
                  
                     
                        •
                     ee taught her not (as many Fathers doo:
                  
                     
                        •
                     oo-many now) vain words, and wanton too,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ut ſome good Prayer, or GOD's Ten-fold Lawe;
                  
                     
                        •
                     hat, with her Milk, ſhe might euen ſuck the Awe
                  
                     
                        •
                     f the Almighty; which not vain appeers;
                  
                     
                        •
                     or that the Damſel brought forth in few yeers,
                  
                     
                        •
                     uits worthy of ſuch Seed: whence did enſew,
                  
                     
                        •
                     hat this her Nurture to a Nature grew.
                  
                     
                        •
                      doth a Veſſel long retain the Sent
                  
                     
                        •
                     f the firſt Liquor we haue ſettled in't:
                  
                     
                        •
                      doth a Bough bend euer (when 'tis big)
                  
                     
                        •
                     o the ſame ſide that it was bent, a Twig:
                  
                     So, Bears, Wolues, Lyons; & our wildeſt Game,
                  Bred tame with vs, with vs continue tame.
                  When as 12. times She 12. new Moons had paſt,
                  This vertuous Pattern all Perfection grac't.
                  For, th'expert Pilot is not more preciſe
                  To ſhun, in Sayling, all the Ieopardies
                  Of Cyane Streight, of hatefull Syrtes Sand,
                  
                     Charybdu Gulfe, and of Capharean Strand,
                  Then was wiſe IVDITH to avoid the Dames
                  Neuer ſo little ſpotted in their Names:
                  Knowing that long converſing with the light,
                  Corrupts the ſobreſt; or at leaſt, though right,
                  Right ſafe th'Honor be ſav'd; the Names not ſo,
                  From common Bruit (though often falſe) we know.
                  For, haunting Good, good are wee holden ay:
                  Bad, with the Bad: Like will to like, vve ſay.
                  
                     Shee, euer modeſt, neuer vs'd to ſtay
                  Abroad till midnight at a Maske or Play:
                  Nor tript from Feaſt to Feaſt, nor Street-webs ſpan,
                  To ſee, and to be ſeene of euery man.
                  But rather, knowing that ſuch fond deſire
                  To gaze and to be gaz'd-on (Flax and Fire)
                  Valid light Dina, and ſuch gadding Dames
                  A thouſand more; their Noble Houſes Shames;
                  
                     She wiſely kept at home; where, Morn and Even.
                  Daily ſhe calld vpon the God of Heav'n.
                  The reſt of euery day in dutious courſe
                  She ſeru'd her Nurſers for a tender Nurſe:
                  As wont the Storks kind and officious Brood
                  For their old Parents to goe gather Food;
                  And on ſome high Firre (far-off hauing flow'n)
                  Bring life to Thoſe from whom they had their own.
                  If in the Day, from Houſwifes needful care,
                  She had perhaps an houre or two to ſpare,
                  She ſpent them reading of the Sacred Booke,
                  
                  Where faithful Soules for ſpirituall Manna looke.
                  Sometimes on Cloth ſh'embroidered cunningly
                  Some Beaſt, or Bird, or Fiſh, or Worm, or Fly.
                  Sometime ſhe wrought with ſilver needle fine
                  On Canvas-web ſome Hiſtory divine.
                  Heer Lot, eſcap't from that dread Flame, frō High
                  Which burnt his Town, with winged Feet doth fly
                  To little Zoar: while his Wife (alack!)
                  
                     
                        •
                     ncredulous, and curious, looking back;
                  GOD in the inſtant ſmighting for that Fault,
                  Transforms her Body to a Bulk of Salt.
                  Heer, chaſte Suſanna (ſlandred of dishonor)
                  
                     
                        •
                     eems led to Death, People ſeem preſt to ſtone her:
                  
                     But, Truth appearing, ſoon they ſeem at once
                  To turn on th'Elders all their ſtorm of ſtones.
                  Heer loyall Ioſeph rather leaues behinde
                  His cloak then hart with his too-Lady-kinde:
                  And rather chooſeth (by her falſe diſgrace)
                  His Irons, then her Armes, him to imbrace.
                  Heer, raſh, rough Iephthe in vnſacred ſlaughter
                  Imbrews his own Blade in his onely Daughter;
                  By priuate and improuident Annoy,
                  Troubling the Publique & the generall Ioy.
                  Weary of Work, on her ſweet Lute ſhe playes,
                  And ſings withall ſome holy Pſalm of Praiſe;
                  Not following ſuch as by laſciuious Dances,
                  Lauiſh Expences, light and wanton Glances,
                  Seek to be ſought, courted, and lov'd of moſt:
                  But, as the Fiſherman that baits the Coaſt
                  With poyſonie Paſtes, may haue a greater draught,
                  And (though leſſe wholeſome) hath more Fiſhes caught
                  Then thoſe that only vſe their Hook, or Net:
                  So may theſe Gallants them more Lovers get,
                  Then modeſt Mayds; But, their immodeſt flame
                  Fires none but Fools, Frantikes, or Voids of ſhame.
                  
                     Vertue alone begins, begets, conceiues,
                  A perfect Loue; which, though it ſlowe receiues
                  
                     His Form & Life, nor is ſo ſoone a fire:
                  
                     
                        •
                     o, neither doth it halfe ſo ſoon expire.
                  
                     
                        •
                     rawe kindles quickly, & is quickly paſt:
                  
                     
                        •
                     on heats but ſlowely, & it's heat doth laſt.
                  Now IVDITH'S fair Renown throgh Iuda rings
                  
                     
                        •
                      euery Citie; and great Suters brings
                  From All-form Faſhions, from faire painted Faces,
                  
                  
                     
                        ••
                     om Powdred Treſſes, from forc't Apiſh Graces,
                  
                  
                     
                        ••
                     om Prince-fit Pompe; from Peacocks ſtrutting by
                  With Boſoms naked to the Navel nigh)
                  
                     
                        •
                     o woo Her Vertue. But, Loues burning Dart
                  
                     
                        •
                     ould neither harm, nor warm her Icie hart.
                  
                     
                        ••
                     r, as hard Hammers, harder Diamant;
                  
                     
                        •
                     e harder did reſiſt Loues grace to grant;
                  
                     
                        ••
                     uing reſolued, ſole and ſingle, rather
                  
                     
                        •
                     o ſpend her dayes with her deer-loued Father.
                  
                     
                        •
                     t at the laſt, importun'd long, and preſt
                  
                     
                        •
                      her deere Parents, carefull of her Reſt;
                  
                     
                        •
                     e tooke MANASSES, one of Noble bloud;
                  
                     
                        ••
                     h, in the Mind's, Nature's, & Fortune's Good.
                  Their Mariage then was neither ſtoln, nor packt,
                  
                     
                        •
                     or poſted; to preuent ſome Pre-contract,
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     o cheat ſome Heire, ſome Auarice to choak,
                  
                     
                        •
                      couer Others, or their own Sin cloak:
                  
                     But duly paſt, modeſt, and reuerent,
                  With Either's Parents knowledge and conſent.
                  
                     Dina's Diſaſters to this day doe proue
                  The ſad ſucceſſes of prepoſt'rous Loue;
                  Of priuie Choice, cloſe Matches, and vnkend;
                  Which ſeldom bring Louers to happy end:
                  And that our Selues ought not our Selues beſtow,
                  But Thoſe frō whom our Birth & Breeding grow.
                  This happy Match begun thus holily,
                  And holy carried, did ſo firmly tie
                  This chaſte young Couple, in ſo mutuall loue,
                  That both their bodies ſeems one ſoule to moue.
                  Th'one neuer wiſht but what the other would:
                  Both by one Organ their one-minde vnfold:
                  And, as a Hurt on the Right ſide (we ſee)
                  Reacheth the Left; euen ſo, by ſympathie,
                  Her Husbands Sorows did ſad IVDITH ſhare,
                  And IVDITH's Sorows her ſad Husband bare.
                  The Husband did not his deer Wife controule,
                  As Tyrants rule: but as the tender Soule
                  Commands the Body; not the ſame to grieue,
                  But comfort rather, cheriſh and relieue.
                  Him IVDITH lou'd as Brother (or more, rather)
                  Feard as her Lord, & honord as her Father.
                  
                     Their Houſe, for Order ſo religious,
                  
                     
                        •
                     eemd more a Temple then a priuate Houſe:
                  There, did no Mayd, with merry-tricks, intice
                  The baſhful Stripling to laſcivious vice:
                  There did no drunken Groom ſick Healths diſgorge,
                  
                     
                        •
                     or againſt Heav'n blaſphemous Oathes re-forge:
                  There no broad Ieſter, no bold common Lyer,
                  
                     
                        •
                     o Gameſter, Thiefe, Rogue, Ruffin, Apple-ſquier,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ad euer harbor: but all Seruants there,
                  To their graue Rulers Rules conformed were.
                  MANASSES, knowing what a Floud of Crimes
                  
                     
                        •
                     urrounded all, in His enormous Times;
                  
                     
                        •
                     ſpecially, what Euills Confluence
                  Sad euen corrupted ſacred Gouernments
                  
                  So that, for fauour, or for Mony (more)
                  
                     
                        •…
                     ols, Knaues, Boyes, Baſeſt, higheſt Burthens bore)
                  
                     
                        •
                     e modeſtly refus'd all Publique Charge:
                  
                     
                        •
                     olding him happy ſo, free and at large,
                  
                     
                        •
                     arre from the Courts of State and Iuſtice too,
                  Quiet at Home, his Houſhold dues to doo.
                  Yet notwithſtanding, knowing too, that none
                  
                     
                        •
                     as euer borne ſo for himſelfe alone,
                  
                     
                        •…
                     t that the beſt part of our dayes (though few)
                  
                     
                        •
                     our Country, Kindred, & our Friends is due;
                  
                     No Magiſtrate, Hee daily ſerv'd the State
                  More then a hundred that in Office ſate.
                  For, in His Houſe did ſacred Iuſtice liue,
                  And from his Lips would She her ſentence giue.
                  He euer was th'afflicted Poores Protector,
                  Widowes Supporter, Silly-ones Director,
                  Orphans kinde Father: Euery age, Sex, Sort,
                  Had from his hand ſome kind of kinde Support.
                  Neuer vain Thirſt of the 'curs't Earth of Inde,
                  
                  Made Him wound Water, neither woo the Winde:
                  Neuer did Avarice his Life endanger,
                  With mercenarie Sword to ſerue the Stranger:
                  Neuer did Hee, to Adverſe-Clients, ſell
                  A double Breath, blowing to Heav'n & Hell.
                  But, ſtrife-leſs, vſing harm-leſs Husbandry,
                  Tooke of his Land both Stock and Vſury
                  Of his lent Labours. For, ſomtimes, by Line,
                  Hee plants an Orchard; which he orders fine,
                  With equi-diſtant Trees, in Rowes direct,
                  Of Plums, of Pears, and Apples moſt ſelect:
                  Heer-there He Crab-ſtocks ſets, then grafts thereon
                  Some ſtranger Slip: inocculates anon:
                  Anon with keen Share the kinde Earth he ſhreds:
                  Anon the Vine vnto the Elme hee weds:
                  
                     
                     
                        •
                     non he prunes-off the ſuperfluous ſhoots:
                  
                     
                        •
                     non the Bodies pares, then bares the roots.
                  
                     
                        •
                     or, neither Dog-Dayes, nor December's Ice,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ould keep Him Priſoner in his Chamber, nice.
                  But, as one-day, his Reapers he beheld,
                  Who, ſwelting, ſwift the yellow handfulls feld;
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        ol, from his head, caus'd a Catarrh deſcend,
                  Which ſhortly after caus'd MANASSES End.
                  He that can number, in November, all
                  
                     
                        •
                     he withered Leaves that in the Forreſts fall:
                  
                     
                        •
                     ee that can number all the Drops, in Showers,
                  Which Hyades, Pleiades, and moiſt Orion poures
                  
                     
                        •
                     pon the Plaines: may tell the Tears Shee ſhed,
                  
                     
                        •
                     or her deer Husband ſo vntimely dead.
                  
                     
                        •
                     he Wealth and Treaſure he had left her, kinde,
                  
                     
                        •
                      ſteed of eaſing, more afflicts her Minde:
                  
                     
                        •
                     h'vſe of his Goods ſtill ſets before her eies
                  
                     
                        •
                     heir good old Owners ſweet and gracefull guiſe.
                  
                     
                        •
                     ad She had all the Gold was gather'd ever
                  
                     
                        •
                     n all the ſhoal Sands of the Lydian River,
                  
                     
                        •
                      had not been Rich, being bereft of Him,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ithout Whō, Wealth doubled her Woes extream:
                  
                     
                        •
                     d, with Whō, glad ſhe would have born the croſſes
                  
                     
                        •
                     f wretched IOB's, ſad, ſodain, many Loſſes.
                  
                     
                     Phoebus had thrice through all the Zodiak paſt,
                  Since His Deceaſe: Yet Time, which all doth waſte
                  And cures all Cares, could not her Griefs recouer,
                  For Loſſe of Him, her deereſt Lord and Lover.
                  Still therefore, cover'd with a ſable Shrowde,
                  Hath She kept home; as all to Sorrow vow'd:
                  For, for the moſt part, ſolitarie ſad,
                  Tears in her eyes, ſack on her back ſhe had,
                  Griefe in her heart: ſo, on the wither'd Spray
                  The Widow-Turtle ſighes her mournfull Lay;
                  Sole, and exil'd from all Delights, that move;
                  Chaſtly reſolv'd t'accept no Second Love.
                  If any time IVDITH went out of Doore
                  (As Duty binds) it was to ſee ſome Poore:
                  Some woefull Woman in deep Paſſions toyld
                  For ſodain Loſſe of her deer only Childe:
                  Some long-Sick body, or ſome needy ſoule,
                  With needfull Comforts of her Bag, or Boule:
                  Or elſe to go (as GOD commanded Them)
                  To pray and Offer at IERVSALEM.
                  Thus, deer Companion, have I briefly ſhow'n
                  Faire IVDITH'S Story: on whoſe Worth alone
                  All eyes are caſt, but cannot tell you out
                  Whether ſhe goes; leſſe, what ſhe goes about.
                  
                     
                     
                        •
                     t, if we may, from former things infer
                  
                     
                        •
                     gheſſe of future; We may hope from Her
                  
                     
                        •
                     me Happineſs: and ſure, me thinks, her Cheer,
                  
                     
                        •
                      pleaſant chang'd, boads ſome good fortune neer.
                  
                     
                        •
                     th this Diſcourſe, the wakefull Hebrew Knight,
                  
                     
                        •
                     alking between, wore-out the wearie Night.
                  IVDITH the while, her Handmaid with her, hies
                  
                     
                        •
                     wards the Trenches of the Enemies.
                  
                     
                        •
                     r from the Fort She had a furlong gone,
                  
                     
                        •
                     e Heathen Scouts deſcrib'd her, and anon
                  
                     
                        •
                     pake her Thus: O! more then humane Beauty,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ence? What are You? What Cauſe hath hither
                  
                     
                        •
                     o th'Aſſyrian Camp? Alas! I am (brought ye?
                  
                     
                        •
                     ghing, quoth She) a woefull Hebrew Dame,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ho, to eſcape ſo many Deaths, or Thrall,
                  
                     
                        •
                     me here to yeeld me to your General.
                  
                  Then to the Duke they lead her. Who-ſo-e're
                  
                     
                        •
                     th ſeen, in Cities, how they flock, to hear
                  
                     
                        •
                     me prating Montibank; or ſee ſome Monſter
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     w brought from Africk, or frō 
                     Inde; may conſter
                  at preſſe of Soldiers from all parts did throng,
                  
                     
                        •
                     out his Tent; and even preſt in among
                  ſee that compleat She, ſo comely deem'd;
                  
                     
                        •
                     o, the more look't on, the more lovely ſeem'd.
                  
                     Her waved Locks, ſome dangling looſe, ſome part
                  In thouſand rings curld-vp, with art-leſs art;
                  With gracefull Shadowes ſweetly did ſet-out
                  Her broad high Fore Head, ſmooth as Ice, about:
                  Two ſlender Bowes of Ebene, equall bent
                  Over two Starres (bright as the Firmament)
                  Two twinkling Sparks, Two ſprightfull Ietty Eyes
                  (Where ſubtle Cupid in cloſe Ambuſh lies,
                  To ſhoot the choiſeſt of his golden Darts
                  Into the charieſt of the chaſteſt hearts):
                  'Twixt theſe Two Suns, down frō this liberal Front,
                  Deſcendingly aſcends a pretie Mount;
                  Which, by Degrees, doth neer thoſe Lipps extend,
                  Where Momus Lips could nothing diſcommend:
                  Her ruddy, round Cheeks ſeem'd to be compoſed
                  Of Roſes Lillied, or of Lillies-Roſed:
                  
                  Her musky Mouth (for ſhape and ſize ſo meet,
                  Excelling Saba's pretious Breath, for ſweet)
                  A ſwelling Welt of Coral round behemms,
                  Which ſmiling ſhowes two Rowes of orient Gemm
                        •
                     
                  
                  Her Ivory Neck, and Alabaſter Breſt
                  Raviſh the Pagans more then all the reſt:
                  Her ſoft, ſleek, ſlender hands, in Snowe bedipt,
                  With pureſt Pearl-ſhell had each Finger tipt.
                  
                     In brief, ſo paſſing Her Perfections were,
                  That, if rare Zeuxis had but found Her there,
                  Or ſuch another; when from curious Cull
                  Of Croton Dames ſo choiſely Beautifull,
                  By many Beawties (ſeuerally mett)
                  His cunning Pencil drew the Counterfait
                  Of Her for Whom Europe and Aſia fought;
                  This only Piece had he ſufficient thought.
                  IVDITH no ſooner came within the Tent,
                  But both her Cheeks a baſhful Bluſh beſprent;
                  Trembling for Fear: vntill, inviting neerer,
                  The courteous General's gentle words re-cheer-her.
                  
                     Sweet-hart, I am not, I am not ſo fel
                  
                     
                        •
                     s falſe Report hath told fond Iſrael:
                  Who Me for Father, I for Children take;
                  
                     
                        •
                      love whom love my Lord their God to make:
                  And who do both, may be aſſur'd to have
                  What ever Good, Mans heart can hope, or crave:
                  Which Iſrael well ſhould finde, would they give care
                  
                     
                        •
                     o that Kings Favour, whoſe drad Power they fear:
                  
                     
                        •
                     hen fear not Thou, my Love; but tell me free
                  
                     
                        •
                     he happy Cauſe that hither bringeth thee.
                  O Prince! ſaid She (with, the
                        •
                     , firm Countenance)
                  
                     
                        •
                     preme, for Fortune, Wiſedome, Valiance,
                  
                     Of all that ever had Command in Field,
                  Or ever manag'd martiall Sword and Shield:
                  Although my fraile Sex, and weak bodie's ſtate,
                  No longer could endure the wretched fate;
                  Wants, Labours, Dangers, and the deep Affright
                  My fellow Townſ-folk ſuffer day and night:
                  Yet is not That the Cauſe that drives me thence,
                  Nor That which drawes me to Your Excellence:
                  But, 'tis a never-never-dying Worm
                  Which gnawes my Conſcience; a continual Storm,
                  A holy Fear, leaſt I be forc't to eat
                  (Among my People) ſome vnlawfull meat.
                  For, I foreſee (Sir) that our Folk, yer long,
                  With cruell Famine ſo extreamely wrung,
                  Wil be conſtrain'd to fill, and file them too
                  With vnclean Fleſh, which GOD forbids vs doo:
                  And that the Lord (who ſtrikes, with iuſt Revenge
                  Whom-ever dare his dread iuſt Lawes infrenge)
                  Will then, without Fight, give Thee vp their Place;
                  And one of Thine Thouſands of Them ſhall chaſe.
                  Therfore (my Lord) GOD's Wrath and yours to fly
                  Out of BETHVLIA, to your Camp come I:
                  Beſeeching humbly, for your Honors ſake,
                  That heer no Rigour, neither Wrong I take.
                  
                     Hee's more then Wit-leſs that him wilfull throwes
                  Winking) in Dangers that he well fore-knowes;
                  And when he may live, pain-leſs, and ſecure;
                  
                     
                        •
                     n Toil-full Fears will his owne Death procure.
                  Now: pleaſe thee grant me, in this Vale (away
                  From noiſe and number) nightly to go pray;
                  
                     Hebrews no ſooner ſhall GOD's Wrath incenſe,
                  But I, inſpir'd, ſhall ſhew thine Excellence:
                  And then ſhall I thy valiant Legions lead
                  Over all Iuda; and thy Standards ſpread
                  Shall ſwell in SION; where not one ſhal dare
                  Lift Launce againſt thee, nor Defence prepare:
                  No, not a Dog ſo much as barke at Thine
                  Arms-claſhing Army, nor their Armors Shine.
                  Thy Name alone ſhall tame the ſtouteſt Troup:
                  To Thee the Hils their proudeſt Tops ſhal ſtoup:
                  Rivers, for Thee, their rapid Courſe ſhall ſtay,
                  To yeeld Thine Hoſte a new vn-wonted way.
                  The Prince replies: O, Worlds ſole Ornament!
                  Lady, as faire as wiſe and eloquent;
                  
                     
                        •
                     ight-Welcome are You: and we wiſh you ever
                  
                     
                        •
                     n all Contentment with vs to perſever.
                  
                     
                        •
                     nd, if you proue in Truth and Loyalty,
                  
                     
                        •
                     s you are pleaſing to mine Eare and Eye;
                  
                     I ſhall from henceforth worſhip evermore
                  The mighty GOD you Hebrewes do adore:
                  You ſhall from henceforth only Lady be
                  Both of my Sceptre, of my Soule, and Me:
                  Hence-forth your Name with high Renown ſhal ring
                  Where Heber, Iſter, Nile, and Ganges ſpring.
                  With Licence then, ſoon as the Moon with light
                  Of ſilver Rayes began to cleer the night,
                  The Widow hies to a dark Vale apart;
                  Where firſt ſhe bathes her hands, and then her heart:
                  Then, from her Eyes a luke-warme Rill ſhe ſhowres;
                  Then, from her Soule this fervent Prayer powres:
                  Lord GOD, no longer now Thine Aide deny
                  To thoſe that only on Thine Aide rely.
                  Lord reſcue Thoſe that ready are to ſpend
                  Their bloods and goods, Thine Honor to Defend.
                  Lord, let our Infants ſad and ceaſe-leſs Mones,
                  Our woefull Elders deep and diſmall Grones,
                  Our Matron's Scrieches, Cryes of Virgins faire,
                  Our ſacred Levit's Day-and-nightly Prayer,
                  Perce to Thy Throne, to wake thy ſlumbring Eye.
                  Drad GOD of Iustice, glorious Father; Why
                  Do ſulphury Bolts of thy beſt Thunder light
                  On Carmel's Top, and little Hermon ſmight:
                  
                     And let th'Heav'n-threatning Sons of Eearth alone;
                  On proudeſt Oſſa prouder Pelion?
                  
                  Alas! What ſaid I? Ah! forgive me, Lord,
                  This idle, raſh, and vnadviſed Word;
                  Which, in frail Paſſion, my fond Lips did borrow
                  
                     
                        •
                     rom fervent Zeale of mine vnfained Sorrow.
                  No: ô, Our Lignes ſole Piller deerly dread,
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      knowe, Thou ſhortly wilt their Head be head:
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      knowe, This hand, by Thy right hand led out,
                  
                     
                        •
                     hall at one Blowe, This Heathen Army rout.
                  The end of the fourth Booke.
               
               
                  
                  BETHVLIANS Reſcue. THE FIFT BOOKE.
                  FOr blood and marrow, in his veines and bones,
                  The Vice-Roy feeds new Pains, new Paſſions;
                  Which, while he ſhuns, he ſeeks; feels, yet not knows;
                  A dead-live Fire, which of Self's Cinders growes.
                  For, th'Hebrew Lady's rapting Rarities
                  Being now ſole Obiect of his Soule's dimme Eyes;
                  Sad, peeviſh, pale, ſoft, drowſie, dream-awake,
                  Care of his Hoſte he doth no longer take:
                  Goes no more out, a-nights, to ſet his Watches,
                  And Courts of Gard about, on all Approches:
                  Comes not to Counſail, neither gives The Word:
                  
                  Nor viewes the Quarters of his Camp: nor ſtir'd.
                  As Sheep, that miſſe their wonted Gard & Guide,
                  Diſperſed ſtray; now, by ſome Rivers ſide,
                  Or gurgling Brook; now, vp & down the Downes;
                  Now, in the Groves; now, on the Fallow grounds:
                  So th'Ethnik Army, without Rule or Reine,
                  Purſue their Pleaſures, violent, or vaine:
                  
                     None will obey; None but will now Command;
                  Each, as him liſteth, dares him now diſ-band.
                  
                     Hebrews, Why ſtay you now mew'd in your City?
                  Now, now or never, doth the Time befit-ye
                  To ſally on the Foe; whoſe rank Diſorder
                  Among themſelves, themſelves (in Fight) wil murder.
                  Nay; bouge not though: of ſuch a Victory
                  GOD will the Honor have, and Author be.
                  Yet that blinde Cupid did this Tyrant blinde,
                  To take the Town was Day and Night his minde;
                  Now, day and night he mindes but how to gain
                  A Lady's grace; Who, taken, is not taen
                  Her Soul being temper'd more then Fancy-proof):
                  
                     
                        •
                     er-while, th'vndanted mighty Theban rough
                  Could not have fear'd Him, with his maſſie Mace;
                  Now, but a Glance of a weak Woman's Grace
                  Diſmaies him, daunts him, nay evē wounds him deep,
                  Paſt care of Cure; and doth him Captive keep:
                  
                     
                        •
                     er-while Ambition, with Drums rattling Din,
                  A wakt him earely, yer the Day peept-in;
                  Now Love awakes him; and with His Alarms
                  Makes him neglect the Hebrews and their Arms:
                  
                     
                        •
                     er-while, he had Princes and Kings at bay;
                  Now, of Him Selfe hath neither Power nor Sway.
                  
                     Alas! alas! Vnhappy Change, ſaid Hee:
                  Muſt I live Captive to my Captive-Shee?
                  Is This (alas!) to live: the Body baſe't;
                  The minde as brute; and both their Power defac't!
                  This's not a Life: or is worſe Life to feel,
                  Then ſad Ixion's, on the brazen Wheel
                  
                  Eternall turning: or a life (in brief)
                  Moſt like the Life of that celeſtiall Thief,
                  Whoſe ever-never-dying heart and liver
                  On Schythian Rocks feed a fel Vulture ever.
                  What boots me, t'have ſubdew'd ſo many Lands?
                  What, to have tam'd with my victorious hands
                  All Nations lodg'd betwixt Hydaſpes large,
                  And th'Haven where Cydnus doth in Sea diſcharge?
                  Sith I am vanquiſht, by the feeble Might
                  Of Captive IVDITH's Glance. What boots my brigh
                        •
                     
                  
                  Strong ſteeled Targe? my brazen Burguinet?
                  My martiall Gard about my Body ſet?
                  Sith the keen Shot which her quick Eye doth dart,
                  Throgh Steel, & Braſs, & Gard, doth wound my ha
                        ••
                     
                  
                  What boots my Courſer ſwifter then the Winde,
                  Leaving the Swallowes in his ſpeed behinde?
                  Sith, on his back flying, I cannot flie
                  The willing Chaines of my Captivitie.
                  
                     Change, change then, Hebrews, into Smiles yor tears;
                  Triumph of Me, mine Hoſte, Arms, Swords & Spears:
                  
                     
                        •
                     am no more the Duke, whoſe Name alone
                  
                     
                        •
                     erwhile with Terror ſhook you every-one:
                  
                     
                        •
                     o: I am He whoſe Courage, late ſo brave,
                  
                     
                        •
                      now become but Slave vnto my Slave:
                  
                     
                        •
                      am not come, to Warr with Iſrael,
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     o burne your Cities, or your Selves to quell:
                  
                     
                        •
                     ut to intreat You, to intreat (for Me)
                  
                     
                        •
                     our match-leſs IVDITH, that She milder be.
                  But, whither, Wit-leſs, whither am I borne
                  
                     
                        •
                     y Loves fond Fury; willfully forlorne?
                  
                     
                        •
                     ave I not Her heer in my Patronage,
                  
                     
                        •
                     hat can the Anguiſh of my Soule aſſwage?
                  
                     
                        •
                     nd yet with idle Plaints I pearce the Skyes;
                  
                     
                        •
                     nd thus vn-Manly melt me at mine Eyes.
                  Vnhappy Me! my wretched Caſe is ſuch
                  His, who wants moſt, what he hath too-much;
                  Cryſtall River flowing to his Lip;
                  
                     
                        •
                     et dies for Thirſt, and cannot drink a ſip:
                  
                     
                        •
                     or, ſo do I reſpect her Excellence,
                  
                     
                        •
                     er Heav'n-given Graces; that, for Reverence,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ine eyes dare ſcarce behold her, and my Tongue,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ſteed of ſuing, to my roof is clung.
                  
                     O that my Breſt tranſparent Cryſtall were,
                  That She might ſee my hearts dire Torment there;
                  And there read plainely, what my Loves exceſs
                  (Alas!) permits not my ſad voice t'expreſs.
                  Since IVDITH firſt came to th'Aſſyrian Camp,
                  Thrice had the Heav'ns light & put-out their Lamp;
                  And now Aurora, with a ſaffron Ray,
                  Began, in Inde, to kindle the fourth Day:
                  When as the Duke, who Food and Reſt forſakes,
                  This heauy Moan, to 's Eunuke BAGOS, makes:
                  BAGOS, my Sonne, adopted, not by Chance;
                  BAGOS, whom I, ſtill ſtudying to advance,
                  Have made, of Meaneſt and neglected moſt,
                  Firſt in my heart, and Second in mine Hoſte:
                  BAGOS, I burn, I rave, I rage, I die
                  Of wounds receiv'd from that faire Strangers Eie.
                  Go, ſeek her out: go quickly: tell her Thou
                  My loving Languor: tell her, that I vow
                  To make her equal, nay above the beſt
                  Of greateſt Dames whom royall Crowns inveſt:
                  Eſpecially, inſinuate ſo, that She
                  Be pleas'd this night to come and ſup with Me.
                  Wear't not a Folly, nay a Madnes meer,
                  In Me, to have the rareſt Beauty heer
                  
                     
                     
                        •
                     his Age hath bred; and yet, too-faint a Foole,
                  
                     
                        •
                     hould not dare my hearts hot Thirſt to coole?
                  
                     
                        •
                     ould not my Soldiers laugh at it apace?
                  
                     
                        •
                     ay: would not IVDITH bluſh at My Diſgrace?
                  BAGOS, too-apt, too-vs'd to ſuch a Turn;
                  
                     
                        •
                     hus oyles the Fire, which but too-faſt did burn:
                  
                     
                        •
                     y Lord, if Private men (whoſe otious Care
                  
                     
                        •
                     arce paſſe the Threſhold of their owne Door dare;
                  
                     
                        •
                     hoſe Mindes, content with their vnhappy Hap,
                  
                     
                        •
                     r other Grace or Greatnes never gape)
                  
                     
                        •
                     e not content (alas!) vnleſs ſome-while
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        us warme Comforts their chill Cares beguile:
                  
                     
                        •
                     w-more vnhappy then, are Thoſe that beare
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     Atlas Burthen: Thoſe that Reſt forbeare,
                  
                     
                        •
                     r Others Reſt: Thoſe that (like Argus) wake
                  
                     
                        •
                     ile Others, fear-leſs, their full Naps doo take:
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      among all their Gall, their Toil, their Teen,
                  
                     
                        •
                     e (Cupids) Hony be not mixt between?
                  Then, Sir, purſue your Love: loſe not the Game,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ich of it ſelf comes to your Net, ſo tame.
                  
                     
                        •
                     d, if in like Imployments, heertofore
                  
                     
                        •
                     ave found Me fit and faithfull evermore;
                  This new Truſt, you ſhall by ſpeedy Trial,
                  
                     
                        •
                     e me more ſecret, diligent, and loyall.
                  
                     Alas! How-many BAGOS's, in our Time
                  In Princes Courts, to higheſt Honors climbe,
                  More, for their Cunning in ſuch Embaſſies,
                  Then for Repute of learned, ſtout, or wiſe!
                  Whilome, great Courts were Vertue's Academs;
                  Now, Schools of Vice: now (rather) Sinks of Realms.
                  
                  You, who, Great-minded, cannot be content
                  To be cloſe-Brokers for th'Incontinent:
                  Who cannot brew (with too-too-dangerous Skill)
                  Both a Love-Potion, and a Cup to kill:
                  
                  Who cannot, noble, your free Natures ſtrain,
                  With flattering pencil on your Face to fain
                  A Face of frownes, or Smiles; of Wrath, or Ruth;
                  To pleaſe the Great (rather with Tales then Truth):
                  Come not at Court; if I may counſail you.
                  For, There, in ſteed of Grace and Honor, dew
                  Vnto your Vertues; you ſhall nothing gain,
                  But that which There ſtill haunts the Good; Diſdain.
                  You, Noble Ladyes, in whoſe heart is graven
                  A filial Fear of th'All-ſee GOD of Heaven:
                  You that more prize your Honor's pure Report,
                  Then Love of Princes: keep you from the Court.
                  
                  But You, who, hauing neither Land nor Money,
                  Out-brave the braveſt: Who with words of Honny,
                  
                     And Friend-like Face, Diſſemblers, humbly greet
                  Whom your falſe harts wiſh in their winding ſheet:
                  Who, laviſh, ſel your Wives for Offices:
                  Who, make you Noble, by baſe Services:
                  Who, ſeruing Time, can ſet your Faith to ſale;
                  Shift your Religion; ſaile with euery Gale:
                  Who, Paraſites, can put more Faces on
                  Then euer Proteus in the Seas hath ſhow'n:
                  Who, forcing Nature, can your Manners fit
                  To my Lords Humor; and ſo humor it;
                  Like a Chameleon, which, heer blew, there black,
                  Heer gray, there green, doth with his Obiect take:
                  Who can invent new Toules, new Taxes finde,
                  To charge the People, and the Poore to grinde:
                  Who, fayning to poſſeſſe your Princes Eare,
                  Make Sutors crouch and court you euery-where;
                  
                     
                        •
                     nd, ſubtle Shifters, ſell them deere your Smoak,
                  
                     
                        •
                     linding the Wretches with a wilie cloake.
                  You, warbling Sirens, whoſe delicious Charms
                  
                     
                        •
                     raw warieſt youth into your wrackfull Armes:
                  
                     
                        •
                     ou Circes, you whoſe powerfull Spells tranſmute
                  
                     
                        •
                     our Loues to Stones, Hogs, Dogs, & euery Brute:
                  
                     
                        •
                     ou Stymphalides, whoſe Auarice deuoures
                  
                     
                        •
                     he richeſt Treaſure of Youth's freſheſt Flowers:
                  
                     You, you, whoſe Painting, and Pearl-golden-gliſter,
                  Of Priam's old Wife, make yong Caſtor's Siſter:
                  You Myr
                           •
                        ha's, you Canaces, Semi-ram's:
                  
                  And, if there be any more odious Dames:
                  
                  Come You to Court: come quickly: There, on You
                  A hundred Honors ſhal be hcapt, vn-dew:
                  You, there ſhall ſell Iuſtice, Preferments, Places:
                  Yea, you ſhall ſell miſ-gouernd Princes Graces.
                  But, Muſe, it boots not: Hadſt Thou thouſand fold
                  The Strength & Stomack of Alcides bold,
                  Thou couldſt not clenſe Theſe Sin-proud ſhining Halls,
                  Fouler by far then foule Augeas Stalls.
                  Let's back to IVDITH; who to bring about
                  Her hard deſeign, ſurvayes her, ſets her out,
                  Be-curles her Treſſes; makes her Cryſtall cleer
                  Her Beauties Iudge, which had in Earth no peer.
                  Then comes ſhe to the Tent, rich hanged round
                  With curious Arras, from the top to ground;
                  Where Artfull fingers, for a Web of glory,
                  Had woven Medes, Perſians, Syrian Princes Story.
                  There Ninus firſt, puſht by vain Prides amiſſe,
                  Vſurps the East: heer comes Simiramis,
                  
                  Who, fayning Her a Man, th'Aſſyrians ſwayes;
                  And to the Clowds her BABYLON doth raiſe.
                  
                     See, ſee a Prince, with ſoft white fingers fine,
                  Effeminate, ſits ſpinning Flaxen Twine:
                  And, for a Launce, bearing a Diſtaffe, ſhowes
                  That more to Female then to Male he owes:
                  See, how he poats, paints, frizzles, faſhions him;
                  Bathes, basks, anoints, viewes, & re-views his Trim
                  Within his Glaſs, which for a Glaiue he weares.
                  See, how he ſhifts to hide his Shame and Fears:
                  From Vardingale to Vardingale, he flyes
                  His braue Lieutenant, leaſt Hee him ſurprize.
                  Yet, ſee, at laſt (to act one Manly thing)
                  Hee burns himſelfe, not to out-live a King.
                  See, heer an Infant ſucking of a Bitch
                  Vnder a Hedge, and in a ſhallow Ditch;
                  Who, grown a Man, heer muſters in his Train
                  
                     
                        •
                     oth bond and free, the Soldier and the Swain;
                  
                     
                        •
                     ubdues the Eaſt, and into Perſia drawes
                  The Medes proud Sceptre; & he giues them Lawes.
                  But, who's That marches ſo diſ-figurd there,
                  
                     
                        •
                     efore an Army, without Noſe, and Eare?
                  Tis that good Servant, who reduc't, alone,
                  
                     
                        •
                     nder Darius, Rebell Babylon.
                  
                  While, with theſe Showes ſad IVDITH entertaind
                  
                     
                        •
                     er Eyes, but not her hart (too-inly-paind)
                  
                     In comes the Duke: & with right courteous cheere
                  Kindely ſalutes her, hands her hand; and neere
                  Cauſing her ſit in a rich eaſie Chaire,
                  Himſelfe, at eaſe, viewes & re-viewes her Faire.
                  Then, ſeeing him ſo nigh his wiſhed Pleaſure,
                  His hart's a fire: nor hath he longer leaſure
                  To ſtay for Venus, till, Star-crowned bright,
                  On their Horizon Shee bring back the Night.
                  The Widow, knowing Time & Place, as yet,
                  For God's Decree, and her Deſeign, vnfit;
                  Findes ſtill Delayes: and, to delude his Loue,
                  Shee (wylie) ſtill Speech vpon Speech doth moue.
                  My Lord, pray tell me, What ſo great Offence
                  So grievouſly your Fury could incenſe?
                  What? When? Where? Why? How? & by Whom our Foll
                        •
                     
                  
                  Could ſo the Wrath of ſuch a Prince provoke,
                  So ſeparate, in Language, Land, and Law;
                  Who neuer Vs, and Whom we neuer ſaw?
                  Vnciuil were He (Sweet) replyes the Prince,
                  Could ought deny to ſuch an Excellence.
                  Then: as the Heav'ns cannot Two Suns ſuſtaine:
                  No more can Earth Two Kings at once contain,
                  Of equall Power and State: for Soveraintie
                  
                  Brooks no Co-partner, no Equalitie.
                  
                  
                     Witnes my Soverain: who, offended at
                  The Power & Pomp of mighty Arphaxat,
                  
                  Who, high aſpire, and farre to ſpred began;
                  And to the Clowds had built his Ecbatane,
                  
                  
                     Ninive's Shame, and dread of Babylon:
                  Brauely endeuors to ſupplant, His Throne,
                  Bereaue his Sceptre, ſack, raze, ruinate,
                  His goodly Cities, and himſelfe diſ-State.
                  But Arphaxat, as valorous as ſage,
                  And both, right worthy of his Crown & Age)
                  Would rather venture Media's Royall Rings,
                  Then vaile to Anie. So between Two Kings,
                  Two ſtout, & ſtirring Spirits (whereof, the one
                  Could brook no Peer, th'other, Superior none)
                  
                     
                        •
                     egan a dreadfull and right deadly War,
                  
                     
                        •
                     aſting (alas!) too-long, ſpreading too-far.
                  
                     Arphaxat arms Thoſe, where the Flower of Greece
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     etcht, not the Locks of an old Golden Fleece,
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     ut maſſie Ingots, which doe richly pave
                  The happy Plains great Phaſis Streams belave:
                  The Harmaſtans, th'Albanians, wont to mowe
                  
                     
                        •
                     hree times a yeere, where only once they ſowe:
                  Whom Oxus boundeth with his ſwelling Tide:
                  Whom Anti-Taurus double Horns diuide:
                  
                     Thoſe on the Mountain, whoſe high-lowely back
                  Bow'd to the Veſſell which preſerv'd from wrack
                  The Worlds Abridgement: Thoſe along the Shores
                  Where proud Iaxartes rapid Current rores:
                  In ſhort, beſides his Medes he had in Pay
                  All, neere the Pontike and the Caſpian Sea.
                  So that, already, This great King-Commander,
                  Had Hopes as high as euer ALEXANDER.
                  My Prince, reſolv'd to conquer, or to die,
                  Omits no point of Opportunitie
                  For his Affaires: Hee armeth Sittacene,
                  
                  Levies the Archers of all Oſrohene:
                  Thoſe, whoſe rich Plains hundred for one repay,
                  From Euphrates and Tigris march away:
                  Fiſh-fed Carmanians (who with Seal-skin Iacks,
                  In ſted of Iron, arme their warlike Backs)
                  Gold-ſanded Hytan's natiue Shores forgo:
                  You, Parthians, Coſsians, and Arabians too,
                  By your ſage Magi's deep prophetike Charmes
                  Sacredly counſail'd, take you all to Armes:
                  And Thou, Chaldéa, turn'ſt to Swords & Speares
                  And Shields, Thy Rules, Squires, Compaſſes & Sphea
                           •
                        
                     
                  
                  For, of his Subiects ſpares he not a man
                  That beare a Launce, or Pike, or Crosbow can:
                  
                     Wiues, Beldames, Babes, Gray-heads (& Sickly, ſome)
                  Through all his Countries onely kept at home.
                  He alſo ſends for Perſians and Phoenicians;
                  For ſoft Egyptians, Hebrews, and Cilicians,
                  
                  Quickly to come, and kindly take his Part:
                  But Neuters, They (more Friends in face, then hart)
                  Reiect his earneſt Sute, Himſelfe neglect;
                  And vſe his Legats but with ſmall reſpect.
                  My Lord diſſembles for a while This wrong,
                  Till hauing tryumpht of a Foe more ſtrong,
                  Hee may with more eaſe, and with danger leſſe,
                  Their Sacrilege and ſurly Pride repreſſe.
                  In Ragau's ample Plain, one Morning, met
                  Theſe Royall Armies, of two Kings, as great
                  As ever Mars with ſteele and Furie arm'd:
                  
                     
                        •
                     ury and Pride ſo Either Souldier warm'd,
                  That hardly could they ſtay till Trumpets ſhrill
                  
                     
                        •
                     enounce the Battaile, & giue leaue to kill:
                  
                     
                        •
                     ut, with ſtern Looks, & brauing Threats, afar;
                  
                     
                        •
                     t hand, with Blowes; they had begun to war;
                  
                     
                        •
                     xchanging wounds. Two thouſand Perduz firſt
                  
                     
                        •
                     iue brauely th' Onſet: and not much diſperſt,
                  
                     
                        •
                     rom ſuddain whirle-wind of their nimble Slings,
                  
                     
                        •
                     o thick a ſtorm of humming Pebbles ſings
                  
                     So ſad a Dirge of Deaths, that they ſuppoſe,
                  That not one Troop, but All, had bin at Blowes.
                  To ſecond Thoſe, then, in good ordinance,
                  With waving Enſignes, thouſand Troops advance:
                  Both Armies ioyne. Now fiercely fall they to't,
                  
                     Mede vpon Chaldé, preſſing foot to foot;
                  Incount'ring felly with a furious noiſe
                  Of claſhing Arms, and Angry-braving Voice:
                  Lowder then Nile, ruſhing from Rocky-Coomb;
                  Or then Encélade, when he ſhakes his Toomb.
                  Heer lyes one head-leſſe: foot-leſſe there (alas!)
                  Another craules among the gorie Graſſe:
                  One's ſhoulder hangs: another hangs his Bowels
                  About his neck (but new bound vp in towells):
                  This, in the Face, That in the Flank is hurt:
                  This, as he dyes, a Floud of Blood doth ſpurt:
                  That, neither liues nor dyes; but ſees at once
                  Both vpper Iove's and neather's diverſe Thrones;
                  Becauſe, ſome little ſpirit (too-ſtubborn-ſtout)
                  Still, in the Body, will not yet come out.
                  Yer-while the ground was yellow, green, & blew;
                  Now onely coverd with a Crimſin hew:
                  While one doth (heer) another deadly thrill,
                  Another Him, Another Him doth kill:
                  
                     Still Rage increaſes: ſtill doth Fury ſpread,
                  Till all the Field be but a Heap of Dead.
                  One-while the Syrians by the Medes are chas'd;
                  Anon the Medes by Syrians are re-chas'd:
                  As one-while, from the Sea vnto the Shore,
                  Surge after Surge, Waue after Waue doth rore;
                  Another-while, from Shore to Sea they ply
                  Waue after Waue, Surge after Surge to fly:
                  Or as (we ſee) the Flowery Ears, in May,
                  When Zephyrus with gentle Puffs doth play)
                  Sway to and fro; forward and backward bend;
                  Now ſtoop a little; and now, ſtand an end.
                  Both Kings the-while, whoſe Force & Fortitude
                  Far paſt their Subiects, ſo their Blades imbrewd
                  
                     
                        •
                     n Bloud & Slaughter, that an open Glade
                  Where-e're they came, in either Camp they made:
                  
                     
                        •
                     o that, nor Casks, Cuirets, nor Shields could ſaue
                  
                     
                        •
                     rom mighty Stroaks their maſſie Weapons gaue:
                  Much like two Torrents, which with headlong fall
                  
                     
                        •
                     rom two oppoſed Hills, downe-bearing all,
                  
                     
                        •
                     anks Bridges, Trees, Corn, Cattell; ſeem to vy
                  Whether of either ſhall moſt damnifie.
                  
                     
                        •
                     ſpecially, the Medes King thundred ſo
                  
                     
                        •
                     pon our Battailes, that our Braveſt tho,
                  
                     Began to ſhrink, & with that ſhameful ſight,
                  Our Hoaſt diſ-ord'red, fell to ſhameful flight:
                  The Foe purſues, ſlayes, ſlaſhes (ſwift as wind)
                  Millions of wounds, and every one behind.
                  In briefe, that Day had Niniué bin downe,
                  Her King vndone (dead, and depriu'd of Crowne)
                  Had not I (full of Force and Furie) quick,
                  Like Lightning, ruſht where deadly Blows were thick,
                  Mails, Murrions, Corſelets, Iron, Steele & Braſſe,
                  Before My Sword were brittle all, as Glaſſe.
                  And onely I, My hand alone, which lent
                  More deaths then blowes, brought more aſtoniſhmēt
                  Vnto Their Camp, then all Our Camp beſide.
                  Their Foot no longer could my Brunt abide:
                  Their Horſmen, fainting, in their Saddles ſhake;
                  Arms on their Backs, harts in their Bellies quake.
                  Heer, with a down-right Blowe, from top to twiſt,
                  I cleaue in ſunder one that dar'd reſiſt:
                  There, I ſo deep dive in Another's minde,
                  That neer two handfulls peers my Sword, behinde;
                  So, that the Medes, now more then wauering,
                  In th'heat of Fight, abandon All their King.
                  Who, ſeeing him ſo betray'd, his Treſſes tore,
                  Retir'd to Ragau, all beſmeard with gore:
                  
                     There, over-taen by Ours, He brauely fought;
                  Mid thickeſt Darts a glorious Death he ſought;
                  Heawes, thunders, thrills, & of his Manly blowes
                  Not one in vaine, not one amiſſe beſtowes:
                  But, yer He die, with quick, keen, Fauchin fel,
                  He ſends before, thouſand ſtout Soules to Hell:
                  So the fierce Tigre, compaſt every-where
                  With Men & Dogs, to Fury turns his Feare;
                  Fights where he findes the greateſt dangerly;
                  Tears, toſſes, kills; not, vnreveng'd to die.
                  But, at the laſt, the vainly Valiant King,
                  Wearie of killing, and of conquering,
                  Thrilld with a thouſand Darts, and wounded rife,
                  Ended at once his lofty Rage and Life:
                  And, falling, fares as doth a mighty Oake,
                  Which, planted high vpon a maſſie Rock,
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      thouſand times hath felt the Winds to beat,
                  
                     
                        •
                     nd thouſand Axes, it a Fall to threat;
                  
                     
                        •
                     o that the Root groan'd, & the Valley nigh
                  
                     
                        •
                     ccho'd the noyſe vnto the ſteepeſt Sky,
                  While that the Top ſtill reeling to and fro,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ow, Theſe; now, Thoſe, threatens with overthrow:
                  Yet, ſtill it ſtands, in ſpight of all their ſpight,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ill at the laſt, all vnder-mined quight
                  
                     With million ſtroaks, it falls, and with the Fall,
                  Bears to the ground, Trees, Rocks, Corn, Cattell, All,
                  For, Arphaxat extinct, extinct with-all
                  Was Median's glory: and, My Lord of All
                  Raz'd Ecbatane; and now grow Weeds & Graſs
                  Where, late, His lofty, rare-rich Palace was:
                  Where, late, the Lute, & the lowd Cornets noiſe
                  In curious Conſort warbled ſweet their voice;
                  The voice of Scriech-Owles, & Night-Ravens is heard,
                  And euery fatall and affrighting Bird.
                  My King-God, weary of Warrs tedious toile,
                  In NINIVE the great, for four months-while
                  Made Publique Feaſts: and, when the Feaſt was don,
                  Commaunds Mee leavie a huge Hoaſt, anon,
                  Of chiefeſt Men; to goe & chaſtiſe Thoſe
                  That had diſdaignd him Aide againſt his Foes:
                  And that, on All that dar'd His Heſts infrenge,
                  With Fire & Sword his Honor I avenge;
                  And that with ſpeed. But, Madam, ſee (alas!)
                  How farre I am from bringing This too-paſſe:
                  For, comming heere, your Nation to ſubdue,
                  My Selfe am conquer'd and ſubdu'd by You:
                  So that (alas!) Death's draddeſt Tyrannies
                  In end-leſſe Night will ſoon ſiel-vp mine eyes,
                  
                     Except the powerfull ſole Preſervatiue
                  Of thy ſweet Kiſſes keepe mee yet aliue.
                  Nay: good My Lord, ſaid Shee, Tell-on (I pray)
                  
                     
                        •
                     our good Succeſſe and Service, by the Way.
                  Then HOLOFERNES, where he left, began
                  A long Narration how He playd the Man;
                  
                     
                        •
                     alfe Truth, halfe Tales: For, tis great Souldiers guiſe
                  
                     
                        •
                     o būbaſt oft their Own Exploits with Lyes.
                  Mine Hoaſt all muſtered & together brought,
                  
                     
                        •
                     'inflame their harts with martial Heat I ſought:
                  
                     
                        •
                     ellowes (ſaid I) if euer Your Deſires
                  
                     
                        •
                     aue thirſted Fame, to liue when Life expires;
                  
                     
                        •
                     o w'now, to puniſh that preſumptuous Crew
                  Which rudely (late) our ſacred Legats ſlew:
                  
                     
                        •
                     o w', to avenge our drad-deer Soverain Liege
                  Of that fel Outrage, nay, foule Sacrilege
                  
                     
                        •
                     gainſt the Greateſt GOD came euer downe
                  
                     
                        •
                     rom Heav'nly Spheares to ſway an Earthly Crown:
                  
                     
                        •
                     rm, arm you, braue Blouds, arm your either hand;
                  
                     
                        •
                     his, with a Blade; That, with a Fier-brand,
                  With Fire and Sword to over-run the Weſt,
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     o lay it waſte; to bear away the beſt:
                  
                     
                        •
                     o ſink it all vnder a Crimſin Flood;
                  
                     
                        •
                     r make (at leaſt) your Horſes ſwim in blood:
                  
                     Go w', take poſſeſſion of Your Valors due,
                  The whole Worlds Crown, which yeelds it all to you▪
                  
                  Take you This Honor; which, in Time-to-come,
                  Shall keep your braue Names from th'obliuious Tomb
                  Take, take your pleaſures of the richeſt ſpoils
                  Of richeſt Cities in a hundred Soiles
                  Which you ſhal ſack. So, may you once in Health
                  Come laden home with Honor & with Wealth.
                  I ceaſt: and ſoon they ſecond, All, my voice
                  With Caps caſt-vp, with clapped hands; & noyſe
                  Of generall Ioy, to haue Me GENERALL.
                  Some ſix-ſcore Thouſand was Mine Hoaſt in all,
                  Or ſom-what-more: with which from NINIVE,
                  But three-dayes march I made to Bectileh;
                  Thence paſt I forward by Hierapolis,
                  
                  Then by Amida, then by Niſibis.
                  
                  And thence to Charan (at the length) I came,
                  Once happy ſeat of your great Abraham.
                  
                  Then wan I th'Hill, whoſe oblique Horns divide
                  All Aſia neer, and limite farre and wide
                  Many large Empires: Where, I ſack, I ſlay,
                  I burn, I raze, what-euer in my way:
                  My Souldiers ſeem ſo many Mowers, right,
                  Which in a Mead leaue not a blade vpright;
                  
                     But, by long Swathes of their degraded Graſſe,
                  Well ſhowe the way their ſweeping Sythes did paſſe:
                  This, Phul, and Tharſis, and all Lydia knowes,
                  
                     
                        •
                     n whoſe waſte Fields now only Bramble growes.
                  Com'n neer the Straight which ſerues for Wall & Fort
                  To 
                        •
                     oft Phoenicians, and Thiefe Iſsians Port:
                  The Roſians, Soleans, Mopſians, Tharſians, Iſsia,
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        nchials, Aegoeans; briefely, all Cilicia;
                  Take-vp this Gate, with all their Power; in hope
                  To ſtay my Paſſage, and my Courſe to ſtop.
                  Should I heer tell the dangerous Enterpriſes
                  
                     
                        •
                     raue Charges, Reſcues, Sallyes, Shocks, Surpriſes,
                  Which there befell, the day would faile (I feare)
                  
                     
                        •
                     efore my Speech: for, the Cilicians were
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      fortifi'd by fauour of the Place,
                  
                     
                        •
                     hat little could wee there preuaile, a ſpace:
                  
                     
                        •
                     ay, all mine Hoaſt, which had ſo often chas't
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      many greater Hoaſts; now ſtood agaſt;
                  
                     
                        •
                     ill in deſpight, and full of deſperate rage,
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      thickeſt dangers, I my Selfe ingage;
                  
                     
                        •
                     here, round aſſaild, and wounded in all parts,
                  
                     
                        •
                     y Shield thick briſtled with a Groue of Darts,
                  Neuer ſhrunk: but ſo be-ſtirr'd mee round,
                  
                     
                        •
                     hat I alone made All their Hoaſt giue ground.
                  
                     Mine Army then, followes the way amain
                  Mine Arm had made, and paved thick with Slain:
                  Now our moſt Cowards (late) for Fear, adying;
                  Wound moſt, kil moſt, and moſt purſue them flying.
                  
                     Cydnus, yer while, for his pure ſilver Flood,
                  Cald King of Waters, wallowes now in blood:
                  And rapid Pyram (paſt his wonted Toule)
                  To Neptune, Shields, Helms, Horſe & Men doth roul
                        •
                     
                  
                  In brief, as heer your Mocmur, ſtopt a while
                  By ſome new Bridge, or ſome vnuſuall Pile;
                  Roars, riſes, foams, fumes, threats, beats, rages, rave
                        •
                     
                  
                  Againſt his new Bank; and with waighty Waves,
                  Waighty and ſtrong, beares down at laſt the Bay,
                  And, for a time, out-laſhing every-way,
                  Tears, over-turns, and vndermines, much worſe
                  Then when he freely hath his natiue Courſe:
                  Even ſo, my Force, having the Force repeld,
                  Which in theſe Straights the ſtruggling Paſſage hel
                        •
                     
                  
                  Burns, kils, confounds, what meets it moſt and leaſ
                        •
                     
                  
                  ASIA, laid waſte: returning to the Eaſt,
                  
                  I conquer'd Coelé, ſpoyling, pityleſs,
                  The fruitfull Verge of famous Euphrates:
                  
                  
                     Rapſis I raz'd; and Agraea overthrow'n,
                  The Vertue of my mighty Arm hath know'n.
                  
                     Thence, keeping ſtill by the Sea coaſt, I ſpoile,
                  
                     
                        •
                     he Madianites: then, marching North a-while;
                  
                     
                        •
                     owards double Liban, I Damaſcus race,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ith her neer Towns, Gaane, Abyle, Hypaepas:
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     hence came I (curious) to that Hill, from whence
                  
                     
                        •
                     he Sun, by Night, is ſeen; and ſeen from thence
                  
                     
                        •
                     ſo to Riſe: Thence, towards the Weſtern Realms
                  
                     
                        •
                     ontinual beaten with Phoenician Streams.
                  Then, Thoſe of Gaze, Tyre, Sydon, Aſcalon,
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        otus, Byblus, Ioppa, every-one,
                  
                     
                        •
                     r'd with my Fame; in greateſt humblenes,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ſpatch their Legates to My Mightines.
                  
                     
                        •
                     ecome not heer with Force and Arms (ſay They)
                  
                     
                        •
                     o bid thee Battail, or to barre thy Way:
                  
                     
                        •
                     t rather, Mightieſt Price, in humbleſt awe,
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      yeeld vs Thine, to accept Thy Will for Law;
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      Life, or Death. Thine are our Fields & Forts;
                  
                     
                        •
                     ine are our Cities; Thine our Ships, our Ports,
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      Lands, our Goods, our Cattail, Corn, & Wine;
                  
                     
                        •
                     ine are our Children, and our Selves are Thine:
                  
                     
                        •
                     ly be pleas'd (Sir) to accept vs ſo,
                  
                     
                        •
                     d ſo eſteem vs: and right happy th
                        •
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     ll we eſteem our Selves, to haue a Lord
                  
                     
                        •
                     n wield ſo well the Sceptre and the Sword,
                  
                     The Lance and Balance; and, beſides, excels
                  Men, equals Gods in euery Vertue elſe.
                  Nor did their People, nor their States diſproue
                  Their Embaſſies; but by all ſignes of Loue
                  Both Yong and Old, crown'd all with Flora's Fauors,
                  Of hundred Colours and of hundred Sauors;
                  Came Dauncing out with Muſiks cheerfull Moods,
                  To offer Me their Bodies and their Goods.
                  Nor did I then a Victor's Right abuſe;
                  But with all Kindneſs them as Friends I vſe:
                  Leaue them their Land: but firſt, their Forts I mand
                  With ſome of Mine; with ſome of Theirs, my Band.
                  For (Madame) ſtill the farther that I go,
                  My Camp, in Bands; my Bands in Soldiers growe:
                  Euen as Danubius, firſt, beginning ſmall
                  Throgh Raurak Plains with ſhallow courſe to craule,
                  Still ſwelling more & more, with three-ſcore Riuers,
                  To th' Euxine Sea his Sea-like Self deliuers.
                  I hop't, as Theſe, ſo alſo Iſrael
                  
                  Would yeeld themſelues; & not at all compel
                  My iuſt Reuenge to threat Extreamities:
                  But, when I came heer to Scythepolis
                  
                  (The Toomb of Her whoſe happy Milk had yerſt
                  The twice-born Dennis in his Cradle nourc't)
                  
                     
                     
                        •
                      was aduertis'd of this ſtubborn Folly;
                  Which will, no doubt, vndoo the Hebrews wholly.
                  The end of the fift Booke.
               
               
                  
                  BETHVLIANS Reſcue. THE SIXT BOOKE.
                  
                     YEt that the Pagan could his Story end,
                     Frō higheſt Hils did dusky Night deſcend:
                     And now the Steward full the Table fraights
                     With all, moſt pretious, moſt delicious Meats;
                     As if the Vice-Roy, to This Iouial Feaſt,
                     Had bid the Kings both of the Weſt and Eaſt.
                     
                     O greedy-guts! O Gulphes inſatiate!
                     A thouſand Worlds, with all their delicate
                     And various Cates deuis'd by th'Abderite,
                     
                     Cannot ſuffize your bound-leſs Appetite.
                     O Belly-gods! for You (at any price)
                     To the Moluques, muſt we trudge for Spice;
                     To the Canaries, for your Sugars fine;
                     To (Ioves-Crete) Candy for your choyſeſt Wine.
                     To pleaſe your Taſts, your Palats to content,
                     Seas ſacred Boſome is profanely rent;
                     Aieris diſpeopled; yea, right hardly can
                     The only Phoenix ſcape the Iawes of Man.
                     
                        O Poiſon! worſe then Plague to Martiall ſtates,
                     Which braueſt mindes baſely effeminates.
                     While Rome, for Heads, had Curios and Fabricios,
                     
                     Whom Roots ſuffiz'd for dainties moſt delicious:
                     While Perſia was with Sallets ſole content;
                     They flouriſht Both, admir'd and Eminent;
                     And Eithers Arms triumphing euery-where,
                     Fill'd all the Earth with Tropheis and with Fear:
                     But, ſince that This, from ſoft Aſſyrians took
                     His vaſt Exceſſe of Kitchin and of Cook;
                     And, ſince that That fel vnder the Diſpoſe
                     Of Galba's, Neros, and Vitellios
                     
                     (More glorying to exceed Others Exceſs,
                     Then conquer Pyrrhus or Mithridates)
                     Both haue bin oft and iuſtly ſackt and ſpoil'd
                     By pettie Nations, whom they oft had foil'd.
                     Natur's ſuffiz'd with Little: Ouer-ful
                     Deadeth the Courage, & the Wits doth dull.
                     Each being ſet; anon, full filled-out
                     
                        
                           •
                        n maſſie Boules the Malmſey walks about:
                     One drinks deuoutly in an Eſtridge Egge;
                     One in a Lute, another in a Legge;
                     One in a Ship, another in a Shell;
                     Another takes a broad deep ſiluer Bell,
                     
                        To ring his Peal; but ſo his hand doth ſway
                     And ſhake, that half he ſheds it, by the way.
                     But, aboue all, the Prince him ſo behau'd,
                     That, now, the more he drank the more he crau'd:
                     Much like the Sea; which, though it take this-while
                     Twin-named Iſter, and Seauen-mouthed Nile;
                     Neuer increaſes, nor is full therefore;
                     But euer ready for as many more.
                     Cup calls for Cup; and when the Skinker weens
                     T' haue done his Seruice, he afreſh begins
                     To fill them Liquor: for, till Midnight paſt,
                     Among the Gueſts this Tippling game did laſt.
                     And then away, with much adoo, they went
                     (Feeling, and reeling) Each vnto his Tent;
                     By th'amorous Tyrant often vrg'd before,
                     Who thought each minute now a yeare and more.
                     When they were gon, Hee 'gan embrace and buſſe
                     The trembling Lady; who beſoothes him Thus:
                     Nay: leaue (my Lord): ſuch haſt what need you make
                     To reap the Fruit which from you none can take?
                     Get you to bed: and, if you leaue me roome,
                     I will not faile you by and by to come,
                     So ſoon as I haue but disburthened
                     My Load of Cloathes, and made me fit for Bed.
                     
                        If ſuttleſt Wits, and if the ſobreſt Brains,
                     Haue hardly ſcaped Womens wylie Trains,
                     Maruaile not, Reader, if One, fool'd at-once
                     By Semele's and Cytheréa's Sonnes,
                     Be thus beguil'd: ſith Either of the Two
                     
                        
                           •
                        ereaues the Bodie's and the Mindes Force, too.
                     Then, letting her ſlide from his arms away,
                     He goes about himſelfe to diſ-aray:
                     Now he vnbuttons, now pulls-off his hoſe;
                     But, his heat hinders, and his haſt foreſlowes;
                     
                        
                           •
                        or (ſleep-awake, blinde-ſeeing) while he plyes
                     T'vntruſſe his Points, them (fumbling) faſter ties:
                     Till, ouercome with Rage, and Longing, more,
                     He cuts his knots, and off his Cloathes he tore;
                     
                        
                           •
                        nd then to Bed. Where (as the Croſſe-bow-man,
                     Who, for his pleaſure, watcheth now and than
                     By ſome Croſs-path, ſome Coney, or ſome Hare;
                     
                        
                           •
                        t euery Noiſe, on euery ſide doth ſtare
                     Where ſtirs a Leaf; and leuels thither-ward,
                     
                        
                           •
                        t the leaſt Wren, or the leaſt Worm that ſtird
                     
                        
                           •
                        eer where he ſtands, ſtill in a Hopefull-Doubt
                     
                        
                           •
                        urning his Body and his Bowe about)
                     The luſtfull Tyrant, if he hear a Mouſe
                     Neuer ſo little ſtir about the houſe;
                     
                        Shivering for Joy, he thinks his Miſtreſſe there:
                     Nay, though he nothing hear, his flattring Eare
                     Thinks it hears ſomething, which can nothing be
                     But his admired moſt deſired Shee:
                     Lifts-vp, layes-down, and vp again re-lifts
                     His heauie Noule: from ſide to ſide he ſhifts;
                     Caſting the Diſtance, counting, in his head,
                     How-many ſteps will bring her to his Bed,
                     The which the-while he full of Thorns doth think.
                     But, now the Fume of his aboundant Drink,
                     Drouzing his Brain, beginneth to deface
                     The ſweet Remembrance of her louely Face:
                     Alreadie wheels his Bed, alreadie ſhine
                     A thouſand Rayes before his ſlumbring Eyne:
                     Alreadie in his Eares (now waxen numme)
                     A thouſand Drones with buzzing Noiſe do humme
                     He ſees Chiméras, Gorgons, Mino-Taures.
                     
                     
                        Meduſas, Haggs, Alectos, Semi-Taures.
                     
                     But IVDITH's heart ſtill beating thick with-in,
                     Felt a fell Combat in it ſelf begin:
                     Now, cauſing Fear her ſacred Fervour quaſh;
                     Anon, her Fervour her faint Fear to daſh.
                     IVDITH, ſaid She, Thy Iacob to deliuer,
                     Now, is the Time; Now to-it. Do-it neuer.
                     
                     
                        O! Yes. O! No. I will. I will not, I:
                     
                     
                        Shall I profane kinde Hoſpitality?
                     
                     Nay, rather ſhall I ſanctifie't the more,
                     When by the ſame I ſhall the Saints reſtore.
                     
                        But, Traitors euer bear Diſhonors brand.
                     
                     Traitors be Thoſe betray; not ſave, their Land.
                     
                        But, Murderers Heaun's rigbteous Iudge abhors.
                     
                     Why? all Man-killers are not Murtherers.
                     
                        But, Hee's a Murderer who his Prince hath ſlain.
                     
                     This is a Tyrant; not My Soverain.
                     
                     
                        But, GOD hath now bequeath'd Him vs for Lord.
                     
                     Hee's not of GOD that wars againſt his Word.
                     
                     
                        Why, then, may All, their Tyrants kill and rid?
                     
                     So Ahod, Iahel, and ſo Iehu did.
                     
                        Yea, but from Heau'n had They autentik Warrant.
                     
                     So hath my Soule (approued and apparant.)
                     
                        But, ah! how weak art Thou, this Work to act!
                     
                     Whom GOD aſſiſted, neuer ſtrength hath lackt.
                     
                        But, hadſt thou done; the Sequel's more to doubt.
                     
                     GOD brought me in: & GOD will bring me out.
                     
                        What, if He pleaſe leaue thee in Heathens hands?
                     
                     Their Chieftain dead, I fear nor Death, nor Bands.
                     
                        But, to their Luſt thou ſhalt be left a Prey.
                     
                     Neuer my Minde; my Body force they may.
                     
                        Then, in this point thus ſacredly confirm'd;
                     With hands heav'd vp, her eies on Heav'n ſhe firm'd.
                     And ſoftly, Thus poures to the Lord her Prayer:
                     O gracious GOD, who with paternal Care
                     Haſt euer kept thine Iſrael, ſtrengthen Thou
                     Mine Arm with Thine, that it may nimbly now
                     Cut-off this Tyrant, who thus dares preſume,
                     To ſcale the Heav'ns; Thy Sceptre to aſſume.
                     And, fith thy grace, through thouſand ſtorms & more,
                     Hath brought my Bark in ſight of wiſhed ſhore,
                     O, let it land: with Poppie's ſleepieſt ſap
                     This Tyrant's ſenſe benum in end-leſs Nap;
                     That I may raiſe this Siege, Thy Thralls releaſe;
                     Return Thee Praiſe; and, to thy SION, Peace.
                     
                     Her Praier done, the Drunken Prince ſhe heares
                     Snotting aloud. Then faire and ſoft She neeres
                     His Pallets ſide, and quickly takes the Sword
                     Which had ſo oft the groaning Earth begor'd.
                     But, euen about the fatal Blowe to giue;
                     Fear, from her hand did the fel Weapon reaue:
                     Her hart did faint, her ſtrength did faile her quite.
                     O GOD (then ſaid She) ſtrengthen by Thy Might
                     My timerous heart's, and trembling hand's Conſent
                     Then on the Duke ſo ſtiffe a ſtroake ſhe lent,
                     
                        As happily, tri-parted (at the poule)
                     Th'Head from the Body, Body from the Soule.
                     His Soule to Hell: his Body on the Bed:
                     In IVDITH's hand his grim and ghaſtly Head;
                     Which ſoon her Handmaid in her Night-bag hid.
                     Then ſpeeding thence, ſuſpect-leſs, or vnſpi'd;
                     Without Impeach the Pagan Hoſte they paſt.
                     For, if that any ſaw them trip ſo faſt,
                     Heav'n-blinde, they thought She went but (as before) Tower,
                     Into the Vale, bright Diane to adore.
                     Now, when chaſte IVDITH came to th'Hebrews
                     
                     Ope, open (ſaid She): for the GOD of Power,
                     Th'Aſſyrian Forces hath this Night forlorn,
                     And lifted vp his choſen Iacob's forlorn.
                     The Town, amaz'd at her Return vn-hop't,
                     Preſſe to the Port; which inſtantly they op't,
                     Thronging about her: who a Tarras mounts,
                     And her Exploit from point to point recounts.
                     Then, from her Bag, for Proof of what ſhe ſaid,
                     She pulls the-while the dreadfull Pagans Head.
                     The Citizens, when in her hand they ſawe
                     Th'Aſſyrian's Head's Head; full of humble Awe,
                     Extoll th'Almighty, who ſo mighty Foe
                     By a weak Woman had ſubdewed ſo.
                     
                        But, moſt of all did Ammons Prince admire
                     GOD's dreadfull Iudgement: and to ſcape His ire,
                     Who Iſrael thus, of vanquiſht, victoriz'd;
                     His Fleſh and Heart he ſodain circumciz'd.
                     
                     How ſweetly, Lord, Thy ſacred Prouidence,
                     
                     Mens ſuttleſt Wiſdome, in their Plots, preuents!
                     For, thine Elected vnto Life, to guide
                     Into thy Fold (when moſt they ſeem beſide)
                     
                        Good out of Ill thou draw'ſt: making their Sin,
                     Means ('gainſt their minds) their Goodnes to begin
                     Lord! foule Deſire of Murther and of Spoile
                     Brought this (late) Pagan to th'Iſacian Soile;
                     Where, meaning (firſt) Thy Peoples bloud to ſpill,
                     Now, ſpend his Owne for their deer ſakes he wil:
                     Thy mercy ſo from his maligne Affect,
                     Maugre his minde, brought forth a good Effect.
                     So, neer Damaſcus, mad'ſt thou, by thy Call,
                     Of Wolf a Shepheard, of a Saule a Paule;
                     Of Perſecutor, an Apoſtle; (brief)
                     Of Chief of Sinners, among Saints the Chief:
                     So ſodainly, that all the Saints about
                     Admir'd his Doctrine; Yet, his Deeds did doubt.
                     So, the Saint Thief, which ſuffered with our Sauior
                     Was led to Life by his Death-dew Behauior:
                     
                        And, when no longer Earth could bear his Sin,
                     Was, in a Moment, made Heau'ns Citizen.
                     
                        O feareful-hopeful Precedent of Grace!
                     
                     
                        Such as, but One, GOD's holy Books imbrace:
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           ne, that None (humbled) ſhould deſpaire of Pardon:
                     
                        But One, that None preſume in Sin to harden.)
                     So, turn, good Lord, O turn the hearts of Princes,
                     Whoſe Rage their realms wth Sts. deer bloud berinſes:
                     O! let the Sword, Thou in their hand haſt put,
                     None but Thy Foes, none but Thoſe Tyrants cut,
                     Who curſedly Thee, or Thy CHRIST blaſpheme
                     Vſurping IVDA and IERVSALEM,
                     
                        
                           •
                        nd all Thy Golden Candleſticks beſide;
                     Threating the Weſt, too, with their Power & Pride):
                     Not Thoſe, who humbly, only, euermore,
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           hee, TRINITY in VNITY, adore.
                     Then, as the braue Virago ordered,
                     Soldier takes th'Aſſyrian Tyrants Head;
                     And, for the Hebrews more Encouragement,
                     
                        
                           •
                        lad ſets it vp vpon the Battlement.
                     There, Parents, Children, Maids, & Widowes ſad,
                     Whom Pagan Swords but new bereaued had
                     
                        
                           •
                        f Children, Parents, Louers, Husbands deer,
                     
                        
                           •
                        wixt Grief and Anger, as diſtracted neer,
                     
                        Pull-off his Beard, pull out his hatefull Tongue,
                     (Which had blaſphemed Heau'n & Earth ſo long)
                     Spit in his Face, ſcratch & poach-out his Eyes;
                     And all, that Hate and Fury can deuiſe.
                     For, lyue Remembrings of their wrongs, them make,
                     On his dead Head, this dead Reuenge to take.
                     
                        Aurora, weary of the cold Embrace
                     Of her old Spouſe, began in Inde apace
                     To paint her Portal of an Opal hew;
                     When, of Bethulians all the braueſt Crew
                     Iſſue in Arms: and ſuch a Noiſe withall,
                     (Such Shouts and Cries) as if, in th'antike Braule,
                     All th'Elements, breaking the bands of Order,
                     Were by the Eares; and in their old Diſorder.
                     The Court of Gard (that night vnuſuall ſtrong,
                     Towards the Town) hearing ſuch Noiſe, ſo long,
                     Start from their Sleep: and crying Arm, arm, arm,
                     
                     Giue ſodainly to all their Hoaſt Alarm.
                     
                     One, for his owne, his Fellowes Helm puts-on:
                     One, his right Vantbras on left arm doth don:
                     One, on his neck, for Launce, a Libbet takes:
                     One ſpeeds him quick: another ſcarce awakes:
                     One mounts his Horſe, yer he be curb'd, or girt;
                     And, without Spurs: Others, to ſhew more heart,
                     
                        Would make a Stand: ſome neither wake nor ſleep:
                     Some, braue in Word; in Deed, as faint as Sheep.
                     Now, by degrees, this Noiſe comes to the Eares
                     Of Holoſernez Houſhold Officers:
                     
                        
                           •
                        o that ſad Bagos hies him in all haſt
                     Vnto the Tent where th'Ethnick ſlept his laſt.
                     With trembling hand, once, twice, or thrice he knockt:
                     
                        
                           •
                        ut an eternall Sleep the Doors had lockt
                     Of his Lord's eares; who had already croſt
                     
                        
                           •
                        he Stygian Ferry, not to be re-croſt.
                     Then, hearing ſtill th'Iſacians lowder ſhout,
                     
                        
                           •
                        e makes the Doore fly-open with his Foot;
                     
                        
                           •
                        nd, entring, findes, in gorie Bed, lowe ſhrunk,
                     Not Holofernez, but his Head-leſs Trunk.
                     
                        
                           •
                        hen did he teare his haire, and rent his Clothes,
                     
                        
                           •
                        nd to the Clowds roars out in yelling Oathes:
                     
                        
                           •
                        ſpecially, when IVDITH there he miſt,
                     Whom now the Murdreſs of his Lord he wiſt.
                     When, ragefull ruſhing from the bloody Tent,
                     
                        
                           •
                        his hideous Cry through all the Camp he ſent:
                     Woe, woe to vs! Alas! this curſed Night
                     
                        
                           •
                        curſed Captiue hath confounded quight
                     
                        
                           •
                        ur awefull Army, and vndone vs All,
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         treacherous ſlaughter of our GENERAL.
                     
                        This new Affright redoubled on the firſt,
                     The ſtouteſt harts doth ſo diſ-hart and burſt;
                     That All (at-once abandoning their Armes,
                     Pikes, Swords, & Shields, Darts, Arrowes, all) by ſwarms,
                     Be take them to their heels; o'r Hill & Dale,
                     Flying from one death, on a worſe to fall.
                     Then the Beſieged, in great Troops deſcend,
                     And on their backs revenging Bowes they bend.
                     Both run apace: Thoſe fly; Theſe follow faſt:
                     But thoſe that fly, make leſſe good ſpeed then haſte.
                     For, without loſſe of Man, th'Hebrews, at will,
                     The flying Pagans ſlaughter, thraſh, and thrill:
                     Euen as a Lyon, in Getulian Lawnes,
                     Beſtreawes the ſoile with fearfull Kids and Fawnes;
                     Where, not a Beaſt his Furie dares abide,
                     Nor lift a horne againſt his awefull pride.
                     One, from a Rock himſelfe doth headlong daſh,
                     And all to peeces all his parts doth paſh:
                     Other, forgetting that in deepeſt depth
                     Fate findes vs out, into a Riuer leap'th.
                     But, if by ſpeed, or ſome good hap, perhaps
                     This Mornings firſt fel Fury any ſcapes,
                     He ſcapes not though thoſe Hebrews outrages,
                     Who kept (about) the Straits & Paſſages:
                     
                        So that ſcarce one of ſuch a Rout could bring,
                     To Niniué, the Newes vnto the King.
                     The Battaile (rather, th'Execution) don,
                     Out of the Citie flocked euery-one
                     Whom Sex or Age had hitherto reſtrain'd;
                     To ſee the drad Revenge the Lord had rain'd
                     So ſuddainly, and paſt all Expectation,
                     On thoſe fell Foes of His deer Holy Nation.
                     
                     One, full of Wounds, yet gaſping, calls in vain
                     On lazie Death, to end his lingering pain:
                     One, grinning gaſtly, in his viſage grim,
                     
                        
                           •
                        howes, dead, the Rage that liuing ſweld in him:
                     
                        
                           •
                        ome mangled heer, ſome there, ſome round about:
                     
                        
                           •
                        nd euery Soule a ſundry way went out:
                     
                        
                           •
                        ccordingly as Valor, Sleight, or Chance,
                     
                        
                           •
                        ed the dead-doing Sword, or Dart, or Launce.
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         ſhort, This ſight ſo truly tragick was,
                     That euen the Victors would haue ſigh't, alas,
                     
                        
                           •
                        ad they ſo vanquiſht any Foe but This.
                     But rifling long, among the Carcaſes,
                     
                        
                           •
                        t laſt the Body of the Duke they found
                     Thogh head-leſs, known beſt, by that only wound).
                     
                        
                           •
                        hither they throng; That, euery blade muſt thrill,
                     
                        
                           •
                        nd euery one that Corps againe would kill:
                     
                        A hundred Swords, a hundred Pikes, and Darts,
                     Are euery moment goring all his parts;
                     And euery Nerue, Vein, Muſcle, Ioynt they hack;
                     Till room (at laſt) their Vulgar Rage doth lack.
                     For, were his Bulk as big as Atlaſſes,
                     
                     His Limbes as many as Encéiades,
                     
                     And ſtrong Briareus; yet, yet think I, all,
                     Their dire Revenge would ſtill, ſtill think too ſmall.
                     For, of the Iewes, none ſo baſe Clown there is
                     But would a Gobbet of that Fleſh of His.
                     Giue, Tyrant, giue thy Right hand to Cilicians,
                     
                     Thy Left to Medes: giue one Arm to Phoenicians,
                     
                     Th'other to Iſmael: and divide thy Feet
                     Between th'Egyptian and the Coelianite:
                     
                     That euery Nation, whom Thine Arms offenc't,
                     May, by ſome Part, be partly recompenc't.
                     Alas! I erre: for, all in Atomies
                     Wert Thou divided, all would not ſuffiſe.
                     But IVDITH, nor forgetful, nor ingrate,
                     Would neither bury, nor Selfe-arrogate
                     The ſacred honor for Aſſiſtance given
                     In This great Work, by th'All-work hand of Heav'
                           •
                        
                     
                     But, tyming meet her Feet to Timbrells noiſe,
                     This Hymne ſhe ſings with glad-ſad warbling voice;
                     
                        Follow'd by all the Flower of Hebrew Dames
                     Maids, Widowes, Wiues) of faultleſs Forms & Fames.
                  
                  
                     
                        Laude, laude we, lowd, with verſe, with voice & ſtrings,
                     
                     
                        The GOD of GODs, the glorious King of Kings:
                     
                     
                        Thoſe Power alone, pulls Tyrants down, & reareth
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           eek in their Room, who HIM ay-faithfull feareth.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        For, who would thinke, one Citie, in one Day,
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            ſuddainly could ſuch an Hoaſt diſmay,
                     
                     
                        Whoſe high Exploits had all the World aſtounded,
                     
                     
                        And, from the Indes, to Iapheths Inns reſounded?
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Lord! who wold think, that HOLOFERNES, 
                           
                              •
                           ate
                     
                     
                        Proud Conqueror of many a Potentate,
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           hould loſe his Life (for all his Selfe-affiance)
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            one weak Woman, not a Troop of Giants?
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Who, who would thinke, that HE, who late poſſeſt
                     
                     
                        At leaſt, had power) from fartheſt East to Weſt;
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           om Pole to Pole ſtretching his arms all-over,
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           ould not haue, left, one Inch of Turſe, for Cover?
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        That ſtately Prince, ſo thick attended-on,
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              ••
                           w dead, (alas!) lyes, aboue ground, alone.
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           t, not alone: for, Thoſe that ſeru'd him, living;
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              ••
                           ſort him, dead; Proofe of their Duties giving:
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Nor yet, aboue ground; for, the Ravens become
                     
                     
                        His mangled Bodie's better-worthy Toomb,
                     
                     
                        Then pretious Marble, let, and Iacynth gilded;
                     
                     
                        Which, for his Bones Himſelfe had proudly builded.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        So, ſo (good Lord) from Hence-forth, let vs finde
                     
                     
                        Thee, not our Iudge, but as our Father kinde;
                     
                     
                        And ſo, Hence-forth, the Foes of SION rather
                     
                     
                        Feele Thee their Iudge, then their propitious Father.
                     
                  
                  
                     Heer IVDITH ends: Heer alſo end will I,
                     With thanks to GOD; and to Your Maieſtie.
                     To GOD, for bringing This my Work about▪
                     
                     To You, for daigning to haue read it out,
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  LITTLE BARTAS: OR Brief Meditations, ON The Power, Providence, Greatnes, & Goodnes of GOD, In the CREATION; of the World, for Man: Of Man, For HIM-SELFE.
                  
                  Tranſlated; & Dedicated To the moſt Royal Lady ELIZABETH.
                  by IOSVAH SYLVESTER.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
                        royal blazon or coat of arms
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  TO The moſt Royal Lady ELIZABETH, Infanta of England; Princeſs PALATINE of Rhine.
                  
                  SWeet Grace of GRACES, Glory of Your Age,
                  
                     Luſtre of VERTVES (Moral and Diuine)
                  Whoſe Sacred Rayes (already) far out-ſhine
                  
                  Your Princely State, Your Royall Parentage;
                  
                  Heer, to your HIGHNES (with all Good-Preſage,
                  Congratuling Your little PALATINE)
                  
                  I conſecrate This LITTLE-One of Mine
                  To ſerue Your Self, firſt; then, Your Son, for Page.
                  Your gracious Favours to my former Brood,
                  
                  So binde my Thoughts, ſo bolden my Deſires,
                  To ſhowe Mee gratefull, as I know You good;
                  
                  That Thus to YOV, This LITTLE Mine aſpires:
                  
                  Little in Growth; yet of ſo great a Spirit,
                  
                  As (happily) Your Graces grace may merit.
                  
                     
                        To Your Highnes Seruice, Dulie and Trulie devoted, Ioſuah Sylvester.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                  Souhaits Royaux & Loyaux.
                  
                     Au Roy.
                     AIuſi, l' Ancien des Temps, d' Ans, d'Honneurs, & Bonl
                     Comblant ce Chef Royal; couronne voz Labeurs:
                     Qui, pour le Droict des Roys, d'vn Glaiue tout divin,
                     Combattez l'Antichriſt, & ſon grand BELLARMIN.
                  
                  
                     Au Prince Charles.
                     
                        
                           •
                        inſi le Tout-puiſſant, de ſa main de PANDORE,
                     Face d'vn Charle-moindre, vn Charle-magne encore;
                     Qui, ſuivant Voz Vertuz, deriue, perennel,
                     Saincts-Sages-Preux STVARTS au Sceptre paternel.
                  
                  
                     Aux Princes Palatins.
                     
                        
                           •
                        inſi, le Ciel benin de ſes Treſors beniſſe,
                     
                        L'Hymen heureux & ſainct de FRED'RIC & d'ELIZ
                     De ſorte, que d'Iceux, leurs Filz, & leurs Neveuz,
                     
                     Nous naiſſent deformais des EMPEREVRS heureux.
                  
                  
                     Aux Anglois & Allemans.
                     
                        
                           •
                        inſi, Lions ANGLOIS & Aigles d'ALLEMAGNE
                     (Triumphants, pour la Foy, de ROME & de l'ESPAG
                     Terraſſent coup a coup les Lunes du TVRQVOIS,
                     Pour planter tout par tout les Lauriers de la CROIX.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  LITTLE BARTAS.
                  
                     IF wanton Lovers ſo delight to gaze
                     On mortall Beauties brittle little Blaze;
                     That not content, with (almoſt) daily ſight
                     Of Thoſe deere Idols of their Appetite;
                     Nor, with th'Idëas which th'Idalian Dart
                     Hath deepe imprinted in their yielding heart;
                     Nor, with Their Pictures (with preciſeſt charge)
                     Done by De-Creets, Marcus, or Peake, at large
                     (And hangd of purpoſe, where they moſt frequent,
                     As ſome faire Chamber's choicest Ornament)
                     They muſt haue Heliard, Iſaac, or His Sonne,
                     To doe in Little, what in Large was done;
                     That they may ever, ever beare about
                     A Pictures Picture (for the moſt, I doubt).
                     Much more ſhold Thoſe, whoſe Soules, in Sacred Loue,
                     
                     Are rapt with Beautie's-Proto-Type aboue
                     
                        (Sith, heere, they cannot ſee th'ORIGINAL;
                     
                     Nor, in themſelues, now, finde His Principal)
                     
                     Thirst for Their Obiect; and [much leſſe content
                     With th'ample Table of the Firmament,
                     And various Viſage of this goodly Globe,
                     Wherein, they ſee but (as it were) His Robe,
                     Embrodered rich; and with Great Works emboſt,
                     Of Power, of Prudence, & of Goodnes, moſt;
                     Yet, ſo farre-off, ſo maſſie, ſo immenſe,
                     As over-ſwaies Their weake Intelligence:
                     Or with that leſſer Tablet of their Owne
                     (The Little-World, wherein the Great is ſhow'n)
                     Which, neer & deer, though ſtill about they beare,
                     Such Cloudes of Paſſion are ſtill crowding there,
                     That ſeld or neuer can they ought perceiue
                     Of thoſe pure Rayes it did at firſt receiue]
                     Long for Their Long-Home, paſt the Gates of Grace,
                     
                     To ſee Their Loue, in Glory, face to face.
                     Till when; awhile to entertaine them heere
                     With Proſpects fitteſt Their faint Thoughts to cheere
                     (Inſted of That Great Vniverſal Table,
                     
                     Made in Six Dayes, with Art ſo admirable;
                     And, by My BARTAS, in His Weekes divine,
                     So large and liuely draw'n in every line)
                     
                        
                        DU-VAL, and I (too ſhort of Iſaac's Art)
                     Haue Thus Eſſaid to play the Limners part,
                     And drawe in little (like a Quinteſſence)
                     That goodly Labours glorious Excellence;
                     For eaſe of Such, whom Publique Charge denies
                     Leaſure to view ſo large Varieties:
                     And Such, whoſe Meanes may not affoord their Mindes
                     So coſtly Pleaſures, of ſo Gain-leſs kindes:
                     And (lastly) Such, as, loving BARTAS beſt,
                     
                        
                           •
                        ould glad and faine ſtill beare Him in their breſt,
                     
                        
                           •
                        t in their Boſome, were He Pocket-fit,
                     As well He might; would Printers Gain permit.
                     Now therfore, Thou, All-forming ONLY-TRINE,
                     
                     As, in the Large, Thou ledſt His hand & Mine;
                     
                        
                           •
                        end likewiſe heere Thy gracious Help agen,
                     
                        
                           •
                        o guide aright my Pencil and my Pen;
                     
                        
                           •
                        o ſute my Colours, ſweet my Shadowes, ſo,
                     
                        
                           •
                        hat This my Little, Thy Great Works may ſhowe.
                     And, grant, the-while, I be not like the Hand
                     
                     Which at S. Albons, in the Street doth ſtand
                     
                        
                           •
                        irecting Others in the ready Way;
                     
                     
                        
                           •
                        ut, void of minde, it Selfe behinde doth ſtay:
                     
                        
                           •
                        or, like a Buoy, which warneth from a Shelfe;
                     
                        
                           •
                        t lyes ſtill wallowing in the Sea, it Selfe.
                  
                  
                     
                     SVpernall Lord, eternall King of Kings;
                     Maker, Maintainer, Mover of all things:
                     How infinite! how excellently-rare!
                     How abſolute Thy wondrous Works they are!
                     How much their Knowledge is to be deſir'd!
                     And Thou, in All, to be of All admir'd!
                     Thy glorious Power ſo ſuites thy gracious Will:
                     Thy ſoveraine Wiſdom meets thy Goodnes ſtill:
                     Thy Word effects thy Work; and, void of Paine,
                     Turns round the Heav'ns, & doth the Earth ſuſtaine.
                     Thy Spirit, infallible and infinite,
                     Filling the World (yet not containd in it)
                     By Power and Preſence, all, in All things dwells;
                     In Eſſence though, the Heav'n of Heav'ns excells.
                     Eternally, before All Forme began,
                     Thou, onely GOD, wert in Thy-ſelfe, even than,
                     As abſolute, as after all the Tearm
                     Of All thy Works: They, Changefull All; Thou firm.
                     The Revolution of This ample All,
                     Heav'ns height, Starr's light, the Ocean's flood & fa
                           •
                        
                     
                     To all Man-kinde, in ſom kinde, make Thee know
                           •
                        
                     
                     But adde not Thee more Glory to Thine Owne.
                     
                        To make a World, or marr it, Thou art free.
                     All comes & goes, by Thy divine Decree.
                     Thou, at Thy pleaſure, haſt made All of Nought:
                     
                        
                           •
                        ll, at Thy pleaſure, ſhall to Nought be brought.
                     Thy Name is (right) I AM: for, without Thee,
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         None: all Beeings of Thy BEEING bee.
                     
                        
                           •
                        ll perfect Vnitie, proper Exiſtence,
                     
                     
                        
                           •
                        s onely found in Thine owne ſacred Eſſence.
                     Although the World a goodly Peece appeere,
                     
                        
                           •
                        T hath, to Thy Greatnes, no Proportion neer:
                     
                        
                           •
                        Tis but a Point, to Thine immenſe Infinitie.
                     Then, what (alas!) is Man, to Thy DIVINITY?
                     Yet, haſt thou Him a Tongue & Reaſon giuen;
                     And Eyes erected towards Thy glittering Heav'n,
                     To read & ruminate Thy Wonders there;
                     And afterwards proclaime them every-where.
                     The Heav'ns declare thy Glory, & they preach
                     To Man, Thy Works, Thine Excellence in Each:
                     The Elements accorded Diſcords ſound
                     How good for vs thy goodly Works are found.
                     The radiant Starrs, in their eternall Sway,
                     Th'alternate Changes of the Night & Day,
                     The birth of Beaſts, the growth of Plants, each houre,
                     Teach every-where Thy Providence & Power.
                     
                        From THEE, the Sun receiues his Beauty bright,
                     And Soverain Rule of Each celeſtiall Light;
                     Whoſe Yearly Courſe, in certain Circuiting,
                     Makes Winter, Sommer, Autumne, & the Spring.
                     Bee't clowdy, cleer, Eclipſe, or Night, or Day;
                     His louely browes are equi-lucent ay:
                     And, whether ſwift or ſoft Hee ſeem to wend,
                     His Speed is ſuch, We cannot comprehend.
                     Though vs Hee Warm, yet is Him-ſelfe not hot:
                     Though red, or pale, Hee ſeem, yet is He not:
                     Though ſmall to vs; His Orb is eight-ſcore times
                     And ſixe, as big as All our Earthly Clymes.
                     Did not Hee drawe moiſt Vapours from belowe,
                     To drench our Fields; heer, nothing green would growe:
                     Did not Hee dry exceſſiue Showers again,
                     We could not ſowe, nor mowe; our graſs, nor Grain.
                     Thou Lord, by Him, work'ſt all this Alteration;
                     And cauſeſt ſo All Creatures generation:
                     Prankeſt the Earth in diverſe-Flowred hew;
                     And Yearly, almoſt, mak'ſt the World anew.
                     Thou haſt diſpos'd His oblique Body ſo,
                     That Riſe he, Set he; be he High, or Lowe;
                     His Noon's perpetual: & hee makes at-once
                     Day, Night;

                           Sūmer;
                           Winter;
                        
frying, freezing Zones.
                     
                        When lowe to Vs, he is to Others high;
                     When Others ſee not, Wee behold his Eye;
                     When heer he Sets, he Riſes other-where;
                     When heer direct, he looketh glancing there.
                     When ſome, in Summer, hear ſweet Nightingales,
                     Then ſome in Winter, hear but bluſtring Gales:
                     
                        
                           •
                        ome, ſee but Buds, when ſom ſupply their Granges,
                     Each-where, the Sun thus Seaſons conter-changes.
                     When heer, there ſprings both leaf & graſs together,
                     
                        
                           •
                        ſ-where the Meads do hang their heads & wither:
                     So, in their turns, ſo in their times, he meaſures
                     His Gifts to all; and all partake his Treaſures.
                     In brief: each change of ſhort, long; Day & Night;
                     Of Seaſons, Times, Turns, & returns of Light;
                     Which, in a whole Yeer, everie-where he formes;
                     That, in the whole World, daily He performs.
                     So that, drad Lord, were not Thy ſacred Lore,
                     Man, aboue All, would likely Him adore
                     A
                           •
                         ſome haue don); but Supreme Reaſon ſhowes
                     That all His Glorie vnto Thine hee owes.
                     Things finite haue Beginning, & Beginner:
                     Things mov'd, a Mover (as the wheele, the Spinner)
                     
                        
                           •
                        ects, their Cauſe final; and (formallie)
                     
                        
                           •
                        der then Time, Nature, or Facultie.
                     
                        Even THEE, the Cauſe of Cauſes: Sourſe of All:
                     
                        Firſt, and Laſt, Moover; Prime, and Principall.
                     
                     Infallible, involuble, inſenſible;
                     All Selfe-compriſing, elſe incomprehenſible:
                     Immenſe, Immortall, abſolute Infinitie,
                     Omnipotent, Omniſcient DIVINITIE.
                     Euen THEE, in Whom only begins all Good,
                     
                     And all returns into Thy bound-leſſe Flood.
                     By Order then of thy Decrees divine,
                     Th'haſt ſet the Sun o're All the World to ſhine;
                     And (as the Subiects lightly ſuit their King)
                     With His faire Light, t'enlighten every thing.
                     His goodly Face, th'vngodly ever fly,
                     Seeking for Night's black horrid Canapie,
                     To cover Theft, Rape, Inceſt, Murder too,
                     And all foule Sinnes; which in the Dark, they doo
                     By Him, Wee ſee Thy Works, in their Proprietie;
                     Diſcerne their Beauties, learn their vaſt varietie:
                     Where, without Him, the World would all return
                     To th'old firſt CHAOS, or in Blindnes mourn.
                     By Him, We calculate our Grandſires Dates,
                     Th'Increaſe of Kingdoms, & Decay of States:
                     By Him, Thou meaſur'ſt, Lord, to Vs & Ours,
                     Years, Ages, Seaſons, Months, Daies, Minuts, Ho
                           •
                        
                     
                     
                        All Wits admire th'immenſe and wondrous way
                     His great bright Body circuits euery Day:
                     The more his Orbe is from the Centre far,
                     The longer Daily his great Iournies are.
                     Beſides his Daily Courſe, his Courſers driue
                     One of three hundred threeſcore Daies and fiue,
                     Fiue Houres, three-quarters: of which Ouer-plus,
                     In euery fourth Year, growes a Day with vs.
                     Yet, whoſo would the Yeer exactly rate,
                     In fiue-ſcore-fiue Years, muſt one Leap abate;
                     And, in threeſcore, for th'Error ready paſt,
                     Should no Biſſextile in our Books be plac't.
                     But, though Wee erre, Hee neuer errs at all:
                     Nor, ſince Thou didſt Him in his State inſtall,
                     Hath Hee miſſt Moment of the Task he ought;
                     Though he haue ſeen Men faile and fall ſo oft.
                     Aboue all Creatures, Hee retains, of Thee,
                     Some-thing conform to Thine Eternitie:
                     For, though Hee ſee our hourely Changes heer,
                     His Light and Beauty ſtill the ſame appear.
                     How many Changes hath Hee ſeen on Earth!
                     Kings, Kingdoms, States; their Burial & their Birth;
                     Riſing and Falling of triumphant Races;
                     Raiſing and razing of renowned Places.
                     
                        How often hath He ſeen Empres reverſt?
                     Rich Cities ſackt? Rare Common-weals diſperſt?
                     Fields turnd to Flouds, & Seas returnd to Sands?
                     While ſtedfaſt He between his Tropiks ſtands?
                     Him, iuſt betwixt Six Wanderers haſt thou plac't,
                     Which prance about Him with vnequall haſt:
                     All which, without Him, could no Light reflect,
                     As is apparant by the Moones Defect.
                     By His Aſpect, her Own ſhee daily makes;
                     She, Wax-leſs, Waen-leſs, doth both waen & wax:
                     And though to Vs, Shee ſeem a Semi-Ray,
                     Her Full round Face doth neuer fall away.
                     By His faire Beames, as well by Day as Night,
                     The full whole Half of Her thick Orb is bright:
                     And, as She drawes neer, or far off from Him;
                     So, more, or leſſe Our Halfe is cleer or dim.
                     Her vpper Halfe is full, in her Coition,
                     Her lower Halfe is in her Oppoſition:
                     Her other Quarters, other Formes expreſſe;
                     And vp, or down-ward, ſhewe Her, more or leſſe.
                     When We ſee little, then the Heav'ns haue ſtore:
                     When Heav'ns ſee little, then haue We thee more:
                     Neerer the Sun, the leſſe Shee ſeems in ſight;
                     Turning her Horn ſtill to her Oppoſite.
                     
                        At Even Increaſing, She the Sun ſucceeds;
                     At Morn, Decreaſing, She his Car preceeds:
                     So that, each Month, the Sun environs Her,
                     On every ſide His Splendor to confer.
                     Her ſiluer Light then onely faileth her
                     When th'Earth's between Them (in Diameter)
                     Which Masks her Beauty with a ſable Clowd,
                     From Sight of Him, her Brother Golden-browd.
                     Good Lord, what changes doſt Thou worke by Theſe
                     Varieties; in Aire, in Earth, & Seas!
                     Faire, or foule Weather; Wind, or Wet, or Thunder;
                     To dry, or drip; or coole, or warm Heer-vnder.
                     If Shee but ſmile the fourth day, 't will be faire:
                     If then She bluſh, we ſhall haue bluſtring aire:
                     If then her browes be muffled with a Frowne,
                     Moſt of that Month ſhall ſad Tears trickle downe.
                     Thus doth the Vigor of the Signes ſuperiour
                     Rule in the Vertues of theſe things inferiour:
                     But All are governd by Thy ſouerain Might:
                     O! happy He who vnderſtands it right.
                     Thrice happy Hee, who ſees Thee every-where,
                     In Heauen & Earth, in Water, Fire, and Aire:
                     Who, due admiring Thy wiſe Works (of Yore)
                     Thee aboue All, Thee onely, doth adore.
                     
                        Who knows Thee ſo, ſo needs muſt loue Thee too;
                     And, with his Will, Thy ſacred Will would doo:
                     Still lifts his Eyes to Heav'n-ward, to contemple
                     The ſtately Wonders of Thy ſtarry Temple.
                     Admires the ſet & meaſur'd Dance of Thine
                     All-claſping Palace, azure-cryſtalline,
                     Rare-rich-imboſt with glittering ſtuds of Gold;
                     And, more admires, the more hee doth behold.
                     'T's a wondrous thing to ſee That mighty Mound,
                     Hindge-leſs & Ax-leſs, turn ſo ſwiftly round;
                     And th'heauie Earth, propleſs (thogh downward tending
                     Selfe-counter-poiz'd, mid the ſoft Aire ſuſpending.
                     On th'ample Surface of whoſe maſſie Ball,
                     Men (round about) doe trample over-all,
                     Foot againſt Foot, though ſtill (ô ſtrange Effect)
                     Their Faces all be towards Heav'n erect.
                     Thoſe dwelling vnder th'Equinoctiall, they
                     Haue, all the Year long, equal Night and Day:
                     Thoſe neer the Tropiks, haue them more vn-euen;
                     The more, the more that they are Nor-ward driuen.
                     But Thoſe, whoſe Tents to either Pole are neer,
                     Haue but One Night, & One Day in a yeer.
                     Yet All well compaſt by due ruled Rite,
                     Neither then other, hath more Darke, or Light.
                     
                        Thus haue thy Works, ô All-Diſpoſing Deitie,
                     
                     Some-what conforme, for all their great varietie:
                     Which Harmony, amid ſo diverſe things,
                     In All, aloud Thy wondrous Wiſedom rings.
                     But, ſpecially, wee wonder at the Place
                     Which heer thou haſt beſtow'd on Adams race:
                     To ſee our ſelues ſet on ſo Round a Ball,
                     So firmly hangd iuſt in the midſt of All.
                     For, This our Globe hangs Prop-leſs in the Aire;
                     Yet, but thy Selfe, can nothing ſhake or ſway-her:
                     No roaring Storm, nor rumbling violence,
                     Can moue the Centre's ſad Circumference.
                     Which, who-ſo ſhould oppoſe in Diſputation,
                     Might be convinc't by eaſie Demonſtration;
                     So evident, from Senſe and Reaſon erre,
                     Who think the Heav'ns ſtand, & the Earth doth ſtir.
                     The Parts & Whole, of ſame-kind bodies, haue
                     Same or like Motions; be they light, or graue;
                     Vp-ward or down-ward; round, or overthwart:
                     Needs muſt the Total moue as doth his Part.
                     So, if we ſee the Sunne & Moon to veere;
                     Their ample Heav'ns haue even the like Cariere:
                     But, who hath ſeene a Selflie-turning Stone?
                     How then ſhould Earth turn her whole lump alone?
                     
                        Let's therefore, boldly, with old Truth, affirme,
                     That th'Earth remaines vnmoueable & firme:
                     And (if wee credit the Geometer)
                     Three thouſand leagues is her Diameter:
                     This Meaſure of her vaſt thick Depth, is found
                     By th'admirable Compaſſe of her Round;
                     Which hath, by teſt of Arts Experiments,
                     More then nine thouſand leagues Circumference.
                     Yet, learned Mappiſts, on a Paper ſmall,
                     Draw (in Abridgement) the whole Type of All;
                     And in their Chamber (paineleſs, peril-leſs)
                     See, in an houre, & circuit, Land and Seas.
                     This mighty Globe is but a Point, compar'd
                     With th'vpper Globe: yet on This Point are ſhar'd
                     Millions of millions of Man-kinde, which plow
                     With Keel & Coultar its Twin Back and Brow.
                     Man, placed thus, in This Mid-Point, ſo even,
                     Sees alwaies Half of God's great Hall of Heav'n:
                     Th'other's beneath him; yet abides not there,
                     But in a Day doth to him all appeare.
                     Ah, Soverain Artiſt! ô how few of vs
                     Knowe right the Place where Thou haſt plac't vs thus!
                     Alas! how-many know not, to What end
                     Thy gracious Wiſdom did them hither ſend!
                     
                        Yet, giving Man a quick Intelligence,
                     Thou ſett'ſt him iuſt in the World's Midſt, that thence
                     Seeing thy Wonders round about him ſo,
                     Knowing himſelfe, he might Thee better know.
                     By th'vſual Circuit of the Heav'nly Ball,
                     The Starres appeare vnto vs (almoſt) all:
                     That We, in time, obſeruing all their Figures,
                     Might contemplate their Courſes, Natures, Vigors.
                     To view the Stars, is honeſt Recreation:
                     To ſearch their Courſe, deſerveth Commendation;
                     So wee beware, with ſome preſuming Sects
                     To pick things future out of their Aſpects.
                     We muſt renounce That Errors patronage,
                     That what ſome Dreamers, by our Births, preſage,
                     Muſt needs betide vs: tying to their Lawes
                     Our nature; governd by a Higher Cauſe.
                     Perhaps the Signes ſome inclination bring,
                     
                        
                           •
                        nducing hearts to ſome Affectioning:
                     But, by Gods grace, well may wee varie that;
                     
                        
                           •
                        s, neuer forc't by neceſſary Fate.
                     For, ſure if Man, by ſtrong Neceſſitie,
                     
                        
                           •
                        oo any Ill, ill meriteth not Hee:
                     
                        
                           •
                        id Starres conſtraine vs; neither Vertue, then,
                     
                        
                           •
                        or Vice, were worth Praiſe, or Reproofe, in Men.
                     
                        If any way the Will of Man be free,
                     On Theſe Effects what Iudgemēts ground can bee?
                     What Certaintie can from the Starres be knowne,
                     Of Weal or Woe; Life, Death; or Thrall, or Throne?
                     When Kings are born, be many born beſide:
                     Muſt all be Deſtin'd to be Kings, that tide?
                     Oft, many at-once are hangd, or drownd, or ſlaine:
                     Did all, at-once, their groaning Mothers paine?
                     Who can conceiue, that ſuch or ſuch Aſpect,
                     Is good, or bad; boads Life, or Deaths Effect?
                     Who can produce ſo ſure Prognoſtications
                     Of our fraile Life, ſo full of Alterations?
                     Certain's that Art, which ſhewes the daily Courſe
                     Of reſtleſſe Starres, their influence & force:
                     But, Divination's an vncertaine Skill,
                     Full of fond Error, falſe, and fayling ſtill.
                     What booted, Lord, our hūbleſt Vowes to Thee,
                     Were their Concluſions certaine Veritie?
                     Diſaſtrous Fate would mate vs with Deſpaire,
                     And fruſtrate all religious Faith and Prayer.
                     Were it their Sayings were right certain true,
                     Then, of neceſſity muſt all enſue:
                     But, if Events their Verdicts often thwart,
                     Falſe is their Aime, & fallible their Art.
                     
                        Obſerue the Works thoſe ſubtle Authors write,
                     Th'are ſo ambiguous, or ſo falſe out-right;
                     That if, ſomtimes, ſome Truth they chance to hit,
                     They'll counterpoize a hundred lyes for it.
                     Too-buſie-bold, with Thee, they, Lord, preſume;
                     And to themſelues Thine Office they aſſume,
                     Who, by Star-gazing, or ought elſe belowe,
                     Dare arrogate the Future to fore-knowe.
                     Wee hardly ſee what hangeth at our Eyes:
                     How ſhould we read the Secrets of the Skyes?
                     None knowes, To-morrow what betide him ſhall:
                     How then fore-tell Years Fortunes yer they fall?
                     Then leaue we All to GOD's high Prouidence;
                     Not liſt'ning for To-morrow-Dayes Events:
                     
                        
                           •
                        etter then We, Hee knowes what's meet to ſend.
                     Then, feare we nothing, but Him to offend.
                     O! Thou All-knower! Nothing more hath thruſt
                     
                        
                           •
                        roud Man from Thee, then This Ambitious-luſt
                     Of knowing All: for, by that Arrogance,
                     
                        
                           •
                        n ſtead of Knowledge, got He Ignorance:
                     Man nothing knowes, nor nothing comprehends,
                     
                        
                           •
                        ut by the Power which Thy pure Spirit him lends:
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , then, Thy Wiſedom haue ſo bounded His;
                     Why would He hold more then His Meaſure is?
                     
                        Let's humbly ſtoop our Wits, with all Sinceritie,
                     Vnto Thy Word: there let vs ſeek the Veritie.
                     And all Predictions that ariſe not Thence,
                     Let vs reiect for impious Inſolence.
                     Let vs repute all Divination vaine
                     Which is derived from man's fuming braine,
                     By Lots, by Characters, or Chyromancie;
                     By Birds, or Beaſts; or damned Necromancie.
                     Let's alſo fly the furious-curious Spel
                     Of thoſe Black-Artiſts that conſult with Hel
                     To finde things loſt; and Pluto's helpe invoke
                     For hoorded Gold, where oft they find but ſmoake.
                     He's fond that thinks Fiends in his Ring to coop,
                     Or in a knife them by a Charm to hoop.
                     Such as haue try'd thoſe Courſes, for the moſt,
                     Haue felt in fine Their malice, to their coſt.
                     Woe, woe to Them that leaue the living GOD,
                     To follow Fiends, and Montibanks abroad;
                     Seeking, for Light, dark, dreaming Sorceries;
                     And, for the Truth, th'erronious Prince of Lyes.
                     Condemning therefore all pernitious Arts,
                     Let's be contented with our proper Parts:
                     Let's meekly ſeeke what may be ſafely known;
                     Without vſurping GOD's peculiar own.
                     
                        W'haue Stuff ynough (beſides) our time to ſpend;
                     And Our ſhort life can hardly comprehend
                     The halfe of halfe the Wonders, licenſt vs
                     To ſearch, & knowe, and ſoberly diſcuſſe.
                     The ſmalleſt Garden vſually containes
                     Roots, Fruits, & Flowres, ſufficient for the paines
                     Of one man's life, their natures to deſcry:
                     When will he know all Creatures propertie?
                     Earth's but a Point, compard to th'vpper Globe:
                     Yet, who hath ſeen, but halfe her vtter Robe,
                     Omitting All her Inwards, All her Water?
                     When ſhall we then ſee All this vaſt Theater?
                     What heer wee ſee, wee ſee is Exquiſite:
                     What's This, to That ſo far aboue our Sight?
                     
                        
                           •
                        xcelling faire, what to our Eye is ſenſible:
                     
                        
                           •
                        ven to our Soule, the reſt's incomprehenſible.
                     Who then can vaunt himſelfe Omni-ſcient,
                     
                        
                           •
                        o
                           •
                        e, then All-ſin-leſs, pure, and Innocent?
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         none's all-guiltleſſe, in thy glorious Eyes,
                     
                        
                           •
                        here's none all-knowing thy high Myſteries.
                     Yet muſt we praiſe & glorifie thee fit,
                     
                        
                           •…
                        r that wee knowe; and for our good by it:
                     
                        
                           •
                        here is no Pleaſure can be comparable
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         Contemplation of Thy Wondrous Table.
                     
                        There-on the more wee muſe, the more we may;
                     So our Delight Deſire increaſes ay
                     Of finding Thee: and that divine Deſire,
                     Calming our Cares, quencheth our fleſhly Fire.
                     All other Pleaſures haue diſpleaſures mixt:
                     Ioyes meet Annoyes, & Smiles haue Tears betwixt:
                     Yea, all Delights of Earth haue ever been
                     Fellow'd, or follow'd, with ſome tragike Teen.
                     But, Who of Thee, & Thine, contemplates ever,
                     Scapes all the Fits of th'hot-cold, cruell Fever
                     Of Fear, of Loue, of Avarice, Ambition,
                     Which haunts all others, with ſmall Intermiſſion.
                     Man, laborleſſe, receiues a rare Delight,
                     When he obſerues the ſettled Order right,
                     Whereby all Creatures (with, or wanting, Senſe)
                     Subſiſt, through thine Vnchanging Prouidence.
                     What more Content can We haue heer belowe,
                     More high, more happy; then, but This to knowe
                     (This certain Sum) That when This World began,
                     Thou mad'ſt Man for Thy-ſelfe; & All for Man.
                     Th'Horſe was not made to glorify thy Name,
                     Nor th'Elephant to magnifie the ſame:
                     Man onely hath voice, memory, and wit
                     To ſing thy Praiſe, & ſound thy Glory, fit.
                     
                        And, to ſerue Thee, as He is ſole ordain'd;
                     So, to ſerue Him, thou haſt the reſt darraind:
                     All things that fly, that walk, that craule, or ſwim,
                     Yea, Heav'n & Earth, & All are vowd to Him.
                     For Him, the Earth yields Herbs, Trees, Fruits, and Flowers,
                     To ſundry purpoſe, & of ſundry powers)
                     Corne of all kindes, in Valleys far and wide
                     For Bread & Drink) & dainty Vines beſide.
                     For Him the Rocks a thouſand Rivers guſh:
                     Heer rowling Brooks, There ſilver Torrents ruſh;
                     
                        
                           •
                        ndenting Meads & Paſtures, as they paſſe,
                     
                        
                           •
                        hoſe ſmyling Pride peeps in their liquid Glaſſe.
                     For Him, the Mountains, Downes & Foreſts breed
                     
                        
                           •
                        uffs, Biefes, Sheep, Venzon; & the luſty Steed
                     
                        
                           •
                        o beare him brauely thorough thick and thin;
                     
                        
                           •
                        nd ſilly Worms, his Silken Robes to ſpin.
                     For Him, the Bullock bears his painfull Yoak:
                     
                        
                           •
                        or Him, the Weather weares his curled 
                           •
                        loak:
                     
                        
                           •
                        or Him, the Birds their brooding-chambers build:
                     
                        
                           •
                        or Him, the Bees their Wax and Hony yield.
                     For Him, the Sea doth many millions nurſe;
                     
                        
                           •
                        ith whom, the Aire helps both his panch & purſe:
                     
                        
                           •
                        he Fire's his Cook, to dreſſe th'aboundant Cheer
                     
                        
                           •
                        hich Aire, & Sea, and Earth, do furniſh heer.
                     
                        Yea, Dragons, Serpents, Vipers venemous,
                     Haue Fel, Fat, Bloud; or ſom-what good for vs;
                     In Leproſie, or Lunacie, apply'd:
                     And Triacle is alſo hence ſupply'd.
                     Hee (briefly) Hee hath vſe of all that is;
                     Winnes the moſt ſavage of the Savages:
                     None ſo fierce Lion, but to tame hee wonts,
                     Nor Elephant ſo high but that hee mounts;
                     And makes, beſides, of his huge Bones, & Teeth,
                     Hafts, Boxes, Combes; & more then many ſee'th.
                     Nay, more: for Him, the fell Monocerote,
                     
                     Beares on his Brow a ſoveraine Antidote.
                     
                     Yea, many ſoveraine Remedies Hee findes,
                     For ſundry Griefes, in Creatures of All kindes.
                     All (in a word) Wilde & Domeſtick too,
                     Some way or other, Him ſome ſervice doo.
                     For Food, He hath the Fleſh of Beaſts & Birds:
                     For Clothes the Fleece, the Haire & Hyde of Heards
                     For Houſe, each Quarr, & every Forreſt, offers:
                     For Metall, Mines furniſh his Camp & Coffers.
                     For Him, the jarring Elements agree:
                     Fire cleers the Aire; Aire ſweeps the Earth, we ſee;
                     Earth bears the Water; Water (moiſtly milde)
                     Cooles Fire, calms Aire, & gets the Earth with-chil
                           •
                        
                     
                     
                        So, All is made for Man; and Man, for Thee:
                     To loue, and ſerue, and laude Thy Maieſtie;
                     Thee aboue All: Thee onely to obay;
                     With Thankful Soule walking Thy ſacred Way.
                     This doth He well, that yields his Wil to Thine;
                     
                        
                           •
                        ull of Deſires, if not of Deeds, divine:
                     
                        
                           •
                        triving to ſtoope vnder the Spirits Awe,
                     
                        
                           •
                        he members ſtubborn & rebellious Lawe.
                     For, Man conſiſts of diſcordant accords
                     What the great World, the little-World affords.
                     There Heav'n & Earth; Heer Heav'n & Earth there are;
                     
                        
                           •
                        here War & Peace; Heer alſo Peace & War).
                     He hath a Heav'nly Soule, an Earthly Sheath:
                     
                        
                           •
                        hat ſoares aboue: This ever pores beneath:
                     
                        
                           •
                        hat, lightly-wingd, All Creatures comprehends;
                     
                        
                           •
                        his, leaden heel'd, but to Corruption tends.
                     The Spirit, oft againſt the Fleſh doth fight;
                     
                        
                           •
                        nd ſome-times, vanquiſht by his Oppoſite,
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         carried Captiue with the moſt Dishonor,
                     
                        
                           •
                        fter his Foe; & forc't to waite vpon-her;
                     
                        
                           •
                         Till rouz'd again, & rayſed by Thy Grace,
                     
                        
                           •
                        is ſtriving Will recovers wonted place:
                     
                        
                           •
                        ith better Watch, & brauer Reſolution,
                     
                        
                           •
                        o ſtand it out, vntill His Diſſolution.
                     
                        Surveying then both Heav'n & Earth about,
                     He bringeth in, what he hath ſeen with-out;
                     And, marking well th'Effects of natures viſible,
                     Aſcends by thoſe vnto their Cauſe inviſible.
                     For, but two Organs hath our Soule, whereby
                     To finde and knowe th'eternall Maieſtie:
                     
                        Faith, which belieues the ſacred Word of GOD;
                     And Reaſon, reading all His Works abroad.
                     Thoſe Wonders ſend vs, to their Author, over;
                     Thoſe certain Motions, to their certain Mover:
                     Then Faith conducts vs, where our Reaſon leaues;
                     And what th'Eye ſees not, That our Faith conceau
                           •
                        
                     
                     
                        Faith, firm and liuely, doth our Soules perſwade
                     That, Thy high Power, of Nothing, All hath mad
                           •
                        
                     
                     Thine ESSENCE is Eternally-Divine:
                     The World Beginning had, & ſhall haue Fine.
                     We muſt not ſay, Of Nought, is formed Nought
                     
                     (Although to Man it may be iuſtly brought).
                     Th'eternall Spirit can All of Nought produce;
                     And inſtantly, to Nothing All reduce.
                     Nor may we ask, What th'Euiternall-One,
                     
                     
                        That ſpace-leſſe Space, could finde to doe alone.
                     
                     His THREE-ONE-Selfe to know & to partake,
                     Is (Countleſs) more then Thouſand Worlds to m
                           •
                        
                     
                     
                        A paſſing Artiſt is no leſſe Compleat,
                     Then in Compoſure, in his rare Conceat:
                     For, in the Knowledge Art's perfection lyes;
                     And, Works deferrd, vaile not the Work-man's Prize.
                     The Mind's not idle, though the hand awhile
                     Vſe neither Pen, Pencil, nor Gouge, nor File.
                     The Mind's before the Work; & works with-in,
                     Vpon th'Idaea, yer the Deed begin.
                     Would we not ſay, the World were God indeed,
                     
                        
                           •
                        f from no other it did firſt proceed?
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           ternal, onely is GOD's proper tearm;
                     
                        
                           •
                        lone preceeding Time, exceeding Tearm.
                     The World ſupports not Thee, nor Thee ſupplies:
                     
                        
                           •
                        hou dooſt Thy-Selfe ſuſtain, Thy-Selfe ſuffiſe:
                     
                        
                           •
                        nd grosly erres who-euer ſhall ſuppoſe,
                     
                        
                           •
                        hee, Infinite, within a World to cloſe.
                     And, as we may not match the Heav'ns Extenſe
                     
                        
                           •
                        nto Thy Circle, infinite, immenſe:
                     
                        
                           •
                        o more may Wee, to Thine Eternal-Age,
                     
                        
                           •
                        ompare the Worlds ſhort, brittle Little-Age.
                     Before All Time, Thou, Everlaſting-One,
                     
                     
                        
                           •
                        ecreedſt in time, to make the Sun & Moone.
                     
                        
                           •
                        he Worlds few Dayes & ill (with little comber)
                     
                        
                           •
                        hy ſacred Book will teach vs ſoon to number.
                     
                        What Book, what Braſs, what Marble, ought can ſhow
                     But of an hundred-thouſand yeers ago?
                     Had Man been Heer, from an eternall Ligne,
                     Heer muſt haue been (ſure) ſome perpetuall Signe;
                     Millions of Millions of Yeares muſt haue paſt,
                     From th'endleſſe Clue of th'eviternal-Vaſt:
                     In all theſe Years, of all that did ſurviue,
                     Of all their Acts, could None to Vs arriue?
                     Wee heare (and often) of the Babylonians,
                     
                     
                        Medes, Perſians, Grecians, Romans, Macedonians:
                     
                     But, Where's the Nation, Whoſe Renowned Glory
                     Hath liv'd a hundred-thouſand years in Story?
                     Seek All (Greeke, Latin, Hebrew) Authors, roun
                           •
                        
                     
                     Of All, will MOSES be the Senior found.
                     Who (to His Times) in expreſs tearms hath caſt
                     Th'age of the World, with the Deſcents that paſt.
                     Now, frō His Daies to Ours, what years amoun
                           •
                        
                     
                     We may with eaſe with-in few Houres account;
                     And adding Both, ſoon by the Total, finde
                     Th'age of the WORLD, & of Our crooked kin
                           •
                        
                     
                     Fiue thouſand years, fiue hundred, forty One,
                     
                        1613.This year are paſt; ſince This vaſt World began.
                     Since all the Heav'ns; Fire, Water, Aire, & Earth,
                     Had, by thy WORD, their being, & their Birth.
                     
                        Then was the Heau'ns azure Pauilion ſpred,
                     And with Spur-Royalls ſpangled over head:
                     Then, thoſe Twin-Princes with their Train of Light,
                     
                     
                        
                           •
                        egan their Kingdoms, ouer Day, and Night.
                     Then was the Aire, the Earth, and Sea, repleat
                     
                        
                           •
                        ith Birds, and Beaſts, and Fiſhes; ſmall & great:
                     With Plants, and Trees, & Fruits; each yeelding ſeed,
                     
                        
                           •
                        o propagate their Kinds that ſhould ſucceed.
                     Then (laſtly) Man, thy Maſter-Piece of Art,
                     
                        
                           •
                        hou didſt appoint to His Imperiall Part:
                     
                        
                           •
                        nobling Him with Senſe and Reaſon's Light,
                     
                        
                           •
                        nd in his Soule, grauing Thine Image right:
                     Gav'ſt Him Poſſeſſion of this Earthly Throne,
                     
                        
                           •
                        nd gracious Promiſe of the Heau'nly one:
                     
                        
                           •
                        mmortall Soule, thou daign'dſt him to inſpire,
                     
                        
                           •
                        qual (almoſt) to thine Owne Heau'nly-Quire.
                     And, as Thy Spirit, all other Spirits excels
                     Angel, or other that in Body dwels):
                     
                        
                           •
                        o doth His Body all elſe Bodies paſſe,
                     
                        
                           •
                        or comely Form, and for maieſtik Face.
                     All Creatures elſe, lowe on the ground do pore,
                     
                        
                           •
                        nd groueling feed: but (as was toucht before)
                     
                        
                           •
                        an hath an Vpright and a ſtately Stature,
                     
                     
                        
                           •
                        ith head aloft, agreeing to his nature;
                     
                        Which, properly, is to behold the Skyes,
                     To lift to Thee, his heart, his hand, and Eyes:
                     And by his Soule's diſcurſiue power to peize
                     Things paſt, and preſent, and of future daies.
                     For, only Man can meaſure, number, waigh;
                     True, Falſe, Good, Euill; knowe, caſt, ſound, ſuruay.
                     Man only, hath an in-reflecting Knowledge
                     Of his owne Self (from Natures only Colledge)
                     Knows his own fact, his form, his load, his ſtrength;
                     Knows that he liues, knows he muſt dy (at length):
                     And, that a ruled ſober life, and ſage,
                     Preſerues his Health, and may prolong his Age.
                     Knowes how to finde eaſe in his owne Diſeaſe;
                     And, if need be, his Neighbour to appeaſe:
                     And for him-ſelf and others, make, of Flowres
                     Fruits, Hearbs, & Roots, Vnguents of paſſing powres
                     But, none ſo powerfull (when their Term is ſpent)
                     As can his Owne or others Death preuent:
                     For, Our ſhort Date; Childe-age, or Wilde-age, ends
                     And now but ſeldome to Old-age extends.
                     Yet, What is Old-Age to ETERNITIE?
                     To Man, expecting IMMORTALITIE,
                     What 
                           •
                        ſt to live ſome Three, or Foure ſcore Year:
                     Or, Yet Ten more (in Languor) linger heer?
                     
                        Of all our Time-Paſt, vnderneath the Sun,
                     Nothing remaines, ſaue Good or Euill done:
                     Hundreds of Yeers, once paſt, are leſs (in Sum)
                     Then a few Daies, or a few Houres to-come.
                     For, to ſay Truth, of Times three-pointed Powers,
                     Only the Preſent (inſtant) Points is ours.
                     W' haue, of the Paſt, but vaine Imagination;
                     Of that To-come, but doubtfull Expectation.
                     But, to th'Eternall, are All Times, alike
                     Inſtant; and preſent, Dead as well as Quick:
                     Aye is To-day with Thee: Lord, in Thy Sight,
                     Both Paſt and Future are euen equal bright.
                     Thogh, in Times Terms the Heav'ns reuolued be;
                     A Thouſand Yeers are but One Day with Thee:
                     And ſhorteſt Moment of one only Day
                     With Thee is as a Thouſand Yeers (for ay).
                     But, Our ſet Daies, to vs, are long, or ſhort;
                     As them, good Accidents, or bad, conſort:
                     Sobrietie and Peace prolong our Life:
                     Which is abridg'd by Surfait and by Strife.
                     Exceſs, or Cares, now, ſo cut-off our liues,
                     That of a thouſand not a man arriues
                     Neer to the Tythe of the admired Age
                     Of thoſe that liv'd in Nature's Pupillage;
                     
                        Eight hundred Yeers, 9. hundred ſom, ſome more;
                     In Minde and Body, full of Natures ſtore;
                     To ſtock the Earth with Iſſue rational,
                     And learn the Courſe of Heau'ns Star-ſpangled Ball:
                     Which, firſt of all, Their long obſeruance found,
                     Then, by degrees, they taught their Heirs the ground;
                     And We, from Them (ſo eas'd of endleſs pain)
                     Deriue that Art, We could not elſe attain.
                     In Their long Age they learn'd Heav'ns ful Careers
                     (Not to be compaſt, in our Span of Yeers)
                     Whence, One of them might in his life know more,
                     Then, in our Dayes, ſucceſſiuely, a Score.
                     Of Their ſo long age, who-ſo doubtfull is,
                     Let him but look in ſacred Geneſis;
                     Where Moſes mentions diuers famous men
                     So old; and ſhowes their Yeers as ours were then.
                     Th'All-drowning Flood-year did 12. Months contain,
                     And euery Month did his due Dayes retain:
                     Which made vp one Yeer of that Patriarch,
                     
                     Who liv'd ſeav'n fifties, hauing left the Arke;
                     And was Sixe hundred when he came aboord:
                     Teaching his Sons his wondrous Skill, by word.
                     See, ſee, alas! how our vnhappy Life
                     Is now abridg'd, and charg'd with Miſ-chiefs rife.
                     
                        Had we not pleaſure in thy Works, ô GOD,
                     Soon muſt we ſink vnder the heauy Load
                     Of Cares and Croſſes (in a thouſand things)
                     Which this, our wretched, ſad, ſhort, Way-fare brings.
                     O! let vs therefore bend our beſt and moſt
                     To magnifie Thee, Lord, in All thine Hoſt:
                     And ſo, contempling all thy Goodnes giv'n,
                     With true Content, begin (in Earth) our Heav'n.
                     Man, knowing Thee, knowes al that can be known:
                     And hauing Thee, hath all that is, his Owne:
                     To long for Thee, is endleſſe Ioy, internall;
                     Diſpos'd to Thee, to Die, is Life Eternall.
                     Not knowing Thee; to liue, is daily Dying:
                     To reſt, with-out Thee, is continual Flying:
                     But all extreames of Torments paſſing meaſure,
                     In Thee, and for Thee, are exceeding Pleaſure.
                     Yet, no man ought to offer wilfull Force
                     To his owne Self; nor his owne Soule diuorce:
                     But patiently attend Thy cheerfull Cal;
                     Then, to Thy hands gladly ſurrender all.
                     Nor may We ween our Soules (as Beaſts) to Die;
                     And with our Bodies Vaniſh vtterlie:
                     Death's but a Paſſage from a Life of Pains,
                     Vnto a Life where death-leſs Ioy remains.
                     
                        W'haue, after Death, another Life to ſee:
                     As, after Storms, a calm & quiet Lee:
                     As, after Sicknes, Health: as after Durance,
                     Sweet Libertie; with Safetie and Aſſurance.
                     Two Contraries, oppos'd, in their Extream,
                     Haue This vnfailing Propertie in them;
                     That th'One's Privation is the others Ens:
                     So, Death, concluding, doth our Life commence.
                     For, on each-other Contraries depend,
                     Chain'd (as it were) vnto each others End:
                     Day after Night: Attonement after Strife:
                     And after mortall Death, immortall Life.
                     Our Soule's immortall then (we muſt infer it)
                     Hauing beginning of th'Immortall Spirit:
                     And they are brute (as Beaſts) that doo contend,
                     That with our Bodies, Soules for euer end.
                     If there be GOD immortall, All-ſcient,
                     All-mighty, iuſt, benign, benevolent;
                     Where were his Wiſdom, Goodnes, Iuſtice, Power,
                     If Vice He damn not, nor giue Vertue Dower?
                     Heere, for the moſt, the Godly ſuffer ſtill:
                     Th'Vngodly, heere haue moſt the Winde at Will:
                     Shall they not, one-day, change their Difference;
                     And one-day look for Diuerſe Recompence?
                     
                        Heer, Proud, Rich, Mighty; Meek, Poor, Weak, oppreſs:
                     
                        
                           •
                        ions kill Lambes; Fox ſtrips the Fatherleſs:
                     
                        
                           •
                        ! is there not another Life imperible,
                     
                        
                           •
                        weet, to the Guiltleſs; to the Guilty, Terrible?
                     Who, for Thy ſake, their Lyues haue ſacrifiz'd,
                     
                        
                           ••
                         all the Torments Tyrants haue deuiz'd;
                     O! how vnhappy were They, were there not
                     
                        
                           •
                        rownes kept with Thee, for their Eternal Lot!
                     Then were We Beaſts, or worſe then Beaſts, indeed:
                     
                        
                           •
                        or He were beſt that could the worſt exceed.
                     
                        
                           •
                        hen, Let vs eat, drinke, dally, might We ſay:
                     
                        
                           •
                        f, after This, there were no Shot to pay.
                     But leauing now that Song of Senſuality,
                     
                     
                        
                           •
                        elieue we firm our bleſſed Immortality;
                     
                        
                           •
                        leſſed for Thoſe, that, in Perſeuerance,
                     
                        
                           •
                        o Thee alone (Lord) their whole Hopes aduance.
                     Bleſſed for Thoſe, who, in ſincere Humility,
                     
                        
                           •
                        cknowledging, as knowing their Debilitie;
                     Through th'old Corruption of all Adams race:
                     
                        
                           •
                        hem-ſelues diſtruſting, only truſt Thy Grace.
                     
                     Thou, Lord (alas!) know'ſt all our Imperfections,
                     Our vain Deſires, our mutable Affections,
                     
                        
                           •
                        ow prone we are to fall; how Wilde, how Wood,
                     
                        
                           •
                        urſuing Euill, and eſchewing Good.
                     
                        Th'inceſſant Sway of our continuall Ill,
                     Requires the Grace of thy preuention ſtill;
                     And th'odious Fruits our Nature wonts to breed,
                     Lord, of Thy Mercies haue continuall need.
                     Of frailtie therefore, when our foot ſhall ſlip,
                     Or ſway, or ſtray, or turne-awry, or trip;
                     Yer flat Wee fall, vouchſafe thy helping hand,
                     To raiſe vs then; and make vs, after, ſtand.
                     For, without Thee, our Force is Feebleneſs;
                     Our Wiſdome Folly; Will is Waywardneſs:
                     Our Knowledge, Ignorance; our Hope Deſpaire:
                     Our Faith but Phanſie, and our All but Aire.
                     Without Thee, Lord, meer Idols are we all;
                     W'haue Eies, but ſee not: feet, but cannot craule:
                     Eares, but we heare not: Senſes with-out Senſe:
                     Soules with-out Soule, with-out Intelligence.
                     Without Thee, all our Counſails & Deſeigns
                     Are but as Chaffe before the boyſterous Windes;
                     Our Preparations quickly come to nought;
                     Our Enterpriſes vaniſh with a Thought.
                     With-out Thee, boot neither our Foot, nor Horſe
                     From Thee alone all things deriue their Force:
                     Thou only giveſt Vertue, Wiſdome, Wealth,
                     Peace, Honour, Courage, Victory, and Health.
                     
                        Thou holdſt the hearts of Princes in thy hand:
                     Their Strength and State is all at thy Command:
                     No Chance of Warre, no Power, no Policy;
                     But, Changeleſs, Thou giv'ſt Loſſe, or Victory.
                     By Thee Kings raign; bound, equally to all
                     To waigh iuſt Iuſtice, both to Great and Small;
                     To reach the good their Sceptre's helpfull Vigour;
                     And teach the Lewd their Swords ſeuereſt Rigour.
                     Who Them reiect, or Their iuſt Lawes repugne;
                     Thine Honor, and Thine Ordinance impugne.
                     They owe their Subiects, Iuſtice and Defence;
                     Their Subiects Them, Honor, Obedience.
                     Each ought to pay Them (in degree, & manner)
                     Tribute, where Tribute; Honor, to whom Honor;
                     
                        
                           •
                        nd, to their People, They their beſt Protection,
                     And Each his Owne; without miſ-fond Affection:
                     And think themſelues (the while) Thy ſubiects too,
                     And bound the more thy ſacred Lore to doo:
                     To ſhew the more Their Vertues Excellence,
                     The more their Charge is, & their Eminence.
                     Iuſtice due Dooms ſlackly to execute,
                     Makes ſome Diſloyal, others Diſſolute:
                     
                        
                           •
                        ome too-outrageous, in Wrongs greedineſs,
                     Others (on th'other ſide) in all Exceſs
                     
                        T'hath oft bin ſeen (& in Our Times & Climes)
                     Good Princes ſmart for wicked Peoples Crimes:
                     And ſometimes alſo for their Princes Sin,
                     Subiects are plagued outward and within.
                     But, O! how highly happy is the Land
                     Where a iuſt Prince doth prudently command!
                     And where the People in a Loue-bred Awe,
                     Pay willing Seruice, and Obey the Law.
                     O happy! both, People and Prince (in fine)
                     Where both obey Thy ſacred Lawes diuine:
                     Who grately vſing Bleſſings great and ſmall;
                     Acknowledge Thee Owner and Lord of All.
                     Of Thee, in Fee, all Princes of the Earth
                     Hold their Eſtates, Goods, Honors, Being, Birth:
                     And, without Thee, can neither keep, nor get,
                     Leaſt point of Honor, nor of Earth leaſt bit.
                     Their Arcenals, without Thee are but vain,
                     Their Hoords of Treaſure, and their Heaps of Grain
                           •
                        
                     
                     'Tis vainr, without Thee, to affie in Force
                     Of Men, Munition, Champions, Charrets, Horſe.
                     Without Thee, Order is diſ-orderd ſoon,
                     Valour ſoon vanquiſht, Policy vndone:
                     Number but Cumber: and a Multitude
                     Of beaten Soldiers, beaten by few rude.
                     
                        Thou, at thy pleaſure, mak'ſt the deepeſt Sea
                     Diuide it Self, to giue Thy Seruants Way:
                     And ſodainly, again itſelf to cloſe,
                     To ouer-whelm Thine and Their ſtubborn Foes.
                     Thou, frō the Rock mak'ſt plentious Riuers ſpout,
                     For Thine to drink, in ſandy Deſarts drought.
                     And, there, from Heav'n ſend'ſt them exceeding ſtore
                     Of Quailes, for meat, till they can eate no more.
                     Thou fedſt them there, with Angels bread (a while)
                     And gav'ſt them then a Milk-&-Hony Soile.
                     There, without ſtroak to conquer in the Field;
                     And, Mine-leſs make their tumbling Walls to yeeld.
                     To ſhew the vſe and power of humble Prayer;
                     And How to Thee behooues vs ſtill repaire:
                     While heart and hands Moſes to Heav'n doth ſtrain,
                     
                        
                           •
                        enowned IOSVAH Conquers in the Plain.
                     Thou, at thy pleaſure, mak'ſt the Sun to ſtay;
                     
                        
                           •
                        nd, without Night, to make one Double Day:
                     
                        
                           •
                        o giue thy Seruants complete Victory;
                     
                        
                           •
                        nd euer-raze their Foes foule memory.
                     Thou, to expreſſe thy Power (in Gedeons Raign)
                     
                        
                           •
                        aſt by Three hundred. Six-Score Thouſand ſlain:
                     
                        
                           •
                        nd, by One man, one Goad-groom (Sillie Sangar)
                     
                        
                           •
                        eſtroy'd Six hundred, in religious anger.
                     
                        Thou canſt in One a Thouſands ſtrength compreſs
                     And place it ſtrangely in his ſlender Treſs:
                     Which, cut, he loſt; and then re-grown, regain'd;
                     And dying, more then liuing, Foes he brain'd.
                     Thou turn'dſt to graſſe, a King of Babylon:
                     And ſetſt a Shepheard on a Regal Throne.
                     Thou ſlew'ſt a Giant, by a gentle Lad,
                     Who, for a Piſtol, but a Pebble had.
                     How-many Troubles had that Prophet-Prince!
                     For happy Seruice, hatefull Recompence;
                     Through Hill & Dale, hunted from place to place:
                     Yet, ſtill preſerv'd by Thine aſſiſting grace;
                     And ſet, at laſt, vpon his Maſters Throne,
                     Subduing all ciuill and forrain Foen:
                     Then, in Thine Honor warbles many a Pſalm;
                     And, hoary, leaues his Sonne, his Kingdome calm.
                     By Thee, His Sonne, renowned Salomon,
                     
                     Obtain'd the Name of Wiſedoms Paragon:
                     
                     For, asking only That; Thou gau'ſt Him VVealth,
                     Honor and Peace withall, and Power and Health.
                     And, as good Princes thus Thou dooſt aduance;
                     So bringſt thou down fel Tyrants Arrogance;
                     Such as, tranſported in their Pride extreame,
                     Dare wrong Thy Saints, or Thy d
                           ••
                        d Self blaſphem
                           •
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        Senacherib muſt This confeſſe, and rew,
                     With nine-ſcore-Thouſand which Thine Angel ſlew,
                     Of His proud Hoſte; beſides th'vnkindly Slaughter
                     Of his owne Self, by his owne Sonnes, ſoon after.
                     So, That Baal-blinded, blood-ſoild, Sin-ſold Paier,
                     In whoſe ſad Dayes the Zealful Thesbits Praier,
                     
                        
                           •
                        or Seav'n Six-Months, ſeald-vp thy heav'nly deaws)
                     
                        
                           •
                        hy Power, Truth, Iuſtice, in Their Iudgemēt ſhews.
                     
                        
                           •
                        ft-times thy Hook hales moody Tyrants back;
                     
                        
                           •
                        ft-times themſelues by their own Swords to wrack:
                     
                        
                           •
                        ometimes, by Womens weak vnwarlike hands,
                     
                        
                           •
                        hou conquer'ſt Captains, & confoundſt their Bands.
                     Yea, Lord, at all times, in extreameſt Straights,
                     
                        
                           •
                        hy ſacred Arme, or Secret Army, waits,
                     
                        
                           •
                        o ſuccour Thine (from Famine, Sword, and Fire;
                     
                        
                           •
                        nd all the Plots that Foes, or Fiends, conſpire)
                     And them, ſo daily, to ſupply, ſupport
                     Their Wants, their Weaknes) in ſo various ſort,
                     That, all thy Wonders of this kinde, to count,
                     
                        
                           •
                        en paſt Examples, paſt all Numbers mount.
                     But, All thy Mercies, vnto All, and Each
                     
                        
                           •
                        f thine Elect; What Words, what Thoughts can reach!
                     
                        
                           •
                        hat Thou haſt ſaid, and done vnto Thy Vine,
                     
                     
                        
                           •
                        hy Loue, Thy Doue, that little Flock of Thine!
                     
                        To whom Thou ſp
                           •
                        keſt diuers waies of old;
                     In Viſions, Dreames, Types, Figures manifold;
                     By Prieſts and Prophets; ſealing oft thine Oracles
                     Of Wrath, or Mercy; with reſpectiue Miracles.
                     And laſt of all, when Times full Term was run,
                     Sent'ſt vs f
                           •
                        om Heav'n Thine Owne and only SON
                     Whom coeternal GOD Thou didſt ingender,
                     Thine own grauē Im
                              •
                           ge, Thine own Glories ſplēdo
                           •
                        
                     
                     Th'Eternal Word, by Whom, when All began,
                     Thou madeſt All; and ſince, re-madeſt Man:
                     The Mediatour, and the Vmpire, giv'n,
                     To reconcile reuolted Earth to Heav'n.
                     Who, to impart to vs His Immortalitie,
                     Took part with Vs in this our fraile Mortalitie;
                     And, in all things (except all Sinne alone)
                     A perfect Man, put all our Nature on.
                     Born in the World, to make Vs Born-anew:
                     In pouertie, Vs richly to endew:
                     Humbling himſelf, that we might raiſed be:
                     In Seruant's Form, to make vs euer Free.
                     Came down to Earth, Vs vp to Heav'n to mount
                     Was tempted 
                           •
                        eer; our Tempter to ſurmount:
                     Dy'd to deſtroy the Strength of Death and Sin:
                     And Roſe again, our Righteouſnes to win.
                     
                        How oft did He viſite the Poore and Sick?
                     Cure the Diſtracted, and Paralitique;
                     Reſtore the Blinde, Deaf, Dumb; and Dead reuiue;
                     And Satans Captiues from his rage repriue!
                     How many Idiots did He make excell
                     The Wiſeſt Maſters in all Iſrael!
                     
                        
                           •
                        ow many rude, plain, ſilly Fiſher-men,
                     
                        
                           •
                        are power-full Preachers; Fiſhers (then) of Men.
                     How-many Sin-ſick did he inly cure;
                     
                        
                           •
                        nd deep Soule-wounded binde-vp, and aſſure!
                     
                        
                           •
                        ow-many Proud, Looſe, Cruell, Couetous,
                     
                        
                           •
                        ade Hee Meek, Modeſt, Gentle, Bountious.
                     By Him, deer Father, come we Thee to know,
                     
                        
                           •
                        hy Word, thy Will; to frame our owne Wils ſo:
                     
                        
                           •
                        y Him alone Wiſedome we ſeek and finde;
                     
                        
                           •
                         Cares and Croſſes, to confirm our minde.
                     By Him alone Thy ſacred Truth we learn
                     
                        
                           •
                        om ſuttleſt Errors cleerly to diſcern:
                     
                        
                           •
                        y Him all Cloudes of Darknes are diſpell'd;
                     
                        
                           •
                        olatry and Hereſie refell'd.
                     By Him, We pray to Thee; and what we craue
                     liuely Faith, we are aſſur'd to haue:
                     
                        
                           •
                        eav'ns Kingdom firſt, Soules Feaſt, & Bodies Food,
                     
                        
                           •
                        race, Comfort, Peaee, & euery needfull Good.
                     
                        By Him, be We Thy Children of Adoption,
                     Coheires of Heav'n, and Veſſels of Election:
                     Becomming Man, He is become our Brother;
                     So, happy VVe haue alſo Thee our Father.
                     By Him, of Thee, Thine Holy Spirit we haue;
                     Which in our hearts thy Law doth lyuelie graue:
                     The Comforter, the Spirit of Truth, of Loue,
                     Of Power, of Peace, of Wiſedome from aboue:
                     The Spirit, which ſtaies vs, when in Storms we ride
                     And ſteers vs ſteddie, in our Calmer Tide:
                     VVhich kills the Fleſh, and chills infatuate Fires;
                     To quicken Soules, and kindle Heav'ns-Deſires:
                     Which brings the Strays home to Thy holy Fold
                     Giues Stutters Tongues, and makes the baſhful bold
                     Opens the Senſe of Sacred Myſteries;
                     Giues Form, or Life to euerie thing that is.
                     In Him, Thou built'ſt Thy Heav'n of Heav'ns excelling
                     Thy Court prepar'd for Saints eternall Dwelling:
                     In Him, Thou mad'ſt the VVorld and All to moue
                     In euery Part as doth it beſt behoue.
                     Hee, to the fainting heart new heart procures,
                     Confirmes the feeble, fearefull Soules aſſures:
                     Giues Faith, and Hope, Loue, Grace & godly Zeal.
                     Happy the Soules where He delights to dwel.
                     
                        For, Thoſe Hee fills with his aboundant Treaſures,
                     
                        
                           •
                        n diuers manners, and in diuers meaſures;
                     
                        
                           •
                        s diuerſly befits Thy Churches-ſtate,
                     
                        
                           •
                        o Plant, or Prune, or Prop, or Propagate.
                     
                     To ſome he giues a cleer, quick Apprehenſion;
                     
                        
                           •
                        o ſome, deep Iudgement; ſome, Diuine Inuention:
                     
                        
                           •
                        o ſome, the doore of gracefull Eloquence;
                     
                        
                           •
                        o ſome, the ſtore of Wiſedoms Excellence:
                     Some, to interpret with Diuine Dexterity
                     
                        
                           •
                        he ſacred Secrets of th'eternall Verity:
                     
                        
                           •
                        ome (School-leſs Scholars; Learned, ſtudy-leſs)
                     
                        
                           •
                        o vnderſtand and ſpeak all Languages.
                     Som (to confirm their Office, and Thine Oracles)
                     
                        
                           •
                        o work ſtrange Wonders, great & many Miracles;
                     
                        
                           •
                        euiue the dead, recouer natiue Euils,
                     
                        
                           ••
                        re all Diſeaſes; and euen caſt out Diuels.
                     Such are th'Effects, Works, Vertues, gifts & graces,
                     
                        
                           •
                        hich, by degrees, in diuers times and places,
                     
                        
                           •
                        hy Holy Spirit to ſillie Men hath giv'n;
                     
                        
                           •
                        om Them, to Thee, to raiſe our hearts to Heav'n.
                     And, as in our fraile Bodies (through varietie
                     
                        
                           •
                        f Members, fitted into One Societie)
                     
                        
                           •
                        ne very Soule doth actions different,
                     
                        
                           ••
                        me more, Some leſſe, Noble, or Excellent:
                     
                        So, in the myſtick Body of Thy Son
                     (Where many Members Loue vnites in One)
                     Thine Owne, One Spirit, works actions admirable
                     Among themſelues more or leſſe honorable.
                     Yet, orderly, Each his owne Rank obſerues;
                     And properly, Each his owne Office ſerues:
                     Nor boaſteth any, other not to need:
                     For oft the leaſt, the moſt of all doth ſteed.
                     Therefore the ſtronger muſt the weak ſupport:
                     The ſafe and ſound, cheer the afflicted ſort:
                     The Rich and mighty, not deſpiſe Inferiours;
                     Neither the mean enuie or hate Superiours.
                     Were All a Head, in This faire Frame of Man;
                     Where were the Foot, the Hand, the Stomack than;
                     Were All a Tongue, where ſhould the Eye becom
                           •
                        
                     
                     Were All an Eye, where ſhould the Eare haue room▪
                     
                     O Spirit Eternall! which haſt All compos'd;
                     In number, meaſure, Order, All diſpos'd;
                     Make Charity Vs (mutuall Members) moue;
                     Vnite our Spirits in thy perpetuall Loue.
                     Quench all Contentions, Errors, Hereſies,
                     Which, both our Mindes and Bodies tyranize:
                     Quench all Concupiſcence, and foule Deſire,
                     Which, both our Bodies and Soules Death conſpir
                           •
                        
                     
                     
                        Vouchſafe our Souls, Reſt; wthout Schiſmik ſtrife;
                     Our Bodies Health, through chaſte and ſober Life.
                     What could we ask? what ſhould wee rather craue,
                     Then in ſound Bodies as ſound Soules to haue?
                     Sound is the Body kept, by keeping Chaſte,
                     With moderate Exerciſe, and mean repaſt:
                     
                        
                           •
                        ound is the Soule, which reſteth (ſober-wiſe)
                     Content in Thee; vn-vext in Vanities.
                     Sound is the Soule, free from all Self-Sedition
                     Of Pride, Hate, Enuie, Auarice, Ambition,
                     
                        
                           •
                        nd all the Crowd of Mans Concupiſcence;
                     
                        
                           •
                        inding His Will, to Thy Obedience.
                     Who is ſo bound (Thy Seruant) is moſt Free:
                     
                        
                           •
                        oſt Rich, who leaues all Riches elſe, for Thee:
                     
                        
                           •
                        oſt eaſie reſts, who moſt for Thee endures:
                     
                        
                           •
                        oſt Self-diſtruſting, moſt Thy Strength aſſures.
                     So Thee to Serue, is euen to Raign: in brief,
                     
                        
                           •
                        o to Obey, is to Command in Chief.
                     
                        
                           •
                        o walke Thy Wayes, is only Libertie.
                     
                     
                        
                           •
                        o learn Thy Learning, ENCYCLOPAEDIE:
                     O! happy Thoſe that ſtand in ſuch a ſtate;
                     
                        
                           •
                        nd in Thy Statutes alwaies meditate:
                     
                        
                           •
                        r, if they ſlip, or trip, or faile, or fall,
                     
                        
                           •
                        eturn betimes, and for Thy Mercy call.
                     
                        For, though thy Law, in Firie Thunder-giv'n,
                     Threat ſtill the Stubborn, with Reuenge frō Heav'n▪
                     
                     Thy gracious Goſpell offers Pardon free,
                     To humbled Soules that Sigh, in Faith, to Thee.
                     And Thou, who wilt not, Sinners die, but liue;
                     Haſt promis'd, All, ſo ſuing, to forgiue.
                     Thy Word is Truth: Thy Promiſe to fulfill,
                     Thou (God of Truth) haſt euer Power and Will.
                     O! bountious Thou, which dooſt ſo oft repaire▪
                     
                     Our broken Soules, and keep'ſt them from Deſpair
                     And, bleſſed Wee, whoſe Faith in Love's Phyſicion
                     Aſſures our Hope, of all our Sins Remiſſion.
                     Who-ſo hath Sorrow for his Sinfulnes,
                     Purpoſe to mend, Deſire of Holineſs,
                     Truſt in Thy Mercy; hath no need to doubt
                     But, by Thy Grace, his Sins are wyped out.
                     O Cordial Word! O Comfortable breath!
                     Reuiuing Soules, euen in the Gates of Death!
                     From Iawes of Hell, raiſing our Hopes to Heav'n!
                     Therefore, deer Lord, To Thee all Praiſe be giv'n
                     Who ſhall accuſe vs now, if Thou acquight?
                     God being with vs, what can vs affright?
                     Our Faith in Thee (ô!) What can ſhake, or ſhock
                     So ſurely fixt vpon ſo firm a Rock?
                     
                        What ſhall diuide vs, Lord, from Loue of Thee?
                     
                        
                           •
                        hall Shame? ſhall Sorrow? ſhall Aduerſity?
                     
                        
                           •
                        hal Famine? Plague? War? Wealth, or Want? (In ſum)
                     
                        
                           •
                        hall Life? ſhall Death? things Preſent, or to-Come?
                     Stay, ſtay, vs Lord, and ſteel our feeble hearts,
                     
                        
                           •
                        gainſt the ſting of temporarie Smarts:
                     
                        
                           •
                        raw, draw our Soules neer to thy Self, ô Lord,
                     With powerfull Touches of Thy Spirit & Word.
                     Guide, guide our Steps ſtill in thy Gracious Way,
                     
                        
                           •
                        uring our Durance in This houſe of Clay:
                     
                        
                           •
                        hat, when This Priſon ſhall be broken down,
                     Wee may with Thee receiue a Glorious Crown.
                     So ſhall Wee euer, with a voice Diuine,
                     
                        
                           •
                        ing Haleluiahs to th'ETERNAL TRINE;
                     
                        
                           •
                        ecord thy Mercies, which all Thoughts Surmount;
                     
                        
                           •
                        nd Thus the Glory of Thy Deeds recount:
                     SVpernall Lord, Eternall King of Kings,
                     Maker, Maintainer, Mouer of All things,
                     
                        
                           •
                        ow infinite! How excellently-rare!
                     
                        
                           •
                        ow abſolute! Thy Works, Thy Wonder are!
                     
                        
                           •
                        ow-much Their Knowledge is to be deſir'd!
                     
                        
                           •
                        ow, THOV, in All, to be of All admir'd!
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  MICRO-COSMO-GRAPHIA; The Little-Worlds Deſcription: OR, THE MAP OF MAN (From Latin Saphiks of that Famous, late, Preacher in London, Mr. HEN. SMITH) Tranſlated; & Dedicated To the Right Honourable, HONORIA, Lady HAY.
                  By IOSVAH SYLVESTER.
               
               
                  
                  
                  To the right-Right Honourable, HONORIA, Wife of IAMES, Lord HAY, Sole Daughter and Heire of EDVVARD Lord DENNY.
                  EQually bound, in humble Gratitude,
                  
                  To Two deer Equals (to You equall Deer);
                  Vnable (yet) with Both at once to cleer,
                  
                  
                     Vnwilling yet, with Eyther to be rude:
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     aine would I craue to haue my Bond renewd,
                  For a more Happy, or more Hopefull Year,
                  When gratious Heav'n ſhall daign to ſet me freer
                  
                  From old cold Cares, which keep my Muſe vnmew'd.
                  Would You be pleas'd (Madame) to interpoſe
                  Your gentle breath, I would not doubt to ſpeed:
                  
                  Such vertue hath Your Vertue ſtil with Thoſe.
                  
                  Therefore in Hope of Your kinde Help (at need)
                  This ſimple Pledge I Offer at Your Feet;
                  
                  
                     Altar of Loue, Where both Their Vowes doe meet.
                  
                     
                        Yor. Honorable Vertue's humble Votarie, Ioſuah Sylueſter.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  THE MAP OF MAN.
                  
                     I Sing not, but (in Sighes abrupt)
                     
                     
                        Sob-out the State of MAN, corrupt
                     
                        By th'olde Serpent's banefull Breath;
                     
                        Whoſe ſtrong Contagion ſtill extends
                     
                     
                        To euery Creature that deſcends
                     
                     
                        From th'old Little World of Death.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Drad-deer Creator, new-create
                     
                     
                        Thy Creature: Sauiour, expiate
                     
                     This, and all our Owne Addition:
                     
                        O Sacred Spirit, Our Spirits renew:
                     
                     
                        Informe, reforme, and tune Mee trew,
                     
                     
                        To condole Our ſad Condition.
                     
                  
                  
                     In Earth, Man wanders (Pilgrim-wiſe)
                     Hopes, doubts; deſires, faints, freezes, fryes;
                     Croſſed, toſſed to and fro:
                     He turns, he windes; he findes no good:
                     He ay complains that Euill's Flood
                     (Farre and wide) doth ouer-flowe.
                  
                  
                     His Birth (in Sinne) beginnes in Teares:
                     His Life is rife in Pains and Fears;
                     Will-He, nill-He, ſpoyling ſport:
                     His Death with groans, in doubtfull caſe,
                     Sends him, God knowes, vnto what place:
                     Bleſt none reſt, but in the Port.
                  
                  
                     
                     The Fleſh againſt the Spirit rebells:
                     The Spirit againe the Fleſh repells;
                     Euer ſtriuing, neuer ſtill:
                     And ſodainly, while theſe contend,
                     Their common Foe, the curſed Fiend,
                     Findes aduantage Both to kill.
                  
                  
                     Earth (Step-dam-like) ſharp Rodds doth yield,
                     To ſcourge her Sonns: the Sea is filld
                     (Both aboue and vnder too)
                     With hideous Horrors, paſt report:
                     Th'Aier, whirling in Tempeſtuous ſort,
                     Beats, and threats All to vndoo.
                  
                  
                     The Countrey's rude, and foe to Fame;
                     The Court more braue, and more to blame;
                     Painted Faces, graces fain'd:
                     The Cittie (There, O! bad's the beſt)
                     Seat of Deceit, and Miſers neſt;
                     Gold their God, vngodly gain'd.
                  
                  
                     Iarr at the Barr: Stewes at the Stage;
                     In Way-fare, Thieues: in War-fare, Rage:
                     Noyſe abroad: Annoyes at home:
                     In Churches, Purchaſe, Profanation,
                     Fiends ſeeming Saints; Abhomination:
                     Euery-where, no Feare of Doome.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     The Throne's not giuen vnto the Iuſt:
                     The Faithfull is not put in Truſt:
                     Prophets are not held for true:
                     Nor loyall lov'd, nor learned grac't,
                     Nor weary eas'd, nor Worthy plac't:
                     Nor hath any heer his dew.
                  
                  
                     The impudent, the inſolent,
                     The Foole, the Friend in complement,
                     And the ſly, we ſee (by proof)
                     Held eloquent, magnanimous,
                     Right pleaſant, kinde, ingenious;
                     And the Wealthy, wiſe ynough.
                  
                  
                     Reward is heard: words are but winde:
                     Each Art is long; Life ſhort confin'd:
                     Might makes Right in euery Cauſe.
                     
                        Phyſicke is vile, and vilely vs'd;
                     
                        Diuinity, diſdain'd, abus'd:
                     Vnder foot men tread the Lawes.
                     
                  
                  
                     The Rich with rage, the Poore with plaints,
                     With hate the Wiſe, with ſcorne the Saints,
                     Euermore are curſtly croſt:
                     With painfull toyle the Priuate-man,
                     The Nobler ſtates with Enuy wan,
                     Without end are torne and toſt.
                  
                  
                     
                     If good, he fares no better for 't;
                     If bad, no worſe they him ſupport;
                     Fortune ſerueth all alike:
                     Though ſhe ſimper, though ſhe ſmile,
                     Though ſhe laugh outright awhile,
                     She is alwaies ſlippery-ſleeke.
                  
                  
                     Who lately ſerued, Lords-it now:
                     Who lately becked, now doth bow:
                     Valleyes ſwell, and Mountains ſink:
                     Who lately flouriſht, now doth fade:
                     Who late was ſtrong, now feeble made,
                     Feeding Wormes, in Duſt doth ſtink.
                  
                  
                     So, Lowly reſts: ſo, Lofty rues.
                     Say that one might his fortune chuſe,
                     Vnder Heauen to haue his will;
                     'Twould be a Doubt, among the Wiſe,
                     Whether it better were to Riſe
                     To High ſtate, or to Sit ſtill.
                  
                  
                     Phant'ſie conceiues, Reaſon receiues,
                     Paſſion repugns (and Patience reaues).
                     What I wiſh, What I deſire,
                     I ſee: and Senſe importunes ſo,
                     I couet, I commend it too:
                     Then againe it doth retire.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        
                           •
                        enſe, whither now? Tis griefe to ſee
                     
                        
                           •
                        hat flits ſo faſt, ſo ſodainly.
                     Reaſon, whither roams thy reach?
                     What hurts, were better ſtill be hid,
                     
                        
                           •
                        nd ſtill vnknowne: O! ill-beſtid!
                     Poor in ſtore, in Wealth a wretch.
                  
                  
                     When Fortune comes, ſhe means our Wrack;
                     And when ſhe goes, ſhe breaks our back:
                     Comming, going, all is one.
                     
                        
                           •
                        or, What ſhe giues ſhe takes away,
                     Vnkinde, and blinde, inconſtant ay;
                     Frank to few, and firme to none.
                  
                  
                     Oft haue I canvas'd, whethers Caſe
                     
                        
                           •
                        s Worſt; the Fall'n, or th'euer-Baſe:
                     Yet, ſcarce can I it decide.
                     The Fall proues plainly for the firſt:
                     Want Pleads, that euer-Want is Worſt;
                     Partiall to their proper ſide.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        t irks the Fall'n to haue been High:
                     Th' ay-Poor could wiſh he had been By:
                     Either others ſtate would glad.
                     If euen in gladnes ſadnes growe,
                     Were not I ſomewhat glad alſo,
                     How extreame ſhould I be ſad!
                  
                  
                     
                     If Care Wee take, it Health impaires:
                     If not, it takes Vs vn-awares:
                     Whether ſhould we ſeek or ſhun?
                     Whether (to paſſe vnto the next)
                     The good or bad be moſt perplext,
                     Is another Queſtion.
                  
                  
                     The Guiltie ſuffers for his Fault:
                     The Guilt-leſs doubts no leſs aſſault
                     By Miſs-Fortune: both deſire
                     To liue on Earth, to draw this breath:
                     Both feare to Die; and, after Death,
                     Torment of eternall Fire.
                  
                  
                     Hence, ſlowe Dayes labour wears vs thin:
                     Hence, lightly, Nightly fears begin:
                     Hence, rathe Riſing and late Reſt:
                     Hence, tougheſt ſtorms, and rougheſt ſtreams:
                     Hence, griping Cares, and ghaſtly Dreams,
                     Waking, ſleeping, do moleſt.
                  
                  
                     Winter's too-colde: Summer's too-hot;
                     Autumne too-moiſt (which breeds the Rot)
                     All the hope is in the Spring.
                     The liuely Spring is louely faire:
                     But, if keen Ice then chill the Aier,
                     Little pleaſure doth it bring.
                  
                  
                     
                     Seas drowne the Vales: the Windes doe heaue
                     The Hills to Heav'n; the Rocks they cleaue.
                     Bold Ambition ſtands amaz'd,
                     Expecting where to build a Fort
                     
                        
                           •
                        o ſtrong, and rampyr'd in ſuch ſort,
                     That it neuer may be raz'd.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        eace is too-drown'd in Luſt and Sloath:
                     Warre is too-drunk with Blood and Wrath:
                     That, too-gawdie; this, too-grim.
                     Mens mindes are all ſo delicate,
                     
                        
                           •
                        o ſoft, and ſo effeminate,
                     Small things, all things, grieuous ſeem.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           ••
                        ither the Head doth alwayes ake,
                     Or Palat ſleep, or Palſey ſhake,
                     Or our Belly roars within:
                     Or elſe with Choler wee abound,
                     Or elſe with Phlegm, or elſe (vnſound)
                     Tumour's humours ſcald our skin.
                  
                  
                     What dread of Death, What greedy Luſt,
                     
                        
                           •
                        hat Surfait, Sloath, and Deeds vniuſt,
                     Daily plunge in Perills rife;
                     What Sword conſumeth every houre,
                     
                        
                           •
                        nd what the Plague doth quick deuoure,
                     Lengthens Phyſick, ſhortens Life.
                  
                  
                     
                     Where's now Aeneas? where's his Sonne?
                     Where's Hercules? Where's Salomon?
                     
                     Where is Dauid? Where is Saule?
                     
                     Where's Cyrus, Caeſar, and the reſt?
                     Ah! Hee and They are all deceaſt:
                     I muſt follow: ſo muſt all.
                  
                  
                     Hark: Thou, whom moſt the People hailes;
                     The wiſeſt errs: the iuſteſt failes:
                     Strongeſt limpeth now and than:
                     The humbleſt ſwels: the ſobreſt ſips:
                     The holieſt ſins: the warieſt ſlips:
                     God is fault-leſſe: neuer, Man.
                  
                  
                     Too-curious or too-careleſly,
                     Too-lauiſh or too-ſlauiſhly,
                     By the Foole or by the Knaue;
                     Too-craking, or too-crauenly,
                     Too-hatefull, or too-gratefully,
                     Haſte or waſte marrs all we haue.
                  
                  
                     Ambition's end is Rule and Raign:
                     Crueltie's, Conqueſt: Guile's, is Gain,
                     To growe Rich by hook or crook:
                     Iuggling, and ſtruggling, ſtrife in all:
                     No Triumph without Fight will fall;
                     Warr-leſs, none for Peace may look.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        
                           •
                        ee think, but neuer can intend,
                     
                        
                           •
                        ood thoughts well to begin; or end
                     If perhaps they be begun:
                     
                        
                           •
                        r, if wee end them, neuer finde
                     How-euer rare, in any kinde)
                     Recompence when we haue done.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        ur heart it hath an in-borne Gueſt,
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           ll-Ill (it hight): it poſteth preſt
                     To the Tongue, ill Words to vent:
                     
                        
                           •
                        eſire, then, ruſhes to ill Deeds:
                     
                        
                           •
                        ngeance anon the Fact ſucceeds.
                     Thus comes Ill to Puniſhment.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        ife, this Snake we choak or charm;
                     
                        
                           •
                        ithin, again We hug it Warm:
                     Daring, doubting, vp and down;
                     
                        
                           •
                        ll Luſt, as lighter, vp doth ſurge;
                     
                        
                           •
                        d th'horror of the fearefull Scourge,
                     Fall, as heauier, to the ground.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        me Fleſh, be frolike, take delight,
                     
                        
                           •
                        's revell now: 't will once be night:
                     Shall a little Gout, or Cholick,
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         ſodaine Qualm, or ſullen Care,
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         addle Fit of idle Feare
                     Mar thy Mirth? Come Fleſh, be frolik.
                  
                  
                     
                     What ſeeks, we ſhun; What ſhuns, we ſeek:
                     What helps, we loath; What hurts, we like:
                     Bird in-hand we leaue, for buſh.
                     For, What we Want we panting craue;
                     And looſely lauiſh what Wee haue:
                     Brag, of that ſhould make vs bluſh.
                  
                  
                     With-childe with mirth, we bring-forth Scorn,
                     We bring-vp Furie; over-born
                     (Moov'd and mooving) either way;
                     Too-ſorrie, or too-merry-mad:
                     The happy Meane is neuer had,
                     While we Wretches heere doe ſtay.
                  
                  
                     Wee reign and ſerue: we want and flowe:
                     We ioy and mourne: we freez and glowe:
                     Vowes we make and break (together):
                     We build and batter; ioyne and iarr:
                     We heap and ſcatter; make and marr:
                     And we flouriſh, and we wither.
                  
                  
                     Wee look to Heauen, and leap to Hell:
                     Our Hope and Feare (by turnes) rebell;
                     Plunging downe, or puffing-vp:
                     Pleaſe would we faine, but finde demurr;
                     Pleaſe might we well, did Will concurr:
                     Sloath doth ſtay, and Luſt doth ſtop.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        
                           •
                        o, ſtill we ſtand, and whine the while;
                     
                        
                           •
                        ought Labour boots, nor loue, nor wile:
                     All is loſt, when 'tis too-late.
                     
                        
                           •
                        uills to th'euill and the good
                     
                        
                           •
                        re daily ſent: and if with-ſtood,
                     We but faſter foſter Fate.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         will at once giue-over quight
                     
                        
                           •
                        oth to be VVicked and Vpright;
                     To doe either Right, or Wrong:
                     
                        
                           •
                        or, Goods well-gotten, growe but thin,
                     
                        
                           •
                        et hardly vp, come ſlowely in:
                     And th'ill-gotten laſt not long.
                  
                  
                     What ſhall I doe? If I forbear
                     
                        
                           •
                        y Cauſe-leſs Foe, I bluſh, I fear
                     His Deſpight, and my Diſparage.
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         to revenge me, I reſolue;
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         ſatiſfies, when I revolue
                     None's all-Fault-leſs, in all Cariage.
                  
                  
                     When I haue ſpar'd, I wiſh t'haue ſpoke:
                     
                        
                           •
                        nd when I ſpeak, I would revoke;
                     Better pleas'd t'haue held my peace:
                     Would God I could (as Wiſer-ones)
                     
                        
                           •
                        oth ſpeake and holde my peace at once;
                     So to liue at Quietnes.
                  
                  
                     
                     Deare Minde, how dooſt Thou? Fraile & ſick,
                     My Fleſh implores thy Succour quick:
                     Canſt? O! canſt Thou cure her griefe?
                     O! daign (I pry-thee) then with ſpeed
                     To help thy Seruant now at need;
                     Send her Reaſon for reliefe.
                  
                  
                     For, Faithfull Minde's firm Reſolution
                     Cures often-times th' ill Conſtitution
                     Of a Body ſick-inclyn'd:
                     But, then the Body (late deplored
                     For weake eſtate) to Health reſtored,
                     Growes a Burthen to the Minde.
                  
                  
                     O Sin-bred Hurt! O in-bred Hell!
                     Nor full, nor faſting, neuer well?
                     Neuer ſound? What ſhall I ſay?
                     Once all was well, and would be now
                     Better then euer, if that Thou
                     Curſed Sin wert quight away.
                  
                  
                     But Now (alas!) all Miſchiefe lies
                     In Ambuſh with all Miſeries,
                     Mans Confuſion to conſpire:
                     
                        Deſire and Feare at-once torment:
                     
                        Feare is a Tyrant; Mal-Content,
                     And inſatiate is Deſire.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Who fears? who mourns? who wants? who wanders?
                     Ah! only Men (Wills ill-Commanders).
                     Man alone abounds therein.
                     Lowd Lamentations, laſting Terrors,
                     Hart-wounding Wants, and wilfull Errors,
                     Had not been, had Man not been.
                  
                  
                     Heere Peſtilence, there Hungers Iawe,
                     Heer Drink, there Duel, there the Lawe,
                     Snatches one or other hence,
                     Heer Croſſe, there Care: or (better bleſt)
                     Who hap Theſe Haps to ſcape the beſt,
                     Age deuoures with-out Diſpenſe.
                  
                  
                     Perpending This in minde perplext,
                     The Miſerable (Envie-vext)
                     Cryes, O Beaſts, O Foules, O Fiſh!
                     You happy, harm-leſs, ſtorm-leſs things,
                     Preciſe in Natures Leſſonings,
                     Liue You long: You Life may wiſh.
                  
                  
                     But, I think, better not be born;
                     Or, born, hence quickly to return
                     To our Mothers duſty Lap;
                     Then liuing, daily heere to die,
                     In Cares, and Fears, and Miſery,
                     By Miſs-heed, or by Miſs-hap.
                  
                  
                     
                     While Hunger gripes mee gut and gall,
                     While burning Thirſt for Drinke doth call,
                     While for Cold I quake: alas!
                     In languor long I linger-on.
                     O! happy Thoſe, whoſe Woes, whoſe Mone,
                     Ridding quick doth quickly paſſe.
                  
                  
                     The Stout, the Coward, and the Meek,
                     All skirmiſh vnder Fortune like,
                     Stryking all with Miſchiefs aye;
                     The Stout repugnes, the Patient prayes,
                     The Hare-like Coward runnes his wayes;
                     Fortune differs not, but They.
                  
                  
                     Too-peeuiſh This, too-pleaſant That,
                     (Too-fierce, or too-effeminate)
                     Golden Mean can hardly ſtand
                     Betwixt theſe Two Extreames, vpright,
                     'Tis worne ſo weak, and waigh'd ſo light:
                     Error playes on either hand.
                  
                  
                     Wedlock, with Wife and Children cloggs:
                     The Single-Life, Luſts heauier Loggs,
                     (Rare's the Gift of Continence).
                     The Young-man ſtalks, the Old-man ſtoops,
                     That over-dares, This euer droops:
                     Th'Infant craules through Impotence.
                  
                  
                     
                     Maiſters taxe Seruants, proud, ſlutt, ſlowe;
                     Seruants, Churle Maiſter, Miſtreſs Shrowe:
                     Either Others Fault can finde.
                     The Daughter thinks her Mother froward;
                     Mother her Daughter deems vn-toward:
                     Kit (they ſay) will after Kinde.
                  
                  
                     Princes doe enuy Subiects Wealth:
                     Subiects doe enuy Princes Health:
                     Each doth enuie Others Good:
                     All, all doe envy Learnings Honour
                     (If any be conferrd vpon her)
                     O! ô wicked, wretched Mood!
                  
                  
                     The Souldier likes the Ruſticks Calm;
                     The Clowne affects the Souldiers Palm;
                     Thus doth Envy inly fret-her:
                     Our Paſtures parch, our Heards be poore;
                     Our Neighbour thriues in every ſtore:
                     Others Crop is ever better.
                  
                  
                     Fond Louers languiſh at their Eyes:
                     The Wrathfull foſters and defies
                     Frenzies, Furies, (wayward Elues):
                     What need we call for Whip or Scourge?
                     Their puniſhment what need we vrge?
                     Their Selfs Errors ſcourge themſelues.
                  
                  
                     
                     Feare hunts the Coward at the heel;
                     The Cruell, ſtill Revenging ſteel;
                     Ruine Him that Ruine ſeeks;
                     Heauy Revenge on hainous Crimes:
                     Yea, in the Sin, the Plague ſome-times;
                     Heauens iuſt hand ſo iuſtly ſtrikes.
                  
                  
                     Sorrow and Shame, for what is paſt;
                     Care, of the preſent; Feare (fore-caſt)
                     Of the danger yet to-come;
                     Make all falſe Pleaſures ſhorter ſeem,
                     And ſharper too in pain extreme,
                     Then euen Paine it ſelfe to ſome.
                  
                  
                     If I be merry, I am mad
                     (Say the Severe): if Sober-ſad,
                     Merry Greeks me Meacock call.
                     Is't poſſible for any-Man,
                     At-once to pleaſe (doe what he can)
                     God, Himſelfe, the World, and all?
                  
                  
                     Who Greatneſſe haultily affects,
                     Who Great Things happily effects;
                     That is hated, This envy'd:
                     But, hoping Greatneſſe, who ſo haps
                     To faile (or fall in After-Claps)
                     Him the Vulgar dare deride.
                  
                  
                     
                     VERTVE is vanquiſht by her Foes,
                     Whoſe Tryumph euen their Fore-head ſhowes,
                     'Tis a ſhame to be aſhamed.
                     But ſhall I tell (and tell thee trew)
                     Thy Fate (the Fruit that ſhall enſew
                     Shame-leſs ſhame-full life vntamed)?
                  
                  
                     This Fate then falls to bee Thine owne,
                     Such ſhalt thou reap as thou haſt ſown:
                     Wages like thy Worke expect.
                     Who heere their Dayes in Euill ſpend,
                     Shall ſuffer Euills, with-out End;
                     Such is Minos Doom direct.
                  
                  
                     Then, ſwagger, ſtagger, ſpend and ſpoyle;
                     Steale and conceale, and keep a coyle;
                     Quickly ſhalt thou all forgoe:
                     Kill, conquer, triumph; down again
                     Shalt thou bee caſt: bouz, beat, diſdaign;
                     Th' End's at hand, and comes not ſlowe.
                  
                  
                     The Wiſe bewaile Mens Follies rife,
                     And faine would cure their Vitious life
                     With Receits of heauenly Skill:
                     But Sin-ſick Fooles (what-ever prick,
                     Benumbd by Cuſtome) lethargike,
                     Care not, feare not, feele no ill.
                  
                  
                     
                     Who knoweth much, much ill he knowes:
                     Who little reaks, much good forgoes.
                     Hence, perplexed Doubts hee caſts;
                     What is great Knowledge? What ſo much
                     Of Learning? or of Book-Skill ſuch?
                     But great Blazes, and light Blaſts?
                  
                  
                     While Plato, ſportiue, doth deſpiſe,
                     The ſullen Cyniks Slouen-guiſe;
                     Hee, as faſt (on th'other ſide)
                     Doth Plato's Pomp as much condemn
                     And trample-on: Were both of them
                     (Who can tell me?) Wiſe, or Wide?
                  
                  
                     
                        Democritus heere laughes a-good:
                     
                        Heraclitus there weepes a Flood.
                     Glad and ſad would mend vs faine:
                     But now, ſo ſtubborn-ſtiffe is Man,
                     That Teares, nor Tunes, nor Ought elſe can
                     Faults reſtore, nor Fates reſtraine.
                  
                  
                     Sloath neuer wanteth Want, for Mate;
                     Thrift, Sweat and Labour macerate;
                     Eyther in their iſſue languiſh:
                     So, Health is neuer without Sin,
                     Nor Sicknes without Paine with-in:
                     Outward Ache, or inward Anguiſh.
                  
                  
                     
                     Service is to the Lofty minde
                     A Curb, a Spur to th'abiect Hinde;
                     Seld or neuer ſtoopes the Will:
                     The Vulgar voice, the Common Cry
                     Is, Welcome, Welcome LIBERTY:
                     
                     Good for good, but ill for ill.
                  
                  
                     A Griefe it is alone to bee;
                     But more, to haue ill company:
                     More or leſſe (alas!) by This,
                     Appeareth plain, when all is donne,
                     (As Proof hath found) that vnder Sunne,
                     Heer's no full, no perfect Bliſſe.
                     
                  
                  
                     Who neuer yet himſelfe could pleaſe,
                     What can content? What vſe? What Eaſe?
                     What availeth Wealth at will?
                     Needy and naked heere I liue:
                     To die, it doth me nothing grieue;
                     But to periſh, and liue ſtill.
                  
                  
                     I look to Heaven, and there (alas!)
                     With Fear I ſee my Iudges Face,
                     Auditing my Summes of Sin:
                     I thinke of Hell, and then I burn
                     Like Aetna: then to Earth return,
                     Cares and Fears there neuer lin.
                  
                  
                     
                     This feele I, thus I iuſtly fare:
                     O Man! learn quickly, and haue care
                     Sacred Duties to obſerue.
                     This Life is rife in Troubles ſore:
                     But yet (alas!) a Million more
                     Our Rebellion doth deſerue.
                  
                  
                     Much like, or worſe then former Age,
                     The futures Face wee may preſage:
                     Better ſeldome comes, they ſay.
                     Now Right, now Wrong; now Good, now Ill;
                     Now Fiend, now Frend; now God, now Will,
                     Seem to haue alternate Sway.
                  
                  
                     Nothing is gratis giuen nor got:
                     Each labours more or leſſe (God wot)
                     With the hand or with the head:
                     None without Art or Vertue thriue;
                     Nor Art, nor Vertue all atchiue:
                     Onely, Theſe, not alwayes ſped.
                  
                  
                     What ſhould I ſeeke or ſue for much,
                     To liue at Reſt? Content is Rich.
                     
                        Fortune often is too-free,
                     And often kills where ſhee's too-kinde:
                     But, had we once an equall Minde,
                     Wee ſhould all Contented bee.
                  
                  
                     
                     But, euery one is too-ſecure
                     In ſunny Dayes; and in obſcure,
                     Too-deiected in Deſire:
                     Hence, ouer-faint, or ouer-full;
                     Too-pyned, or too-plentifull,
                     Fry we all with inward Fire.
                  
                  
                     Now, Duſt her duſtic Brood expects:
                     
                        Come, Earth to Earth (of either Sexe).
                     Pleaſure trembles at her Call;
                     Cryes-out of Haſte, complaines of Heaven:
                     But Paine and Sorrow (narrow-driven)
                     Are well pleaſd, an
                           •
                         eaſd with-all.
                  
                  
                     Who giues me grace to guſh-out Teares,
                     And lends me ſpace to poure forth Prayers;
                     Yet, both ſeeming to neglect?
                     'Tis God the dreadfull, Sinners Scourge;
                     The gratious God, which oft doth purge
                     Ills with Pills, in his Elect.
                  
                  
                     Behold me, Thou that didſt beſtow
                     Thy Sonne on Mee: Forgiue me, Thou
                     That didſt ſuffer for my Sin:
                     Aſſiſt and ſtay me euermore
                     Thou, Thou that heere ſo oft before,
                     In my breſt a Gueſt haſt bin.
                  
                  
                     
                     Regard vs, Lord, vnworthy though;
                     Thy Glory ſeek, thy Mercy ſhowe;
                     Enimies approach apace:
                     We faile, we fall, we cannot ſtand,
                     Our Foes will haue the vpper hand,
                     But Thou help vs with thy Grace.
                  
                  
                     Witnes my Selfe that heer lie ſlain,
                     But, by Thy Touch reuiu'd again;
                     Glad to liue, to liue to Thee:
                     And yet deſire to be diſſolv'd
                     (When my due Date ſhall be revolv'd)
                     As more happy farre for Mee.
                  
                  
                     Shew me the Holy Land, which flowes
                     With Milke and Hony (Saints Repoſe).
                     Traine mee in the new Commerce,
                     In the New Art of Better Life:
                     
                     Then farewell Muſes, fare-well Strife:
                     In Thy Courts I will conuerſe.
                  
                  
                     
                        I cannot ſtrike Apollo's ſtring,
                     
                     
                        Study for Heav'n and timely ring
                     
                     
                        Sacred Aaron's golden Bell;
                     
                        Nor ſing at-once the Theſpian Songs,
                     
                     
                        And ſerue my Countrey, as belongs:
                     
                     
                        Therefore, MVSES, heere Fare-well.
                     
                  
                  FINIS.
               
               
                  
                  CERTAIN EPIGRAMMS of the ſame Mr. H.S. Translated; & Dedicated To my deer-affected, due-reſpected, Dr. HALL, & Dr. HILL.
                  I Owe You Each a larger Summ:
                  Why bring I then to Both a Crumm?
                  To ſhew you Both, My Shifts, to liue;
                  Euen faine to Borrow what I giue:
                  
                  But better ſo, then (bluſhleſs) ſteal
                  
                  Others Conceipts; or Debts conceale.
                  
                  Til more my Might, diuide this Myte.
                  
                     A Larke (they ſay) is worth a Kite:
                  
                  Some Greater, greater things preſent,
                  Of leſſer Worth, or worſer meant.
                  
                  
                     GOD meaſures not our Work, but Will:
                  
                  Doe You the like: and loue me ſtill.
                  
                     I. S.
                  
               
               
                  
                  EPIGRAMMS.
                  
                     1. Of a King.
                     EXtirp1, extoll2; knowe3, keep4; loue5, learne6 (from High)
                     Bad1, Good2; Thy Self3, The Lawes4-path; Peace5, to Dye6.
                  
                  
                     2. Of a Lawyer.
                     Liue iuſt (Iuſtinian) ſtill: ſhield1, ſhun2, ſuppreſs;3 
                     
                     Good-mens Good1 Cauſe, Bribes2, Brawling3-Peeuiſhnes.
                  
                  
                     3. Of a Phyſician.
                     He that can Cure the Sick, and Keep the Sound,
                     Shall be My Leach (Whether He Kill, or Wound).
                  
                  
                     4. Of a Diuine.
                     Knowe GOD; know'n, teach Him; as thou teacheſt, trea
                           •
                        
                     
                     So ſhall thy Flock be as well taught, as fed.
                  
                  
                     5. Of a Iudge.
                     Both blinde and lame I iudge Thee beſt to make;
                     Leaſt that thine Eyes miſs-giue, thy Hands miſs-take.
                  
                  
                     6. Of a Husbandman.
                     Good-morrow bids the Cock, th'Owle bids Good-night,
                     To Countrie-Cares: I bid, GOD ſpeed them right.
                  
                  
                     7. Of a Captaine.
                     In War and Peace, CHRIST is the ſole Commander
                     To lead to God-ward: follow ſtill His Standard.
                  
                  
                     Of all the Seauen.
                     So Rule1, Plead2, Practiſe3, Preach4, Doom5, Delue6, Direc
                           •
                        
                        7
                     
                     Climes1, Cauſes2, Cures3,CHRIST4, Crimes5, Turues6, Tro
                           •…
                        
                        ſel
                           •…
                        
                        7
                     
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  LACHRYMAE LACHRYMARVM: or The Spirit of Teares, Diſtilled For the vn-timely Death of The incomparable PRINCE, HENRY (Late) PRINCE of WALES.
                  By IOSVAH SYLVESTER.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     
                        HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
                        royal blazon or coat of arms
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                  LACHRYMAE LACHRYMARVM. A Funeral Elegie.
                  
                     The Argument, in an EPITAPH.
                     
                        
                           HEre lyes (Drie Eies, read not This EPITAPH.)
                        
                           Heer lyes Great-Britans Stay, Great Iacob's Staff:
                        
                        
                           The ſtately Top-bough of Imperial Stemme,
                        
                        
                           World's richeſt Iewell, Nature's rareſt Gemme,
                        
                        
                           Mirror of Princes, Miracle of Youth,
                        
                        
                           All Vertues Pattern, Patron of all Truth;
                        
                        
                           Refuge of Armes, ample Reward of Arts,
                        
                        Worth's Comforter, milde Conquerer of Hearts:
                        
                        
                           The Churche's Tower, the Terror of the Pope,
                        
                        
                           Herôik HENRY, Atlas of our Hope.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        HOw-euer, ſhort of Others Art and Wit,
                        
                        I knowe my powers for ſuch a Part vnfit;
                        And ſhall but light my Candle in the Sun,
                        
                        To doe a work ſhall be ſo better Donne:
                        
                        Could Teares and Feares giue my Diſtractions leaue,
                        Of ſobbing words a ſable Webbe to weaue;
                        Could Sorrow's Fulnes giue my voice a vent;
                        How would, how ſhould, my ſaddeſt Verſe lament,
                        In deepeſt Sighes (in ſtead of ſweeteſt Songs)
                        
                           This Loſs (alas!) which vnto All belongs!
                        
                           To All, alas! though chiefly to the Chief;
                        His royal Parents, Principalls in grief:
                        To All the Peers, to all Confederate,
                        
                        To All the CHVRCH, to all the CHRISTIAN State!
                        To all the Godly now, and future, farr:
                        To all the WORLD; except S.P.Q.R.
                        To All together, and to Each a-part,
                        That liues, and loues Religion, Armes, or Art:
                        
                        To all abroad; but, to Vs moſt of all
                        That neereſt ſtood to my High Cedars fall:
                        But, more then moſt, to Mee, that had no Prop
                        
                        But HENRY's Hand; and, but in Him, no Hope:
                        
                        In Whom, with Nature, Grace and Fortune mett,
                        To conſummate a PRINCE, as Good as Great:
                        
                        In Whō, the Heavn's were pleas'd to ſhew the Earth
                        A richer Iewell then the World was worth,
                        Or worthy of: therefore, no more to make
                        So rare a Piece, His pretious Moulde they brake.
                     
                     
                        O ſoudain Change! O ſad Viciſſitude!
                        O! how the Heav'ns our Earthly Hopes delude!
                        O! what is firm beneath the Firmament!
                        O! what is conſtant heer that giues Content!
                        What Truſt in Princes! O! what Help in Man,
                        Whoſe dying Life is but in length a ſpann!
                        
                           Melting, as Snowe before the Mid-day Sunn;
                        Paſt, as a Poſte, that ſpeedy by dooth runn;
                        
                           
                              •
                           wift, as the Current of the quickeſt Stream;
                        
                           
                              •
                           ain, as a Thought; forgotten, as a Dream.
                        O Deereſt HENRY, Heav'n and Earth's Delight!
                        O cleereſt Beame of Vertues, Riſing bright!
                        O pureſt Spark of Pious Princely Zeale!
                        O ſureſt Ark of Iuſtice ſacred weale!
                        O graueſt Preſage of a Prudent Kinde!
                        O braueſt Meſſage of a Valiant Minde!
                        O All-admir'd, Benign and Bountious!
                        O All-deſired (right) PANARETVS!
                        PANARETVS (All-vertuous) was thy Name;
                        Thy Nature ſuch: ſuch euer be thy Fame.
                        O deereſt! cleereſt! pureſt! ſureſt Prop!
                        O graueſt! braveſt! higheſt! nigheſt Hope!
                        O! how vntimely is this Sunne gonn down!
                        This Spark put-out! This Ark (as) ouerthrown!
                        This Preſage croſt! This Meſſage loſt and left!
                        This Prop diſplac't! This Hope of All, bereft!
                        O! How, vnkinde! How, graceleſs! How, ingrate!
                        Haue Wee cut-off Thy likely longer Date!
                        For, were This Stroak frō Heav'ns immediat hand;
                        Or (by Heav'ns leaue) from Hell's ſuborned Band
                        
                           Of ROMVLIDES (What dare not They preſume
                              •
                           
                        
                        If this, That Sea a Sulphury Sea conſume.)
                        How-e'r it were, We were the Moouing Cauſe
                        
                        That ſweet Prince HENRY breath no-longer draw
                              •
                           
                        
                        Wee all (alas!) haue had our hands herein:
                        And Each of vs hath, by ſome cord of Sinne,
                        
                        Hal'd down from Heav'n, from Iuſtice awfull Seat,
                        This Heauy Iudgement (which yet more doth threat)
                        
                           Wee Clergie firſt, who too-too-oft haue ſtood
                        More for the Church-goods, thē the Churches good
                        
                           Wee Nobles next, whoſe Title, euer ſtrong,
                        Can hardly offer Right, or ſuffer Wrong:
                        
                           Wee Magiſtrates, who, moſtly, weak of ſight,
                        Are rather faine to feele then ſee the Right:
                        
                           Wee Officers, whoſe Price of euery Place
                        
                        Keeps Vertue out, and bringeth Vice in grace:
                        
                           Wee Gentrie then, who rack, and ſack, and ſell,
                        To ſwimme like Sea-Crabs, in a foure-wheeld Shell:
                        
                        
                           Wee Courtiers, next, who French-Italianate,
                        
                        Change (with the Moon) our Faſhion, Faith, & Fate.
                        
                        
                           Wee Lawyers then, who Dedalizing LAVV,
                        And deadding Conſcience, like the Horſe-leach drawe:
                        
                           Wee Cittizens, who ſeeming Pure and Plaine,
                        Beguile our Brother, make our God our GAYNE:
                        
                           
                           Wee Country-men, who ſlander Heav'n and Earth
                        As Authors of Our Artificial Dearth:
                        
                        
                           Wee Pourueyors, laſt, who taking tenn for two,
                        Rob both at once, our Prince and People too:
                        All, briefly all; all Ages, Sexes, Sorts,
                        In Countries, Citties, Benches, Churches, Courts.
                        
                        (All Epicures, Witt-Wantons, Atheists,
                        
                        
                           Mach'-Arctines, Momes, Tap-To-Bacchoniſts,
                        
                        
                           Batts, Harpies, Sirens, Centaures, Bib-all-nights.
                        
                        
                           Sice-ſink-ap-Aſſes, Hags, Hermaphrodites)
                        And Wee poore Nothings (fixed in no Spheare,
                        Right Wandring Tapers, Erring euery-where)
                        Scorn of the Vulgar, Scandall of the Gowne,
                        
                        Haue pull'd this waight of Wrath, This Vengeance down.
                        All, All are guilty, in a high Degree,
                        Of This High-Treaſon and Conſpiracie;
                        More brute then Brutus, ſtabbing more then CAESAR,
                        With Two-hand-SINNES, of Profit and of Pleaſure:
                        
                        And (th'odious Engine, which doth all include)
                        Our Many-pointed proud INGRATITVDE.
                        For, for the Peoples Sinnes, for Subiects crymes,
                        God takes-away good Prin
                                 •
                              es oftentimes.
                        So, good IOSIAH (HENRY's parallel)
                        Was ſoon bereft from Sinfull Iſrael:
                        
                        
                           So, our good EDVVARD (HENRY's Pre-cedent)
                        For ENGLAND's Sinnes was hence vntimely hent
                        So, heer, good HENRY is new taken hence,
                        For now Great-BRITAN's, great Sinnes Confluence.
                     
                     
                        VVee ſee th'Effect: wee haue the Cauſe confeſt:
                        O! Turn wee then, with ſpeed, to Saue the reſt:
                        
                        O! Turn vs, Lord; turn to vs, turn away
                        Thy Frowns, our Fears, with humbleſt Tears we pray
                           ▪
                        
                        O ſaue our SOVERAIN; ſaue his Royall ſeed;
                        That ſtill his Owne may on his Throne ſucceed.
                        Let Each of vs make priuie Search within;
                        And hauing found, bring forth the Traitor SIN
                        To Execution, with all Execration
                        
                        Henceforth renouncing ſuch In-Sin-newation.
                        
                        Let Each of vs (as Each hath throw'n a Dart,
                        
                        A Dart of Sinne, at HENRY's princely heart)
                        Send-vp in Sighes our Soules deuouteſt breath.
                        To Shield our IAMES, ANNE, CHARLES, ELIZABETH,
                        And HIM whoſe Loue ſhal render HER her Brother,
                        
                        And make Her ſoon a happy Princes Mother.
                        Let Each of vs ceaſe to lament (in vain)
                        
                           Prince HENRY's Loſs: Death is to HIM a Gain.
                        For Sauoy's Dukelings, or the Florentine,
                        
                        He Wedds his Sauiour, of a Regal Ligne;
                        
                           
                           Glory, for Gold; for Hope, Poſſeſſion (there)
                        
                        
                           Of Crowns ſo Rich as neuer entred Eare,
                        Eye neuer ſawe, nor euer Heart conceav'd;
                        So ſtrong Aſſur'd, as cannot be bereav'd.
                        Waile not his death: His Vertues cannot Dye;
                        Immortall Iſſue of ETERNITY.
                        His Soule in Bliſs beholds her Makers Eyes:
                        His goodly Body ſhall more glorious Riſe.
                        
                        
                           Weep not for HIM: weep for our ſelues, alas!
                        (Not for our Priuate, or Peculiar caſe:
                        As, for our Sonn's, Brother's, or Maſter's lack,
                        Or Prince's loſs (our Expectations wrack)
                        Our Places, Graces, Profits, Penſions loſt,
                        Our preſent Fortunes caſt, our future croſt)
                        Weep for our Sinnes, our Wicked-Prouocations,
                        Our haynous, horrid, high ABHOMINATIONS;
                        Both ſeen and ſecret; both in High and Lowe:
                        Weep, weep for Theſe; and ſtript, from Top to Toe,
                        Of guiddie-Gaudes, Top-gallant Tires and Towers,
                        
                        Of Face-pride, Caſe-pride, Shin-pride, Shoo-pride, ours
                        (Like NINIVITES ſo neer Their threatned Fall)
                        In blackeſt Sack and Cinders ſhrowded All:
                        Not like a Bul-ruſh, for a day or two,
                        To ſtoop, and droop, and ſeem as others doo,
                        
                        
                           (As ACHAB yerſt, and PHARAO, in Diſtreſs)
                        And then return vnto our old Exceſs
                        (As Doggs vnto their Mewte, Hoggs to their Mire
                        But, day by day, vntill our laſt exſpire,
                        With bended Knees, but more with broken hearts.
                        And th'inward reſt of right Repentant Parts,
                        
                           Proſtrate our Soules in Faſting and in Praier,
                        
                        Before the Foot-ſtool of th'Empyreal CHAIER:
                        That So, What-euer bloody DELVGE float
                        From th'old Red Dragon's wide-wide-yawning Thro
                                 ••
                              
                           
                        
                        We, Humbled MOVRNERS may be Heav'nly Ma
                                 〈…〉
                              
                           
                        
                        In MERCIE's Veſſell to be All imbARET.
                     
                  
                  FINIS.
               
               
                  
                  AN EPITAPH.
                  WHen Great French HENRY Fates bereft,
                  His Name & Fame to OVRS He left;
                  As ableſt ATLAS Then, to proppe
                  
                  The Waight of WORTH, the World of HOPE:
                  
                  But, ENGLAND's Sinnes (a heauier Load)
                  So over-layd His Shoulders broad,
                  That, cruſhed down, Heer lies HEE dead.
                  
                  So, HOPE is fall'n, and WORTH is fled.
               
               
                  ANOTHER.
                  WHom All admir'd, whō All (almoſt) ador'd,
                  For all the Parts of all PANDORA's Treaſure;
                  The Hope of all, to haue all Good reſtor'd;
                  
                     HIM, All our Ills haue ſlain, by Heav'ns Diſpleaſure.
                  
                     
                        By HIS (late) HIGHNE's Firſt Worſt & Poet Penſionr 
                        Ioſuah Sylueſter.
                     
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  
                     
                        HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
                        royal blazon or coat of arms
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  AN ELEGIAC-EPISTLE Conſolatorie, Againſt Immoderate Sorrowe for th'immature Deceaſe Of Sr. WILLIAM SIDNEY Knight, Sonne and Heire apparant To The Right Honourable ROBERT, LORD SIDNEY, L. Vi-Count Liſle; L. Chamberlain to the Queen, & L. Gouernour of His Maieſties Cautionarie Town of VLVSHING.
                  by IOSVAH SYLVESTER.
               
               
                  
                     
                        blazon (consisting of arrowhead from Sidney armorial bearings)
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                  To the right Honorable, the Lord Vi-count LISLE, and his moſt vertuous Lady: To Sir Robert SIDNEY, Knight, their Hopefull Sonne: To the moſt Worthy Lady WROTH, with the reſt of their right vertuous Daughters: & To all the Noble SIDNEYS & SEMI-SIDNEYS.
                  ALthough I know None, but a Sidney's Muſe,
                  Worthy to ſing a Sidney's Worthyneſs:
                  None but Your Own Anagram. LA:WROTH. 
                     AL-WORTH, Sidnëides,
                  
                  In whom, Her Vncle's noble Veine renewes:
                  
                     
                        •
                     nd though I know (ſad Nobles) to infuſe
                  My fore-ſpent Drops into the bound-leſſe Seas
                  Of Your deep Griefs, for your deer Ioy's Deceaſe;
                  To Your full Ocean nought at-all accrues:
                  
                     
                        ••
                     t, as the Floods Queen) Amphitrité daignes
                  To take the Tribute of ſmall Brooks and Bournes;
                  Which to Her Bounty (that Their Streams maintains)
                  
                     
                        •
                     e humble Homage of Their Thanks returnes;
                  Accept Theſe Sighes and theſe few Teares of Ours,
                  Which haue their Courſe but from the Source of Yours.
                  
                     Yr Noble Name's & Vertue's moſt Obſervant, IOSVAH SYLVESTER.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  An ELEGIAC EPISTLE.
                  
                     WHat Obiect, leſs thē our Great HENRY's Herſ
                        
                           e
                        
                     
                     Could ſo haue ſeiz'd the voice of euery Verſe?
                     
                     What Subiect elſe could haue ingroſſed ſo
                     The publique Store and priuate Stock of Woe?
                     
                     What Sea, but th'Ocean of His Vertues Fame,
                     Could drink all Teares, or drown a SIDNEY's Na
                        
                           me
                        
                     
                     (As buried quick) ſo quickly (though ſo yong)
                     So vn-bewayled, ſo vn-ſigh't, vn-ſung?
                     O, glorious HENRY! though alone to Thee,
                     
                     I owe my all, and more then all of Mee;
                     And though (alas!) the beſt and moſt of mine
                     
                     Reach not the leaſt, the loweſt Dues of Thine:
                     
                     Yet, woldſt thou, couldſt Thou hear (as heer-to-fo
                           •
                        
                     
                     And grant a Boon; I onely would implore
                     Thy leaue a little, for a SIDNEY's Death
                     To ſigh a little of my Mournfull breath:
                     The rather, that, as Yerſt Hee ſeru'd You heer,
                     And, in His End attended Yours ſo neer;
                     Through-out all Ages ſubſequent to Ours,
                     
                     His Name and Fame may ever waite on YOVRS:
                     Sith All the MVSES owe That Name alone,
                     A Dia-paſon of each ſad-ſweet Groan:
                     
                        
                        
                           •
                        t, more peculiar, and preciſely, Mine;
                     
                        
                           •
                        ineally bound vnto That Noble Ligne.
                     ARCADIANS know no Other, for APOLLO,
                     
                        
                           •
                        o other MARS (in Arms or Arts to follow
                     
                        
                           •
                        s DEMI-GODS, as well of Warre as Wit)
                     
                        
                           •
                        hen SIDNEYS yerſt, or SEMI-SIDNEYS, yet.
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           et, fit I ſaid: for, of This deer Deſcent,
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           ature (of late) too-lauiſhly hath ſpent,
                     Like My Ill-Huſwifes which at once doe burn
                     
                        
                           •
                        wo or three lights, where One wold ſerue the turn)
                     
                        
                           •
                        ot her Own only, but more orient Gemms,
                     
                        
                           •
                        ore rich, more rare; more fitting Diadems.
                     
                     As, firſt, th'old Father, famous-fortunate,
                     
                        
                           •
                        he prime firme Founder of our IRISH State:
                     
                     
                        
                           •
                        ext, His Son PHILIP (More thē PHILIP'S Son)
                     
                        
                           •
                        hoſe World of Worth, a World of Honor won:
                     
                        
                           •
                        hen, His ſole Heire (ſole VENVS-IVNO-PALLAS)
                     
                        
                           •
                        ll Beauties Pattern, and All Vertues Palace;
                     Whoſe memorie, on MVSES Faireſt Hill
                     
                     
                        
                           •
                         
                        Canonized, by a Phoenix Quill).
                     
                        
                           •
                        heſe Three, the which Three Ages might haue grac't,
                     
                        
                           •
                        ll Theſe and more in My ſhort Age haue paſt:
                     
                        
                           •
                        eſides This new SWEET-WILLIAM now deceaſt
                     Th'Epitomè and Summe of All the reſt)
                     
                        The Flower of Youth, of Honour, Beauty, Blood,
                     
                     Th'Apparant Heire of All the SIDNEYS Good;
                     For Minde, for Mould, for Spirit, Strength, & Stature,
                     A Miracle, a Maſter-piece of Nature.
                     
                     Alas! How groſſely doe our Painters erre
                     In drawing Death's grim Viſage (euery-where)
                     With hollow holes, as wholely dark and blind!
                     Ah! See wee not, how ſtill Hee ſees to finde
                     The faireſt Mark, the rareſt and the beſt
                     Of Vertues Budds, and lets alone the reſt?
                     Ravens, Brambles, Bandogs, Sirens, heer he leaues;
                     Swannes, Roſes, Lions, Dians, hence he reaves:
                     Nay; th'onely PHOENIX hath he newly ſlain
                     (But, maugre Death, That Bird reuiues again).
                     No maruaile then, if SIDNEYS fall ſo faſt.
                     So early ripe are ſeldome apt to laſt:
                     So Eminent are imminent to die;
                     Malicious Death doth Such ſo eas'ly ſpie.
                     But, why of Death and Nature, raue I Thus;
                     Another Stile (my LISLE) befitteth vs.
                     Another Hand, another Eye, directs
                     Both Death and Nature in Theſe high Effects;
                     The Eye of PROVIDENCE, the Hand of POVVER,
                     Diſpoſing All in Order and in Hower;
                     
                        So working in, ſo waking over All,
                     That but by Thoſe doth Nothing heere befall.
                     Then, not (as Currs) the ſtone or ſtaff to bite,
                     Vn-heeding why, or who doth hurl or ſmight;
                     Vnto That Eye let vs erect our owne;
                     And humble vs vnder That Hand alone,
                     Which (as the Potter his own Work controules)
                     
                        Diſſolueth Bodies, and abſolueth Soules:
                     Vn-partiall euer, Vn-prepoſterous;
                     How-euer Other it may ſeem to vs.
                     For, euer ſince firſt WOMAN teemed Twin,
                     
                     And at a Birth brought forth both Death & Sin
                     
                     
                        Sin, as her Heir; Death, as an Heritage
                     
                     
                        
                           •
                        uſtly deriued down from Age to Age)
                     It is Decreed (by a more Chang-leſſe Lawe
                     
                     Then euer yet the Medes and Perſians ſawe)
                     That All men once (as well as Lowe, the High,
                     Of Either Sex, of Every Sort) muſt die.
                     
                     Yea, th'INNOCENT, for Our imputed Ill
                     
                     Who came, not Lawes to break, but to ful-fill)
                     The Son of GOD (The Son of MAN become)
                     Th'Immortal yielded to This mortal Doome.
                     
                     
                        
                           •
                        o that (for Sin) no Son of MAN hath breath
                     But once muſt dye. Wages of SIN is Death.
                     
                     
                        As for the reaſon, Why it comes to paſſe
                     Somtimes, that Age ſeems to haue turn'd his Glaſſe;
                     While oftentimes Youth's, yer it ſeem begun,
                     
                     Is crackt, or broken, or already run:
                     Why Lillies, Roſes, Gillie-flowers, be reft;
                     When Nettles, Thiſtles, Hemlocks heere be left:
                     Why Cedres, Okes, Vines, Oliues, rather fall,
                     Then Bruſh and Bryars (good for nought at all)
                     Let Fleſh and Blood, let Duſt, be rather mute,
                     Then with His MAKER ſawcily diſpute.
                  
                  
                     Yet heer (me thinks) but little Queſtion needs.
                     Doe not We rather gather Herbes then Weeds?
                     Doe not We take the timber for our turn,
                     And leaue the Dottrells, in their time to burn?
                     And, in the Shambles, who is it but would
                     Be rather ſped of yong Fleſh then of old?
                     And yet in Seaſon, when we ſee it good,
                     Wee weed our Gardens, fell our Vnder-wood;
                     And kill old Cattell, leaſt they goar the yong,
                     Or fall away, or mix ſome Mange among.
                  
                  
                     Much like, the Lord: who knoweth beſt all Seaſon
                     And beſt obſerues. But, will we vrge his Reaſon?
                     His Reaſon is His WIL: His Wil is iuſt,
                     
                     Or rather Iuſtice; which His Power muſt
                     
                     
                        In Wiſedome execute (right vnderſtood)
                     To His Owne Glory, and His Childrens Good;
                     Wherein His Goodnes through His Mercy ſhines,
                     To cleer and cheer devout and humble mindes.
                     For, to the Godly (in deſpight of Hell)
                     Heav'n maketh all things to re-iſſue well.
                     
                     Heer, heer's a Harbour; heer's a quiet Shore
                     From Sorrowe's Surges, & all Storms that rore.
                     This is Cap Comfort (a high Promontorie,
                     
                     Of richer Store then heer is roome to ſtorie).
                     Heer let vs bide, and ride-out all Events,
                     With Anchor Hope, and Cable Patience;
                     Vntill our Bark ſome happy Gale ſhall driue
                     Home to the Haven where we would All arriue.
                     Come, Noble Vi-Count, put into This Bay,
                     
                     Where (with a Light) our A'M'RAL leads the way,
                     Though deepeſt laden, & the moſt diſtreſt,
                     The greateſt Ship of Burthen, and the beſt.
                     HIM boldly follow: & though heer, as CHIEF
                     In Grief, as Greatnes, His muſt drown your Grief,
                     
                     Count it an Honour, to be call'd to try
                     Your Vertue's Valour, in your Soveraine's eye.
                     Wee All partake His Croſs; His Loſſe is Ours:
                     But His Affections (to the life) are Yours.
                     
                     
                        The neerer then You match His mournful fate,
                     His royal Patience neerer imitate.
                     And you, ſad Lady, Mother of annoy
                     For hauing loſt the prime Sonne of your Ioy;
                     Ah! ſee, the Soveraine of your Sex hath ſo.
                     Some think it eaſe, to haue ſome peer in Woe:
                     
                     But, ſuch a PEER, and ſuch a Pattern too,
                     Should much (me thinks) confirm & comfort You
                     To beare-vp hard into this happy Road,
                     
                     And lighten ſomwhat of Your heauy Load:
                     The rather, ſith (beſides the Happineſſe,
                     
                     Which now, aboue, your Darling doth poſſeſſe;
                     The Crown, the Kingdome, and the Companie,
                     
                     Of All the holy, heauenly HIERARCHIE:
                     Beſides your Meſs of goodly GRACES left
                     (Whoſe WORTH, frō Al, the Prize of Worth hath reft
                     Foure louely Nymphs, foure Rivers, as it were,
                     Your veines of Vertue through the Land to bear)
                     You haue another Model of The ſame,
                     
                     To propagate renowned SIDNEY'S Name;
                     Another, like in every part to proue
                     As worthy of our Honor, and your Loue;
                     In whom (if now, You, IOB-like, bear this Croſs)
                     Heav'n may reſtore you, manifold, your Loſs.
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  THE SECOND SESSION of the PARLIAMENT of Vertues Reall (Continued by Prorogation) For better Propagation of all true Piëtie, & Vtter Extirpation of

                        ATHEISME, & HYPOCRISIE;
                        AVARICE, & CRVELTIE;
                        PRIDE, & LVXVRIE.
                     
                  
                  (From th'Originall) Tranſcribed, & Inſcribed To the High-Hopefull CHARLES, Prince of Great Britaine, By IOSVAH SYLVESTER.
               
               
                  
                  A DIVINE & TRVE TRAGI-COMEDY; IOB TRIVMPHANT in his Triall: OR THE HISTORIE OF His Heroicall Patience, In A meaſured METAPHRASE.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     To ARTHVRS CASTLE (call'd by ART'S CHAST LVRE)
                     My Hope Heere Hasteth, For My HART's LAST CVRE
                     
                  
                  Sir, YOV haue ſeene In My PANARETVS, A SVVEET IDEA Of—Our hopes in YOU:
                  A REAL ACT of That Ideall VIEVVE, In My LEVV
                        •…
                      Roy—
                        •…
                      Vertue
                  Heer (more HEROIK and more HOLY-True)
                  I bring Your Highneſs Yet A Higher Peece
                  (Paſt all the Pattern
                        •…
                      of old Rome & Greece)
                  Faith's PATIENT Champion, in His Triumph due
                  Farre bee His Croſſes Frō my Prince, I pray:
                  Neer bee His Courſe As the moſt Complet
                        •…
                     
                  
                  In ſacred GRACES that beſeeme The GREAT)
                  Towards God and Man; in Cleer or Clowdy Day▪
                  
                  So much More needfull In This Sin-full Age,
                  By How Much Satan (neer his end) doth rage
                  VVith VVhom and His, the better Aye to wraſtle
                  
                  Great Michael gard & ſtrengthen ARTHVRS CASTLE
                  
                  
                     praies Proſtrate Ioſuah Sylvester.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                  
                     To the Right Reuerend & Honorable FAther, GEORGE ABBOT, Lord ARCH-Biſhop OF CANTERBVRY.
                  
                     IN Grate-full HONOR
                  
                  Of Your MANY Giftes
                  Of GRACE & NATVRE
                  
                  (Apted to Your Place)
                  This DORIKE Piller
                  My DEVOTION liftes;
                  To ſhewe Heere—After, 
                  What We owe your Grace:
                  
                     Both, for Your Prudence,
                  
                  And Your Pious Zeale;
                  
                     Learning, And Labour
                  
                  In Your Double Charge; 
                  Swaying The CHVRCH.
                  
                  Staying the Cōmon-Weal; 
                  Moſt STVDIOVS Euer
                  EITHER to Enlarge:
                  
                     And Laſt (not leaſt) of all,
                  
                  For CONSTANT ſtanding
                  On Right's vveake Side,
                  Againſt the tide of wrong; 
                  When PHILISTINES
                  
                  And Daliladies banding,
                  With Armes or Charmes
                  Would bind or blind the Strong:
                  
                     In Honor of theſe Honors, this I bring
                  
                  
                     To Reuerend ABBOT, & His Second; KING.
                  
                  
                     
                        VESTER—SYL—VESTER Deditiſsimus.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                  TO The Right Honourable, The Lord ELESMORE, L. High Chancelour of England. *THOMAS EGERTONVS: 
(Anagramma) *NESTOR THEOMAGVS.
                  GRaue,* GOD-WISE NESTOR; Neuer did a Name
                  (Saue A IVST MASTER) better ſpeak a man
                  (As Court & Councell, with Mee, witnes can)
                  Than doth Your Owne, in This Your Anagram.
                  
                  Should I A Volume of Your Vertues frame,
                  Broad as my Brest, & Thicker then my Span;
                  Could I ſay More, more True, more Duly, than
                  
                     The Character concluded in This ſame?
                  
                  For, * PIOVS-Prudence cannot but be Iuſt:
                  And Iuſtice cannot but be Temperate:
                  
                  And Temperance from Courage iſſue must.
                  So that Your Name doth Your whole Life relate,
                  So NESTOR-like, for grace-full,* Godly-Sage,
                  
                  That Nothing wants, but (what we wiſh) His Age.
                  
                     
                        Ex Animo exoptat Ioſuah Sylvester.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                  To the Right Honourable, WILLIAM HARBERT, Earle of Penbroke, Lord Chamberlaine, &c.
                  
                     PATIENCE preuailes (when Paſſions are vndon)
                  This doth This Volume truly intimate:
                  So doth Your Vertue, firm, and fortunate,
                  Now cheer'd with Radiance of our Royall Sun.
                  
                  O! long and Happy may Hee ſhine vpon
                  So Noble a Plant (mo Such to propagate)
                  So Grace-full, Vſe-full, both in Court and State;
                  
                  
                     Help-full to All, Hurt-full at-all to None.
                  Among Thoſe Many whom your Worth hath won
                  (Of either Sexe, of euery Age, and State)
                  With glad Applauſes to congratulate
                  The worthie Honour of Your Charge begun
                  (Though not (perhaps) ſo long and lowd, as Many)
                  Accept My AVE, as Deuout as Any,
                  
                  
                     Your Lordſhips moſt obliged, Ioſuah Sylveſter.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                  To the Right Honorable, Sir EDVVARD COKE, Knight; Lord Chief Iustice of England, and one of his Maieſties moſt Honorable Priuie Councell. *EDVARDVS COCVS: (Anagramma)
*SVCCEDO, ARDVVS.
                  
                     HArdy and Happy may You long Succeed,
                  
                  In all the Courſes of your Chriſtian Zeale,
                  To ſcourge Abuſe; and purge the Publike-Weale,
                  Of vicious Humors, with auſpicious Speed.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        ardy and Happy Neuer more did need,
                  To meet with Malice, and with Might to deale;
                  And ſift the Drift the Serpent would conceale.
                  How happy, Heav'n You for Theſe times decreed!
                  
                  
                     Hardy and Happy may you ſtill proceed,
                  
                  Vntill You finde, confound, and ſuffocate,
                  The Viperous Vermin that deſtroy the State.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        ardy, and Happy, be your Minde, and Meed
                  With GOD and Men: applauded and approou'd,
                  Of Prince and People; of All Good, belou'd:
                  
                     
                        Ex Animo Exoptat Ioſuah Sylveſter.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                  TO The Right Honourable Lords Spirituall & Temporall; The Knights and Burgeſſes of the Lower-Houſe; & To all generous and ingenuous Readers.
                  
                     YOur preſt Aſsiſtence & Aſsiſtance, paſt,
                     Vouchſafed, Heer, whē you were ſummond laſt,
                     Binde & imbold mee once more to preſent
                     My humble Briefs, in form of PARLIAMENT;
                     Hoping no leſſe Conſent of Your Good-wills
                     In paſsing Theſe, then of Our former Bills;
                     So-much more Need-full in this Weed-full Time,
                     By How-much Vice doth ouer Vertue clime.
                  
                  
                     
                        An Act againſt Atheiſme & Irreligion. Page. 4.7
                        An Act of pious and humble PATIENCE. 7
                        An Act conformable to the former. 9
                        An Act confirming Both. 9.67
                        An Act of humane Frailty, to teach the Beſt, Humility. 10.18.29
                        An Act of the Weaker Veſſell. 9
                        An Act of Imitation, with better Application. 13
                        
                           An Act (of many Branches) concerning the Iuſtice of GOD in his Iudgements 14.89
                        An Act of Exhortation to Repentance and Humiliation. 16.23.31.60.90
                        An Act against Preſumption of our ſelues. 30.40.91
                        An Act touching GOD's Omnipotence, Omniſcience, Al-Regencie, Al-Sufficiencie. 33.89.93
                        An Act againſt raſh and erroneous Cenſures. 35
                        An Act against Partiality in Iudgement, falſe Witneſſe, Suborned Euidence. ibid.
                        An Act, intimating the Comfort and Confidence of a good Conſcience. 36.67
                        An Act, auerring the Shortnes of Life, and vncertaine Certainty of Death. 37
                        An Act againſt Saduces and Epicures. 38
                        An Act againſt Puritiſme. 41.65
                        An Act intimating the effects of an euill Conſcience. 41
                        An Act againſt the Security & Inſolence of fat & Eaſefull Epicures and Oppreſſors. 42
                        An Act againſt Hypocrites. 43.67.93
                        An Act againſt Bribrie, Brokerie, Vſurie. 43
                        An Act againſt vnciuil Indiſcretiō 
                           in viſiting of Frinds, Eſpecially against Aggrauation of Grieſs. 43
                        An Act for our Imitation. 45.72.76.77.82.104
                        An Act againſt Flattery. 46.84
                        An Act of Terror to the Wicked in their ſodain & fearfull Fall. 47.64. (Anno. 1615.)
                        An Act againſt Ambition conformable to the former. 52
                        An Act againſt Vnkindeneſſe of Kinſmen, Neighbours, Friends, Seruants, Wiues, &c. 50
                        
                           An Act of liuely FAITH, againſt all Saduces, Epicures, Atheiſts. 51.
                        An Act of Animaduerſion, that wee ſtumble not at the Proſperity of the Wicked. 55
                        An Act, for the Laſt Aſſiſe, and finall Sentence and Execution of the Vngodly. 57
                        An Act against Merit of Works. 58.91.98
                        An Act againſt Works of Supererogation. 58.91
                        An Act against the Children of Darkneſſe; Murderers, Adulterers, Burglers, &c. 64
                        An Act againſt all greedie Wringers, Wrongers, Vſuters, & Oppreſtors. 62.68
                        An Act of Meditation on the manifold Manifeſt Works of GOD, mighty and maruelous. 66.96.98
                        An Act of Inuincible Faith and PATIENCE. 67
                        An Act againſt Tyrants, Extortioners, Rackers, and all Vnrighteous and vnrelenting Rich. 62.68
                        An Act, limitting Mans Wit and Induſtrie from th' illimitable Wiſdom & inimitable Works of GOD. 70.83
                        An Act againſt looſe and idle Education of Youth. 74
                        An Act againſt Wandring & Wanton Eyes. 77
                        An Act againſt Pride & Vanity of all kindes. 77
                        An Act againſt Couſenage, Concupiſcence, Cruelty, Briberie. 77
                        An Act against Adulterie. 77
                        An Act against impious and imperious Maſters & Miſtreſſes. 78
                        An Act againſt dilatorie Almners and ſolitarie Nabals. 78
                        An Act againſt th'Vncharitie of our Dayes, ſuffering ſo

many Poore to die without Doores. 7
                              •
                           
                        
                        An Act against all Iniurie, Inhumanity, &c. 7
                              •
                           
                        
                        An Act againſt Auarice & Infidelity, Superſtition & Idolatry, Sacriledge & Surcuidry. 7
                              •
                           
                        
                        An Act againſt inſulting ouer Miſerie. 8
                              •
                           
                        
                        An Act againſt all maner of Extortion & Cruelty. 8
                              •
                           
                        
                        An Act touching the right vſe and happy iſſue of Afflictions. 86.92.93.109
                        An Act of the proueneſs of Mercy toward the Penitēt. 8
                              •
                           
                        
                        An Act against empty & idle FAITH. 8
                              •
                           
                        
                        An Act (by implication) againſt the Popes depriuing & deprauing of Princes. 8
                              •
                           
                        
                        An Act conteining a Diuine Lecture of Naturall Phi
                              ••
                           
                           ſophy. 98. To the last Chapter: which is the Laſt Act of This Holy PARLIAMENT: 
                     
                  
                  
                     WHoſe ſeueral Acts, of ſweet and ſouerain Vſe
                     
                     To cheriſh Vertue, and to check Abuſe
                     
                     (Too rough tranſcribed, by too rude a hand,
                     For ſo high Statutes of the HOLY-LAND)
                     Are heer preſented, as fit Precedents
                     
                     Of ſacred Rules for your High Parliaments;
                     By (th'once, leaſt Moat in th'Vpper-Houſes Sun)
                     
                        
                           Your Vnder-Clarke, Vnworthily Vndon (By ouer-truſting to a ſtarting Bow-Yer-while too-ſtrong, to my poor Wrong & Woe) IOSVAH SYLVESTER,
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  IOB TRIƲMPHANT in his Triall.
                  
                     The Proëm.
                     A Solid Rock, farre-ſeated in the Sea
                     
                     (Where many Veſſels haue been cast away)
                     
                        Though blackeſt Storms of bluſtering Winds do threat,
                     
                     
                        Though boistrous Rage of roaring Billowes beat;
                     
                     
                        Though it be raake with Lightning, & with Thunder;
                     
                     
                        Though all at once aſſault, and Each aſunder;
                     
                     
                        With maſsie Bulk of it Selfes Marble Tower,
                     
                     
                        Still, ſtill repells th'ineuitable Stower;
                     
                     
                        And ſeemes ſtill firmer, and more permanent,
                     
                     
                        The more the Tempest hath been violent:
                     
                     
                        Right ſo the Faithfull; in vvhoſe humble Breſt
                     
                     
                        Religious feare of GOD is deepe impreſt;
                     
                        What-euer Stroak of Fortune threat his State,
                     
                     
                        What-euer Danger him diſcommodate,
                     
                     
                        What-euer Miſchiefe that betide him ſhall,
                     
                     
                        What-euer Loſſe, what-euer Croſſe befall;
                     
                     
                        Inflexible, inuincible, purſues
                     
                     
                        The ſacred Footings he did euer vſe:
                     
                     
                        
                        And aye more constant, and confirm'd is He,
                     
                     
                        The more extream that his Afflictions be.
                     
                     
                        If any Spirit, inſpir'd with Holy-mood,
                     
                     
                        Carefully-curious of the Publike Good,
                     
                     
                        Would liuely limne 
                              •
                           h'immortall Excellence
                     
                     
                        Of ſuch a Pattern of ſuch PATIENCE;
                     
                        As neither Elements di
                              •
                           placed quight,
                     
                     
                        Nor enuious Starres, nor angry Foes deſpight,
                     
                     
                        Nor all the Fiends inſatiate Furie fell
                     
                     
                        (By fraud or force) could euer quail or quell:
                     
                     
                        Twere labour loſt, to fable (Homer-like)
                     
                        The ſtrange long Voyage of a wily Greek;
                     
                        The Paines, the Perills, and extream Diſeaſe
                     
                     
                        That he endured, both by Land and Seas;
                     
                     
                        Sith ſacred Truthe's Heav'n prompted Books preſent
                     
                     
                        In Conſtant IOB a worthier Argument.
                     
                     
                        Thou then, Vrania, to whom right belongs
                     
                     
                        The ſacred Confort of Celeſtiall Songs,
                     
                     
                        Tune Thou my Voyce, Thou teach me to record
                     
                     
                        Who did incite, what did inuite the Lord,
                     
                     
                        With Miſeries ſo rewfull and ſo rife,
                     
                     
                        So to diſturb his quiet happy Life;
                     
                     
                        What haynous Sin, what horrid high Offence,
                     
                     
                        The Almightie's Vengeance mought ſo deep incenſe:
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           
                              •
                           r elſe what Cauſe, what Obiect elſe might ſtir-it.
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           oiles there ſuch Wrath in an impaſsiue Spirit?
                     
                     
                        But, ô Preſumption! Why haue I begun
                     
                     (Alas! no Prophet, neither Prophet's Sonne;
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           o Prieſt, no Leuite; nay, no Iſraelite
                     
                        Such as Nathanael) but a Cananite
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           ull of Corruption foule of hand and hart)
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           o touch the ARK? to vnder-take This Part?
                     
                        Ah! pardon Lord; O! purifie mee all
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           rom all Prophaneneſſe; from Sinne's bitter Gall:
                     
                     
                        And as y
                              •
                           r while it pleaſd thee to infuſe
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            mine vnſchooled and vnskilfull Muſe
                     
                        By vertue of Thine All-ſufficing Grace)
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           mmediat power du-BARTAS Track to trace;
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           o as (how-euer weake and Art-l
                              •
                           ſſe, I,)
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           hat Worke findes Welcome with the graueſt Eye:
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           ow more, good Lord, my Wits & Words refine,
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           o treat diuinely Matter ſo Diuine:
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           ! ſacred Spirit, now ſanctifie my Stile;
                     
                     
                        Let not my Senſuall, thy pure Senſe defile:
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           ut tune mee, right, to Eccho, as belongs.
                     
                     
                        Thy HVSSIAN's Sighs & then Thy IESSEAN's Songs.
                     
                        And to that end, vouchſafe me at Thy pleaſure)
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           eſſe Need-full Life, in a leſſe Care-full leaſure
                        ▪
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                        
                           
                              
                                 •
                              p. 1.NEere where Idumè's dry and ſandy Soile
                     Spreads Palmful Foreſts, dwelt a Man yer-while
                     Of life vnblotted, and vnſpotted Fame;
                     God-fearing, Iuſt, Sin-flying, IOB by Name.
                     
                        With due reſpect to Heauen's & Nature's Law,
                     
                     
                        In Wedlocks ſweet Yoake did he ſeemly draw:
                     
                     
                        Whence, by that Bountie, whoſe all Bleſsings bee,
                     
                     Seavn Sonnes he had, and louely Daughters Three,
                     Great was his Subſtance: for of fleecie Sheep
                     Vpon the Downes ſeavn Thouſand did he keep;
                     Fiue hundred yoak of Oxen did he owe;
                     Fiue hundred Aſſ-ſhees, Camels ſix times ſo:
                     Great Train within doores, & great Train with-out,
                     Made him eſteem'd through all the Eaſt about.
                     His Sons, by turns, their Siſters did inuite
                     And feaſt each other, in a Daily Rite:
                     IOB bleſt them euery Even; and euery Morn
                     When firſt Aurora's roſie beames return,
                     The good Old-man, to GOD, in humble-wiſe,
                     For each of them did offer Sacrifice:
                     Leſt They might haue miſ-don, miſ-ſaid, miſ-thought,
                     
                     Or (in their Feaſts) offended GOD by ought.
                     While happy IOB thus brought the yeere about,
                     It came to paſs one day when all the Rout
                     
                        Of Light-full Angels did themſelues preſent
                     Before the Foot-ſtoole of th'Omnipotent,
                     
                     There alſo came the Executioner,
                     Th'ambitious Prince, Malicious Lucifer:
                     With whom the LORD expoſtulating, Thus
                     Said; Sathan, ſay, Whence comeſt Thou to vs?
                     I come, ſaid Hee, from walking in and out,
                     And compaſſing the Earthlie Ball about.
                     Haſt thou not then ſuruey'd my Seruant IOB
                     (Reply'd the LORD) whoſe like in all the Globe
                     There is not found; ſo full of louing-feare,
                     So faithfull, fruitfull, rightfull, and ſincere?
                     Is it for Nothing, ſaid the ſubtle Foe,
                     That IOB adores, and loues, and feares Thee ſo?
                     Haſt thou not hedg'd him ſafe on euery ſide?
                     Haſt thou not heapt him Bleſſings far and wide?
                     But, for awhile with-hold thy Fauour's ſtream,
                     With-draw thy hand, and hide thy Bounties beam,
                     Then ſhalt thou ſee (or double my Diſgrace)
                     Hee will anon blaſpheme thee to thy Face.
                     Lo, ſaid th'Eternall, from this inſtant hower
                     All that he hath is in thy hand and power;
                     All, but Himſelfe, Himſelfe I ſole exempt.
                     
                        Sathan eftſoones aſſumes his bold Attempt.
                     
                        As all his Children were together met,
                     Their elder B
                           •
                        others ha
                           •
                        t
                           •
                        e Cheere to eat,
                     Cam
                           •
                        one to OB 
                           •
                        unning, & breathleſs nigh,
                     Scarce coul
                           •
                         he ſpeak, yet weakly thus did cry,
                     Ah! woe is me to be the Meſſenger
                     Of ſo ſad N
                           •
                        w
                           •
                        s is now I bring you, Sir:
                     As all your Oxen vnder painfull yoak,
                     Their pointed Iourneyes in your Fallowes broke;
                     And as your Aſſes in the Meads did feed,
                     
                        S
                              •
                           bê
                              •
                           n 
                        
                           •
                         hieues came forth with furious ſpeed
                     And tooke them all, and all your Seruants ſlew,
                     I onely ſcap't, to come and tell it you.
                     While He yet ſpake, there came Another in,
                     Hared and hot, and Thus did He begin:
                     Sir, from the Heav'ns a ſuddaine Fire did fall
                     Among your 
                           •
                        heep, & hath conſum'd them all,
                     And ſlaine your Seruants yer they could eſchew;
                     I onely ſc
                           •
                        p't to come and tell it You.
                     While He yet ſpake, Another came, amaz'd,
                     And ſadly ſ
                           •
                        d; Sir, while your Camels graz'd
                     In your owne P
                           •
                        ſtures vp and down the Lands,
                     The proud Chaldéans, in three armed Bands,
                     Surpriz'd them all, and all your Seruants ſlew;
                     I onely ſcap't, to come and tell it you.
                     
                        While He yet ſpake, Another came and cryde
                     In pitious Fright (as if himſelfe beſide)
                     O, 
                           〈◊〉
                        ! your Sons & Daughters (all the reſt)
                     Were met to day at my young Maſters Feaſt,
                     Where, from beyond the Wilderneſs anon
                     A ſuddain Whirle-wind roſe, and ruſht vpon
                     The corners of the Houſe, and ſhooke it ſo
                     That inſtantly it fell from Top to Toe,
                     And with the Fall them altogether ſlew;
                     I onely ſcap't, to come and tell it you.
                     Then ſtarting vp, IOB gan his clothes to rent,
                     Shaues his hoare haire, his head with aſhes ſprent;
                     As in a ſwoune falls to the ground with grones,
                     And ſemi-ſighing Thus himſelfe b
                           •
                        mones:
                     Ah! Naked came I from my Mothers wombe,
                     Naked I ſhall returne vnto my Tombe:
                     The LORD hath taken what himſelfe hath giuen:
                     Bleſſed be GOD, th'Almighty LORD of Heauen.
                     Yet did not IOB, for all that him miſ-fell,
                     Murmur at GOD, nor inly ſink or ſwell;
                     Nor ſinne againſt th'eternall Prouidence,
                     But ſuffred all with humble Patience.
                     
                     ANother day, when all the ſacred Bands
                           Ca
                                 •
                              
                            
                           
                              •
                           
                        
                     
                     Came all attending their high Kings cōmands,
                     
                        Came alſo Hee, whoſe Enuie (ſince Hee fell
                     Frō Heavn) hath ſtriu'n to hale down Man to Hell;
                     With whom the LORD expoſtulateth Thus:
                     Now Sathan, ſay, Whence comeſt Thou to Vs?
                     I come ſaid He, from walking in and out,
                     And compaſſing the Earthlie Ball about.
                     Then, Haſt thou found, replyes th'Omnipotent,
                     
                     In all thy Circuit, Man more confident,
                     Or minde more Conſtant, or more faithfull Soule,
                     Then IOB my Seruant: whom thine Enuy foule,
                     Late, vrg'd my Leaue by ſharp Aſſaults to try?
                     How haſt thou ſped? What haſt thou got thereby?
                     Alas, ſaid Hee, I reft him but the things
                     That flie from Men with tranſitory wings;
                     And therefore he regards his loſſe the leſſe:
                     But would thy Power him ſomwhat neerer preſſe,
                     Would'ſt thou permit me touch him to the quick,
                     I yeeld me conquer'd, if he doe not kick;
                     If more he ſerue, truſt, pray, or praiſe thy Grace,
                     If he, in fine, blaſpheme not to thy Face.
                     Pinch but his Body, and then, Skin for Skin,
                     
                     Hee'l wince without, and ſodain flinch within.
                     Go Fiend, ſaid GOD; ſith th'art ſo obſtinate,
                     Fall on my IOB, him felly cruciate:
                     
                        Touch not his Soule; his Body only touch.
                     Hence Satan hyes, glad that he might ſo much.
                     Without Delay then, with the moſt Deſpight,
                     He ſets on IOB; and in moſt pitious Plight,
                     With vlcerous Anguiſh fils his body ſo,
                     That cruſted all in Scabs from top to toe,
                     Amid the Aſhes, ſad and deſolate,
                     Scraping his Sores with ſhels (or ſherds) he ſate;
                     Yet Conſtant ſtill, ſtill calmely Patient,
                     
                     Without a word of grudging Diſcontent.
                     Then ſaid his Wife, What helps Integrity?
                     What boots it, Man? alas! curſe GOD, and die.
                     Go, fooliſh Woman, the good man reply'd,
                     Thy rebell heart doth thy raſh tongue miſ-guide:
                     Shall we, from GOD, of Good receiue our F
                           •
                        ll;
                     And, at his pleaſure, not partake of Ill?
                     So IOB as yet, for all that him miſ-fell,
                     Diſpleas'd not GOD, but bore it wondrous well.
                     By This, the light-foot, fether-tongued Dame
                     Had farre and wide ſpred and diſperſt the fame
                     Of IOB'S Miſ-fortunes (from the firſt begun)
                     That He was halfe dead, and was whole vndone.
                     His Friends then, Eliphas the Themanite,
                     
                     
                        Bildad the Shuite, the Naamathite
                     
                     
                        
                        Zophar (as others) hearing this report,
                     As ſoone as might be towards him reſort;
                     Reſolu'd with Comforts, to relieue in part
                     Their Friends Affliction, & aſſwage his Smart.
                     But, there arriued, at the very ſight
                     Of his ſo wofull and ſo wretched Plight,
                     They all amaz'd, their Garments ſadly tore,
                     Their heads with Aſhes all beſprinkled o're;
                     And for ſeavn dayes and nights in Sorow drown'd,
                     Lay grieuing, by him, groueling on the ground,
                     Without word ſpeaking, leſt vntimely trouble
                     Amid his Anguiſh ſhould his Dolors double.
                     
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           . 3.IOB therefore ſtraining his obſtructed voice,
                     Began Thus, ſadly with a ſhiuering noiſe:
                     O! VVo be to the Day when I was born:
                     O! be it eue
                           •
                         of the Light forlorn:
                     O! may it euer vnder Darknes lie,
                     And neuer S
                           •
                        n vouchſafe it cheerfull eye;
                     Nor GOD regard it: let a deadly Shade
                     O're-clowde it aye, as euer Diſmall made.
                     O! wo be alſo to the Night wherein
                     My Mother my Conception did begin:
                     Lightning & Thunder thrill it euermore,
                     Whirle-wind & Tempeſt may it euer roare:
                     
                        Of Fogs, of Froſts, of Showers, of Snowes, of Haile,
                     Of Miſts. of Mil-deawes may it neuer faile:
                     May it no more in Calendar be plac't,
                     But, from the Role of Months and Yeares be rac't:
                     May th' Euening Stars be dark: No light returning:
                     May it no more ſee th'Eye-lids of the Morning,
                     Becauſe it clos'd not, at my wretched Birth,
                     The fruitfull Doore that brought me weeping forth;
                     But let me paſſe into this woefull Light,
                     To vndergoe ſo miſerable Plight.
                     O! Why, when ſhapeleſſe in my Mothers Womb
                     I l
                           •
                         as dead, Why did not Death ſtrike home?
                     VVhy not (alas!) amid the bearing Throes,
                     VVhen I began to feele Mans feeble Woes?
                     VVhy did the knees ſupport me? Why the Breſt
                     Supply me ſuck? Why was I ſwath'd and dreſt?
                     Sith elſe (alas!) I had now lien at eaſe,
                     Had been at reſt, had ſlept in quietneſſe,
                     Among the high and mighty Potentates,
                     Kings, Counſellors, great Lords, and Magiſtrates,
                     VVho in the VVorld to leaue their Names Renowne,
                     Haue built thē Bowers which others ſhall pul-downe:
                     And thoſe rich Princes that haue heapt of-old
                     Their houſes full of Siluer and of Gold.
                     
                        Or, Why (alas!) as an Abortiue Birth,
                     Was I not hid and buried in the Earth?
                     There, Tyrants ceaſe from their imperious Pride:
                     There, Vertuous Workers at their reſt abide:
                     There, Priſoners reſt from their Oppreſſors Braule:
                     There, Slaues are free from their fell Maſters Thrall:
                     There, High and Lowe (without Diſdain, or Dread)
                     Reſt all together in one Common bed.
                     O! wiſhed Death (more to be wiſht then Life)
                     Thou breakſt the Force of Enuies Engines rife:
                     Thou cutteſt-off our Trauails Tediouſneſſe:
                     Thou kilſt our Cares, Thou calm'ſt our moſt Diſtreſs·
                     O! to the wretched why is Light imparted?
                     Why Life (alas!) vnto the heauie-hearted?
                     [Who longs for Death: and if it linger long,
                     Would fainer ſeek it then euen Gold (among)
                     And gladder find it (as of Ioys the Chiefe)
                     Within their Graue to burie all their Griefe]
                     Eſpecially, to Him whoſe Way is hid:
                     Whom GOD hath ſhut-vp, ſtopt & ſtreightened?
                     Sith, yer I eat, My Sighes refell my Food,
                     My Roarings guſh out like a raging Flood.
                     For (though my Plenty, neuer made me proud;
                     My Power, imperious; nor to pleaſure bow'd:)
                     
                        What moſt I doubted I endur'd, (alas!)
                     And what I feared is euen comn to paſſe.
                     For Care and Feare, I had no reſt before;
                     Yet Trouble's come, and trebbles more and more.
                     IOB ceaſing ſo; began the Themanite,
                        
                           C
                                 •
                              
                            
                           
                              •
                           
                        
                     
                     Ioly perplext, an Anſwer thus to dight:
                     If We preſume to comfort thee, deer Friend,
                     Wil our Diſcourſe (I feare it will.) offend?
                     Will thy Diſeaſe our kinde Good-wills diſdain?
                     But, in this Caſe (alas!) Who can refrain?
                     Who ſo hard-hearted, or vnciuill-bred,
                     That can vnmoued ſee thee thus beſted?
                     To ſee and heare Thee in this deep Diſtreſſe,
                     Who can keep ſilence? Who can hold his peace?
                     Why! Thou wert wont, in thy Proſperities,
                     To ſtay weak hands, and ſtrengthen feeble knees;
                     To counſell thoſe that in their Courſe had ſtray'd,
                     To comfort thoſe whom Croſſes ouer-lay'd:
                     Now that Miſ-hap on thine owne head hath hit,
                     Now that the Storm hath thine owne veſſell ſmit,
                     Now that the Caſe is Thine, How art thou ſunk
                     From thine owne Succor! From thy ſelf how ſhrunk!
                     Where is, alas! Where is thy Confidence,
                     Thy Conſtancy, thy Hope, thy Patience,
                     
                     
                        Thy Piety, thy Faith, thy Feare of God,
                     And th'vpright Path which Thou haſt euer trod?
                     O! ponder this: Who euer Innocent
                     Hath periſhed? Hath the Omnipotent
                     Eternall Iuſtice euer plagu'd the Iuſt;
                     Deſtroyd the Righteous who Him only truſt:
                     As I haue ſeen Thoſe that haue plough'd and ſow'n
                     Iniquity, reap ſodenly their owne;
                     When with the Blaſt of GOD they blaſted fall,
                     And with his Breath are quick conſumed all?
                     GOD, in his Fury ſtarueth in diſtreſſe
                     The roaring Lion and the Lioneſſe;
                     Their rauening Whelps are ſcattered farre away,
                     Their Teeth are broken, and they pine for Prey.
                     I'll tell thee more: Once, in a certain Night,
                     Silent, I heard a Voyce, and ſaw a Sight,
                     (About the time when Sleep begins to ſeaze
                     Our drouzie Lids, our Dayly Loads to eaſe)
                     Amaz'd with Feare my haire began to heaue,
                     My heart to tremble, euery part to leaue
                     His proper Part; When to mine eyes a-ſpace
                     Appeerd the Image of an vnknowne Face:
                     One ſtood before me, Whence (yet more diſmaid)
                     I heard a Voyce, and Thus (me thought) it ſaid:
                     
                        Shall Man be iuſter then his GOD (ſaid He)?
                     The Creature purer then his Maker be?
                     Behold, he found not in his Angels bright
                     Firme Fealty, but Folly in his ſight:
                     How much more then, in Thoſe whoſe habitation
                     Is but of Clay, but Duſt their beſt Foundation?
                     Whoſe brittle Veſſels heer ſo little laſt,
                     That yer they know them they are often paſt:
                     Whoſe fickle Garment (how-ſo-euer loath)
                     Shall be deſtroy'd and done, before the Moath:
                     Whoſe doubtfull Daies, yer they begin, be gon;
                     Cut downe by Death, when leaſt they think thereon:
                     Whoſe Dignities (how-euer grac't, or Great)
                     Shall die with them, and Them the Wormes ſhall eat.
                     NOw call thou lowd, if any will reply:
                           Cap 
                           
                              •
                           
                        
                     
                     Among the Saints where wilt thou turne thine eye?
                     Two ſorts of Fooles (th' Idiot and Enuious) die;
                     Of Anger th'one, th'other of Iealouſie.
                     I haue beheld the Foole faire rooted yerſt:
                     Yet haue I ſoon his Habitation curſt;
                     Becauſe his Children ſuccour-leſs ſhall ſuffer
                     By Iuſtice Doom, and none ſhall Pittie offer:
                     Him Selfe withall confounded, void of Hope,
                     To gather-in his long expected Crop,
                     
                        Which th'hunger-ſtarued frō the Thorns ſhal ſnatch;
                     The Thirſtie ſhall hir ſubſtance all diſpatch;
                     A Miſery, which GOD doth oft permit:
                     For, th' Earth it ſelfe is not the Cauſe of it;
                     Sith, were not Sin, it ſhould not barren be:
                     But, Man, for Sin, muſt toile him ſeruilelie,
                     In Sweatfull Labour, borne for Labour's end
                     As properly as Sparkles to aſcend.
                     But were My Caſe, as Thine; in this Diſtreſſe,
                     Rather to GOD would I my ſelfe addreſſe:
                     Him would I ſeek, of Him would I enquire,
                     Whoſe Works are great, whoſe Wonders all admire:
                     Vnſpiable, Vnſpeakeable by Man;
                     Immutable, Inſer
                           •
                        table to ſcan:
                     Who on the Earth the raine at pleaſure poures,
                     And in the Streets diſtills the liquid Showers:
                     Who lifts the Lowly vp, brings downe the Lofty;
                     And reares ſad Mourners vnto Health and Safety:
                     Who diſſipates the craftieſt Policies;
                     And diſ-appoints the Counſells of the Wiſe:
                     Who takes the warieſt in their proper Wiles;
                     And Wicked ones in their owne Guile beguiles;
                     So that they meet with Darknes in the Day,
                     And, as at Midnight, groap at Noon their way:
                     
                        But, He preſerues the Poore, from ſword & tongue,
                     And cruell hands of Tyrants, prone to wrong:
                     So that the Poore ſhall haue their bleſſed Hope:
                     But Wicked ones their curſed mouthes ſhal ſtop.
                     Lo, then, how happy he whō GOD correcteth!
                     Repine not therefore that he Thee afflicteth.
                     He wounds, & heales; he ſtrikes, & he reſtores:
                     He ſendeth Plagues, & Plaiſters for the Sores:
                     Hee, in ſix Troubles, ſhall deliuer thee;
                     And in the ſeauenth, thou ſhalt be danger-free.
                     He will preſerue thee from fel Famines rage;
                     And from the Sword of War thee diſ-ingage:
                     Thou ſhalt be ſafe frō ſcourging tungs of Momes,
                     Nor ſhalt thou fear Deſtruction when it comes:
                     
                        
                           •
                        ay, thou ſhalt laugh at it, and Death der
                           •
                        de;
                     Not dreading Beaſts of felleſt Pawes and Pride.
                     
                        
                           •
                        tones, thorns, & thiſtles ſhal be friends with thee:
                     With thee the Beaſts in conſtant league ſhall be.
                     And, as without, thou ſhalt haue Peace within
                     Thy houſe; thou ſhalt behold it, and not ſin.
                     Thou ſhalt perceiue thy Seeds ſeeds ſeed to ſpred
                     As Graſs in Fields, & Flowers in euery Mead.
                     
                        
                           •
                        n a full Age to thine own Graue ſhalt Thou,
                     As, in due time, Corne to the Barne or Mow.
                     
                        Lo, This is Truth; and Thus we daily try-it:
                     Conſider it, and to thy Selfe apply-it.
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 •
                              ap. 6.IOB then reply'd: ô! were my Sorows waigh'd,
                     And with my Suffrings in iuſt Balance layd,
                     They would exceed the Seas wet Sands in poize:
                     Therefore (alas!) they ſwallow vp my voice:
                     For th'Arrowes of th'Almightie, keen and quick,
                     Haue thrilled me, & ſtill within mee ſtick;
                     Their Anguiſh makes my ſpirits faint & quaile me.
                     Alas! the Terrors of the LORD aſſaile me.
                     Braies the wilde Aſſe if he haue graſs his fill?
                     Or lowes the Oxe if he haue fodder ſtill?
                     Vnſauory things who without Salt can eat?
                     In whites of Eggs is there a taſte of meat?
                     Yet am I faine, alas! and forc't (indeed)
                     Of what my Soule abhorred moſt to feed.
                     O! that the LORD would daign me my deſire,
                     Grant me my Lo
                           •
                        ging, grant what I require:
                     Which is but This; that He would end my dayes,
                     Let goe his hand, and let me goe my waies.
                     So ſhould I yet haue Comfort (though I burn
                     In bitter pangs of Death, I will not ſpurn.
                     Let him not ſpare me) for yet do not I
                     The holy Word of th'Holy-One denie.
                     
                        But, ô! What Power haue I to perſiſt?
                     What may enſue, if I ſhall long ſubſiſt?
                     Am I as hard, as tough, as ſtrong (alas!)
                     As ſtrongeſt Stones? or is my Fleſh of Braſs?
                     Nay, am I not already Impotent,
                     My ſpirits conſumed, & my ſtrength all ſpent?
                     In Croſſes, Comforts ſhould Friends moſt afford:
                     But men (alas!) haue left to feare the LORD.
                     My Brethren haue deceiu'd mee, as a Brooke.
                     As rifing Flouds, they haue me ſoone forſook;
                     Which, foule and deep, in Winter all o're-flow,
                     Or, cruſted thick with ice, no moiſture ſhow;
                     Or elſe, in Summer, by Sol's thirſty Ray
                     Are licked-vp, and quicklie dry'd away,
                     While Trauailers to Thaema, and Saba thought
                     To water there, & for their ſuccour ſought;
                     But failing quite, and fruſtrate of the ſame,
                     They are confounded, & they bluſh for ſhame:
                     Even ſuch are you, you ſee me ill appaid
                     In diſmall Plight, and you are all diſmaid:
                     Why are yee ſo? When haue I bid you bring,
                     Or out of yours ſupply me any thing?
                     Or crav'd of you auxiliarie Bands
                     To reskue me from Foes, or Tyrants hands?
                     
                        Shew me mine Error, where I haue gone wrong:
                     Tell me my Fault, and I will hold my tongue.
                     But, bold and free's the ſpeech of Innocence:
                     Which of you can reproue; and what Offence?
                     Thinke You aduantage of my words to haue,
                     As if Affliction made me wildely raue?
                     Then on the Orphan doth your furie fall;
                     You dig a Pit to catch your Friend withall.
                     Therefore, vouchſafe me better to reviſe;
                     Wrong me no more: My words be neither lyes,
                     Neither my deeds (as you ſhall find, I truſt,
                     If you returne) in that behalfe vniuſt.
                     Complain I cauſeleſs? Do I counterfait?
                     Is not my mouth with Anguiſh all repleat?
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 •
                              ap. 7.HAth not Man's warfare his ſet limits heere,
                     As hath the Hireling (by the day, or yeere)?
                     As toyled Seruants for the Night attend;
                     And weary Taskers for their Labors end;
                     So haue I looked, but (alas!) in vain,
                     For end of Sorrowes, & for eaſe of Pain.
                     Perpetually my fruitleſs Months proceed;
                     My tedious Nights inceſſantly ſucceed:
                     No ſooner layd down but I long to riſe,
                     Tired with toſſing, till the Morning ſpies.
                     
                        My Fleſh is clad with Worms; with excrement
                     Of lothſom duſt, my Skin doth rot and rent:
                     My Dayes flit faſter then the Shuttles ſlide
                     From Weauers hands, whipping frō ſide to ſide.
                     Conſider, Lord, my Life is but a Blaſt:
                     Mine eye no more ſhall ſee the Goodnes paſt:
                     Who now beholds me, ſhall no more, anon:
                     
                        
                           •
                        f Thou look-on Mee, I eft-ſoones am gon.
                     As Clowdes do paſſe, & quite away do flit,
                     Whoſo deſcends, aſcends not from the Pit;
                     Neither returnes vnto his wonted owne;
                     Nor of his place is any more be-known.
                     Therefore (alas!) I will not ſpare to ſpeake;
                     
                        
                           •
                         cannot hold, needs muſt I ſilence break,
                     Amid the anguiſh of my Spirits diſtreſſe,
                     And in the depth of my Soules bitterneſſe.
                     Am I a Sea? or Whale? that with a Gard
                     Thou girteſt me, & keep'ſt me in ſo hard?
                     
                        
                           •
                        f I haue ſaid; In ſilence of the Night
                     When drouſie Humor ſiels-vp euery Sight;
                     When All, aboue, in, vnder, Aire; Earth, Seas;
                     
                        
                           ••
                         quiet Slumber ſeem to take their Eaſe)
                     
                        
                           •
                         may be that my painfull Pangs ſhall ceaſe:
                     
                        
                           •
                         may be that my Paſſions ſhall haue peace:
                     
                        With fearefull Viſions then thou dooſt affray me,
                     With Dreames & Fanſies dreadfully diſmay me:
                     So that my Soule had rather chuſe (at once)
                     To die then liue in Durance of my Bones.
                     Wearie of life, liue alwaies ſhall I not;
                     Then leaue me, Lord, alas! my dayes are nought.
                     O! What is Man that thou extoll'ſt him ſo?
                     That Thou on Him dooſt euen thy heart beſtow?
                     That euery Morning Him thou viſiteſt?
                     And euery Moment Him examineſt?
                     How is it that Thou leau'ſt me not a little?
                     Alas! nor lett'ſt me ſwallow-in my ſpettle?
                     O! Thou Preſeruer of Mankind, I knowe,
                     And I acknowledge I haue ſinn'd: but, O!
                     What ſhall I ſay? What ſhall I do to Thee?
                     Why, in thy Wrath dooſt Thou incounter Mee?
                     Why mak'ſt Thou Me (alas!) the Mark & White
                     To thy Diſpleaſure, in my Selfe's deſpight?
                     Remit, O Lord, what I haue ill omitted:
                     Remoue (alas!) what I haue miſs-committed,
                     For, now I goe down to the duſt, to lie:
                     And, if Thou ſeek, to morrow, none am I.
                     
                        
                           Caep. 8.BVt Bildad then (loth longer to refrain)
                     Said; IOB, How long wilt thou this Plea maintai
                           •
                        
                     
                     
                        VVith words, as high, as Tempeſts vehemence,
                     Blow'n by the breath of thine Impatience?
                     Dar'ſt Thou, averr, that GOD doth Right ſubuert?
                     Or that th'Almighty, Iudgement doth peruert?
                     Though, ſith thy Sons had ſinned, them he ſent
                     To the due Place of their ſinnes puniſhment;
                     Yet, if Thou early vnto GOD repaire,
                     And to th'Almighty make thine humble Prayer,
                     If Thou be pure, and in his ſight ſincere;
                     He will again awake to Thee: and reare
                     Thy ruin'd State; thy righteous Houſe reſtore
                     With Peace & Plentie, manifoldly more.
                     Aske of the Ages paſt: inquire (I pray)
                     Of th'Ancient Fathers (for, of yeſterday
                     We Nouices knowe nothing in effect;
                     Our dayes are but a Shadow in reſpect)
                     Will not They teach thee (without wiles of Art)
                     And truly ſpeak the language of their hart?
                     Can Ruſhes ſpring? are Sedges ſeen to grow,
                     Where is no moiſture; where no waters flow?
                     Say that they ſhould: yet would they ſooner wither,
                     Though neuer cut, then all elſe graſſe together.
                     Such is the way of all that GOD forget:
                     So failes the Hope of th'Holy-Counterfait:
                     
                        His Hope ſhall be cut off: his Confidence
                     Like buſie Spider's brittle Reſidence:
                     He ſhall be leaning on his Houſe, but it
                     Shall not be able to ſupport him; yet
                     He ſhall hold faſt, & theron fix him ſure;
                     But that (alas!) ſhall neuer long endure:
                     As doth the Tree, which growing in the Sun,
                     O're-ſpreads an Orchard with freſh Boughes, anon,
                     His happy Roots among the Fountaines winding,
                     And round about the rockie banks them binding:
                     If from his Place to pluck it any ween,
                     It will denie; as ſafe, as if not ſeen:
                     Lo, by this meanes it will reioyce, the while
                     That it may proſper in another Soile:
                     So, GOD will neuer the Sincere reiect.
                     Neither the vvicked by the hand erect.
                     Till he haue filld thy mouth with meriment,
                     Thy lips with tryumph (in intire content)
                     Thy Foes ſhal all be with confuſion clothed,
                     Wrapped in ſhame, diſperſt, deſpiſd & loathed;
                     Th'vngodly ſhal be razed to the ground,
                     Their Tabernacle ſhal no more be found.
                     
                        
                           Cap. 9.IOB then reply'd: I know, I grant you This;
                     In GOD's reſpect, that No Man righteous is.
                     
                        No: if He argue, if He queſtion;
                     O! VVho can anſwer of a Thouſand, one?
                     What heart ſo conſtant! O! what ſoule ſo clear,
                     That dares for Iuſt before that Iudge appear?
                     He is All-prudent, and All-powerfull too:
                     VVho thriues, that ſtriues with what he minds to doo?
                     He mounts the Vallies, and he vailes the Mountains:
                     He ſhakes the Earth; he opes & ſtops the Fountains:
                     He bids the Sun ſhine, and forbids it ſoon:
                     He ſeals the Starres vp; he conceales the Moon:
                     He ſpreads alone the Heauens large Canapey:
                     He treads vpon the bound-leſſe ground-leſſe Sea:
                     He makes Arcturus Starre, the 
                           
                              〈…〉
                           
                         
                        Stormy youth,
                     
                     The Pleiadés, and Climats of the South:
                     He worketh mighty things and manifold,
                     Miraculous, and more then can be told:
                     He paſſeth by me, and repaſſeth ſo,
                     Vnſeen of me, and vnperceiued tho:
                     He, when him pleaſeth, if a Prey he take,
                     Who can compell him to reſtore it back?
                     Nay: who ſo bold into his Acts to pry?
                     Or, Who dares queſtion What he doth, or Why?
                     His Anger is not ſtopt, nor ſtoopt a whit;
                     But ſtrongeſt helps are fain to ſtoop to it.
                     
                        Then, how-much-leſs; O! how-much-leſs am I
                     Able (alas!) with Him my Caſe to try?
                     No
                           •
                         were I iuſt, I were not abſolute;
                     But to my Iudge would I make humble Sute:
                     And, to my Cry if he reply, yet hard
                     Can I beleeue that He my voyce hath heard.
                     For, with a Tempeſt he deſtroyes me ſterne;
                     And wounds me Cauſe-leſſe (for ought I diſcerne);
                     Nor ſuffers me ſo much as breathe at all;
                     But fills me ſtill with Bitterneſſe and Gall.
                     If Srength we ſpeak of; Who is ſtrong but He?
                     If Iudgement; then, Who ſhall mine Vmpire be?
                     If I would iuſtifie my Selfe (with Him)
                     He by mine owne Mouth will me ſoon condemn:
                     If I would plead me perfect and vpright,
                     He, He would iudge me wicked, in his ſight:
                     Though I were perfect (to my Selfe) from Sin;
                     Alas! I know not mine owne Soule within.
                     Therefore (Thus vexed and perplexed rife)
                     I loath alas! and I abhorre my life.
                     Yet, grant I not; but that the Lord doth ſmight
                     (Which you deny) both Wicked and Vpright.
                     Elſe, when He ſtrikes a People (old and young)
                     Would He ſeem ſmile at Good mens Stripes emong?
                     
                        Would He beſtowe vpon th'Vngodly-moſt
                     Earth's Soueraintie, and let them rule the Roſt?
                     Would He permit profane Bribe-blinded ones
                     With blunted Sword to ſi
                           •
                         on Iuſtice Thrones?
                     While that the Vertuous to the w
                           •
                        llare thruſt?
                     While th'Innocent are troden in the Duſt?
                     For, Who, but He, directs, acts, orders All
                     In all the World, what euer doth befall?
                     My Daies far ſwifter then a Poſte haue paſt;
                     Paſt without ſight of any Good (to-laſt):
                     As ſwifteſt Ships, ſo haue they ſlid-away;
                     Or as the Eagle haſting to her Prey.
                     If that I ſay, I will forget my Griefe,
                     Forgoe my Wrath, and yet re-hope Reliefe:
                     Ah! then my Torments all afreſh affright,
                     With Terrours, leaſt Thou wilt not quit me quight.
                     For, if I be Vngodly all in vaine
                     I cry to Thee, and to no end I plaine:
                     Or, if Vnguilty, Cleane, and White as Snowe
                     (In mine owne ſight) in Thine I am not ſo;
                     But in the ſight of Thy pure Eyes, as ſoild,
                     And with the Garment that I weare defild.
                     GOD is not Man, as I (in equall Sute)
                     That I with Him ſhould argue or diſpute:
                     
                        Nor is there (ſhould we meet) a Moderator,
                     Twixt Him and Me to arbitrate the Matter.
                     Let him leaue-off his hold, take-off his Rod,
                     Lay-oft his Awefull Maieſty, as GOD;
                     Then will I ſpeak, and freely, voyd of Feare:
                     But, as it is, I muſt, I will forbeare.
                     AS dead aliue; vpon my Selfe I'll lay
                     My ſad Complaint; and in mine Anguiſh pray
                     Thus to the Lord: O Lord, condemne me not;
                     But ſhow me, why thou hunteſt me ſo hot,
                     Lord! art Thou pleaſed to oppreſſe me Thus?
                     O! doſt Thou iudge as do th'Vnrighteous
                     (Vnheard, vntry'd, and vnſuſpect) to trip
                     And caſt-away thine owne hands Workmanſhip?
                     Seeſt Thou, as Man? or haſt Thou carnall Eyes?
                     Years as Mans Years? Daies as Mans Daies, who dies;
                     That thus Thou rack'ſt Me, and protractſt Me ſtill,
                     Searching and ſifting to find out mine Ill?
                     I cannot ſin, Thou know'ſt, but Thou muſt ſee:
                     For, from Thine hands can None deliuer Me.
                     Thy hands haue made Me, all, and euery part:
                     And wilt Thou now thine owne hands Work ſubuert?
                     Remember, Lord, how fraile and brittle ſtuff
                     Thou mad'ſt me of (then vſe me not ſo rough)
                     
                        Euen of the Clay, as is the Potters Cruſt:
                     And wilt Thou then re-cruſh me into Duſt?
                     Thou pourd'ſt me out as Milk (within the womb)
                     Thou mad'ſt me there, as Cheeſe, a Crud becom;
                     With Skin and Fleſh Thou cloth'dſt me fair and fit,
                     With Bones and Sinewes faſt together knit:
                     Inſpir'dſt me Life and Soule, Reaſon and Senſe;
                     And ſtill preſeru'dſt me by thy Prouidence.
                     Theſe Things as hidden in thy Boſome bee:
                     But well I know, that it is ſo with Thee.
                     If I haue ſinned, Thou wilt ſift me neer;
                     And of my Guilt Thou wilt not hold me cleer.
                     If Wicked I haue been; then Woe to Me:
                     If Righteous; Yet ſtill will I humble be;
                     Though deep confounded, and amazed much,
                     To ſee, and feele, my ſad Affliction Such.
                     But, be it more: come, Lion-like ſet on-me;
                     Returne and ſhow Thee maruelous vpon-me:
                     And ſo (indeed) Thou dooſt: for, Thou reneweſt
                     Thy plagues on me; and me more fierce purſeweſt:
                     Changes of Woes, Armies of Paines extreame,
                     Afreſh inuade me, and me round behem.
                     Then, Why (alas!) Why didſt thou bring me forth
                     From fruitfull Womb (being no better worth)?
                     
                        O! that I there had periſhed, vnſeen:
                     And that I were as if I had not been,
                     Brought from the Womb (one Tomb, vnto Another)
                     To Earth my Mother from my Earthly Mother.
                     Is not my Glaſſe neer out? My Date neer done?
                     O! let him ceaſe, and leaue-oft laying-on;
                     That I may take a little Comforts breath,
                     Yer quite I goe to the dark Land of Death;
                     A Land of Darkneſs, Darkneſs Selfe (I ſay)
                     And Sh
                           •
                        de of Death: where is no Light, no Day.
                     
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           . 11THen anſwered Zophar, the Naamathite;
                     Should words preuail? Shal prating paſs for right
                           •
                        
                     
                     Should all be mute? Shall no man dare reply,
                     To mock thy Mocks, and giue thy Lie the Lie?
                     For, Thou haſt ſaid (and that, too-vehement)
                     My Words, and Deeds, and thoughts are innocent;
                     Pure in Thine eyes. But O! that GOD would ſpeak;
                     That He would once His ſacred Silence break;
                     To ſhew thee Wiſdome's Secrets: Thou might'ſt ſee,
                     Thou me
                           ••
                        t'ſt double what he layes on Thee;
                     And ſurely know that (in his Iuſtice ſtrict)
                     After thy Sins, He doth not Sores inflict:
                     But ſeems to haue forgotten, or forgiuen
                     Thy Treſpaſſes againſt Him Selfe and heauen.
                     
                        Canſt Thou, by ſearching, GOD's deep Counſel find?
                     Conceaue th' Almighty? Comprehend His mind?
                     Reach His perfection? It doth Heauen excell
                     In Height; in Depth exceeds the loweſt Hell:
                     Longer then Earth: larger then all the Seas.
                     O! What? When? Where? How wilt Thou meaſure Theſe?
                     If He cut-off, ſhut-vp, collect, reiect;
                     Who can diuert Him? Who his Courſe correct?
                     He knows vain Men: He ſees their harts that hard thē
                     
                     In Guiles and Wiles; and will not He regard them?
                     That fooliſh man, made wiſe, may be reclaimed;
                     Borne bruit and dull, as an Aſſe Colt, vntamed.
                     If therefore, by Repentance, thou prepare
                     Thine humbled heart: if that, in hearty Prayer,
                     Thou ſtretch thine hands vnto his Throne aboue:
                     Though thou haue ſinn'd; if Thou thy Sin remoue:
                     If Thou remoue it, and permit no more
                     In quity to dwell within thy Doore:
                     Then ſhalt Thou, doubtleſſe, free from Fault & Fear,
                     Settled and ſafe, thy Face againe vprear:
                     Then ſhalt thou ſure forget thy Miſery;
                     Or, but eſteem it as a Streame paſt by:
                     Then ſhall thy Daies be, then the Noon more bright;
                     And thou ſhalt ſhine, as Morning after Night:
                     
                        Then ſhalt thou reſt ſecure and confident,
                     Hopefull, and Happy, in thy proper Tent,
                     In thine owne Dwelling: where, for Eminence,
                     Sutors ſhall flock, with ſeemly Reuerence.
                     But, as for ſtubborne, wilfull Wicked-ones,
                     That ſtill run-on in their Rebellions,
                     Their Helps ſhall faile, and all their Hap ſhall fall;
                     And as a Ghaſp, their Hopes ſhall vaniſh all.
                     
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           . 12THen ſaid the Huſsian: You, vndoubtedly,
                     You are the Men: Wiſdom with you muſt dy:
                     Yet (would yee knew it) ſomwhat know I, too;
                     I vnderſtand perhaps as well as you.
                     Nor will I yeeld you in this Iarre a lot:
                     VVhat you haue vrg'd I know: and Who doth not?
                     Yee ſay, I lie; yee tell me, that I mock:
                     But I am made my Fellowes Laughing-ſtock:
                     Who calls on GOD, and whom He heareth preſt,
                     Th' Vpright and Iuſt (indeed) is made a leſt:
                     And He that's going downe (in ſtate forlome)
                     Like dying Lamp, is to the Rich a Scorne;
                     VVhile (for the moſt) Oppreſſors proſper, ſure;
                     And God-prouokers, ſafely and ſecure,
                     Haue in their hand (GOD in their hand hath pu
                           •
                        )
                     The Horne of Plenty, them at will to glut.
                     
                        Aske but the Beaſts: inquire of Earth, or Seas;
                     Or Fowles, or Fiſh: for, which is it of Theſe,
                     But knowes, and ſhowes, & plainly tells thee This;
                     That GOD's their Maker: and of All that is:
                     That in His hand's the Life of all that liues:
                     That He alone, to All Men, Breathing giues.
                     Doth not the Eare try Speeches (bad or good)?
                     And, for it Selfe, the Palate taſte the food?
                     So, Wiſedom ſhould be to the Many-year'd;
                     And Vnderſtanding to the Hoary-hair'd.
                     With Him it is (with th'Ancient of Dayes)
                     With Him is Counſaile, Wiſedom, Power, & Praiſe:
                     Lo, He deſtroyes, and no man can reſtore:
                     Whom He ſhuts-vp, can be let out no more:
                     He ſtops the Streams; then dry they vp and ſhrink;
                     He ſends them forth; then all the Earth they ſink.
                     With Him is Strength: with Him is All that is:
                     Who erreth, & Who maketh erre, are His:
                     He doth diſtract the Counſailors of State:
                     He makes the Iudges as infatuate:
                     He breaks the Bonds of Kings Imperiall Awe;
                     And brings Them bounden vnder Others Law:
                     He leads the Princes as a Captiue prey:
                     Diſmounts the Mightie; and, with ſtrange diſmay,
                     
                        He dulls the Learned, dumbs the Eloquent,
                     And reaues the Iudgement of the Ancient:
                     He poures contempt vpon the Noble-born:
                     He ſtrips the Strong: He leaues the Stout forlorn:
                     He deepeſt Secrets ſoone diſcouereth:
                     He brings to light the darkeſt ſhades of Death:
                     He multiplieth People; and He mowes
                     Them down again (by Famin, Plague, or Blowes):
                     He ſends them forth in Colonies 
                        
                           •
                        o ſpread;
                     And brings them back (by wrack, lack, ſack, or dread):
                     He reaues the hearts of thoſe that rule the E
                           •
                        th,
                     And makes thē roam throgh Deſertſands of Death,
                     Where None go by; They g
                           •
                        ope as in the Dark;
                     They haue no Light, no Sight; no certain Mark;
                     They ſtray; they ſtumble; to & fro they wheel:
                     And He, He makes Them, Drunkard-like, to reel.
                     
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            3.A
                           •
                         This mine e
                           •
                        es haue ſeen, mine ears haue heard:
                     All This my heart hath weigh'd, & wel conferd.
                     So that, in Th
                           ••
                        , what you haue known, I knew;
                     And 
                           •
                        m not Herrein to gi
                           •
                        e 
                           •
                        l
                           •
                        ce to You.
                     But, as 
                           ••
                        u wiſh, I alſo wiſh: O! would
                     Th'Almighty pleas'd that I might be ſo bold
                     (In his own Preſence, at his Bar to ſtand)
                     To plead with Him the Cauſe I haue in hand.
                     
                        For, You, indeed, are too S
                           ••
                         hiſticall:
                     Silly 
                           •
                        hyſic
                           •
                        ans, for my Sickne
                           ••
                         
                        
                           •
                        ll.
                     O! that you therefore had ſtill he
                           ••
                         you mute:
                     S
                           •
                         might you ſtill haue held a wiſe Repute.
                     But, 
                           •
                        i
                           •
                        t you now vnto my Arguing:
                     Ma
                           ••
                         well my Reaſons, & the Proofes I bring.
                     Will You ſpeak falſly for th'Almighty Lord?
                     Will you for Him pronounce a Guileful word?
                     VVill you be partiall for His perſons ſake?
                     Will you for Him, with Cauils vnder-take?
                     Shall it auaile you? will He con you 
                           •••••
                        k
                     At his great Audit, for this double 
                           •
                        rank?
                     (Or, ween you, ſmoothing, theſe De
                           •••
                        s to ſmother?
                     Or but to mock Him, as one Man another)
                     No you ſhal know, He wil not brook, nor bear it,
                     But chide you ſharp; how-euer ſecr
                           •
                        t were it.
                     Shall not the brightnes of His Fac
                           •
                         a
                           •••
                        y 
                           ••
                        u?
                     His Ma
                           ••
                        ſtie with awefull Ra
                           •
                        es di
                           •
                        may 
                           •
                        ou,
                     M
                           •
                        er Earth & Aſhes (daring thus to play)
                     Your B
                           •
                        ſt but Duſt: your reſt but Du
                           •
                        t & Clay?
                     Hold you your tongues: no more your ſilence bre
                           •••
                        
                     
                     But (at my Perill) giue Me leaue to ſpe
                           •
                        k.
                     Why ſhould I 
                           •
                        eare me (as one out of S
                           •
                        )
                     With mine own Teeth? or doe S
                           •
                        lfe-Violence▪
                     
                     
                        No: ſhould He ſlay me, I would hope againe
                     (Though in his ſight I ſtill my right maintaine)
                     For, He himſelfe will ſaue and doe me right;
                     And cleere mee from your doome of Hypocrite:
                     Sith, in His preſence Such can haue no place,
                     Nor hope ſuch help of His aſſiſting Grace.
                     Giue therefore eare vnto my words; & waigh
                     VVith due regard what I ſhall truly ſay.
                     Lo, heere I ſtand, as ready to be try'd
                     (And well I knowe I ſhall be iuſtifi'd)
                     Come, who will charge me, & oppoſe my Pleas
                     (Alas! I die, if now I hold my peace)
                     Onely, but ſpare me in Two things: with-drawe
                     Thy heauie hand; vvith-hold thy glorious Awe
                     From frighting me: then, from before thy face
                     I ſhall not hide me; nor betray my Caſe:
                     Then, at thy choiſe, be in this Cauſe dependant
                     (I am indifferent) Plaintif, or Defendant.
                     
                     What? and How-many are my Sins (pretended)?
                     Shew me Wherein, and How, I haue offended,
                     That Thou ſhould'ſt ſhun, & turn thee from me ſo;
                     And handle me as thy moſt hated Foe.
                     Dooſt Thou vouchſafe a witherd Leafe to cruſh?
                     Againſt dry Stubble dooſt Thou daign to ruſh?
                     
                        That in ſo bitter and ſeuere a ſtile
                     Thou dooſt indight mee: and recite (the while)
                     My ſinnes of Youth (them re-recording freſh,
                     VVith th'Heritage inherent vnto Fleſh):
                     And putt'ſt my feet into the Stocks ſo ſtrait;
                     VVatcheſt my Waies, and at my heeles dooſt wait,
                     To finde ſome hole in my fore-acted Life
                     (Scourging mine Errors with thy Terrors rife)
                     VVhile, rotten-like, it waſteth, as a Cloth
                     Grown full of holes, & eaten by the Moth.
                     MAn, born of Man's & Womans loynes, alas!
                           Cap 
                           
                              •
                           
                        
                     
                     Hath but few dayes, & thoſe ful ſad, to paſs:
                     Much like a Flower he ſhooteth vp; and fades,
                     Quickly cut downe: he vaniſheth, as Shades;
                     Of no continuance [here]. Yet, doſt Thou daign
                     To frowne at Such? & ſtriue with Me, ſo vaine?
                     Who, from Pollution, can pure thing extract?
                     O! there is None; none that is ſo exact.
                     Sith then his dayes Thou haſt determined;
                     Sith that his Months with thee be numbered;
                     Sith Thou haſt ſet the certain Time he has
                     (To Him vncertain) which He cannot paſs:
                     Forbeare awhile, & from him looke away,
                     Till (as the Hireling) he hath done his Day.
                     
                        For, though a Tree befelled: from the Root,
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         there hope 
                           〈◊〉
                         inches will re-ſhoot;
                     Though in the Earth 
                           〈…〉
                         be old and dry,
                     T
                           •••
                         on the Ea
                           ••
                        h 
                           〈…〉
                         as dead do lie;
                     Y
                           ••
                         
                        
                           •
                        y the Se
                           •
                        t of the nee
                           •
                         
                        
                           •
                        inding Flood,
                     It w
                           ••
                         
                        
                           •••
                        e, and as a Plant, re-
                           •
                        ud:
                     P
                           •
                        t Man (man's Body from h
                           ••
                         Soule bereft)
                     Man down & dead; O! wh
                           •
                        t of Him is left?
                     Si
                           ••
                        , a
                           •
                         S
                           ••
                        -wa
                           •
                        ers, paſt, re-p
                           •
                        ſſe no more;
                     As R
                           •••
                        rs, 
                           •
                        ry'd, return not to their Shore:
                     Man, Dead-aſleep ſhall neuer wake again;
                     Nor neuer riſe, till Heav'n no more remain.
                     O! wert thou pleas'd, me in my Graue to hide,
                     V
                           •
                        till thy Wrath were paſt and pacifi'd!
                     Or that there were ſome Time, or Term aſſign'd me,
                     When Thou wilt ceaſe; & in thy Mercy mind me!
                     Or, ſhall a Man neer dead heer liue again;
                     Still liuing-dying in continuall Pain?
                     And ſhall I ſtill, in this diſtreſſed ſtate,
                     Wait, all the Dayes of mine appointed Date,
                     Vntill my Cha
                           •
                        g
                           •
                         (my Ren
                              ••
                           ation) come?
                     When Thou ſhalt call me: nor ſhal I be dumb,
                     But anſwer thee: Then then Thou wilt approue
                     That Thou the Works o
                           •
                         thine own hands dooſt loue;
                     
                        Though now my ſteps thou numbreſt ſo exact;
                     Not'ſt all my Sins, & ſeem'ſt them to haue packt
                     As in a Bagge, ſafe ſealed; yea, to add
                     New Treſpaſſes vnto the old, I had.
                     So that, as Mountains, mouldring, down do ſink;
                     As from their places ſhiuer'd Rocks do ſhrink:
                     As waters break the Stones; as Showres ſurround
                     The duſty Earth; Thou dooſt Man's hope cōfound;
                     And tryumph'ſt euer ouer Him, deiected;
                     Transform'd in Face, as from thy Face reiected.
                     Nor knoweth He, whether his deer Poſteritie
                     Shall poorely fare, or flouriſh in Proſperitie:
                     But, while his Soule his Body beares about,
                     That, ſhall haue Woe within; & This, without.
                  
                  
                     
                     The ſecond Booke.
                     
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            15.TO This of His (ſo hot and vehement)
                     Thus Eliphas (in the ſame Element):
                     Should one ſo wiſe (as thou dooſt vaunt thee heere)
                     Diſcourſe ſo vainly? bring ſuch idle geare?
                     Vent from the Centre of a ſwelling breſt
                     As noyſome Gales as the vnholſome Eaſt?
                     Trifle the Time [about I vvot not what]
                     In idle and vnprofitable chat?
                     Nay: nullifie Religious Feare and Pietie,
                     
                     Not praying to, but pleading with the Deitie?
                     
                     VVhich thine own mouth hath witneſt too-too-far,
                     VVith ſubtile Cauils of a Sophiſter.
                     Yea, thine own mouth (not mine) ſhall thee cōuince:
                     Againſt thy Selfe thy lippes giue Euidence.
                     Why Man! wert Thou the firſt man on the earth?
                     Or, wert Thou born before the Hills had birth?
                     Haſt Thou alone GOD's Secret vnderſtood?
                     And haſt Thou onely VViſedom, in thy Hood?
                     VVhat is't Thou knoweſt, that We haue not kend?
                     VVhat vnderſtand'ſt Thou, but VVe comprehend?
                     There are of Vs as old as Thou; or rather,
                     Some (I ſuppoſe) more antient then Thy Father:
                     
                        And dooſt Thou ſlight our Comforts (godly ſent)?
                     Or haſt Thou of thine Owne more excellent?
                     Why doth thy heart, and whither, thee tranſport?
                     Why dooſt thou cloſe thine eyes? that in this ſort
                     Thy Spirit turnes (ſhall I ſay ſpurns?) at GOD:
                     And from thy Lips ſpets words ſo bold and broad?
                     O! What is Man, that He ſhould clean exiſt?
                     Or Womans Son, that He ſhould Iuſt perſiſt?
                     Behold, He found, his Angels ſtood not ſure:
                     Neither, the Heanens, in His pure ſight, are pure:
                     Then, How-much-more, before Him, filthy ſtinks
                     Stock-ſtained Man, who Sin, as Water, drinks?
                     I'll therefore ſhew the (hark, and marke me well)
                     What I haue ſeen; I will declare and tell
                     What, from their Elders, Sages yerſt haue know'n,
                     And to their Heires ſucceſſiuely haue ſhow'n.
                     Such as, indeed, haue had the Helm in hand,
                     To ſteer their Owne, and Strangers to with-ſtand.
                     The Wicked Man's in-labour, all his Life;
                     In bitter Pains, in Pangs, and Paſſions rife:
                     Number of yeares are ſeldome His, to ſumme:
                     A Sound of Feares ſtill in His eares doth humme:
                     Or, if at all He ſeem in eaſe to ſwim;
                     The ſwift Deſtroyer ſhall ſoon ſeaze on him,
                     
                        H
                           •
                        p-leſs, and Hope-leſs euer to recouer:
                     S
                           •
                        eing the Sword, him euer hanging ouer.
                     Needy, indeed; or greedy ſtill of more
                     (Pining in Plenty, ſtaruing in his Store)
                     He wanders, ſeeking of his Bread about;
                     In dread of Want; of a Black Day, in doubt:
                     Trouble and Anguiſh ſhall him deep affright;
                     As royall Armies ready for the Fight.
                     For, He hath ſtretched his proud
                           ••
                         and at Heav'n;
                     And ſtubbornly hath with th' Almighty ſtriv'n,
                     Running at Him, ruſhing vpon his Neck;
                     Yea, on the Poſſes of his Shield ſo thick:
                     Becauſe his Fat, his full broad Face doth couer;
                     And la
                           •
                        die C
                           •
                        ilops on his ſides hang ouer;
                     And dwe
                           •
                        ls in Houſes, rather Townes of late,
                     (By H
                           ••
                        ) 
                           •
                        i-pa
                           •
                        ron'd and depopulate;
                     By Him, 
                           •
                        e built, re-gilt, re-gloſt, re-glas'd;
                     By H
                           •
                        m, re-N
                              •
                           med (ready to be ras'd).
                     Yet, ſhall not 
                           •
                        e
                           ••
                         R
                           •
                        ch; nor in Proſperity
                     Perſiſt; nor leaue Poſſeſſion to Poſterity:
                     Nor, onto Darknes euer get ſhall He;
                     Nor euer other then inglo
                           ••
                        ous be:
                     His Branch ſhall wither, and with Flame be waſted:
                     Him Self ſhal, ſodain, with GOD'S Breath be blaſted.
                     
                        Then, let not (hard-beleeuing hau
                           •
                         Humanity)
                     O! let not the Deceiued truſt in Vanity.
                     For, Vanity ſhall be his Recompence:
                     Before his Time ſhall he be ſnatched hence:
                     His Spring ſhall neuer ſprout, his Flowers ſhall fall,
                     His Fruit, yer ripe, ſhall be off-ſhaken all
                     (As Grapes and Oliues, with vntimely Froſt)
                     The Lord ſhal ſhake them, and they ſhall be loſt.
                     For, th'Hypocrites D
                           •
                        ſſembling Congregation,
                     Shall be diſperſt, and brought to Deſol
                           •
                        tion:
                     And ſodainly ſhal Fire conſume the Tents
                     Of Briberie, with all their Inſtruments.
                     For, They conceiue but Miſchiefe; breed but Guile,
                     And bring forth vain Iniquitie the while.
                     HE pauſing heer, IOB Thus replies him, ſad:
                           Ca
                                 •
                              
                            
                           
                              •
                           
                        
                     
                     Yet more of This? This haue we often had.
                     You are indeed a ſort of Viſiters;
                     A Crew of cold and wretched Comforters.
                     Shall idle, iddle, aiery, Words ſurceaſe?
                     Or what doth make thee dare to dwel on theſe?
                     Could I, as you, if you were in my Caſe,
                     And I in yours; your Soule in my Soules place:
                     Could I, againſt you, words haue multipl'ed?
                     Inſulted on you? at you, ſhook my head?
                     
                        No: I ſhould rather haue raught you Reliefe,
                     And with my ſpeeches haue aſſwag'd your Griefe.
                     But, though I plain, my Griefe's not mitigated;
                     Either, forbeare I, What is it abated?
                     For, He hath wearied me: Yea, Lord, Thou haſt
                     Spoild me of All: and laid me wholly waſt:
                     The wrinkled Furrowes, on my Brow and Back
                     (Bare skin and bone) bear witneſſe of my Wrack.
                     My Foe's fell wrath hath raakt and rent me ſore:
                     He ſtriues againſt me; and ſtill angry more,
                     More eager ſtill, gnaſheth his Teeth vpon me;
                     And with his eyes keen flaſhing frowneth on-me.
                     My Friends (alas!) they laugh at me the while,
                     They buffet me, and bitterly reuile;
                     They gape vpon me, and together gather,
                     Not to relieue me, but to grieue me, rather.
                     Thus hath GOD hemm'd me with vngodly Bands,
                     And turnd me ouer into Wicked hands.
                     I was at eaſe; When by the Neck he took-me,
                     Brake me a-ſunder, and to ſhiuers ſhook me:
                     And (whether for Diſport or for Deſpite)
                     Made me his Butte, and ſet me as his White.
                     His cunning Archers do beſet me round:
                     He cleaues my Reines; and ruth-leſs, on the ground
                     
                        Poures-out my Gall: with doubled Blowes he cruſhes,
                     And Giant-like, vpon me fiercely ruſhes.
                     I haue in Sack-cloth ſadly ſow'd my Skin,
                     In Duſt and Aſhes haue I humbled bin,
                     I haue (alas!) beſmeard my Face with Teares,
                     On mine Eie-lids Death's Shade hath ſwom, in Fears:
                     For no foule Sin; neither, for Faſhions ſake,
                     To ſeem a Saint: pure Prayers did I make,
                     Pure and Sincere: elſe, neuer may they come
                     In Heau'n, to haue either regard or roome.
                     Neither, O! Earth! if euer Blood I ſhed,
                     O! let it not by Thee be couered.
                     But, lo, my Witneſſe is in Heav'n aboue;
                     My Record there, my Conſcience to approue.
                     My Friends contemne me, and condemne me too:
                     But, droun'd in Teares, to GOD appeal I doo.
                     O! that one might (as Man with Man, in Sute)
                     That Neighbor-like, one might with GOD diſpute.
                     For, the few Daies of my ſet Number gone,
                     I goe the Way, from whence Returne is none.
                     MY Spirit's ſpent: my Daies are don (& leaue me)
                     The Graue's already ready to receiue me.
                           Cap. 
                           
                              •
                           
                        
                     
                     Yet are there with me none but thoſe that mock me:
                     Doth not mine eye ſtill ſee them ſtill prouoke me?
                     
                        But, put me in a Surety, giue me Pledge,
                     To anſwer me what I ſhall then alleadge.
                     Who 'll vndertake it? Who will giue his hand,
                     That to the Triall Thou wilt daign to ſtand?
                     Sith Thou, O Lord, Their hearts haſt hidden quight,
                     From Vnderſtanding, and from iudging right;
                     And therefore wilt not, for their Arrogance,
                     Admit of them, nor them ſo high aduance.
                     Not, that I would, they ſhold haue ſooth'd me neither:
                     For ſuch ſhal periſh, and their Seed together.
                     But, to the Vulgar I am made a Song,
                     A Tale, a Tabret vnto euery Tongue
                     (Through grief whereof, mine Eye decaies & dims;
                     And as a Shadowe are my other Limbs):
                     The better ſort, amazed at my Plight,
                     The Innocent, iudge me an Hypocrite.
                     Yet, ſhall the Righteous ſtill hold on his Courſe;
                     And the Sincere ſhall ſtill adde force to force.
                     Therefore, my Friends, returne, recant, re-call
                     Your hard Opinions, and miſ-Cenſures, all:
                     For, of you all, not one Wiſe man I finde;
                     Nor fit Phyſician for a troubled minde.
                     My Daies are paſt; and my Deſſignes vndon;
                     Yea, euen my Hopes (my hearts Poſſeſſions) gon:
                     
                        My Noon (alas!) is changed into Night;
                     Small ods there is twixt Darkneſſe and my Light.
                     What can I looke for, but among the Dead
                     To make my Houſe? to haue my Graue for Bed?
                     For, to Corruption, thus alou
                           •
                         I call;
                     Thou art my Father: to the Worms that crawl,
                     You are my Mother, and my Siſters, all.
                     Where's then my Hope? How ſhal that Hap appeer,
                     Which you yer-while old ſo re-promiſe, heer?
                     Thoſe things, with me ſhall downe into the Deep;
                     And, with my Doſt, 
                           •
                        mid the Duſt ſhall ſleep.
                     THen ſaid the Shuhite: Will you neuer ceaſe
                           Cap. 1
                              •
                           
                        
                     
                     Your tedious Talking? Neuer hold your peace?
                     Forbeare a while; giue eare a little now:
                     Obſerue our Speech, and we will anſwer you.
                     But, why, as Beaſts are we vpbraided thus?
                     And why ſo baſely doe you count of vs?
                     He, rather ſeems to be beſides his Senſe,
                     That wounds him Selfe in his Impatience.
                     Why? Shall the Earth, for Thy ſake be forſaken?
                     The Rocks remou'd? and ſolid Hils be ſhaken?
                     No, no: The Light of Wicked-ones ſhall out:
                     His Fiery Sparkle ſhall not ſhine about:
                     Within his Doores ſhall Darknes be for Light:
                     With Him, his Candle ſhall be quenched quight:
                     
                        His Strength ſhall faile him (or be fatall to-him):
                     His Counſels caſt him; His owne Wit vndoo-him:
                     For, his owne Feet ſhall bring him to the Net;
                     And willingly vpon the Gin ſhall iet:
                     Him, by the heele the ſubtill Snare ſhall catch:
                     Him, ſhall the Theeues and Robbers ouer-match:
                     For him are laid the Meſhes of Miſ-hap;
                     Traines on the ground, and in his wayes a Trap:
                     Him, on all ſides, ſad Terrors ſhall affright;
                     And ſudden driue him to his Feet, to flight:
                     His plentious Store ſhall Famine ſoon deuoure:
                     Deſtruction's Sword ſhall hunt-him euery-hower,
                     Conſume his Sinewes, and vn-bar his Skin:
                     And Peſtilence (Death's Heire) ſhall rage within.
                     His Hope ſhall hop without his expectation:
                     His Confidence ſhall from his Habitation
                     Be rooted out, and razed (as it were)
                     And bring him downe to the drad King of Feare;
                     Who aye ſhall dwell within His Tabernacle,
                     (Becauſe not His, not his owne Habiracle):
                     Some ſecret Flame, ſom Flaſh, ſom Sulphury ſhower,
                     Shall ſudden ſpred amid his curſed Bower:
                     His Roots belowe ſhall rot amid the Clay;
                     His Boughes aboue be cut and caſt away:
                     
                        His Memorie ſhall periſh from the Earth;
                     His Name heer nameleſs (as before his Birth)
                     He ſhal be driv'n to Darknes, from the Light:
                     And forth the World he ſhall be hunted quight.
                     Nor Sonne, nor Nephew ſhall be leaue behind;
                     Nor in his Houſes any of his Kind.
                     So that, the Ages, preſent, and to come,
                     Shall ſtand amazed at his diſmall Doome.
                     And This is ſure the Lot, the heauie Load
                     Of VVicked-ones, that fear not, know not, GOD.
                     IOB then reply'd: Alas! how long will Yee
                     Torment my Soule, with words; & torture Mee?
                           Ca
                                 •
                              
                            
                           
                              •
                           
                        
                     
                     Ten times ye haue, with too obdurate minde,
                     Reproacht mee This: vnciuill and vnkind.
                     But, put the Caſe, that I haue ſinn'd, indeed:
                     Muſt not I beare it? Then (alas!) what need
                     You load me more; and magnifie your wit,
                     To amplifie my Guilt, and Griefe of it?
                     Seeing you ſee that GOD hath caſt me downe,
                     And with his Net hath compaſſed me round.
                     Lo, I cry-out of wrong & violence;
                     Aloud I cry; yet haue no Audience,
                     Nor Eaſe at all: He hath ſo hedg'd my VVay,
                     I cannot paſſe: My Paths, in ſtead of Day,
                     
                        Are Darke beſet: He hath my glorie reft;
                     And from my head He hath the Crowne bereft:
                     He hath deſtroy'd me, euery-way vndone:
                     My Hope, remoued (as a Tree) is gone:
                     And more, His Wrath againſt me fiercely fryes;
                     He reckons Me among his Enemies:
                     His Troupes aſſembled, march againſt Me, egre;
                     And, round about, my feeble Tent bel
                           •
                        guer:
                     He hath diſperſt my Brethren from me farre;
                     To Me, my Kindred as meer Strangers are;
                     My Neighbors flie me; my Familiar Frend
                     Hath now forgot me (as if neuer kend):
                     Nay▪ mine own Houſehold; Men, Maid-ſeruants, all;
                     Count me a Stranger, care not for my Call,
                     Nor will come at me; though I ſpeak them faire:
                     Nay: to mine own Wife (for the noiſome aire)
                     My Breath is ſtrange, though I beſeech her, ſad,
                     By thoſe deer Pledges wee together had.
                     The Baſeſt ſcorn me; and when vp I riſe,
                     They ſpet their Spight in bitter Obloquies.
                     Mine Intime-moſt, Thoſe that I loued beſt,
                     Abhor mee All, and me the moſt moleſt.
                     My Bones, in ſted of Fleſh, cleaue to my skin;
                     And that not ſound, ſaue what my Teeth grow in.
                     
                        Then 
                           •
                        itty me, ô pitty me, my Frends;
                     Sith GOD on me his heauie hand extends:
                     Ah! Why do you yet perſecute me, rough,
                     As GOD? Alas! hath not my Fleſh enough?
                     O! that my words (the words I now aſſ
                           •
                        uer)
                     Were writ, were printed, & (to laſt for-euer)
                     Were grav'
                           •
                         in Marble with an Iron pen
                     With Lead in-yoated (to fill vp agen).
                     
                        I ſurely knowe that my Redeemer liueth:
                     
                     
                        And that He ſhal
                              •
                           
                         (This firm my Faith belieueth.)
                     
                        In th'End of Time, return & riſe from Duſt
                     
                     (The Fi
                              •
                           ſt & Laſt) to iudge and ſaue the Iuſt:
                     
                     
                        And that, I ſhall when worms haue eat This Clod,
                     
                     
                        I ſhal
                              •
                            awake, & in my fleſh ſee GOD:
                     
                     
                        Yea: I ſhall ſee him with Theſe Eyes of mine,
                     
                     
                        And with none elſe: though Now in Paines I pine.
                     The rather, therfore ſhould you now retract,
                     And Thus Your-ſelues diſcreetly now correct:
                     
                        Why perſecute We Him? Why hate Him, Wee?
                     
                     Sith 
                           •
                        his Foundation is thus fixt in Mee.
                     Then, be you warn'd: beware, & fear the Sword:
                     For Wickednes & Cruelty [in word]
                     Incenſeth Wrath: Know, there ſhal Iudgment come,
                     To doom them right, who Others (raſh) miſdoom.
                     
                        SCarce had He done, when the Naamathite
                     
                     Replyes him Thus: Therefore my thoughts incite
                     My ſuddain Anſwer: therfore, am I ſpurr'd
                     (Regarding light thy ſharp and ſhamefull Guird)
                     VVith ſpeed to ſpeake vnto the Point in hand,
                     VVhat I conceiue, & rightly vnderſtand.
                     Know'ſt thou not This of old, through euery Age,
                     Since firſt on Earth began Man's Pilgrimage;
                     That the tryumphing of the Wicked Sort,
                     The Ioy of th'Hypocrite is euer ſhort.
                     Although to Heav'n hee mount his glorious Top,
                     Though to the Clowds his head be lifted vp;
                     Yet ſhall he periſh, as his dung, for aye:
                     And who hath ſeen them, ſhal ask, VVhere are they?
                     As Dreames forgotten, ſhall he take his flight;
                     Yea, chas'd away, as Viſions of the Night:
                     Th'Eye that hath ſeen him, ſhal not ſee him twiſe,
                     Nor ſhall his Places him againe reuiſe.
                     His Children ſhall be fawning on the Poore;
                     And His Extortions ſhall to them reſtore:
                     His Bones are full of his Youth's ſinnes (his Luſt)
                     VVhich ſhall not leaue him till he lie in duſt:
                     Though to his Taſte his Sin be paſſing ſweet,
                     Though vnder-neath his Tongue he couer it,
                     
                        Though there he ſpare it, and not ſpet it out,
                     Though on his Palate ſtill it roule about;
                     Yet is his Meat turnd, in his Bowells, all;
                     And is, within him, as the Aſpic's Gall:
                     H'hath ſwallow'd Wealth, but GOD ſhall make him fain
                     To ſpue it out, to caſt it vp againe:
                     He ſhall the Aſpic's direfull Poiſon ſuck:
                     VVith Vipers tongues he ſhall be deadly ſtuck:
                     He ſhall not ſee the Oylie Riuers Currents,
                     Nor Brooks of Butter, nor the Honny Torrents:
                     His Labour neuer ſhall regain his Loſſe:
                     He ſhal reſtore whom he before did croſſe;
                     The Reſtitution ſhal be all his ſtate;
                     He neuer ſhall digeſt, nor ioy thereat:
                     Becauſe the Poore he cruſhed, and forſook;
                     And Others Houſes violently took.
                     Sure he ſhall haue no quiet Calm within;
                     VVithout, no Store of what he ioyeth in.
                     There ſhalbe no Remainder of his meat;
                     And his Reuerſions none ſhal wait to eat:
                     Nay: in his Ruffe, and at his Greateſt Height,
                     He ſhal be ſtocked in full many a Strait:
                     Continuall Hazards ſhal him round enring;
                     Each ſpightfull hand ſhall haue at him a fling:
                     
                        VVhen he is readie for his rich Repaſt,
                     On Him will GOD his fietie Furie caſt;
                     Amid his Feaſts his dead Diſpleaſure thrilling,
                     In ſtead of Food, his breſt with horror filling.
                     If he eſcape the Sword; from Bowes of ſteel
                     Steel-headed Arrowes ſhal him thorough thrill:
                     The naked Swords bright-ſhining terror ſhall
                     Peep through his Boſom, creep throgh guts & gall.
                     Horrors ſhal haunt him: and ſo, hard-beſtid,
                     From hiding him, all Darknes ſhall be hid.
                     A Fire vnblow'n him ſuddain ſhall conſume:
                     A
                           •
                        d woe to them that tarry in his Roome:
                     Heav'n ſhall diſcouer his Iniquities,
                     And Earth for witneſſe ſhall againſt him riſe;
                     All his Reuenewes, all his ſtate, and ſtay,
                     Shall flowe to Others in his Wrathful Day.
                     This is the Por
                           •
                        ion of the Wicked: This
                     His Heritage by GOD appointed is.
                     SO Zephar ceaſt. Then IOB reply'd: I pray
                     Heare heedfully what Now I haue to ſay:
                     Be this the Comfort you vouchſafe, alone;
                     Let Me but ſpeak; and afterwards, mock on.
                     Doe I complain or make my moan to Man?
                     Why doe you croſſe, or interrupt me, than?
                     
                        If I haue cauſe of Griefe, ſhould not my ſpirit
                     Be moou'd withall? Can Fleſh & Bloud forbear it?
                     Behold me well; & be withall diſmay'd:
                     And let your hand vpon your mouth be layd.
                     Thought of the like (elſe-where) would me affright,
                     And daunt my Fleſh: How then, my preſent ſight?
                     How comes it, that the Wicked liue, liue long;
                     Grow Rich, grow Great; wex Eminent, & Strong?
                     They ſee their Children, & Grand-children, rife
                     Setled about them: In their Houſe, no Strife;
                     No Feare; no Foe: They feele not any Rod,
                     No ſtripe no ſtroak, of the drad hand of GOD.
                     Their Bullock genders, and proues euer fit:
                     Their Heifer calues, & neuer caſteth it:
                     Their Little ones, like Lambkins ſend they out;
                     Their Stripplings play & skip, & dance about;
                     They tune their Voice to ſweeteſt Inſtruments,
                     Harp, Pipe & Tabret; to delight their ſenſe:
                     In Wealth & Health They liue; ſcarce, euer, ſick
                     Of long Diſeaſe; but to their Graues go quick.
                     Yet 
                           •
                        heſe are Thoſe, that to th'Almighty ſay;
                     
                        Depart from vs; we will not learn thy Way:
                     
                     
                        Who is the Lord? that we ſhould Him obay.
                     
                     
                        What ſhould we profit, if to Him we pray?
                     
                     
                        They haue not ſure the power in their Own hand,
                     To get and keep their Wealth at their Command.
                     Be therefore farre, be euer farre from Mee,
                     Their Works, & Words, & Thought's Impietie:
                     Farre their Counſailes: far be all their VVaies:
                     And farre the Peace of their ſo proſperous Dayes.
                     And yet, how often, is their Lamp put-out?
                     How often, are They compaſſed about
                     VVith ſwift Deſtruction? In his Furie ſtrict,
                     How oft, doth GOD Their Paiment here inflict?
                     How oft, as Straw before the winde, are They,
                     And as the Chaff with Tempeſt whift away?
                     How oft, doth GOD, in the Vngodly's ſight,
                     For Their own Guilt, their own deere Iſſue ſmite?
                     Or, let Themſelues heer ſee themſelues vndone;
                     Drinking the hot Wrath of th'Almighty-one?
                     For, what is it to Them? or what care They
                     (Their Months cut off; Their mouths once ſtopt with clay)
                     What hap their houſe, what hazard follow ſhal:
                     VVhat Weale or Woe, vnto their Heires befall?
                     But herein, who GOD's Wiſedom ſhall impeach?
                     Or, who ſhall, Him, that rules the higheſt, teach?
                     One dies at eaſe, in Strength's perfection growing;
                     His Breſts with Milk, his Bones with Marrow flowing.
                     
                        Another dies in Anguiſh of his Spirit;
                     And neuer did good Day or Night inherit:
                     Both, are, alike, laid in the Duſt together;
                     And Wormes, alike, doo caſe and couer Either.
                     Lo, I conceiue your miſ-conceipts, from hence;
                     Your miſ-collections, and your wreſted Senſe:
                     For, Where (ſay ye) Where's now the Princes Court?
                     And Where the Palace of the wicked ſort?
                     Haue ye not asked thoſe that trauaile by?
                     And doe ye yet, can ye, Their Marks deny?
                     That (for the moſt) the Wicked moſt are ſpared,
                     Repriued heer, till That dread Day prepared
                     For dire Deſtruction: and then (for their Errors)
                     Shall be brought-forth, in That great Day of Terrors.
                     For, Heer ſo Mighty and ſo Great they are;
                     Who, to their face ſhall their Offence declare?
                     Who dares diſcloſe it? Who ſhall proſecute?
                     And their due Sentence Who ſhall execute?
                     Nay (notwithſtanding) to their Graue in peace
                     They paſſe, with Pompe of ſolemne Obſequies;
                     Accompany'd, attended (in their kinde)
                     With Mouruing Troupes, before them and behinde:
                     Entomb'd among their Anceſtors: and reſt
                     In gloomie Vales, as happy as the Beſt:
                     
                        How do You, then, Me comfort, or confute;
                     While vainly thus, and falſly you diſpute?
                  
                  
                     The third Book.
                     
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            22TH'old Thaemanite, as mou'd withall, replies:
                     Can Man, to GOD (as to Him-ſelfe, the Wiſe)
                     Be profitable? Any pleaſure is't
                     Vnto the Lord, if Righteous Thou perſiſt?
                     If Thou be iuſt, if perfect, and vpright;
                     Is GOD the better? Gaines th' Almighty by't?
                     For feare of Thee, will He reproue thee (ſtrict)
                     Enter in Iudgement, and thee thus afflict?
                     Is not thy Sin great and thy Wickedneſs;
                     And infinite thy foule Vnrighteouſneſs?
                     Yes: Thou haſt ta'en thy Brothers Pledge for nothing,
                     And ſtripped euen the Naked of their Clothing:
                     Thou haſt not giuen the wearie Drink, at need;
                     Nor to the Hungry, wherewithall to feed:
                     The Eminent and Mighty had their fill:
                     They held the Earth, and ſwayd thee at their will:
                     But ſilly Widowes haſt thou empty packt;
                     And th'armes of Orphans haue bin cruſht and crackt.
                     
                        Thence is it, now, that Snares beſet thee round,
                     And ſodain Feares thee trouble and confound:
                     Or a black Darknes that thou canſt not ſee;
                     And a huge Deluge that ore-whelmeth thee.
                     Is not the Lord in th'High Empyreal Bliſſe?
                     Behold the Stars, how high their Diſtance is:
                     And then (ſaiſt Thou) What can th' Almighty mark?
                     How iudgeth He? What ſees he through the Dark?
                     Clowds couer Him from ſpying ſo far hence:
                     He walketh in the Heav'ns Circumference.
                     But, haſt not Thou obſeru'd the ancient Track
                     The Wicked trod, to their vntimely Wrack;
                     Who, quick cut downe, ſupplanted where they ſtood,
                     Had their Foundations ſwallowed with the F
                           •
                        ood?
                     Who ſaid to GOD, Depart from vs; and thought,
                     What can th'Almighty doo to vs, in ought
                     Yet, with good things He fi
                           •
                        l'd their habitations.
                     But, farre from me be their Inmaginations.
                     This ſee the Righteous; ſafe the while, and glad:
                     And laugh at them, in their Deſtruction ſad.
                     For, We ſhall ſtand; our Subſtance not decay:
                     But their Remainder ſhall the Fire deſtroy.
                     Therefore, acquaint thee (and that quickly too)
                     With GOD; make peace: & Thou right wel ſhalt doo
                     
                        Receiue (I pray thee) from his mouth Direction;
                     And in thy heart, lay-vp his Words inſtruction.
                     If, to th'Almighty, Thou at-once returne;
                     Thou ſhalt be built-vp: and ſhalt brauely ſpurne
                     Iniquity farre from thy Selfe away;
                     And from thy Dwellings put it farre, for aye.
                     Then, as the Duſt thou ſhalt haue Gold, at will;
                     Pure Ophyr Gold, as Pebbles of the Rill:
                     Yea, the Almighty Thy defence ſhall be:
                     And ſtore of Siluer ſhall be ſtill with Thee.
                     For, in the Lord thy Pleaſure ſhalt thou place;
                     And vnto Him ſhalt thou lift vp thy Face:
                     Him ſhalt Thou pray-to; He ſhall heare thy Layes,
                     And grant thy Sute; and Thou return him Praiſe:
                     Thou ſhalt decree, and He ſhall make it good,
                     (So thy good Purpoſe ſhall not be withſtood):
                     And on Thy Wayes, and in all Works of Thine,
                     His Light of Grace (and glory too) ſhall ſhine.
                     Nay: when-as Others (as thy ſelfe art now)
                     Shall be caſt downe; re-comfort them ſhalt Thou,
                     And Thus re-cheer them: Yet, yet may you riſe;
                     
                        For, GOD will ſaue ſuch as haue humbled eyes.
                     
                     Yea: on the Noxious will he pittie take,
                     For th'Innocent; and ſpare them for thy ſake.
                     
                        THen anſwered IOB:
                           Cap 
                           
                              •
                           
                         Tho to this Day my mones
                     Right bitter be, my Griefe exceeds my Grones:
                     How is it then, that I, as yet, am held,
                     For hauing plain'd, as if I had rebeld?
                     O! that I knew, that ſome would ſhew me, Where
                     I might goe find my Souerain Arbitrer.
                     That I might ſpeedy vnto him repaire;
                     And euen approach to His Tribunall Chaire.
                     I would before Him ple
                           •
                        d my iuſt Defence,
                     And fill my Mouth with pregnant Arguments.
                     Then would I know what ſhould His Anſwer be:
                     And vnderſtand what He would ſay to me.
                     Would He oppoſe me with His Power diuine?
                     No: rather would He ſteele and ſtrengthen mine.
                     There might the Iuſt in his iuſt Plea proceed:
                     And I ſhould euer from my Iudge be freed.
                     But, Whether to the Weſt I take my way;
                     Or, to the pearely Portall of the Day;
                     Or, to the Norward, where he worketh rife;
                     Or, to the South, the Cell of bluſtering-ſtrife:
                     Whether I looke before me, or behind;
                     On This, or That ſide: Him I cannot find.
                     Yet, knowes He well my Way: and hath me try'd:
                     And I, like Gold, ſhall come forth purified.
                     
                        My Foot hath walked in His ſteps: His Way
                     Haue I obſerued; and not gon aſtray:
                     Nor haue I ſtarted from His Precepts ſet,
                     But priz'd them more then my appointed Meat.
                     Yet, He perſiſteth in one purpoſe ſtill.
                     Who can diuert him? He doth what he will;
                     And will performe what is of me decreed.
                     And many ſuch things are with Him, indeed.
                     Therefore, before Him, am I wonder-ſmit;
                     Affraid of Him, when I conſider it.
                     For, GOD hath ſuppled and made ſoft my heart,
                     And deep perplext me in my inward part;
                     Becauſe my Languors neither end, nor I:
                     Nor can I ſee, nor ſound the Reaſon, Why.
                     
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            24BVt, can it be (How can it other be?)
                     But that the Times of the Diuine Decree,
                     (Concerning Iudgements more or leſſe ſeuere;
                     When, Why, and Who, and How, & What, & Where)
                     Hidden with GOD, and hidden from his Owne;
                     Should to the World, and wicked be vnknowne?
                     They ſhift the Land-marks from their ancient ſeat:
                     They take by force mens Flocks, to feed, or eat:
                     They driue away the ſilly Orphans Aſſe:
                     They take for Pledge the Widowes Oxe (alas!):
                     
                        They turn the Needy from their neereſt Way:
                     They make the Poor together hide them aye:
                     Lo, Like wilde Aſſes in the Wilderneſſe,
                     They ramp about their brutiſh Buſineſſe:
                     Riſing betimes for Boot (like Free-booters):
                     The Deſart Field yeelds Food for them and theirs,
                     They reap them Each a Crop, from Others Crop:
                     They gather Each a wicked Vintage vp:
                     They cauſe the Naked without Clothes to lie,
                     Quiuering for Cold, no Couering but the Skie;
                     Waſht with the Showers that frō the Mountains ſhed;
                     Embracing Clifts, for Shelter; Rocks for Bed:
                     They Pluck the Pupil from the tender Breſt:
                     They take from Poor a Pawne of all their beſt:
                     They leaue them Naked; Nay, the Hungry ſoule
                     Euen of his Sheaf, and gleaned handfuls p
                           •
                        ule:
                     Yea; Labourers, that in Their ſeruice toile;
                     That tread their Wine-preſſe, & that make their Oile,
                     That trudge and drudge in their Affairs; in fine
                     They let them ſtarue, and euen for thirſt to pine.
                     The Citie grones vnder their Wicked Thrall:
                     Th'oppreſſed, ſlain, and wounded, cry, and call:
                     Yet, 'tis apparant (as the Sun is cleer)
                     GOD doth not alwaies ſmite (nor cite) them heer.
                     
                        Yet, Theſe are Thoſe that aye the Light abhor:
                     Know not her Way, nor keep, nor care it for:
                     The Murd'rer riſes (early) yet the Light;
                     To kill the Poore: and robbeth (late) at Night:
                     Th'Adulterer's Eye doth for the Twy-light wait;
                     And, muffled, thinks, none ſees my quaint Deceipt:
                     They (Burglars) digge through houſes in the Dark,
                     Which, in the Day, they for their owne did mark.
                     But, Light they loath: Morning to Them is Death:
                     Death's Terror, Day; which all diſcouereth:
                     On Waters ſwim they light and ſwift, for Fear:
                     On Earth, as Vagrants, fly they heer and there,
                     (Their curſed portion) euery-where vndon:
                     By-waies they ſeek, and the High-waies they ſhun.
                     As Heat and Drought, diſſolue & drink the Snow;
                     The wicked-one the Graue ſhall ſwallow ſo.
                     The Womb that bare him, ſhall him quite forget;
                     And, to the Worme he ſhall be wel-com Meat.
                     He ſhall, with Men, no more remembred be:
                     But broken-off, as is a withred Tree.
                     He weds the Barren that brings neuer forth;
                     And, if a Widowe, leaues her nothing-worth.
                     Yet, by his power, He drags the Mighty downe;
                     And none is ſafe, if He, in Fury frowne:
                     
                        No; though, with Preſents, they his Patience buy,
                     And build on it; on Them he caſts an eye.
                     Such, for a little, are aloft: Anon
                     As lowe as Others; as All others, gone:
                     Soone taken hence, ſhut-vp, cut-off, & ſhorn
                     As (with the Haile) the tufted eares of Corn.
                     If Thus it be not: Who will (I deſire)
                     Diſproue my Speech; and proue me now a Lyer.
                     TO This, the Shuhite anſwered ſhortly Thus:
                           Cap 
                           
                              •
                           
                        
                     
                     He is Almighty, Dradly-Glorious;
                     Whoſe Power imperiall, & All-humbling Awe,
                     Rules his High Places in moſt peacefull Law.
                     Is any number of His Armies known?
                     What Light ſo bright, but His hath ouer-ſhone?
                     How, then, may Man, with GOD, be iuſt defin'd?
                     Or, He be Clean, that's born of Woman-kind?
                     Behold, the Moon, before Him, is not bright:
                     Starres are not pure in his (All-piercing) ſight.
                     Then, How-much-leſſe? How-much-leſs Man (alas!)
                     The Son of Man: a Worm, a VVorthleſſe Maſs?
                     IOB, heervnto replyes incontinent:
                           Cap. 
                           
                              •
                           
                        
                     
                     Well haue ye ſaid; but, How impertinent!
                     How haſt Thou holp the weak & feeble wight?
                     How fit defended him that hath no might?
                     
                        How ſweetly taught the ſimple and vnwiſe?
                     How full declar'd the Matter, as it lyes?
                     To Whom dooſt Thou this Speech of thine direct?
                     VVhat mooues thee to it? & to what effect?
                     For, I (for My part) know, that, Not alone,
                     Th'Eternall rules, on his ſupernall Throne
                     The things aboue, in their harmonious Courſe;
                     But heere belowe, the Better and the Worſe.
                     Beneath the Waters, dead things formed bin;
                     And, dumb (their owne Inhabitants) within:
                     Hell is not hid from Him: Deſtructions Caue,
                     From His inſpection, can no Couering haue.
                     He, th'ample Heav'ns ouer the Void extends:
                     He, vpon Nothing the ſad Earth ſuſpends:
                     Within his Clowdes He bottles vp the Rain,
                     Which with it weight tears not the Clowds in twain
                           •
                        
                     
                     He hath in-bowd the fore-front of his Throne,
                     And ſpread his clowdy Canapey thereon:
                     He hath begirt the VVaters with a Liſt
                     Shall euer laſt, till Day and Night deſiſt.
                     The maſſie Pillers of the Pole doe ſhake
                     If He but chide; & at His check they quake.
                     He, by his Power, doth the deep Sea diuide:
                     His Prudence ſmites her in her felleſt pride:
                     
                        He, by his Spirit, the ſpangled Heav'ns hath dreſt
                     With glittering Signes; the Serpent, & the reſt.
                     Lo, Theſe are parcells of his VVaies ſuprem:
                     But, ô! How little doe VVe heare of Him!
                     Who can conceiue? Who vnderſtands the Thunders
                     Of His more ſecret, & moſt ſacred VVonders?
                     WHile none repli'd, IOB grauely Thus goes on:
                           Cap 
                           
                              •
                           
                        
                     
                     As liues the Lord, th'Almighty Holy-One,
                     
                     VVho ſeems a ſpace my Verdict to ſuppreſs,
                     Loading my Soule with brunts of Bitterneſs;
                     VVhile Breath is in me; till my Spirit, inſpir'd
                     By GOD, be gon, & from me quite exſpir'd;
                     My Lips ſhall ſpeak no wickednes, no wile;
                     Nor ſhall my Tongue deliuer any guile.
                     No; GOD forbid that I ſhould iuſtifie
                     Your raſh miſs-Iudgement. Mine Integritie
                     
                        
                           •
                        'll not abandon, to my Dying-day:
                     Mine Innocence I neuer will betray:
                     My Righteouſnes ſtill will I faſt retain;
                     And, my cleer Conſcience while I liue, maintain.
                     But, as the VVicked, be mine Enemies:
                     Thoſe, as Vnrighteous, that againſt me riſe.
                     For, what's the Hope of th'hollow Hypocrite
                     Though He haue heaped Treaſures infinite)
                     
                        VVhen GOD ſhal take (in a diſaſtrous Day)
                     His Land (his Life) his Goods (his Gods) 
                           •
                        way?
                     Will GOD regard, or heare his howling Cry,
                     VVhen He is compaſt with Calamitie?
                     Or, in th'Almighty can He comfort take?
                     Will He to GOD continuall Prayer make?
                     I'll ſhow you, how th'Almighty hand doth deale:
                     God's wonted Courſe I will not now conceale:
                     Nay; you your Selues, you all haue ſeen it too.
                     VVhy talk ye then thus vainly as yee doo?
                     This is, with GOD, the Portion & the Part
                     Of the Vngodly & the Cruell heart:
                     This heritage ſhall impious Tyrants haue
                     From the 
                           •
                        lmightie, This they ſhall receaue:
                     If many Children be ſhall leaue behind,
                     As many ſhall the Sword or Famine find:
                     Or, if that any in Remain be left;
                     They, by the Plague, ſhal, vnbewayl'd, be reft.
                     If He haue heaped Siluer, as the Duſt;
                     And Clothes, as Clay; he may: but ſure the Iuſt
                     Shall ioy his Siluer, & his Treaſures ſhare;
                     And wear
                           •
                         his Ward-robe, how-ſo rich & rare.
                     If braue he build; it is but like the Moth
                     (On others ground, as that in others Cloth)
                     
                        Soon diſpoſſeſt: or, like a Watch-houſe, ſoon
                     To be ſet vp, and ſuddainly pull'd-down,
                     Such Rich, ſhall die; and he without regard,
                     Vngather'd to his Fathers Toomb prepar'd:
                     Nothing of Him remains in Memorie:
                     He vaniſheth in Twinkling of an eye.
                     Horrors ſhall ſeaze him, as a Floud, with Fright;
                     And as a Tempeſt, hurry him in the night.
                     An Eaſtern Storm him quite away ſhal chaſe;
                     And, as W
                           •
                        i
                           •
                        le-wind, hurle him from his place.
                     So pittileſs, in wrathfull Ielouſie,
                     (VVhile glad & fain he would his fingers flie)
                     VVil GOD purſue him; & Good men ſhal ſmile,
                     And clap their hands, & hiſs at him, the while.
                     SVre, there are Mines & veinlings (vnder ground)
                     Whence Silver's fetcht, & wherin Gold is found:
                           Ca
                                 •
                              
                            
                           
                              •
                           
                        
                     
                     Iron out of Earth, and out of Stone the Braſs
                     Is melted down (into a purer maſs).
                     Beyond the bounds of Darknes Man hath pry'd,
                     And th'Excellence of vnder-ground deſcry'd:
                     The rareſt Stones, & richeſt Mineralls,
                     From deadly Damps & horrid Darks he hales:
                     And, if ſome Torrent come there ruſhing in
                     Such as no Foot hath felt, no Eye hath ſeen)
                     
                        He can reuert it, or diuert it, ſoon,
                     Without Impeachment to his VVork begun.
                     Earth's ſurface yeelds him Corn & Fruits, for food;
                     Her vnder-folds, ſome burning Sulphury flood:
                     Amid the Quarrs of Stone are Saphires ſtore:
                     Among the Duſt, the precious Golden Ore
                     (VVhere neuer Bird, before did Path diſcry,
                     VVhere neuer Vultur caſt her greedy Eye,
                     VVhere ſauage Whelps had neuer neuer trac't;
                     Nor furious Lion euer by had paſt):
                     On Cliffs of Adamant He layes his hands;
                     Their height & hardnes He at will commands;
                     Slents them with Sledges, crops their clowdy crown:
                     He, by the roots turns Mountains vp-ſide down:
                     To let out Rills, He cleaueth Rocks inſunder:
                     His Eye perceiues all that is precious, vnder:
                     He binds the VVaters, that they ſhal not weep;
                     And diues for Riches in the deepeſt Deep.
                     All This, & more, hath Man. But where is found
                     That ſouerain VViſedom, ſacred & profound?
                     That Vnderſtanding of the VVaies diuine,
                     Of GOD's ſupream and ſecret Diſcipline?
                     Man knowes it not; nor kenns the worth of it:
                     It is not found in any liuing VVit.
                     The Deeps confeſs, the Sea acknowledgeth;
                     
                        Tis not in Me; nor with Me; th'other ſaith.
                     Nor Gold, nor Siluer, nor all Gems that are,
                     Can purchaſe it, nor equall it by farre:
                     No wedge of Ophir, neuer ſo refin'd;
                     No Aethiopian Topaze, Pearle of Inde,
                     
                     No precious Onyx, neither Saphire pure
                     (Corall and Cryſtall paſſe I, as obſcure)
                     No Carbuncle, no Diamant ſo rare;
                     No One, nor All, with VViſedom may compare.
                     But, Whence is then, & Where is to be found
                     That ſacred VViſedom, ſecret & profound?
                     Sith it is hidden from all humane Eyes;
                     And from the ſight of euery Foule that flyes.
                     Death & Deſtruction; ſay; VVe of the ſame
                     Haue with our eares but onely heard the Fame?
                     GOD, GOD alone, doth vnderſtand it Way;
                     And knowes the place where it abideth aye.
                     For, He, at once beholdeth All that is
                     In all the VVorld: All vnder Heav'n he ſees,
                     To poize the Winds, & portion (at his pleaſure)
                     Vnto the Waters their due weight & meaſure.
                     When for the Raine he ſtabliſht a Decree,
                     And for the Thunder's Lightning Mutinie;
                     Then did Hee ſee it, and fore-ſee it fit:
                     He numbred, pondred, & prepared it:
                     
                        And vnto Man This Maxime did apply;
                     
                        GOD's Feare is Wiſedom & from Sin to flie.
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            
                           
                              •
                           9IOB yet proceeded, & ſaid furthermore,
                     O! were it with mee, as it was of yore,
                     In my fore-paſſed Months, my former Dayes,
                     When GOD preſeru'd me; when with gracious raies
                     His Lightfull Lamp reflected on my head,
                     Whereby I walkt through Darknes, void of Dread:
                     As in my younger times, when yet the Lord
                     Vouchſaf't me Bleſſings of my Bed & Boord;
                     When yet the Lord was with me in my Tents,
                     And ſhowred there his hidden Prouidence.
                     Whē, where I went, my waies were bath'd in Butter,
                     And Rocks about me Rills of Oile did gutter:
                     VVhen I had gon vnto the publique Gate
                     To take my place where all our Senate ſate,
                     At ſight of Me, would Young men hide them thence,
                     And th'Elder ſort ſtand vp, for reuerence:
                     Nobles were ſilent, if I preſent were;
                     And, if I ſpake, they turn'd their 
                           •
                        ongue to Eare:
                     And th'Eare that heard me bleſſed me: & the Eye
                     That ſaw me, witneſt mine Integritie.
                     For, I deliuered euery Poore oppreſt,
                     The Orphan & the Helpleſs I redreſt:
                     
                        He bleſſed me that was wel-neer vndon:
                     The Widowes heart I cheered: I put-on,
                     
                        
                           •
                         put-on Iuſtice, as a ſeemly Gowne;
                     
                        
                           •
                        t was vnto me as a Robe and Crowne.
                     
                        
                           •
                         as an Eye vnto the Blind became;
                     And as a Foot, vnto the Halt and Lame:
                     A Father was I to the Poore: and where
                     The Caſe was Dark, I would diſcuſſe it Cleer.
                     I alſo brake th'Oppreſſors greedy Iawes,
                     And took the Prey out of his Teeth and Pawes.
                     Then thought I, ſure, to die at home, in reſt:
                     And ſaid, I ſhall with long good Daies be bleſt.
                     For, by the Waters was my Root out-ſpred:
                     Vpon my Top Heav'ns nightly Deaw was ſhed:
                     My Wealth increaſt, mine Honour daily grew,
                     My Bowe of Health (my Strength) did ſtill renew.
                     When I had ſpoken, euery Eare was preſt
                     To giue me eare, and in my Counſels reſt,
                     Without Reply: and as the latter Rain
                     The thirſtie Earth, my Words they entertain.
                     If I had laught, or ſmil'd on any, neer,
                     They took no notice, nor would change my Cheer.
                     
                        
                           •
                         ſate as Chief, I onely rul'd the roaſt,
                     Dwelt as a King amid an armed Hoaſt;
                     
                        And, as a Man, amid a mourning Rout,
                     That, from his lips, pours liuely Comforts out.
                     
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            30BVt now (alas!) My Puiſnès Me deride:
                     The meaneſt mock me; Yea, and Thoſe (beſide)
                     Whoſe ragged Fathers I refus'd, to keep
                     My Shepheards Curs (much more to cure my Sheep)
                     For, to ſay truth, what Seruice could they doo,
                     So idle bred (both Young and Elder too)
                     Weakned with Sloath, and wicked Conuerſation;
                     And waxen old, in wretched Deſolation:
                     For Cold and Hunger wandring here and there,
                     With Mallowes fed, and roots of Iuniper:
                     Purſewd as Theeues, hunted from place to place
                     With Hue and Cries; and euer had in Chaſe;
                     And therefor fain, for Shelter's ſake to creep
                     In Clifts and Caues; in Rocks and Dungeons deep:
                     Among the Thorns and Thickets roaring rife:
                     Wild Out-lawes, leading a moſt Beaſtiall life:
                     The Breed of Fooles, the Fry of baſeſt birth,
                     Of name-leſſe Men: indeed the Scums of Earth?
                     And yet, to Such am I now made a Song,
                     A Ballad and a By-word on their tongue:
                     Yea, Theſe deſpiſe me, and deſpight me too:
                     Spet in my Face, and make no more adoo.
                     
                        Becauſe the Lord my Bowe-ſtring hath vnbent,
                     And ſlackt my Cord, therefore theſe inſolent
                     Inſulters Now looſe and let-go the Raines
                     Of all Reſpect, vnto their lewd Diſdaigns.
                     Now, very Boyes do take the Wall of me,
                     Trip at my Feet; and (in their Iollitie)
                     Miſ-iudge my Life, and of me Rumors raiſe,
                     After their owne cruell and curſed Waies:
                     They mar my Path that I haue walked in,
                     Further my Woes, and haue no help therein:
                     As a wide Flood-breach they haue ruſhed on-me,
                     And with the Ruines haue roul'd-in vpon-me.
                     Terrors are turn'd vpon me, and purſew
                     My Life as Winde; my Weale, as Vapours flew:
                     Therefore my Soule, in ſore Afflictions vext,
                     
                        
                           •
                        s poured out, and inly deep perplext.
                     Daies dark and irkſome haue vpon me ſeaz'd:
                     And in the Night (when Others moſt are eas'd)
                     My very Bones within me are oppreſt,
                     Nay, pierced through; my Sinnewes take no reſt:
                     My ſtrange Diſeaſe, with angry Violence
                     Of th'hot Impoſtumes loathſome Virulence,
                     Hath ſtaind my Garments: &, with ſtraining Dolor,
                     About my Neck it gripes me as a Coller.
                     
                        Laid in the Duſt, I roule the Mire among,
                     Become'n, indeed, like Aſhes, Duſt, and Dung.
                     To Thee I cry, to Thee the while I call;
                     But, Lord, Thou hear'ſt not, nor doeſt heed at all.
                     Nay, Thou art alſo Cruel turn'd, to me;
                     With hot Aſſaults, as on an Enemie:
                     Thou lift'ſt me vp, (as in a Storm, the Stubble)
                     To ride a Whirle-winde, while (with Fear & Trouble)
                     I faint, and fall (d
                           •
                        ſſo
                           •
                        ued, as it were)
                     In deadly Swound, hurry'd I wot not where:
                     But well I wot. Thou ſoon wilt bring me home
                     To Death, the Houſe where all that liue ſhall come;
                     Whither, thy H
                           •
                        nd thou wilt no longer ſt
                           •
                        etch;
                     And Whence, no Prayers boot, nor need, to fetch.
                     Did not I weep, for Others Wofulnes?
                     Was not my Soule grieu'd at the Poores Diſtreſſe?
                     When Good I lookt for, Euill came: when Light,
                     A diſmall Darknes, worſe then blackeſt Night.
                     My bowels boiled with continuall heat;
                     A troublous Time vpon me ſodain ſet:
                     Not with the Sun, but Sorrow, black I turn'd:
                     Amid th'Aſſembly lowd I cry'd and mournd,
                     With hidious Noyſe (for horrid Anguiſhes)
                     As kin to Dragons and to Oſtriges.
                     
                        My Harp is tuned to a heauie Tone;
                     My Muſick turned to the voyce of Mone.
                     I Made a Couenant with my conſtant Eyes,
                           Cap. 
                           
                              •
                           
                        
                     
                     From gazing out on blazing Vanities:
                     (Hauing my Choiſe, wheron my thoughts were ſtaid)
                     Why ſhould I once m
                           •
                        -think vpon a M
                           •
                        d?
                     For, O! for ſuch, what Part, what Portion is
                     With GOD, aboue in th'Heritage of Baſſe?
                     Nay: is there not Deſtruction ſtill behinde,
                     Strange Puniſhment, for Wicked (of this kinde)?
                     Are not my Paths apparant vnto GOD?
                     Doth not He ſee and ſum the Steps I trod?
                     If I haue walkt in Vanitie and Pride:
                     If vnto Fraud my Foot haue euer hy'd:
                     In his iuſt Balance let him waigh me right,
                     And he ſhall find me by his Beam vpright.
                     If that my Steps haue ſtraid, or trod awry:
                     If that my Heart haue harkened to mine Eye:
                     If to my Hand haue cleaued any Spot:
                     If Blood or Bribes the ſame did euer Blot;
                     Then let me Sowe, and Others eat my Crop;
                     Yea, let my Plant be euer plucked-vp.
                     If euer Woman haue my heart beguil'd;
                     Or I laid wait t'haue Others Wife defil'd:
                     
                        Let mine again vnto Another grinde,
                     And me be puniſht in my Sins owne kinde.
                     For This is ſure a high and hainous Crime,
                     To be condemn'd and puniſht in the prime:
                     Yea, 'tis a Fier, whoſe Fury would not ceaſe,
                     But ruine all, and root out my Increaſe.
                     If euer I deſpis'd my Man, or Maid,
                     Debating with me, and them ouer-waid;
                     What ſhall I do? What Anſwer ſhall I make,
                     When GOD, as Iudge, their Cauſe ſhall vndertake?
                     Did not one Maker them and me create,
                     Of Matter like, in Manner like, and Fate?
                     If euer I delay'd the Poor's deſire:
                     Or let the Widowes longing Hopes to tire:
                     Or euer eat my Morſells all alone,
                     And gaue the Orphan and the needy none:
                     (He hath been with me from my Child-hood bred
                     As with a Father: She, in Husband's ſted,
                     Hath euer had my Counſell for her Guide,
                     My Power for Guard; my Purſe her Want ſuppli'd,)
                     If I haue ſeen or ſuffered any Poore
                     To lie and die, Naked, or out of Doore:
                     Nay, if his Loynes be-bleſt not me from harm,
                     Becauſe my Fleece and Cottage kept them warm:
                     
                        If euer I, againſt the Impotent,
                     Poore, Father-leſſe, or Friend-leſſe Innocent
                     (For Feare or Fauour, of a Friend or Foe,
                     For Gain, or Grudge (that I did euer owe)
                     Haue lift my hand, or Him in right withſtood;
                     Or, when I might haue, haue not don him good:
                     Then let mine Arme off from my Shoulder fall,
                     And from the bone be paſht to powder all.
                     For, GOD's drad Iudgements did I alwaies feare:
                     Whoſe Highneſs Wrath I could nor balk nor beare.
                     If I on Gold haue fixt my Hope, or Heart;
                     Or, to the Wedge haue ſaid: My Truſt thou art:
                     If I haue ioy'd for being grow'n ſo Rich;
                     Or for my Hands had gotten me ſo much:
                     If, when I ſaw the Sun or Moon to ſhine,
                     My heart (intic't) in ſecret did incline
                     To th' idle Orgies of an Idoliſt;
                     Or (Heathen-like) my Mouth my Hand hath kiſt:
                     Or, if, in Summer of my golden Dayes,
                     Or ſiluer Nights ſhining with proſperous Rayes;
                     My heart in priuate hath been puft too-high,
                     Aſcribing all to mine owne Induſtrie
                     Which had been impious Sacrilege and Pride:
                     For, then had I the GOD of Heav'n deny'd):
                     
                        If I reioyc't at Ruine of my Foes,
                     Or haue triumphed in their Ouerthrowes;
                     Or haue ſo much as let my Tongue to roule,
                     Or Heart to wiſh a curſe vnto their Soule:
                     Though oft, my Seruants, in their rage extream,
                     Would fain haue beaten, nay, haue eaten them.
                     If I haue ſhut the Stranger out of Doore;
                     Or let-not-in the wearie Pilgrim poore:
                     If I (like ADAM) haue conceald my Sin,
                     And cloſely cloakt my Wickednes with-in:
                     (Although I could haue ouer-born, with Awe,
                     Whole multitudes; the meaneſt Groom I ſawe,
                     I feared ſo, I durſt not wring, nor wrong,
                     Nor wrangle with: but kept my Tent and Tongue)
                     O! that I had an equall Arbitrer,
                     (To heare, and waigh, conſider, and confer).
                     Behold my Aime: th' Almighty I deſire
                     (A certain Signe of mine Intent intire)
                     For, He, I know, would ſentence on My ſide;
                     And witneſſe for me, that I haue not ly'd.
                     Then, though againſt me, (in his fell Deſpite)
                     Mine Aduerſarie ſhould a Volume write,
                     It, as a Robe, I on my back would beare,
                     And as a Garland on my head it weare:
                     
                        I would, by peece-meale, ſhew my Conuerſation,
                     All ſo vnlike to all his Accuſation,
                     That clearing Me, it ſhould him more conuince,
                     To come and aske me Pardon, as a Prince.
                     But, If my Land againſt me plead or plain;
                     Or, If my Furrowes cry-out, or complain:
                     If, Tithe-leſſe, Tax-leſſe, Wage-leſſe, Right-leſſe, I
                     
                     Haue eat the Crop; or caus'd the Owners die;
                     In ſted of Barley, and the beſt of Corn,
                     Grow nothing there, but Thiſtles, Weeds & Thorn.
                     Heere IOB ſurceaſt.
                  
                  
                     
                     The fourth Booke.
                     
                        
                           
                              〈…〉
                           
                        H
                           •
                         
                        
                           〈…〉
                         Three fore-named Friends
                     
                        
                           •
                        m 
                           •
                        rth 
                           •
                        ech (
                           •
                        s hopeleſs of their ends)
                     Sith IOB 
                           •
                        ſti
                           •
                         ſtill maint
                           •
                        in'd his right
                     Of R
                           •
                        g 
                           〈◊〉
                         his own proper ſight.
                     The
                           •
                         ang
                           •
                        y Zeal began to ſwelt and ſwel
                     In Elihú the ſonne of Barachel,
                     
                     
                        Th
                              •
                            Buz
                              •
                           te borne, and of the Race of Ram:
                     B
                           •
                        th againſt IOB began his wrath to flame,
                     (Becauſ
                           •
                        , 
                           •
                        s t
                           •
                         of his words imply'd,
                     Rather Himſelfe, then GOD he iuſtifi'd)
                     And alſo Thoſe his 
                           •
                        oe-friends for ſo ſtrict
                     Condemning IOB, vntry'd and vnconvict.
                     His modeſtie him hitherto with-held,
                     As giuing place to others of more Eld:
                     But, ſeeing IOB to a full Period come;
                     And th'other 
                           •
                        hree without Reply, as dumb;
                     His Zeal burſt out, and Thus in briefe began.
                     I muſt confeſſe, I am too young a man
                     T' haue interrupted you (ſo old) before
                     In This Diſpute; and therefore I forbore:
                     I was in doubt; I durſt not ſpeak (till now)
                     My weak Opinion, and preſent it you.
                     
                        For, Dayes (thought I) & Yeers can farther reach:
                     And long Experience Wiſedom beſt can teach.
                     Men haue a Soule, & Reaſon's light inherit:
                     But, Wiſedom is inſpir'd by th'Holy-Spirit
                     
                     (Which bloweth where it will, & worketh free,
                     Not ty'd to Age, nor to Authoritie):
                     For, Great men alwaies are not wiſeſt found,
                     Nor the moſt Ancient ſtill the moſt profound,
                     Therfore awhile to Me giue eare, I pray;
                     And let Me alſo mine Opinion ſay.
                     I well obſeru'd your words, with diligence
                     I ſcann'd your Reaſons, markt your Arguments:
                     Yea, neer and narrow haue I watcht & waigh'd
                     What Each of you, and All of you haue ſaid:
                     Yet is there None of you (apart, or ioynt)
                     Conuinces IOB; or anſwers to the Point.
                     Leſt You ſhould ſay; We Wiſedom compaſs can,
                     GOD will evince him; not the VVit of Man.
                     For Me, Me yet he neuer did gain-ſay:
                     Nor doe I mean to anſwer him, your way.
                     Here-with amaz'd, they ſtil continuing mute
                     Without Reply, or ſhew of more Diſpute
                     For I expected yet ſome Speech from ſome:
                     
                        
                           •
                        waited ſtill: and when as none would come)
                     
                        I will, ſaid I, now proſecute my part,
                     To giue my 
                           〈◊〉
                         from a ſingle heart:
                     For, I am full of matter to the top;
                     My Spirit within me, ſtraines me, ſtirres me vp:
                     My Breſt is like a Wine-Burt, wanting Vent,
                     Ready to burſt; or Bottles, like to ſlent.
                     I'll therefore ſpeak, that I may yet re-ſpire;
                     And ope my mouth, to fanne mine inward fire.
                     Yet None, I pray, from Me the while expect
                     Smooth, ſoothing Titles; perſonall Reſpect:
                     For, ſoothing Titles knowe not I to giue;
                     Nor ſhould I, would my Maker let me liue.
                     
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            
                           
                              •
                           3.NOw therfore, IOB, hark with attentiue beed
                     To all the Words that from me ſhal proceed:
                     For, what I ſpeak, premeditated is;
                     Not out of Paſſion, or of Preiudice:
                     But moſt ſincere, and from a ſingle heart,
                     Out of cleer Knowledge (without Clowds of Art).
                     One & the ſame, of the ſame Maſs of Mire,
                     Made Me, as Thee; & did my Spirit inſpire:
                     Feare not therfore, if Thou haue ought to ſay;
                     Oppoſe and anſwer: put thy Words in ray:
                     I am (according to thy wiſh) to plead
                     And parley with thee, in th'Almighties ſtead;
                     
                        And yet, a Man: My Terrors ſhall not fright thee,
                     Neither my hand with heauy Tortures ſmight thee.
                     Lo, Thou haſt ſaid (I heard & markt it well)
                     
                        In Mee, there none Iniquitie doth dwell:
                     
                     
                        I am Vpright, and Clean, and Innocent:
                     
                     
                        Yet, as a Foe, Hee is against mee bent:
                     
                     
                        Hee picks occaſions to inflict mee Stroaks;
                     
                     
                        Sifts all my Waies, and ſets me in the Stocks.
                     
                     And lo, in This, euen in This ſaying ſo,
                     Thou art not Iuſt: for (if thou know'ſt not) know,
                     That GOD is Greater then All Men: then, Why
                     Striu'ſt Thou with Him? whoſe ſupream Soueraignty
                     Yields vs no Reaſon, nor Account at all,
                     Of His high Counſailes; Why, or How, they fall.
                     For once, yea twice, to Man th'Almighty ſpeaks;
                     Yet Man perceiues not (or it little reaks)
                     By Dream, or Viſion of the Night, in Sleep
                     Vpon his Bed; or in ſome Slumber deep:
                     Then opens He Mens eares, & him reuealeth,
                     And ſweetly there their meet Inſtruction ſealeth;
                     To turn a Man from his intended Ill,
                     And hide the Pride of his ambitious Will:
                     To keep his Soule back from the brink of Hell;
                     And ſaue his Life from Death & Dangers fell.
                     
                        Some-times, He's alſo chaſt'ned on his Bed,
                     With grieuous Sicknes, from the foot to head;
                     Inceſſant burning in his Bones and Bloud:
                     So that he 
                           •
                        oatheth the moſt dainty Food.
                     His Fleſh conſumed, & his Bones ſo high
                     That they appeare (as an Anatomie):
                     His Life and Soule draw neer vnto the Pit,
                     (The Graue doth gape, & Worms doe wait for it).
                     If with Him be a holy Meſſenger
                     (One of a Thouſand) an Interpreter,
                     To ſhew to Man the Iuſtice of his GOD,
                     In his Correction, with his ſharpeſt Rod;
                     And, rightly humbled, re-aduance the Meek,
                     By Faith, aboue his Righteouſnes to ſeek,
                     And pray to Him; He will propitious ſtand,
                     And to his Seruant He will Thus command,
                     
                        Deliuer him from going to the Graue,
                     
                     
                        I am appeas'd: a Ranſome found I haue.
                     
                     Then, than a Child ſhall freſher be his Fleſh,
                     He ſhall return vnto his Youth afreſh:
                     Then ſhall he call on GOD, and GOD ſhal be
                     Right gracious to him: He with ioy ſhall ſee
                     His glorious Face. For, He will render than
                     (He will impute) His Righteouſnes to Man.
                     
                        He viſits Men; and if that any ſay,
                     
                        I haue offended: I haue gone aſtray:
                     
                     
                        I haue miſs-done: I haue peruerted Right:
                     
                     
                        Oh! I haue ſinn'd, & had no profit by 't;
                     
                     He will deliuer, from Infernall Doom,
                     His Soule; his Life from an vntimely Toomb.
                     Lo, all Theſe things doth GOD do twice or thrice
                     (Oft and again) to Man (too prone to Vice)
                     To re-reduce his Soule from Death's dark Night;
                     To be enlightned with the liuing Light.
                     IOB, mark it well, And harken farther yet
                     What I ſhall ſpeak: ſaue, when thou ſeeſt it fit,
                     If ought thou haue to anſwer, or obiect,
                     Speak on, in GOD's Name (for I much affect
                     To iuſtifie and cleer thee (if I may):
                     If otherwiſe, if nought thou haue to ſay;
                     Lift, and obſerue with ſilence, I beſeech;
                     And I ſhall teach thee Wiſedom, by my Speech.
                     SO, he proceeded, and ſaid furthermore:
                           Ca
                                 •
                              
                            
                           
                              •
                           
                        
                     
                     Heare Me, ye Sages; Men of Skilfull lore:
                     For, as the Palate doth diſcern of Food,
                     Th'Eare trieth Words (how they be bad, or good).
                     Let's then debate This Matter, among vs;
                     Examine it, and what is right, diſcuſs.
                     
                        For, IOB hath ſaid: O! I am Iust, Vpright;
                     
                        And yet (ſaith He) GOD hath bereft my Right.
                     
                     
                        Should I belye my Cauſe? My thrilled Wound
                     
                     
                        Is past all Cure; and yet no Crime is found.
                     
                     What man, like IOB, himſelfe ſo ouer-thinks?
                     VVho (wilfully) Contempt, like Water, drinks:
                     VVho, with the Wicked & Vngodly walks,
                     Iumps iuſt with Them, & in their language talks.
                     For, he hath ſaid; Man hath no profit by't
                     
                     
                        To walke with GOD, and in Him to delight.
                     
                     But, heare me now, all yee that vnderſtand;
                     O! be it farre from the All-ruling hand
                     Of Iuſtice Selfe (th'Almighty GOD, moſt High)
                     To doe Iniuſtice, or Iniquitie.
                     No: He to Each man his own Work repayes;
                     And makes him finde according to his Waies.
                     Vndoubtedly, the Lord of Hosts, the Strong,
                     Nor hath, nor doth, nor will, nor can, doe wrong.
                     Who hath to Him charge of the Earth impos'd?
                     And, Who but He, hath the whole World diſpos'd?
                     If He but pleaſe on Man to ſet his minde,
                     To re-aſſume his Spirit, his Breath, his Wind;
                     All Fleſh at once (if He but hold his breath)
                     Shall turn to Duſt; and periſh all, in Death.
                     
                        Now note Thou this, if ſo thou haſt a heart
                     To vnderſtand; liſt what my Words impart:
                     Shal He haue Rule, that Iudgement loathes (& lacks)?
                     And for vniuſt, wilt Thou the Iuſteſt taxe?
                     Beſeems it Any to a King to ſay,
                     
                        O! Thou art Wicked (in thy partial Sway)?
                     Or vnto Princes (to vpbraid them) Thus
                     
                        You are Vngodly, you are Impious?
                     
                     Then, how-much leſſe to Him that puts no Ods
                     Touching the Perſons of thoſe Earthly Gods;
                     Nor twixt the Rich and Poore, the Great and Small;
                     For, they (alike) are his owne Hands-work, all.
                     They (at His will) ſhall in a moment die;
                     Yea, euen at Mid-night (vnexpectedly)
                     The People ſhall be troubled and tranſported;
                     And euen the Princes, without hands ſubuerted.
                     For, euermore His eyes are open wide
                     On all Mens Waies, on euery Step & Stride.
                     There is no Darknes, nor no Shade of Death,
                     For Wicked-ones to hide them vnder-neath:
                     Nor, will he, though, Any ſo ouer-load,
                     That they may iuſtly grudge, or plead with GOD.
                     By Heaps, will He to peeces grinde the Great,
                     And (in their ſteed) ſet Others in their ſeat:
                     
                        For, vnto Him, their Works are manifeſt;
                     Night turn'd to Light: and they ſhall be ſuppreſt.
                     Them, as moſt Wicked, ſmites he (as it were,
                     In all mens ſight, in open Theatre)
                     Becauſe from Him they did reuolt and ſwerue;
                     And would not any of his Waies obſerue:
                     But caus'd the loud Cries of the Poore aſcend
                     To Him, who alwaies doth their Cryes attend.
                     When He giues Quiet, who dares be ſo bold
                     To cauſe Diſturbance? And, if He with-hold
                     His Countenance, who then behold Him can;
                     Whether a People, or a Priuate man?
                     That th'Hypocrite no more may Raign (as King)
                     Nor, vnder him, the ſnared People wring.
                     Vs therfore Thus beſeems, to ſay to GOD:
                     
                        I beare with Patience thy correcting Rod:
                     
                     
                        I will not murmur, nor burſt out therefore;
                     
                     
                        But ſigh in ſilence, and offend no more:
                     
                     
                        Shew me my Sins I ſee not, nor perceiue;
                     
                     
                        And, Hence-forth will I all Iniuſtice leaue.
                     
                     Or, ſhould it be after Thy pleaſure ay?
                     No: will-thou-nill, He will (not I) repay.
                     Now, therefore ſpeak thy Conſcience ſeriouſly;
                     And let the prudent mark and teſtifie,
                     
                        That, void of Knowledge, IOB hath miſ-auerr'd;
                     And, wide of Wiſdom, his Diſcourſe hath err'd.
                     Would therefore (Father) he might yet be try'd:
                     Sith for the Wicked he hath ſo reply'd;
                     For to his Sin he doth Rebellion ad:
                     Claps hands at vs, as He the Better had:
                     And (too-too-pure in his too-prudent Eyes)
                     Againſt th' Almighty, Words he multiplies.
                     
                        ELihú, proceeding, Thus moreouer ſaid:
                           Ca
                                 •
                              
                            
                           
                              •
                           
                        
                     
                     Thinkſt Thou this right (
                           •
                        f it be rightly waid)
                     Which thou haſt ſpoken (or thy peech imply'd)
                     
                        My Righteouſnes is more than GOD's (O Pride!).
                     For, Thou haſt ſaid, What will it vantage thee,
                     
                     
                        What ſhall I gain, if I from Sin be free?
                     
                     I'll anſwer thee; and with Thee, All ſo dreaming:
                     Look-vp, and ſee the Heav'ns aboue thee gleaming;
                     Behold, how high: if therefore thou tranſgreſſe,
                     And multiply thy Sin and Wickedneſſe;
                     What hurt dooſt Thou to GOD? What Detriment?
                     On th' other ſide, if Thou be innocent,
                     If luſt; What dooſt Thou to his Goodnes giue?
                     Or, from Thy hand, What, What doth He receiue?
                     Thy Wickednes may hurt a Man (like thee):
                     Thy righteouſnes, to Man may helpfull be.
                     
                        For manifold and frequent Tyranny,
                     Oppreſſors make oppreſſed-ones to cry;
                     Yea, to cry-out for cruell Violence
                     Of Mightie-ones, of Men of Eminence:
                     But, there is None that ſaith (as due belongs)
                     
                        Where's GOD, my Maker (Who by Night giues Songs,
                     Who teacheth vs, hath vs more Wiſdom giuen,
                     Than Beaſts of Earth, or to the Fowles of Heauen).
                     There cry they oft; but none doth heare or heed,
                     For th'Euils ſake (who in all Ills exceed):
                     For, Vanity, GOD doth not, hath not heard;
                     Nor euer will th'Almighty it regard.
                     Now, though Thou ſaiſt, thou ſeeſt Him not, Hee's Iuſt:
                     With Him is Iudgement; therefore in Him truſt:
                     For want whereof, his Wrath hath viſited;
                     Yet not ſo hot as Thou haſt merited.
                     Therefore doth IOB open his Mouth in vain:
                     And void of Knowledge, yet, yet, miſ-complain.
                     
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            36
                        ELihu yet ſaid: A little ſuffer me;
                     For I haue yet more to alleadge to Thee,
                     On GOD's behalf. I'll fetch mine Arguments
                     From farre (confirm'd by long Experience)
                     To iuſtifie my Maker's Holineſſe,
                     
                     Giue Him his owne, and right his Righteouſneſſe.
                     
                        I'll ſpeak no Falſhood, nor no Fraud propound:
                     All my Diſcourſe ſhall be ſincere and ſound.
                     Lo, GOD is Mighty; yet doth none deſpiſe:
                     Omnipotent, Omniſcient; Strong and Wiſe.
                     
                        
                           •
                        e ſpareth not the Life of Wicked wights;
                     
                        
                           •
                        ut, the Oppreſſed in their wrongs he rights.
                     
                        
                           •
                        is Eyes are neuer off the Righteous ſort:
                     Them on the Throne He doth with Kings conſort:
                     Them He aduances; and beyond all Term
                     
                        
                           •
                        oth them eſtabliſh, and them faſt confirm.
                     Or, if that euer Fetters them befall,
                     Or, they be holden in Afflictions Thrall;
                     He lets them ſee their Works, their Wickednes,
                     Their wandring By-waies, and their bold Exceſſe;
                     And opens then their Eare to Diſciplin,
                     Commanding quick, that they returne from Sin.
                     If they return, to ſerue and Him obey,
                     Their Daies & Years right happy ſpend ſhal They:
                     
                        
                           •
                        f not; the Sword ſhall ſmite them ſodainly:
                     And in their wilfull Folly ſhall they die.
                     But, Hypocrites, the Men of double heart,
                     They heap-vp Wrath: they cry not when they ſmart.
                     They die in Youth; their Life among th' Vncleane,
                     Moſt Inſolent, moſt Impudent, Obſcoene.
                     
                        He th'humble Poore in his Affliction frees:
                     Their Eares he opens, in Calamities:
                     So woald He, Thee from thy Diſtreſſe haue freed,
                     And brought thee forth far from the Streits of Need,
                     To ſpacious Plentie; and thence forth thy B
                           •
                        ord,
                     Should with the beſt and fatteſt haue been ſtor'd
                     Bu
                           •
                        , Thou, too-wicked-like, too-ſtifte haſt ſtood;
                     As their preſumptions ſeeming to make good;
                     Not ſtoopt, but ſtrutted in Conteſting Pride.
                     Therefore, on Thee doth Iudgement yet abide.
                     Sith wroth he is, beware to tempt him more;
                     Leſt with his Stroak, he ſodain ſmite the
                           •
                        ore:
                     Or hiſſe thee hence with his al-mighty Breath:
                     Then can no R
                           •
                        nſom thee redeem from Death.
                     Will He regard thy Goods? or reak thy Gold?
                     Thy State, or Srength (how much, or manifold)?
                     Nor wiſh Thou (hope-l
                           •
                        ſs) for the (hap-leſs) Night,
                     When from their place People are taken quight:
                     Beware, regard not Thou Iniquitie;
                     Neither (alas!) through faint 
                           •
                        nfirmitie,
                     Chuſe rather That, than thine Affliction's Part,
                     With humble Patience of a Conſtant heart.
                     Behold, the Lord is, for his Power, ſuprem:
                     And, for his Prudence, Who doth teach like Him?
                     
                        
                        
                           •
                        ho hath appointed vnto Him his way?
                     
                        
                           •
                        r, Who can tell him, Thou haſt gon astray?
                     Rather, remember that thou magnifie
                     
                        
                           •
                        s publike Works, apparant to our eye;
                     
                        
                           •
                        viſible, that both the young and old,
                     
                        
                           •
                        em from a farre do bright and brim behold.
                     Lo, GOD is Greater then We comprehend:
                     
                        
                           •
                        or can the Number of his years be kend.
                     
                        
                           •
                         makes the thick exhaled Vapours thin,
                     
                        
                           •
                        at down again in ſiluer Deaws they ſpin,
                     
                        
                           •
                        m ſtrouting Clowds abundantly diſtilling
                     
                        
                           •
                         th'vſe of Man, the Plains with Plenty filling.
                     Alſo, can Any vnderſtand th' Extent
                     Clouds, or know the Rattling of his Tent?
                     
                        
                           •
                        old, He ſpreadeth out his Light there-ouer,
                     
                        
                           •
                        d euen the bottom of the Sea doth couer.
                     
                        
                           •
                        , by the ſame He worketh diuers-waies,
                     
                        
                           •
                        h to his Iuſtice and his Mercie's Praiſe:
                     
                        
                           •
                        at, through exceſſe cauſing a fearfull Flood;
                     
                        
                           •
                        is, temperate, producing ſtore of Food.
                     
                        
                           •
                        vailes the Light with Clowds that come between,
                     
                        
                           •
                        bids it ſhine, and lets it not be ſeen:
                     
                        
                           •
                        ding a Shower, or Storms approaching rage;
                     
                        
                           •
                        ich oft, euen Cattell of the Field preſage.
                     
                        
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           . 37HEre-at, my Heart trembles for inward Feare,
                     As if remou'd from it owne place it were:
                     Hark, hark with heed vnto the hidious Noiſe,
                     The horrid Rumbling of his dreadful Voyce,
                     Which, with his Lightning, he directeth forth,
                     Vnder whole Heav'n, and ouer all the Earth.
                     After the Flaſh, a Claſh there roareth high;
                     He thunders-out his Voyce of Maieſty:
                     And then no longer will He keep them back,
                     When that is heard ouer our heads to crack.
                     GOD, with his Voyce, doth thunder wondrouſly,
                     And works great things that we cannot diſcry:
                     He bids the Snow to couer Hill and Plain;
                     So, drizling Showers; and ſo, his Mighty Rain;
                     Wherby, From Field-works He ſeals-vp mens hands,
                     That they may know His works; how He cōmands.
                     Then, to their Den the Sauage Heards do hie;
                     And for a ſeaſon in their Couert lie.
                     From Southern Chābers the hot Whirl-wind coms:
                     From Northern Cels, That wch with Cold benumbs,
                     The Froſt is giuen vs, by the breath Diuine;
                     When Cruſts of Cryſtall ſpreading Floods confine.
                     The blackeſt Clowd He doth exhauſt of waters:
                     And, his bright Cloud (the Lightnings ſhroud he) ſeatters.
                     
                        And (by the Counſaile of his Prouidence)
                     All This, by Turnes, in round Circumference
                     Is turnd about: and ready at his Call,
                     Throughout the World, to do his will, in all.
                     For, He commands them come, for Puniſhment;
                     Or Loue to His; or elſe Indifferent.
                     Harken to This, ô IOB; ſtand ſtill, & ponder
                     The Works of GOD, ſo full of waight & wonder.
                     Know'ſt Thou (alas!) when He diſpoſed them;
                     Or caus'd the Light out of his Lūp to beam?
                     Know'ſt Thou the Clowd's iuſt Poizes (the high or lower,)
                     And wondrous works of the All-perfect Knower?
                     How, when He calms the Earth with Southern puff,
                     Thy thinneſt Clothes thou findeſt warm enough.
                     Haſt Thou, with Him, ſpred forth the ſpangled Sky,
                     That (liquid Cryſtall-like) ſtrong Canopie?
                     If ſo; then ſhew vs, what to ſay to Him:
                     For, what to ſay, wee are (alas!) too dim.
                     
                        
                           •
                        hould I miſ-ſpeak, needs any Him inform?
                     Nay, ſhould I not be ſwallowed vp (in ſtorm)?
                     None fixly can (when clowds be clear'd away)
                     
                        
                           •
                        ehold the bright & ſhining Lamp of Day:
                     
                        
                           •
                        rom out the North ſtream goodly Beams of gold:
                     With GOD is Light more bright by manifold,
                     
                        More pure, more piercing, paſt a mortall Eye;
                     More dreadfull farre. His glorious Maieſtie
                     (Dwelling aboue, in Splendors inacceſsible)
                     For vs to find, out is a Point impoſſible.
                     Hee's excellent in Prudence: paſſing Strong:
                     Plentious in Iustice: and doth No man wrong.
                     Therfore Men fear him: Yet, for Their deſert,
                     Regards not He thoſe that are VViſe of hart.
                     
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            
                           
                              •
                           3.THen, drad IEHOVA from a Whirle-wind ſpake
                     In ſacred tearms; & Thus with IOB hee brake:
                     Where? Who is He, that (to Himſelfe ſo holy)
                     Darkens my Counſails, with contentious Folly?
                     Come, gird thy loynes, prepare thee, play the Man;
                     I will oppoſe thee: anſwer, if thou can.
                     Why! Where wert Thou, tell (if thou know'ſt, diſmaid)
                     When the Foundations of the Earth I layd?
                     VVho marked firſt the Meaſure of it out?
                     Or (canſt Thou 
                           •
                        ell) Who ſtretcht the Line about?
                     VVhat Baſes had it; and fixt Where-upon?
                     Or, Who thereof layd the firſt Corner-ſtone,
                     VVhen Morning-Star
                           •
                        s for Ioy together ſang,
                     And all GOD's Children cheerful eccho rang?
                     Or, Who, with Doores, ſhut-in the Sea ſo ſtreight;
                     When from the Womb it ruſhed with ſuch weight?
                     
                        VVhen as I made the Clowd a Clowt for it,
                     And blackeſt Darknes as a Swathe-band fit:
                     And cradled it, in mine appointed place;
                     With Barrs about, & Doores at euery pace:
                     And laid vnto it; Hitherto extend;
                     And f
                           •
                        rther, not: Heer, thy proud Waues be pend.
                     Hadſt Thou the Morning from thy birth, at beck?
                     Mad'ſt Thou the Dawn in his due place to break;
                     That it might reach the Earth's Circumference,
                     And that the Wicked might be ſhaken thence:
                     To ſtamp it (various, as the Potters Clay)
                     VVith many Formes, in manifold array,
                     VVhen as th'Vngodly ſhall be all deſcry'd;
                     That Iuſtice hand may break the armes of Pride?
                     Haſt Thou gon down into the Sea it ſelfe;
                     Walkt in the Bottom; ſearched euery Shelfe;
                     Survaid the Springs? Or haue the Gates of Death
                     Been opened to Thee; and thoſe Dores beneath
                     Death's gaſtly ſhadows? Know'ſt Thou (to cōclude)
                     (Tell, if thou know'ſt) the Earth's iuſt Latitude?
                     Which is the way where louely Light doth dwell?
                     And as for Darknes, where hath She her Cell;
                     That thou ſhold'ſt Both, in both their boūds cōpriſe;
                     And know their dwellings, & their Paths, preciſe?
                     
                        Needs muſt Thou know them: Thou wert born yet than:
                     No doubt Thou wert, Thou art ſo old a man.
                     Haſt Thou the Treaſures of the Snow ſuruay'd?
                     Or ſeen the Store-houſe of my Haile (vp-layd
                     And hid in heaps, againſt a time of need)
                     For War-like Battery, where I haue decreed?
                     Which is the way whence Lightning flaſheth out,
                     Scattering th'vnhealthy Eaſtern Gales about?
                     VVho hath diſpos'd the vpper Spouts & Gutters,
                     VVhereby the Aire his ouer-burthen vtters?
                     Or giuen the Lightning & the Thunder way,
                     To cauſe it rain on places parcht away;
                     On thirſtie Deſarts, where no People paſſe;
                     On barren Mountaines, to reuiue the Graſſe?
                     Had Rain a Father? Or, begot by whom
                     Was pearly Deaw? Or, frō what pregnant Womb
                     Came cryſtall Ice? Or, canſt Thou rightly render,
                     Who did the hard & hoary Froſts ingender,
                     When Waters creep vnder a Stone-like couer,
                     And th'Oceans ſurface is thick-glaſed ouer?
                     Canſt Thou reſtrain the pleaſant Influing
                     Of Pleiades (the Vſhers of the Spring)?
                     Or, canſt Thou loſe Orion's Icie Bands
                     (Who rules the Winter with his chill Commands)?
                     
                        Canſt Thou bring forth (the ſoultry Sūmers Guide)
                     Bright Mazaroth (or Dog-star) in his Tide?
                     Or canſt Thou lead Arcturus (& his Train,
                     Th'Autumnall Signes) his Sons (or Charls his Wain)?
                     Know'ſt Thou the Statutes of the Heav'ns aboue?
                     Or canſt Thou (here) them in their order moue?
                     Wilt Thou command the Clowds, & Rain ſhal fall?
                     VVill Lightning come, & anſwer, at thy call?
                     VVho hath infus'd VViſedom in th'inner part?
                     Or Vnderſtanding who hath giuen the hart?
                     Who can ſum-vp the Clowds, or cleer the Skye?
                     Or ope Heav'ns bottles, when the Earth is dry?
                     To ſteep the Duſt, & knead the clotted Clay,
                     Yerſt ouer-baked with too-hot a Ray?
                     WIlt Thou go hunt, th'old Lioneſs to help;
                           Cap. 3
                              •
                           
                        
                     
                     Or fetch-in prey to fill her greedy whelp,
                     VVhen they are couchant in their Den, or watch
                     For paſſant Heards, their wonted Boot to catch?
                     Who, for the Raven, prouideth timely Food;
                     VVhen as her hungry greedy-gaping Brood,
                     VVandring about, & wanting what to eat,
                     
                        
                           •
                        e (croaking) call, & cry to Mee for meat.
                     
                        
                           •
                        now'ſt Thou the time whē moūtain Goats & 
                           •
                        inds
                     
                        
                           •
                        e yean and calue (according to their Kinds)?
                     
                        Canſt Thou keep reckning of the Months they go,
                     And how their Burdens to their Birth-time grow;
                     When they but bow them, and forthwith let fall
                     Their tender Fruit, and all their Paines withall.
                     Who hath ſent out the Wilde Aſs, free to feed;
                     Or let him looſe (from ſeruing humane need)
                     Whoſe houſe & haunt I haue ordaind expreſſe
                     VVithin the brackie barren Wilderneſſe.
                     He ſcornes the Cities multitude and noiſe:
                     He reaks not of the yawning Driuers voice:
                     The craggy Cliffs his ſhaggie Paſtures been;
                     Where, off he croppeth what he findeth green.
                     VVill th'Vnicoine thee willingly obay?
                     Or, will hee come vnto thy Crib, for Hay?
                     VVill he be brought to harrow or to plow?
                     Or, will hee bring thy Corn vnto thy Mow?
                     Wilt Thou preſume of Him, for ſtrength in fight?
                     Or leaue, to him, thy Labour to acquite?
                     Didſt Thou beſtow the Peacoks goodly Fan?
                     Or, gau'ſt Thou Feathers to the Stork (or Swan)▪
                     
                     Or, to the Oſtridge her delicious Treſſe
                     (Th'ambitious Badge as well of War as Peace)
                     VVho layes her egges, & leaues them in the Duſt,
                     To hatch them there, with radiant Heat aduſt,
                     
                        Without her help, or heed; leſt Tread or Track,
                     Of Man or Beaſt them all to peeces crack:
                     Vokindeſt Dam, the labour of her wombe
                     That dares annull; while Hers not Hers become:
                     So void I made her of Intelligence,
                     And kind inſtinct of Natures Influence:
                     Yet with her Wings & Feet ſo faſt ſhe skippes,
                     That She the Horſe & Rider both out-ſtrips.
                     Haſt Thou indew'd the Horſe with ſtrengthful wonder,
                     And cloath'd his creſt, & fild his breſt with thunder?
                     Canſt Thou affright Him, as a Graſs-hopper;
                     Whoſe noſtrills pride ſnorts Terrors euery where?
                     He pawes the Plain, he ſtately ſtamps, & neighes,
                     And glad goes-on againſt the arm'd Arraies,
                     Diſ
                           ••
                        ining Fear. For, for the Sword & Shield,
                     Dart, Pike, & Lance, He'll not forſake the Field,
                     Nor turn his back (how-euer thick they ſhiuer)
                     Nor for the Croſs-bow, & the rattling Quiuer.
                     He ſwallowes-vp the Earth in furious heat;
                     Nor will belieue the Sound of the Retreat.
                     Among the Trumpets, ſounds his cheerful Laugh,
                     
                        Ha-Ha ha-ha
                        ▪ he ſmelleth a farre-off
                     The wiſhed Battaile; hears the thundring Call
                     Of proud Commanders; & lowd Shouts of all.
                     
                        Is't by thy wiſedom that the Hawk doth mew,
                     And to the Southward ſpreads her winged Clew?
                     Doth th'Eagle mount ſo high at thy Beheſt,
                     And build aloft (ſo neer the clowds) her Neſt?
                     She dwells vpon the Rock & ragged Cliffe,
                     And craggy places the moſt ſteep & ſtiffe:
                     From whence, about to ſeek her prey ſhe flies;
                     Which, from afar, her quick keen Sight eſpies:
                     Her young ones alſo, onely Bloud do ſuck:
                     And where the Slain are, thither doe they ruck.
                     
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            40.MOreouer, yet, The LORD, proceeding, ſaid
                     To IOB: ſhal He that dares with GOD to plead,
                     Teach Him His part? Let him (who GOD doth tax)
                     Heer let me hear the Anſwer that he makes.
                     IOB ſadly then Thus humbly did reply:
                     O! LORD, behold; ô! moſt-moſt Vile am I.
                     What ſhal I anſwer Thee? What ſhall I ſay?
                     Onely, my hand vpon my mouth I'll lay.
                     Once haue I ſpoak, & twiſe; & too-too bold:
                     But now, for euer I my Tongue will hold.
                     Again, the LORD out of the Whirle-wind ſpake,
                     And ſaid to IOB: Yes, yes; thy Theam re-take:
                     Gird vp thy loynes again, and play the Man:
                     I'll queſtion thee: now anſwer, if Thou can.
                     
                        Wilt Thou make void my Iudgements (iuſt & hie);
                     Condemning Me, thy Selfe to iuſtifie?
                     Haſt thou an Arme like to the Arme diuine?
                     Or is Thy Voyce as Thunder-like as Mine?
                     Put-on thy Robes of Maieſtie and Might:
                     
                        
                           ••
                        ck Thee with Glory, and with Bewty bright,
                     Dart forth the Lightnings of thy wrathfull Frowne;
                     Againſt the Proud, and bring them tumbling downe:
                     Behould Thou all and euery one that's Proud,
                     And downe with Them, and all the Wicked Croud:
                     Trample vpon them, in their very Place:
                     Hide them in Duſt at once; there binde their Face:
                     Then will I grant (what Thou haſt vrg'd ſo braue)
                     That thine owne Selfe thine owne right hand can ſaue.
                     But, Now, behold (thy Fellow) BEHEMOTH,
                     Thy fellow Creature; for, I made you Both.
                     
                        
                           •
                        e, like an Oxe amid the Field doth graze:
                     
                        
                           •
                        's Loynes and Nauell his moſt Srength he has:
                     
                        
                           •
                        e whisks his ſinewie Taile, ſtiff as a Ceder;
                     
                        
                           •
                        is Stones (within) with Nerues are wreathd together.
                     
                        
                           •
                        is Bones and Ribs be ſtrong as Brazen Bars,
                     
                        
                           •
                        nd as vnyeelding as the Iron-Spars:
                     
                        
                           •
                        ee's of the Maſter-peeces of the LORD,
                     Who alſo arm'd him with a readie Sword.
                     
                        The Mountains yeeld him meat; where night & day,
                     All other Beaſts do fear-leſſe feed and play.
                     Beneath the broad-leau'd ſhady Trees he lodges
                     Amid the Fens, among the Reeds and Sedges,
                     Compaſt with Willowes of the Brook about;
                     Where, when he enters (in the time of Drought)
                     The maſſie bulk of his huge bodie bayes
                     The Torrents courſe, and euen the Current ſtayes:
                     There, yer he go, the Riuer dry he drinks;
                     And in his Thirſt to ſwallow Iordan thinks.
                     Dare any come, before him, Him to take,
                     Or bore his Snowt, of Him a Slaue to make?
                     CAnſt Thou hale vp the huge LEVIATHAN,
                     
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            41With hook and line amid the Ocean?
                     Canſt Thou his tongue with ſteely Crotchets thril▪
                     
                     Or with a Thorn his ſnuffing Noſe, or Guil?
                     Will He come ſue, by Supplications, to-thee?
                     Wil He with ſmooth & ſoothing Speeches woo-thee▪
                     
                     Will He by Couenant, ſerue thee, at thy beck?
                     Or, be thy Slaue, for euer at thy Check?
                     Wilt Thou with Him, as with a Sparrow, play;
                     And giue him ty'd, vnto thy Girles, away?
                     Shall Fiſher-men of Him a Feaſt prepare?
                     Shall They his fleſh among the Marchants ſhare?
                     
                        Canſt Thou his Skin with barbed pheons pierce?
                     Or plant his Head with groues of Otter-ſpeares?
                     Lay hold on Him: ſet on him: but, before
                     Think on the Battell, and come there no more.
                     For, 'tis ſo farre from hope of Victory,
                     That euen His ſight would rather make thee fly.
                     There's None ſo fierce that dares Him rouze or hunt.
                     [Then, Who ſhall ſafely Me my Selfe affront?
                     Who hath preuented Me? To Whom haue I
                     Been firſt beholding for a Curteſie,
                     Or bound at all for any Benefit
                     Beſtow'd on Me, that I ſhould guerdon it?
                     Why? is not All Earths ample arms confine,
                     All vnder Heav'n, All in the Ocean, Mine?]
                     I will not hide his Parts and Properties;
                     Neither his Strength, nor ſeemly Symmetries.
                     Who ſhall vnhood him? Who with double Rain
                     Shall bridle him, with Snaffle, Trench, or Chain?
                     Or put the Bit between his Iawes (his Portall)
                     Impal'd with Terror of his Teeth ſo mortall
                           •
                        
                     
                     His Shield-like Scales, he chiefly glories in,
                     So cloſe compact, glew'd, ſealed; that, between,
                     No Aire can enter, nor no Engin pierce,
                     Nor any Point diſioyne them or diſperſe.
                     
                        His Sneeſings cauſe a Light, as brightly burning;
                     His Eyes are like the Eye-lids of the Morning;
                     Out of his Mouth flowe blazing Lamps, and flie
                     Quick Sparks of Fire, aſcending ſwift and hie:
                     Out of his Noſtrils, Smoak, as from a Pot,
                     Kettle or Caldron when it boileth hot:
                     His Breath doth kindle Coals, when with the ſame
                     He whirleth-out a Storm of Fume and Flame:
                     Strength dwelleth in his Neck; ſo that he ioyes
                     In ſaddeſt Storms, and tryumphes of Annoies▪
                     
                     His Flakes of Fleſh are ſolid to his Bone;
                     His Heart's as hard as Wind-mils neather-ſtone.
                     To ſee Him riſe, and how he breakes withall;
                     The ſtouteſt ſtoop, and to their Prayers fall.
                     No Weapons of Defence, or of Offence,
                     Can Him offend, or from Him be Defence:
                     Iron and Braſſe He waighes as Sticks and Straw:
                     Sling-ſtones and Arrowes Him do neuer awe:
                     Darts daunt him not, more then they Stubble were:
                     He laugheth at the ſhaking of a Speare:
                     Sharp ragged Stones, Keen-pointed Sherds & Shels,
                     He reſteth on, amid his muddy Cels.
                     He makes the deep Sea like a Pot to boile,
                     A Pot of Oyntment (caſting ſcummie Soile):
                     
                        Where He hath paſt, he leaues vpon the ſtreams
                     A ſhining Path, and th'Ocean hoarie ſeemes.
                     In Earth is Nothing like Him to be ſeen;
                     So Fear-leſſe made, ſo full of hautie Spleen;
                     Deſpiſing all High things, Him-ſelfe beſide.
                     He is the King of all the Sons of Pride.
                     IOB, proſtrate then, Thus to the LORD profeſt:
                           Cap 
                           
                              •
                           
                        
                     
                     Drad GOD, I know, and I acknowledge preſt,
                     That All Thou canſt; and All Thou kenneſt too:
                     Our Thoughts not hid; Thine owne not hard to do.
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                            am the Man, Who (to my ſelf too-Holy)
                     
                     
                        Darkned thy Counſells, with Contentious Folly.
                     
                     
                        
                           •
                        or, I haue ſpoken what I vnderſtood not,
                     Of wondrous things which comprehend I could not.
                     Yet, LORD, vouchſafe, vouchſafe, I thee beſeech,
                     An Eare, and Anſwer to my humble Speech.
                     Till now, mine Eare had only heard of Thee:
                     But, now, mine Eye thy Gratious Selfe doth ſee.
                     Therefore, My Selfe I loath, as too-too-bad;
                     And heer repent in Duſt and Aſhes, ſad.
                     Now, after This with IOB; it came to paſſe,
                     The LORD did alſo ſpeake to Eliphaz
                     
                     The Thaemanite; and Thus to him ſaid He:
                     
                        
                           •
                        y wrath is kindled with thy Friends and Thee:
                     
                        For None of You haue ſpoken of My Path,
                     So right and iuſt as IOB my Seruant hath.
                     Therefore, go take you Rams and Bullocks faire,
                     Seav'n of a ſort; and to my IOB repaire;
                     Bring for your Selues your Burnt Oblations due,
                     And IOB my Seruant He ſhall pray for you
                     (For, Him will I accept) leſt, Iuſtly-ſtrict,
                     After your Folly I reuenge inflict;
                     Becauſe You haue not ſpoken of my Path,
                     So right and iuſt as IOB my Seruant hath,
                     So Eliphaz, the ancient Thaemanite,
                     
                     
                        Bildad the Shuhite, the Naamathite
                     
                     
                        Zophar, (together) them prepar'd and went
                     And did according GOD's Commandement.
                     Alſo the LORD accepted IOB, and ſtaid
                     His Thral-full State (when for his Friends he praid)
                     And turned it to Solace-full, from ſad;
                     And gaue him double all the Goods he had.
                     Then all his Brethern, Siſters all, and Kin;
                     And all that had of his acquaintance bin,
                     Came flocking to his Houſe, with him to feaſt;
                     To wail his Woes, and comfort him their beſt,
                     For all the Euill which the LORD (of late)
                     Had brought vpon his Perſon and his ſtate.
                     
                        
                        
                           •
                        d Each man gaue him (as beſt beare they could)
                     
                        
                           •
                        eece of Money and Ear-ring of Gold.
                     So, that the LORD bleſſed IOB'S later Time,
                     
                        
                           •
                        th more abundance then his flowry Prime.
                     
                        
                           •
                        r, Fourteen Thouſand Sheep were now his flock;
                     
                        
                           •
                        mels ſix Thouſand; Steers a Thouſand yoak;
                     
                        
                           •
                        e-Aſſes twice fiue Hundred; Familie
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         as before: Seuen Sons, and Daughters Three.
                     Th'Eldeſt I
                              •
                           mima, Kezia the Next.
                     
                        
                           •
                        d K
                              •
                           ren Happuch (ſaith my ſacred Text)
                     
                        
                           •
                        e Third he named (Names of gooly Senſe,
                     
                        
                           •
                        uding to ſome Gracefull Excellence:
                     
                        
                           •
                        e firſt, as much as Lustre of the Morn;
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           ia, the Next; laſt, Alabaſtrine Horn)
                     
                        
                           •
                        n all the Countrey were no Women found
                     
                        
                           •
                        air as Theſe, IOB, of his Goods and Ground,
                     
                        
                           •
                        ong their Brethren gaue them Heritage.
                     
                        
                           •
                        et, after This, IOB liv'd a goodly age,
                     
                        
                           •
                        ce Seauenty yeers, & ſaw his Sons Sons Sons,
                     
                        
                           •
                        ceſſiue
                           •
                        y, Four Generations:
                     
                        
                           •
                         then He dy'd, Ancient and Full of Dayes.
                     
                        GOD, for Him, and all his Saints, be Praiſe,
                     
                     
                        for His Succour in Theſe ſacred Layes.
                     
                     AMEN.
                  
                  
                     
                     EPITAPHIVM IOBI.
                     Qui Se, qui Sêclum vicit; qui ſaeua Suorum
                     Funera, Amicorum iurgia, Pauperiem;
                     Vlcera qui carnis, qui Coniugis impia verba;
                     Qui Coelum iratum, mente tulit placida:
                     Inuictum virtute IOBVM, Patientia Virgo,
                     Nunc vidua, hoc Sponſum condidit in Tumulo.
                  
                  
                     Who, SELF, The World, & Satan, triumphto're;
                     Who, Wealth's, & Health's, & Children's ruefull Loſſe;
                     Who, Frends Rebuke, Foes rage, Wifes curſing Croſſe;
                     Hevns Frowne, Earth's for
                           •
                         Hels Furie, Calmely bore:
                     
                        Th' Inuincible in Vertue, IOB, Her Pheere,
                     
                        The Virgin Patience (Widow now) toomb'd Heer.
                     
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  MEMORIALS of MORTALITIE: Written 
                        •
                     n Tablets, or Quatrains, BY By PIERE MATHIEV.
                  The firſt Centurie.
                  Tranſlated, & Dedicated To the Right Honourable HENRY Earle of South-hampton.
                  By Ioſuah Sylveſter.
               
               
                  
                  
                  TO The Right Honourable, HENRY WRIOTHESLEY, Earle of South-hampton, &c.
                  SHall it be ſaid (I ſhame, it ſhould be thought)
                  When After-Ages ſhall record Thy Worth;
                  
                  My ſacred Muſe hath left SOVTH-HAMPTON forth
                  Of Her Record; to Whom ſo Much ſhee ought?
                  
                     
                        •…
                     th from Thy Town (where My Sarauia taught)
                  Her ſlender Pinions had their tender Birth;
                  And all, the little all ſhee hath of worth,
                  Vnder Heav'ns Bleſsing, onely Thence ſhee brought.
                  
                     
                        ••
                     r lack, therefore, of fitter Argument;
                  And lother Now, it longer to delay;
                  Heer while the Part of PHILIPS Page I play)
                  I conſecrate This little Monument
                  Of gratefull Homage, to Thy noble Bounty;
                  
                  And Thankeful loue to (My deer Nurſe) Thy County.
                  
                     
                        Humbly deuoted Ioſuah Sylvester.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  MEMORIALS of Mortalitie.
                  
                     1
                     LEt whoſo liſt, thinke Death a dreadfull thing,
                     And hold The Graue in horror & in hate:
                     
                        
                           •
                         think them, I, moſt worth the wel-comming;
                     Where, end our Woes; our Ioyes initiate.
                  
                  
                     2
                     Man, Death abhors, repines, & murmurs at-her,
                     
                        
                           •
                        lind in that Law which made her, good, for Him:
                     
                        
                           •
                        oth Birth & Death the daughters are of Nature;
                     
                        
                           •
                        n Whom is nought imperfect, ſtrange, or grim.
                  
                  
                     3
                     
                        Death's vglineſs is but imagined;
                     
                        
                           •
                        nder foule Vizard a faire Face Shee weares:
                     
                        
                           •
                        er Vizard off, there is no more to dr
                           ••
                        d;
                     We laugh at Children whom a Vizard feares.
                  
                  
                     4
                     
                        Death, in ſtrange Poſtures daily is diſguiſed,
                     
                        
                           •
                        ith Darts & Sythes in hand, Beers on her back:
                     
                        
                           •
                        s Angels are with wings & locks deuiſed;
                     
                        
                           •
                        o, Her a Body of bare Bones they make.
                  
                  
                     5
                     Who feares this Death, is more then deadly ſick;
                     
                        
                           •
                        midſt of Life he ſeems euen dead for dreed;
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           ath in his breſt he beares, as buried Quick:
                     
                        
                           •
                        r, feare of Death is worſe then Death indeed.
                  
                  
                     
                     6
                     Each fears this Death: & with an equall Dread,
                     The Young as from a hideous Monſter hie-them.
                     Th'Old, at her ſight ſhrink down into their Bed;
                     All ſhun her aye, the more She draweth nigh-them.
                  
                  
                     7
                     What Good, or Bad, boads Life or Death, to giue;
                     To be ſo fond of That, & This ſo flying?
                     Thou would'ſt not die, yet know'ſt not how to liue;
                     Not knowing, Life to be a liuing-dying.
                     
                  
                  
                     8
                     One loues this Life, Another loathes it wholly:
                     Som look for Eaſe, Promotion ſom, ſom Profit:
                     To loue it, for the Pleaſures heer, is Folly;
                     Weaknes, to hate it, for the Troubles of-it.
                  
                  
                     9
                     The Storm at Sea vnder a Calm is bred:
                     Within Good-hap, Ill-hap hath life included;
                     Begun in Tears, in Toiles continued;
                     And, without Dolour cannot be concluded.
                  
                  
                     10
                     Life, like a Taper, with the weakeſt Blaſts
                     Is waued, waſted, melted, puffed out:
                     In ſome, ſomtimes, euen to the Snuff it laſts;
                     In others hardly to the halfe holds-out.
                  
                  
                     
                     11
                     Fruit on the Trees firſt blooms, thē buds, thē grows,
                     Then ripes, then rots: Such Our condition iuſt;
                     
                        
                           •
                        egot, born, bred, liue, die; ſo roundly goes
                     Times Wheel, to whirl our Bodies back to Duſt.
                  
                  
                     12
                     This Life's a Tree, whoſe goodly Fruits are Men;
                     
                        
                           •
                        ne falls, Himſelfe; Another's beaten down:
                     
                        
                           •
                        's ſtript at laſt of Leaues and Apples then,
                     
                        
                           •
                        y Time's ſame hand which had them firſt beſtown.
                  
                  
                     13
                     This Life's a Table, where, in earneſt-ieſt
                     
                        
                           •
                        oure Gamſters play: Time, eldeſt, vantage takes,
                     
                        
                           •
                        nd biddeth Paſſe: Loue fondly ſets his Reſt:
                     
                        Man needs will ſee it; but, Death ſweeps the ſtakes.
                  
                  
                     14
                     This Life (indeed) is but a Comoedie,
                     
                     Where This, the Kaiſer playes, & That, the Clowne;
                     
                        
                           •
                        ut, Death ſtil ends it in a Tragoedie,
                     
                     Without diſtinction of the Lord from Lowne.
                  
                  
                     15
                     This Life's a Warre, ciuill, & forrain too;
                     Within, without, Man hath his Enemies:
                     
                     To keep the Fort, Death doth the Towne vndoo;
                     To ſaue the Soule, the Body Shee deſtroyes.
                  
                  
                     
                     16
                     The World's a Sea, the Galley is this Life,
                     The Maſter, Time; the Pole, Hope promiſeth;
                     Fortune the Winde; the ſtormie Tempest, Strife;
                     And Man the Rowe-Slaue, to the Port of Death.
                  
                  
                     17
                     The World (mee thinks) is like our Parliaments,
                     Where Right too oft is ouer-born by Wrong;
                     Where Quirks & Quidits are of Conſequence;
                     Where laſtly nought Death's Sentence can prolong.
                  
                  
                     18
                     The World is much of a faire Miſtreſs mood,
                     Which, wilie, makes more Fooles then Fauorites;
                     Hugs Theſe, hates Thoſe; yet will of all be woo'd:
                     But neuer keeps the Promiſe that ſhe plights.
                  
                  
                     19
                     Life's ſmootheſt gloſſe is like the Sphear of Glaſſe
                     
                     
                        Archimedes framed, and fill'd with Starrs;
                     As fraile as faire: for, the leaſt ſtorme (alas!)
                     That raps it, ſnaps it; and the Pleaſure marrs.
                  
                  
                     20
                     Th'Honor thou thirſteſt (as one Dropſie-ſick)
                     Weening to quaff it, often ſtops thy winde:
                     'T's a ſwelling Bladder; which whē 
                        Death ſhal prick,
                     (Thou wilt confeſs) thou but a Puff didſt finde.
                  
                  
                     
                     21
                     And that Ambition which affords thee Wings,
                     
                        
                           •
                         ſeek new Seas beyond Our Ocean's Arms,
                     
                        
                           •
                         Mounts of Gold and Pearle, & pretious things;
                     
                        
                           •
                        l not preſerue thy Carcaſs from the Worms.
                  
                  
                     22
                     That Pleaſure too, which ſtops thy Reaſons eares,
                     
                        
                           •
                        ots thy Soule, intoxicates thy Senſe;
                     
                        
                           •
                        d ſad Repentance ſtill behinde it beares;
                     
                        
                           •
                         moment Ioyes, leanes Sorrowes Monuments.
                  
                  
                     23
                     
                        Pleaſure which tires thee, but contents thee neuer,
                     
                        
                           •
                        y Body wearing more, than wearying:
                     
                        
                           •
                        e Danaides Siue-like Tub, a-filling euer,
                     
                        
                           •
                         neuer full, for all their bucketing.
                  
                  
                     24
                     
                        Beauty, which makes the prowdeſt Kings to crouch,
                     
                        
                           •
                        ich ſerues the Soule as Letters in her fauour;
                     
                        
                           •
                         ſee, delightfull; Dangerous, to touch;
                     
                        
                           •
                        m Death's drad Fury, may not, cannot ſaue her.
                  
                  
                     25
                     But, Beauty, Grace-leſs, is a Saile-leſs Bark,
                     
                        
                           •
                        reen-leſs Spring, a goodly light-leſs Room,
                     
                        
                           •
                        un-leſs Day, a Star-leſs Night and Dark;
                     
                        
                           •
                        d yet this Grace cannot eſcape the Toomb.
                  
                  
                     
                     26
                     When Bodie's Bewty with Soule's Bewty dwels,
                     Ther's a Perfection paſſing all the reſt:
                     Without This, Bewty ſeems a Blemiſh els:
                     Without That, Vertue ſeems not ſeemly dreſt.
                  
                  
                     27
                     That Bewty, which the Air, Age, Ague quailes;
                     VVhich buſies ſo our Eyes, Toungs, hands & harts;
                     At fifteen, buds; at twenty, flowers; and failes,
                     Or falls, at thirtie, and to Duſt reuerts.
                  
                  
                     28
                     
                        Gold, the Worlds God, the Sun of Plutoe's Sons;
                     VVhom Fire and Sword inceſſant ſerue ſo fell;
                     Gold, Vertue's Friend, and Vices Fort at-once,
                     Serues oft for Bridge to paſſe in poſt to Hell.
                  
                  
                     29
                     Man's Knowledge heer, is but meer Ignorance:
                     VVe ſee the wiſeſt foulely ſtumble oft:
                     Learning is puft with Doubt-full Arrogance:
                     And Truth is loſt while it is too-much ſought.
                  
                  
                     30
                     With Myſteries the Idiot meddles moſt;
                     Peeps into Heav'n, into Kings Counſels pries:
                     In Pulpit Phormio doth darrain an Hoſt:
                     
                        Therſites prates of Arms and Policies.
                  
                  
                     
                     31
                     Th'Aſsyrian's Empire is now ſeen no more:
                     
                        
                           •
                        e Medes and Perſians did the Greeks intomb:
                     
                        
                           •
                        eat Allexander's Kingdom kinged Foure:
                     
                        
                           •
                        hoſe Crownes, in fine, ſtoopt to the State of Rome.
                     
                  
                  
                     32
                     Where are Thoſe Monarchs, mighty Conquerors,
                     
                        
                           •
                        hoſe brows ere-while the whol Worlds Laurel dreſt,
                     When Sea & Land could ſhow no Land but Theirs?
                     
                        
                           •
                        ow, of it All, only Seauen Hils do reſt.
                  
                  
                     33
                     VVhere are Thoſe Cities (great & goodly States)
                     
                        
                           •
                        f Niniue, with thrice fiue hundred Towers?
                     
                        
                           •
                        eat Babylon? Thebes, with a hundred Gates?
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           rthage (Rome's Riuall) Didoe's deareſt Bowers?
                  
                  
                     34
                     All Theſe huge Buildings, Theſe proud Piles (alas!)
                     Which ſeem'd to threaten, Heav'n it ſelfe to ſcale;
                     
                        
                           •
                        aue now giuen place to Forreſts, Groues, & Graſs;
                     
                        
                           •
                        nd Time hath chang'd their Names & Place withall.
                  
                  
                     35
                     Nay, wilt thou ſee, how-far Great Kings are foild?
                     
                        
                           •
                        e how ſomtime in Gold they ſwallow Poiſon:
                     
                        
                           •
                        e Ptolomeus Croſs't, Boleſlas boild,
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           iazeth in a Cage, Richard in Priſon.
                  
                  
                     
                     36
                     See, ſee a Prince, neer Cairo, flayed quick:
                     See Sápores by his prowd Victor trod:
                     See Monk-like ſhav'n our Cloiſtred Chilperick:
                     See Denis beare, for Sceptre, Pedant's Rod.
                  
                  
                     37
                     See Gordian there in his owne Girdle hung:
                     Se Phocas bones broken with furious Batts:
                     See Dioméde to his owne Horſes flung:
                     To Wolues Licáon, Popiel to Rats.
                  
                  
                     36
                     See, ſee proud Salmon ſodain Thunder-ſlain:
                     See Theódorick with horrid Terror thrild:
                     See Longuemare hangd in a golden Chain:
                     See a fierce Courſer dragging Brunechild.
                     
                  
                  
                     39
                     See Attalus, hauing, for Court, a Forge:
                     See Phalaris burnt in Perillus Bull:
                     See Memprice left the greedy Wolues to gorge:
                     
                        Cambyſes Sword ſheath'd in Him-ſelfe too full.
                  
                  
                     40
                     Who but will feare amid the Frights of France;
                     Seeing how Death Two Henries reft of Life?
                     The Sire, in Paris, with a ſplinterd Lance;
                     The Son, before it, with a poyſoned Knife.
                  
                  
                     
                     41
                     That Queen, whoſe Court was in a Caſtle coopt,
                     
                        Priſoner, heer; aboue, a Princeſſe, hop't.)
                     
                        
                           •
                        oſe royall Throne to a Tragick Seaffold ſtoopt,
                     
                        
                           •
                         Head ſhe felt with whiffing ſteell off-chopt.
                  
                  
                     42
                     That King, who could within his Kingdom
                           •
                         drad,
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        Sol ſtill ſhine, when hence he vaniſheth;
                     
                        
                           •
                        o, paſt Our Seas, another Empire had,
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         All he had, had but a louzie Death.
                  
                  
                     43
                     Who more his Garden of Salona priz'd
                     
                        
                           •
                        an ROME's great Empire & the Worlds Cōmand,
                     
                        
                           •
                        ew well the Cares from Corwnes inſepariz'd;
                     
                        
                           •
                        d Scepters ſad Waight in the ſtrongeſt hand.
                  
                  
                     44
                     Towards our End inſenſibly we ſlip:
                     
                        
                           •
                        , ſpeaking, ſporting, laughing, ſnoring deep,
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           th ſtil drawes on-wards: as at Sea the Ship
                     
                        
                           •
                        es to her Hav'n-ward, though the Maſterſleep.
                  
                  
                     45
                     
                        Death Each-where kills: in hunting, Carloman;
                     
                        
                           •
                         Caue, Caligul
                              •
                           ; Ariſtobulus,
                     
                     Bath; by th'Altar, Philip; Iulian,
                     
                     Camp; in Councell, conquering IVLIVS.
                  
                  
                     
                     46
                     
                        Death ſeeks th'Aemathian; & from Nero flies:
                     One in a Shallow drownes, who Seas did ſcape:
                     An Emperour in eating Muſhromes dies:
                     A Holy-Father in a Harlots lap.
                  
                  
                     47
                     No hand but ſerues Death's turn: Edric by's Mother;
                     
                        Alboin by's Wife; Ariſto by his Friends;
                     By's owne Son, Baiazeth; Conrad, by's Brother;
                     
                        Muſtapha, by his Sire; Self, Cato ends.
                  
                  
                     48
                     
                        Death diuerſly makes him familiar heer:
                     
                        Henry the Black, a bit of Bread could fine;
                     A King of Goth's died, in a Tub of Beer;
                     
                        Thalis, of Thirſt; of Hunger Antonine.
                     
                  
                  
                     49
                     
                        Death, euery-where, in euery thing diſtils
                     Her fell Deſpite; Fire, Aier, Earth, Ocean:
                     
                        Druſus, a Peare; a Fig Terpander kils;
                     A Fly (in drinking) choaketh Adrian.
                     
                  
                  
                     50
                     As ſoon, a Souerain, as a Shepheard's gon:
                     Men dying heer haue but one equall Quality:
                     By Birth and Death is Their Condition one;
                     Their Stay, and State, between, make th'Inequality.
                  
                  
                     
                     51
                     There's no Death Sodain to the godly-Wiſe:
                     His heart goes out to meet all haps before:
                     VVhen he embarks, he caſts Wracks Ieopardies;
                     And when Wind ſerues nor, He will rowe no more.
                  
                  
                     52
                     Not knowing then, When, Where, thy Death will ſnatch;
                     
                        
                           •
                        t Sea, or Land; young, old; Morn, Noon, or Night:
                     Look for it euer, euery-where keep watch.
                     
                        
                           •
                        or, what we look-for, little can affright.
                  
                  
                     53
                     If Infants oft, no ſooner breathe then die;
                     
                        
                           •
                         Good-men little-laſt, and Wicked long:
                     
                        
                           •
                        e not too-curious in that Secret's Why?
                     
                        
                           •
                        h' are ſtroaks of that hand wch ſtrook neuer wrong.
                  
                  
                     54
                     VVhy Good men go, and Why th'Vngodly ſtay,
                     
                        
                           •
                        iſpute it not; GOD hath permitted ſo.
                     Thoſe die, to liue: Theſe liue, to die for aye:
                     Theſe, liue at caſe; Thoſe in a World of VVo.
                  
                  
                     55
                     If from thy Dayes thou but thy Nights ſubtract;
                     
                        
                           •
                        hy Sleep's, thy Care's, thy Mawe's, thy Muſe's waſte,
                     What thy Wife weareth, VVhat thy Friends exact,
                     
                        
                           •
                        hy Griefs, thy Sutes: How ſhort a Life thou haſt!
                  
                  
                     
                     56
                     The Head-ach, Tooth-ach, Gout, or Feuer riſe,
                     Or Vlcer in the Leg, Stone, in the Reines,
                     By lingring Drops ſtrains out the tedious Life;
                     Yet art thou loth that Death ſhould rid thy Paines.
                  
                  
                     57
                     Thy Term expir'd, Thou put'ſt-off Payment yet,
                     And weenſt to win much by ſome Months delay.
                     Sith pay thou muſt, wer't not as good be quit?
                     For, Death will be no gentler any Day.
                  
                  
                     58
                     Th'affaires of Parting poaſt not to to-Morn.
                     For, on Delay, Repentance waits with Woe:
                     The Wind and Tide will in a Moment turn:
                     All houres are good for Thoſe reſolu'd to goe.
                  
                  
                     59
                     Grudging to die in flower of thine age,
                     Thou grieu'ſt to be too-ſoon diſcharg'd from Priſon
                     
                        
                           •
                        epin'ſt, too-ſoon to haue don thy Pilgrimage,
                     Loth to haue-in thy Harueſt in due Seaſon.
                  
                  
                     60
                     Make of thy Deeds, not of thy Dayes, account:
                     Think not how far, but think how faire thou paſſeſt:
                     See to what Sum thy Vertues will amount;
                     For, Life and Gold are choſe by waight; the maſſi'ſt.
                  
                  
                     
                     61
                     Life's valued by th'effect, not by the age;
                     The labour, not the laſting, praiſe it moſt:
                     Long hath he liu'd that liueth to be ſage;
                     
                        
                           •
                        ood life (too-often) in long life is loſt.
                  
                  
                     62
                     Long Acts commend not moſt a Comoedi
                              •
                           ,
                     
                     Tis ſtill eſteemed as the Parts are plaid:
                     
                        
                           •
                        o, in our Liues, not Yeers conſidered be;
                     
                        
                           •
                        ut, worthy Actions by the Wiſe are waigh'd.
                  
                  
                     63
                     Who grieues becauſe he liu'd not heer, yet born,
                     Hundred yeers; is double worthy laughter:
                     
                        
                           •
                        t, trebble He who at his Death doth mourn;
                     
                        
                           •
                        re not to liue a hundred yeers heer-after.
                  
                  
                     64
                     Man's not more Happy for long-liuing heer,
                     
                        
                           •
                        mber of Dayes doe not more Bliſſes bring:
                     
                        
                           •
                        ore Compaſs makes not a more cōplete Sphear.
                     
                        
                           •
                        round's a little, as a larger Ring.
                  
                  
                     65
                     And, if that Death wait on thee, & protract;
                     
                        
                           •
                        h Vſurie, ſhee'll make thee pay it double:
                     
                        
                           •
                        y Ioyes in Dream, thy Dolours ſtill in act,
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         make long Life a long Repenting Trouble.
                  
                  
                     
                     66
                     If Hee that heer thee in his Vineyard hir'd,
                     Pay thee at Noon thy Wages, full aſmuch
                     As Thoſe that there all the whole Day haue tir'd;
                     Why murmurſt thou? why doſt thou grieue & grutch?
                  
                  
                     67
                     He caſts his Work well, well his Work-men kens;
                     Thy Slackneſs, Slowneſs, Weaknes to hold out:
                     Therefore, yer wearie, he thy Way-fare ends;
                     Leſt, ſtaying longer, thou mar all, 'tis doubt.
                  
                  
                     68
                     He giues our Task, & he again will take it;
                     Who Him, vnwilling; Him, vnworthy ſerues:
                     Before he call, 'tis follie to forſake it;
                     And who-ſo leaues it, to be left deſerues.
                  
                  
                     69
                     Or firſt, or laſt, on All this Stamp is ſet;
                     Early or late, into This Port muſt Wee:
                     Who gaue the Charge, ordained the Retreat;
                     One ſelf-ſame Law did Life & Death decree.
                  
                  
                     70
                     The more the Body dures, Soule more indures;
                     Neuer too-ſoon can Shee from thence exile:
                     Pure, in ſhe came; there liuing, Shee impures;
                     And ſuffers there a thouſand Woes the while.
                  
                  
                     
                     71
                     The Soule is forc't within the Fleſh to dwell;
                     
                        
                           •
                        n danger there ſhee liues, & ſleeps in fear:
                     To hatch her Bird, ſhe needs muſt break her Shell,
                     
                        
                           •
                        nd think It neuer can too-ſoon appear.
                  
                  
                     72
                     Soule blames the Body, Body blames the Soule;
                     
                        
                           •
                        t, Death ſurpriſing, ends their Quarrell preſt:
                     
                        
                           •
                        own goes the Body, in the Duſt to roule;
                     
                        
                           •
                        he faithfull Soule, vp to th'eternall Reſt.
                  
                  
                     73
                     
                        Death frees the Soule from Bodies wilfull Errors;
                     
                        
                           •
                        om the Soules Vices, She the Bodie ſaues:
                     
                        
                           •
                        he Soule's Annoyes, are to the Body Terrors;
                     
                        
                           •
                        e Bodies Torments, to the Soule are Graues.
                  
                  
                     74
                     This Body is not Man: His Stuff's more fine;
                     
                        
                           •
                        s Beauty, with Heau'ns Beauty hath Affinitie:
                     
                        
                           •
                        e Body dead, That euer-liues, diuine;
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         euen a Beam from the ſupream Diuinitie.
                     
                  
                  
                     75
                     If then the Soule, ſo long Heer languiſhing
                     
                        
                           •
                        hin the Bodie, doe not gladly part;
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         hath forgotten her own Source or Spring,
                     
                        
                           •
                        d that She muſt, from whence ſhe cam, reuart.
                  
                  
                     
                     76
                     But, more then Death, Death's Pain appalleth thee;
                     That's but a Stream which ſwiftly vaniſheth:
                     Ther's, as no Pain, in that Extremitie:
                     For, th'Body, down, doth nothing feele in death.
                  
                  
                     77
                     Then quit thoſe Fears that in thy Phantſie ſtick:
                     For, violent Euills haue no permanence:
                     If that Death's Pain be keen, 'tis alſo quick;
                     And by the Quicknes takes away the Senſe.
                  
                  
                     78
                     To leaue thy Babes behind, thy hart it gripes;
                     In Whoſe Thou ſhalt reuiue, from lap to lap:
                     Happy who hath them; for they are our Types:
                     And oft Who hath None,'s happy by mishap.
                  
                  
                     79
                     To leaue thy Wife thou wail'ſt, wel worth excuſing
                     'T's a neceſſary Ill, Good ſtranger-like;
                     Which, cleereſt Eyes (Self-wiſe) too-oft miſchuſing,
                     In little Fleſh finde many Bones to pick.
                  
                  
                     80
                     Th'art loth to leaue the Court's Delights, Deuices,
                     Where None liues long vnbrau'd, or vnabhorred:
                     Where Treaſon's Prudence; where the Vertues Vices
                              •
                           
                        
                     
                     Where ſom no Eyes, & wher ſom haue no Forehead.
                  
                  
                     
                     81
                     The Mariner, that runs from Rock to Rock,
                     
                        
                           •
                        rom Wrack to Wrack, dwelling in dangers rife,
                     Waue's Bal, Wind's Thral, & Tempeſt's Shuttlecock,
                     Would not exchange His for the Courtiers Life.
                  
                  
                     82
                     The Court beguiles thee, as black-Angel-Bands,
                     
                        
                           •
                        n giuing Leaues for Fruits to Circes Siſters:
                     Their brighteſt Torches are but funerall Brands:
                     
                        
                           •
                        nd, in the Court, All is not Gold that gliſters.
                     
                  
                  
                     83
                     Thou wold'ſt in Death reuenge thy wrōged Worth,
                     
                        
                           •
                        ake known thy Loue, haue ſhown thy braue Ambition,
                     
                        
                           •
                        hy fram'ſt thou not thy Death vnto thy Birth,
                     
                     Which brought thee naked forth, & void of Paſſion?
                  
                  
                     84
                     Fain wold'ſt thou ſee thy Learning's fruit (perhaps)
                     
                        
                           ••…
                        pe, yer Thou rot; that's but a vain Deſire:
                     
                        
                           
                              ••
                           rt now-adayes may ſtarue, while Ignorance
                     
                     
                        
                           ••
                        th Shades for Summer; & for Winter, Fire.
                  
                  
                     85
                     All day thou trudgeſt thorough thick & thin,
                     
                        
                           ••
                        r that dull Bulk which doth thee daily braue:
                     
                        
                           
                              ••
                           inice wreaths Ropes, which aye his Aſs windes-in:
                     
                        
                           ••
                        e Soule that ſerues the Body, is a Slaue.
                  
                  
                     
                     86
                     As many ſteps in Death as Life we tread:
                     Eſteem, for Deaths, all Daies ſince thou hadſt breath:
                     
                        To come's not Thine; Preſent, is inſtant fled:
                     And Time, in time, is ouer-come by Death.
                     
                  
                  
                     87
                     When Man's imbarkt on th'Vniuerſal Deck,
                     Hee neither can ſwiften his Courſe, nor ſlack it:
                     Tide, Winde, and Weather, are not at his Beck;
                     And, To put back, hath many often wracked.
                  
                  
                     88
                     Some, ſomtimes grieue for one that gladly dies:
                     
                        Socrates ioyes, ſith wrong he ſuffereth:
                     
                        Xantippa melts in Tears; He laughs, She cries:
                     Diuerſly iudging of theſe Darts of Death.
                     
                  
                  
                     89
                     To runne vnto this Death, is Deſperate rage:
                     Wiſe Patience onely waits it euery-where:
                     Who ſcorns it, ſhowes a Reſolution ſage;
                     For, Cowards flie it, & the Idiots feare.
                  
                  
                     90
                     When the laſt Sand of our laſt Glaſs goes out,
                     Without recoiling, we muſt ſtep our laſt:
                     As, without grudge or noiſe, diſlodge the Stout;
                     And when they muſt goe, ſtay not to be chac't.
                  
                  
                     
                     91
                     The Pilgrim longs to haue his Iourney done;
                     The Mariner would fain be off the Seas:
                     The Work-man ioyes to end his Work begun;
                     
                        
                           •
                        nd yet Man mournes to finiſh his Diſeaſe.
                  
                  
                     92
                     For a ſhort time Thy Sun is ouer-caſt:
                     
                        
                           •
                        ut, Thou ſhalt once re-ſee't more bright than euer:
                     
                        
                           •
                        nd, that ſame Day, which heer thou think'ſt thy laſt,
                     
                        
                           •
                         a New-birth Day, to be ended neuer.
                  
                  
                     93
                     What Wrong doth Death, I pree-thee Worldling ſay,
                     
                        
                           •
                        hen, loſing (vnder hope of happier matches)
                     
                        
                           •
                        utting thy Life, he takes thy Card away;
                     
                        
                           •
                        nd when, to ſaue thy Life, thy Light he ſnatches?
                  
                  
                     94
                     Fear'ſt thou, Faint-hart, that narrow Plank to paſs
                     
                        
                           •
                        hich GOD Himſelf hath gone; which all Men muſt?
                     
                        
                           •
                        at, like a Childe, held by the ſleeue (alas!)
                     
                        
                           •
                        th Eye ſtill glancing on the brim thou go'ſt?
                  
                  
                     95
                     Beyond it, thou ſhalt ſee thoſe pleaſant Plains,
                     
                        
                           •
                        oſe boundleſs Beauty all Diſcourſe tranſcendeth:
                     
                        
                           •
                        ere Kings & Subiects ſoules, haue fellow Raigns,
                     
                        
                           •
                        bleſſed Thrones, whoſe Glory neuer endeth.
                  
                  
                     
                     96
                     What ſhalt thou ſee more, for more liuing Heer?
                     This Heauen, this Sun, thou oft before haſt ſeen:
                     And ſhouldſt thou liue another Plato's Yeer.
                     This World would be the ſame that it hath been.
                  
                  
                     97
                     
                        Death's end of Ills, and only Sanctuarie
                     Of him that cannot ſcape the Grudge, the Gall
                     Of a ſeuere Iudge and proud Aduerſarie:
                     It is a Point which Heav'n appoints to All.
                  
                  
                     98
                     At that Diuorce ſigh Bodies, Soules do ſolace;
                     Th'Exile exulteth at his Home-Retreat:
                     This Bodie's but the Inne, tis not the Palace:
                     Th'immortall Soule, hath an immortall Seat.
                  
                  
                     99
                     
                        Death's as the Dawning of that happy Day,
                     VVhere without Setting ſhines the eternall Sun,
                     VVhere-in who walk, can neuer neuer ſtray:
                     Nor Feare they Night who to the Day-ward run.
                  
                  
                     100
                     There's Reſt eternall for thy Labours rife:
                     There's for thy Bondage bound-leſs Liberty:
                     There when Death endeth, ſhe begins thy Life.
                     And where's no more Time, there's Eternity.
                     
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  MEMORIALS of MORTALITIE: Written 
                        •
                     n Tablets, or Quatrains, BY PIERE MATHIEV.
                  The ſecond Centurie.
                  Tranſlated, & Dedicated To the Right Honourable, ROBERT, Earle of Eſſex.
                  By Ioſuah Sylveſter.
               
               
                  
                  
                  TO The Right Honorable, ROBERT DEVREVX, Earle of Eſſex & Ew, &c.
                  Your double Title to My ſingle heart,
                  Both by your Purchaſe, and your Parents Right;
                  
                  
                     Claims both a better and a greater Part
                  Of gratefull Seruice, than This ſlender Mite.
                  
                  
                     
                        ••
                     t, ſith (to profit, more than pleaſe) I write
                  More Sighes than Songs (leſſe vs'd to Smiles than Smart)
                  Diſdain not Theſe Reſtrainers of Delight;
                  
                  Though bitter, fitter, than the Soothing Art,
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     keep the Minde and Bodie both in Health;
                  
                  To coole the Fits of Luſt, Ambition, Pride
                  
                  (Surfaits of Eaſe, Youth, Liberty, and Wealth)
                  
                     
                        ••
                     d cure All Sickneſs of the Soule, beſide.
                  Whence, Euer free; and full of Euery Good
                  From GOD and Men, be ESSEX Noble Bud.
                  
                     
                        Ex Animo exoptat Ioſuah Sylvester.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  MEMORIALS of Mortalitie.
                  
                     1
                     THat height of Kings, Crowns Honor, Worthies Wō
                        der,
                     Is now but wind, duſt, ſhade. He whoſe Approch
                     
                        
                           •…
                        pall'd the Prowdeſt: Whom; All trembled vnder;
                     
                        
                           •…
                        urſed baſe hand butcherd in his Coach.
                     
                  
                  
                     2
                     All Triumph, yeſterday; to-day, all Terror:
                     
                        
                           •…
                        y; the faire Morning ouer-caſt yet Euen:
                     
                        
                           •…
                        y; one ſhort Hour ſaw, liue and dead, Wars Mirror,
                     
                        
                           •…
                        uing Death's ſpeed-ſtroak vndiſcerued giuen.
                  
                  
                     3
                     
                        
                           •
                        n all This World, All's fickle; nought is Firm:
                     
                        
                           •…
                        s a Sea ſanz, Safety, Calm, or Port:
                     
                        
                           ••…
                        es, Cities, Empires haue but heer their Term:
                     
                        
                           ••
                        at euer's born muſt vnder Death reſort.
                  
                  
                     4
                     Time flits as Wind, and as a Torrent ſwifteth:
                     
                        
                           •
                        aſſeth quick, and Nought can ſtop it flying:
                     
                        
                           •
                        ho knowes what Ills it euery Moment drifteth,
                     
                        
                           •…
                        ms, that To leaue to liue, is To leaue dying.
                  
                  
                     5
                     
                        
                           •
                        an in the Wombe knowes nothing of his State:
                     
                        
                           •…
                        wile of Nature) for, there, had he Reaſon,
                     
                        
                           •
                        hould fore-know this Worlds too-wretched Fate;
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         rather would intom be him in that Priſon.
                  
                  
                     
                     6
                     Our Birth begins our Beere; our Death, our Brea
                           •
                        
                     
                     On that Condition Heer aboord we come:
                     To be's as not to be: Birth is but Death:
                     Ther's but a Sigh from Table to the Tombe.
                  
                  
                     7
                     Life's but a Flaſh, a Fume, a Froath, a Fable,
                     A Puffe, a Picture in the Water ſeeming;
                     A waking Dream, Dreams Shadow, Shadowes Ta
                           •
                        
                     
                     Troubling the Brain with idle Vapors ſteeming.
                  
                  
                     8
                     Life, to the life, The Cheſſe-boord lineats;
                     VVhere Pawnes and Kings haue equall Portion:
                     This leaps, that limps, this cheks, that neks, that ma
                           •
                        
                     
                     Their Names are diuerſe; but, their Wood is one.
                  
                  
                     9
                     
                        Death, Exile, Sorrow, Fear, Diſtraction, Strife,
                     And all thoſe Euils, ſeen before ſuſpected;
                     Are not the Pains, but Tributes of this Life;
                     Whence, Kings no more than Carters are protecte
                           •
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     10
                     No: Sacraments haue been no Sanctuarie
                     
                     From Death; Nor Altars, for Kings offering-vp:
                     Th'Hell-hallowed Hoſt poyſons Imperiall Harrie:
                     
                        Pope Victor dies drinking th'immortall Cup.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     11
                     Thou ow'ſt thy Soule to Heav'n; to pay that Debt
                     
                     
                        
                           •
                        ot compeld; Chriſtians are willing Payers:
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         yet, thy Soule as a good Gueſt intreat;
                     
                        
                           •
                        om no good Hoſte will tumble down the Stairs.
                  
                  
                     12
                     
                        
                           •
                        is better fall, then ſtill to feare a Fall:
                     better die, then to be ſtill a-dying:
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         End of Pain ends the Complaint withall:
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         nothing grieues that comes but once, & flying.
                  
                  
                     13
                     This Life's a Web, wouen fine for ſom, ſom groſſe;
                     
                        
                           •
                        e Hemp, ſome Flax, ſome longer, ſhorter ſome:
                     
                        
                           •
                        d and Ill Haps are but the Threeds acroſſe:
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         firſt or laſt, Death cuts it from the Loom.
                  
                  
                     14
                     Theſe Names, which make ſome blubber, ſome ſo braue
                     
                        
                           •
                        mes ſprung from Iniury, or from Ambition)
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           eath are equall: Earle, and Sir, and Slaue,
                     
                     
                        
                           •
                        er his Empire, are in one Condition.
                  
                  
                     15
                     
                        
                           •
                        or Friends Deceaſt, ceaſe not Repaſt nor Sleep;
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         Sorrow ſutes not th'Intellectual part:
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         wailes man's Death, that He was man doth weep:
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         that He promiſt, comming, to depart.
                  
                  
                     
                     16
                     The Young and old goe not as equall pas't:
                     Th' one ambles ſwift, the other gallopeth:
                     Tis good to die, yer we our Life diſtaſte.
                     A valiant Man ſhould dare to feel his Death.
                  
                  
                     17
                     Happy who leaue the World when firſt they come
                           •
                        
                     
                     Th' Aier, at the beſt, is heer contagious thick:
                     Happy that Childe, who iſſuing from the Wombe
                     Of's Spaniſh Mother, there returned quick.
                  
                  
                     18
                     The Bodie's Torments are but Twigs to beat
                     And bruſh the Duſt from Vertues pleights about;
                     And make the Paſſions of the Soule more neat:
                     As th'Aier is pureſt when the Winds roar-out.
                  
                  
                     19
                     Grieuing that Death ſhuts not thine Eyes at hom
                           •
                        
                     
                     And where the Heav'ns vouchfaf't them firſt to ope
                           •
                        
                     
                     Thou fear'ſt the Earth too-little for thy Tombe,
                     And Heav'n too-narrow for thy Corpſes Cope.
                  
                  
                     20
                     Heav'ns haue no leſſe Order, then at their Birth,
                     Nor Influence: Sun, Moon, and Stars, as bright;
                     All hold their owne; Fire, Water, Aier, & Earth:
                     Man, Man alone's fall'n from his priſtine Plight.
                  
                  
                     
                     21
                     Worldling, thou ſaiſt, 'Tis yet not time to mend;
                     But, GOD hates Sinners that in Sin delight:
                     To groſſeſt Sinners doth hee Mercy ſend;
                     But, not to Sinners ſinning in deſpight.
                  
                  
                     22
                     Who, Morn & Euen, doth of Himſelfe demand
                     
                        
                           •
                        ccount of All that he hath done, ſaid, thought;
                     
                        
                           •
                        hall find him much eas'd, when he comes to ſtand
                     To that Account where All ſhal once be brought.
                  
                  
                     23
                     For bitter Checks that make thy Cheeks to flame,
                     
                        
                           •
                        nd to thy Teeth tell Truths, thou haſt no Action:
                     
                        
                           •
                        o doe the Euill, ſith thou hadſt no ſhame,
                     
                        
                           •
                        e not aſham'd to ſuffer thy Correction.
                  
                  
                     24
                     Perhaps, this Child, ſhal Rich, or Poore, becom:
                     
                        
                           •
                        erhaps a Wretch, perhaps a Liberall:
                     
                        
                           •
                        erhaps a Wiſe-man, & perhaps a Mome:
                     
                        
                           •
                        t, paſt perhaps, aſſured, die he ſhall.
                  
                  
                     25
                     When Wine runs lowe, it is not worth the ſparing;
                     
                        
                           •
                        he worſt & leaſt doth to the Bottom diue:
                     
                        
                           •
                        ong not thy leiſure (yeers vouchſafe) in daring:
                     
                        
                           •
                        t ſome-times looke into thy Graue, aliue.
                  
                  
                     
                     26
                     Sinner, thy GOD is not inexorable;
                     No Rhadamanth, Returning hearts to hate:
                     There is no Sin, in Heav'n vnpardonable;
                     Nor no Repentance, in this Life, too late.
                  
                  
                     27
                     The Eye that fixlie the Sun-beames beholds,
                     Is ſuddain daz'd: ſo, in GOD's Iudgements high,
                     Mens cleereſt Iudgements are as blind as Moulds:
                     None, none but Aegles, can the Lightning eye.
                  
                  
                     28
                     O wrecked Vertue! wretched is Thy ſtate;
                     For, Fortune hath the Fruit, Thou ſcarce the Flower▪
                     
                     Thou art a Stranger at thy proper Gate,
                     Thy Friends thence baniſht, & thy Foes in Bower.
                  
                  
                     29
                     Man, Knowledge ſtill, to the laſt gaſpe, affecteth;
                     In learning, Socrates liues, grayes, and dyes.
                     Free frō 
                        Death's Proceſs Knowledge none protecteth
                           •
                        
                     
                     But, to learn Well to die, is to be Wiſe.
                     
                  
                  
                     30
                     To liue, is to begin One-Work, and end it,
                     Life hath, with All, not ſame Repute, Report;
                     'T's an Exile, to the Sot; Sage, Iourney ween'd it:
                     Wherein Hee walks, not as the Common-ſort.
                  
                  
                     
                     31
                     For hauing a good Prince, Peers iuſt & wiſe,
                     
                        
                           •
                        bedient People, Peace concluded faſt,
                     State's not ſure: Storms after Calms ariſe;
                     
                        
                           •
                        d faireſt Dayes haue fouleſt ouer-caſt.
                  
                  
                     32
                     Man, though thou be from Heav'n Originarie,
                     
                        
                           •
                        eſume not yet to Peer thee with thy God:
                     
                        
                           •
                        e's Soueraign King; Thou but his Tributary.
                     
                        
                           •
                        e's euery where; Thou but in one poore Clod.
                  
                  
                     33
                     Of Elephants, the biggeſt leads the Band;
                     
                        
                           •
                        e ſtrongeſt Bull ouer the Heard doth raign:
                     
                        
                           •
                        , Him behooues who will Mankind command,
                     
                        
                           •
                        t ableſt Body, but the apteſt Brain.
                  
                  
                     34
                     Kings Maieſtie ſeems as eclipſed much,
                     
                        
                           •
                        eſs great Seruants in great Troops attend:
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         ſure an Honour to be ſeru'd by Such;
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         on Their Faith 'tis fearfull to depend.
                  
                  
                     35
                     To build a Palace, rareſt Stones are ſought:
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         build a Ship, beſt Timber is ſelected:
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         to inſtruct young Princes (as they ought)
                     
                        
                           •
                        ght all the Vertues to be there collected.
                  
                  
                     
                     36
                     
                        Art's now-adayes a Deſert deſolate:
                     Kings gracious Raies are there no more diſcerned:
                     Philoſophers wait at the Wealthies Gate,
                     And rarely Rich men do regard the Learned.
                  
                  
                     37
                     Th'hand bindeth not except the heart with-go:
                     What coms not thence, nor Thank nor Thought 
                           〈◊〉
                         ſer
                           •
                        
                     
                     He giueth All that doth Himſelfe beſtow;
                     He Nothing giues who but his heart reſerues.
                  
                  
                     38
                     That curious Thirſt of Trauaile to and fro,
                     Yeelds not the Fruit it promis'd men in minde:
                     Changing their Aire, their Humors change not th
                           •
                        
                     
                     But, many Lodgings, & few Friends they finde.
                  
                  
                     39
                     In vain the Soule hath Reaſon's Attribute,
                     Which vnto Reaſon cannot Senſe ſubmit:
                     For, Man (alas!) is bruter then a Brute,
                     Vnleſs that Reaſon bridle Appetit.
                     
                  
                  
                     40
                     Self-ſwelling Knowledge, Wits own Ouerbearer,
                     Proues Ignorance, & findes it Nothing knowes:
                     It flies the Truth to follow Lyes and Error:
                     And, when moſt right it weens, moſt wry it goes.
                  
                  
                     
                     41
                     The Vicious trembles, alwaies in Alarmes;
                     
                        
                           •
                        h'Eye of the Vertuous keepes him as at Bay:
                     
                        
                           •
                        hen All the World fear'd Rome's All-reaching Arms,
                     
                        
                           •
                        he vertuous Cato did all ROME diſmay.
                  
                  
                     42
                     Vice blinds the Soule, & Vnderſtanding clogs,
                     
                        
                           •
                        kes good of ill, takes foule for faireſt look,
                     
                        
                           •
                        a, Durt for Dainties: ſo liue loathſom Frogs,
                     
                        
                           •
                        ther in Puddles than in pureſt Brook.
                  
                  
                     43
                     
                        
                           •
                        n Greateſt Houſes Vice hath battered,
                     
                        
                           •
                        oſe Honors though no leſs haue ſhined bright:
                     
                        
                           •
                        at are the Graceleſs to the Good? Not dead,
                     
                        
                           •
                         liuing Branches, in the Tree haue Right.
                  
                  
                     44
                     
                        
                           •
                        f Men might freely take Eſſay of Court;
                     
                        
                           •
                        ne, hauing taſted, would return ſo neer:
                     
                        
                           •
                        e happieſt there meets many a Spight in Sport,
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         knows too-well he buyes his Weal too-deer.
                  
                  
                     45
                     To loue None; All to doubt; to fain, to flatter;
                     
                        
                           •
                        form new Faces, & transform true harts;
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         offer Seruice, & flie-off in Matter;
                     
                        Coutiers Leſſons, and their Ground of Arts.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     46
                     Set not thy Reſt on Court, Sea's barren ſand;
                     There grows no Goodnes; good, there, euil growes
                     
                        Reſt's Temple yerſt did forth the Citie ſtand:
                     No Sent's ſo ſweet, as is the Country Roſe.
                  
                  
                     47
                     Who weens in Court to thriue, will find him weak
                     Without two Aiders; Impudence, Immunitie:
                     For, firſt behooues him his own Brows to break,
                     Yer Others heads he break with Importunitie.
                     
                  
                  
                     48
                     Who is not ſory for Time's loſſe, in ſtay
                     For Kings ſlowe Fauours, ſeems to haue no ſenſe:
                     The loſſe of Goods a Prince may well repay,
                     But loſs of Time Kings cannot recompence.
                  
                  
                     49
                     Is't not the Top of Follies Top, to note
                     An Old Sir Tame-aſſe gallanting in Court,
                     To play the Yonker, & Swan-white to dote
                     On Venus Douelings, in deſpight of Sport?
                  
                  
                     50
                     A mean Man hardly ſcapes the Mightie's Clawe
                           •
                        
                     
                     Hee's as a Mouſe play'ng by a ſleeping Cat;
                     Who lets it run, then locks it in her Pawes:
                     And all her ſports boad but the Death of That.
                  
                  
                     
                     51
                     World's Vanitie is rife in euerie place,
                     Alas! that good Wits ſhould be'witched ſo!)
                     
                        
                           •
                        askt in the Church, in Court with open Face.
                     
                        
                           •
                        or, there's the place herperfectly to knowe.
                  
                  
                     52
                     By euill Manners is good Nature marred;
                     
                        
                           •
                        one falls at once, all Vertue to defie.
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           ee, in the Soule is a ſtrange Plant transferred:
                     
                        
                           •
                        nd wert not dreſſed, it would quickly die.
                  
                  
                     53
                     With By-Reſpects Impietie wee couer:
                     
                        
                           •
                        rth more then Heav'n is priz'd among vs Now:
                     GOD'S great Name we ſcarce our heads vncouer;
                     When Kings are named, euery knee doth bow.
                  
                  
                     54
                     Diſorder Order breeds: good Lawes haue ſprung
                     
                        
                           •
                        om Euill-liues: Would All keep Iuſtice line,
                     
                        Weſtminſter there would be ſoon leſſe Throng,
                     
                        
                           •
                        ſs Work, leſs Wrack, leſs Words for Mine & Thine.
                     
                  
                  
                     55
                     Law-Tricks now ſtrip the People to their ſhirt:
                     
                        
                           •
                        ift is their Shield, Gold in their onely God:
                     
                        
                           •
                        aſps break the Web, Flies are held faſt & hurt:
                     
                        
                           •
                        he Guiltie quit, the Guiltleſs vnder-trod.
                  
                  
                     
                     56
                     Ther's now no truſt: Brother betraies his Brother:
                     Faith's but a phanſie, but by Fooles eſteemed:
                     Friend's falſe to Friend; & All deceiue each-other;
                     Th'Iuie pulls down the Wall by which it climbd.
                  
                  
                     57
                     Treaſons be Trifles: Man's a Wolfe to Man:
                     Crimes be but Crums; Vice is for Vertue vanted;
                     
                        Sodom's and Cypris Sinnes we ſuffer can:
                     And Impious tricks in all their Tracks are hanted.
                  
                  
                     58
                     In perfect'ſt Men ſom Imperfection's found,
                     Some-what amiſs among their good is ſeen:
                     Gold, & pure Gold we dig not from the ground,
                     There's Duſt & Droſs, & groſſer ſtuffe between.
                  
                  
                     59
                     Merit, of old did Friendſhip feed & fix;
                     Where now-adaies 'tis founded all on Profit,
                     With deep Diſſembling & Deceitfull-tricks,
                     And euermore the Poore is fruſtrate of it.
                  
                  
                     60
                     Th'Earth cannot fill thy hearts vnequal Angles;
                     Thy Hearts a Triangle, the Earth's a Round:
                     A Triangle is fill'd but with Triangles:
                     And th'infinite the finite cannot bound.
                  
                  
                     
                     61
                     'T's a Death to die far from ones Natiue Citie:
                     
                        
                           •
                        et Death's not milder there, then elſe-about:
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           eath without ROME, did not Rutilius pittie;
                     Neither, within ROME, Him that ne'r went out.
                  
                  
                     62
                     When Man is com'n to th'old laſt Caſt of Age,
                     When Nature can no longer lend nor borrow;
                     
                        
                           •
                        e thinks not yet to pack, and leaue the Stage;
                     
                        
                           •
                        ut ſtill, ſtill hopes to liue vntill to-Morrow.
                  
                  
                     63
                     Fain, would'ſt thou ſhe Loue's wanton Luxurie?
                     
                        
                           •
                        ut-off Occaſions: ſpeak farre-off; fly Fitnes:
                     
                        
                           •
                        hun Solitude: liue ſtill in Companie:
                     They fall alone that would not fall with Witnes.
                  
                  
                     64
                     Muſe not, to ſee the Wicked proſper faire:
                     
                        
                           •
                        he Sun his Shine euen vnto Theeues doth giue:
                     When of their Patients Leaches do deſpaire,
                     They giue them ouer as they liſt to liue.
                  
                  
                     65
                     
                        Slander is worſer than Hell's burning Torture,
                     The Force more fierce, the Heat more vehement:
                     
                        
                           •
                        ell, after Death, doth but the Guilty martyr;
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           ander, aliue, torments the Innocent.
                  
                  
                     
                     66
                     
                        Affliction razes, and then raiſes hearts:
                     As, vnder Waight, victorious Palms are wont:
                     As, vnder Seals the Wax doth ſwell (in part);
                     Vnder the Croſſe the Soule to Heav'n doth mount.
                  
                  
                     67
                     
                        Enuie, in vain pure Vertues Anuil bites,
                     Breaking her Teeth: as on a Stone the Cur,
                     That barks of Cuſtom, rather then Deſpight,
                     At euery poore and harmleſſe Paſſenger.
                  
                  
                     68
                     
                        Enuie's a Torture which doth Men moleſt;
                     Euen from their Birth; yer they ought els can doo:
                     Behold Two Infants nurſed at one Breſt;
                     They cannot brook their Teat for meat to Two.
                  
                  
                     69
                     This is the Ods twixt Honeſt men & Knaues;
                     Th'one tels his Neighbor, All mine owne is mine,
                     And all Thine too: The other (void of Braues)
                     Saith, Thine's not Mine; but, what I haue is Thine.
                  
                  
                     70
                     What Enuie likes not, that ſhe makes a Fault:
                     
                        Ioſeph, with Iſmael, for his Dream, was barter'd:
                     
                        Abels pure Offring to his End him brought:
                     And for the Truth the Innocent are martyrd.
                  
                  
                     
                     71
                     
                        Flat-Cap, for whom, hoord'ſt thou thy heaped Treaſures?
                     Thy Bodies Sweat, thy Soul's deer Price (poor Sot!)?
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           ir Prodige-all (thine Heire) in Protean Pleaſures,
                     VVill waſte, in one Day, All thine Age hath got.
                  
                  
                     72
                     True Liberality would be intire:
                     Yet not at-once, at all times, and to all.
                     One may miſ-giue, to giue yer one require:
                     Yet Gifts vn-asked ſweeteſt Gifts I call.
                  
                  
                     73
                     Content with Fruits from thine own Labor grow'n,
                     A fore-hand ſtill, a ſet Reuenew ſaue:
                     
                        
                           •
                        or, He's a Foole in more reſpects than one,
                     That ſpends his Store, or more, before he haue.
                  
                  
                     74
                     There is no Goodnes in a groueling heart,
                     
                        
                           •
                        ent on the VVorld, bound to this Rock belowe:
                     VVere not the Moon ſo neer this Neather part,
                     
                        
                           •
                        he would not, could not, be Eclipſed ſo.
                  
                  
                     75
                     Goods are great Ills to thoſe that cannot vſe them:
                     Miſers miſ-keep, and Prodigals miſ-ſpend-them:
                     Hell-hounds, to haſten toward Hel, abuſe-them:
                     As Wings, to Heav'n-ward, heav'n-bent-Soules extend thē.
                  
                  
                     
                     76
                     Preſumptuous Spirits ſpring not frō right Nobility:
                     Courage, that comes from Pride, proues neuer true:
                     Pride ruines hearts, whoſe Raiſer is Humility:
                     The humble Shepheard the proud Giant ſlew.
                  
                  
                     77
                     
                        Pride glitters oft vnder an humble Weed:
                     Oft louely Names are giuen to loath'd Effects;
                     Men ſooth them in the Cauſe, to 'ſcuſe th'ill Deed:
                     And blame Light, rather than their Sight's Defect.
                  
                  
                     78
                     A Prudent man is, for Him-ſelf, ſought-forth:
                     He's more admir'd then what the World moſt vants:
                     Praiſes are due vnto ones proper Worth:
                     Not pureſt Gold addes Price to Diamants.
                     
                  
                  
                     79
                     Th'Humble, doth Others prize; Him-ſelf depreſs:
                     Saue againſt Pride he neuer bends his Browes:
                     The more his Vertue mounts-him, counts-him leſs:
                     God th'humble Sinner, not proud Iuſt, allowes.
                  
                  
                     80
                     O! Hypocrite, which haſt but Vertue's Vaile,
                     Seem what thou art, and what thou ſeemeſt be:
                     To hide thy Filth, all thy Fig-leaues will faile:
                     Thou canſt not hide thee from thy God, nor Thee.
                  
                  
                     
                     81
                     Mock-Saints, whoſe Soul-weal on your Works you lay,
                     VVith eyes & hands to Heauen, while hart's els-where:
                     For ſhame you durſt not to the leaſt man ſay,
                     VVhat you (profane) dare whiſper in Gods eare.
                  
                  
                     82
                     Gold's fin'd in fire: Soules in Affliction, better:
                     
                        
                           •
                        oths gnaw the Garment locked in the Cheſt:
                     
                        
                           •
                        till water ſtinks, vnwholeſom, black, and bitter:
                     
                        
                           •
                        words ruſt in Sheathes, and ſo doe Soules in Reſt.
                  
                  
                     83
                     Opening thy Soul to God, cloze Mouth from Men:
                     
                        
                           •
                        or let thy Thoughts roame from thy due Intent;
                     GOD ſees the hearts, his iudgement ſoundeth them,
                     
                        
                           •
                        nd Them confounds whoſe Words & Deeds diſſent
                  
                  
                     84
                     
                        Gamesters may well All to to-Morrow poſt,
                     
                        
                           •
                        o ſee, or to be ſeen, th'haue neuer leaſure:
                     With aduerſe Windes their Minds are euer toſt;
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           oſſe bringing Grief, more than the Gain brings Pleaſure.
                  
                  
                     85
                     To ſhun Affaires, behoues exceeding heed:
                     
                        
                           •
                        roubles vnſent-for, and vnlookt-for, haſte;
                     
                        
                           •
                        n-ſet, vn-ſowen, too-early growes the Weed:
                     We meet too-ſoon the Care we hoped paſt.
                  
                  
                     
                     86
                     All Idleneſs, diſ-natures Wit, diſ-nerues-it;
                     A mod'rate Trauell makes it quick, addreſt:
                     Sloath quels and kills it; Exerciſe preſerues-it:
                     But, He's not Free that hath no time to reſt.
                  
                  
                     87
                     Who ſeeketh Reſt in troublous Managings,
                     Thinks to find Calm amid Tempeſtuous Seas:
                     The World & Reſt are Two, two aduerſe things:
                     Thick ſtreams re-cleer when Storms & ſtirrings ceaſe
                  
                  
                     88
                     
                        Fortune in Court, is fickle, apt to varie:
                     Fauors ſort ſeldom to the Suiters minde:
                     They many times euen in the Port miſ-carie:
                     The hotter Sun, the blacker ſhade they finde.
                  
                  
                     89
                     Gifts, Honors, Office, Greatnes, Grace of Kings,
                     Are but the Vſhers of Aduerſity:
                     For their laſt miſchief, haue the Emmets wings:
                     And height of Health betokens Sicknes me.
                  
                  
                     90
                     Youth hath more Lures, more Traps, more Trai
                           •
                         to I
                           •
                        
                     
                     Then Fouler Sins, or Baits the Fiſher-man:
                     Age would, but cannot what it would, fulfill:
                     
                        Senex, thou leau'ſt not Sin: Sin leaues Thee, than.
                  
                  
                     
                     91
                     Th'Eye tends to Bewty, as the Centre of-it:
                     
                        
                           •
                        er the Eyes, Heart and Affections drawe:
                     
                        
                           •
                        s hard to keep ſafe what ſo-many couet:
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , mens Deſires Kings cannot keep in Awe.
                  
                  
                     92
                     Good or Ill-hap that heer happens thee,
                     
                        
                           •
                        mes from Opinion (which All-ruling ſeems).
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           nion makes vs Other then we be:
                     
                        
                           •
                        s not vnhappy, who him happy deems.
                     
                  
                  
                     93
                     
                        
                           •
                        rom contrarie Effects is formed Sadnes:
                     
                        
                           •
                        h Smoak & Smiles haue made the Eyes to water.
                     
                        
                           •
                        o ſowe in Tears, ſhall one day reap in Gladnes;
                     
                        
                           •
                        o ſowe in Ioyes, ſhall reap Annoys heerafter.
                  
                  
                     94
                     
                        
                           •
                        s leaue out I, and No, in Conuerſation:
                     
                        
                           •
                        rds now tranſ-poſed, and wax-noſed, Both,
                     ROMES New Doctrine of Equiuocation,
                     
                     
                        
                           •
                        ich giues a Lye the Credit of an Oath.
                  
                  
                     95
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           riends, now-adayes, wake at the noiſe of Gain.
                     
                        
                           •
                        ees to Flowers, as Crowes to Carion haſte,
                     Flyes to Fleſh, as Birds and Ants to Grain;
                     Friends to Profit thickly flock and faſt.
                  
                  
                     
                     96
                     Who reaues thine Honour, ſcoffes, if he preſume
                     T' haue don thee fauour, that thy life hee left:
                     Why ſhould the Bird liue, hauing loſt her Plume?
                     The reſt is nothing when the Honor's reft.
                  
                  
                     97
                     Little ſufficeth Life, in th'vn-delicious;
                     The Sun for need may ſometimes dreſſe our Victu
                           •
                        
                     
                     I blame, alike, the Cynik and Apicius;
                     This, for his too-too-much; That's, too-too-little
                  
                  
                     98
                     Too-oft is made too-ill Interpretation
                     Of Word & Deeds beſt meant & built by Reaſon▪
                     
                     All's euill to the Euill, by Self-flation:
                     Whence Bees their Hony, Spiders ſuck their Poiſ
                           •
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     99
                     
                        Happy the People where Iuſt-Gentle Prince-is:
                     Whoſe Sword is Iuſtice, and whoſe Shield is Loue.
                     
                     For Theſe Augustus Deified long-ſince-is:
                     And without Theſe, Kings Scepters maimed pro
                           •
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     100
                     Good-hap, Good-heart, Fauour, and Labour
                           •
                        
                     
                     Bring Men to Riches and to Honors heer;
                     But that's the Way about: To be born Great,
                     
                     Is great Aduantage; Not to buy ſo deer.
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  HENRIE THE GREAT, (The Fourth of that Name) LATE King of FRANCE & NAVARRE: HIS Tropheis and Tragedie.
                  Written By PIERE MATHIEV.
                  Tranſlated, & Dedicated 
                        〈◊〉
                      the Right Honorable, WILLIAM Earle of Salisburie.
                  By Ioſuah Sylveſter.
               
               
                  
                  
                  To the Right Honorable WILLIAM CECILL, Earle of Salisbury.
                  
                     
                        •
                     Eſides the Bonds which did most Vowes engage
                  To your deere Elders; and beſides the Due
                  Which to your Selfe might iustly thence accrew;
                  apparant Vertues of Your April-age,
                  
                     
                        •…
                     leng'd of right This Poëms Patronage:
                  
                     
                        •
                     he rather, ſith we firſt receiu'd from you,
                  
                     
                        •
                     he ſpeedy Notice (no leſſe quick than true)
                  
                     HENRY'S Death, through Hells diſ-chained Rage.
                  ſaw this Sunne, at his High-Noone-ſhine Set
                  ſuddaine Clowd of his owne Royall Bloud.
                  Horrid Hap! Who euer can forget
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      Fate, ſuch Hate; of one ſo Great, ſo Good:
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      Iuſt Revenge, roote out th'Ignatian Pack,
                  
                     
                        ••
                     e Moules that moou'd in Faux and Rauaillac.
                  
                  
                     IOS. SYL.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  THE 
                        ••
                     opheis of the Vertues and Fortune of HENRIE the Great.
                  
                     
                        ••
                     nce firſt Apollo lent the World his light,
                  And Earth empregned with his heatfull might,
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        pe hath ſeene no Potentate, no Prince,
                  Parallel Great HENR
                        ••
                     S excellence.
                  Terme, no Time, his freſh Renown ſhal ſhed:
                  
                     
                        •
                     er was King more dear, neuer more dread.
                  
                     
                        •
                     oenix of Kings, wonder of Chriſtendome,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ng all paſt, and without Peere to come;
                  Courage onely matcht His Clemencie;
                  ſhould his Tomb to Theſe Two equall be,
                  Spain & France, could not contain the ſame,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ch haue ſo often ſeen his feates of Fame.
                  
                     
                        •
                     s Life's a lamp to Princes, and a line;
                  
                     
                        •
                     rophey rear'd by Miracle diuine:
                  
                     
                        •
                     eater to all the Vertues built;
                  
                     
                        •
                     odly Garden with ſuch plenty fild
                  
                     
                        •
                     oiſeſt fruits & flowers, that chuſing, there
                  
                     
                        ••
                     ndance troubles more then Want elſe-where.
                  
                     The yeer that EDWARD in Great Brittain dy'd:
                  That France (beyond the mountains) Spain defi'd:
                  That Therwin walls were thundred to the ground:
                  That a faire flower our Royall Hymen Crownd:
                  I'th vvinter Solſtice (when the yeare is worn)
                  Within Pau Caſtle This young MARS was born,
                  Born for the Worlds Good, as his Enterance
                  Preſag'd him then the HERCVLES of France;
                  To re-aduance her Lillies long decayd:
                  For as (by chance) bare-head, abroad he playd,
                  At foure yeers old, a Snake he finds & kills;
                  At forty, foiles the Hydra of our Ills.
                  Nor was He bred in ſoft delicious wiſe
                  (Which forms young Spirits into the form of Vice
                  His Grandſire vs'd him to all VVeathers Ire,
                  His Sauce was Labour, Exerciſe his Fire,
                  His noble Heart did neuer ought inflame,
                  Saue Heauens deſire, & th'Honour of the ſame.
                  Scarce fourteen times had he beheld the birth
                  Of th'happy Planet (which praeſag'd his Worth)
                  Predominant in his Natitiall;
                  When he became an Armies Generall,
                  Whoſe hotteſt flame, without Him was but fume;
                  Nor, but by Him, durſt any good preſume.
                  
                     He purchaſt Peace, the which eftſoones was ſtaind
                  
                     
                        ••
                     th His Friends bloud, & his young ſoule conſtraind
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      faine ſome Change of His Religion:
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        inſeine Caſtle He was ſeaz'd vpon,
                  
                     
                        ••
                     d to the Court confin'd; where, diſcontent,
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      Spirit droopes, out of His Element.
                  Eſcaped thence: with reſtleſſe toyle, He tends
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      ſaue the Side of his Afflicted Fiends;
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      peace again he bringeth all in vre:
                  
                     
                        ••
                     d Mounſieur's death doth well his Hopes aſſure
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                     th' after Crown, who but between him ſtood;
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      now was He the firſt Prince of the Blood.
                  Then from afarre he doth new Storms diſcry,
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      threat his fortune, and his force to try:
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      meets the danger with vndaunted front,
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      in foure yeeres beares ten braue Armies brunt,
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      with the might of a great Monarch grac't;
                  Thereof, at Contras he defeats the laſt.
                  
                     
                        •
                     t laſt, the King to extreame Streights reduc't,
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        •
                     oubt of all, and daring none to truſt,
                  
                     
                        ••
                     lores This Prince, who reſcues him from Tours,
                  
                  
                     
                        ••
                     h iuſt Reuenge; & had, yer many houres,
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     humbled Paris to her Princes yoake,
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      for Saint Clements Paricidiall ſtroake.
                  
                     After which ſtroak (which all true French-men hate)
                  
                     France ſadly falls in a moſt wretched ſtate:
                  VVho hath leaſt Reaſon, hath moſt Inſolence;
                  VVho hath moſt Power, hath leaſt Obedience.
                  Nor Awe, nor Law; Diſorder euery-where:
                  Good, without hope, and Wicked without feare.
                  Rebellion ſpaunes as faſt as (in the Spring)
                  Fruit-fretting vermine; it doth Diſcord bring
                  In Families, dearth in Townes, death in Field:
                  O! happy you who neuer daign'd to yeeld
                  Vnto that Hagge; but, Loyall to the Crowne,
                  Haue left your Heires, Heires of a true renowne.
                  Who counts the Cares that on a Crown doe wait,
                  As well may number Autumnes fruitful fraight,
                  And Flora's too. Yet this great ſpirit of man,
                  Mid th'ebbs and flouds of This vaſt Ocean,
                  Seems a tall Ship, which maugre Winds & Waues,
                  In wiſhed Hauen her & her Burthen ſaues.
                  Hee's neuer idle, nor his Exerciſe
                  Other than ſtands with princely offices:
                  MARS, & DIANA, & CVPID wait on Him:
                  Maugre his Loſſe, hee alwaies gaines by Time.
                  Vnto Affaires his cares are open aye,
                  Nor waits hee lazying on his bed for day.
                  
                     Shafts, Tigers, Torrents; no nor Lightning flies
                  
                     
                        •
                     pre ſwift about, than This bold Eagle plies
                  
                     
                        •
                     mid all perils) to preſerue his State,
                  
                     
                        •
                     th Heed & Speed, from Rebels Pride & Hate.
                  Battells firſt, laſt in Retreats: in brief,
                  Action, Souldier; in Direction, Chief.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        iepe ſaw his Fortunes on a deſperate Dy:
                  
                     
                        •
                     e League preſum'd he needs muſt yeeld, or fly:
                  
                     
                        •
                     , as a Brook the more we ſtop his Courſe,
                  
                     
                        •
                     aks down his Bay, and runs with ſwifter force,
                  
                     
                        •
                      foiles his Foes at Arques, and ſhewes them plain,
                  
                     
                        •
                     t Heauens iuſt hand doth his dear Right ſuſtain.
                  Tis, buzz'd in Paris, and beleeu'd in part,
                  
                     
                        •
                     t he is taken; or conſtraind to ſtart
                  
                     
                        •
                     m Diepe to Douer, to ſeek Englands Aid;
                  
                     
                        •
                     , while Him comming Priſoner-wiſe, they ſaid,
                  
                     
                        •
                      the Baſtile; He came and ouer-came
                  
                     
                        •
                     ir Suburbs ſoon, to their Suborners ſhame.
                  
                     
                        •
                     onqueſt attends Him, whether he encamps,
                  
                     
                        •
                     marches on: again he takes Estampes:
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        ux, Eureux, Mans, Meulan, Vandoſme, Perch,
                  
                  
                     Honfleur, formoſt in His Trophie march;
                  
                     
                        •
                     rneſt-pence of His recouer'd State,
                  Crowne of France, which well admits no Mate.
                  
                     
                     Tiber and Iber then together flow
                  (Too ſtrong in wrong) his Right to ouer-throw.
                  There proudeth Power, Heer Proweſs brighter ſhines
                  And daily ſhewes vs by a thouſand Signes,
                  How great Aduantage a true Birth-right brings
                  (Againſt Vſurpers) vnto lawfull Kings.
                  In IVRY Fields, he ſeems a Blazing Star;
                  Seen in the Front of all his Hoaſt, afar:
                  Maieſtick Fury in his Martiall Face,
                  The braueſt Troops, doth in an inſtant Chaſe:
                  And boldeſt Rebels, which the reſt had led,
                  Came Charging one way, and by forty Fled.
                  
                     Melun ſurrenders, to his War-like Lot,
                  
                     Chartres is chaſtizd with his thundring Shot,
                  
                     Louuiers lyes humbled at his Conquering Foot,
                  
                     Noyon lamenteth her Three Succors rout,
                  
                     Eſpernay yeelds her wholely to his heſt,
                  
                     Dreux twiſe beſieged, opens as the reſt.
                  The League that late ſo violently burn'd;
                  To a Cold Feuer now her Frenzie turn'd;
                  And truſting ſtill in Strange Phyſycians aid,
                  Neglects her Cure till all her ſtrength decaid:
                  In dread of all, In doubt her owne will quaile;
                  As a weak Ship affraid of euery Saile.
                  
                     That (late) ACHILLES of the Spaniſh-Dutch,
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        rnezean Parma that atchieu'd ſo much
                  
                     Anwerp's Siege, by match-leſſe Stratagem;
                  
                     
                        •
                     d weend the World had had no Peer to Him:
                  
                     
                        •
                     d here the heart, twice, to refuſe to Fight;
                  
                     
                        •
                     d twiſe departed and bod none Good-Night.
                  
                  Fortune, for Him, no longer vs'd her Wheel;
                  
                     
                        •
                     t, kind and conſtant, followes at his heel:
                  
                     
                        •
                     's Happy euery where, and ouer all
                  
                     
                        •
                     ring Palmes and Lawrels: only neer Aumale
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     urderous Bullet put him to ſome pain,
                  
                     
                        •
                     t hindred not His Reſcue of his Train.
                  Who weens to vanquiſh Him, makes Him invict;
                  
                     
                        •
                     de to the Meek, to Proudlings ſtern and ſtrict:
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      loues the Lawrels without blood be-ſprent,
                  Cruell Conqueſt He doth euen lament.
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      Thunder batters but Rebellious Walls:
                  
                     
                        •
                     d who leaſt fear him, on them firſt he falls.
                  
                     France, Selfe to ſlay, and her owne Throat to Cut,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ms her owne hands; & (in ſtrange rage) doth put
                  
                     
                        •
                     e Knife to whet, in Spaines ambitious pawes;
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        in that would Spoil her Crowns primordial Lawes,
                  I would a Scepter with a Diſtaffe blin:
                  
                     
                        •
                      all in vain: The Lillies cannot Spin.
                  
                     
                     Re-Romaniz'd, ſo (ſay They) Heauen coniures;
                  His Errors at Saint Denis he abiures:
                  This Chāge, in Court yet chang'd not one nor other;
                  For, though his Subiects haue not all one Mother,
                  He holds them all his Sons, They him their Sire;
                  And Chriſtians all, all to one Heav'n aſpire.
                  Wiihin the Temple of The Mother-Maid,
                  
                  That bore her Son, her Sire, her God, her Aid,
                  With Heav'n-ſent Oyle He is anointed King,
                  Dons th'Order-Collar; and by euery thing,
                  To proue, in Him, Saint Lewis Faith and Zeale,
                  The Sick he touches, and his Touch doth heale.
                  By law of Arms, a Citie tane by Force,
                  Should feele the Victors rage, with ſmall remorſe;
                  
                     Paris ſo taken, is not treated ſo:
                  Though well his Iuſtice might haue razed lowe
                  Thoſe rebell Wals which bred and fed Theſe Wars;
                  To ſaue the guilt-leſs, He the guilty ſpares.
                  There, There's the Hope and Safety of His Side;
                  If There he faile, then farewell all beſide:
                  The Spaniard therfore Thither ſpeedy ſends,
                  A great ſtrong Conuoy to confirm His Friends.
                  Which ſoon defeated, There began the End
                  Of Ciuill Wars, and all to Vnion tend.
                  
                     Th'Honor of ſauing and reſtoring France,
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     s not alone due to His Valiance?
                  His Clemencie hath part; which lets him in
                  To ſtronger Holds, than all his Arms could win:
                  That, ſatisfied with Tears, makes from all parts,
                  Repentant Rebels yeeld him vp their Hearts.
                  
                     Lyons, the Porter of one Part of France,
                  
                  
                     Rouen, that ſees none like ſtrong in Ordinance,
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        rleans, which England did vndaunted proue,
                  
                     Marsëillis, iealous of old Neptune's loue,
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        ix, Bourges, Sens, Meaux, Poictiers, Troy, Thoulouſe,
                  
                  And Reins; of Theſe, each to his Bounty bowes.
                  This gracious Prince excus'd the ſimpler ſort,
                  VVhom (Malice-leſſe,) blind Paſſions did tranſport,
                  Againſt the Lawes, with fury of the Time,
                  VVho ſelf-affraid to faile in fowler Crime,
                  
                     
                        •
                     educ't by others ſlie ſeditious Lore,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ollow'd (like Sheep) their Fellowes ſtraid before.
                  This heauenly humane Clemency of His,
                  Yet cannot ſhield Him from ſome Treacheries;
                  One wounds him in the Mouth and breaks withall
                  One of his Teeth, (O Act vnnaturall!)
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      had not God in part put-by the blowe,
                  
                     
                        •
                     uen then in Paris had he periſht ſo.
                  
                     But, hauing quencht the Ciuill Fires in France,
                  
                  Gainſt his ill Neighbors now his Arms aduance;
                  In Piedmont-Fields his Lilly-flowers he plants,
                  Pills Bourgognie, and all Artois He dants,
                  And makes the great Caſtilian MARS to fly,
                  With Feare within; without, with Infamy.
                  Then, thoſe great Warriors that had diſobeyd
                  (Whom not their Courage but their Cauſe betray'd
                  Which came with ſhame and ſorrow (as was meet)
                  To caſt their ſwords at his victorious Feet,
                  Fearing his Rigor; He receiues them (rather)
                  With King-like grace, and kindneſſe like a Father.
                  Heauen daily works, for Him, ſome ſpecial Mira
                        •
                     
                  
                  His Faith's an Altar, and his Word an Oracle:
                  His greateſt foes haue neuer found him faile.
                  And ſhould Sincerity, in all men quaile,
                  Exiled from the World (as Moors from Spain)
                  In This Kings ſoule ſhe had been found againe.
                  
                     Spain by a train of many Wyles well laid,
                  Surpriſeth Amiens, France is all affraid:
                  The Spaniard, hence prouder then euer, ſwells,
                  Vndanted HENRY Thence him ſoon repells,
                  Regains his Citie, and conſtrains His foes,
                  To beg their Peace, or to abide his blowes.
                  
                     The Storms that long diſturbd the ſtate are val'd,
                  
                     
                        •
                     h' ill Vapors now are from all hearts exhal'd,
                  
                     
                        ••
                     d France is now all French euen all about:
                  
                     
                        •
                     nly the Breton ſtifly yet ſtood out.
                  
                     
                        •
                     t, thoſe white Ermines at the laſt muſt need,
                  
                     
                        •
                     f th' only Sent of the faire Lillies feed
                  Old PHILIP longs to ſee the Waters calme,
                  
                     
                        •
                     nds all deſignes vain to ſupplant This Palme;
                  
                     
                        •
                     h the more ſhaken, it more faſt doth grow:
                  
                     
                        •
                     e ſeeketh Peace, the Pope ſolicits ſo,
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        ruins doth treat it, Bruxells ſweares it don,
                  
                     
                        •
                     nd PHILIP pleas'd departs the World anon.
                  
                     France yet retains one ſenſible Offence,
                  
                     
                        •
                     r which ſhe vowes Reuenge or Recompence:
                  
                     
                        •
                     mong the Alps her thundring Canons roare,
                  
                     
                        •
                     oud-browd Montmeilan flaunts & vaunts the more
                  
                     
                        •
                      ſtop her fury, but in fine is fain
                  
                     
                        •
                      rue her raſhneſſe and repent in vain.
                  God haſtens his owne Work: This Monarch marries
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        yons Church, the choice, the Chief of Maries;
                  
                     
                        •
                     e Heauens delight, our Lilies ornament:
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        e, in one heart two louely Soules hath blent:
                  
                     
                        •
                     ence Peace is more confirm'd, and Diſcord, daſht.
                  
                     
                        ••
                     , by This knot many great Plots are quaſht.
                  
                     At Fountainbleau (a Paradiſe for ſite)
                  She brought him forth his Dolphin, his delight,
                  Whoſe tender youth giues happy hopes of Worth;
                  One Daughter alſo did ſhe there bring forth,
                  And two Sons more (Supporters of the Crowne):
                  Two daughters more, Paris for birth doth owne.
                  His Clemency hath conquered Rebels rage,
                  Made of diſ-loyall loyall Vaſſalage;
                  Yea forced Wills by Pardons and by Grace,
                  The proof whereof is writ in euery place;
                  Through all the Townes of France both great & ſ
                        •
                     
                  
                  Where, for Reuenge, Reward was daign'd to all.
                  Once, only once, his Mercy admirable,
                  VVas deafe to Biron and inexorable;
                  Sith when he might, his hault deſpight would none
                  I wonder not to ſee that Myrmidon,
                  
                  In the Bastile, a ſhamefull death to beare:
                  But This I wonder, that he would come there.
                  Of factious ſpirits, of cloſe deep hearts and do
                        •
                     
                  
                  (Whoſe Life is ſtrife, whoſe Reſt is beſt in trouble)
                  He knowes the drifts, & knowen diſſolues the ſam
                        •
                     
                  
                  As faſt as fire melts Lead within the flame.
                  His voyce alone, as Duſt caſt vp aloft,
                  Breakes Hornets buzzing and their ſwarming, of
                        •
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Diſcord diſturbing holy Churches reſt,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ixt Rome and Venice did debates ſuggeſt:
                  
                     
                        ••
                     bition ſet in foote, fore-ſweld with hope,
                  
                     
                        •
                      bridle both the Senate and the Pope;
                  
                     
                        •
                     h preſt to fight: His Prudence reconcil'd
                  
                     
                        ••
                     eir Difference, and did their mindes remil'd.
                  
                     
                        •
                     e reliſht now the harmleſs Sweets of Peace,
                  
                     
                        •
                     illing his People ſhould partake no leſſe;
                  
                     
                        •
                      yet ſome-where he feeles a Thorne to prick:
                  
                     
                        •
                      pluck it out he armes and marches quick,
                  
                     
                        •
                      to the Frontier: There attaines his will,
                  
                     
                        •
                     dome (ſo) fitly takes her Seaſon ſtill.
                  
                     
                        •
                     ou Nations, that for fortie yeeres haue ſeen
                  
                     
                        •
                     LONA'S Tempeſts, & felt MARS his Teen;
                  
                     
                        •
                      for your Liberties haue pawnd your Liues:
                  
                     
                        •
                     ely now you ioy your Wealth, your Wiues:
                  
                     
                        •
                     w your Trades into the Eaſt you bring,
                  
                     
                        •
                     er Heauens Kingdom) onely thank This King.
                  
                     
                        •
                     heapt with Honors, This braue King is loath
                  
                     
                        •
                     his braue Knights, effeminiz'd by Sloath,
                  Games & Dames, during ſo long a Peace,
                  
                     
                        •
                     d ſtill lye ſtill in Citties pomp and eaſe:
                  
                     
                        •
                     efore he rears an Army ſtrongly dight,
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        lich's Claim, his wronged friends to right.
                  
                     A noble Prince, whoſe Prowes & Prudence, late
                  
                     Buda admir'd, and Rome hath wondred-at
                  (The Honor of His Time) was Generall;
                  So ſtoard with Gold, with Guns, with Arms, with all,
                  That neighbor Princes all were in alarm:
                  Yet Them This Thunder brought more feare then harm,
                  Fearleſs it marches; &, reſpectleſs, threats
                  What-euer Log its ready Paſſage lets;
                  Geſture and voice already skirmiſhing,
                  And vnder Conduct of ſo braue a King,
                  
                     Great-Britaines, Germans, Switzers, Belgians,
                  
                  Serue all the Greatnes of the Crown of France.
                  
                  Elſ-where, the while, The Duke that rules the Alp
                  
                  Seemd t'haue his heart no more beyond the Calpes;
                  Braue noble heart, Saxonically-French.
                  
                  
                     Fuentez, affraid, with ſhoulder-ſhrinking wrench,
                  Doubts leſt that Milan ſtoop to France againe;
                  And CHARLES prouoked proue the Scourge of Sp
                           •
                        
                     
                  
                  Heau'ns now, to Crown his Tropheis, had ſet down
                  That at Saint Denis he his Queen ſhould Crown
                  VVith royall Diadem; and in one Day
                  The State, the Maieſty of France diſplay.
                  Nothing but Great; but great Magnificence;
                  But, MARIES Grace excell'd all Excellence.
                  
                     HEnce, hence falſe Pleaſures, momentary Ioyes;
                  Mock vs no more with your illuding Toyes:
                  
                     
                        •
                     trange Mishap, hatched in Hell below,
                  
                     
                        •
                     th plung'd vs all in deepeſt Gulfe of Woe,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ught vs, that all Worlds-hopes as Dreams do fly,
                  
                     
                        •
                     d made vs all, Cry All is Vanitie.
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     our houres frō Noon, forth frō the Louure rode
                  
                     
                        •
                     is mighty Prince (without his Gard) abroad,
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      ſee His Arcenall: To his Caroche,
                  
                     
                        •
                      ſtreight Lane, a Hell-hound durſt approche;
                  
                     
                        •
                      with a Knife, twice ſtabbing, kill'd him quite,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ning that faireſt Day to fouleſt Night.
                  
                     
                        •
                     wice did the Monſter ſtab: for elſe, the firſt
                  
                     
                        •
                      not been mortall; but, the Knife, accurſt,
                  
                     
                        •
                     illing his Lungs, cut at the ſecond ſtroake
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        artereal vein, whoſe bloud-floud ſoon did choak
                  
                     
                        •
                     peerleſs Prince; His dying Eyes & Hart
                  
                     
                        •
                     oring Heauen, ſoone did his Soule depart.
                  
                     
                        •
                     ell Tyger, tell vs, tell vs Why, or Whence,
                  
                     
                        •
                     u durſt (accurſt) aſſault ſo Great a Prince?
                  
                     
                        •
                     rein had He to Thee or Thine done wrong?
                  
                     
                        •
                      once (yer this) Thou didſt too neer him throng,
                  Gard rebuk't thee; but, He Them, for That:
                  
                     
                        •
                     'd That Thy Malice, & His Murderous fate?
                  
                     Fates ruthleſs Law allots his royall breſt
                  To die the death that CAESAR thought the beſt;
                  Death without ſenſe of death, a death ſo quick,
                  It ſildome leaues Kings leiſure to be ſick;
                  Nor giues Him leaue of his ſixt Decads date
                  To fill the Roule; but ſeauen ſix Months did bate.
                  He, He that was the Hope, the Prop of His,
                  He that reſtored France to what it is,
                  He that confin'd the Power of Princes ſtill,
                  He that Commanded Victory, at will,
                  That was the Worlds delight, Kings glory ſheen,
                  He, He receiues Deaths treacherous ſtroak vnſeen.
                  Th'vnhappy ſtreet where This fell Hap fel-out,
                  Where wofull Paris ſaw her Light put out,
                  VVhere curſed Iron pierc't her Princes hart,
                  In ſhall no more be clept The Iron-mart:
                  It ſhall be call'd The curſed Corner, ſtill;
                  
                     The Hag-street, or The Hell-ſtreet: which you will.
                  Lord! where wert Thou! When That diſloiall wre
                        •••…
                     
                  
                  With cruell hand did Thine Anointed reach;
                  Quenching the Raies of Royall Maieſtie?
                  No heart is hid from thine All-piercing Eye,
                  It ſees the Centre, knows the thoughts, yet though
                        •
                     
                  
                  Could it ſee This, and ſuffer it be wrought?
                  
                     Hell oft before, out of his black Abyſs,
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     d ſpew'd vp Monſters to haue acted This:
                  
                     
                        •
                     t, ſtill thy hand from former wounds did ward.
                  
                     
                        •
                     d had he not ſtill truſted to Thy Gard,
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      Owne had waited Round about his Coach,
                  
                     
                        •
                     d This fell Tyger neuer ſhould approach.
                  Theſe Words, theſe raſher Words eſcapt my tong;
                  
                     
                        •
                     en I beheld That Monarch layd along
                  
                     
                        •
                     d on his Bed; ſo dead, ſo butchered;
                  
                     
                        •
                     med Heauens, & Whiſpering ſoft, I ſaid,
                  
                     
                        •
                     uſe They ſtopt not This ſtrange Hap before,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ir ſlūbring eyes now watch the World no more.
                  
                     
                        •
                     t, are mine eyes mine own? Is This That Prince
                  
                     
                        •
                     ch might haue made all Europe His, long ſince,
                  
                     
                        •
                     he not thought th'Empire of France enough;
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      Lion-heart, that Courage Cannon-proofe,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ich did ſo oft Impoſſibles atchieue?
                  
                     
                        •
                     is He: yet ſcarce my ſight beleeue.
                  This That Mighty King, Gods liuely Image,
                  
                     
                        •
                     hom the greateſt in the World did Homage?
                  
                     
                        •
                     ce a Doue, in Warre an Aegle quick,
                  
                     
                        •
                     TOR in Court, in Camp ACHILLES-like;
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      with a hundred horſe, a thouſand foil'd:
                  
                     
                        •
                     rom moſt Dangers neuer yet recoil'd.
                  
                     Great Rome was ſtrangely maz'd and all a-mort,
                  When She beheld her CAESAR'S bloody ſhirt:
                  And ſay, Great Citty, how wert Thou diſmaid,
                  When firſt thou ſaw'ſt Thine HENRY ſadly layd
                  Along his Coach, & couered with a Cloak?
                  "I thought the Prop of all my Fortunes broak.
                  
                  Thoſe that haue ſeen in Townes ſurpris'd (whil
                        •
                      y
                        •
                     
                  
                  When to the Churches All haue fled for fear,
                  May well imagine Paris deepe Affright.
                  Nothing but ſhiuering: Nobles armed bright,
                  Clergy at Prayers, People weep and houle:
                  And HENRY's wound hath wounded euery Soul
                        •
                     
                  
                  
                     Paris in Honour of her peerleſs Queen,
                  Had plotted Showes (more pompous neuer ſeen)
                  As, rich to th'outward, rare to th'inward ſenſe;
                  But, all thoſe Archs (Marks of Magnificence),
                  Thoſe Tropheis, Terms, Statues, Coloſſes, All,
                  Make but more Mourners at the Funerall.
                  I yeeld My Penſill: help APELLES, heere,
                  To Limn (to life) Her dying-liuing Cheere:
                  Beleefe is hardly in Mans heart impreſt,
                  Her Griefe more hard to be by Art expreſt.
                  Therfore ô Queen! Great Stay, Great Star of 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
                  This Veile I draw before Thy Countenance.
                  
                     Heauē ſteel'd Thy Hart with Fortitude That Day,
                  
                     
                        ••
                     y Courage kept the Kingdom from Decay;
                  
                     
                        •
                     nd to the Throne Thy Son our Soueraign heft:
                  
                     
                        ••
                     ough angry Fates of Father him bereft,
                  
                     
                        •
                     t Mercifull, they left him ſuch a Mother,
                  
                     
                        ••
                     at France could hardly haue been rul'd by other.
                  The ſuddain Clap of This drad Thunder ſounds,
                  
                     
                        •
                     om Alexander's to Alcides Bounds:
                  
                     
                        •
                     he Kings and Princes ſtand amazed all,
                  
                     
                        •
                     th horror of an Act ſo Tragicall.
                  
                     
                        •
                     me, Reſt forſake: others, Repaſt forbeare,
                  
                     
                        •
                     d Each like Fortune to himſelfe doth feare.
                  So ſuddainly to ſee Day turn'd to Night,
                  
                     
                        
                           •••
                        umphant Palmes, into Funerall Plight,
                  
                     
                        ••
                     e Royall Crown to a deep Mourning Vale,
                  
                     
                        •
                     iuing King, to a dead Corps & pale,
                  
                     
                        ••
                     r Flowers to Thorns; ſeem Tricks of Sorcery,
                  
                     
                        •
                     erein, Conceit conſents not with our Eye.
                  Yes, He is dead: and his eye-lids no more
                  
                     
                        •
                      view this Light ſhall open (as before);
                  
                     
                        ••
                     oſe louely Eyes, the Load-ſtarrs of the Court,
                  
                     
                        ••
                     oſe gracious glances, on the Worthy ſort,
                  
                     
                        •
                     e Vertue vigor; and Whoſe awefull frowne
                  
                     
                        •
                      dared Vice; are now Eclipſt and downe.
                  
                     Where are thoſe ready Battaile-ranging Hands?
                  Thoſe lightning Eyes whoſe wrath no wall withſtand
                  That Voice ſo dreadful to the ſtouteſt harts?
                  That Heart which wrought ſo many wondrous pa
                        •
                     
                  
                  That piercing Wit, diſperſing Clowds of Doubt?
                  VVhere is that mighty King, ſo Fam'd about?
                  Inexorable Death! inhumane, cruell,
                  Thou ſhalt no more reaue vs ſo rare a Iewell;
                  
                     Nature hath broke the Mould ſhe made Him in.
                  In all thy Triumph (trayling euery Kin)
                  Shal neuer march His Match, nor worthier Prince,
                  T'haue been exempted from thine Inſolence.
                  Ah! poore, weak Vertue, zealous Loue of Thee,
                  Prolongs not Life, protracts not Death (I ſee):
                  This Prince that gaue Thee euē his Hart for Tēpl
                        •
                     
                  
                  This Prince whoſe Raign ſhal ſerue for rare Exemp
                        •
                     
                  
                  To future Kings, in future Things diſmaid,
                  Should haue come ſooner, or haue later ſtayd.
                  His Pietie, was neither Fond, nor Faind;
                  His Proweſſe, neither Feare, nor Raſhnes ſtaind;
                  His Prudence clear'd his Coūcells, ſteerd his State
                  His Temperance his Wrath did temperate;
                  His Iuſtice with his Clemencie did Yoake:
                  Yet could not All free Him from Fatall ſtroake.
                  
                     Inuincible in all: only, the Darts,
                  Which haue not ſpar'd the Gods immortall harts,
                  
                     
                        •
                     aue often batterd His: but, by your leaues,
                  
                     
                        •
                      faireſt Bewties! (Bewtie it ſelf deceiues)
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     ou neuer were the Souerains of his breſt:
                  
                     
                        •
                     e You (perhaps) You neuer Him poſſeſt.
                  
                     
                        ••
                     u Arms-Art, what He knew not, none can know't,
                  
                     
                        •
                     either attempt what He attempted not,
                  
                     
                        •
                     eaſon was aye the Aime of His deſignes,
                  
                     
                        •
                     is braue Exploits (worthie immortall lines)
                  
                     
                        •
                      all furniſh Theam to Thouſand learned Clarks,
                  
                     
                        •
                     hoſe Works ſhal Honor Him, He more their Warks
                  His Royall Geſts are euery-where extold,
                  
                     
                        •
                     rauen, Carued, Caſt, in Marble, Wood, & Gold;
                  
                     
                        •
                     s Life alone's an Hiſtory admir'd,
                  
                     
                        •
                     herein all Pens, all Pencills ſhall be tir'd,
                  
                     
                        •
                      pourtraying all His valiant Fears to-forn,
                  
                     
                        •
                     hoſe Tables euer ſhall all Courts adorn.
                  His Bounties Temple had a hard Acceſſe,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ot known to any but to Worthineſſe:
                  
                     
                        •
                     at Gate (indeed) did ſeldom open quick.
                  
                     
                        •
                     s Liberality, (coy Bewty-like)
                  
                     
                        •
                     u'd to be woo'd, preſt, and importun'd ſtill;
                  
                     
                        •
                     a, forc't to giue, what glad and fain ſhe will.
                  
                     Yet, by th'effects to waigh his Clemencie,
                  Me thinks His Heart muſt more then humane be,
                  Me thinks therein ſome higher Power did ſhine,
                  It ſurely ſeem'd celeſtiall and diuine,
                  And but I ſaw him dying, pale and wan,
                  I could haue ſcarce beleeu'd This Prince a Man.
                  He euer lou'd rather to ſaue then ſpill,
                  Not cementing his Throne with Blood, with Ill;
                  Nor ween'd, by Feare his Diadem aſſur'd;
                  With mildenes rather, grieued minds he cur'd:
                  His Memory did neuer wrongs retain;
                  Beloued Kings, He thought, ſecureſt raign.
                  Praiſe you his Bounty, you that, paſt the Poles,
                  Beare Heauens Embaſſage to Belief-leſs Soules:
                  HENRY reſtor'd your Countrey, and your Credit,
                  He gaue you leaue ouer all France to ſpred it;
                  Reſtor'd you Bizance, and each pleaſant part,
                  Left you his Court, bequeath'd to you his Heart.
                  If France now flouriſh, proyning, round about,
                  Oliues within, and Lawrels all with-out,
                  If now, She giue the Law to other States,
                  If Peace and Plenty raigne within her Gates,
                  If now She feare no Ciuill Storms again,
                  Theſe are the fruits of This Great HENRY's Raig
                        •
                     
                  
                  
                     If now Her Schooles with learned men abound,
                  Her rare wits be through the World renownd,
                  
                     
                        •
                      doubts of Faith be cleared and explor'd,
                  
                     
                        •
                      Learning be to her due Place reſtor'd,
                  
                     
                        •
                      now Deſert the Charge in Church attain,
                  
                     
                        •
                     heſe are the Fruits of This Great HENRY's Raign.
                  If now her Buildings paſſe for bewty farre
                  
                     
                        •
                     he Worlds old Wonders (which ſo famous are)
                  
                     
                        •
                      
                     Paris Thou be peerleſſe to behold,
                  
                     
                        •
                     or State, for Store, for People, Goods, & Gold,
                  
                     
                        •
                      in thy Citie, Cities ſprout again,
                  
                     
                        •
                     heſe are the Fruits of This Great HENRY's Raign.
                  If the French Scepter be now Self-entire,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ear-leſs of Forain or Domeſtick fire:
                  
                     
                        •
                      France haue Fellowes of ACHILLES Fame;
                  
                     
                        •
                     f now in France be nothing out of frame,
                  
                     
                        •
                     f now the Indies her Baſtile containe;
                  Theſe are the Fruits of this Great HENRY's Raign.
                  If now we ioy to ſee our Countrey free
                  
                     
                        •
                     rom Theeues and Rebels (which exiled be):
                  
                     
                        •
                     f Iuſtice now doe keep the lewd in awe,
                  
                     
                        •
                     f Deſperate Duels be now curbd by Lawe,
                  
                     
                        •
                     f now the Weak waigh not the Strongs diſdain,
                  Theſe are the Fruits of This Great HENRY's Raign.
                  
                     If Merchants rich, If Magiſtrates be ſound,
                  If Officers like Emperors abound,
                  If Purſie Lawyers liue Prince-like at home,
                  If now Inuentions to their height be come,
                  If now good wits find where them to ſuſtaine,
                  Theſe are the fruits of This Great HENRY's Raigne.
                  Who lou'd not Him, neuer beheld his browes,
                  Who knew his Fortunes, muſt admire his Prowes,
                  Who feard him not, His greatnes did offend,
                  Who weend Him to beguile, his Wiſdom kend:
                  Who durſt diſpleaſe Him, knew his mercies ſtore;
                  Who durſt not ſpeak, his mildnes did ignore.
                  Who waileth not his Death, knew not his Life,
                  Glory of His and Others Enuie rife,
                  Incomparable, Admirable Prince,
                  Excelling all th'old HEROES Excellence.
                  For, His true Story ſhall their Fables ſhame:
                  Inimitable Life, Illimitable Fame.
                  O French-men, ſtop not yet your weeping flood:
                  This Prince for you hath lauiſht oft his blood.
                  O! be not niggards of your Tears expence,
                  (Vaile heer, my Verſe, do ANNE a reuerence;
                  Rare ANNE that ſhames the rareſt wits of Ours,
                  Her diuine Stances furniſh thee theſe Flowers).
                  
                     The Heauens may giue vs all Proſperities,
                  
                     
                        •
                      ſtain our State, remooue our miſeries;
                  
                     
                        •
                      cannot dry vp our Tears bitter ſtreame:
                  
                     
                        •
                      extreame Euills remedies extreame.
                  
                     
                        •
                     ſtore our King, quick ſhall our Ioyes recouer:
                  
                     
                        •
                     , neuer look our Sorrowes ſhould giue-ouer.
                  Eech-where our Grief finds matter to augment it,
                  
                     
                        •
                      Names remembrance doth each-where preſent it,
                  
                     
                        •
                      famous Geſts do buſie euery Sort,
                  
                     
                        •
                     me tell his Warres, others his Works report.
                  
                     
                        •
                     hers his Fauors paſt, glad-ſad deplore;
                  
                     
                        •
                     en, not to mourn, is not to mind Him more.
                  Ah! muſt we liue, and ſee ſo ſodain dead
                  
                     
                        •
                     e Life that late our Liues inſpirited?
                  
                     
                        •
                     ke ſaile my Soule, let's put-into the Port,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ile HENRY liu'd 'twas good to liue (in ſort):
                  
                     
                        •
                      let vs after: ſith Hee's reft of breath,
                  
                     
                        •
                      fire of Life is now farre worſe then Death.
                  
                     
                        •
                     orrow, with vs doth both lie-downe and riſe,
                  
                     
                        •
                     nkles our Browes, withers our Cheeks & Eyes:
                  
                     
                        •
                     e ſhun what-euer might our Griefs allay,
                  
                     
                        •
                     e wiſh the Night, w' are weary of the Day,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ht brings ſad Silence with her horrid Shade,
                  
                     
                        •
                      euen her Colour ſeems for Mourning made.
                  
                     Extreameſt Woes yet are with Time ore-paſt,
                  Riuers of Teares are dryed-vp at laſt:
                  But neuer Ours; Ours, euer freſh ſhall flow:
                  We defie Comforts, We'll admit no mo,
                  Nor ſeek them, but as Alchimy profound
                  Seeks that which is not, or which is not found.
                  Who, from the Ocean, Motion can recall,
                  Heat from Fire, Void from Aire, Order from All,
                  From Lines their Points, from IRIS all her Dyes,
                  Perils from Seas, from Numbers Vnities,
                  Shadowes from Bodies, Angles from the Square,
                  May free our Hearts from Grief, our Mindes from Ca
                        •
                     
                  
                  He muſt be hart-les that is ſmart-les found:
                  The Soule that is not wounded with This wound,
                  Moſt brutiſh, hath no humane Reaſon in't:
                  There is no breſt of Steel, no heart of Flint,
                  But muſt be-mone ſo great a King, ſo ſlain.
                  Who would not waile a Gally-ſlaue ſo tane?
                  Let vs no more name HENRYes, Kings of France
                  
                  Death with two Kniues, & with one ſhiuer'd Lance,
                  Hath kild Three HENRY's: one at Iouſts (in ieſt);
                  Th'other in's Cloſet; in's Caroche, the beſt:
                  So, Three King RICHARDS, & Fiue Other, cry
                  Some fatal Secret in ſome Names doth lie.
                  
                     What worſe Diſaſtre can you haue behinde,
                  
                     
                        •
                      threaten France? O Deſtinies vnkinde!
                  
                     
                        •
                     at greater Miſchief can your Malice bring?
                  
                     
                        •
                      good a Father reſt, ſo great a King?
                  
                     
                        •
                     at will you more? ſith we no more can hope
                  
                     
                        •
                      any Good that with This Ill may cope.
                  This noble Spirit doth to his Spring re-mount,
                  
                     
                        •
                     is Bounties Flood retireth to his Fount,
                  
                     
                        •
                     s Atomie to's Vnity vnites,
                  
                     
                        •
                     s Star returns to the firſt Light of Lights,
                  
                     
                        •
                     s Ray reuerts where firſt it light did take,
                  
                     
                        •
                      mortall wounds, This Prince immortall make.
                  
                     
                        •
                     are-well ſole Honour of all earthly Kings,
                  
                     
                        •
                     -well rare Prince for All-kinde Managings,
                  
                     
                        ••
                     -well Great HENRY, Heav'ns & Natures Gem,
                  
                     
                        •
                     e-well bright Star of Kings, Glories great Beam,
                  
                     
                        •
                     e-well ſole Mortall that I keep in minde:
                  
                     
                        •
                     -well falſe Hope, Fortune, & Court vnkinde.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        eer, lest Obliuion ſhould vſurp her roome,
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        ME writes in Gold, Theſe Lines vpon thy Toomb.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        is Prince, vn-Peerd for Clemency and Courage,
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        y Sur-nam'd, the Great, the Good, the Wiſe,
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        ror of Future, Miracle of Fore-Age;
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        hort Miſ-hap for-euer Happifies,
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  St. LEWIS; the KING: OR A Lamp of Grace, lighting THE GREAT (in the right vvay) To GLORIE.
                  Tranſlated, & Dedicated (As a New-yeeres-Gift) TO The High-Hopefull Prince, CHARLES, Heire Apparant of Great-Britan's Kingdomes, & The Hopes of Christendom.
                  By IOSVAH SYLVESTER. 1615.
               
               
                  
                  
                  TO My Gracious Lord, THE PRINCE.
                  NOT that yor Highnes needs My mean Direction
                  
                  (Hauing, within, a Princely ſpirit for Guide;
                  Without, your Parent; round about (beſide)
                  
                     Precepts & Patterns of diuine Perfection)
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     eſume I Thus to bring (in dim Reflexion)
                  This forain LAMP (admired far & wide):
                  But, as An humble Gift This New-Years-Tide,
                  
                  To intimate my Faith, and my Affection.
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     r gracious hand Thus binds my gratefull heart
                  To Offer Heavn my Vowes, & You my Verſe,
                  
                  For that Deliuerance You haue daignd, in part,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ny poore Hopes, wrackt in your Brothers Herſe.
                  You haue begun; Vouchſafe me, Sacred Powers,
                  
                  You may go-on, & make Me wholely Yours
                  
                  
                     
                        In Effect, as In Affection To yor
                         Highnes ſeruice humbly deuoted, Ioſuah Sylueſter.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  A HYMNE of St. LEWIS (The ninth of that Name) King of France.
                  
                     OF all the KINGS, admired ouer All,
                  Whoſe Prudence, ſwayd This Crown Imperiall,
                  
                     
                        ••
                     oſe Proweſſe, moſt our Lillies Bounds inlarg'd,
                  
                     
                        •
                     oſe Iuſtice, beſt their Charge in Peace diſcharg'd;
                  
                     
                        •
                     om moſt the Raies of glorious Greatnes crownd,
                  
                     
                        •
                     o brighteſt ſhin'd, Who was the moſt Renownd,
                  
                     
                        ••
                     t magnified, for Manly Conquering
                  
                     
                        •
                     hin the World the World: was th'Holy King
                  
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      whoſe chaſt loynes, frō out whoſe loyall Bloud
                  
                     Heröick Stems of Royall BOVRBONS bud;
                  
                     
                        •
                     ous St. LEWIS; Good KINGS Preſident,
                  
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     , for his CHRIST, & for His Croſſe, him ſpent:
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     , by his Valour ſo renown'd his Name,
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      all the Earth hath trembled at the ſame:
                  Who, to free, from captiue Furie fell,
                  Fields where yerſt Our Captain conquerd Hell,
                  
                     
                        •
                     rageous Zeale ſetting his Soule on fire)
                  
                     
                        ••
                     med FRANCE againſt the Aſian's ire.
                  
                     When I his Vertues read, & Acts ſo great,
                  Which Him, ſo high among the Saints haue ſet;
                  And heere belowe, ſo laſting glory wan,
                  I iudge them ſcarce Works of a meerly Man;
                  But, of an Angel in Mans ſhape bedight,
                  To ſhew the World the Way of Vertue right.
                  Amaz'd, to ſee, among ſo many Sinnes
                  As (fatally) the Court breeds & beginnes,
                  Among ſo many Pleaſures, whoſe ſweet Baits
                  Intrap the warieſt with their wylie Sleights;
                  A KING to curbe him ſo, in Power ſupreame,
                  To vvatch him Selfe ſo, with ſuch care extreame,
                  As not to taſte Delight (of any kinde)
                  Which Reaſon barrs a braue and noble Minde:
                  But ſo vpright in VERTVES track to tred,
                  That euen in Earth a Heav'nly Life he led.
                  For, neuer was there more accompliſht KING,
                  Whoſe royall hart had more repleniſhing
                  Of Princely Vertues, fit for Powerfull hand,
                  Or to be wiſht in Mindes of High Commaund.
                  Nay; would the Heavns, their Treaſures all prod
                        •
                     
                     cin
                        •
                     
                  
                  All Gifts of Body & of Minde conducing,
                  Mould for Mankinde a Prince or Potentate,
                  
                  Worthy to gouern th'VNIVERSAL State;
                  
                     
                     
                        ••
                     ey could not giue the World (& We, much leſſe,
                  
                     
                        •
                     h) One more worthy; with more due Addreſſe,
                  
                     
                        •
                     take into his Royall hand the Helm,
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     ormfull Times ſo apt to ouer-whelm.
                  
                     
                        •
                      much the Star, which rules in Birth of Kings,
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     en He was deſtin'd to Theſe manegings,
                  
                     
                        •
                     de and propitious, in His heart connext,
                  
                     
                        •
                     , feare of GOD, & loue of IVSTICE next:
                  
                     
                        •
                     RTVES, whoſe habit Happineſſe doth nouriſh:
                  
                     
                        ••
                     kes Cōmon-Wealth flow, & The Church to flouriſh:
                  
                     
                        •
                     es beſt for Baſe to each illuſtrious State:
                  
                     
                        •
                     es mightieſt KINGS calm Crowns, & fortunate:
                  
                     
                        •
                     ſeth their Subiects feare them louingly:
                  
                     
                        •
                     pes Them, in Dangers, euer danger-free.
                  
                     
                        •
                      the Almightie, printing in their Face,
                  
                     
                        •
                     le-Maieſtie, ſweet-Terror, dreadfull-Grace,
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                      heaping Hap vpon them euery-where;
                  
                     Good, feare, for them; Them, the Euill feare.
                  
                     
                        •
                     ow many braue Marks, left his noble Minde,
                  
                     
                        •
                     h'Happineſs Theſe Vertues bring Mankind;
                  
                     
                        •
                     en, full of Conſtancie, he durſt maintaine,
                  
                     
                        •
                     t, raigning for Him, Who made him to raign,
                  
                     
                        •
                     e ſacred Twinnes, nigh frō the World diſ-pell'd,
                  
                     
                        •
                      their Temple, in His Boſom dwell'd;
                  
                     Guided his Perſon, gouern'd his Affaires,
                  Counſaild his Counſails, qualified his Cares,
                  Steerd all his Courſe, through all his Voyage heer,
                  As men their Ships by Card & Compaſſe ſteer.
                  Theſe making him with rareſt ſpirits compeer,
                  In holy pride, Hee euen deſpiſed heer
                  The Kings, that, puft with glory of a Throne,
                  Commaunded All, except themſelues alone.
                  By th'one, he happied his owne Soule, with Reſt:
                  By th'other, alſo he his People bleſt.
                  By th'one, becomming to him Selfe ſeuere,
                  He rul'd him Selfe; kept his own Power in feare;
                  By th'other, giuing free Courſe to the Law,
                  He kept his Subiects in: and happy, ſaw
                  Through all his Kingdome, Peace & Plenty flowe
                        •
                     
                  
                  In baſeſt Grange, as well as golden Bower.
                  But 12. times Sol throgh the 12. Signes had go
                        •
                     
                  
                  When Heauens aſſignd him to his Fathers Throne
                  And to the hands of his Man-Childhood left
                  The glorious Burthen of This Sceptres heft:
                  But, as in th'Orchards at Monceaux or Blois,
                  
                  The Gard'ners Care ouer ſome Graftlings choiſe,
                  The ſecond yeare of their adoption there,
                  Makes them as good & goodly fruits to beare,
                  
                     Trees, whoſe Trunk & branched Top bewraies
                  
                     
                        ••
                     eir Months as many as the Other's dayes;
                  
                     
                        ••
                     rough the Heavns fauor & Earths fruitfulneſs,
                  
                     
                        •
                     wing that God their yoūg firſt-fruits doth bleſs:
                  
                     
                        •
                      forward Vertue in his Pupillage,
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     ught forth th'effects of a mans perfect age;
                  
                     
                        •
                     prouing quite his feeble ſignes of youth,
                  
                     
                        •
                      prouing him inuincible (in truth)
                  
                     
                        •
                     inſt vaine Pleaſures, all their Baits condemning:
                  
                     
                        •
                     inſt all Perils, Death it Selfe contemning:
                  
                     
                        •
                     inſt all Paſsions, euer them reſiſting:
                  
                     
                        •
                     inſt all Croſſes, conſtant ay-perſiſting.
                  
                     
                        •
                     or, looke how lowe, his hart in humble awe,
                  
                     
                        •
                      bow'd to GOD, and bended to the Lawe;
                  
                     
                        ••
                     gh he mounts it, in Praiſe-worthy Pride,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ue the World, Fortune, and All (beſide)
                  
                     
                        •
                     ſe Vanitie, with falſe gloſs gilded o're,
                  
                     
                        •
                      Mortals, moſt deſire, admire, adore:
                  
                     
                        •
                     ring, onely, with that holy Marie,
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                      his degree) That One thing neceſſary:
                  
                     
                        •
                     iring ſolely th'holy Works, wherein
                  Almighty Workers wondrous hand is ſeene:
                  
                     
                        •
                     ring none but th'Euerlaſting One;
                  
                     
                        •
                      louing beſt; fearing but HIM alone.
                  
                     Then, bearing aye This Oracle impreſt
                  Within the Centre of his royall breſt,
                  That A ſincere & true-Religious KING,
                  
                     Feared of All, needs feare at all no-Thing;
                  
                  Where Hee whoſe Soule hath not This Feare in-layd,
                  
                  
                     Of none is feared, but of All affraid.
                  
                  Arm'd with This Breaſt-plate, as with ſtronger Ar
                        •
                     
                  
                  Then Thoſe (of old) bleſt with inchanting Charm
                        •
                     
                  
                  He brau'd all Perills that his Proweſſe met,
                  And His calm Spirit, amid a Storme ſo great
                  As would haue caſt Youth in a ſwoune inſenſible,
                  Shew'd Reſolution of a heart inuincible;
                  Appearing ſuch, indeed, as Painters fain
                  Great Hercules, when Iuno's fell diſdaign,
                  Purſuing him, he Monſters quaild and killd;
                  A Man in Courage, though in Age a Child.
                  Which well he proou'd to thoſe Rebellious Peers,
                  
                  Who making light of his, then-tender yeers;
                  And meaſuring his in-ſide by his age,
                  Troubled his State with ſtorms of Ciuill Rage:
                  Armed againſt him many a Tower & Towne,
                  Aymed by Ambuſh to ſurpriſe his Crowne.
                  
                  When He, to heale, by neceſſary Ill,
                  This Ill, before th'Impoſtume ouer-fill,
                  
                     
                     
                        •
                      Sword in hand their firſt Aſſault preuents;
                  
                     
                        •
                      as His Subiects, brauely them conuents,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ome and caſt them arm-leſs at his feet;
                  
                     
                        •
                     elſe, as Foes, his armed Force to meet:
                  
                     
                        •
                     n Him, their true Liege (if true French they be)
                  
                     
                        •
                     d in the Field, to take This Offer free,
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        nge, or Pardon of their paſt Miſ-deeds,
                  
                     
                        •
                     all the Miſchief which the ſame ſucceeds.
                  
                     
                        •
                     one, his Power ſhould preſs them to, perforce,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ther, their Duties, vrged with Remorſe:
                  
                     
                        •
                     eir blind Furie did the One contemne,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ther ſhould poure Death & Diſgrace on them.
                  
                     
                        •
                     ! how the words of a braue Prince preuaile!
                  
                     
                        •
                      daring Speech did ſo their Courage quaile,
                  
                     
                        •
                      though the cold Ice of a prudent Feare,
                  
                     
                        •
                     not forth-with put-out their frenzie there;
                  
                     
                        •
                     id it daily from thence-forth decline,
                  
                     
                        •
                     all their Flame turn'd but to Fume, in fine.
                  Thoſe, whoſe furie dream't a Diadem,
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     r Side abandon, & disbanding them,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ct their vaine Hopes; and, in ſeaſon, flie
                  
                     
                        •
                     he King's Mercie for their Remedie.
                  
                     
                        •
                     ers, more dreading Rigour of the Law,
                  
                     
                        •
                     er protection of the Engliſh draw:
                  
                     Guilding their Guilt with friuolous pretences,
                  Arming their weak Cauſe with as weak defences;
                  Till, but increaſing their dishonor by't,
                  Wanting as well good Fortune as good Right,
                  They'r alſo faine to beg his Bounty royall,
                  Ill worthy Them, ſo obſtinate-Diſloyall.
                  What proofs of Proweſſe, vvhat contēpt of dang
                        •
                     
                  
                  Expreſt this Prince vpon the enuious Stranger,
                  On cryſtall Charant, in Zantognian Coaſt,
                  When falſe la-March, backt with a foraine Hoſt,
                  Muſtred againſt him from ſo many parts,
                  So many Groues of Lances, Pikes, and Darts?
                  There France and England, fully bent to Fight,
                  Had both their Armies in their Order pight;
                  From Either ſide mount winged Clowdes amain;
                  On Either ſide they poure their Showers againe:
                  While ſiluer Charant, to haue barr'd their Teene,
                  Her ſwelling ſhoulders did oppoſe between.
                  This Riuer makes the Reed-crownd Banks to
                  By th'arched fauour of a Bridge there is:
                  Whoſe gaine or loſſe (beſides the honor) boades,
                  Or barrs, the Prize of Victorie, by ods:
                  The Engliſh, friended by a Fort at hand,
                  Which proudly did the neighbour Plaines cōman
                        •
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      won this Paſſage, and were paſſing on
                  
                     
                        •
                     erely to end their Victory begun:
                  
                     
                        •
                     n Lewis, ruſhing to the Bridge, the firſt,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ells the Foe, and puts him to the worſt;
                  
                     
                        •
                      dead and wounded all the place he paues,
                  
                     
                        •
                      then Horatius, brauer him behaues:
                  
                     
                        •
                     artens His: re-haleth from the Foe
                  
                     
                        •
                      
                     Victorie, ready with Them to goe:
                  
                     
                        •
                     ing alone, as a firm Rock, afront,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ſt alone, to beare the Battailes brunt;
                  
                     
                        •
                     onely marke of many thouſand Darts,
                  
                     
                        •
                     m alone ſtill aimed from all parts:
                  
                     
                        •
                     t the laſt, by his example preſt,
                  
                     
                        •
                     inning all, his Armie wonne the reſt;
                  
                     
                        •
                     , if his Courage ſhin'd in Conquering,
                  
                     
                        •
                      did his Mildneſſe in the managing.
                  
                     
                        •
                     o can recount, and yet who could conceale
                  
                     
                        •
                     uſtrious Vertues, whoſe induſtrious zeale
                  
                     
                        •
                      the World his honors blazed yerſt,
                  
                     
                        •
                     heſe miſts, theſe firſt clowdes were diſperſt,
                  
                     
                        •
                     catterd all by the bright-ſhining Rayes
                  
                     
                        •
                     is new Sunne, in Summer of his dayes,
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      (Europ's Vmpire) making Peace with Men,
                  
                     War proclaim'd againſt their Vices then?
                  
                     The glorious Works his Royall Vertues did,
                  Cannot, without impietie, be hid;
                  Although, without diminiſhing their Worth,
                  My Muſe (alas) can neuer ſet them forth:
                  For, of all Vertues ſacred Tracts (leaſt rife)
                  His Life's a Picture, limmed to the life.
                  And ſuch a Pattern, as to match again,
                  The Wiſh is vertuous, but the Hope is vain:
                  Sith, the more wondrous 'tis, & Worthy Table
                  To imitate, 'tis more inimitable.
                  So that, His Worth, weening to-life to limne,
                  I ouer-reach, in ſtead of reaching Him:
                  And, like bad Singers (as too-bold, too-blame)
                  Sounding His Praiſe, rather My Selfe I ſhame.
                  In heav'nly Annals are his Acts inrold:
                  His Royall Geſts are yet in Aſia told:
                  In Affrike, yet his Valour is renownd:
                  Through Europe euer ſhall his Vertues ſound;
                  And euery-where Ninth LEWIS (Great in Fame
                  Seems, not a Man's, but very VERTVES Name
                  Neuer did Faith, Honor, Vprightnes, raign,
                  With Conſtancie, in Soule of SOVERAIN
                  More pious-giuen, more fearing-God, more Foe
                        •
                     
                  
                  To Idol-Rites (Religion's ouerthrowe);
                  
                     
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      more deſirous Vertue to preferre,
                  
                     
                        •
                     propagate CHRIST's Kingdom euery-where;
                  
                     
                        •
                     oot-out Vice, to raze Idolatry,
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                      raiſe the Trophies of TRVTH's Victory.
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     rning with this Deſire (his beſt Delight)
                  
                     Affrike, twice, He Croſſed Standards pight,
                  
                     
                        •
                     old his Life vnto the chance of War;
                  
                     
                        •
                     ea and Land aduentur'd oft, and far:
                  
                     
                        •
                     re, ſeeking Death, at laſt, He Durance fand,
                  
                     
                        •
                     in a faith-leſs, loue-leſs, law-leſs Land,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ere Hee, as Gain, & as to raign, did take,
                  
                     
                        •
                     erue & ſuffer for his Sauiours ſake.
                  
                     
                        •
                     t, all the Battaills, won and loſt to ſing,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ad atchieued by this Valiant King:
                  Sack of Damiete, & the bloudy Spoile
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        arazens, both on the Shores of Nile,
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                      of the Sea, thrice ſtrewed (as it were)
                  
                     
                        •
                      Carcaſes of Pagans ſlaughtered there:
                  Siege of Cairo, when braue Victorie
                  
                     
                        •
                     nd all in Black for His Captiuitie:
                  
                     
                        •
                     acred Terror & Maieſtike Grace
                  
                     
                        •
                     h (from aboue) ſhin'd in his eyes & Face,
                  
                     
                        •
                     n two Turk-Traitors (with their Swords, in grain
                  
                     
                        •
                      with the bloud of their late Souldan ſlain)
                  
                     Comming to kill him, felt, with ſtrange remorſe,
                  Their furie feebled by a ſecret force;
                  From murderous fiſts letting their weapons fall
                  When they beheld his face maieſticall.
                  His Lybian iourney, when to Carthage tho
                  This Champion ſeemd another Scipio:
                  Th'honor he won at Tunis, where he crownd
                  His Life & Fortunes, euermore renownd.
                  In briefe, to vndertake to tell at large
                  All his Exployts, were a more waighty Charge
                  Then can the powers of my weak Soule ſupport:
                  And ſuch a Web to weaue in worthy ſort,
                  Behoues the hand of a more happy Wit,
                  Both wa
                        •
                     p and woofe with golden Threds to fit.
                  I therefore, quitting th'hopefull Arrogance
                  Sprung from ignoring of our Ignorance,
                  Shall thinke My Labour crownd ſufficient,
                  If this my ſpeaking Penſil, Phoebus lent
                  To colour Verſes, can but duly lim
                  Leaſt-glittering Raies that ſhin'd with Praiſe in H
                        •
                     
                  
                  Leauing therefore His Wars diſcourſe to Tho
                        •
                     
                  
                  Whoſe buskind Muſe Bellona's march out-goes,
                  Whoſe Numbers thunder, & whoſe ſtile diſtills
                  Freſh drops of Death from their heroïck Quills,
                  
                     
                     
                        •
                     fty ſtraines, as grauely, brauely-bold:
                  
                     
                        •
                     owely ſound his Laurels leſs extold,
                  
                     
                        •
                     h He (at Peace) won in his War with Vices,
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                      happy Toile in holy Exerciſes.
                  
                     
                        •
                      as I cannot His high Prowes expreſs;
                  
                     
                        •
                     h-leſs can I with ſilent Slothfulneſs,
                  
                     
                        •
                     er Obliuion's ruſtie keyes conceale
                  
                     
                        •
                      wondrous Care, the right religious Zeale
                  
                     
                        •
                     h from his Youth ay in his heart had burn'd,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ee The ſeen Houſe of the Lord adornd:
                  
                     
                        •
                     n this Vertue, none hath neer Him come
                  
                     
                        •
                     l the Kings haue raignd in Chriſtendome.
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                      for, We owe to Him the Monuments
                  
                     
                        •
                     h with his bloud Our Sauiour's Patience
                  
                     
                        •
                     d in his Paſsion, & whoſe Sight, as yet,
                  
                     
                        •
                     es godly Soules in ſad-glad ſacred Fit:
                  
                     
                        •
                     or (abhorring Shepheards bad & blind)
                  
                     
                        •
                     ious Care boyld in his zealous Minde,
                  
                     
                        •
                     urn'd his Soule's ſoule with a hot deſire,
                  
                     
                        •
                      in the Church-Ship, none to Charge aſpire,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ilfull, faithfull, carefull, Mariners,
                  
                     
                        •
                      apt for all Affaires of Hers;
                  
                     
                        •
                     e holy Labors, in couragious ſort,
                  
                     
                        •
                     e all Storms, may ſteer into the Port.
                  
                     Deuoured of this Zeale, and dreading aye
                  Leaſt He be charged at the latter Day
                  By th'onely Iudge, with Vice & Ignorance
                  
                  Of thoſe he choſe, through all the Folds of France,
                  
                  To Feed the Flocks vnder his Power ally'd:
                  When's royall office bound him to prouide,
                  With wondrous Care did he their liues explore,
                  Who-euer had commended them before:
                  And neuer gaue he the ſupreme Degrees,
                  Th'Eccleſiastik ſacred Dignities,
                  
                  But vnto Thoſe whoſe Life & Learning too
                  Were Eminent, both to direct and doo;
                  To feed, as Shepheards; as a Watch, to Ward;
                  To heale the Sick, Sound from the Wolf to gard,
                  And carefull Stewards in due time to break
                  The Bread of Life both to the ſtrong and weak:
                  Not Thoſe whoſe Eyes deep vaild with Ignorance
                  
                  Or Knowledge ſtain'd with Sinnes Exorbitance,
                  
                  Made like th'old woodden Mercuries, erect
                  In publik Wayes, the Paſſage to direct,
                  Who, with their finger the Right Path did point,
                  But, with their foote could neuer moue a ioynt.
                  How, how ſhould Thoſe, for Guide & Lantern
                        •
                     
                  
                  To th'Ignorance of People prone to ſwerue;
                  
                     
                     
                        •
                     ſe Ignorance, deuoid of Learnings Light,
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     ot diſcerne from crooked Waies the right?
                  How can Thoſe, foule, Sin-ſick Soules recure
                  
                     
                        •
                     ō Patterns more then Precepts would allure)
                  
                     
                        •
                     ſe Eloquence, whoſe excellence of Wit,
                  
                     
                        •
                     s their Well-ſaying by Ill-dooing it;
                  
                     
                        •
                     e what they Preach, in Practice they denie,
                  
                     
                        •
                     y their Deeds, giue their own Words the Lie.
                  
                     
                        •
                     ither the Learned, of true Vertue void;
                  
                     
                        •
                     er the Vertuous, without Learning's aide;
                  
                     
                        •
                     n the Flock of CHRIST's Redeemed deere,
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     th'holy Sheep hooks ſacred Burthen heere,
                  
                     
                        •
                      that Succeſs which ſhould be wiſht by Them
                  
                     
                        •
                     eek the glory of Ieruſalem.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        ing and Vertue muſt together match,
                  
                     
                        •
                      ſacred Flocks dulie to Weeld and Watch:
                  
                     
                        •
                     's their pain, who do not lead, but driue,
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        ing like Shepheards, while like Wolues they liue;
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        his good Prince: and that ſame very Thought
                  
                     
                        •
                      from his hart this holy Speech had brought,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ht forth th'effect: He did ſo thirſt to ſee
                  
                     
                        •
                      flouriſh; and through th'Induſtrie
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        ourers, diuinely Willd and Skilld,
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     s holy Vine-yard, trulie, duly tilld.
                  
                     Nor was His Care leſſe, nor, much leſſe, his Zea
                        •
                     
                  
                  Of Lawes ſupport (Props of the Publik-Weal)
                  So ſtrict he was & ſo preciſe in Choiſe
                  Of Thoſe (not waighd but by their Merits poize)
                  Whom, arming with his Sword, as Delegates,
                  Hee ſent amid the Rank of Magiſtrates,
                  
                  Garniſht with Vertues, grac't with Learning, fit
                  On bright Aſtréas ſacred Thrones to ſit.
                  His Predeceſſors, winking at the Crimes,
                  Or elſe conſtraind with Miſchiefe of their Times
                  (All giuen to Gain, greedy of Gold) had made
                  Of Offices a miſerable Trade:
                  Neuer regarding, that they ſet (withall)
                  Both Innocence, Honor, & Right to-ſale:
                  Sold, to th'inſatiate, Licence (as they pleaſe)
                  To pill the People, vnder ſhowes of Eaſe:
                  And let the Knaue, with his full Purſe, preuent
                  The known long Merit of the Excellent.
                  Hee, ſeeing This Abuſe to ope the Gate
                  To all Iniuſtice, to confound a State:
                  The Guiltie quit, the Innocent condemnd;
                  Wrong countenanc't, Right rated, or contemnd;
                  And onely Fauour (vnder fained Gowne)
                  O're-ruling Iudgements, Equitie put-downe:
                  
                     
                     
                        
                           •
                        e, in Courts vſing her Balance bright,
                  
                     
                        •
                     aight the Parties Money, not their Right:
                  
                     Ignorance, in Dignities ſupreame,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ing their ſacred Chayres with Wrongs extream;
                  
                     
                        •
                     ng too-ſhame-leſs, too-vnconſcionable,
                  
                     
                        •
                     t Shee, vnworthy, bought vnreaſonable:
                  
                     
                        •
                     g, in briefe, his Realmes neere Ieopardie:
                  
                     
                        •
                      ſtrength of Lawes turnd to meer Robberie:
                  
                     
                        •
                     rant Thefts, with Warrant vnder-handed,
                  
                     
                        •
                     onely not condemned, but commanded:
                  
                     
                        •
                     e as his Valor, quelling all his Foen,
                  
                     
                        •
                     et him quiet on his Fathers Throne,
                  
                     
                        •
                     aniſht quite This ſad Confuſions Cauſe,
                  
                     
                        •
                      fatal Death of Letters, & of Lawes;
                  
                     
                        •
                     rding to our Sauiours bleſt Example,
                  
                     
                        •
                      angry chas't the Chapmen forth his Temple.
                  
                     
                        •
                     en, where he met a Well-diſpoſed Wit,
                  
                     
                        •
                     e Knowledge and whoſe Cariage, matching fit,
                  
                     
                        •
                      him good hope, that beeing (free) prefard,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ould be th'Orphans & the Widowes Gard;
                  
                     
                        •
                     oore's Protector, in their Right to ſtand:
                  
                     
                        •
                     e for Fauour; & for Bribes, no hand;
                  
                     
                        •
                     we of Threats, and for Intreats no Eare,
                  
                     
                        •
                     g aſide, Loue, Hatred, Hope, and Feare,
                  
                  
                     When he ſhall ſit as Oracle, to doome;
                  Where Man is vnto Man, as in God's Roome:
                  Him would this noble Prince freelie create
                  
                  A Chancelour a Iudge, a Magiſtrate,
                  
                  A Deane, a Biſhop; without buſie Suit
                  Of bribed Minions baſely to purſu't.
                  O euer-wiſhed, neuer hoped Dayes,
                  Which Gold's-contempt ſo gilt with golden Ray
                  How calm you paſt! How was the People bleſt,
                  Vnder the Lawes of ſuch a Princes Heſt!
                  And ô! How worthy Hee, in ſpight of Time,
                  To be renowmed ouer euery Clime!
                  Through whom Integritie reuiu'd again,
                  And Sentences, ceaſing to paſſe for Gain
                  (As now, God wot, too many witneſſe can)
                  Were GOD's owne Sentence, in the Mouth of M
                        •
                     
                  
                  For neither ſpar'd He Rigour nor Reward,
                  Where he had hope, by gentle hand or hard,
                  To conquer Vice, and that ſame ſeruile Vein
                  
                  Which loues not Goodnes, but for Goods & Gain
                  And with a hart whoſe Gold-Thirſt neuer ſat is,
                  Will neuer till the Field of VERTVE, gratis.
                  
                  Knowing therefore, that in a Seaſon vicious,
                  We ſooner finde a Pyrrhus, then Fabricius;
                  
                     
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      wiſely fearing leaſt the feare of Want,
                  
                     
                        •
                     oue of Wealth ſhould worldly minds ſupplant,
                  make them paſs their duties bounds perchance,
                  
                     
                        •…
                     m he to place of Honor ſhould aduance:
                  
                     
                        •
                     eep their Port, with People, venerable;
                  
                     
                        •
                     ear their Charge of needfull Train & Table;
                  
                     
                        •…
                     m'd their Vertue againſt Pouertie
                  
                     
                        •…
                     e ſecret Foe to ſound Integritie)
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      ample Stipends, able to repell
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      law-leſs Lawes of thoſe Two Tyrants fell,
                  
                     
                        •••
                     ſe Iron Scepter, too-too-often forces
                  
                     
                        ••…
                     t honeſt Natures to dishoneſt Courſes.
                  
                     
                        •
                     her, if Fauour, Feud, or Auarice,
                  
                     
                        •
                     roſſe Iniuſtice did their hands intice,
                  
                     
                        •
                     uniſht aye their Treſpaſs with ſuch Rigor,
                  Lawes, recouering then their ancient vigor,
                  
                     
                        ••…
                     'd That ſeuere Example to reviue,
                  
                     
                        ••…
                     h in the Skin of Father flay'd aliue
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                     rong Decrees) his Sonne ſucceeding thruſt;
                  
                     
                        •…
                     odie Doom, yet, for Iniuſtice, iuſt:
                  
                     
                        •
                      after-Iudges, by their Iudge-skin Chaire
                  
                     B
                           ••
                        hes and Brokage might be warned faire.
                  
                     
                        •…
                     ou
                        •
                      all Crimes, his hearts iuſt Iealouſie
                  
                     
                        ••…
                     rred moſt Murder and Blaſphemy:
                  
                     Nor euer did the Firſt eſcape with life;
                  Vnleſſe by Proofs it were apparant rife,
                  That Self-defending, 't was vnwilling done;
                  Forc't, deadly Stroak, by deadly Stroak, to ſhun:
                  Th'other was puniſht where he ſinned, iuſt,
                  A red-hot Iron through his Tongue was thruſt;
                  To teach Blaſphemous Mouthes no more to blam
                        •
                     
                  
                  That holy, high, vn-vtterable Name,
                  Ador'd in Heau'n & Earth, & euery-where;
                  Which, euen the Angels ſpeak not, but with feare,
                  O! how he hated Thoſe light, lothſom, Places,
                  Where Venus ſells her to all lewd Embraces!
                  The Shepheard, finding, vnder Stacks, or Stones,
                  A Neſt of Hornets, or a Swarm of Drones,
                  Or knot of Vipers, is not bent more fierce,
                  Their Cells to ſpoile, Themſelues diſpatch, diſper
                        •
                     
                  
                  Then Hee was egre, & againſt Them bent
                  Seuereſt Lawes, with ſharpeſt puniſhment;
                  Clenſing with Fire thoſe foule Augéan Stalls,
                  And, to the ground, razing their filthy Walls.
                  Lacing with laſhes their vn-pittied Skin,
                  Whom Lust or Lucre had beſtow'd therein.
                  Him-Selfe, ſo chaſte of Body, and of Minde
                  (If Fame ſay true: who ſeldom ſoothes behinde.)
                  
                     
                     
                        •
                     at neuer Hee (rare in a Princes Life!)
                  
                     
                        •
                     ew other Venus, then his Queene and Wife.
                  
                  What Prince was euer, to the ſilly Poore,
                  
                     
                        •
                     re tender-harted, either helpfull more?
                  
                     
                        •
                     any Kings haue, by high Feats in Warr,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ownd their Names, & ſpred their Glories farr:
                  
                     
                        •
                     holeſome Lawes Licentious Rage repreſt:
                  
                     
                        •
                     any Proofs their Prudence well expreſt:
                  
                     
                        •
                     ll the parts of Policie & Prowes,
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                      all the Honors earthly State allowes:
                  
                     
                        •
                      few vouchſafe to ſtoope their ſtately eyes
                  
                     
                        •
                     h'humble Poore that on the dunghill lyes:
                  
                     
                        •
                      little think, that, in thoſe Little ones,
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        t, Christ Him-ſelfe vnto their Greatnes grones;
                  
                     
                        •
                     s at their Feet, in raggs, and hunger-driuen;
                  
                     
                        •
                      promiſeth, for Bread to giue Them Heav'n.
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                      hearts of Adamant! This pittious King
                  
                     
                        •
                      Your fel Natures was far differing.
                  
                     
                        •
                      oftentimes, from his high Throne deſcending,
                  
                     
                        •
                     owe & reap the Fruits on Almes attending,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ll that could from ordinary rate
                  
                     
                        •
                     oyall Charge of Kingdom, Houſe, & State,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ely ſpar'd, with honorable Thrift,
                  
                     
                        •
                      ſuch a heart & hand ſo apt to Gift;
                  
                     Would He beſtowe in building ſacred Cells,
                  
                  For th'Aged, Poore, Sick, Sight-leſs (Help-leſs els)
                  In ayding Widowes, whom the bliſs of Bearing
                  
                  Made wretched, wanting for their Childrens Reari
                           ••
                        
                     
                  
                  Redeeming Captiues, raiſing Doweries
                  For honeſt Maydens apt for Mariages,
                  (Whoſe Banes (vnaskt) ſtill Pouertie forbad)
                  Paſſing their Flower in Feares & Languors ſad:
                  In breeding Orphans, and in feeding Thoſe
                  Whoſe baſhfull Silence, biting-in their Woes,
                  Smoother'd the Sighes within their ſwelling breſt,
                  Wh
                        •
                     h frō their Mouthes meer Hunger often pre
                        •
                     
                  
                  In briefe in pouring on all Poore, no leſſe
                  Streams of Reliefe, then Fortune of Diſtreſſe:
                  Approuing plain, that, in moſt Pomp of State,
                  
                  Him Selfe a Man he 
                        •
                     ye did meditate.
                  His People He ſo lou'd, and their Proſperitie,
                  That, eaſing them of former Kings ſeueritie
                  In Impoſts, Tributs, Taxes, & the reſt,
                  Where-with his Kingdom had been ſore oppreſt:
                  He wont with Tears to bathe his Cheeks
                  When vrging Cauſe compelled him to lay they ſa
                        •
                     
                  
                  On his poore Subiects any new Exciſe,
                  Neuer ſo needfull, iuſt, or light to prize;
                  
                     
                     
                        •
                     ich yet his Pittie rarely did permit;
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      onely when Bellona (preſſing it)
                  
                     
                        •
                     inſt our Lillies ſome ſuch Storm had blown,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ath too-often Empires ouerthrown.
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     , for the Charge of needfull Dignitie,
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      royall State beſeeming Maieſtie,
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      neuer ſought from other Source to drain,
                  
                     
                        •
                     n th'euer-Springs of his owne iuſt Demain.
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     eſting th'vſe of other Potentates,
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     , but to gild their Pride in pompous States,
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      all their Subiects with extreame Exceſſe:
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      then conſuming it in Showes & Feaſts,
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      ſcorning thoſe whom they had eaten-vp
                  
                     
                        •
                     h-out Compaſſion) in a golden Cup
                  
                     
                        •
                     ouſed deep their wretched Peoples blood,
                  
                     
                        •
                     m God had giuen Them to protect, in good.
                  
                     
                        •
                     hat Lawes-Obliuion, What Contempt of GOD
                  
                     
                        •
                     s, this good Prince, Them, ſhril & ſharply chod)
                  
                     
                        •
                     ens your Eares againſt ſo many a Plaint!
                  
                     
                        •
                     mane ſoules, who, toucht with bloody Taint,
                  
                     
                        •
                     epheards, ſhear not, but euen flay your Fold,
                  
                     
                        •
                     urn the Skins to Caſ
                        •
                     akins of Gold;
                  
                     
                        •
                     ke You, the Heav'ns, which hate all Tyrannie,
                  
                     
                        •
                     wink at Yours, and let you ſcape ſo, free?
                  
                     No, no; they'll ruine Your vnrighteous Power;
                  And, cauſing ſoon Your Subiects riſe in Stower,
                  The Iuſt-Reuenger, who all Realms transfers,
                  Of mightieſt Kings ſhal make you School-maſte
                        ••
                     
                  
                  Shall break your proud Tax-puffed Sceptres ſo,
                  That, for th'abuſe, you ſhall the vſe forgo:
                  Or ſhall ſo curſe the cruell Policies
                  Your Minions finde to feed your Vanities,
                  That in Your hands your Gold ſhal melt away,
                  And ſtill the more you pill, the more you may:
                  (Like Dropſie-ſicke, the more they drink, the drye
                        •
                     
                  
                  The more you ſhall deuour, the more deſire:
                  New Eriſichthons, through inſatiate heat,
                  Forced in fine your Selues to teare & eate.
                  Branding with Shame of Marks ſo mercie-leſs,
                  So impious Pride of hearts ſo Pitie-leſs,
                  Who burd'ning Subiects more then beare they c
                        ••
                     
                  
                  Hold neither God for God; nor Man for Man.
                  But, whither run I, on ſo harſh a ſtring,
                  Out of my Tune; to tell how This good King
                  Reprou'd bad Princes of his Time for preſſing
                  Their People cauſe-leſs with vnceſſant Seſſing.
                  Let's re-aſſume our Song, our proper Theam:
                  Let's paſſe-by Vice, & rather couering them,
                  
                     
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      Them recounting in eternall Story,
                  
                     
                        •
                     s returne to ſing of Vertues Glory.
                  
                     
                        •
                     ow happy is the Prince, who ſquaring right
                  
                     
                        ••
                     cred Lawes the limits of his Might,
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      in Well-dooing, and as Iuſt as Wiſe,
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     ks not himſelfe to raign; ſaue, Noblewiſe,
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      He his People heeds, and hearing aye
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      iuſt Complaints, doth in due time repay
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      euery Monarch (with deuotion) vowes
                  
                     
                        •
                     OD & Men, when firſt his royall Browes
                  
                     
                        •
                     er ſo many ſolemne Myſteries:
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      hopeful Subiects wiſhfull, ioyful Cryes)
                  
                     
                        •
                     n the glad-ſad ſacred Diadem,
                  
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      inſtantly from thence-forth puts on Him
                  
                     Robe of Power, which thoſe doth much miſ-ſuit
                  
                     
                        •
                     aue not on rare Vertues richeſt Suit.
                  
                     
                        •
                     ong ſuch Kings, who ay, as Right directs,
                  
                     
                        •
                     re their Greatnes by their Good-effects;
                  
                     
                        •
                     y their Fortunes, or their Force of hand;
                  
                     
                        •
                     ny Nations vnder their Command;
                  
                     
                        •
                     at illuſtrious Prince to whom we pay
                  
                     
                        •
                     k Duties in this Hymnik Lay.
                  
                     
                        •
                     hile, at home, he happy Peace inioyd,
                  
                     
                        •
                     uer ſuffer'd day to vaniſh voyd
                  
                     Of giuing Audience, & extending free
                  Fruits of his Iuſtice vnto each Degree:
                  Grieuing in minde, grudging at thoſe, as loſt,
                  Leſs worthy ſpent, although vnwilling moſt.
                  Perſwaded ſure, that with what eye or eare
                  His Peoples Caſe a Prince doth heed and heare;
                  With like, the Lord, in his extreame Affaires,
                  Will looke on Him, & liſten to his Prayers:
                  That that ſame pompous, glittering, glorious Slau
                        •
                     
                  
                  Improperly calld Royall (for the Brauery)
                  In proper ſpeech (by due Experience ſcand)
                  'T 's an Onerous-Honor, a Confin'd Command:
                  That Kings were made for Subiects; & not they,
                  Not They for Kings: that though both Land & S
                        •
                     
                  
                  Adore their Greatnes (Lawes Support alone)
                  Yet, Princes Eares are not indeed their Owne;
                  But their own Peoples that doe humbly liue
                  Vnder th'obedience of the Lawes They giue:
                  That, to be briefe, of mightieſt Kings that are,
                  Labour's the Glory, and their Greatnes Care,
                  Such ſound Inſtructions, from his Cradle vs'd,
                  His vertuous Mother wiſely had infus'd;
                  Which in his Princely breſt digeſting milde,
                  A Man, he practiz'd what he learnt, a Childe:
                  
                     
                     
                        •
                     dy to heare the meaneſt that complaine;
                  
                     
                        •
                     erring wiſely ſuch a ſacred paine
                  
                     
                        •
                     re the pleaſure of the choiceſt Sport
                  
                     
                        •
                     ld be deuiſd in Countrey or in Court:
                  
                     
                        •
                     nce in his People ſuch Affection ſpreads,
                  
                     
                        •
                     y bleſs his Birth-day, & the ground he treads;
                  
                     
                        •
                     him their Father, & with Vowes amain
                  
                     
                        •
                     uent the Altars for his long-long Raign:
                  
                     
                        •
                      that Wiſh (the Sum of their Deſire)
                  
                     
                        •
                     ained All all Prayers could require,
                  
                     
                        •
                     d to beg of Heav'ns eternall Bountie,
                  
                     
                        •
                     king Peace, Riches, Religion, Plentié,
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     ll the Bleſſings which ASTREA's hand
                  
                     
                        •
                     lant or poure vpon a happy Land.
                  
                     
                        •
                     at Tracts of Art, What Tropes of Eloquences
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     uely repreſent to modern Princes,
                  
                     
                        •
                      euen Envies Self ſhall nought controule)
                  Self-ſeuere Integritie of Soule,
                  
                     
                        •
                     e humble, patient, conſtant Temperance,
                  
                     
                        •
                     o Succeſſor as yet had in France,
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     et elſ-where, how-euer euery State
                  
                     
                        •
                     et admire it, none can imitate.
                  
                     
                        •
                     ROPE (where euer Vice and Vertue moſt
                  
                     
                        •
                     triuen for Empire, beſt & worſt to boaſt)
                  
                     Hath whilom ſeen Kings treading in the Path
                  Of notedſt Tyrants, who with Threatful Wrath,
                  And all the Terrors, which Mans Cruell Rage,
                  To fright Mankinde had found in former age,
                  Reſtraind their Subiects frō their Deaths Cōſpiring
                  Who, ſo, leſs-daring, had the more deſiring.
                  But, This right generous Prince, ſtill walking fit,
                  Within the Path which Tyrants neuer hit,
                  Onely reſtraind all Publique Inſolence,
                  By th'euen-born Raines of his own Innocence.
                  Giuing ſo little hold to Mal-contents,
                  
                  Taking, at ſharp Reproofs, ſo ſmall Offence,
                  That by effect his Royall Soule did ſhowe,
                  That in the ſame no liuelier Flame did glowe,
                  Then a Deſire, ſo Temperate to frame-him,
                  That all might boldly, none might iuſtly, blame 
                        •
                     
                  
                  Smooth Soothers, poyſoning by the Eare the 
                        •
                     
                  
                  Pernitious Weeds, who (Ivie-like) ſubuert,
                  Diſtort, deſtroy the Trees you climbe vpon;
                  Still feeding Vice with ſuch Contagion,
                  That ſeldom, Soules, who with Applauſe appro
                        •
                     
                  
                  Your praiſing them, do ought Praiſe-worthy lou
                        •
                     
                  
                  Vizards of Homage, Vertues Peſtilence,
                  Right ill-come were You to This Vertuous Pri
                        •
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     , ſhunning aye Your banefull Whiſperings,
                  
                     
                        ••
                     mmon Poiſoners of the publique Springs,
                  
                     
                        •
                     rr'd your preſence, & could better brook
                  
                     
                        •
                     ſs-Fault-finder, then a Fawner's look.
                  
                     
                        •
                     uch a Noble Minde, remote from Vice,
                  
                     
                        •
                     g true Honor, loatheth Flatteries.
                  
                  
                     
                        ••
                     at pleaſure took He, how extream Delight
                  
                     
                        •
                      ſtories where many times hee might
                  
                     
                        •
                     w him Seife; amaz'd, to read the things
                  
                     
                        •
                      ſaid, of Kings; which none dare ſay to Kings!
                  
                     
                        •
                      was he rapt! how ſweetly extaſed,
                  
                     
                        •
                      that diuine Eternall Will he read,
                  
                     
                        •
                     e, with ſo liberall, iuſt, & louing hand,
                  
                     
                        •
                     hares to His the Heav'nly-Holy-land!
                  
                     
                        •
                     at which is ſaid of Alexander's loue
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        omer's Works (whoſe graces, all approue)
                  
                     
                        •
                     well of Him, for honoring the Miracles
                  
                     Heav'nly Author, ſpeaking in his Oracles:
                  
                     
                        •
                     h, as a precious Treaſure, richly cas't
                  
                     
                        •
                     ld & Cedar, had hee neer him plac't;
                  
                     
                        •
                     g it aye his Ioy of Exerciſes,
                  
                     
                        •
                      u
                        •
                      of Vertues, & the Curb of Vices.
                  
                  
                     
                        ••
                     ly his Tublik Cares lent Leaſure,
                  
                     
                        •
                     nt 
                        •
                     t not in more contenting pleaſure,
                  
                     Then That ſo ſacred Studie's Fruit imparts
                  To th'healthy Taſte of true God-fearing hearts.
                  And well appeared, by rare, rich Effects
                  Of Vertues ſhining ouer all his Acts,
                  That that diuine Seed (happy ſowne the while)
                  Fell in no Thorny, Stony, Sandy Soile.
                  For, if that euer Soule did Vice auoid,
                  If euer heer meer humane Spirit inioyd
                  
                     Prowes, Pietie, Prudence, and Iuſtice, mixt,
                  Without the Foil of Follies Droſſe betwixt
                  (Frō proudeſt Wrong, the pooreſt Right defendin
                        •
                     
                  
                  Diſdaining Pleaſures towards Vice but tending:
                  Milde to the Meek; to Malapert, auſtere:
                  To good men, Bountious; to the bad, Seuere)
                  'Twas This braue Prince: Whō, They do beſt reſe
                     
                        •
                     
                  
                  In Whom Theſe Vertues moſt of all aſſemble.
                  Kings of his Time, raigning in Eaſt and Weſt,
                  
                  Reuéring him for ſuch, his Greatnes bleſt:
                  Th'Afflicted Princes choſe him for Refuge;
                  The Strong, for Friend; & Thoſe at Strife, for Iudg
                        •
                     
                  
                  When they grew weary to diſpute their Cauſe
                  By th'old ſharp Argument Kings Furie drawes,
                  When, Mars vſurping milde Aſtréa's room,
                  In ſted of Words, their Swords muſt giue the Do
                        •
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        •
                     en Iniurie with Iniury repelling,
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      ſtrength of Lawes by ſtronger Lawes refelling
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      back their Own, or Others Claim to barr)
                  
                     
                        •
                     y ſeek their Right in Might; their Peace, in War.
                  
                     Such was St. LEWIS: and Such was, wel-neer,
                  
                  
                     Own St. EDWARD (and ELIZA deer;
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         for Her Sex, the Salique Law, perchance,
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        s Her Succeſsion to the Saints of France)
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        ll prime Vertues of a complete Prince
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        ake a Saint-King. And, if euer, Since,
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     ROPE hath ſeen, or any kingdom know'n
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        uing Shrine of Both Theſe Saints in One
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        ugh, ſome, Suſpect of the ſmooth Soothing-Crime;
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        e, groſſe Neglect of This Ingratefull Time,
                  
                  Envie-prone, permit not So to ſay)
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        ill be Said and Sworne another-Day
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        en ſwelling Clowds, that dare Eclipſe our Sun,
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , by His Rayes diſperſed, be vndone;
                  
                     
                        •
                     HE, Him-ſelfe, in his Own ſplendor ſhine)
                  As our IVST-MASTER, learned & diuine.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        nd, if that euer (for the Time to come)
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        e haue bin Hope of like in CHRISTENDOM;
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        e was a Prince, and is a Prince with GOD,
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        e Name is deer, and deer the Duſt he trod
                  
                  
                     (Whoſe Memory My Teares muſt euer mix)
                  
                     On Whom all Eyes, in Whom all Hearts did fix:
                  
                  
                     Whoſe Vertues Harueſt ripened in his Spring,
                  HENRY was made a Saint, before a King,
                  
                     Leauing his Brother (where His Beſt re-flowres)
                  
                     Sole Heire apparant to His Hopes and Ours.
                  
                  
                     And, if yet, vnder Heav'ns gilt-azure Cope,
                  
                  
                     There now remaine Another liuing Hope
                  
                     Of new St. LEWIS, or His like again,
                  
                  
                     For godly, goodly, gracious, glorious Raign,
                  
                     With Bleſſe to BRITAN, and the Sacred Flock,
                  
                     Not built on Peter's ROME, but Peter's Rock;
                  
                     This, This is Hee: My Patrone and my Prince,
                  
                  PANARETVS; Whoſe Pupil-Excellence
                  
                     Boads, in his Age, to make This Poëm ſeem
                  
                  No Poëm, but a Prophecie of HIM.
                  
                     For, neuer was there Sonne more like to Sire,
                  
                  
                     In face, or grace, or Ought that Wee admire;
                  
                  
                     Then is Our CHARLES, in his yong Vertues Spri
                        •
                     
                  
                  
                     Like th'happy Non-Age of that Holy King
                  
                     (Like his Owne Father; like his Onely Brother,
                  
                  
                     So as Hee ſeems rather The ſame, then Other)
                  
                  
                     For Gracious Gifts, & Natiue Goodnes, tilld,
                  
                  
                     By like graue Tutors, in their Function skilld.
                  
                  
                     
                     O Thou All-Giuer! Fountaine of all Good!
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        ure daily downe vpon This Hopefull Bud
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         Deawes of Grace: ſhine on it from aboue
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         mildeſt Rayes of Mercie and of Loue:
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        ſted of Suckers, ſend it Succours ſtill,
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         feed the Root, that That the reſt may fill
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        th liuely Verdure of a fruitfull Sap,
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        oad with Plentie euery Vertuous Lap:
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        athe on it Bleſſings: leaue no Weed with-out,
                  
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      Worm with-in it: hedge it round-about
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        m Boares, and Beaſts, domeſticall & Stranger;
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         Wylde & Wylie (Where leaſt Dread, moſt Danger):
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        t it may kindly ſpring, and timely ſpred,
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        ulk and Branch, with leaues that neuer ſhed:
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        er whoſe Shade mine Aged Muſe may warble
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        e Monument (out-laſting Braſſe & Marble)
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        wan-like notes, to My Mecoenas Honor,
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        en Hee beſtowes ſome Neſt of Reſt vpon-her.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        or may my Vowes ingratefully forget
                  
                  Other Branch (in Other Soile new-ſet)
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        ſe tender Leaues, ſhaken with Sighs of Ours,
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        ed of Tears, haue dropped Siluer ſhowers
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        ole My Thirst, my Cares to cure, or calm,
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         timely Vſe of Bounties princely Balm:
                  
                  
                     
                     O Sea of Bounties neuer-dryed Source!
                  
                     So water it with Thy rich Fauours Courſe,
                  
                  
                     That, Happy thriuing by her PALATINE,
                  
                     The Royall Iſſue of Their Roſie-Vine,
                  
                     From Rhine and Iſter, may to Tiber ſpred,
                  
                  
                     And, ouer-topping ROMES vſurping Head,
                  
                     From Bramble-Kings recouer CEASARS Seat,
                  
                  
                     With greater Sway thē
                      CONSTANTINE the Gre
                        •
                     
                  
                  
                     Great Arbitrer, whoſe Counſails none can ſound;
                  
                     Who canſt all Thrones confirm, and all confound;
                  
                  
                     Conferring Kingdoms, and transferring them,
                  
                  
                     How, When, & Where Thou wilt, from Stem to Stem;
                  
                  
                     Eſtabliſh, Lord, in Royall IAMES his Race,
                  
                     Theſe Kingdoms Geatnes, & Thy Kingdoms Grace!
                  
                  
                     Proſper our DAVID, bleſs his SALOMON,
                  
                     That after Them, vpon GREAT-BRITAN's Th
                        ••
                     
                  
                  (Maugre Hells malice & the Rage of ROME,
                  
                     Their roaring Bulls, their Charms, their Arms, to-com
                           •
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Their Powder-Plots, their Pistols, Poyſons, Kniues;
                  
                     And All their Ieſuites murdrous Art contriues)
                  Their Seed may ſit; and neuer Other hand
                  
                  
                     Then STVARTS ſway the Sceptre of This Land;
                  Wiſe, Great, Good, STVARTS, that may ſhine as c
                           •
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     As This St. LEWIS; both in Heav'n & Heer.
                  AMEN.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  A 
                        •
                     YMN of ALMS: OR THE BEGGERS BELL; heard, from beyond THE CHARTER-HOVSE, To ring All-in, To The Temple of CHARITIE; In an Eccho Iterated, & Conſecrated To The right-right Reuerend & Double-Honorable Father, GEORGE ABBOT, L. Arch-Biſhop of Canterbury, &c.
                  By IOSVAH SYLVESTER.
               
               
                  
                  
                  TO My Lord of Canterbury His Grace.
                  MY Wit, weak Orphan, weaned too-too-yong
                  Frō 
                     PALLAS Breſt, & too-too-Truant-bred
                  Not, as too-wanton, but too-wanting) led
                  
                     
                        •
                     om Arts, to Marts (and Miſeries among)
                  
                     
                        •
                     elſe perhaps (beſides du BARTAS) ſung
                  
                     
                        •
                     me natiue Strains the graueſt might haue read;
                  
                     
                        •
                     nd to your Grace now grately tendered
                  
                     
                        •
                     me fitter Sound then This rude Bell hath rung.
                  
                     
                        •
                     ſith it tends to drown th'Heavn-reaching Cry
                  
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     Blood heer ſhed by Luxe and Auarice;
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     d to awake the World to CHARITIE
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     reof Your Life ſo liuely Pattern is)
                  
                     
                        •
                     opitious, pardon mine officious Zeal,
                  
                  This lowd Eccho of a lowder Peal.
                  
                     Your Graces moſt bounden & humble Bead-man, IOSVAH SYLVESTER.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                  AD Eundem Praeſulem praeoptimum EPIGRAMMA; Ex lat. I. O. 
                     1611.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •…
                        ane, Oxford's Head; Soone Winton's Dean Thou wert
                  
                     
                        
                           •…
                        one, Litchfield had thee Her Dioceſan:
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •…
                        e, London had thee Hers, by Thy Deſert:
                  
                     
                        
                           •…
                        e, England ioyes Thee Metropolitan:
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •…
                        e, by the King, call'd to His Counſailes High:
                  
                     
                        •
                     hat ſhall I wiſh thee late? but, late to die.
                  
                     Eiuſdem
                     
Ampliſsimi
                     ANAGRAMMA
                     
                     Duplex.
                  
                  Georgius Abbot.
                     Gregis Tuba, böo:
                      
                     Subitò gregabo,
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                  AD Reuerendiſsimum Dominum 
                        
                           •
                        piſcopum Londinenſem, EPIGRAMMA; Ex lat. I. O. 1611.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        e, learned KING, the learnedſt King elected
                  
                     
                        •
                     reat LONDON's Paſtor; which Thee glad-expected:
                  
                     
                        •
                     s are wont, that hunt for ſuch Reward
                  
                     
                        •
                     it & Art, ſue in the SEE's Vacation:
                  KING, the King, th'Arch-Biſhop call'd, prefard;
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        itie, too; Thou hadſt thy SEE's Vocation.
                  
                  
                     Eiuſdem 
                     
Praeconis diſertiſsimi
                     ANAGRAMMA.
                     
Iohannes King.
                     Oh, Igni-Canens!
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  A HYMNE of ALMES.
                  
                     ALMES (holy Gift, vouchſafed from aboue)
                  Is a ſure Pledge and Symbole of that Loue,
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     ch GOD, iuſt Steward, as a Deaw poures-out
                  Earth, expoſd to empty Aier about:
                  
                     
                        •
                     from this Vnion, from this conſtant League,
                  
                     
                        •
                     n time to time Mankinde doth duely beg
                  
                     
                        •
                     at the Sun imparts his powers vnto,
                  
                     
                        •
                     uing Creatures and vn-liuing too:
                  
                     
                        •
                     at, our Being, Begging may we call;
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      of her Maker, Nature borrowes all:
                  
                     
                        •
                     ſt Vſurers and Churles Vnthankfulnes,
                  
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      to CHRIST's Members ſhew them Mercy-leſs.
                  
                     
                        •
                     e that, for GOD, but a good Motion hath,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ing his Minde vp to the Milkie Path,
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     mire there (nameleſs) what he cannot knowe
                  
                     
                        •
                     'eye of Reaſon (where yet ſhineth though
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        un of Righteouſnes; as th'vſuall Sun,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ugh Crannies ſhines into a Dungeon:)
                  
                     He, He (I ſay) that hath but Nature's ſenſe,
                  For Faith; for Law, but natiue Innocence;
                  In his ſimplicity hath alwaies care
                  To practiſe ALMES, ALMES to receiue & ſhare
                  So common 'tis with ſociable Man
                  To giue and take the mutual ALMES he can;
                  Yea, in our Cradles, yet our Tongues can craue,
                  We beg with Cries what we had need to haue.
                  The Heav'ns, diſpenſing ſacred Influences,
                  Predominant in Birth of Poore and Princes,
                  Aboundantly (with bountious Ouer-plus)
                  Poure th'Hebrew's Manna, many waies, on Vs;
                  To teach that We, by ſundry Charities,
                  Should mildely eaſe each others Miſeries.
                  Euen as the Opal, in his orient luſtre
                  Where various colours of all Stones doe muſter,
                  Shewes the rare Riches of the Pearly East;
                  
                     Almes is The Glaſs of wel-bred ſoules and bleſt,
                  Shewing each other Vertue's ſacred Quality,
                  In th'Heav'n-allyed Man of Liberality.
                  
                  ALMES are the Caement of this round Theat
                        •
                     
                  
                  Where, in a differing kinde, Earth, Aier, and Water,
                  Intend the ſame thing; liberally to giue
                  
                  
                     Their ALMES to Rocks, Plants, Creatures all that li
                        •
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        •
                     ducing Fire withall, whoſe Force vnſeen
                  
                     
                        •
                     es frankly, too, his helpfull Heat between.
                  ALMES, in our Bodies worketh all in all:
                  
                     Eyes lend it Light; the Hands, moſt liberal
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     orious ALMNERS, being home to the Head
                  
                     
                        •
                     needfull Store where-with the VVhole is fed:
                  
                     
                        •
                     e Feet ſupply it with their meet Support;
                  
                     
                        •
                      each, each other, as their Parts comport:
                  
                     
                        •
                     e Liuer, Nurſe of Naturall Faculties,
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      warms, then feeds, the Nerues, Veins, Arteries;
                  
                     
                        •
                     ſing the Stomach (as His Almes) receiue
                  
                     
                        •
                     e Heat which firſt his vertue doth conceiue:
                  
                     
                        •
                     e ſpongie Lungs with gentle Sighes inſpire
                  
                     
                        •
                     e vitall Aier our Little-Worlds require:
                  
                     Heart quick and ready, with Almes-vowed Vigor,
                  
                     
                        •
                     wes to it ſelfe (againſt extreameſt Rigor,
                  
                     
                        •
                     vtmoſt Refuge) all our liuelieſt Heat,
                  
                     
                        •
                     uccour Nature, when Death ſeems to threat:
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     Soule (ſolely diuine) Life's motion brings
                  
                     
                        •
                     all the Members of This Thing of Things,
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     ME'S Heir apparant) to VVhom, ſupreme Sage
                  
                     
                        •
                     'ns Alm'ner gaue the Earth for heritage;
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     , hauing free receiv'd ſo various Store,
                  
                     
                        •
                     hould be frank to th'Needy, Naked, Poore.
                  
                     Be bountious ALMNERS, ſaid All Bounties Father
                  Y' are not heer Owners, but meer, Stewards rather:
                  I haue ordain'd you to prouide and care
                  For th'Orphane, Poore, that vnprouided are.
                  If, narrow-hearted, You ſhrink-in your hands
                  From th'humble Begger that Your ALMES demand
                        •
                     
                  
                  I'll make Your Goods (like water) leak away;
                  Your Lands, a Stranger ſhall inherit aye;
                  Your Gold (your God) before you be aware,
                  Some barbarous Souldiers in your ſight ſhall ſhare
                  Your ſtately houſes (ſtiled by your Names)
                  VVarres rage ſhall ruine, or ſome ſodain Flames,
                  VVhich I ſhall kindle (in my iuſt diſpleaſure)
                  Againſt yor Selues, yor Seed, yor Truſt, yor Treaſ
                        •
                     
                  
                  The Mercileſs, with Me ſhall Mercy miſs:
                  That Vice alone all Vertues Poyſon is.
                  
                     Abram, Lot, Ioſeph, Iob, were ALMNERS all
                  (To Strangers kinde, to Neighbours liberal)
                  By ſacred record, which renownes them more
                  For this rare Vertue, then All elſe, of yore;
                  As if, with GOD (the Author of all Good)
                  Their chief perfection in this Function ſtood,
                  Sole Soule of Vertues, ſecond Life of all
                  This various vaſt Orbe, which the World we call.
                  
                     
                     Calling to record the Rein-ſearching Eye,
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        er I protest that in My Pouerty
                  
                     Though theſe deer Times daign Me ſo ſcant a Scope,
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        at hauing Nothing, I can Nothing hope)
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        ext my Home-charge (where Charity begins)
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        y deepest Sighes (ſaue for my Debts and Sinnes)
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        ſe from Compasſion, and Deſire to ſteed
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        ers which Helps which yet my Self I need:
                  Succour Others: to be (like the Sun)
                  
                     
                        •
                     ending Light and Heat to Euery-one:
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        e, to All, in ſome ſort, neceſſarie
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        or Vertues Meed, and not as mercenary):
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        her, to giue, then take; to lend, then borrow;
                  
                     Pound to-Night, then but a Crowne to-Morrow:
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                      
                     th'Heau'nly Wiſedome (best, it Selfe knowes Why)
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        h ſtill th'Effect of This Affect deny,
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        rying Meanes and Matter, to expreſs
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        ne inward Zeal to ALMES and Thankfulnes;
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        ch oft breakes-out (without a Trompet blow'n)
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     giue (GOD knowes) more then I knowe mine Own
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        e more my Grief) the leſs my Thought of Merit,
                  
                     Thirſt of Praiſe, though heer I thus auerr-it;
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        h'humble Proffer of ſo Poor a Mite,
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        bundant Rich to Bounty to incite.
                  
                  
                     
                     Vain-glorious ALMNERS are effeminate,
                  Affecting Works, but to be wondred-at;
                  Whoſe Vertue is meer Vanity (indeed)
                  And heer receiues their momentary Meed:
                  
                  The Meritorious (ſuch as ween them ſo)
                  
                     Indebting GOD to Them for what they doe;
                  In ſted of Heau'n, where Humble Soules abide,
                  Shall purchaſe Hell, the Portion of their Pride.
                  
                  O! Thrice, thrice Happy He, whoſe free Deſires,
                  To Charity a holy feruour fiers:
                  VVho only mindes GOD's glory, by his Gift,
                  And Neighbor's Good; without ſiniſter Drift:
                  
                     Famine (familiar vnto Rogues that range)
                  Shall not come neer his Garner nor his Grange:
                  His Fields, with Corn, abundant Crop ſhall couer
                  His Vines with Grapes, his Hedge vvith Roſes o
                        •
                     
                  
                  His Downs wth Sheep, his Daery-grounds with Ne
                        •
                     
                  
                  His Mounts with Kids, his Moores with Oxen gre
                        •
                     
                  
                  His Groues with Droues (increaſing night and day
                  His Hills with Heards, his ſmiling Meads with Ha
                        •
                     
                  
                  His Fenns with Fowl, his Pills and Pooles with F
                        •
                     
                  
                  His Trees with Fruits, with Plenty euery Diſh:
                  
                     Content and Health (the beſt of Earthly bliſs)
                  Shall euermore remaine with Him and His:
                  
                     
                     
                        •
                     n, Pride nor Enuy neuer ſhall moleſt;
                  
                     
                        •
                     r Corſiue Care, Foe to Repaſt and Reſt.
                  
                     
                        •
                      th'All-ſee Eye ſtill carefully reſpects
                  
                     
                        •
                     e ALMNER's Houſe, and euer it protects;
                  
                     
                        •
                      finally, vvhen Iustice endeth All,
                  
                     
                        •
                     et Mercie's Voice Him to Heauens Kingdom cal.
                  
                     
                        •
                     ut, th'Vſurer (how-euer heer he thriue
                  Heards and Hoords) already dead aliue
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                      Heat of Loue, no Heart to giue a Mite,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ept to gain and gather double by't)
                  
                     
                        •
                     , in That Day (to Him a Day of VVoe)
                  
                     
                        •
                     e Holy-One, th' All-Knower will not knowe.
                  
                     
                        •
                     me and Confuſion ſhall be-ſpred him ouer,
                  
                     
                        •
                     iſhing the Holes to hide, & Hills to couer:
                  
                     
                        •
                     nal Fier ſhall fry his thirſty Veines;
                  
                     
                        •
                     ortal dying in eternal Pains.
                  Eyes, ſo nice to look on Lazars Sore,
                  
                     
                        •
                      ſwim in Sulphury Teares (tortur'd the more,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ee aboue, in Bliſſe and Glory rife,
                  
                     
                        •
                     m, Ruth-leſs, heer they would not ſee, in life):
                  Eares, Heer deaf vnto diſtreſſed-ones,
                  
                     
                        •
                      there hear Horror of the Damned Grones:
                  
                     
                        •
                      ſhall the voice of Mercy Him ſalute,
                  
                     
                        •
                     o in Effect, to Needy Mones was mute:
                  
                     Millions of Maſſes cannot him redeem,
                  Nor all Church-Treaſure euer ranſom him,
                  From all-Thought-pasſing Pangs of Wretchednes;
                  As, End-leſs, Eaſe-leſs, and Remedy-leſſe.
                  ALMNES are ſo vſual in the Eaſtern parts,
                  Where Heav'n & Earth & Aier, improue their Parts,
                  That euery Village there, in Winters Need,
                  Is wont the Flocks of Wyldeſt Fowles to feed,
                  And break the Ice (of purpoſe) for their drink,
                  When cryſtall Cruſts haue glas'd the Waters brink,
                  A Charity of Infidels, to Fowles;
                  Shaming ſome Chriſtians, towards Chriſtian Soules.
                  Rich Anatolia, and her happy Coaſt
                  (Th'abbridged Glaſſe of all the World (almoſt)
                  In her huge Cities (rather Shieres wall'd-in)
                  Theſe hundred yeers hath not a Beggar ſeen;
                  (GOD's ſtrict Edict they there obſerue ſo well,
                  
                     Forbidding Beggers in His ISRAEL)
                  Sith 'tis miſpriſion of the Law of Nature,
                  Nay, impious Pride againſt our All Creator,
                  
                  To ſuffer Man (GOD's Image, and our Owne)
                  VVhom we may ſuccour, to be ouer-thrown;
                  To ſtark for Cold, to ſtarue for Food, to periſh
                  In Penury, when we haue power to cheriſh:
                  
                     
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     , in ſuch Caſes, where (we knowe) we can,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ere not to Comfort, is to Kill a Man.
                  Yet, ſole the Chriſtian (Each a Wolf to other)
                  
                     
                        •
                     dains to look on his Distreſſed Brother;
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        d heer, in LONDON [Coaching ſwiftly by;
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        ſtalking on, with Self-ſuruaying Eye;
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        ſtrutting out, to vye his Purles or Lace:
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                      
                     ſtepping-in, to ſee ſome painted Face,
                  
                  
                     Fire-new Faſhion of a Sleeue or Slop;
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        o ſome Tauern, or Tobacco-Shop;
                  
                     
                        •
                      
                     towards Burn-Bull (if not Turnbul) Street;
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        to Black-Friers, ſome white Nunnes to meet]
                  
                     Doores, on Dunghils, vnder euery Stall,
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                         pined, ſick, poor, naked Christians fall,
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        ut, ſtarue, and dye; for lack but of the Price
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        he leaſt Croſs of his laſt Cast at Dice;
                  
                  
                     Of the Tythe but of his Shoo-tyes Coſt;
                  
                     Of the Spangles from his Garters loſt:
                  
                  
                     Of his ietting the Canaries Iigg:
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        f the puffing of his Perriwig.
                  Times! O Manners! O mad, Murderous Vanity,
                  
                     Either Sexe, of equal Inhumanity!
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        he hideous Cryes of the Afflicted, fright
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        ſable Horrors of the ſilent Night,
                  
                  
                     
                     So that She, pearced with their pitious Caſe,
                  
                  
                     Clothes them with Clowdes, and lends them Eaſe a ſp
                           •
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     The hollow Rocks, and hardest Marble Stones,
                  
                  
                     Weep when they weep, and eccho with their Grones:
                  
                  
                     Their Shiuering fits, their Feares, their Feauers make
                  
                  
                     The Firmament, the fixed Poles, to ſhake:
                  
                  
                     Yet heer (alas!) th'abundant Riotous
                  
                     Are neuer mov'd: much leſs the Couetous
                  Rich, raking Wretch; the needy-greedy Chuff,
                  
                  
                     Whoſe (Hel-like) heart can neuer haue enough;
                  
                     Who rather grindes, then giues; and beggers many
                  
                  
                     Yer to a Beggar he affoord a Penny,
                  
                  
                     Or penny-worth, of All his plentious Store
                  
                  
                     When Bags, and Banks, and Barns can hold no more,
                  
                  O Times! O Manners! O mad murderous Vanity,
                  
                  
                     In Yong and Old, of equall Inhumanity!
                  
                     But, pardon, LONDON; I haue ouer-ſlipt:
                  
                     I must recant, leaſt I be ſtript and whipt.
                  Chriſt-Church, S. Thomas, Bartholmew (My Fre
                        •
                     
                  
                  Bride-well and Bedlam, better Thee commend:
                  
                  
                     Beſides a many of peculiar Charges
                  
                  
                     Of Companies; and more of Priuat Largeſs:
                  
                  
                     And, aboue All, that black Swan (SVTTON)'s N
                        •
                     
                  
                  (From One, alone almoſt worth All the reſt)
                  
                     
                     
                        
                           •
                        t new Zaccheus, who reſtored free
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        ld Charter-houſe to better CHARITIE.
                  
                     
                        •
                      
                     not Theſe, ALMES? Are not Theſe, Monuments
                  
                     
                        •
                     ious Zeal; of kind Beneficence?
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        ant they are (Giue GOD and Men their due):
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        reuerend Green-Staues, what's All This to You
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        leſs, as Romiſts by implicit Creed,
                  
                     
                        •
                      
                     hope for Heav'n, by Right of others Deed:
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        well with glory of your Elders Good;
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        ſelf-Ignobles boaſt their Fathers Blood)
                  Theſe few, dead, heer a few Hundreds cheriſh;
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        uing, You let many Thouſands periſh;
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        ant, perhaps, not of your Gift, but Gain;
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        ch ſome, perhaps, from others Gifts restrain;
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        h (if time ſerue) when they can hold no more,
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                      
                     will (perhaps, the tenth-tenth-part) reſtore
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                      
                     they are dead; to build a Front for Fiue,
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        oſe fiue Hundred they haue ſtaru'd, aliue.
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     imes! O Manners! O mad Murderous Vanity,
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        ery Sort, of equal Inhumanity!
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        thiops and Turks againſt Our Rich ſhall riſe,
                  
                     
                        •
                      can behold with vnrelenting Eyes
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        e, Aged, Sick Soules gaſping out their laſt;
                  
                     
                        •
                     ttle moued, and no more agaſt
                  
                     Then is the Huntſ-man, when a Deer at Bay
                  Doubles, in vain, and windes to get away.
                  During th'old Golden, happy, harmleſs, Age,
                  
                  When Saturn ruled (without Sathan's Rage)
                  When Reaſon ſate as Iudge on euery Throne:
                  When Iuſtice ſhar'd iuſtly to Each his owne:
                  When Innocence was Cities Citadel:
                  Whem Charity ſole ſwayd the Common-weal:
                  
                  Then had the Heav'ns nothing but ALMES for E
                        •
                     
                  
                  Then had the Earth (which now the Heav'ns defie)
                  No other Heav'n then th'only Mantle faire
                  Of ALMES, beſtow'd by Water, Earth, and Aire,
                  
                  And Fier withall; from whoſe fel Nature, ALM
                        •
                     
                  
                  Extracts the Fierceneſs and the Fury calmes.
                  ALMES was the Word th'All-perfect Artiſt ſaid,
                  When out of ALMES, He bade, A Heav'n be mad
                           •
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     A fruitfull Earth; a Lightful, heatful Fier;
                  
                  
                     A Sighful Aier (though Soule-les) to reſpire;
                  
                  
                     A moiſtful Water, wauing Changefully:
                  
                  
                     A World (in brief) full of all Quality.
                  
                  So that (in fine) of All This All-Theatre
                  
                  ALMES is the Forme, ALMES is the primer M
                           •
                        
                     
                  
                  So neceſſary for Our Liuely-hood,
                  That, after GOD, it is Man's Souerain-Good.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        
                           •
                        artha's and Marie's ALMES (in Bounty rife)
                  
                     
                        •
                     or'd their Brother to a ſecond Life:
                  
                     
                        •
                     who ſo free the Fire-Coacht Prophet fed,
                  
                     
                        •
                     nd happy Guerdon; for (her Darling dead)
                  
                     Faithful ALMES, wingd with his feruent Prayer,
                  
                     
                        •
                     rought the Breath of her Death-ſeized Heir.
                  
                     
                        •
                     LMES is the Glew of Frendſhips permanence:
                  
                     
                        •
                     of all Vertues th'only Quinteſſence:
                  
                     
                        •
                     inſt Heav'ns Anger, 'tis an Anchor ſure:
                  
                     
                        •
                     inſt Earth's Rage, a Rampire to endure:
                  
                     
                        •
                     ck of Honor, againſt Slanders Armes:
                  
                     
                        •
                     ield of ſafety, againſt hurtfull Charms.
                  
                     
                        •
                     or, on the Man where pious Pitty dwels,
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        ice can nothing, with Theſſalian Spels,
                  
                     
                        •
                      Traitor's Poignard, nor his Powder-Wit:
                  
                     
                        •
                      cunning mixture of a Murderous Bit:
                  
                     
                        •
                      ſecret Wyles of cheating Hypocrites:
                  
                     
                        •
                      priuie Thieues, nor proud Monopolites:
                  
                     
                        •
                      ought, nor All, that Miſchief can reuolue
                  
                     
                        •
                     are the Heauens, or Nature to diſſolue.
                  
                     
                        •
                     LMS calms the Winds, & giues them gentle breth:
                  
                     
                        •
                      War of Waues it quickly quieteth:
                  
                     
                        ••
                      Shoals and Shelues, from where the Siren ſings,
                  
                     
                        •
                      ALMNER's Ship it ſwift and ſafely brings:
                  
                     When need requires, it Oares and Sailes ſupplies;
                  And, paſt the Pole, another Pole eſpies,
                  To ſteer his Courſe; if what his heart doth vow
                  
                  Abroad, at home, his loyall hand allow
                  In liberal ALMES vnto the Needy ſort
                  At his Return into his wiſhed Port.
                  The Golden Table that Great Pompey pilld
                  From Salem, ſerv'd (as ſacred Vengeance willd)
                  For Sword to Caeſar: GOD ſo ielous is
                  
                  (Though Nought He needs) of what is vowed Hi
                        •
                     
                  
                  Th'High Threaſorer of ASIA's impious Rapt,
                  
                  VVithin the Temple was with Horror wrapt:
                  And, but th'High-Prieſt by Praier ſuccoured,
                  The Sacrilegious had there periſhed.
                  So may they ſpeed, or worſe then ſo, that ſpoile
                  GOD's liuing TEMPLFS (by, or Gripe, or Guile
                  That from their Paſtor, or their PRINCE, detain
                  The Tithe, or Tribute, ſacred Lawes ordain:
                  That from the Poor their ancient Rights conceal,
                  Or, in their new, with Them vniuſtly deal:
                  That haue by ſecret ſacrilegious Theft,
                  Robd Church, or State, or holy Almes bereft:
                  O! may they once, as high as Haman, mount;
                  And from Mount Faulcon giue a ſad Accompt
                  
                     
                     
                        •
                     all the Wrongs (as Conſcience them conuinces)
                  
                     
                        •
                     ne to their GOD, their Country, Peers and Princes;
                  
                     
                        •
                     ile Great-ones, blinded, or as loth to ſpy,
                  
                     
                        •
                      oft their Fingers in the Golden Pye;
                  
                     
                        •
                      priuate Profit or peculiar Pleaſure,
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     glecting Poore, Publik's and Princes Threaſure.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        imes! O Manners, Moſt to be deploi'd!
                  
                     
                        •
                      ſodain mend them, or ſoon end them, Lord.
                  
                     
                        •
                     or, if poor France fal in an All-Conſumption,
                  
                  Death's ſad Criſis will be This Preſumption
                  
                  
                     Priuat Lucre, without publike Care;
                  
                     
                        •
                     ile Each, Self-ſeruing, winks at Others Share.
                  
                     
                        •
                     OD, for his Mercy, grant My Feares be vaine:
                  
                     
                        •
                     rid me ſoon out of the Care-full Pain
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     fer daily, while ſo few I ſee
                  
                     
                        •
                     m This Corruption's foule Contagion free:
                  
                     
                        •
                      would I had his bred in humbleſt Thatch,
                  
                     
                        •
                     re of the loigns of one that Sprats doth catch;
                  
                     
                        •
                     oor in Wit, as not of power to knowe
                  
                     
                        •
                     impious Trains that Empires ouer-throwe:
                  
                     
                        •
                     appily, more dull of head and heart,
                  
                     
                        ••
                     ould I feel vn-feeling France's Smart;
                  
                     
                        •
                      ſayes her Self by Selfs-Diſloyalties,
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     ng no Foe but her Owne Avarice,
                  
                  
                     With Pride her Partner, and Impunity,
                  
                  Their ſtrong Abbettor: Which Triumviri
                  
                  Is able, ſole, and ſoon, to ruinate
                  And raze the Glory of the greateſt State;
                  Or bury 't quick i'th Tombe of careleſs Princes
                  That wink, or ſhrink vnder their Inſolences,
                  
                  Robbing them Selues of th'Honor and Renoune
                  Which Heav'ns entail vnto a happy Croune.
                  
                  But, if I can be willing not to dye,
                  'Tis, out of hope, to ſee the Company
                  Of Sacrilegious roundly go-to-pot,
                  Expos'd in publike to ſome ſhamefull Lot,
                  VVhen our Great Hercules (All monſters Dread)
                  Shall haue cut-off the Golden Hydra's head;
                  For an eternal Trophey of his Glory,
                  And Argument of an Immortal Story.
                  But, now return we to our Theam, from whence,
                  Our Charity (through Zeal's too-Vehemence)
                  Seems to haue ſtrayd. Yet 'twas meer ALMS did mo
                        •
                     
                  
                  My grieued Verſe Theſe Guilty to reproue;
                  To turn their hearts to GOD, and to their King;
                  Their priuat Heaps for publike Helps to bring,
                  Againſt th'Ambition of ſome Foxie Foe,
                  That by our Selues, our Selues would ouerthrowe;
                  
                     
                     
                        •
                     t by his Arms, but by his ALMES, to Some:
                  
                     
                        •
                     , golden Launces, oft haue ouercome.
                  Deer Patriots, That Spightfull ALMES diſdain,
                        ſee M
                           •
                         Fra
                           •
                         Ral
                           •
                         
                        fol.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     ich brings you Crowns; but tis Our Crown to gain:
                  
                     
                        •
                     th Groues of Honors ſeems your brows t'imboſs;
                  
                     
                        •
                      'tis to grace her Profit and your Loſs:
                  
                     
                        •
                     ich decks the Church, and doth the Maſſe adorne;
                  
                     
                        •
                     , by the Maſſe, 'tis but to ſerue her Turn:
                  
                     
                        •
                     res (in ſhew) both PETER's Chaire and Keyes;
                  
                     
                        •
                      if they Ope and ſhut not as ſhe pleaſe,
                  
                     Charity and Her Deuotion dye:
                  Her Religion is but Policy;
                  
                     Soule, but State; Her Life, but Rules-Deſire,
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     oſe Heat hath ſet all Europe on a Fier.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        ilus (that ſerues for Rain, to th'Abysſine,
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                      light-foot Memphite, and the Canopine)
                  
                     
                        •
                     ples with his ALMES the Choler's feruency
                  Earth and Aier, which there the Sun doth fry:
                  
                     
                        •
                     aters the Plains which Orion parcheth aye
                  
                     
                        •
                     th twinkling Sparkles of his heatfull Ray:
                  
                     
                        •
                     npers the torrid Aethiopian Zone:
                  
                     
                        •
                     s to haue Life, though it indeed haue none,
                  
                     
                        •
                     e that of ALMES; ſole Cauſe efficient
                  
                     
                        •
                     is fat Liquor, Africk's Nouriſhment.
                  
                     The Heau'ns, as Ielous of ſo Bountious Gifts,
                  
                  VVould ſhut-vp Nile within Godonian Clifts:
                  And Nature, enuious of this Africk Prince
                  
                  His lauiſh Largeſs and Magnificence,
                  Fronts him with Hills that ſeem to threat the Stars,
                  (As if renewing the old Titans Wars)
                  That one would think, amid the Mountains thick,
                  
                     Nilus were bay'd-vp, if not bury'd quick.
                  But by the Power which makes him charitable,
                  He finds, that ALMES to force the Heau'ns are a
                        •
                     
                  
                  He therefore, ruſhing, and out-roaring Thunder,
                  Surrounds the Rocks that ween to keep him vnder▪
                  
                  And with his ſwift Courſe breaks the Cataracts,
                  
                  Deafning withall the Parthians and the Bacts.
                  
                  
                     Pactolus, Ganges, and the golden Tay,
                  
                  Not only ſteep their Stronds, ennammeld gay
                  With various Tindge of thouſand Flowers and m
                        •
                     
                  
                  Sow'n on the ſurface of their wynding Shore:
                  But, for a richer ALMES, they Gold beſtowe,
                  As needfull now, as Reaſon (well we knowe)
                  In This Gold-Iron Age; where, who ſo wants
                  All-mighty Gold, but Scorn and Scandal haunts.
                  
                  When Androde fled his cruel Maſters Fiſt,
                  
                  And cauſe-leſs Fury (but for Had-I-wiſt)
                  
                     
                     
                        •
                     id the horror of the Woods he meets
                  
                     
                        •
                     re ALMES & Mercy then in ROMES proud ſtreets:
                  
                     
                        •
                     ere found he Man, to Man of brute Immanity;
                  
                     
                        •
                     er finds he Brutes of mildneſs and humanity:
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      Lord, there paid his Scruice but with Blowes;
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        ion, heer him double gratefull ſhowes:
                  
                     
                        •
                     to the Beaſt had ſhow'n him ſeruiceable;
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      Beaſt to Him ſeems much more charitable.
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      hauing long with his Beſt Prey's maintain'd him,
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      in his Den, as deer Gueſt, entertain'd him,
                  
                     
                        •
                      (two yeers after) alſo ſaues his Life
                  
                     
                        •
                     oſd (in ſport) to Fight and Fury rife
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      Man, and Beaſt, whom (forced) Hunger, there,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ld neuer force The Slaue to touch or teare:
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      th'awefull Lion (which ſuch M
                        •
                     n may ſhame)
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      ſafely reskues from Romes bloody Game.
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      noble Lion! thou haſt brought to paſs,
                  
                     
                        •
                     oſt yeeld to old Pythagoras,
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     is Opinion of M
                           •
                        tempſychoſis,
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        s-animation (ſo the Word compoſes)
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        oules deceaſt, to Bodies good or bad,
                  
                     
                        •
                     eer, D
                        •
                     light in Good or Ill they had.
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      durſt 
                        •
                     cely in his Doctrine wander,
                  
                     
                        •
                     uld ſuppoſe Thee ſecond Alexander;
                  
                     And that, a Beaſt, his Habits ſtill are one
                  As when a Man and King of Macedon.
                  
                  But, leauing Forreſts, Floods, Fields, Earth & A
                        •
                     
                  
                  VVhoſe ALMES already haue appeared faire;
                  Shall we yet mount among the Wandring Seauen,
                  
                  And ſee how conſtant They to ALMES are giuen
                  There ſhall we finde Man's monſtrous Self-reſiſti
                        •
                     
                  
                  Being made of Almes, all by meer Almes ſubſiſting
                  Beaſts, Birds & Plāts, Roots, Reptiles, Daies & Nig
                        •
                     
                  
                  Haue ſecond Being from Theſe Heau'nly Lights;
                  From Whom our Selues, flat Beggers, borrow'd ha
                        •
                     
                  
                  The Beſt that makes our Worſer part ſo braue:
                  The Sea's their Subiect, and th'All-bearing Earth
                  Without their ALMES can bring vs nothing forth
                  
                     Saturn is kinde to Marchants, Mariners,
                  Storm-wonted Fiſhers, ſtooping Labourers,
                  Carefull Houſholders, curious Architects;
                  And euery one that Gain with Pain reſpects.
                  Milde Iupiter (more bountious) Beawty giues,
                  Sweet gracefull Port, freſh Health (that happy liue
                        •
                     
                  
                  ALMNER of Vertues, ſtoring Man with Graces
                  
                  Moſt Angel-like, and meet for higheſt Places:
                  
                     Kings, Counſailors, Lords, Princes, Magistrates,
                  
                  Hold, after GOD, of Him their High eſtates.
                  
                     
                     Mars, ſureſt Patrone of Sarmatians ſtout,
                  
                     
                        •
                     f part of AFRIK, and the Southern Rout;
                  
                     
                        •
                     igh daily giues them millions of Delights,
                  
                     
                        •
                     nd makes them naked make a thouſand Fights.
                  
                     
                        •
                     ll Arts, wherein are Fier or Iron requir'd,
                  
                     
                        •
                     f his ſole Almes are to our Life acquir'd.
                  
                     Sol's Soule of Almes; who, richly Liberal,
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     iues him to All, yet cannot giue him all:
                  
                     
                        •
                     reat Seaſon-Bounder, artificiall Dreſſer
                  
                     
                        •
                     f Yeers and Dayes, the euen and only Seſſor
                  
                     
                        •
                     f Times rich Almes, which by his Heat he varies,
                  
                     
                        •
                     fter the Innes wherein he Monthly taries:
                  
                     
                        •
                     is Bounty moſt is bent vnto Muſicians,
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        ards, Poets, Leaches, Herbarists, Phyſicians.
                  
                  
                     Venus, each Morning, with a gentle Ray
                  
                     
                        •
                     ſhers the Sun, and Summons vs away
                  
                     
                        •
                     rom lazie Beds (our Bodies liuing Graues)
                  
                     
                        •
                     Vhen Day begins to iſſue from the Waues.
                  
                     
                        •
                     er Almes goes chiefly to the preſeruation
                  
                     
                        •
                     f Nature's Powers, and Parts of Generation:
                  
                     
                        •
                     mooth ſmiles ſhe giues, ſweet, cheerful charming Ein
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        oue is Her Gift; a Gift indeed diuine.
                  Quick Mercury, great Atlas's Daughter's Son,
                  
                     
                        •
                     Vit's Threaſorer, Well of Inuention,
                  
                  
                     He giues vs Arts, Knowledge; and Floquence,
                  
                  Which ſteales vs oft from Reaſon and from Senſe:
                  A bountious ALMNER of Aſtronomy,
                  
                  Rare (for the moſt) vnto Man's feeble Eye;
                  Who, yet vnſeen feeles (almoſt euery houre)
                  Hundred Effects of its admired power;
                  A Power which cannot be ſufficient ſhowne
                  By Verſe or Voice (vnleſs by Hermes owne)
                  For All that at this Day makes hunger flie
                  (Gold, Siluer, Braſ
                           •
                        
                     ) is draw'n from Mercury.
                  
                  
                     Cynthia, ador'd with hundred Fumes and Flames;
                  Honored (abroad) by more then hundred Names;
                  She giues vs Humors more or leſs abounding,
                  As in her Courſe her Fall or Full is rounding:
                  She faſhions Time; which Shee again defaces
                  With conſtant 
                        •
                     urnes of her inconſtant Faces:
                  She ſwayes the Floods, and ſhewes (by Euidence)
                  Her Self ſole Law of liquid Elements:
                  She formes, by Night, the freſh and fruitfull Deaw,
                  Which euery morning Flora's Budds doth ſtreaw;
                  Whoſe Purled Pearles are euer bigger found
                  And more, the more Lucina waxeth 
                        •
                     ound.
                  In brief, All, giuen to ALMES & Liberality,
                  
                  They All teach Man the ſame ſupernal Quality,
                  
                     
                     
                        •
                     owards the Needy, that doth nought poſſeſſe,
                  
                     
                        •
                     d from his Cradle brought but wretchedneſs,
                  
                     
                        •
                     t Sin and Death; had not Heau'ns ALMES bin ſhed
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         bloody Bath, to White This Monſter's Red;
                  Monſter, made of Earth, for Earth ſtill burning,
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      though to Earth he ſee him hourely turning.
                  Yea; proudeſt Kings haue had no other Birth
                  
                     
                        •
                     en pooreſt Beggers: Both begin of Earth;
                  
                     
                        •
                     th like in Cryes, in Perils, and in Pain;
                  
                     
                        •
                     th alike Guilty in their Grand-Sires Stain:
                  
                     
                        •
                     th, as in Birth, ſo in their Death alike:
                  
                     
                        •
                     th Kings and Beggers one ſame Dart doth ſtrike;
                  
                     
                        •
                     th paſs together, in one ſelf ſame Boate,
                  
                     
                        •
                     om th'arched Palace and the thatched Cote.
                  
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      that, in Life what-euer Ods there be;
                  Birth is None: None in their Death, we ſee.
                  Only, the Good (of what Degree ſoeuer)
                  
                     
                        •
                     e free from Death; & though they dye, dye neuer;
                  
                     
                        •
                     ue to the Grief of Vertuous Soules (their Frends)
                  
                     
                        •
                     hom, to ſuruiue the Good, it heer offends:
                  
                     
                        •
                     ean, in Bodie, which a Death they hold,
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      Toomb, or Priſon, that doth Them with-hold
                  
                     
                        •
                     om th'Happy Haven; & makes them leſs inclin'd
                  
                     
                        •
                     o ſeek their GOD, & his ſtrait Wayes to finde.
                  
                     
                     The Good are They, who, not alone not wring;
                  VVho not alone not wrong, in any thing;
                  VVho not alone not hurt; but (from their heart)
                  
                     Doe Good to Others; and their Owne impart
                  In liberal Almes vnto the Poor's Relief,
                  After their power; as grieued with their Grief.
                  
                     Such ſhall not dye, but to liue euer Bleſſed:
                  
                     Such ſhall not liue, but to dye heer poſſeſſed
                  
                  Of Grace, and Glory with th'ETERNAL GOD,
                  
                     Author of Almes; and euer-ſcourging Rod
                  
                  Of Such Gold-heaped, Iron-hearted Wretches
                  As to the Poor impart no part of Riches;
                  Nor lend, nor Lodge, nor clothe, nor free, nor feed
                  
                  
                     Diſtreſſed CHRIST, in His deer Saints, that need.
                  
                  
                     Such ſhall not liue, but to dye double martyr'd:
                  
                     Such ſhall not dye, but to liue euer tortur'd
                  In Hell and Horror, without End, or Eaſe.
                  
                     Now, Worldlings, chuſe You which you will of Theſe
                  
                  Fines.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  THE 
                        •
                     ATAIL of YVRY: OR THE BREAK-NECK of The Helliſh-Holy League; In That famous Ʋictorie vvonne By HENRY the Great; Written By Du BARTAS: Tranſlated, & Dedicated TO The Right Honorable, RICHARD, EARLE of DORSET, By 
                        •
                     OSVAH SYLVESTER.
               
               
                  
                  
                  TO The Right Honorable Earle of Dorſet.
                  
                     
                        •
                     S th'awefull Child, that long hath truanted,
                  
                  Dares not return vnto the Schoole, alone;
                  
                     
                        •
                     or Shame & Feare to be there diſcipled
                  
                     
                        •
                     ith many Stripes for many Faults in One:
                  
                     
                        •
                     ares (my Lord) My long Omiſſion
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     f th'humble Thanks I ought haue tendered
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     or kinde Endeuours You beſtowd vpon
                  My Right, my Wrong to haue recouered.
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     d, as (in fine) He brings his Mother forth
                  To beg Forgiueneſs, or his Fault to ſcuſe:
                  
                     
                        •
                     o bring I beere My deer DUBARTAS Worth,
                  
                     
                        •
                     mediate for My too-faultie Muſe;
                  
                  Whom daign to pardon: and in gentle Part
                  
                     Accept This laſt of His, not least in Art.
                  
                  
                     
                        Your Lordſhips most Obliged, Ioſuah Sylueſter.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                  Ad eundem Comitem Illuſtriſsimum (Nuper ex Gallijs reducem) EPIGRAMMA Ex Lat. I. O.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        Yer's Change hath changed (wch but rare doth chance)
                  Your good, to best; in Science and in Senſe:
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        er and better, and Both, from FRANCE:
                  
                     Wel-come, Great Earle: few are ſo Well come Thence.
                  
                     Eiuſdem
                     
Clariſsimi,
                     ANAGRAMMATA:
                      
                     Clarus, Divis Charus;
                     
Richardus Sacvilus:
                     Is Clarus, diu Charus.
                  
                  
                     Exoptat I. S.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  THE BATTAIL of YƲRY.
                  
                     O! What a Sun-ſhine gilds vs, round-about!
                  O! What a Hymne of Triumph troule they out,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ll our Temples! ô! What cheerfull noyſe!
                  
                     
                        ••
                     at Bells! What Bonfires! ô! What Publique-Ioyes!
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     Day is Ours: and on the Leaguers head,
                  
                     
                        ••
                     e angry Heav'ns haue their iuſt Vengeance ſhed.
                  
                     
                        ••
                     e ſmooth my Brows & You, my throbing thoughts
                  
                  
                     
                        •••
                     ong, deeply ſunk in Sorrowes ſable Vaults)
                  
                     
                        ••…
                     r-vp to Heav'n: You Siſters Three-fold-Three,
                  
                  
                     
                        ••…
                     o of late Yeeres haue ſcarce vouchſafed Mee
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      wet my lipps: Now ſweetly ſteep my Tongue
                  
                     
                        •
                     our beſt Syrups: poure, vpon This Song,
                  
                  
                     
                        •…
                     eaw of Gold, a May of learned Flowres.
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      not mine Eyes, blubberd with priuate Showres,
                  
                     
                        ••…
                     ſſe publique Glee: nor (ſilent) Me conceale,
                  
                     
                        ••
                     ile Others ſing, Theſe Tropheys of our Weale.
                  Ah! now begins my rapted Brain to boile
                  
                     
                        •
                     h braue Invention: Now's the fitteſt while
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      my Carreer. Others may hold their tongue;
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      hardly can great Ioyes be hidden long.
                  
                     But now; How, Where, of What, ſhall I begin
                  This Gold-grownd Web to weaue, to warp, to ſpin
                        •
                     
                  
                  For heer I liſt not, in theſe leaues, my Lord,
                  The famous Facts of thy firſt Arms record;
                  So many, and ſo numbery Armies ſcatterd,
                  So many Townes defenc't, ſo many batterd
                  By Thy young Valour. Neither ſhall my Pen
                  Re-purple Liſle; nor with dead Greaſe agen
                  Re-ſoile the Soile at Courtras: neither (dread)
                  Heere reaue again thy Ragefull Foes of Head.
                  Nor ſhall my Muſe relate, how that yer-while
                  (Abuſings King's and Churche's ſacred ſtile)
                  All EVROPE nigh (all ſorts of Rights reneg'd)
                  Againſt the Truth and Thee, vn-holy leagu'd;
                  While Thou (a Prince, nor hauing Mē, nor Treaſu
                        •
                     
                  
                  But poore, in All; ſaue rich in Hope paſt meaſure)
                  Reſembleſt right one of thy Hills in Foix,
                  
                  Which ſtands all Storms, firm'd by it ſelfs ſad poize
                  Boldly beholds the frowning Vpper-Stage,
                  Diſdaining Winds, deriding Weathers rage:
                  And with his brows cleauing the proudeſt Thunde
                        •
                     
                  
                  With knobbed knees ſtill keeps it brauely vnder.
                  Nor may I now our Thoughts cleer Heav'n o'r-ca
                        •
                     
                  
                  With Clowdy Theam of Miſcries fore-paſt.
                  
                     Nor cruelly begin againe to launce
                  New-skinned wounds, to the new griefe of France.
                  
                  Sing Others Thoſe: Me ſhall ſuffice to ſing,
                  That in few Months, ſince Thou wert heer Our King,
                  
                  Thy valiant hand hath more ſtrong places won
                  Then Both the Sides in thirty yeers haue don.
                  Though Swarms beſieg'd, in number did ſurmount
                  Beſieging Troops, in ſo vn-equall count,
                  That oft there ſeemd of Foes more Troops (almoſt)
                  Then ſingle Souldiers in thy Royall Hoſt.
                  Thou ſeemſt a Lightning, & thy nimble Bands
                  Follow thy will rather with wings, then hands;
                  And impt with plumes of Honor-thirſting minds,
                  Are brauely born with Thy Good-fortunes winds:
                  Thou cam'ſt, ſaw'ſt, ouercam'ſt, as ſwift well neer
                  As theſe ſwift Words I haue digeſted heer.
                  Onely, neer Arques, for few dayes, the Foe
                  Thine Expeditions ſome-what doth fore-ſlowe:
                  But as a Torrent, whoſe proud ſtream for ſtop,
                  Hath the thick height of ſome new Cauſwaies top;
                  The Bottome vndermines, beats on the ſhore,
                  And ſtill (in vaine) adds Forces more and more,
                  Till, at the laſt, aided with Showres and Snowes,
                  Fel, foaming, lowd, his Priſon ouer-throwes,
                  
                     Tears Bridges down, bears away Mounds & Mills,
                  And hauing won the Valleys, threats the Hills;
                  Swells as a Sea, & in his furious Pother
                  Takes Land from ſome, & giueth more to other:
                  So thou re-Campſt, runn'ſt ruſheſt, ruineſt
                  Holds, Houſes, Townes, & neuer 
                        •
                     ooſt thou reſt,
                  Till rebel Paris, pale for guiltie Feare,
                  Behold thy Face with too-iuſt Furie there,
                  In her vaſt Sub-vrbs; Sub-vrbs flanked ſtrong;
                  Sub-vrbs, whoſe ſtreets with Souldiers thickly throng:
                  Thou tak'ſt Eſtamps: & looſing ſcarce a man,
                  Thy martiall Troops ingrateful Vandoſme wan.
                  
                     Mans is aſſaild, and taen; Falaiſe, Eureux:
                  
                     Maine followes thoſe; & after that Lizieux,
                  
                  And Honfleur too, ſtoop to thy Sacred Flowers.
                  
                  And now began thy Sulphury Thunder-flowers
                  To batter Dreux: when as the Leaguers Chief,
                  Puft with ſome new Supplies, & freſh Relief,
                  From fatall Philip (who right Foxie-Wiſe,
                  Wide yawning ſtill after ſo rich a Prize;
                  Ambitious waits, nor wiſhes nothing more,
                  Then that our Great each other enter-gore,
                  In Ciuill Rage; that at the eaſier rate,
                  Himſelfe may ſnatch the Price of Their debate)
                  
                     Drawes neer thine Hoſt. Then, Thou, whoſe Fear was great
                  Leaſt He too-feard thee, fainedſt a Retreat,
                  Seemſt loth to fight, ſeemſt thy hault Heat to ſlack;
                  And, to leap further, ſtepſt a little back.
                  Thou ſtopſt, He flies; Thou followſt, then He ſtands:]
                  And now, both Sides for Battail range their Bands:
                  They ſeem two Foreſts: euer Chief, apart,
                  Darrains his Troops with order, ſpeed, and art.
                  The Lightning-flaſh from ſwords, casks, courtilaces,
                  With quiu'ring beams beguilds the neighbor graſſes
                  As th'Hoſt of Stars, which ſhine aboue ſo bright,
                  Beſpangles rich the Mantle of the Night.
                  The Souldier now looks ſterner then of long;
                  Rage in his Eyes, fel outrage on his Tongue,
                  Iron on his back, Steel in his hand: and fell
                  
                     Erynnis makes in YVRY Fields her Hell.
                  There's nothing heard but Drums, Fifes, Trumpets noiſe,
                  But ſharp-ſhril neighs, but dreadful Tempeſts voice.
                  Terror and Horror ouer all are ſpred;
                  Horror's there louely, and there ſweet is Dread:
                  Already fight they with their voice and geſt;
                  Already Horſemen couch their ſtaues in reſt;
                  Much like a Lion, meeting hand to hand,
                  Some ſauage Bull, vpon the Deſert ſand;
                  
                     Th'one, with wide noſtrills, foming wrathfull heat,
                  With lowd proud bellowes, with a thundrous threat
                  Defies his Foe; toſſes his head on high,
                  Wounds with his hooues the Earth, with horns the sky:
                  Th'other, as furious, from as fiery Throat
                  Roaring, replyes him with more hideous note;
                  Vnder his horrid Front, in ghaſtly-wiſe
                  He roules the Brands of his fierce-flaſhing Eyes;
                  Rearing his Creſt, he rears his courage ſtout,
                  And whets his Rage, whisking his train about.
                  The Canon's prim'd, diſcharg'd, hand-ſtrokes begin:
                  Friends, fellows, neighbors, brothers, coſins, kin,
                  Loſe all reſpects; ſaue onely where they may,
                  Deep, deadly Wounds, worthy their Rage, repay.
                  But, North-weſt winde, vnder the weeping Kid,
                  
                  Neuer ſo thick his volleys racqueted,
                  Of bounding Balls of Ice-pearl ſlippery ſhining,
                  On thoſe high Hills my Gaſcony confining,
                  As heer raine Bodies, heer haile lumps of Lead,
                  Making a flood of Blood; a mount of Dead.
                  Torn Limbs, toſt Trūcheons, Shiuers, Fire, & Smoak,
                  As with thick clowds, both Armies round be-cloak:
                  Th'Earth quakes for fear, the Aire recoileth quick,
                  And Pluto's ſelfe ſeems to looke pale and ſick.
                  
                     This Side advances now, and now retreats:
                  That, loſt but now; and now the better gets.
                  For, yet (IOVES iſſue) Victorie (begert
                  With Sword by-ſide, & Trump behind, athwart;
                  Her head with crowns, her hands wth ſceptres fraught,
                  Her coſtly Robe with many Conqueſts vvrought,
                  Nouriſht with Palms, figur'd with Townes about,
                  
                     
                        •
                     mboſt with Enſignes, with Aſſaults ſet-out)
                  
                     
                        •
                     lyes to and fro; from Camp to Camp ſhe plies,
                  
                     
                        •
                     nd in her hand ſhe leads triumphant-wiſe
                  
                     
                        •
                     weet-rapting Glorie, full of cheerfull grace,
                  
                     
                        •
                     o either Side ſhewing her louely Face.
                  O Sons of Mars! which, which of you this day,
                  
                     
                        ••
                     s worthy Spouſe, ſhall bear for Bride, away
                  
                     
                        •
                     his Beautious Loue? Who, by her ſide ſhall lie?
                  Who, of her Kiſs the balmie Bliſſe ſhall trie?
                  
                     
                        •
                     hrice happy Hee: Him ſhall the Kings adore;
                  
                     
                        •
                     im ſhall the Nobles humbly bow before:
                  
                     
                        •
                     im ſhall the Vulgar (as a Sea it were)
                  
                     
                        •
                     ollow, and flock about: and euery-where
                  
                     
                        •
                     is famous Face ſhall ſet-aworke the chiefe
                  
                     
                        •
                     f Penſills, Grauers, Chiſels, Moulds: in briefe,
                  
                     
                        •
                     e ſhall be Summe of an admired Storie;
                  
                     
                        •
                     nd euery Age ſhall celebrate his glory:
                  
                     His high renowne ſhall onely bounded bee
                  With the World's bounds, and with Eternitie.
                  Thus hauing ſaid, into their breſts ſhe blew
                  No common Heat, but Fits of Furie new:
                  Heer Number winns, there Courage, & there Art:
                  And yet Good-fortune falls to Either part:
                  As when the ſpightful ſullen Earth hath meant
                  War with the Flouds, war with the Firmament,
                  Sh'incites, inflames, ſets-on, in new-found Duel,
                  I
                        •
                     e-bearded Boreas, Storm-armd Auſter cruel;
                  Floods float vncertain, & the Clowds do varie
                  Whither it pleaſes Either Blaſt to carie:
                  Till th'one at laſt, the other conquering,
                  Become Ayer's Tyrant, & the Water's King.
                  But, lo My Liege: ô Courage! there he comes:
                  What ray of Honor round about him loomes!
                  O! what new Beams from his bright eyes do glance!
                  O Princely Port! Preſagefull Countenance
                  Of Hap at hand! Hee doth not nicely prank
                  In clinquant Pomp (as ſome of meaneſt Rank)
                  But arm'd in Steel; that bright abilliment
                  Is his rich Valours ſole rich Ornament.
                  Steel was his Cradle, vnder Steel he dight
                  His Chin with Doune, in Steel begins it white:
                  
                     And yet, by Steel he conquers, brauely-bold,
                  Towns, cities, ſtates, crowns, ſceptres, goods & gold.
                  Yet, void of Mark, He doth not hide him quight
                  Amid the Throng a Plume dread-dancing light
                  
                     
                        •
                     eclowds his Cask; & like a Willow ſhowes;
                  Which, prun'd belowe, cloſe by a Riuer growes,
                  And hath no ſooner Heav'ns calm fauour loſt,
                  But inſtantly his Tops green Tuffe is 
                        •
                     oſt,
                  Now vp, now down, & waues (as pleaſe the Wind)
                  Now to, now fro; now forward, now behind.
                  Thus (to be known) Invincible by Force,
                  He, with ſix hundred, charg'd ſix thouſand Horſe.
                  The firſt that felt his arm and Fauchin keen,
                  Was, blindly-bold, a Warrior that did ween
                  Himſelfe as ſtout, as ſtrong; as ſtrong, as great;
                  And, daring ſo, 'vndaunted HENRY met;
                  Who offers preſt his Piſtol in his Face,
                  Which would not off, although it fierd a ſpace.
                  Whence ſom-what mou'd, with angry voice (q'd hee)
                  Hence guileful Arms: the glittering Sword for Me:
                  And drawes withall; then nimbly toſſing light
                  The flaſhing Horror of his Fauchin bright
                  Like an Autumnall ruddy-ſtreaming Star
                  Preſaging Famine, Peſtilence, and War)
                  
                     Copes with his Foe, th'Aſſailant he aſſaults,
                  And reſolute obſerues his Arms defaults:
                  At laſt, betwixt his Breſt-plate & his Baſes,
                  Seeks for his Soule, there findes, & thence it chaſes.
                  Go, happy Soule, go tell the newes beneath,
                  How thou we
                        •
                     t honord, to haue had thy death
                  By th'onely hand of th'Hercules of FRANCE,
                  Th'invincible (for, ſuch a Death, perchance,
                  Shall more extoll thy famous Memorie,
                  Then to haue wonne ſome other Victorie):
                  Say, heere reviues a MARTEL, Foes to maule;
                  And that ORLANDO rules againe in Gaule.
                  
                  But, Thou go'ſt not alone: this deadly Fray
                  Thou but beginn'ſt, as Prologue of his Play.
                  He deales about as many Deaths as Blowes,
                  Hee hacks, heaws, hurts all; all hee ouerthrowes,
                  Swifter then Wind, or Cannon-ſhot, or Thunder,
                  Trees, towns, & towers, turns vp, beats down, brings vnder.
                  One place, 1. puſh, 1. deed, 1. death, 1. wound,
                  Cannot ſuffice, nor his braue Fury bound:
                  He layes on All; and fiery-fierce, and ſtout,
                  A hundred waies croſs-carues the Field about;
                  All fall, in fine, but fall not all alike,
                  Some did he thrill, ſome thwart, ſome downe-right ſtrike.
                  
                     
                     
                        •
                     t, as a Lion, in Numidian Field,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ing awhile on trembling Heards that yield;
                  
                     
                        •
                     he heare a Beares noiſe neere about,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ing his Eares & Creſt, he roareth-out;
                  
                     
                        •
                     es Lambs, Kids, Kine; glad he incountred hath
                  Obiect worthier of his noble Wrath:
                  
                     
                        •
                     match-leſs Prince, diſcrying Duke De Mayne,
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     e
                        •
                      vulgar blood, and ſpeeds to Him amain;
                  
                     
                        •
                     ough thickeſt troops of ſtouteſt men at-arms,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ough horſe & foot, through ſhot, pikes, Enſignes, Arms
                  
                     
                        ••
                     t
                        •
                     rs Him: on Him his load he layes;
                  
                     
                        •
                     round about on euery ſide aſſayes,
                  
                     
                        •
                     e
                        •
                      his Arms, to ſeek in euery part
                  
                     
                        •
                      heart which onely gaue the Leaguers hart.
                  
                     
                        •
                     t, dreading his diſdain, De-Mayne with-drew:
                  
                     
                        •
                      all his Hopes ſo ſuddain daſht, did rew:
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      at his paſt Bliſs, full of carefull toyle,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ing the Field, new witnes of his Foile.
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     , YVRY out of ſight, he Mante approches:
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      ea
                        •
                     y horſe, his weary rowell broches,
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     , in 
                        ••
                     k-winded, creſt-faln, ſweaty-ſwelted,
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      his greaſe in and without him melted,
                  
                     
                        ••
                     g his cares, hanging his head and neck,
                  
                     
                        •
                     pur he ſtirs no more, then ſtock or ſtick.
                  
                     O, noble Duke! ô wherefore flyeſt Thou?
                  What Panik Terror daunts thy Valour now?
                  Thy conſtant Face what paints with pale Affright?
                  Alas! thou lack'ſt not Courage heer, but Right.
                  The Cauſe confoūds thee: CHARLS, yet ſtay & ſta
                        •
                     
                  
                  To HENRY's mercy; humbly kiſſe his hand.
                  If red Reuenge, for thy dead Brethrens chance,
                  Made thee take Arms: what's that (alas!) to France
                  
                  What, to This King? whoſe heart & hands are kno
                        •
                     
                  
                  From both their Bloods as cleer as are thine Own.
                  If 'twere Ambition, mought'ſt thou not expect
                  From Him, that knowes how Vertue to reſpect,
                  And can, as King, magnifikly aduance
                  His faithfull Seruants, & the Friends of France,
                  
                  More Honor & Reward, then from the rude
                  Poore, gyddie, groſſe, ingratefull Multitude;
                  Of many Heads, of more then many Mindes,
                  Leaking in euery Storm, led with all Windes;
                  Who pay with Death, or Exile (at the beſt)
                  Their Dions, Phocions, Camills, and the reſt:
                  Whoſe Rule is Rage; Who (Ivie-like) in time
                  Decay the Tower whereby themſelues did clime.
                  If it were Feare to finde His fauours gate
                  Now barr'd too-faſt for thee to enter at;
                  
                     O! was there euer known more gracious King,
                  Forgetting Ill-turnes; Good remembering!
                  Hee rather would, by Benefits, then Blowes,
                  Redu
                        •
                     e his Rebells. When his Furie glowes,
                  'Tis but as Straw-fire: while he ſtrikes, he ſighes,
                  And (for the moſt part) from his Enemies
                  Drawes not more blood, then tender Tears withall
                  From his own Eyes: His Spirit's void of Gall
                  (Peculiar Gift, hereditary Grace,
                  The Heav'ns haue giuen vnto the Burbons Race):
                  And neuer did the all-diſcerning Sun,
                  Which daily once about the World doth run,
                  Behold a Prince religiouſly more loth
                  To ſhake, for ought, his Honor-binding Oath.
                  Offer my Liege the Germain Empery,
                  
                     Spayn's Diadem, the Turks Grand-Signorie,
                  
                  Yea, make Him Monarch of the World, by wile;
                  Hee'll ſpurn all Sceptres, yet his Faith he file.
                  But, 'tis (ſaiſt Thou) for the Faith Catholike.
                  
                  Why▪ who Commands in matters Politike?
                  Who in his Camp? but ſuch as more then Thou
                  
                     
                        •
                     ith Tooth & Naile Romes Vatican avow?
                  
                     
                        •
                     es not his Name for Refuge, euery-where
                  
                     
                        ••
                     uring Prieſthood from all Force and Feare?
                  
                     No Athëiſme, Hee, nor Superſtition ſents:
                  Hee's a right Christian and religious Prince.
                  He firm belieues, that GOD's reformed Awe,
                  He from his Cradle, with his milk did drawe:
                  Yet, is not partiall, nor preiudicate.
                  And, if the Church, now neerly ruinate,
                  By our profane hands, our ſtrife-ſtirring Quills,
                  May euer looke for a Redreſſe of Ills;
                  If it may euer hope to re-procure
                  A holy and a happy Peace, to dure;
                  It ſhall be, doubtleſs, vnder ſuch a Prince,
                  So free from Paſſions blinded Vehemence.
                  Back, to the Battail, Muſe, now caſt about:
                  Ah! there they flie; there all are in a Rout:
                  All's full of Horror, full of Ruth and Feare,
                  Full of Diſorder, and Confuſion there:
                  There, none obey; there none at all command,
                  There euery Souldier makes apart his Band.
                  The ample Plain is couerd all about
                  With casks, ſwords, muskets, pikes; and the moſt ſtout
                  To darkeſt Groues carry their Deaths conceaued,
                  In deepeſt Holes bury their Deaths receaued.
                  The Victor followes, ouer-takes anon;
                  Feares not the way the Flyers feard t'haue gone.
                  
                     The moſt he fears, is leaſt Some's ſhift-full feare,
                  Other's deſpaire, finde out for ſafetie there,
                  
                     
                        •
                     om Flat, ſom Foord, ſom Bank, ſom bridge, ſom way
                  
                     
                        •
                     o paſſe the Eure: but preſſed with Diſmay,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ll breath-leſs, panting in a deſperate haſt
                  
                     
                        •
                     hem heere and there, into the Riuer caſt.
                  Th'immortall Nymph NAVONDA azure-ey'd,
                  Qu
                        •
                     en of that Cryſtall, and that Currents Guide;
                  
                     
                        •
                     r'd with their noiſe, aboue the water puſhes
                  
                     
                        ••
                     e dropping Head, in Caule of weeping Ruſhes.
                  
                     
                        •
                     ! whence (qd ſhe) whence coms this iron ſpawn?
                  Thoſe Metall-men? Frō what mount Gibel drawn?
                  
                     
                        •
                     hat Vulcan gaue, What Myron lent (I pray)
                  
                     
                        •
                     el, life, to ſtirr; to Iron, breath, to neight?
                  
                     
                        •
                     eace, Monſters, hence (Wars dreadfull work-manſhip:
                  
                     
                        •
                     ith bloody deaws your Mother-Earth be-dip;
                  
                     
                        •
                     d let vs gently, without ſtop, or ſtaine,
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      meet our Tritons, roule into the Maine.
                  Her voice doth vaniſh, in ſo various noiſe:
                  
                     
                        •
                     s with his Own, that with his Armors poize,
                  
                     
                        •
                     s inſtantly: Som haue, in ſted of graues,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ught but their Steeds, their Steeds no tombes but waues.
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     , more diſmaid, for Skiff their targets take,
                  
                     
                        •
                     oars their arms; their ſail their plumes they make:
                  
                     But, greedy Whirle-pooles, euer-wheeling round,
                  Suck in at once, Oars, Sailes, & Ships to ground.
                  Thoſe that, by chance, ſcape to the other Shore,
                  Chāging their place, change not their caſe the more.
                  Dikes, Bridges broken, Citties, Rampires caſt,
                  Cannot ſecure their more then headlong Haſt.
                  Did any Squadrons dare thy Conqueſt croſſe,
                  They but increaſt Thine Honor, & their Loſſe.
                  Witnes the Band of Spaniſh-Belgian Foes,
                  Vnder three Enſignes marching ſtrongly cloſe;
                  Whom, Thou, the fifteenth, chargeſt; beateſt down
                  That mightie Bodie; ſuddain ouerthrow'n;
                  Euen as a Galley, in ſmooth Sea ſubdues
                  The talleſt Ship that in The Straights doth vſe:
                  Or as a Iennet in his nimble Speed
                  Oft ouerturns the ſtrongeſt German Steed.
                  Thou heaw'ſt, beat'ſt, breakeſt down: Thou conque
                        ••
                     
                  
                  Till dusky Night haue robd thee quight of Day;
                  And Death, of Foes. Th'Helvetian Bands alone,
                  Loth to diſgrace their ancient Valor known,
                  Againſt the Victor their ſteele Staues addreſſe,
                  As moſt Couragious in the moſt diſtreſſe:
                  But, ſoon the Lightning of thy Martiall eyes
                  Their Diamantine hearts diſſolues to Ice;
                  
                     That Ice to Water, That to Vapour vain:
                  And Thoſe whom Death rather then Feare could ſtrain,
                  
                     
                        •
                     hoſe, thoſe that neuer turnd their backs at all,
                  
                     
                        •
                     t to Warrs-Phoenix, Conquerer of Gaule,
                  
                  Thoſe King-correcting, Tyrant-ſcourging Braues,
                  
                     
                        •
                     aſt at thy feet their Bodies and their Staues.
                  Thou, then, as loth perpetually to brand
                  People ſo loyall to the Lillies Land,
                  
                     
                        •
                     lming the rage of thy iuſt hearts diſdain,
                  
                     
                        •
                     heir Colours to their Cornets giu'ſt again.
                  O! proudeſt Trophey, which all Tropheys paſſes!
                  Browes, whom Bayes eternall treſs imbraces!
                  
                     
                        •
                     vincible! ô more then Royall Breſt,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ho, of Thy Selfe, & Tryumph, tryumpheſt!
                  
                     
                        •
                     o pleaſeſt All: vvith Victory thine Hoſt,
                  
                     
                        •
                     y Foes with Grace: Both with thy Glory, moſt.
                  Earth's Ornament, Thou Honor of our Times,
                  
                     
                        •
                      on the wings of mine Heroik Rimes,
                  
                     
                        ••
                     ran
                        •
                      Exploit be brauely borne about:
                  
                     
                        •
                     y all our Commons (commonly too-ſtout)
                  
                     
                        ••
                     o bred in Braules, in Broiles, & Inſolence,
                  
                     
                        •
                     od, as at gaze, diſtracted in ſuſpence,
                  
                     
                        ••
                     pecting th'Iſſue of This dreadfull Fight,
                  
                     
                        ••
                     ke their due profit, & apply it right.
                  
                     May now the Nobles freely grant, for true,
                  That the World's Empire to Thy Worth is due:
                  That, now they haue Wiſe happy Prince for Head:
                  That, by This Battaile Thou haſt rendered
                  To Them th
                        ••
                      Rank, reueng'd the King deceaſt,
                  Reſtor'd the State, & captiue France releaſt.
                  May now the Clergie ingenuouſly confeſs,
                  God on Thy Side, giuing Thy Right Succeſs;
                  Crowning Thy Vertues, & with ſacred Oyle
                  Of his own Spirit anointing Thee the while.
                  May now (in briefe) All Frenchmen ſay & ſing,
                  Thou art, Thou ought'ſt, Thou only canſt be King.
                  But, ô! ſome Gangrene, Plague, or Leproſie,
                  O're-ſpreads vs all: a Brand of Mutinie
                  Barnes France to Aſhes. And but Thou (vnidle)
                  Bear'ſt-vp ſo hard this ſtumbling Kingdoms Bridle;
                  Our State (yerſt honor'd where the Sun doth riſe)
                  Would flie in Sparks, or die in Atomies.
                  
                     Prieſts ſtrike the Fire, the Nobles blow the Coale
                  Of this Conſumption: People (peeuiſh whole)
                  Pleaſd with the Blaze, do, wretched-witched Elves,
                  For fuell (fooles) caſt-in their willing Selues.
                  O Clergy (mindleſs of your Cure and Coat)
                  Becomes it you to cut your Princes throat?
                  
                     To kill your King? Who, in the Wombe (of kin
                  To Thouſand Kings) that Office did begin:
                  Who, for Your Law, Your Altars, & Your Honors,
                  Hath ventur'd oft his blood in many manners:
                  Who, as deuout to Rome, as any Man,
                  Fear'd moſt your roring Bulls of Vatican:
                  And canonize amid the ſacred Roule
                  Of glorious Saints a Patricidiall Soule,
                  Whoſe bloody hand had ſtabd with baneful knife
                  The Lords Anointed, & Him reſt of life?
                  Ignoble Nobles, ſee You not (alas!)
                  Your King ſupplanting, you your Selues abaſſe?
                  And, while you raze this Royall Monarchie,
                  
                  You madlie raiſe a monſtrous Anarchie,
                  
                  A Chaos rude; ſtill whetting, day and night,
                  Againſt your Selues, the Peoples proud Deſpight;
                  Who hate the Vertuous, & haue onely Hope
                  T'enſue the Switzers too-rebellious Scope?
                  And Thou fond People, Who (before a Father,
                  A wiſe, iuſt, King; a valiant Monarch) rather
                  Tak'ſt hundred Tyrants: who, with tuſhes fell,
                  Will ſuck thy marrow out, & crack thy ſhell:
                  To whom the Gold, from India's bowels brought,
                  Or mid the Sands of ſhining Tagus ſought,
                  
                     Seems not ſo good, as doth the Gold they fet
                  From out thy Womb, or what thy Tears ſhall wet.
                  No, no: the French, or Deafe, or Lethargik,
                  Feele not their danger, though thus deadly Sick:
                  Or, if they liue and feele; they, frantik, arm
                  Againſt their Leach that fain would cure their harm,
                  Applying many ſound-ſweet Medcines fit:
                  But They, the more increaſe their furious Fit.
                  Yet, Courage HENRY, ſix thy Thoughts heeron,
                  Purſue (braue Prince) thy Cure ſo well begun:
                  And, ſith ſo little, gentle Plaiſters thriue,
                  Let it be launc't, lay-on the Corroſiue:
                  C
                        •
                     oke me This Hydra whence ſuch Mōſters ſprout,
                  And with thy Fam
                        •
                      fill me the World about.
                  Follow thy Fort
                        ••
                     e: Hills moſt lofty-browd,
                  Stoop to thy Steps; ſwift Riuers, ſwelling proud,
                  Dry-vp before thee: Armies, full of Boaſt,
                  Like Vapo
                        •
                     s vaniſh at Thy ſight, almoſt.
                  Yea, at thy Name alone, the ſtrongeſt Wall,
                  And m
                        •
                     ſſ
                        ••
                     ſt Towrs ſhake (as affraid) & fall.
                  But yet, My Liege, beware how Thou expoſe
                  Thy blood ſo oft among thy bloody Foes:
                  Be not too-lauiſh of thy Life; but waigh,
                  That Our Good-Hap on Thine dependeth aye.
                  
                     But, if Thou light regard This lowe Requeſt
                  Of Thy Fames Trumpet; liſt how France (at leaſt)
                  Preſents her to thee: not as Once Shee was
                  (When Baltik Seas within Her bounds did paſs:
                  When Nile & Euphrate, as Her Vnder-Realms,
                  Through fruitful Plains rould tributary ſtreams:
                  When to proud Spanyards Shee did Kings allow;
                  And to Her Lawes imperiall ROME did bow)
                  But, lean & lank, bleak, weak, & all too-torn,
                  And in a Gulfe of Miſeries forlorn.
                  Deer Son (ſaith She) nay, My Defender rather,
                  My Staff, my Stay, my ſecond-founding Father;
                  For Grief, and Furie, I ſhould deſperate die,
                  I ſhould Selfe ſtab-mee, I ſhould ſhamefully
                  Stop mine own breath, to ſtint theſe Cares of mine▪
                  
                  Wert Thou not Mine (my Liege) were I not Thine.
                  Therfore, deer Spouſe, be of thy Life leſs lauiſh;
                  Let not, My Lord, Fames greedy Thirſt ſo rauiſh
                  Thy dauntleſs Courage into Dangers need-leſs,
                  Nor, too-too-hardy hazard Thee ſo heed-leſs.
                  A braue, great Monarch in Youths heat behoues,
                  Once, twiſe, or thriſe, to ſhew Courageous proues:
                  For, Proweſſe is bright Honors braueſt Gate,
                  Yea, the firſt Step, whereby the Fortunate
                  
                     Climbe Glorie's Mount: & nothing more (in briefe)
                  Fires Souldiers Valor, then a Valiant Chiefe.
                  But afterward, he muſt more warie vvar,
                  And with his Wit, ofter then Weapon, far:
                  His ſpirits contenting with the pleaſing-paine,
                  No
                        •
                      of a Souldier, but Soueraign
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
                  My So
                        •
                      too often hath thine own hand dealt
                  Too-many Blowes which thouſands yerſt haue felt:
                  My Liege, too-often haſt Thou toyled Thee
                  For Honors Prize: braue Prince, My Victory
                  Not in thine Arms ſtrēgth, but 
                        •
                     hy Yeers length lies;
                  Thy Life, my Life, Thy Death, my Death implies.
                  If Thou, thy Self neglect, reſpect Me though,
                  At leaſt ſome Pittie to thy Country ſhowe.
                  Weigh, weigh my ſad plight, if vntimely Death
                  Should (ô, vntimely!) reaue My HENRY's breath:
                  Euen like a widow-Ship, her Pilot loſt,
                  Her Rudder broke, in ragefull Tempeſt toſt
                  Againſt the horned Rocks, or horrid Banks,
                  Hoaring the Shore with her diſperſed Planks.
                  But, if too-much Heart, of thy life too-careleſs,
                  Too-ſoone expoſe thee not to Siſters-ſpareleſs,
                  I hope to flouriſh more then e'r in Arts,
                  
                  
                     Wealth, Honors, Manners, Vertues, Valiant hearts,
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        
                           •
                        ligion, Lawes: and Thy iuſt Raign (at reſt)
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     Happineſſe ſhall match AVGVSTVS Beſt.
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     ONOR's FARWEL To Her Honorable Frends: Or The LADIE HAY's Laſt Will: Copied By a Well-willer, in WAKEFVL DREAM; & Dedicated TO Her R. Honorable Executors.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                  TO My Reuerend Friend, Mr. Doctor Hall.
                  
                  NOne ſhould, but Thou, This Ladies death be grieving;
                  None knew ſo well the Vertues of her life:
                  
                     Death's robd of Her death, by Thy labours rife;
                  By Thee, is Shee in Heav'n & Earth ſtill liuing:
                  Heav'n, by hearing & (through Thee) belieuing
                  
                  Th' eternall Word; which taught Her Holy ſtrife
                  
                  Gainſt Hell, & Sin; and (as becomes a Wife)
                  
                     Peace with her Spouſe, him due Obedience giuing:
                  
                     Earth, for acting (in ſo gracious meaſure)
                  The twice-preacht Lectures of thy Life & Tongue;
                  
                     Alms, Meeknes, Mildnes (towards Old & Young)
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     giuing wrongs, forgetting all Diſpleaſure.
                  O happy Seed that fell in ſuch a Ground!
                  And happy Soile that ſuch a Seed-man found.
                  
                     I. S.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                  TO The Right Honourable Executors & Overſeers, EDWARD. Lord Denny; IAMES, Lord Hay; & MARY, Lady Denny.
                  
                     
                        ••
                     om Gratitude, From Dutie, From Affection,
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     o You (my Lords) Your HONOR, & Your Name
                  
                  
                     
                        •••
                     hout Offence, without Miſ-ſenſe, or Blame
                     )
                  
                     
                        •…
                     iue, conceiue, conſider
                      THIS DIRECTION
                  
                     
                        •••
                     INST th' Exceſs, the Rage, the Inſurrection
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     ears, of Sighs, of Sorrowes
                      FOR THIS DAME
                  
                     
                        •
                     EAD, WHO LIVES (in Soule, in Seed, in Fame
                     )
                  
                     
                        •
                     RING Breth, Life, Strength,
                      To THIS COLLECTIŌ
                  
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     , aimed, meant,
                      FOR quick, kind, keen,
                      CORRECTIŌ
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     en, of Minds, of Manners
                      (OVT OF FRAME)
                  
                     
                        •
                     ie, Court, & Country
                      (ALL TOO-BLAME)
                  
                     
                        •
                     gh Sin's, throgh Satan's, throgh our Selues
                      INFECTION.
                  
                     
                        •
                     n Vow, Som Verſe, Som Monument
                      To HONOR
                  
                     
                        •
                     ought, I ought, and Thus I
                      Dreamed on-Her.
                  
                     I. S.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  HONOR'S FAREWELL.
                  
                     FRom Man-Gods Birth (the Scale of Earth to Heau'n)
                  
                     Th' Yeer twice Eight hundred & twice ſingle Seau'n:
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        midſt the Month which Second Caeſar names;
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        on the Day which Diane weekely clames:
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        bout the Howre that golden Morpheus vſes
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        hantaſtikly to feaſt perplexed Muſes
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        hile Phoebus Coach-man, ſcarce awake, did ſeem
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        ing to harneſs all his fiery Teem)
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        ing, me thought (ith' Ward-robe, or at Waltham)
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        ong the Chief, where Grief did ſo aſſalt 'em:
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        n Either ſide) that neither Great nor Small
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        d one dry Eye, to ſee My ſight withall:
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        e thought, I ſawe a White bright-ſhining Creature
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        uſt in the Forme of HONOR's wonted Feature)
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        proaching ſoftly to a Sable Bed,
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        ere weeping Sorrow layd his ſleepeleſs head;
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        d, with a Voice like one deuoutly praying,
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        ill-ſoftly, Thus (me thought) I heard it ſaying:
                  
                  Sweet Loue, My Lord, Loadſtar of my Deſire,
                  
                     
                        •
                     hoſe pureſt flame had only power to fire
                  
                     
                        •
                     e Icie Forte of HONOR's chaſte Affection,
                  
                     
                        •
                     onne by thy loue; but more by thy Perfection:
                  
                     Deere Soule, which draw'ſt (by vnſeen vertue) ſo,
                  My Soule to greet thee once yet yer I go;
                  Ceaſe, ceaſe to weep, giue ouer Sighes & ſobbing
                  Thine eyes of Reſt, thy breſt of Comforts robbin
                        •
                     
                  
                  For, though ſoft Water hardeſt Marble weares,
                  Flint-harted Death is neuer perc't with Teares.
                  
                  Vſe therefore other Arms againſt his Rages:
                  And, of Thy loue, giue more autentik Gages.
                  Whom yerſt I choſe among the choiceſt Wort
                        •
                     
                  
                  Of Britiſh Gallants (ouer South and North)
                  For Parts and Port; for mild & Martiall manner,
                  In braue Deſeignes to do their Country honor:
                  Who, in mine eye, ſeem'd to excell the reſt,
                  And Whom my Mind eſteem'd aboue the beſt;
                  Muſt not expreſſe His loue to Mee, departed,
                  
                  With vulgar Showes of the moſt-vulgar-hearted.
                  No: light Me Lamps that may Thy loue beco
                        •
                     
                  
                  Such as may ſhine, about, aboue my Tombe,
                  To all Beholders, as a holy Mirror,
                  Reducing Nobles from Ignobles Error:
                  Or as a Pharus to direct the Court,
                  From Rocks & Wracks into the Happy Port:
                  For, thogh my loue ſeek but my HAY & DENN
                        •
                     
                  
                  My Charitie is heer-in meant to Many.
                  
                     
                     
                        •
                     s from the Dead, I come, the Quick to call
                  
                     
                        •
                     om Sinn's deep Sleep: & Thee (Deer) firſt of All.
                  Deer, if thou yet hold-deer a Soule deueſted
                  
                     
                        •
                     f worldly Pomp (which hath the World impeſted)
                  
                     
                        •
                     weet heart, put-off; ſweet Hay, now, leaue Thou, quick,
                  
                     
                        •
                     hat (ô!) I left not, till nigh deadly Sick:
                  
                     
                        •
                     orſake the World yer it haue Thee forſaken;
                  
                     
                        •
                     nd, yer thy Youth with Ruth be ouer-taken,
                  
                     
                        •
                     egard thy Soule, thy Bodie leſſe reſpect:
                  
                     
                        •
                     ll Vanitie, curbe euery fond Affect,
                  
                     
                        •
                     hereby the World ſtill ſtriueth to impriſon
                  
                     
                        •
                     he pureſt Raies of Man's diuineſt Reaſon.
                  
                     
                        •
                     reep heer no longer with thy mortall Duſt;
                  
                     
                        •
                     limbe with thy fiery Soule vp to the Iuſt.
                  
                     
                        •
                     xhale thee ſo, in heau'nly things admiring,
                  
                     
                        •
                     s to the Place of thy firſt Birth aſpiring.
                  Few are thy Dayes, with many Dolors fill'd,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ith Hoping tired, with Deſiring kill'd,
                  
                     
                        •
                     er thou attain what thou would'ſt fain & merry:
                  Or, if thou dooſt, anon it makes thee weary.
                  
                     
                        •
                     or what Delight that euer Earth thee lent,
                  
                     
                        •
                     aſt thou aye found pleaſing and permanent?
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        onor's faire Mask, for all the Pomp & Brauerie,
                  
                     
                        •
                     n golden Gyues is chaind to Silken Slauery.
                  
                  
                     Wealth, which the World holds ſuper-Souerain,
                  
                  With vſe, doth vaniſh; without vſe, is vaine:
                  And Both, too often (as Coat Cards may cotten)
                  Vnworthily, as well are loſt, as gotten.
                  Few Obiects heer (my Deer) but ſubiect bee
                  To Labour, more then vnto Libertie:
                  
                     Youth's Health & Strēgth are quickly quaſht, or dated
                  Pleaſure & Loue as ſoon are croſt, or ſated:
                  Affront ſtill driues the Weakeſt to the Wal:
                  The Mightieſt ay are vnder Enuie's Maule:
                  A lowely Fortune is of all deſpiſed:
                  A lofty one, oft, of it ſelfe, nullized.
                  In Brief, Deer Soule, thou ſeeſt how Certain Fate
                  
                  Conduces all things to their finall Date.
                  
                  As on the Shore a rowling Billow ſplitteth,
                  When foaming high, and roaming home, it hitteth
                  Againſt the keen Knees of a horned Cliff,
                  Ending his Courſe in an Incounter ſtiff;
                  Then ſwels another, which yet higher wallowes,
                  In the ſame courſe; Whom the ſame Fortune follows▪
                  
                  So, We (O, Worlds-Waues!) as ſoon dead as borne,
                  With diuers Shock, on the ſame Rock are torn.
                  This Age hath ſhow'n great Fortun's greedy Miniōs
                  (By hook or crook) aboue the Worlds Opinions;
                  
                     
                     
                        •
                     boue their owne Hopes: nay, aboue well-nigh
                  
                     
                        •
                     he clowded Aime of their inſatiate Eye:
                  
                     
                        •
                     ut, Now where are they? Wher's their Grace? their Glorie?
                  
                     
                        •
                     otten in duſt; forgotten all their Storie
                  Vnleſs, perhaps, what heer ſo goodly ſhin'd,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ent out in Snuffe, and left ill ſent behinde)
                  
                     
                        •
                     nd all their vaine Fume, turn'd to violent Fire,
                  
                     
                        •
                     or euer burns (ſuch is Ambition's Hire):
                  Where, too-too late, they finde, vnto their Coſt,
                  
                     
                        •
                     uch Fauours, ſo found, had bin better loſt.
                  Soul's ſad Repenting, & Hearts heauie Throeing
                  
                     
                        •
                     re ſureſt Fruits that in the World are growing:
                  Heer's Nothing firmer, nothing frequent more,
                  Then Death: Which (liuing) not to minde before,
                  Makes Men run headlong to the Gulf infernall;
                  
                     
                        •
                     nd, for howers Ioyes, to loſe the Ioyes eternall:
                  
                     
                        •
                     raw'n diuerſly by diuers Appetites,
                  
                     
                        •
                     fter the Humors of their vain Delights.
                  Some Apiſh, acting euery Faſhions Model:
                  
                     
                        •
                     ome Swiniſh, wallowing in their Surfaits Puddle:
                  
                     
                        •
                     ome Goatiſh, hanting Fillies with their Dams:
                  
                     
                        •
                     ome Woluiſh, worrying Innocenteſt Lambs:
                  
                     
                        •
                     ome Curriſh, ſnarling at all good mens Good:
                  
                     
                        •
                     ome Monkiſh, hollow vnder Holy-Hood:
                  
                  
                     Some Brutiſh, Monſters in all kind of Euill:
                  Some Helliſh, Actors, Factors for the Diuell.
                  Deer, tread not Thou in Errors common Track:
                  But, in thy Life, ſure thine Election make.
                  Fear, loue, belieue, ſerue, ſorrow, ſue, contemple;
                  And rather walk by Precept, then Exemple.
                  
                  'Tis vtterlie to be of iudgement void,
                  'Tis wilfullie to haue ones Selfe deſtroyd;
                  To truſt our Soule with ſuch whoſe Stipulation
                  Cannot repaire, cannot repriue, Damnation.
                  
                  Who, curious, cares but for the things belowe,
                  Shall finde, in fine, that he ſhall Both forgoe:
                  But Hope of things aboue (with due progreſſion)
                  Is far more ſure, then th'others full Poſſeſſion.
                  Labour Thou therefore for the certain Gain:
                  And, if thou lov'ſt mee, higher, higher ſtrain.
                  In Holy Pride, hence-forth diſdaign the Creature,
                  And moūt thy Thoughts vp to the Lord of Nature.
                  Loue, free thy loue from this dark Dungeon heer,
                  And hence-forth fix it in th'Empyreall cleer:
                  Whither no ſooner ſhall thy Mind be raiſed,
                  But all thy Mournings will be ſoon appaiſed,
                  With other Comforts then the World affords,
                  In bitter Deeds candied in ſugar Words.
                  
                     The World it Selfe is dying and decaying:
                  The Earth more ſterile, Heau'nly Stars more ſtraying:
                  The Sphears diſtun'd. Theſe are the laſt, laſt Times;
                  Where Vertue failes, where Vice preuails & climes;
                  Where good Men melt away; Vngodly harden.
                  How many Flowres (the choiſe of all our Garden)
                  Of either Sex, of euery Age, and Rank;
                  From euery Quarter, Border, Bed, and Bank
                  [Beſides that paire of Royall Siſter-buds,
                  
                  Whoſe life had promiſd Europe many Goods:
                  Beſide That Prime-ROSE, Miracle of Princes,
                  Whoſe Herſe as yet a Sea of Tears berinſes:
                  Beſides that knot of Noblest HARRINGTONS,
                  Th'old Father's Honors doubling in the Sons:
                  Beſides GODOLPHIN, BODLEY, Muſes Father;
                  Rare SACKVIL's-Neuil (new Minerua, rather):
                  Beſides St. DRVRY, SIDNEY's-Rutland, CHEINEY,
                  M
                        •
                     rror of Dames, and other Worthies many]
                  Hath Our Great Husband lately ſnatched hence,
                  Before his Wrath's approching Storm cōmence?
                  Why wail'ſt thou then My happy Diſsolution,
                  
                  By Natures Current, & Heav'ns Conſtitution?
                  Repell thy Sorrowes: and repeale to Thee
                  All actiue Vertues. Mourn no more for Mee.
                  
                     I liued long enough; ſith while I liued
                  Thou louedſt me: but (ſo ſhould I haue grieued)
                  Hadſt thou appeer'd vnkinde vnto thy Wife,
                  My longer Date had bin a ſhorter Life,
                  I leaue thee Babes ynow; A Sonne and Daughter:
                  Ynow to craue thy care, and cauſe thee laughter:
                  Ynow for Thee; ynow for Mee to beare:
                  Which oft I wiſht: And the Almighties Eare
                  (Who hear's his Owne, and on them ay beſtoweth
                  Their owne deſires; or what Hee better knoweth)
                  Heard me in This; and One Petition more;
                  
                     That, when Wee parted, I might paſſe before.
                  
                  So, fare thou well (Deer Heart) farewell: my leaſure
                  Serues now no longer for this laſt beſt pleaſure.
                  Farewell, deer Pheer: Farewell, deer Father too:
                  
                     This is my last Will, which I leaue with You.
                  
                  
                     You, ioynt Executors I haue ordained:
                  And for an Helpe, My Mothers loue vnfained
                  As Ouer-ſeer I beſeech you call:
                  And for your Counſail vſe our heauen'ly HALL.
                  
                  So, in the heaun's, among my Ioies ſupernall;
                  So, in my Glaſſe, the Viſion of th' Eternal;
                  If I ſhall ſee You, in your Pilgrimage,
                  O! bee it happy, as my Hopes preſage.
                  
                     So, in our Children, as their Yeers be growing,
                  May Natures Gifts, & Heauenly Grace be flowing:
                  One haue I heer; Two haue You there below:
                  We heer haue Peace, You there haue Wars (we know)
                  With-out, with-in: the more therefore behoues-you
                  Defence from Hence. So wiſhes She that loues you.
                  So, grant me God (if it be lawfull heer)
                  
                     
                        •
                      neuer loſe remembrance of my Deer:
                  
                     
                        •
                     o, calmed be the Tempeſt of Your mourning
                  
                     
                        •
                     or My Deceaſe (according to my warning)
                  
                     
                        •
                     o, caſting off this Load of Heauineſs,
                  Our Loue vnceaſing, may Your Sorrow ceaſe.
                  
                     So ceaſt the Voice, and ſo the Shadow vaniſht.
                  
                  
                     The Mourners then, more rauiſht then aſtoniſht,
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        id ſtill, ſtill, listen with a longing Eare
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        or more ſuch Muſik: which then miſsing there
                  
                  
                     Me thought) the Sable Curtaines back they haled,
                  
                  
                     And, looking round, were readie to haue called;
                  
                     When inſtantly their Pasſions ſo abound,
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        hat downe they ſink, & as they ſink they ſwound:
                  
                  
                     Where-at, I (grieu'd to ſee ſuch Friends bereft me)
                  
                     
                        •
                     tarting to help, diſturbed Morpheus left me:
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        ut, as he rouz'd, by chance be caſt a Quill,
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        or preſent Pen to copie HONOR's Will.
               
               
                  
                  HONOR'S EPITAPH.
                  Heere-vnder, lyes
                  The Wonder of her Kinde:
                  The rareſt Work
                  Of Nature & of Grace:
                  A beautious TEMPLE
                  Of a bountious Minde;
                  Where Venus, Iuno,
                  
                  
                     Pallas, had their Place.
                  Nay; Heav'ns & Natures
                  Gifts, ſingled to Manie,
                  Heer All concurr'd
                  TO HONOR HAY & DENNY.
                  
               
            
         
      
   