
      
         
            
            
               
THE ANNALES OF CORNELIVS TACITVS.
            THE DESCRIPTION OF GERMANIE.
            M. D. XCVIII.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE ROBERT EARLE OF ESSEX AND EWE, EARLE Marſhal of England, Viſcount Hereford and Bourchier, Lord Ferrers of Chartley, Bourchier and Louaine, Knight of the moſt noble order of the Garter, Maſter of the Queenes Maieſties horſe, and one of her Maieſties moſt honorable priuie Councell.
            
            
               THE woorthines of this Author well knowen vnto your honor, putteth me in ſome hope of pardon for my preſumption: in preſenting vnto your Honors view, and crauing a fauourable acceptance of my bold vnskilfulnes. For if Hiſtorie be the treaſure of times paſt, and as well a guide, as image of mans preſent eſtate, a true and liuely pattern of things to come, and as ſome terme it, the work-miſtreſſe of experience, which is the mother of prudence: Tacitus may by good right chalenge the firſt place among the beſt. In iudgement there is none ſounder, for inſtruction of life, for al times, to thoſe which oft read him iudiciouſly, nothing yeelding to the beſt Philoſophers: no woord not loaden with matter, and as himſelfe ſpeaketh of Galba, he vſeth Imperatoria breuitate: which although it breed difficultie, yet carrieth great grauitie. I preſent him therfore to your Honors fauourable protection in regard of himſelfe: but yet no otherwiſe then as a glaſſe, repreſenting in liuely colours of proweſſe, magnanimitie and counſell; not onely woorthie perſonages of ages paſt and gone, but alſo your L. owne honorable vertues, wherof

the vvorld is both vvithes & iudge. If your L. vouchſafe to receiue him (though greatly darkened of that he firſt was, and verie much dimmed in reſpect of the Hiſtorie alreadie in our toong) into any degree of fauour, I little doubt but others will both looke on him, and the better like and allow him; for here belovve we receiue either light or darkenes from aboue. Veſpaſians example wrought more than a lawe: for obſequium in principes, and aemulandi amor, to ſpeake with Tacitus, maketh that to be in greateſt requeſt, which perhaps in it ſelfe deſerueth leaſt. VVhatſoeuer my vnskilfull paines hath beene, my zeale and deuotion to your Honor I preſent vvith it; vnto whom I wiſh al good hap and felicitie, with the accompliſhment of vertues and Honorable deſires.
            
               Your Honors most humbly deuoted
RICHARD GRENEWEY.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE READER.
            
               THat which most men alleage (courteous Reader) as a cauſe of publiſhing vnto the world their commendable endeuours; as commaundement of ſuperiours, intreatie of friends, or ſuch like: cauſes yeelding ſome excuſe, if things well done by them needed any; that can I no way pretend: though no man hath iuſter cauſe to inuent ſomewhat to excuſe that, which (well knowing and confeſsing my owne inſufficiencie) I ſhould by no inducements haue beene drawen vnto. For I wanted not iudgement to know, that to performe this I vndertooke as I ought, was a matter beyond the compaſſe of my skill: yet neuertheleſſe my will ouercomming my owne iudgement and reaſon in vndertaking, I haue ventured my credit to the wide ſea of common opinion, and dangerous cenſure; and knowing the beſt haue followed the woorſt. A fault perhaps pardonleſſe, in the rigorouſt cenſure, and which bred in my ſelfe a long time distruſt and feare: yet at laſt, incouraged by hope to find ſome milder iudges for my boldnes, I ventured this labour, and performed it thus meanely as thou ſeeſt: truſting the courteous Reader, if in ought I haue pleaſured him, will affoord me his good woord for my good will, and in that I haue done amiſſe pardon, and a fauourable construction for my paines. And although in reaſon it ſeemeth, I ſhould moſt of all feare the cenſure of the learned (if any ſuch vouchſafe to read this tranſlation) in regard they best can, and with quickest inſight pearce into my want of skill, iudgement, and vnderstanding;

yet in thoſe is my greateſt hope, becauſe they be learned. Cauſe ſufficient to feare no captious or carping conſtructions, as a propertie ill beſeeming their good qualitie and education. I was well aſſured that he who beſt might, would take no further paines in this kind: nor hearing of any other which would, I thought ſome could be contented to haue it rather il done, than not at all. Friendly Reader, I craue pardon for my faults, and deſire thou wouldest fauourably beare with my ouerſights.
            Farewell.
         
      
      
         
            
            THE FIRST BOOKE OF THE ANNALES OF CORNELIVS TACITVS.
            
               The Proeme of Tacitus, containing the forme of gouernment vntill Auguſtus time: with the ſubiect of this worke.
               
                  THE citie of Rome was in the beginning gouerned by Kings. Libertie and the Conſulſhip L. Brutus brought in. The Dictators were choſen but for a time: the Decemuiri paſſed not two yeeres: neither had the Conſularie authoritie of the Tribunes of the ſoldiers any long continuance: nor Cinna, nor Sillaes dominion: Pompey and Craſſus quickly yeelded to Caeſars forces: Lepidus and Antonie to Augustus; who entitling himſelfe by the name of Prince, brought vnder his obedience the whole Romane ſtate, wearied and weakened with ciuill diſorders. But as well the proſperous, as vnproſperous ſucceſſes of the ancient Common-wealth, excellent writers haue recorded: neither wanted there woorthie & ſingular wits, to deliuer Auguſtus exploits; vntill they were by the ouerſwarming of flatterers vtterly diſcouraged. Tiberius, Caius, Claudius and Neroes actions, they yet liuing and flouriſhing, were falſly ſet downe, for feare; and after their death, through freſh hatred, as corruptly as before. Whereupon I intend to deliuer ſome few things done in Augustus later times: then Neroes raigne, and other occurrents as they fell out, without paſſion or partialitie, as being free from motiues of both.
            
            
               1. The meanes by which Auguſtus came to the empire: and whom he choſe to ſucceed.
               AFter that Brutus and Caſsius were ſlaine, and no armes now publikely borne; Pompey defeated in Sicilie; Lepidus diſarmed; Antonie killed; and no chiefe leader of Iulius Caeſars faction left, but onely Augustus: he would no longer be called Triumuir, but in ſhew contented with the dignitie of a Tribune to defend the people, bearing himſelfe as Conſul: after he had wound into the fauour of the ſoldier by giftes; of the people by prouiſion of ſuſtenance; and of all in generall with the ſweetenes of eaſe and repoſe; by little and little taking vpon him, he drew to himſelfe the affaires of Senate; the dutie of magiſtrates and lawes, without contradiction of any: the ſtowteſt by war or proſcriptions alreadie ſpent, and the reſt of the nobilitie, by how much the more ſeruiceable, by ſo much the more bettered in wealth, and aduanced in honors: ſeeing their preferment to growe by new gouernment, did rather chooſe the preſent eſtate with ſecuritie, than ſtriue to recouer their olde with danger. That forme of gouernment the prouinces diſliked not, as miſtruſting the Senates and peoples regiment by reaſon of noble mens factions; couetouſnes of magiſtrates: the lawes affoording no ſecuritie, being ſwaied hither

and thither by might, ambition, and corruption. Beſides this, Augustus labouring by ſome ſtay, to ſettle the ſoueraigntie, aduanced Claudius Marcellus his ſiſters ſonne being very yoong, to the pontificall dignitie and Aedilſhip: and M. Agrippa meanly deſcended, but in martiall exploites warlike, and a companion in his victories, to be twiſe Conſul togither; and after Marcellus death choſe him to be his ſonne in lawe. And his owne houſe not failing, he beſtowed the title of Emperor vpon Tiberius Nero and Claudius Druſus his wiues children; and adopted Caius and Lucius, Agrippaes children: and making ſhew to the contrarie; yet his earneſt deſire was, they ſhould be called Princes of youth, and choſen Conſuls elect, before they had caſt off their praetext or infants garments. But when Agrippa was dead, and Lucius going into Spaine to take charge of the armie, and Caius returning wounded out of Armenia, by haſtie fate or trecherie of their ſtepmother Liuia: Druſus alſo dead long before, onely Nero was left of all Augustus ſonnes in lawe. Vnto him all men now crowched and fawned; being receiued the adopted ſonne of Augustus; copartner of the empire; aſſociate of the Tribunitian dignitie; ſhewen to the campe as ſucceſſor; not as before by ſecret deuiſes and practiſes of his mother, but openly perſwading the Emperor thereto. For ſhe had ſo enthralled the ſillie olde man, that Agrippa Posthumus his onely nephew, he had confined in the Iland Planaſia: in deede, badly trained vp in liberall ſciences, and ſottiſhly bragging of his ſtrength and actiuitie of bodie; but yet neuer detected of any notorious vice. He gaue Germanicus ſonne vnto Druſus, charge ouer eight legions, by the riuer of Rhene; and commanded Tiberius (albeit he had a ſonne of his owne) to adopt him, the better to eſtabliſh the ſucceſſion with mo ſtaies than one. Wars there were none at that time, but onely againſt the Germans; not ſo much in regard of enlarging the empire, hope of bootie or reward, as to blot out the diſhonor receiued, when he loſt his armie with Quinctilius Varo. All was quiet in the citie; the old names of the magiſtrates vnchanged; the yoong men borne after the victorie at Actium, and the greateſt part of the old, during the ciuill wars: how many were there which had ſeene the ancient forme of gouernment of the free Common-wealth? Thus then the ſtate of the citie turned vpſide downe, there was no ſigne of the olde laudable cuſtomes to be ſeene: but contrarie, equalitie taken away, euery man endeuored to obey the prince; miſdoubting nothing whileſt Augustus yet ſtrong in bodie, was able to defend himſelfe, his houſe, and peace. But when he grew olde and feeble with ſicknes, and that the end of his gouernment, and hope of a new was not far off: ſome few, but in vaine, diſcourſt of the commodities of libertie; ſome feared war; ſome deſired it: but the greateſt part vſed lauiſh ſpeeches, and ſpred rumors againſt the next coniectured ſucceſſor. Agrippa they accounted by nature cruell, and through the indignitie of his late diſgrace eaſily kindled; yoong, and rawe in ſtate matters; vnable for ſo great a charge. In deede, Tiberius was of conuenient and ripe yeeres, expert in feates of war; but poſſeſt with the hereditarie pride of the Claudian familie: yea manie apparent ſparkles of crueltie did burſt out in him, howſoeuer he went about to ſuppreſſe them. Beſides, he was brought vp in a houſe, which knew how to raigne: the Conſulſhip was more than once caſt vpon him with triumphes. During the time that he was at Rhodes (cloking his exile vnder colour of retiring himſelfe) he dreamte of nothing but reuenge, diſſimulation, and ſecret meanes of licentious luſts: withall, he had his mother at hand; vntolerable in all imperfections incident to the ſexe: and thereby they were to obey a woman, and two yoong men, which would in the meane ſpace oppreſſe, and in time rent in peeces the Common-wealth.
            
            
               
               
                  II. The death of Auguſtus: and Tiberius Nero made Emperour.
               WHileſt they thus debated the matter, Augustus maladie increaſed; and as it was ſuſpected by ſome, through the lewde practiſe of his wife. For not many months before a rumor was ſpread, that Augustus with the priuitie of a few, accompanied only with Fabius Maximus, had conueyed himſelfe to the Iland Planaſia, to viſite his nephew Agrippa, both weeping tenderly at their meeting, with manifeſt tokens of loue, and a hope conceiued that the yong man ſhould be recalled and reſtored to his Grandfathers houſe. Fabius diſcloſed this to Martia his wife, and ſhe to Liuia, and C. Nauus to Caeſar: for not long after Fabius (doubtfull whether by his owne procurement or not) being deceaſed, his wife Martia among other her lamentations at her husbands funerall, was ouer-heard to accuſe her ſelfe, as the cauſe of her husbands death. But howſoeuer the matter paſſed, Tiberius had ſcarſe put foote in Illyricum, when by letters from his mother he was recalled in poſt haſte: not being well knowne, when he arriued at Nola, whether there were any breath yet left in Augustus or not. For Liuia had beſet the houſe with a watchfull and ſtraight gard, ſometimes giuing out that Augustus was on the mending hand; and ſo hauing made all ſure on all hands, as the time and occaſion required: the ſame rumor which not long before gaue ioyfull newes of Augustus amendment, now publiſhed that he was dead, and Nero in poſſeſſion of the Empire. The firſt exploit this new Prince did, was the murdering of Poſthumus Agrippa; whom a Centurion reſolute and appointed for the purpoſe, and taking him vnarmed, and miſdoubting nothing, yet could hardly diſpatch. Tiberius made no words of this to the Senate, but pretended that it was done by his fathers appointment; who (as he ſaid) had giuen charge to the Centurion which had the garding of him, to make him away incontinently after he had intelligence of his death. Little doubt but Augustus, complaining of the yong mans vntowardly behauior, cauſed his exile to be confirmed by decree of the Senate: but yet he neuer perſiſted long in deſiring the death of any of his; neither was it credible that to aſſure the eſtate to his wiues ſonne, he would ſeeke the bloud of his owne nephew. But very likely it is, that the yong mans death was haſtened by Tiberius feare, and Liuiaes hatred: the one as iealous, leaſt he ſhould bandie for the ſoueraigntie: the other through the naturall hatred incident to all ſtepmothers. When the Centurion brought him word (as the manner of ſeruice was) that he had fulfilled his commandement, he anſwered preſently, that he commanded him no ſuch matter, and that he ſhould anſwere it before the Senate. When this newes came to Criſpus Sallustius eares (who being inward in greateſt ſecrets with Tiberius, had by letters giuen the Centurion order how to proceede) fearing leaſt his owne turne ſhould be next, dangerous to him alike: to confeſſe the truth, or to ſtand to a lye: aduiſed Liuia that ſhe ſhould not in any wiſe diuulgate the ſecrets of her houſe, the counſell of friends, and ſeruices of ſouldyers; and that Tiberius ſhould beware of weakening the power of ſoueraigntie, in referring all things to the Senate: the qualitie of abſolute rule being ſuch, that it could not ſtand but in one alone. Now at Rome the Conſuls, the Senators, and Gentlemen ranne headlong to ſeruitude; and the more nobler the fairer ſhew, and the more haſtie; but with a compoſed and ſetled countenance, leaſt they ſhould ſeeme ouerglad of the death of the laſt, or diſcontented with the new Prince; they tempered their griefe with ioy, and lamentation with flatterie. The two Conſuls

                  Sext Pompeius, and Sext. Apuleius did firſt ſweare allegeance to Tiberius Caeſar: and after into their hands, Seius Strabo, and C. Turrianus, the one Captaine of the Gard, the other chiefe officer for prouiſion of corne. After them the Lords of the Senate, the ſouldiers, and the people. For Tiberius would haue all things begun by the Conſuls, as the manner was in the ancient free common wealth: as though he had not reſolued with himſelfe whether it were beſt for him to accept of the Empire or not. No not ſo much as the Edict to call the Lords of the Senate to counſell, but was proclaimed in vertue and authoritie of a Tribune; which dignitie he had receiued in Augustus time. The words of the Edict were not many, and deliuered in modeſt termes. That he would only conſult what pomp and honor were fit to be done for his father: and that he would not depart from the body: which ſhould be the onely publike charge he would vndertake. Neuertheleſſe when Augustus was dead, he gaue the watchword to the gard: placed the watch: diſpoſed of the ſouldiers: managed all the affaires of Court, as if he had been Emperour. The ſouldiers waited on him to the place of publike aſſemblies; to the Senate houſe; and diſpatched letters to the Camp; as though he had bene in full poſſeſſion of the ſtate; irreſolute in nothing, but whē he ſhould ſpeake in the Senate. The chiefeſt cauſe proceeded of feare; leaſt Germanicus, who had ſo many legions at commaundement; ſuch ſtrong aides of confederates; and ſo exceedingly beloued of the people; ſhould rather hold, then expect the poſſeſſion of the Empire. He ſtoode on his reputation likewiſe, and ſeemed rather to be called and choſen by the Common-wealth, then creepe in by the canuaſing of a woman, and adoption of an old man. It was afterward further knowne, that he vſed that lingering doubtfulnes, the better to ſound the affection of the Nobilitie; for obſeruing their countenance, and wreſting their words to the worſt, he bare them all in minde. In the firſt meeting of the Senate, he would haue nothing debated, but Augustus laſt will and teſtament; which being brought in by Vestaes Virgins, declared Tiberius and Liuia to be his heires: and that Liuia was adopted into the Iulian familie, and entituled by the name of Augusta. After them he ſubſtituted his nephews, and nephews ſonnes: and in the third place the Peeres of the citie, which in generall he hated: yet he did it to win fame and glory with poſteritie. His legacies were moderate, like vnto other citizens, ſauing that he gaue as well to the common ſort, as the reſt of the people, foure hundred and thirty fiue thouſand nummos: Three pound uen ſhillings 11. pence q. cee. to euery ſouldier of the Pretorian band a thouſand; 7. li. 16. s. 3. d. to euery one of the legionary cohorts which conſiſted of citizens of Rome, three hundred 46. s. 10. d. ob..
            
            
               
                  III. The ſolemnities of Auguſtus funerals, and the cenſure vvhich men gaue of him.
               AFter that, conſultation was had concerning the pomp and ſolemnities of the funerals; among which the moſt honorable and magnificent were iudged to be theſe. Gallus Aſinius thought it meete that the dead corps ſhould be brought through the triumphall gate; and L. Arruntius, that the titles of the lawes by him ordained, and the names of the nations by him vanquiſhed, ſhould be caried before him. Meſſalla Valerius added, that it was conuenient the oath of allegeance ſhould euery yeare be renewed in Tiberius name. Who being demanded of Tiberius whether he had commaundement from him ſo to aduiſe? anſwered, that he did propound it of his owne free motion: and that in matters concerning the common-wealth, he would vſe no mans aduiſe but his own, although it ſhould be with danger

and offence: ſo farre had flattery ſpread it ſelfe, that that only kinde remayned vnpractiſed. The Lords of the Senate after that cryed with one voyce, that they themſelues would carry the corps to the funerall fire on their ſhoulders: which Caeſar did yeeld vnto with a modeſty, yet ſauoring of arrogancie. And admoniſhed the people by Proclamation, that they would not (as in times paſt they had diſturbed the buriall of Iulius Caeſar of famous memory) carried away with ouergreat affection, ſo deſire now that Augustus body ſhould rather be burnt in the place of publicke aſſemblies, then in Campus Martius, a place deputed to that vſe. The day of the funerals being come, the ſoldiers were placed as it were a gard to the body, when as ſuch as had eyther ſeene, or heard their fathers report, of the freſh and late yoke of cruell ſeruitude vnluckely attempted to be ſhaken off, and recouer their auncient libertie: then I ſay when the murdering of Iulius Caeſar the Dictator, ſeemed vnto ſome a wicked, and vnto others a worthy deede; laughed to ſee that now an old Prince which had raigned ſo many yeares, and prouided heires to ſucceede him in might and wealth, ſhould neede a gard of ſouldiers quietly to celebrate his funerals. This bred ſundry ſpeeches of Augustus, many maruelling at vaine and friuolous things: as that his death fell on the ſame day he was made Emperour: that he dyed at Nola in the ſame houſe and chamber, that before him his father Octauius did: they made it a great matter that he alone had been as oft Conſull, as Valerius Coruinus, and C. Marius both together: that he had continued Tribune ſeuen and thirtie yeares; had beene honored with the name of Emperour one and twentie times; with many other old and new dignities beſtowed or inuented for him. But among the better ſort his life was diuerſly commended or diſcommended: Some ſayd, that the loue of his father, and the care of the Common-wealth, at that time when all lawes were daſht, droue him to ciuill warres, which can neuer be begun or proſecuted by any good meanes: and that he had yeelded in many things to Antony, and to Lepidus in like maner, becauſe he would reuenge his fathers death. For ſeeing the one grew careleſſe with age, and the other waſted with laſciuiouſnes, there was no other meanes left to redreſſe all diſcords in the common-wealth, then to bring her vnder the obedience of one alone, who ſhould gouerne; neuertheleſſe not as King or Dictator, but as Prince. The Empire he had bounded with the Ocean, and other Riuers farre off: the Legions, Prouinces and Nauie, were linked and knit in peace and vnitie: iuſtice was miniſtred in the cities: the allies intreated with modeſtie: the citie beautified with ſumptuous building: and if any rigorous dealing had bene vſed againſt ſome few, it was for ſetling of quietnes in the whole. Contrarily ſome ſayd, that the loue of his father, the corruption of times, ſerued him but for a cloake and colour: and that he had ſtirred vp the old ſouldyers by gifts and bribery, through ambition and deſire of rule; that being yet but yong and a priuate perſon, he had gathered a power; corrupted the legions of the Conſuls; that he made a ſhewe only of fauouring Pompeius ſide: but had no ſooner gotten by order of the Senators the faſces or knitch of rods, and the Pretorſhip; after the death of Hircius and Panſa, (both ſlaine by the enemie, or Panſaes wound poiſoned, and Hircius murdered by the ſouldyers, or by Caeſar the contriuer of the feate) but he ſeaſed on both their forces, extorted the Conſulſhip, mauger the Senators; and the power aſſigned him to ſubdue Antony, he conuerted againſt the Common-wealth. He baniſhed the citizens, diuided their lands, and gaue away their goods, which were things by the doers themſelues diſcommended. In deede, the reuenge and purſuing his fathers death vpon Caſsius and Brutus maybe tolerated (albeit it had bene conuenient for a publick benefit to haue layd aſide priuate grudges) but he deceiued Pompey vnder

colour of peace, and Lepidus vnder a ſhadow of friendſhip. Afterward he tolled on Antony with the treatie of Tarentum and Brunduſium, and mariage of his ſiſter, which deceitfull alliance he payed with the loſſe of his life. Doubtleſſe a peace enſued this, but a bloudie one, as may witnes the death of Lollius and Varus, and in Rome it ſelfe, of Varro, Egnatius and Iulus. Neither did they forbeare to diſcourſe of his domeſticall affaires: as that he tooke Neroes wife from him, & asked the opinion of the Pontife in a ſcoffe, whether there might be a lawfull marriage betwixt them, ſhe being with childe by her other husband, but not yet deliuered. They forgat not L. Atedius, and Vedius Pollios riot and laſciuiouſnes. Finally, that Liuia was an intollerable and burdenſome mother to the common wealth, and to the houſe of the Caeſars a dangerous ſtepdame. There was no honor left for the gods, ſeeing hee would himſelfe by the Prieſts and Flamines be worſhipped in the temples, with all the ornaments belonging to the gods. Neyther was Tiberius choſen ſucceſſor to the State for loue of himſelfe, or care of the Common-wealth, but deepely inſeeing into his loftie and bloudie diſpoſition, he would by being ſo vnequally compared with ſo outragious a mate, win glory afterward to himſelfe. And although Auguſtus had not many yeeres before vttered honorable ſpeeches in Tiberius behalfe before the Lords of the Senate, when he ſued to make him once againe Tribune: yet he interlaced ſome things among, touching his attire and behauiour, which in the excuſing of him, ſeemed to turne to his diſgrace and reproch.
            
            
               
                  IIII. Tiberius diſſembling colour in refuſing the empire: Auguſtus iudgement of three vvhich vvere deſirous or vvoorthie of the Empire.
               
                  AVgustus funerals being ended according to the vſuall manner; a temple and religious ceremonies were inſtituted in honor of him: from that time forward all ſutes and requeſts were made to Tiberius, who diſcourſing diuerſly of the greatnes of the empire, and in modeſt termes of his owne inſufficiencie, thought Auguſtus wiſedome onely capable of ſo weightie a charge; that himſelfe being aſſumed by Auguſtus, as an aſſociate and partner in the ſtate, had by good proofe learned, how hard a matter, and how ſubiect vnto fortunes change: rule and ſoueraigntie was. And ſeeing the citie was repleniſhed with ſo many famous and woorthie perſonages, better it were and more eaſe, that manie, ioining their ſtudies and cares togither, ſhould vndertake the charge, than caſt all vpon one mans ſhoulders. This ſpeech carried greater maieſtie than truth: for Tiberius either by nature, or by cuſtome, yea euen in thoſe things which he would haue knowen, ſpake alwaies darkly and doubtfully; but then of ſet purpoſe endeuoring to hide his drifts, wrapped himſelfe more than euer, in a darke cloud of vncertaintie and ambiguitie. But the Lords of the Senate fearing all one thing (which was leaſt ſome perill might enſue, if he ſhould doubt that they perceiued his diſſimulation) began to lament; complaine; offer vp vowes; and lift vp their hands to the gods; to Auguſtus image, and to his owne knees; vntill he commanded the booke of remembrances to be brought foorth and read. That booke contained the wealth of the publike treaſure; how many citizens and allies were in armes; what ſtrength there was by ſea; how manie kingdomes, prouinces, and countries yeelded obedience to the empire; what tribute was leuied; what cuſtomes; what neceſſarie charges iſſued out; what giftes; and al written with Auguſtus owne hand. Withal he gaue a politike inſtruction (yet whether for feare or enuie vncertaine) how to reſtraine the empire within bounds and

limits. Whileſt theſe things were a handeling, and the Senators in moſt lowe and humble maner intreating, that he would accept the charge: Tiberius letting ſlip a word by chaunce, that as he was vnable to take charge of the whole; ſo he would vndertake the protection of any one part they ſhould aſſigne him. Aſinius Gallus asked him, what part, Caeſar, wouldeſt thou haue committed to thy charge? Who being ſtroken into amaze with this vnlooked for demand, ſtood mute a while: then gathering his ſpirits to him, anſwered; That it ill befitted his modeſtie, to chooſe or refuſe any one part of that, from all which he deſired to be excuſed. Gallus replied (for by his countenance he coniectured he was offended) that he did not therefore demand that queſtion, as thought he would ſeuer that, which was inſeparable; but by his owne confeſſion conuict him, that the Common-wealth was but one bodie, and therefore to be gouerned by ones onely wiſedome. And continuing his ſpeech added many things in commendation of Auguſtus: and called to remembrance Tiberius owne victories, and diuers notable things done for many yeeres in time of peace. But all this could not appeaſe the Princes inueterate hatred againſt him: as though by marrying Vipſana daughter to M. Agrippa, once wife to Tiberius, he had carried too loſtie a courage, and higher aſpiring minde, than the priuate calling of a citizen; and ſauoring of the headie and fierce humor of Aſinius Pollio his father. After that L. Aruntius vſing ſpeeches not vnlike vnto Pollio, offended alike. And although he bore Aruntius no old grudge, yet bicauſe he was wealthie, bold, learned, and in reputation with all men, he had him in iealouſie. When Auguſtus drew towards his later end, diſcourſing who were likelieſt to poſſeſſe the place after his death; who would refuſe it although they ſhould be choſen as meete: who being vnmeete and vnable, yet would deſire it: who could diſcharge it, and would vndertake it: ſaid that M. Lepidus was for his ſufficiencie able, but would refuſe: Gallus Aſinius greedie to laie holde on it, but was inſufficient: L. Aruntius was not vnwoorthie, and if occaſion were giuen would venter for it. All men agree that the two firſt were ſo named, but for Aruntius ſome put Cn. Piſo: and howſoeuer it was, all ſauing Lepidus, through Tiberius practiſe, for ſundrie pretended crimes were made awaie. L. Haterius likewiſe, and Mamercus Scaurus troubled his iealous head: the one by ſaieng, How long Caeſar wilt thou ſuffer the common-wealth to want a head? The other bicauſe he hoped that the petitions of the Senators ſhould take effect, ſeeing he did not as he might, withſtande the relation of the Conſuls by being Tribune. He inuaied ſharply, and that incontinently againſt Haterius, but let go Scaurus without any word: although he were more implacably offended with him then the other. And being wearied with the clamors of all ingenerall, and importunitie of ſome in particular, by little and little yeelded vnto their requeſts: not ſo much bicauſe he would confeſſe, he tooke the charge of the Empire on him; as to make an end of refuſing, or being any more entreated. Certaine it is, that as Haterius went to the pallace to craue pardon of Tiberius; he narrowly eſcaped from being ſlaine of the ſoldiers: bicauſe that caſting himſelfe at his knees as he was walking; either by chance, or happily hindered by Haterius, the Emperor fell: yet that danger did nothing mitigate his wrath: vntill Haterius making entreaty to Auguſta, by hir earneſt ſute was protected. Exceeding great flatterie was vſed towards hir by the Senators, ſome being of opinion that ſhe ſhoulde be called the foundres of the common-wealth, ſome the mother: and many that beſides the name of Caeſar, the ſonne of Iulia ſhould be added. But Tiberius anſwered that titles of honor ought to be moderately giuen vnto women: and that he would vſe the ſame moderation in ſuch, as ſhould be beſtowed on himſelfe. This he did vpon enuie and

iealouſie: and therefore thinking hir greatnes to be his owne abaſement, would not ſuffer hir to haue a ſergeant before hir, or an altar to be dedicated in memorie of hir adoption, nor any ſuch like honor. He entreated neuertheleſſe that proconſularie authoritie might be giuen Germanicus Caeſar, which was ſent him by ambaſſadors, with commandement to comfort him for the death of Auguſtus. The reaſon why the like was not demanded in fauour of Druſus, was bicauſe he was there preſent and Conſul elect. And as Auguſtus had ordained before, he did nominate twelue competitors, for the Pretorſhip, and bound it with an oath he woulde not paſſe that number, although the Senators exhorted that they might be increaſed. That was the firſt time that the election of Magiſtrates was taken from the people, and tranſferred to the Lords of the Senate. For although vntill that daie all matters were ſwaied as beſt liked the Prince: yet ſome things were left to the fauour and voices of the Tribes. Neither did the people but with a vaine rumour complaine, that their right was taken from them; and the Senators ſeeing themſelues deliuered of manie bribes and vnſeemely ſutes, were well contented to accept the authoritie: Tiberius ſo moderating the matter, that he commended onely fower competitors, which ſhould be elected without ſute or feare of repulſe. The Tribunes of the people made requeſt, that it might be lawfull for them to ſet foorth plaies at their owne coſts, and recorde them in the Calendar of the Citie, and call them Auguſtales, by the name of Augustus. The Playes were graunted: but the coſts and expenſes were to riſe out of the publicke Treaſury: and that it ſhould be lawfull for them to vſe the triumphall robe in the race, but not be carried in a Chariot. Not long after the annuall celebration of theſe Playes, was caſt vpon the Pretor, which was iudge betweene the citizen and the forrener.
            
            
               
                  V. A rebellion in Pannony, ſtirred vp by Percennius.
               
               THis was the eſtate of the citie affaires, when the legions of Pannony mutined: for no new occaſions, but only becauſe the change of the Prince gaue licence of hurlyburly, and hope of gaine by ciuill warres. Theſe were three legions of the ſommer camps committed to Iunius Blaeſus charge, who aduertiſed of the death of Augustus; and Tiberius entering to the gouernment (in regard of the vacation which then hapned, or ioy conceiued) neglected the accuſtomed care of his dutie. Herevpon the ſouldyers began to grow licentious and quarelſome, and gaue eare to the moſt diſſolute and diſordered: and in fine, hunted after riot and eaſe; ſet nought by all military diſcipline, and refuſed trauell and labour. There was one Percennius in the garriſons, who had bene ſometimes a ringleader of factious companions on Stages and Theaters; afterward a common ſouldier; an impudent and ſaucy prater; well practiſed in diſturbing aſſemblies, to ſhewe fauour vnto ſuch actors as he fauored. This Percennius after the better ſort were gone to their lodgings, by little and little in ſecret conuenticles in the night, or in the ſhutting of the euening, gathered together, and ſtirred vp the vnexperteſt of the ſouldyers, and ſuch as were moſt doubtfull what entertainement they ſhould expect after the death of Augustus. And when he had gathered about him of the moſt licentious a ſufficient rabble, and readieſt inſtruments of ſedition, in manner of an Oration he began to queſtion with them thus: Why they would like bondſlaues be ſubiect to a ſmall number of Centurions, and a ſmaller of Tribunes? when durſt they ſeeke a redreſſe, if they would not now preſent themſelues to the Prince with intreatie or the ſword;

whileſt he is new, and not fully ſetled in the ſtate? they had through cowardlines held their toong many yeares, ſome thirtie, ſome fortie in pay, ouergrowne with age, and many their limmes loſt in ſeruice. And after they were licenſed to depart, yet they were not at an end of ſeruice; but detayned vnder enſignes, indure as great toyle as before vnder a new name. And if any eſcaped ſo many hazards aliue, they were drawne into ſundry countries, where vnder a colour of ſome lands, eyther mooriſh bogs, or barren mountanous crags were alotted to their ſhare. Beſides, ſeruice was painefull in it ſelfe and vnprofitable; their liues and bodies valued but at ten aſſes 7. pence ob. a day: hauing no better allowance to furniſh themſelues with weapons, apparell, and tents; and redeeme themſelues from the cruell vſage of the Centurians; pay fees of vacations from ſeruile miniſteries: yet their ſtripes, wounds, hard winters, ſcorching ſommers, bloudie battels, and fruitles peace had no end: and hope of redreſſe there was none, vnleſſe certaine lawes were ſet downe for ſuch as enter into ſeruice; as that euery ones pay ſhould be bettered to a deniere 9. pence, counting the denarius as 12. aſſes. a day; and none bound to ſerue aboue ſixteene yeares; that from that time forward, they ſhould not be detayned vnder enſignes, but receiue in the ſame camp they ſerued, their recompence in readie coyne. What? did the Pretorian bands, which receiued two deniers 18. pence. a day, and at the end of ſixteene yeares were ſent to their houſes, oppoſe themſelues to greater dangers then they? yet he did not ſpeake this to depraue or diminiſh the credite of the citie-gard, but becauſe they ſhould conſider what a hard part they were offered; yet he for his owne part being lodged among ſauage and barbarous people, did from his cabine ſee the enemie euery howre. The baſer ſort came murmuring about him, and ſtirred vp others with diuers encouragements: ſome reprochfully ſhewing the wales of their ſtipes; ſome their gray haires; ſome their ragged torne coates; ſome their naked bodies. At laſt they grew into ſuch a fury and rage, that they purpoſed of three legions ſhuffled together to make one: but they changed that deuiſe very quickly, euery one through emulation coueting that honor for his owne legion: and pitched the three ſtandarts and enſignes together: withall they threw vp mounds of turfes, and placed on it a Tribunall, to the end the ſeate might be more conſpicuous. As they haſtned to finiſh the worke, Blaeſus came in among them, rebuking ſome, and hindering now one, now another, and crying alowde, In my bloud rather embrue your hands; for it is a leſſer offence to ſlay the Lieutenant, then fall from the obedience of the Emperour. I will either with my life keepe the legions in faithfull allegeance; or being ſlaine by you, haſten your repentance. Neuertheles they held on their worke vntill they had brought it breaſt high; when at laſt being ouercome with his importunacy, they gaue ouer their enterpriſe: then Blaeſus did in good and eloquent manner ſhew vnto them, that it was not conuenient that ſouldyers petitions ſhould be caried to the Emperour by mutinie and rebellion. Neyther did the old ſouldyers vnder Emperours in times paſt, nor yet they themſelues demaund of Augustus ſuch vnlawfull and new requeſts; and that in an vnſeaſonable time: the new Prince was burdened with cares in the beginning of his Empire. Notwithſtanding, if their purpoſe was to obtayne that in a time of peace; which being conquerors in ciuill warres, they neuer attempted; yet why do they contrary to the dutie of allegeance, and order of ſeruice vſe force? they ſhould rather depute ſome Embaſſadors to Caeſar, with publicke commiſſion, to declare their requeſts. They all cryed immediately, that Blaeſus ſonne a Tribune, might vndertake the Embaſſie, and intreate that all ſuch as had ſerued ſixteene yeares, ſhould be diſmiſſed and ſent home: which being graunted; then they would enioyne him the reſt of his charge. The yong man being departed with this

meſſage, they ſurceaſed their rebellion. But the ſouldiers grew prowde that the Lieutenants ſonne vndertooke to pleade the common cauſe; as being an euident token that they had wrung out that by force, which by modeſt demeanour they ſhould neuer haue obtained.
            
            
               
                  VI. The rebellion continueth: a practiſe of Vibulenus against Blaeſus.
               
               IN the meane ſeaſon, certaine bands of ſoldiers ſent to Nauportum before the rebellion began, to ſee the waies cleere, the bridges ſafe, & other conueniences for the warre: vnderſtanding of the mutinie growen in the campe, ſnatched vp their enſignes; and ſacking villages adioining, & Nauport it ſelfe, which might haue paſſed for a reaſonable free town; iniuried & reuiled the Centurions which went about to bridle them; firſt with ſcoffes and reprochful termes; then with blowes & ſtripes. But they had an eſpeciall hart-burning againſt Aufidienus Rufus, the campe-maſter; whom they pulled out of his chariot, and loaded with a fardell of ſtuffe, & made him march formoſt of all the companie: now & then asking him in a mockerie, whether he bare ſo great a burden willingly or not; or whether ſo long a iourney ſeemed not tedious vnto him? This Rufus had long been a common ſoldier; then a Centurion; then the Camp-maſter: and ſought to renew the ancient rigor of ſeruice: and being himſelfe hardned to beare any labor and trauel, was ſo much the more cruel, bicauſe himſelfe had endured the like. Theſe companies ioining with the other legions, began to rebell afreſh; and ſtragling ſome one waie, ſome another; deſtroy and waſte al about them. Blaeſus to terrifie the reſt, commanded ſome few, and eſpecially ſuch as had the greateſt pillage, to be apprehended, whipt and caſt into priſon; for euen then the Centurions, and the better ſort of the ſoldiers were obedient to the Lieutenant. But the priſoners drew backe, and reſiſted ſuch as led them, catched holde and embraced the knees of the ſtanders by; calling euerieman by his name, or by the name of the band he ſerued vnder, or cohort, or legion; crieng that they ſhoulde drinke all of the ſame cup: withall, they heaped iniurie vpon iniurie againſt the Lieutenant: called to witnes the heauens and the gods; and left nothing vndone or vnſaide, which might ſerue to ſtirre hatred, mooue compaſſion, breed feare, or prouoke anger. The ſoldiers cluſtered all togither, brake open the priſons, ſet at libertie the priſoners, and ſhuffled in among themſelues, the fugitiues and condemned of capitall crimes. This kindled the rage of the ſoldier: and more ringleaders ioined with them. Among whom one Vibulenus a common ſoldier, lifted on the ſhoulders of the ſtanders by, before Blaeſus Tribunall, began to ſpeake vnto the diſordered and attentiue ſoldiers in this maner. You haue giuen light and life to theſe innocent and miſerable wretches; but when will you reſtore life to my brother; and my brother to me? who, being ſent vnto you from the Germane campe, to entreat of the common profit and good, was this laſt night murdered by his Fencers, which he hath alwaies readie armed to cut the ſoldiers throtes: anſwere Blaeſus, where haſt thou throwne his bodie? for the enimies themſelues enuie not that I ſhould burie him? And when I ſhall haue filled my griefe with kiſſing, and weeping ouer him, command me to be murdered alſo: ſo as theſe our companions burie him and me; ſlaine for no other offence, but bicauſe we furthered the common good and profit of the Legions. He inflamed his words with teares, beating himſelfe on the face and breſt: then thruſting them from him on whoſe ſhoulders he was caried, and throwing himſelfe at euery mans feete, droue them all into ſuch amaze,

and ſtirred ſuch hatred, that part of the ſouldiers laid hands on Blaeſus Fencers, and bound them; part on the reſidue of his familie; and part ran hither and thither, to ſeeke for Vibulenus brothers body. And if it had not appeared incontinently, that there was no ſuch body found; if his ſlaues by torture had not denied any ſuch pretended murder to haue beene committed; and further, that Vibulenus neuer had any ſuch brother: the ſoldiers would hardly haue ſpared the Lieutenants life. Neuertheleſſe, they thruſt out the Tribune and Camp-maiſter, ſpoiled & robbed ſuch as fled, ſlew Lucillius a Centurion, whome the ſouldiers by a nickname called Cedo alteran, giue me another, becauſe that when he had broken vpon a ſouldiers ſhoulders his vine wand, his manner was to call alowde, giue me another; and when that was broken, another. The reſt were ſaued by hiding themſelues; only Iulius Clemens they kept aliue, becauſe that hauing a readie and quicke wit, they thought him a meete man to be employed as an Embaſſador in the ſouldiers behalfe. Beſides this, the eight and the fifteenth legions, were now ready to go together by the eates, becauſe the eight legion demaunded Sirpicus a Centurion to death, whom the fifteenth defended: if the ninth legion had not interpoſed her ſelfe, firſt by way of intreatie; then menacing ſuch as made light of them.
            
            
               
                  VII. Druſus is ſent to appeaſe the rebellion in Pannony: and the ringleaders puniſhed.
               WHen Tiberius had intelligence of theſe mutinies; although he were cloſe, and a great diſſembler of bad tidings; reſolued to ſend his ſonne Druſus vnto theſe legions, with certaine of the principalleſt Gentlemen of the citie, and two Pretorian bands; without any limited commiſſion, but to determine there, as occaſion beſt required. Theſe bands were of extraordinary choiſe men, and ſtronger then any other were vſed to be, and a great part of his gard of horſemen, and the ableſt Germans of his owne gard. Aelius Seianus alſo Captaine of the gard was ſent with him, once an aſſociate and companion to Strabo his father, and a man highly in credit with Tiberius; as well to be a guide to the yong Prince, as to ſhew vnto others the danger or reward of ill or well doing. When Druſus was come neere vnto them, the legions met him as it were to do their dutie; but not as the manner was, cheerefully with glittering enſignes, but in baſe and abiect habit; and in countenance although pretending ſadnes, yet in deede were neerer wilfull obſtinacie. After he was entered the trench of the camp, they ſet a ſtrong gard at the gates, commanded ſome troupes to attend at certaine places of the camp, and the reſt came and enuironed the Tribunall in huge multitudes. Druſus ſtoode vp, and with his hand commaunded ſilence to be made. When the ſouldiers beheld what a multitude they were, they made a dreadfull noiſe with hideous tunes; then anon turning their eyes towards Caeſar, they quaked for feare: after that, they made a confuſe murmuring and buzzing; then a cruell outcry; and on a ſuddaine all was huſht againe; which bred as men were diuerſly affected, either a feare in themſelues, or in others. At laſt the tumult ceaſing, he read his fathers letters, which contained what a ſpeciall care he had ouer thoſe moſt valorous legions, with whome he had ſuſtained many battels; and that as ſoone as his minde could be at reſt, and the mourning for his father paſt, he would deale with the Lords of the Senate concerning their demaunds: that in the meane ſpace he had ſent his ſonne which ſhould graunt without delay, as much as for the preſent could conueniently be yeelded: and that the reſt ſhould be reſerued to the conſideration of the Senate, whom it was conuenient

ſhould iudge as well what deſerued fauour, as rigor and ſeueritie. They anſwered all in generall, that Clemens the Centurion had charge to propound their demaunds: he began with licence to depart after ſixteene yeares, with recompence after the end of their ſeruice: and that their wages might be a denarius a day; that the old ſouldiers ſhould not be conſtrained to continue vnder enſignes. But when Druſus began to pretend, that theſe were fit matters to be referred to the Lords of the Senate, and his fathers conſideration; they cut off his ſpeech with clamors, expoſtulating: That ſeeing he had no authority to augment their pay; nor eaſe them of their labor; nor benefit them any way; to what purpoſe was he come thither? But to beate and put them to death, euery man had authoritie. It was an old trick of Tiberius to fruſtrate the legions deſires, with the name of Augustus: and Druſus doth now put the ſame in practice. Shall they neuer haue any ſent them, but ſuch as are vnder the power of another? It was ſtrange, that the Emperour ſhould referre only that to the knowledge of the Senate, which concerned the ſouldiers commoditie. It were as requiſite the Senators aduiſe ſhould be knowne, when a ſouldier ſhould be puniſhed, or brought to fight in battell. Did it ſtand with reaſon, there ſhould be maiſters appointed, to diſpoſe of their rewards and recompence; and that without any iudge their puniſhments ſhould be arbitrary? At laſt they go from the Tribunal and threaten with their fiſts thoſe they met, of the gard, or Caeſars friends and familiars, as deſirous to pick quarrels, and raiſe ſedition. But they bare a ſpeciall grudge vnto Cn. Lentulus, becauſe that he, for his yeares, and experience in martiall feates, in greater reputation then the reſt; was thought to animate Druſus againſt the ſouldiers, and firſt of all reiect their licentious demaunds. Whom not long after (foreſeeing the danger he was in) going with Caeſar to the ſtanding camp, they enuironed him, asking whither he went? towards the Emperour, or towards the Senate? whether there he would be alſo againſt the legions profit? And withall comming fiercely vpon him, and throwing ſtones at him, all embrued in bloud, and certaine of preſent death, yet was ſuccoured by ſuch as came with Caeſar. That night, which menaced great diſorder, and outragious behauiour, was quieted by a meere chaunce. For the Skie being cleere and bright, yet the Moone ſeemed to be eclipſed on a ſudden; which the ſouldiers, being ignorant of the cauſe, conſtrued as a preſage of preſent ill lucke: and comparing their attempts, to the eclipſe; were of opinion that their ſucceſſe ſhould be proſperous, if the goddeſſe ſhould become cleere and bright againe. Whereupon they began with Trompets, Cornets, and other brazen inſtruments, to make a lowd noiſe, now ioyfull, now ſad, as the Moone appeared either cleere or darke. But when the black clowdes, riſing, tooke from them the ſight of the Moone, ſuppoſing ſhe had bene hidden in darknes, and vtterly loſt her light: as troubled minds fall eaſily into ſuperſtition, they began to complaine and lament, that, that portended their labours ſhould haue no end; and that the gods turned their faces from their wickednes. Caeſar thinking it expedient to make his profit of their feare; and gouerne that by wiſedome, which fortune had offered; commaunded the Pauillions to be viewed; Clemens the Centurion to be called, and ſuch others, as for their laudable vertues were beſt liked of the common ſort: who thruſting themſelues into the watch, the wardes, and gate-keepers, increaſed ſometimes their feare, and ſometimes promiſed hope, ſaying: How long ſhall we beſiege the Emperors ſonne? what ſhall be the end of our reuolt? ſhall we ſweare allegeance to Percennius and Vibulenus? ſhall we looke for our pay at their hands? ſhall they reward the old ſouldiers with lands? to be briefe, ſhall they take vpon them the gouernment of the Romane Empire, in Neroes and Druſus ſtead?

were it not better that as we were the laſt which offended; ſo we ſhould be the firſt to repent? Demaunds in common are ſlowly graunted: a priuat fauour is no ſooner deſerued, then obtained. Theſe ſpeeches troubled their mindes, and bred a miſtruſt among themſelues: the yong ſouldiers forſooke the old: and one legion parted from an other. By little and little they returned to their allegeance; went from the gates which before they poſſeſſed: carried to their vſuall places the enſignes, which in the beginning of their rebellion they had pitched together. Druſus the next morning calling an aſſembly, although he were no great Orator; yet the worthines of his birth ſupplying that want, he condemned their former, and commended their preſent behauior. Aſſured them that he was not to be ouercome with feare and threatning: but if he perceiued in them a modeſt cariage, intreatie of pardon with ſubmiſſion; he would write vnto his father, that forgetting that which was paſt, he would giue eare to the legions ſuites. At their intreatie Blaeſus, and L. Apronius, a Gentleman of Rome, and one of Druſus company, and Iustus Catonius a chiefe Centurion, were ſent againe to Tiberius. This done, Druſus counſellers diſagreed in opinions: ſome holding it expedient, that expecting the Embaſſadors returne; the ſouldiers in the meane ſeaſon ſhould be gently intreated: ſome that ſharp remedies ought to be vſed: affirming that there was no meane in the common people; and vnleſſe they were kept in awe, they would keepe others vnder. That they might eaſily be dealt withall whileſt they ſtoode in feare; and therefore it was needefull that they ſhould be brideled by their Generals authoritie: the ring-leaders of the reuolt executed, whileſt yet the ſuperſtition held them in aſtoniſhment. Hereupon Druſus being naturally of a rough diſpoſition, cauſed Percennius and Vibulenus to be put to death. Some ſay they were murdered in the Gouernors tent; others that their bodies were throwne out of the rampire to the terror of the reſt. After this, a ſearch was made for the principall captaines of the conſpiracie: whereof ſome roming about the camp, were ſlaine by the gard: others the ſouldiers themſelues deliuered, as a teſtimonie of their allegeance, into Druſus hands. But there did nothing more augment the ſouldiers diſtreſſed caſe, then an vntimely winter, continuall and cruell raines; that they could neyther put foote out of their tents; nor meete together: nor hardly keepe vp their ſtandarts, through boiſterous windes, and ſtormie ſhowers, toſſing them hither and thither. They were not yet rid of the feare, the heauens ire ſtroke them into: imagining that the ſtarres grew not darke in vaine againſt their wickednes; and that the tempeſts fell vpon them for their lewde and villanous demeanor. There was no comfort left, but to abandon thoſe vnlucky, and diſloyall camps; and being purged of their offence by ſome propitiatory ſacrifice, each legion to repaire to his ſtanding camp. The eight legion departed firſt; then the fifteenth. The ninth cried that they ought to tarry for Tiberius anſwere: but being diſcomfited by the others departure, preuenting imminent neceſſitie, voluntarily went away. Druſus not expecting the Embaſſadors returne, ſeeing all quiet for the preſent, went back to Rome.
            
            
               
                  VIII. A mutinie in Gallia, and many Centurions ſlaine: Germanicus loyaltie to Tiberius.
               ALmoſt at the ſame time, and for the ſame cauſes, the legions of Germanie rebelled: ſo much the more violently, by how much the more in number: with great hope that Germanicus Caeſar could neuer endure to be commanded by another: and that by following the humor of the legions, he would by main ſtrength

be maſter of all. There lay by the riuer of Rhene two armies: the one called the higher, vnder the Lieutenant C. Silius: the other the lower, vnder A. Caecina. But the Lord generall ouer them all, was Germanicus, then greatly buſied in leuying of ſubſidies and taxations in Gallia. Thoſe which Silius commanded, wauering and irreſolute, looked into the ſucceſſe of others reuolt: but the lower armie grewe into a rage and furie: the conſpiracie beginning by the one and twentith and fift legions, which drew alſo to their ſide the firſt and the twelfth: all of them being in the ſame ſommer campes, in the confines of Vbium, idle, or in very eaſie ſeruice. Aduertiſement being come of Augustus death, a multitude of citie-borne bond-men, and after made free, newly muſtered to be ſoldiers, giuen to licentiouſnes, and impatient of labour: began to fill the mindes of the ruder ſort, with theſe ſpeeches. That the time was now come, that the olde ſoldier might demand a ſhorter time of ſeruice; the new greater pay; and all in generall an end of their miſeries: and opportunitie giuen to reuenge the crueltie of the Centurions. This was not ſpoken by one alone, as when Percennius incited the legions of Pannonie▪ nor vnto daſtards looking that men of better courage than they ſhould begin: but many ſeditious mouthes and voices, were at once heard to ſay; that the whole Romane ſtate was in their hands; that by their victories it was growen great: and that of them the Emperors tooke their ſurname. The Lieutenant, the rage of the multitude hauing taken away his conſtancie, durſt not reſiſt them: when on the ſudden like frantike men, with their ſwords drawen (a very olde ſubiect of quarrell and hatred in ſoldiers, and a beginning of crueltie) they fell on the Centurions; threw them along; laide them on with ſtripes; three ſcore to one, to make euen number with the Centurions. And hauing thus mangled and torne them, and ſlaine ſome, they threw them out of the trench, or into the riuer of Rhene. Among others Septimius fled to the Tribunall, and caſt himſelfe at Caecinaes feete: but was with ſuch importunacie demanded, that he could not but deliuer him to the butcherie. Caſsius Chaerea (famous afterward to poſteritie for murdering C. Caeſar) then a yoong man, but of a ſtout and braue courage, made way with his ſword, through ſuch, as armed, went about to hinder his paſſage. After that neither Tribune, nor campe-maſter was obeied; the watch and warde, and whatſoeuer the preſent time required, was ordered, and diſtributed among themſelues. Thoſe which deepely looked into the diſpoſition of ſoldiers; iudged it a ſtrong argument, of a great and implacable reuolt, that they were not ſcattered and diuided; nor any attempt giuen by a few; but grew inſolent altogither: were quiet at once: with ſuch a moderation and conſtancie, that thou wouldeſt haue thought they had been gouerned by one head. In the meane ſeaſon, newes was brought to Germanicus (who as I haue ſaid, was leuying of ſubſidies and tributes in Gallia) that Augustus was departed. Germanicus had married Auguſtus niece Agrippina, and had by hir many children, and was Druſus, Tiberius brothers ſonne, and nephew to Auguſta: but greatly perplexed, by reaſon of his vncles and grandmothers ſecret hatred towards him; ſo much the more deepe and deadly, bicauſe vniuſt. This proceeded of the good will and remembrance which the people of Rome had of Druſus: all of them certainly beleeuing, that if he had gotten the ſoueraigntie, he would haue ſct libertie on foote againe: and hoping the like of Germanicus, bare him the like affection. This yoong Prince was of a milde diſpoſition, very courteous, nothing at all reſembling Tiberius in countenance, or couert and arrogant ſpeech. Beſides this, womens quarrels were mingled among, Liuia (as is the maner of all ſtepdames) exaſperating Tiberius againſt Agrippina: a woman indeede eaſily mooued: but through hir chaſtitie, and loue towards hir husband, though otherwiſe

of an inuincible ſtomacke, yet turned all to the beſt. But the neerer Germanicus was to the higheſt hope, the more he labored to ſettle Tiberius in the ſtate: compelling the Sequans adioining, and the cities of Belgia to ſweare their allegeance vnto him. Then vnderſtanding of the hurly burly of the legions, departing in all ſpeede, met the ſoldiers out of their campe, hanging downe the head; repenting them of that they had done. He was no ſooner within the trench, but there was heard a confuſe lamentation and complaint among them: ſome taking him by the hand as it were to kiſſe it, thruſt his fingers into their mouthes, that he might feele they were toothleſſe: others ſhewed their crooked bodies with age. Who perceiuing them confuſely ſhuffled togither, commanded to ſeparate themſelues into companies, the eaſier to heare his anſwere: and beare their enſignes before them; the better to diſcerne their bands: wherein they obeied ſlowly ynough. Germanicus beginning with the reuerence of Auguſtus, fell by little and little into the praiſe of the victories and triumphes, and eſpecially the famous exploites Tiberius had done in Germanie with thoſe legions. Then extolled the vnitie of Italie; the loyaltie of Gallia; and how all other partes of the empire were quiet. The ſoldiers gaue eare vnto all this with ſilence, or with a ſmall murmuring: but as ſoone as he began to touch their mutinies; expoſtulating; What was become of the modeſt behauiour of ſoldiers? where was the honor of ancient diſcipline? whither they had driuen their Tribunes and Centurions? they all vnclothed themſelues, ſhewed him their wounds, ſcars, and marks of their ſtripes: then with a confuſe note, how deerely they bought their eaſe and vacations; found fault with their ſmall pay; the intolerable paines they were put to in working: by name condemning the rampires, trenches, ſeeking of ſtower, carrying of ſtones & timber, and all other prouiſions, either neceſſarie in the campe; or to keepe the ſoldiers from idlenes. But the greateſt clamors were heard to proceede from the old ſoldiers; whereof ſome hauing ſpent thirtie yeeres in ſeruice, ſome more; beſought him to prouide for ſuch ouer wearied poore ſoldiers; and not ſuffer them to end the reſt of their daies, in miſerie and paine: but deliuered of ſuch labor and toiles, that they might at length enioie repoſe without penurie. Some demanded the legacie bequeathed by Auguſtus wil, and wiſhed Germanicus all good fortune; offering themſelues to his deuotion if he would take vpon him the empire. Whereat, as though he had beene diſtained with ſome villanie; he leapt from the Tribunall: and as he would haue departed: the ſoldiers turned their weapons towards him in menacing wiſe: vnleſſe he would go backe againe. But crying that he would rather die, than falſifie his faith: drew his ſword from his ſide; bent the point of it towards his breſt, readie to haue thruſt it in; if ſome which were neere him by catching hold of his hand, had not withheld him by maine ſtrength. That part of the throng which was fartheſt behinde, and which is ſcarce credible, ſome other getting neerer & neerer, encouraged him to ſtrike boldly; and one called Caluſidius, offered him his naked ſword; ſaying that it was better pointed than his. But that euen to the moſt furious, was thought a barbarous and ſauage part, and an euill preſident. Caeſars friends had time to conduct him to his pauilion: there they conſulted what was beſt to be done; bicauſe newes came, that the ſoldiers were in hande to diſpatch embaſſadors to the higher armie, to drawe them to the ſame attempt: and that they had determined to ſacke Colen; and hauing imbrued their hands with that pray, run on to pill and waſte Gallia.
            
            
               
               
                  IX. Order is taken against the diſorder, by yeelding to the ſoldiers requests: Germanicus ſendeth away his vvife and children.
               
                  GErmanicus feared ſo much the more, bicauſe he knew the enimie woulde not faile to inuade, as ſoone as he vnderſtood of the diſſenſion within Rome, and that the riuers ſide was vndefended. On the other ſide, if the allies and confederates ſhoulde arme themſelues againſt the legions, it was to begin a new ciuill war. And that it was to the ſtate dangerous a like; to vſe either ſeueritie or liberalitie: and no leſſe, to graunt the ſoldier all thing or nothing. The matter being thus debated on both ſides, it was thought good, that letters ſhould be written in the princes name, containing: that ſuch as had ſerued twentie yeeres, ſhould be fully diſmiſſed: and ſuch as ſixteene, diſcharged alſo; with condition onely to remaine vnder enſignes, and repulſe the enimie. That their legacies left them by Augustus, ſhould be doubled and paied. The ſoldier perceiued that thoſe were ſleights to win time; and therefore vrged a preſent execution: licence of departure was preſently yeelded by the Tribunes; but paiment deferred. The fift, and one and twentieth legion, refuſed to go to any ſtanding campe; vntill they had their paie in the ſame camps they ſerued in. Which they receiued of ſuch prouiſion, as Caeſar could either make by his friends, or had to ſerue his owne turne. Caecina the Lieutenant brought backe to Vbium, the firſt, and the twentieth legion, in baſe & diſorderly aray: carying between the enſignes and ſtandarts, maſſes of money, extorted from the Emperos treaſure. Germanicus went to the vpper armie, and there without delaie, tooke the oath of allegeance, of the ſecond, thirteen, and ſixteenth legion; the fowerteenth yet reſting doubtfull what were beſt. But they had all their diſcharge and money offered them vnasked. At the ſame time, certaine vexiliarie ſoldiers which continued vnder enſignes, and were placed for a guarde to the countrey, of two legions which before were at iarre, began a tumult in the countrey of the Chauceans: which was quickly ſuppreſſed by putting to death two of the ſoldiers. Which Mennius the Camp-maſter commanded rather for example, then right of his office. But the tumult growing hot, Mennius fled; and being found out, perceiuing that there was no ſafetie in lurking, tried what boldnes coulde auaile: ſaying; That they bent not their forces againſt the Camp-maſter; but againſt Germanicus their Generall, and Tiberius the Emperor: perceauing that thoſe words daunted ſuch as would haue hindered him, ſnatching vp an enſigne, went to the riuer ſide; and denouncing him a fugitiue and traitor which refuſed to follow; brought them to the winter ſtanding campe, aſtonied, and not daring to attempt any thing. In the meane ſeaſon the embaſſadors ſent from the Senate to Germanicus, found him at Vbium, at the place called the Altar. Where two legions, the firſt and the twentieth wintered, with the old ſoldiers lately diſmiſſed and kept vnder enſignes. The timorous and troubled in conſcience, were ſurpriſed with a ſudden feare, leaſt ſome were come by commandement of the Senate, to make fruſtrate all, they had wrung out by rebellion. And as the manner of the people is, alwaies falſely to accuſe ſome one or other whom they ſuſpect: ſo now they laide all the blame, on Munatius Plancus; who had beene Conſull and chiefe in the Embaſie: affirming him to be the author of that decree. And in the dead of the night, went to Germanicus, importunately demanding an enſigne which was in his houſe: and flocking togither brake downe the gates: entered his houſe; drew Germanicus out of his bed; and threatening to kill him, forced him

to deliuer the enſigne. Then running vp and downe, they met with the embaſſadors, hearing of the deſperate tumult, going to Germanicus: the ſoldiers iniuring them, and readie to kill them: and aboue others Plancus, who in regarde of his dignitie coulde not flee: hauing no other refuge left in diſtreſſe and danger, then to flie to the campe of the firſt legion: where imbracing the ſtandard and enſignes, founde ſafetie as in a religious place. And had not Calphurnius, the ſtandard bearer, garded him from the furie of the ſoldiers (a thing which ſeldome hapneth, euen among the enimies) an embaſſador of the people of Rome, in the Romans campe, had with his bloud polluted the altars of the gods. Aſſoone as it was daie, that the L. Generall, the ſoldier, and the attempts might be knowen; Germanicus entered the campe: and commanding Plancus to be brought to him, placed him in the Tribunall by him. Then ſharpely rebuking their fatall rage, ſtirred vp by the wrath of the gods, and not the ſoldiers will: he openeth vnto them the cauſe of the embaſſadors comming: their priuiledges: bewailing with great eloquence, Plancus vndeſerued hap; and the diſcredit of the legions. And hauing rather rauiſhed then quieted the aſſemblie, ſent away the embaſſadors with a garde of auxiliarie horſemen. During this feare, euerie man blamed Germanicus, that he went not to the vpper armie, where he ſhoulde haue both obedience, and aide againſt the rebels: that his fault had beene great inough, in diſmiſſing the ſoldiers with money in their purſes, and vſing them ſo curteouſly. And if he made no greater reckoning of his owne perſon; yet he had no reaſon to leaue his yoong ſonne, and his wife great with childe, as a praie to furious and mad men; breakers of all humane lawes. And that he ſhould preſerue them, at the leaſtwiſe, for their grandfather, and the common-wealth. He then weighing long what he were beſt to reſolue: his wife refuſing to forſake him; alleaging, that ſhe was deſcended from Augustus, and proteſting that ſhe would neuer degenerate from hir bloud, whatſoeuer danger might be preſented: at laſt embracing both hir and the child, with manie teares conſtrained hir to depart. Away then packt this lamentable companie of women; and the Generals wife: fleeing with his little ſonne in hir lap, with a heauie troupe of hir friends wiues about hir, lead away with hir for companie: thoſe which remained behinde, no leſſe ſorrowfull then they. This reſembled not a triumphing Caeſar, marching out of his campe: but the bewailing and lamentation of a citie, conquered and ſackt of the enimie. Which piercing the eares of the ſoldiers: they went out of their cabbines; enquiring what that dolorous tune was? and from whence proceeded that lamentable noiſe? And perceiuing thoſe noble dames to go without any Centurion or ſoldier, to garde them; and their Emperours wife deſtitute of hir accuſtomed traine, going towards Treuers, to commit hirſelfe to the mercie of ſtrangers: were ſtroken into ſhame and compaſſion: when they called to minde Agrippa hir father, Augustus hir grandfather, and Druſus hir father in lawe: and how ſhe hir-ſelfe was for hir chaſtitie and childe bearing, honored of al: and how ſhe had had, a childe borne and brought vp in their campe: whom by a militarie name they called Caligula: bicauſe that to win the fauour of the common ſoldier, he wore the ſame kinde of ſtocking or buskin as he did. But nothing did mooue them more, then the hatred to thoſe of Treuers: and therefore began to intreat, and hinder their going; praying hir that ſhe would returne and remaine with them. Some ran before Agrippina; many turned backe to Germanicus: who through the late occaſions, yet full of griefe and anger, vttered to the multitudes about him, this ſpeech as followeth.
            
            
               
               X. Germanicus Oration to the ſouldiers: the feare the Citie vvas in.
               
                  NOt my wife, or ſonne, are deerer vnto me, then my father and the Common-wealth: but him, his owne Maieſtie; the Empire, the other armies ſhall defend. I do now remoue my wife and children (which neuertheles I would willingly offer vnto death, were it to your glory and honor) from the ſight of raging mad men: that all your lewd actions be purged with my bloud only; leaſt if you ſhould murder Augustus nephewes ſonne, and Tiberius daughter in law, you ſhould become guiltie of moe hainous crimes: for what haue you not dared to attempt theſe daies paſt? or what haue you left vnuiolated? By what name ſhall I call this aſſembly? Shall I call you ſouldiers, who haue beſieged your Emperors ſonne euen within the trench? or ſhall I call you citizens, by whom the authoritie of the Senate is ſo little regarded? You haue broken that law which one enemy obſerueth to another: violated the ſacred freedome of Embaſſadors, and the lawe of Nations. Iulius of famous memory, repreſſed a ſedition in his army with one bare word: calling ſuch Quirites, which drew back countrary to their oath of allegeance. Auguſtus of ſacred memory, daunted the legions at Actium, with his looke. And as for vs, although we be neither of them, yet being extract from them, we thinke it ſtrange and vnmeete, that the Spaniſh or Syrian ſouldier ſhould contemne vs. Thou the firſt legion, and thou the twentith, the one hauing receiued enſignes of Tiberius, and the other a companion in ſo many battels, and enriched with ſo many recompences, do you thus guerdon your Generall? Is this the meſſage I ſhall carry my father (who receiueth but good tidings from all other Prouinces) that neither the yong, nor old ſouldier, can be ſatisfied with licence to depart, nor money in their purſe? And that heere only, the Centurions are murdered, the Tribunes driuen away, the Embaſſadors ſhut vp? that the tents and riuers are ſtained with bloud? and that I my ſelfe, hold my life but at the curteſie of ſuch as hate me? Why did you ſnatch out of my hands, the ſword which I meant to thruſt through my breaſt, the firſt day of our meeting? O vnaduiſed friends: yet he dealt better and more louingly with me, which offered me his ſword; for by that meanes I ſhould haue ended my life, before I ſhould haue ſeene ſo many outrages in my army. You ſhould haue made choiſe of a Generall, which would haue left my death vnpuniſhed; yet haue reuenged the death of Varo, and of the three legions. The gods forbid, that the Belgians, though offering themſelues, ſhould carry away the credit and the honor of ſuccouring the Romanes, and brideling the Germans. Let thy ſoule, Auguſtus of ſacred memorie, receiued into heauen, thy image father Druſus, and the remembrance of thee, together with theſe ſouldiers whom ſhame and glory do enter into, wipe away this blot, and conuert this priuate rancor, to the deſtruction of the enemie. And you, in whom I perceiue another countenance and another will, if you purpoſe to reſtore the Embaſſadors to the Senate; yeeld dutifull obedience to the Emperour; and me, my wife and ſonne: withdraw your ſelues from the contagion of the ſeditious, and go from them which haue beene the authors of this rebellion: that ſhall be a ſure token of your repentance, and a bond of fidelitie. With theſe ſpeeches the ſouldiers humbling themſelues, confeſſed all to be true which was vpbraided them: and beſought him that he would puniſh the faultie, and pardon thoſe which were ſeduced, and bring them againſt the enemie: recall his wife and the legions child; and not deliuer him to the Gaules for an hoſtage. Germanicus
                  
excuſed the returne of his wife by the neerenes of her time, and winter; yet that his ſonne ſhould returne againe: and as for other things, that they themſelues ſhould ſee them performed. The ſouldiers then, being better perſwaded, ran from place to place, layd hands on the moſt diſordered perſons, and brought them bound before C. Cetronius, Colonel of the firſt legion: who gaue iudgement and puniſhment on euery of them in this manner. The legions called together, ſtoode with their ſwords drawne before the Tribunal: and the offender ſhewen by the Tribune out of a high ſeate: and if the ſouldiers did cry that he was guiltie, he was immediately throwne downe headlong, and cut in peeces: the ſouldier reioyſing in theſe maſſacres, as though himſelfe thereby had bene acquited. Germanicus did not hinder them at all, ſeeing, that being done without his commaundement, as well the fact, as the enuie of it, ſhould light vpon their owne necks. The old ſouldiers following that preſident, were anon after ſent to Raetia, vnder colour of defending the prouince, from the inuaſion of the Sweuians: but in deede, to draw them from thoſe garriſons; yet breathing of crueltie, no leſſe by that cruel meanes of redreſſe, then memorie of their former outrages. This done, he tooke a ſuruey of the Centurions: who being called by the Captaine, told their names, degrees, and countrey, what payes they had receiued, and how many yeares: what exploits they had done in ſeruice, and with what donatiues rewarded. If the Tribunes and legions approued their valour and integritie, they kept their roomes: if by common conſent, couetouſnes, or crueltie were laid to their charge, they were caſſirde. Things thus ſetled for the preſent, there aroſe immediately, a matter of no leſſer waight then the former, through the headie inſolencie of the fift, and one and twentith legion, lodged in winter ſtandings threeſcore miles off, at Vetera. For they firſt led the daunce, and with their owne hands, committed the lewdeſt outrages: Nothing terrified with their fellowes puniſhment, continued impenitent, and ſtill harbored anger in their breaſts. Whereupon Caeſar gathereth forces, prepareth a Nauy with confederates and allies, to ſend downe the Rhene: purpoſing if they were obſtinate, to try it out in a maine battell. No tidings being all this while brought to Rome, of the ſucceſſe in Illyricum: and vnderſtanding of the riſing of the Germaine legions; the citie trembling with feare, began to blame Tiberius, that counterfeiting a doubtfulnes of taking on him the Empire, mocked the Lords of the Senate, the weake & vnfurniſhed common people, and ſuffered the ſeditious in the meane time to rebell, which by the weake authoritie of two yong men could not be ſuppreſſed. That he ſhould therefore haue gone himſelfe in perſon, and oppoſed his imperiall maieſtie againſt them; at whoſe ſight they would preſently haue yeelded, being by long experience skilfull, and carrying with him power to puniſh, or reward. If Augustus ſtriken in yeares, could make often iourneies into Germanie: ſhould Tiberius being of a ſtrong and able bodie, ſit in the Senate, carping the Senators words? He had taken good order how to keepe the citie in ſeruitude: and that it was now time to applie ſome medicine to the ſouldiers minde, to induce them to a diſpoſition of peace. Notwithſtanding Tiberius ſtanding ſtiffe in his determination, reſolued not to forſake the head of the empire, and hazard himſelfe and the whole ſtate. Many things troubled his minde: as that the Germane armie was the ſtrongeſt: and the Pannonian neere at hand: the one leaning to the ſtrength of the Gaules: the other, lying in the confines of Italie: doubtfull himſelfe which firſt to go to; leaſt the other being poſtpoſed ſhould take it in diſdaine. But his ſonnes, might viſit both: as a thing ſtanding well with imperiall maieſtie, bearing greater ſtate fartheſt off. The yoong men might be excuſed if they referred ſome things

to their father: and if they ſhould reſiſt Germanicus and Druſus, he ſhould be able to appeaſe or ouerthrowe them. But if they ſhould ſet light by the Emperor, what remedie could be then looked for? Neuertheles as though he would depart out of hand, he made choiſe of his followers, prouided his carriages in a readines, prepared ſhipping; then excuſing himſelfe, now with the hardnes of the winter; now with this, now with that: he deceiued firſt the wiſe, then the vulgar ſort, and the prouinces a very long time.
            
            
               
                  XI. The first and the ninth legion kill many of the rebels: Germanicus ouer commeth the Marſeans, beateth dovvne the temple of Tanfana. The death of Iulia.
               
               BVt Germanicus, although he had an armie in a readines to reuenge vpon the rebels: thinking it conuenient neuertheles, to giue them ſome reſpite; to ſee whether they would be reclaimed by the example of the other legions: ſent letters before to aduertiſe Cecina, that he was comming with a power: and that if they would not puniſh the offenders before his comming, he would without any reſpect make a generall ſlaughter of them all. Theſe letters Cecina ſecretly imparted to the ſtandard and enſigne bearers, and the better ſort: perſwading them to deliuer all in generall from infamie, and themſelues from death. For in time of peace each mans cauſe and merit was waighed; but in warre, the guiltie and guiltleſſe periſhed alike. They then ſounding the mindes of thoſe they thought fitteſt, and finding the greater number of the legionarie ſoldiers to continue dutifull; following the Lieutenants aduice, ſet downe a time when to cut off the lewdeſt, and moſt ſeditious among them. Then the watch-word giuen, they breake into their tents; ſlue them; none priuie to the cauſe but ſuch, as were of counſell in the enterpriſe: neither imagining the beginning, nor the ende of this butcherie. The ſtrangeſt manner of ciuill warre that euer happened was this: for without order of battell; not ſallying out of diuers ſtandings; but out of the ſame beds, in which they had eaten by day, and ſlept by night: they banded into factions; lanced their dartes: outcries were heard; wounds giuen; blood ſhed; but the cauſe vnknowen: fortune ruled the reſt, and ſome honeſt men were ſlaine among. But it was no ſooner knowne againſt whom this watch was intended, but the worſt perſons ſnatched their weapons likewiſe: no Lieutenant, nor Tribune preſent to bridle them: but euery man licenced to reuenge his fill. Germanicus anon after entering the camp, with many teares calling that a butchery, and not a medicine, commaunded the bodies to be burnt. The bloudie ſouldiers thirſted after the enemie, as a ſatisfaction of his furie: ſuppoſing that the ghoſts of their companions could by no other meanes be appeaſed, then by receiuing honorable wounds in their wicked breaſts. Caeſar followed the ſouldiers heate, and building a bridge ouer the riuer, paſt ouer twelue thouſand, drawen out of the legions; ſixe and twentie cohorts of allies: and eight wings of ſuch horſemen, as during the mutinie, were of good and modeſt cariage. The Germanes not farre off were iocand: whileſt we for the death of Augustus, and by ciuill diſcords, kept holy day. The Romane army marching with ſpeede, paſt the wood Caeſia; and the bound begun by Tiberius, and encamped vpon it: fortifying the front and the back with a trench, and the ſides with loppings of trees. From thence they marched through darke forreſts, and conſulting of two waies, which was beſt: the ſhort and vſuall: or the vnbeaten and hardeſt: and therefore leaſt doubted of the enemie. And hauing made choiſe of the longeſt, they

haſtened other things the more. For the ſcoutes had brought word, that the Germans would ſpend that night in ſolemne feaſting and banquetting. Cecina had charge to leade the way with a cohort lightly armed, and make plaine the paſſage of the wood; whom the legions immediately followed. The ſtarre-light helped them, till they came to the villages of the Marſies: whom they beſet round; being yet either a bed, or at table; without feare, and no watch ſet. So farre had they left all things at randon; nothing miſdoubting warre; nor, being drunke, greatly caring for peace. Caeſar deuided the legions greedy of pillage to waſte the more ground, into foure pointed battels; and deſtroyed with fire and ſword, fiftie miles; neither age nor ſexe, mouing him to pitie: profane and ſacred places, and the temple called Tanfana, a place of great fame among thoſe people, he battered to the ground: the Romanes receiuing no wound, but ſlaying the enemie halfe a ſleepe; or vnarmed, and ſtragling without order or aray. That ſlaughter ſtirred vp the Bructeri, Tubantes, and the Vſipetes; who beſet the wood, that way the army ſhould returne. Whereof the Captaine being aduertiſed, he marſhalled his men in order at once, both to march and fight. Part of the horſemen with auxiliary cohorts lead the way: after them followed the firſt legion: the cariages incloſed in the middeſt, had on the left ſide the 21. legion; on the right, the fift: in the rereward, the twentith; and after them the reſt of the confederates. But the enemie ſtirred not whileſt the Romane camp marched through the wood: then lightly skirmiſhing with the flanks and the formen; ſet amaine on the hindmoſt: who being but ſlenderly appointed, and amazed with the thick troupes of Germans, were readie to ſhrinke: had not Caeſar ſtepped to the twentith legion; crying alowd, that now was the time to blot out the infamies of their former conſpiracies: and ſhew valoure; and make haſte to turne their former fault into glory and honor. This ſpeech ſo inflamed their courages, that breking in ſuddainly vpon the enemies, droue them to an open place, and hewed them in peeces: and the vantgard getting out of the wood, began incontinently to fortifie and intrench. After that, they marched without diſturbance: emboldened with their late ſucceſſe, and forgetting what was paſt, were brought to their ſtanding camps. Theſe newes made Tiberius both glad and ſory: glad, that the ſedition was ſuppreſſed: ſory, that Germanicus had purchaſed the ſouldiers fauour by largeſſe, and timely diſmiſſing them: not alittle grieued alſo with the glory that Germanicus got in that warre. Yet he imparted theſe newes to the Senate, highly commending his exploites: rather in colour and ſhew of words, then beleeued that he ſpake from the hart. Druſus he commended alſo; and the ſucceſſe of the Illirian rebellions, in fewer words, but more vnfainedly, and with better affection; yet confirmed all that Germanicus had graunted; and gaue the like to the armies in Pannonie. The ſame yeare Iulia dyed: confined firſt by Augustus her father for her vnchaſt life, in the Iland Pandateria: then in Rhegium, a towne ſeated vpon the Sicilian ſea. She had beene Tiberius wife, whom ſhe contemned as an vnfit match for her; whileſt Caius and Lucius flouriſhed: which was the very inward and ſecret cauſe, why Tiberius withdrew himſelfe to Rhodes. But hauing gotten to be Emperour, and that by the death of Agrippa Poſthumus, her hopes were cut off; baniſhed and infamous, with great want hungerſtarued her: perſwading himſelfe that her long baniſhment, would haue ſmothered the ſpeech of her death. The like occaſion egged him to the like crueltie againſt Semp. Gracchus: who nobly deſcended, quick witted, and eloquent to perſwade to naughtines; ſeduced the ſame Iulia to lewdenes when ſhe was M. Agrippas wife. Neither was that the end of their licentiouſnes; but the wilfull adulterer abuſed her companie, when ſhe was Tiberius
                  
wife: incenſing her to diſobedience and diſlike. Diuers ſuppoſing that the bitter letters, which ſhe ſent to Augustus her father againſt Tiberius, were of his inditing. Whereupon being baniſhed to Cercina, an Iland in the Affrican ſea, after foureteene yeares exile: the ſouldiers ſent to put him to death, found him on the ſhore as one expecting bad tidings. Of whom he requeſted ſome ſhort time, to write his laſt will to Alliaria his wife; which being done, he offered his neck to the executioners: in the conſtancie of his death, not vnworthy the Sempronian name; though in his life he had degenerated. Some gaue out, that thoſe ſouldiers were not ſent from Rome, but from L. Aſprenas, Proconſull of Affrike, by Tiberius appointment; hoping though in vaine, that the infamie of the murder ſhould redound to Aſprenas diſcredit. This yeare were inſtituted new ceremonies, by founding a ſocietie of Prieſts, called Auguſtales: as in times paſt T. Tatius, deſirous to continue certaine religious ſolemnities of the Sabins, ordained a companie of Prieſts called Titians. One and twentie of the chiefeſt of the citie were drawne by lot, and Tiberius, Druſus, Claudius, and Germanicus added to the number. Theſe playes at their firſt beginning, were diſturbed by a contention riſing betwixt ſtage players: Augustus himſelfe fauoring the ſport, to pleaſe Mecaenas; who was exceedingly caried away with affection towards Bathillus, and himſelfe not diſliking them, thought it no vnciuill matter, to ſhew himſelfe at thoſe diſports, amongſt the common people. But Tiberius was of an other humor; yet durſt not on the ſudden reduce the people to a ſtraighter courſe, which ſo many yeares before had bene nuzled in pleaſure and eaſie vſage.
            
            
               
                  XII. Germanicus inuadeth the Chatti. A ſtrife betweene two noble men of Germanie, Armihius and Segeſtes. Arminius wife is taken.
               
                  DRuſus Nero and C. Narbo being Conſuls, a triumph was ordained in honor of Germanicus, the war yet continuing: for which although great preparation was made for the ſommer following; yet he by a ſudden incurſion made on the Chatti, did anticipate it in the beginning of the ſpring. For a rumor bred a hope, that the enimies were banded into factions, ſome fauoring Arminius; and others Segestes: the one moſt loyall; and the other moſt diſloyall vnto vs. Arminius diſquieted Germanie: Segeſtes diſcouered often to Varus, but eſpecially in the laſt banket, after which armes were taken, a rebellion intended: and counſelled him to caſt himſelfe, Arminius and the chiefeſt of the conſpirators into priſon: the people not daring any attempt, the ringleaders being taken away; and that he ſhould haue time thereby to ſift out the offenders from the innocent. But Varus by deſtinie, and Arminius violence died. And although Segestes was by common conſent drawen to the war, yet he ſhewed himſelfe very backward by his priuate grudge againſt Arminius increaſing more and more; bicauſe he had taken away by force his daughter betrothed to another. Thus then the ſonne in lawe being odious to the father: the fathers in lawe at vtter defiance betwixt themſelues; that which ſhould ſerue for a bond of friendſhip among friends, ſerued here for a prouocation of wrath and malice. Whereupon Germanicus committed fower legions to Cecinaes charge, fiue thouſand auxiliaries, and certaine Germain bands leuied in haſte, inhabiting the hither ſide of Rhene. Himſelfe conducted the like number of legions, with twiſe as many confederates: and hauing builded a fort on the hill Taunus, where his father before him had appointed a garriſon, led his armie without encombrance againſt

the Chatti; leauing L. Apronius behinde him, to mend and make ſure the paſſages by land and riuers: for by reaſon of a drought, and lowneſſe of the waters (a thing ſeldome ſeene in that countrie) they had marched a good way without danger; but feared raine and riſing of the water at his returne. But his comming was ſo ſudden vpon the Chatti; that the weaker ſort by age, or ſexe, were preſently either taken or ſlaine: the yoong men ſwam ouer the riuer Adrana, and draue backe the Romans, which began a bridge: But at laſt driuen away themſelues with ſhot of arrowes and other engins, entreating in vaine of conditions of peace: ſome fled to Germanicus: the reſt abandoning their villages and houſes, diſperſed themſelues in the woods. Germanicus hauing burned Mattium the capitall citie of the countrey, returned toward the Rhene: the enimie not daring to ſet on him as he retired, as his manner is, when he gaue grounde, rather vpon policie then feare. The Cheruſci woulde willingly haue ſuccoured the Chatti; but Caecinaes armie fleeting from place to place, kept them in awe: and ouerthrew the Marſi, which ventured to ioine battell with him. Shortly after embaſſadors came from Segeſtes, to craue aid againſt the violence of his countriemen, which had beſieged him: Arminius bearing greater ſway, bicauſe he incited them to warre. For among barbarous people, the more audacious a man ſheweth himſelfe, the more loiall he is reputed; and the fitteſt inſtrument in troubled times. Segestes ioined his ſonne Sigiſmond to theſe embaſſadors; but being touched in conſcience, was vnwillingly drawn to it: bicauſe that when the Germans rebelled, being prieſted at the altar of the Vbians, he brake his head-bande, which was the marke of his calling, and fled to the rebels. Yet truſting in the Romans clemencie, fulfilled his fathers commandement; and being courteouſly, receiued was conueied with a garde, to the ſhores of Gallia. After this Germanicus thought it conuenient, to conuert his power againſt thoſe which beſieged Segestes, whom he deliuered, with a great number of his kindred, and followers. Among whom there were many noble dames, and Segestes daughter, Arminius wife; affecting rather hir husband than father; and being taken, not once falling a teare, nor crauing fauor, ioining hir hands on hir breaſt, looked down vpon hir great belly. The ſpoiles of Varus ouerthrowe were at the ſame time brought in and diſtributed, as a bootie to the greateſt part of ſuch, as had yeelded themſelues with Segestes. Who with a comely maieſtie, and bolde courage, and loyaltie to the Romans, began a ſpeech in this maner. This is not the firſt day that the people of Rome, hath had experience of my conſtancie and loyaltie: for ſince Augustus of famous memorie, gaue me the priuileges of a citizen of Rome; I made choiſe of ſuch friends or enimies, as might ſtand you in ſtead: not for any hatred to my countrie (for traitors are odious euen to thoſe whoſe inſtruments they be) but bicauſe I iudged it profitable alike to the Romans and Germans: and preferred peace before war: for this cauſe I accuſed Arminius, rauiſher of my daughter, and infringer of the league concluded with you, before Varus the generall. But when I was by the ſlacknes of the generall deferred to a farther day of hearing, hauing ſmall hope of ſupport in lawes; I beſought him earneſtly, that he would commit me, Arminius, and the reſt of the conſpirators, to ſtraight cuſtodie. I call to witnes that night (which if it had pleaſed the gods I would it had been my laſt) in which thoſe things enſued, which deſerue rather to be bewailed, than maintained. In fine, I laide irons on Arminius, and ſuffered the ſame in my ſelfe, by his faction. But ſeeing you haue vouchſafed me your preſence; I prefer old quietnes before new garboiles; not hoping for any reward thereby; but onely to excuſe my ſelfe from diſloyaltie, and to ſerue for a conuenient meanes of reconciliation for the German nation, if they will

rather repent than periſh. For my ſonnes youth and error I craue pardon: my daughter I confeſſe, was drawen hither by force. It reſteth in you to determine, whether it ought to be of greater force, to be with childe by Arminius; or be begotten by me. Caeſar with a milde anſwere, promiſed his children & his kindred ſafetie: and himſelfe his ancient ſeate in the prouince. This done he bringeth backe his armie, and with Tiberius liking, tooke vpon him the name of Emperor. Arminius wife was deliuered of a ſonne; which was brought vp at Rauenna; of whom we will ſpeake more hereafter, and how he ſerued for fortunes ſcorne.
            
            
               
                  XIII. Arminius ſtirreth the Germans to warre: ſeeketh reuenge: What danger Caecina vvas in. Germanicus burieth the legions vvhich vvere ſlaine vvith Varus.
               
               THe newes being ſpred of Segestes yeelding, and gentle vſage, as mens mindes were affected to peace or warre; ſo they were mooued with hope or griefe. Arminius being fierce of his owne diſpoſition vnderſtanding that his wife was taken priſoner, and the fruite of hir wombe, a bonde ſlaue; became as it were mad: and raunging the Cheruſcians countrey; craued for ſuccour againſt Segeſtes, and Caeſar; not being able to containe for outragious ſpeeches: ſaieng That, that muſt needes be a braue father, a mightie Emperor, a woorthie armie, that coulde, with ſo much helpe, carrie awaie one ſillie woman. He had defeated three legions, and ſo many lieutenants: not by treaſon, nor againſt women great with childe, but in the face of the enimie, and againſt armed men, atchieued his enterpriſes. And that the enſignes, which he had taken from the Romans, were to be ſeene in the woods of Germanie, offered vp in honour of their countrey gods. Let Segestes inhabite the conquered banks; and reſtore his ſonne to his prieſtlie dignitie: that the Germans coulde neuer excuſe it: that the Romans haue beene ſeene to beare their roddes, their axes, and gownes betweene Abbis and Rhene. Other nations being ſtrangers to the Romane gouernment, could ſpeak nothing, of their cruell puniſhments and grieuous tributes: and ſeeing they had ſhaken off thoſe burdens; and that, that Augustus whom they placed among the gods, and Tiberius choſen after him, loſt their labour; they ſhoulde not feare an vnexperienced yoong man, nor his mutinous companie. If they preferred their countrey; their kindred; their auncient life, before newe lordes, and newe colonies; they ſhould rather follow Arminius, protector of their glory and libertie, then Segestes the author of reprochfull ſeruitude. Theſe ſpeeches incenſed not only the Cheruſcians, but the neighbors adioyning alſo; and drew Inguiomerus, a man once in credit with the Romans, and vncle to Arminius by the fathers ſide, to their partie, which increaſed Caeſars feare the more. And therefore leaſt the whole waight of the warre ſhould at once fall vpon him: he ſent Caecinna with fortie cohorts of Romanes, to ſeauet the power of the enemie through the Bructeries countrey, to the riuer of Amiſia. Pedo the Camp-maiſter had the conducting of the horſemen, by Friſia: himſelfe embarqued foure legions, and lead them through the lakes: all the horſemen, footemen, and the whole nauie meeting together at the ſaid riuer; and receiued the Chauceans among them, who had promiſed them ayde. The Bructeri burning their owne countrey, Stertinius ouerthrew with a companie of light harneſſed ſouldiers, ſent againſt them by Germanicus▪
                   and found betweene the ſlaughter and the bootie, the banner of the nineteenth legion which was loſt with Varus. From

thence the armie marched to the vtmoſt confines of the Bructeri, all the countrey waſted betwixt the riuer Amiſia, and Luppia: not farre from the foreſt Tentoburgh; where the reliques of the legions which Varus lead, were reported to lye vnburied. Whereupon Caeſar had a great deſire to celebrate the captaines, and ſouldiers funerals; all the armie moued to compaſſion: ſome calling to minde their kinsfolks; ſome their friends: and ſome in conſideration of the hazards of warre, and the ſlipperie eſtate of man ſubiect vnto fortunes change. And hauing ſent Caecina before, to ſearch out the ſecret places of the foreſt, and caſt bridges and cauſeyes ouer the moiſt and deceiptful paſſages of the bogs, they marched thoſe dolefull wayes, yrkſome to behold, and dreadfull to remember. Varus firſt encamping ſeate, by the large circuit of ground it contained, and dimenſions of the Principia, the place in the camp where the ſtandard and enſignes are pitched. Sav. in mar. lib. 1. cap. 7. Principia, did ſhew that the incloſure was capable of three legions: then by a rampire halfe broken downe, and a ſhallow trench, they perceiued where the ouertoyled remnant was retired. In the middle of the field lay white bones, either ſcattered, or on a heape, as they had eyther reſiſted or fled: hard by, trouncheons of weapons, and horſes ribs; and before them mens heads, faſtened vpon the bodies of trees. In the woods were their barbarous altars, on which they ſacrificed the Tribunes and chiefe Centurions. Thoſe which eſcaped aliue, or broke priſon after the butchery, tould that here the Liutenants were ſlaine; there the ſtandards taken: where Varus receiued his firſt wound; where with his owne vnluckie hand he ſlew himſelfe. On what Tribunall Armin ius made his oration. How many gibbets he had ſet vp for captiues, and what ditches: and with what prowde diſdaine he skoffed at the enſignes and ſtandarts. The Romanes then which were preſent, ſixe yeares after the ſlaughter, oppreſſed with griefe, yet more then euer kindled with rage againſt the enemie; couered with earth the bones of the three legions: as if they had been all their friends or kindred; howbeit it was vncertaine whether they buried the ſtranger or friend. Caeſar to ſhew a gratefull memory of the dead, and himſelfe to be partaker of their griefe, with his owne hands put the firſt turfe on their tombes; which Tiberius miſliked: either as conſtruing all Germanicus actions to the worſt; or becauſe the ſight of the dead, vnburied, would make the ſouldiers more fearefull of the enemie, and leſſe forward to fight: and becauſe a Generall honored with the Augurall dignitie, and deuoted to moſt ancient ceremonies, ought not to meddle in mortuaries. But Germanicus purſuing Arminius, alreadie crept into inacceſſible places; as ſoone as he found conueniencie, thruſt his horſemen on him, and recouered the field which the enemie occupied. Arminius gathered his men together; and commaunding them to draw neere the wood, turned ſhort on the ſudden, and gaue them the watch-word which he had hidden there before, to breake out. Whereat the horſemen amazed, and the cohorts ſent for a ſupplie, borne backe with thoſe which fled; augmenting their feare, were almoſt thruſt into the bogs, well knowne to the conquerors, and dangerous to the Romanes; had not Caeſar come on with the legions in battell aray. Which ſtroke a terror into the enemie, and aſſured the courage of the ſouldier: both the armies in the end parting on euen hand. Anon after the armie being brought to the riuer Amiſia, he conducted the fleete and the legions back againe, in the ſame manner they came thither. Some of the horſemen were commaunded to returne to the riuer of Rhene, ſtill coaſting the Ocean ſhore. Caecina who conducted another companie, although he was skilfull in the wayes, yet was charged to returne with all diligence by the long bridges; which was a narrow cauſey betwixt wide mariſhes, throwne vp in times paſt by L. Domitius. The reſt of the countrey was miry, and full of faſt binding clay, with ſome doubtfull brookes.

Round about were woods, aſcending little and little, which Arminius had filled, by a neerer way, and light armie, preuenting the Romans, loden with armour and carriages. Caecina doubting how he ſhould at once, repaire thoſe bridges, alreadie decayed with age, and driue back the enemie; thought it beſt to encamp in the ſame place; that whileſt ſome were fortifying, others might skirmiſh with the enemie. The barbarians vſed all force to breake the wardes, and make way to the trench-makers: ſet on them, compaſſed them in; ranne from place to place; leauing nothing vndone, to diſturb them. The laborers and the fighters made one confuſe cry: nothing proſpering on the Romans ſide. The place was nothing but a deepe mire, not firme to tread on, and ſlipperie to march: the waight of their corſelets an hinderance, and they vnable to launce their iauelins in the waters. Contrarily the Cheruſcians being a great limmed people, and accuſtomed to fight in bogs, were with huge ſpeares able to hurt a farre off. To be briefe, the night deliuered the legions from an vnluckie battell. The Germaines through proſperous ſucceſſe, nothing wearied, but forbearing from reſt; turned all the waters which roſe in the mountaines, into the vnder grounds: whereupon the plaine being drownd, and ſo much of the worke ouerthrowne as they had caſt vp, the Romaine ſouldier was put to a double labour.
            
            
               
                  XIIII. The Romans eſcape a great danger through the good conduct of Caecina.
               
               
                  CAEcina had then in qualitie of a ſoldier of commander fortie yeere receiued pay: and therefore being acquainted as well with the changeable euents of fortune as proſperous ſucceſſes, fell nothing at all in courage: but pondering in his minde what might follow, found nothing more expedient, then to incloſe the enimie in the wood, vntill the wounded, and the cariages were gotten before. For betwixt the hils and the marſhes, there ſtretched out a plaine, capable of a ſmall armie. The legions were ſo placed, that the fift ſhoulde be in the right flancke; the one and twentieth in the left; the firſt to lead; and the twentieth to defende, if they were purſued. The night was vnquiet for diuers reſpects: the barbarous enimie, in feaſting and banketting, ſongs of ioie, and hideous outcries filled the valleies and woods, which redoubled the ſounde againe. The Romans had ſmall fires, broken voices, laie neere the trenches, went from tent to tent, rather diſquieted, and not able to ſleepe, then watchfull. The generall had that night a heauie dreame; which droue him into a feare: for he thought that he had ſeene Quinctilius Varus, riſing out of thoſe bogs, embrued all in bloud, calling him by name, and ſtretching out his hand towards him; which he thruſt backe refuſing to follow. At daie breaking, the legions appointed for the flankes, either for feare, or contempt, abandoned their ſtandings; and ſeaſed on the fielde adioining beyond the marſhes. Arminius although hee might ſafely haue, aſſaulted them, yet forbare a time. But he no ſooner perceiued their bag and baggage to ſticke in the mire, and ditches, and the ſouldiers troubled about it, disbanded and out of order, and the enſignes confuſedly diſordered; as it falleth out in ſuch times, euery man buſie to helpe himſelfe, and deafe to harken what was commanded; but he encharged the Germaines to breake in, crieng aloud. Behold Varus, and the legions once againe vanquiſhed by the ſame deſtinie. Hauing thus ſaide, accompanied with a choiſe band of horſemen, breaketh the rankes of the Romans, and eſpecially woundeth their horſes: which ſlipping, by reaſon of their owne bloud, and moiſture of the bogs; ouerthrowing their maſters,

either trode vnderfeete, or ſcattered all they met. Much a doo they had about the enſignes, which they could neither beare vp, the ſhot came ſo thicke: nor pitch on the ground, it was ſo mirie. Whileſt Caecina maintaineth battell, his horſe was killed vnder him; from which being fallen, he had been taken by the enimie, if the firſt legion had not oppoſed herſelfe. The greedines of the enimie was ſome helpe vnto them; being more thirſtie of pillage then bloud: whereby the legions had leiſure towards the euening, to win the open firme land. And yet their miſeries did not thus end: They had defences to make: and ſtuffe wherewithall, to ſeeke: their tooles to caſt vp earth, or cut turfes, were almoſt all loſt: tentes they had none to couer them: nor medicaments to heale the wounded: and diuiding their meate partly ſtained with bloud, or beraied with dirt, they bewailed that vnfortunate darknes; and that onely daie left for ſo many thouſands to liue. By meere chance a horſe brake looſe in the campe, and praunſing vp and downe, affrighted with noiſe, ouerthrew all he met in his waie: which ſtroake ſuch a feare and terror in the ſouldiers harts, that thinking the Germans had broken vpon them; ran all to the gates of the campe, and eſpecially to the Decumana, which was fartheſt from the enimie, and ſafeſt to flee awaie. Caecina being aſſured that it was but a vaine feare, yet not being able either by his authoritie, entreatie, or forcible meanes to ſtaie their fleeing; caſt himſelfe a croſſe the gate; and ſo mooued them to pitie, ſtopping the paſſage; bicauſe they would not tread on their captaines bodie. The Tribunes and Centurions ſhewed them withall, that their ſeare was falſe and without cauſe. Then aſſembling them in the Principia, and commanding ſilence, admoniſhed them of the time and neceſſitie they ſtoode in. That their ſafetie onely conſiſted in their weapons; which yet they were to moderate by diſcretion: keeping ſtill within their trench, vntill the enimie, with hope to breake vpon them, ſhould drawe neere: and that then they ſhoulde ruſh out on euerie ſide, and ſo get to the riuer of Rhene. Whereas if they ſhould flie, they ſhould paſſe through more woods, finde deeper bogs, and the enimie more cruell then euer: but by conquering they ſhoulde purchaſe glorie and renowme: putting them in mind of thoſe things which were eſteemed deere at home, and of credit in campe: not once mentioning their diſgraces and aduerſities. This done, he aſſigned to the moſt couragious a horſe: beginning with his owne; then with the Tribunes and Centurions, not reſpecting calling or quality: to the end that they ſhould firſt inuade the enimie, and the footemen follow. The Germains, what with hope, what with greedines of praie, what with diſgreeing opinions of captaines; were as much diſquieted as the Romaines. Arminius thought it beſt to ſuffer them come out of their fort, and ſet on them in the bogs and marſhes: but Inguiomerus aduiſe, though more cruell, was moſt pleaſing to the barbarians: which was, that they ſhould beſiege the campe: perſwading that by that means, the aſſault would be eaſier; more captiues taken; and the bootie entire and vntouched. Aſſoone then as it was day, they beate down the trenches, filled them vp with hurdles, grappled vp to the toppe of the trench, fewe ſouldiers reſiſting them, and thoſe all ſtocke ſtill in amaze. The cohorts within had the alarum giuen; the cornets and trumpets ſounded; and with a great clamour ſallied out couragiouſlie, and hemmed the enimie in: caſting in their teeth, that heere there were neither woods nor quagmiers, but the places and the gods indifferent to both. The enimies imagining it but an eaſie conqueſt, and that there were but a fewe to reſiſt, and thoſe but halfe armed; hearing the ſound of the trumpets, and ſeeing the glittering of the armour; which ſeemed ſo much the greater, by how much the leſſe they were eſteemed: on a ſudden were beaten downe and ſlaine, as men in proſperitie greedy, and in aduerſitie,

vncircumſpect. Arminius and Inguiomerus fled, th'one not hurt, and the other greeuouſly wounded. The common ſort were ſlaine as long as the daie and anger laſted: the legions returned at night to their forte. And although there were more wounded then the day before, and no leſſe want of victuales: yet with the victorie they thought they had recouered, ſtrength, courage, health, and all other neceſſaries.
            
            
               
                  XV. The danger the legions vvere in vnder Vitellius. Tiberius renevveth the lavv of treaſon.
               IT was noiſed abroad in the meane ſeaſon, that the legions were beſieged; and that the Germaine hoſt was entering Gallia. And if Agrippina had not hindered the pulling downe of the bridge ouer Rhene; ſome through feare would haue ventured ſo lewde an action. Who being a woman of a great courage, tooke vpon hir for ſome daies the office of a Captaine: relieued the ſoldiers, as they had moſt need, with apparell and medicine. C. Plinius a writer of the Germaine warres, recounteth; that ſhe went to the ende of the bridge and there ſtaied, praiſing and thanking the legions as they returned. A matter which entered deepely into Tiberius minde: imagining with himſelfe that it was not for nought, that ſhe vſed ſuch care and curteſie: that ſhe ſought not the fauour of the ſoldier againſt the ſtranger. That there was nothing left for the Emperors to do, if a woman tooke once vpon hir to viſit the bands, go to the enſignes; and ſeeke meanes to corrupt the ſoldier? As though it had beene but a ſmall point of ambition, to carrie her ſonne about the campe in the attire of a common ſoldier, and call him Caeſar Caligula. That Agrippina was now of greater credite with the armie, than the Lieutenants and Captaines; and that a woman had ſuppreſſed a ſedition, which Caeſars name and power could not do. All this was aggrauated by Seianus, well acquainted with Tiberius humour; and who had long before ſowen ſeedes of hatred: which for the time he ſmoothered, bicauſe they ſhould burſt out the greater in the end. But Germanicus gaue P. Vitellius charge of the ſecond & fowerteenth legion, which he had brought by ſea, to conduct by land: to the ende the ſhippes might in the lowe water ſaile more eaſilie, or in the ebbing lie a ground more lightly. Vitellius had a quiet beginning of his iourney, a drie ſhore, and ſmall flote: but by and by through a gale of northren winde, the aequinoxe falling out the ſame time, and the ſea ſwelling extraordinarily; his armie was toſſed hither and thither: the face of the earth was couered with waters, the ſea, the ſhore, the fields, were all but one. The vncertaine ſands coulde not be diſcerned from firme lande: nor the ſhelues from the deepe ſeas: their horſes and cariages were drawen vnder water, and ſwallowed in the gulfes: dead bodies flotted and met one another: the ſoldiers diſorderly mingled, now breaſt, now chin high in water; and ſometimes looſing footing, either drowned or ſcattered. Encouragments tooke no place: & being thus toſſed with waues, the valiant man was not diſtinguiſhed from the coward: the wiſe not knowen from the foole; nor no difference betwixt counſell and chance; but all wrapped vp in like violence. In the end Vitellius hauing gotten the higher ground, brought the reſt of his companie thither, where they paſſed all that night without vtenſiles, or fire: the greateſt part either naked, or moiled, in no leſſe miſerable a taking, then the beſiged by the enimie: for the end of thoſe is glorious, and the death of theſe without honour. The day ſhewed them land, and they paſſed to the riuer Viſurgis, where Caeſar was arriued with the whole fleet: into which he receiued the legions, reported

to haue beene drowned, and neuer beleeued to be aliue, vntill they ſawe Caeſar and the armie returned. Now Stertinius ſent before to receiue Segeſtes brother Segimerus, who had yeelded himſelfe; brought him and his ſonne to Colen; and both pardoned; though Segimerus eaſlier then his ſonne: becauſe it was layd to his charge, that he had skoffed at Quinctilius Varus body. But to ſupplie theſe loſſes which the armie had ſuſtained; Gallia, Spaine, and Italie, ſtroue who ſhould furniſh moſt; offering armour, horſes, gold, and ſuch things as they had moſt in a readineſſe. Germanicus commending their loue and affection, accepted only their armour and horſes, and furniſhed the reſt with his owne charges. And to comfort and mitigate the remembrance of their ouerthrow, with ſome courteous vſage; he went about to viſite the wounded: praiſing in particular euery ones valiantnes, and looking on their wounds; fed one with hope, and an other with praiſe: woon all by good words, and care, and made them conſtant to himſelfe, and reſolute to fight. The ſame yeare by decree of Senate, the markes of triumph were ordained for A. Caecina, L. Apronius, C. Silius, for their noble exploites atchieued vnder Germanicus. And Tiberius refuſed the Title, of father of his countrey, which the people had often caſt vpon him. Nor would not ſuffer any to ſweare, to the obſeruation of his ordinances, although the Senate were thereto conſenting: affirming, that all mortall things were mutable and vncertaine; and the higher he ſhould clime, the ſlipperer his eſtate ſhould be. Notwithſtanding all this, they could not be perſwaded that he meant well to the citizens; becauſe he had put on foote againe the law of treaſon, knowen to the ancients by the ſame name. But by vertue of that law other things were brought into queſtion: as if any had betrayed the armie; ſtirred the people to ſedition: badly managed the affaires of the common-wealth: impaired and weakened the maieſtie of the people of Rome. But then deedes only were puniſhed, words went ſcotfree. Augustus was the firſt, who vnder colour of this law, comprehended the examination of infamous libels: moued thereto by the inſolent behauiour of Caſsius Seuerus, who had defamed honorable perſons, both men and women, with ſcandalous writings. Tiberius alſo, when Pompeius Macro the Pretor asked whether iudgement ſhould be giuen, touching the ſaid crime, made anſwere; that the lawes were to be obſerued. Tiberius was the more exaſperated, through certaine verſes caſt abroad by an vncertaine author, againſt his crueltie, pride, and diſagreeing with his mother. It ſhall not be amiſſe, if I rehearſe, with what pretended crimes, Falanius and Rubrius, both meane Gentlemen of Rome were charged: to make it knowne by what beginnings, what ſleights of Tiberius, an vtter ruine of the common-wealth was intended, then ſuppreſſed; afterward reuiued againe, and in the end, ouermaſtered all. Falanius accuſer obiected againſt him, that amongſt other worſhippers of Augustus (for ſuch fellowſhips there were almoſt in euery houſe as it had beene Colleges) he had receiued one Caſsius a ſtage-player, and infamous of his bodie: and that with his gardens he had ſould Augustus image. Rubrius was accuſed to haue violated an oath made in Augustus name. When theſe things were brought to Tiberius notice, he anſwered: That his father had not a place aſſigned him in heauen by decree of Senate, becauſe that honor ſhould be conuerted to the ouerthrow of the citizens. That Caſsius the ſtage-player, was wont to be admitted with others of the ſame trade, to the playes which his mother had conſecrated to Augustus memorie. That there was nothing done againſt religion, if his image was ſould, as the counterfets of other gods were, in the ſale of their gardens and houſes. And as for Rubrius oath, it was to be held in the ſame accompt, as if he had deceiued Iupiter himſelfe:

and that the iniuries done vnto the gods, ought to be referred to the care of the gods.
               
            
            
               XVI. An accuſation againſt Granius Marcellus, Orders againſt ſuing for dignities.
               NOt long after, Granius Marcellus Pretor of Bithynia, was accuſed of treaſon by Caepio Criſpinus his Quaeſtor: Romanus Hiſpo ſubſcribed thereto: who entered into a courſe of life, which the calamities of times, and mens boldnes made famous. For being needie, obſcure, and a buſie companion, by ſecret information he ſo crept into the cruell humor of the Prince, that he was able in ſhort time to endanger the eſtate of the beſt in the citie: thereby getting credit and authoritie with one, and hatred of many. He gaue an example, which many following, of beggers became rich, of baſe and contemptible perſons, feared; procuring deſtruction to others, and in the end to themſelues. He accuſed Marcellus to haue vttered bad ſpeeches againſt Tiberius: which was an accuſation ineuitable; becauſe that hauing choſen out the greateſt blemiſhes of Tiberius life and manners, becauſe they were true; were beleeued. Hiſpo added, that Marcellus image was placed higher then thoſe of the Caeſars; and that the head of another of Augustus being cut off, Tiberius image was put vpon it: which ſo incenſed him, that breaking ſilence, he cried out that he would himſelfe, and that ſworne, giue open ſentence in that cauſe: to the end the reſt ſhould be inforced to do as he had done; for as yet there were ſome marks of dying libertie left in the Senate. Then ſaid C. Piſo. What place wilt thou take Caeſar to deliuer thy cenſure? If thou wilt ſpeake firſt, I ſhall haue a preſident to follow: if laſt, I feare I ſhall ſwarue from thee vncircumſpectly. Abaſhed with this, the hotter vnaduiſedly he had growne, the more repenting; he ſuffered the arraigned of treaſon to be quit. As concerning the extorſions, the cauſe was put ouer to the delegates. And not contented with the iudgements of the Senators, he aſſiſted in the hearing of cauſes himſelfe, and ſate in the end of the Tribunal, leaſt he ſhould put the Pretor out of his chaire. Many orders were giuen in his preſence againſt canuaſing for offices, and noblemens ſuites: but whileſt he laboured for iuſtice, libertie went to wracke. Whileſt theſe things were adoing, Pius Aurelius a Senator, complained that his houſe was decayed and growne to ruine, by the rayſing vp of a publick way, and conueyance of water: and craued aide of the Lords of the Senate in that behalfe. And where the Treaſurers oppoſed themſelues againſt it, he was relieued by Caeſar, who payed him the value of his houſe: deſirous to employ his money in honeſt actions: which vertue he long retained after he had ſhaken off al others. He beſtowed About 7. thouſand eight hundred and twelue pounds ten ſhillings. ten hundred thouſand ſeſterties vpō 
                  Propertius Celer, once Pretor, and now crauing licence to giue vp his roome, by reaſon of the pouertie his father left him in; and commanded others which made the ſame ſute, to make it knowen to the Senate, that their petition was true: deſirons to be accounted ſeuere in things well done: which cauſed others rather to indure their pouertie with ſilence, then by acknowledging it, receiue a benefit at his hands. The ſame yeere, through continuall raines the riuer Tibris roſe ſo high, that it couered all the flat places of the citie; and in falling, there inſued a great ruine of men and buildings. Whereupon a remedie being conſulted of in Senate, Aſinius Gallus was of opinion, that the bookes of the Sybils ſhould be ſearched: which Tiberius hindered; as one who would hide from them, as well things diuine as humane. But he committed that charge vnto Ateius Capito, and L. Arruntius. Achaia and Macedonia

complaining of their heauie taxations: it was agreed in Senate, that they ſhould no longer be gouerned by a proconſull, but by Caeſar. Druſus being made ouerſeer of a play of fencers, ſet foorth in his owne and his brother Germanicus name; becauſe he ſeemed to take ouer great pleaſure in ſhedding of blood; ſtroake a feare into the peoples minds, and as it is reported, was diſliked of his father. Why Tiberius forbare to ſee this ſpectacle, it was diuerſly conſtrued: ſome thought becauſe he loathed to be in great aſſemblies: ſome becauſe he was of a melancholy ſad diſpoſition: and alſo miſdoubting leaſt ſome ſhould fall into compariſon, betwixt him and Auguſtus, who was woont to be preſent at ſuch plaies with courteous and milde cariage. I cannot thinke that his meaning was, to giue his ſonne occaſion to ſhew his crueltie, and mooue the people to offence; although ſome haue ſo reported. The licentiouſnes begun in the Theator the laſt yeere, grew now to a farther outrage: many not onely of the common people ſlaine; but ſoldiers and Centurions, and a Captaine of the guarde, whileſt they went about to bridle the inſolencie of the people, and hinder them from vſing lauiſhing ſpeeches againſt magiſtrates. That ſedition was debated in Senate: many being of opinion that it it was conuenient, that the Pretor ſhould haue authoritie to whip the ſtage-plaiers. But Haterius Agrippa Tribune of the people contradicted him: whom Aſinius Gallus rebuked in an oration: Tiberius holding his peace; ſuffering the Senate to vſe that ſhadow of libertie. Yet Haterius preuailed, bicauſe Auguſtus had once declared the ſtage-plaiers to be free from ſtripes: and therefore not lawfull for Tiberius to infringe it. Many orders were layd downe touching the moderation and charges beſtowed vpon plaies: and againſt the inſolent behauiour of their fauourers; wherof the chiefeſt are theſe. That no Senator ſhould enter into a plaiers houſe: that the gentlemen of Rome ſhould not accompanie them in publike places: that it was not lawfull to ſee their plaies but on the Theater. And that the Pretor ſhould haue authoritie to baniſh ſuch lookers on, as behaued themſelues diſorderly. The Spaniards had licence graunted them, at their requeſt, to erect a Temple in honour of Auguſtus, in the free towne of Tarracon; which was a preſident for all the other prouinces to follow. The people making ſupplication, that they might be vnburdened of the impoſition of one in the hundred of all things bought and ſold, which began after the wars were begun: Tiberius anſwered by an edict that it was the onely ſtay of ſouldiers wages: and that the ſtate would be ouercharged if the olde ſoldiers ſhould not be diſmiſſed after twentie yeeres ſeruice: and by this meanes, the order wrunge out to appeaſe the ſoldiers, that the ſoldiers ſhoulde be diſmiſſed after ſixteene yeeres ſeruice, was abrogated. After this it was propounded in Senate by Arruntius and Ateius, whether for the repreſſing of the inundations of Tiber, it were conuenient to diuert the courſe of the riuers and lakes, which were cauſe of his riſing. Vpon this occaſion, the ambaſſadors of other free townes and colonies were heard: and eſpecially the deputies from the citie of Florence; requeſting that Clanis might not be turned out of his owne chanell into Arne, as a matter greatly to their hurt. The like ſpeech the Interamnates vſed, ſhewing that the fertileſt tract of Italie ſhould be loſt, if (as it was intended) the riuer Nar ſhould be cut into manie branches; and ſo all become a ſtanding poole, if the new chanels were not capable of ſo much water. The Reatins did not in this caſe hold their peace: no way yeelding that the mouth of the lake Velinus ſhould be dammed vp, where it diſcargeth it ſelf into Nar: for ſo it would ouerflow al about it. And that nature had wel prouided for the neceſſitie of mans vſe: hauing giuen all riuers, their courſe and mouth, and as well their bounds, as beginnings. That the religion of their allies was to be conſidered,

who conſecrated vnto the riuers of their countrey, woods and altars. Yea that Tiber would not be depriued of his neighbour-riuers, and ſo run his courſe with leſſer glory. In the end either through the intreatie of the Colonies, or difficultie of the worke, or ſuperſtition, Piſoes opinion was approued, which was, that there ſhould be nothing changed. Poppaeus Sabinus was continued in the gouernment of Maeſia, and Achaia and Macedonia added to his charge. For it was Tiberius manner, to continue men in their office and charge, either of warre, or iuriſdiction, ſometimes during their life; whereof there were diuers reaſons giuen. Some ſaid he did it, to auoid the tedious care of often prouiding; and that he would haue that to continue which he had thought once well done: ſome did interpret it to be done of enuie, becauſe many ſhould not enioy them: ſome, that as he was of a ſubtile wit, ſo of no reſolute iudgement; as not chooſing men of excellent vertue: and on the other ſide, hating vices. He feared leaſt the beſt would attempt ſomewhat againſt him, and the worſt diſhonor the ſtate. Which doubtfulnes brought him to that paſſe at laſt, that he gaue the gouernment of prouinces to ſome, which he would not ſuffer to depart the citie. Concerning the election of Conſuls, which was firſt obſerued vnder this Prince, and afterward by others, I dare aſſure nothing: not only the authors, but the Prince himſelfe doth ſo much differ in his orations. For ſometimes not naming the ſuters, he deſcribed euery mans beginning, life, and what pay he had receiued; that a man might eaſily geſſe who they were. At another time, not touching any of thoſe particulars, he perſwaded the ſuters, not to diſturbe the elections, by bribing and canuaſing: promiſing that himſelfe would be a meane for them. And oftentimes he ſayd, there were no more which pretended to be ſuters, but ſuch only, whoſe names he had preſented vnto the Conſuls: and that others might bring in their names likewiſe, if they would truſt either to their merit or fauor. But all was but faire words, and in deede deceiptfull and without effect: and by how much the more they were masked with a colour of libertie, by ſo much the heauier and greeuouſer a ſeruitude they were like to bring after them.
            
         
         
            
            THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE ANNALES OF CORNELIVS TACITVS.
            
               I. The cauſe of the Parthian warres. Vonones driuen out of his kingdome.
               
                  
                     SIſenna Statilius Taurus, and L. Libo being Conſuls, the kingdome of the Eaſt, and the Romane prouinces rebelled: the beginning thereof proceeding from the Parthians; who hauing demaunded and receiued a King from Rome, yet contemned him as a forrener, although he were deſcended of the Arſacides. Vonones was this King, who had beene before giuen in hoſtage to Augustus, by Phrahates. For although Phrahates had repulſed the armie and the Romane captaines, yet he ſhewed all duties and reuerence to Augustus. And the better to confirme friendſhip, ſent ſome of his children to him: not ſo much for feare of vs, as diſtruſt of diſloyaltie in his owne ſubiects. After the death of Phrahates, and other ſucceeding Kings, through murthers committed among themſelues: Embaſſadors came to the citie, from the chiefe noble men of Parthia, to demaunde Vonones the eldeſt ſonne of Phrahates. Caeſar thinking that to be an honor to himſelfe, enduing him with great riches deliuered him: and the barbarians, as their maner is at the change of a new Prince, receiued him with great ioy. Not long after the Parthian grew to be aſhamed, that he had ſo much degenerated, as to demaund a Prince from another countrey; trained vp in the ſleights of their enimies. That now the royall ſeate of the Arſacides was giuen and accounted among the Romane prouinces. Where is the glorie of thoſe which murdered Craſſus, and chaſed away Antonie; if Caeſars bond ſlaue after ſo many yeeres ſeruitude ſhould commaund and rule ouer the Parthians? He himſelfe kindled their difdainefull minds, by ſwaruing from his predeceſſors manner of life; as going ſeldome a hunting; being careleſſe of horſes; carried in a charriot in the ſtreetes; and loathing their countrey fare: his Grecian followers were ſcorned, and himſelfe laughed at, for keeping vnder his ſeale his baſeſt vtenſiles. But the free acceſſe vnto him, his courteſie towards all men; vnknowen vertues to the Parthians; were accounted new vices: and bicauſe they were not vſed of their anceſtors, were odious alike to the good and bad. Whereupon Artabanus, one of the Arſacides blood, brought vp with the Dahes, was raiſed againſt him: who in the firſt encounter ouerthrowen, recouered newe forces, and enioyed the kingdome. When Vonones was ouercome hee fled to Armenia, then without a King; and betwixt the Parthian and the Romane wealth wauering, through Antonies trecherie: who hauing vnder colour of friendſhip tolled vnto him their King Artauaſdes, loaded him with chaines, and in the end depriued him of his life. Artaxias his ſonne, hating vs for the iniurie done to his father, with the power of the Arſacides, defended himſelfe and the kingdome againſt vs. But when Artaxias was ſlaine by the treaſon of his neereſt friends, Tigranes was made King of the Armenians, and brought by Tiberius Nero into the kingdom. Yet Tigranes raigne dured but a ſhort time, nor his childrens: although they were, as the maner of ſtrangers is, linked in marriage with the Armenians. Then by commaundement of Auguſtus, Artauaſdes
                  
was appointed their King, and afterward driuen out: not without a great ſlaughter of our men. After that Caeſar was choſen to ſettle the affaires of Armenia; who with the good liking of the Armenians, appointed Ariobarzanes, deſcended from the Medes, to be their King: a man greatly reckoned of for the comelines of his perſonage, and valiant courage. Ariobarzanes dying by misfortune, the Armenians would endure none of his race: but tried the regiment of a woman called Eratus, whom they expulſed in a ſhort time: and lead an vncertaine and looſe kinde of life, rather without a Lord, then in libertie: and in the ende receiued the fugitiue Vonones againe. But when Artabanus began to vſe threatning; and that ſmall aide was to be expected of the Armenians: and yet if he ſhould be defended by our forces; it were to enter into war againſt the Parthians: Creticus Silanus gouernour of Syria ſent for Vonones: and appointed him a guarde: and ſuffered him to inioy all pompe and ſumptuouſnes, and name of a King: from which mockerie how he purpoſed to deliuer himſelfe, we will ſet downe in his place.
            
            
               
                  II. Germanicus maketh war in Germanie.
               BVt it diſpleaſed Tiberius nothing at all, that the Eaſt parts were in an vprore; bicauſe that vnder that pretext he might draw Germanicus from his accuſtomed legions, and by giuing him charge ouer new prouinces, expoſe him to trecherie and hazard. But he, by how much the more affectionate the ſouldiers were towards him, and his vnkle backward; by ſo much the more earneſt he was to haſten the victory; and laide all the plots he could to giue the enimie battell: Diſcourſing with himſelfe, what fortunate or vnfortunate ſucceſſes had happened vnto him thoſe three yeeres paſt, which he had ſpent in war amongſt them: that the Germans in a pitched field and indifferent places would eaſily be vanquiſhed: that they tooke aduantage of woods, bogs, ſhort ſommers, and timely winters: that his ſouldiers receiued not ſo great hurt by wounds, as by long iourneies and waight of their armor: that Gallia was wearied with furniſhing horſes: the long traine of cariage was ſubiect to ambuſhes; and not eaſily defended. But if he ſhould take ſea, the poſſeſſion was open for him, and vnknowen to the enimie. Withall, that ſo the war might be ſooner begun: the legions and victuals brought togither: the horſes and horſemen conueied by channels and mouthes of riuers into the hart of Germanie. Hauing thus reſolued, he ſent P. Vitellius, and Scantius to leuie the ſubſidies of Gallia: Silius Anteius, & Caecina had charge of all preparation by ſea. A thouſand ſhips were thought to ſuffice: which were made ready with ſpeed. Some were ſhort, and narrow at the fore & hinder part, & broad in the middle, as ſtronger againſt the waues. Some were flat bottommed, to land without danger. Many had rudders at both ends, that the rowers altering their ſtroke on a ſudden; might driue to land at either end. Many of them had bridges ouer, to carrie both their engins, horſes, and prouiſion: ſwift of ſaile, and nimble with oares; in ſhew gallant and fearefull to the enimie, by reaſon of the ſoldiers cheerfulnes. The place appointed to meete at, was the Iland of the Batauians, as a place of eaſie arriuall; and fit to receine the armie: and frō thence to tranſport them to the place of battell. For the riuer of Rhene keeping one chanell, or elſe enuironing but fewe Ilands, at the entering of Batauia, is diuided into two riuers, and keepeth his name and ſwiftnes through Germanie vntill he fall into the Ocean. But by the coaſt of Gallia it waxeth broader, and runneth not ſo ſwiftly: and changing his name, the inhabitants call it Vahales: which name, it afterward changeth againe into Moſa: ſo continuing vntill it fall into the

ſame Ocean, with a great bredth. Whileſt the ſhips were a putting from ſhoare: Caeſar commandeth the Lieutenant Silius, with a bande of men lightly appointed, ſuddenly to inuade the Chatti. And himſelfe vnderſtanding that the fort of Luppia vpon the riuers ſide, was beſieged, conducteth thither ſixe legions. Silius by reaſon of ſudden raines, did little elſe then bring away, ſome ſmall bootie, and the wife and daughter of Arpas, prince of the Chatti. Neither did thoſe which had beſieged the forte, ſtaie to fight; but ſlipt away, when Caeſars comming was noiſed. Yet they had throwne downe the tumbe, lately built in honor of Varus legions, and the old altar erected for Druſus. The altar, the Prince reedified; and in memorie of his father, he and the legions ran a horſe race; but thought it not conuenient to ſet vp the tumb againe: but fortified all paſſages betwixt the fort, Aliſo, and Rhene, with new mounds and bulwarks. By this time the Fleete was come: and hauing ſent before all prouiſion, and aſſigned the legions and confederates their ſhipping; himſelfe entered the ditch, called the Druſian ditch, where he made a prayer to Druſus his father, that hauing vndertaken the ſame enterpriſe, that he had done; he would willingly and benignly further him, with the example and memorie of his counſels and exploites. From thence he ſailed proſperouſly, by the lakes and Ocean, vntill he came to the riuer Amiſia, where the nauie was left, leauing the riuer on the left ſide of it. Wherein there was an ouerſight, that they brought the ſhipping no higher, the ſouldiers being afterward conſtrained to land on the right ſide: whereby many dayes were ſpent in making of bridges to paſſe them ouer. The horſemen and legions paſſed the firſt arme of the ſea, the waters being yet but ſmall, without feare: but the auxiliary ſouldiers which followed, and Batauians, whileſt they ſported themſelues, and ſhewed their skill in ſwimming, were ſome hindered and troubled, and ſome drowned.
            
            
               
                  III. Arminius dehorteth his brother Flauius from the Romans ſeruice.
               AS Caeſar was planting his camp, word was brought, that the Angriuarians were reuolted behinde him. And Stertinius was incontinently diſpatched away with a companie of light horſemen, which reuenged their treaſon with fire and ſword. Betwixt the Romaines and the Cheruſcians ran the riuer Viſurgis, and on the banke ſide was Arminius, with the reſt of the nobilitie: who inquiring whether Caeſar were come; and anſwere giuen him that he was: intreated that he might haue licence to ſpeake with his brother Flauius, who was in the camp: faithfull and truſtie to the Romaines: and who not many yeares before, had loſt one of his eyes, vnder Tiberius. His requeſt was graunted him: and as Flauius came neere, Arminius ſaluted him. And cauſing his followers to withdraw themſelues, requeſted that our archers which were placed in order on the banke ſide, ſhould ſtand farther off; who being gone away, he asked his brother how he came to that blemiſh in his face. He named both the place and the battell. He asked him further, what rewards he had receiued? Flauius telleth him that his pay was augmented, ſheweth his chaine, his crowne, and other military gifts: which Arminius skorned as baſe rewards of ſeruitude. After that, they grew to farther communication, the one extolling the greatnes of the Romans: Caeſars wealth: the grieuous puniſhments inflicted on the conquered: and the clemencie vſed to ſuch as yeelded: that neither his wife nor ſonne were intreated as enemies. Arminius alleaged the dutie of his countrey: their auncient libertie: the gods of the inward parts of Germanie:

that his mother and himſelfe beſought him; that he would not rather chooſe to be a traitor and forſaker of his countrey, then a captaine of his kindred, allies and nation. Growing from thence by little and little to hard words, although the riuer was betwixt them, they had coped; if Stertinius had not run in, and held backe Flauius, full of anger, calling for his armour and horſe. Arminius was heard to threaten on the other ſide, and denounce battell: intermingling ſome latine words: for once he commaunded his countriemen; and receiued pay in the Romaine campes. The next day, the German armie preſented it ſelfe in battell aray beyond Viſurgis. Germanicus not thinking it the part of a commaunder, to hazard the legions, not hauing firſt made bridges, and appointed gards to defend them, paſſed ouer the horſemen at the foord. Stertinius and Aemilius, ſometime captaine of the principall enſigne, were the leaders: who ſeperated themſelues farre one from the other, to deuide the enemies forces. Carioualda, Captaine of the Batauians, where the riuer was ſwifteſt ſallied out: the Cheruſci making as though they fled, tolled them to a plaine, enuironed with woods: and there turning againe, and ſpreading abroad, droue back thoſe which made head; hotly purſued thoſe which ſhrunke: then being gathered round in a ring, ouerthrew them; ſome neere, ſome farre off. Carioualda hauing long ſuſtained the brunt of the enemie; exhorted his ſouldiers cloſely together, to breake into the enemie troupes: himſelfe venturing amongſt the thickeſt, was beaten downe with darts; and his horſe killed vnder him, and many noble men about him. The reſt either through their owne valour, or aide of the horſemen, with Stertinius and Aemilius, eſcaped danger. When Caeſar had paſſed the riuer Viſurgis, he vnderſtoode by a fugitiue from the enemie campe, what place Arminius had choſen to giue battell: and that other nations were aſſembled in a wood conſecrated to Hercules, with intention to aſſaile the camp by night. The runnagate was beleeued: lights were ſeene: and the eſpiales getting neerer, reported they heard a great confuſe noiſe of men and horſes. Being therefore at a iumpe to hazard all, thinking it conuenient to founde the ſouldiers minde, he bethought himſelfe what was the fitteſt expedient to trie the truth. The Tribunes and Centurions brought him oftener, pleaſing then true newes: the freed men were of a ſeruile diſpoſition: in friends therewas flatterie: if he ſhould call an aſſembly, that which a few ſhould begin, the reſt would applaude. That their minds would be beſt knowen, when they were by themſelues; not ouerlooked: in eating and drinking they would vtter their feare or hope. As ſoone as it was night, going out at the Augural gate, accompanied with one alone, in ſecret and vnknowen places to the watch: caſting a ſauage beaſts skin on his backe, he went from one place to another: ſtoode liſtning at the tents: and ioyeth in the praiſe of himſelfe: ſome extolling the nobilitie of their Captaine; others his comely perſonage: many his patience, and courteſie: that in ſports and ſerious matters, he was ſtill one man: confeſſing therefore that they thought it their parts, to make him ſome requitall in this battell, and ſacrifice the traitors and peace-breakers to reuenge and glory.
            
            
               
                  IIII. Arminius and the Germans ouerthrow.
               AMidſt theſe things, one of the enimie campe, skilfull in the Latine toong: riding cloſe to the trench: promiſeth a lowd in Arminius name, wiues, and lands, & a hundred About fifteene ſhillings ſeuen pence. ſeſterces a day, as long as the war cōtinued, if any would flee from the Romans, and come to his ſide. That brauado did greatly exaſperate the legious: wiſhing among themſelues: O that the day were come, that we might

once come to ioine battell with them: ſaying, that they would take poſſeſſion of the Germans lands, and bring away their wiues by force. They accepted of their words as a preſage, and vowed they would haue their wiues and money for a bootie. About the third watch the enimie aſſailed the campe, but threw no dart: bicauſe he perceiued many in a readines to defend their fortes: and no man remiſſe in his charge. The ſame night Germanicus in a pleaſant dreame, thought he had beene offering of ſacrifice, and that his pretext or robes of his infancie, had beene ſprinkled with holy blood, and that he receiued another at the hands of Auguſta his grandmother. Emboldned with that dreame, and the Augures foretelling lucky ſucceſſe, concurring with it: he called the ſoldiers to an aſſembly: and declared vnto them what things by wiſedome he had foreſeene: and what he thought expedient for the imminent danger of the battell. That not onely the open fields were commodious for the Romans to fight in, but the woods alſo and foreſts; if they proceeded by diſcretion. Neither were the barbarous huge targets, and long pikes ſo handſome, among trees and low ſhrubs; as darts and ſwords; and armour cloſe to the bodie. They ſhould therefore lay on thicke load; and ſtrike at their faces with their ſwords. That the Germans had neither coat of fence nor helmet: and their bucklers were not ribbed with iron, or ſinewes, but with oſiars, or painted thinne boord. Their firſt rancke was in ſome ſort appointed with pikes: but the reſt had but ſhort weapons burnt at the point. And although they were grim in countenance, and of ſome courage for a ſhort fit: yet being once wounded they would flee and be gone without ſhame of diſcredit, or care of their Captaine: in aduerſitie faint harted and timorous: but in proſperitie, vnmindfull both of diuine and humane lawes. If they deſired an end of their weariſome iournies, and ſea; in this battell they might eaſe themſelues. Albis was now neerer then Rhene: Neither was there any further warre to be made, if in that place treading the ſteps of his father, & vncle, they would make him Conqueror. The heat of the ſoldier being inflamed with this ſpeech of the Captaine, the ſigne of battel was giuen. Neither did Arminius nor the reſt of the Germā nobility omit to incourage theirs on the other ſide, ſaying: Theſe are the Romans which fled from Varus campe: who for fear of ioining battel, had raiſed a rebelliō. Wherofſom their backs loadē with wounds; & others their ſides tired & brokē with waues & tempeſts of ſea; once more offered themſelus to the enimy ful of ire, without hope of good; the gods being againſt them. They tooke ſea, and choſe out the bie-waies of the Ocean, leaſt they ſhould haue beene encountered as they came, or purſued, after they were repulſed. But when they ſhall come to handiſtrokes, they ſhall find ſmall refuge in the winde and oares. That now they ſhould call to minde their coueteouſnes, crueltie, and pride: was there any thing els to be done, then to maintaine their libertie; or die rather then be brought to ſeruitude? Thus encouraged, and demaunding battell, they were brought into a place called Idiſtauiſum, betwixt Viſurgis and the hils: not of one breadth, but now wide, now ſtraight, as the riuer or iutting out of the hils did ſuffer. Behinde them was a wood of high trees: and betweene thoſe trees a plaine and eeuen ground, which the Barbarians had poſſeſſed with the entrance of the wood: the Cheruſci put themſelues on the tops of the hils, to fall furiouſly vpon the Romans in the heat of the fight. The order of our battell was this. The aides of Gallia, and the Germans were placed in the front: followed with the foote archers: after them fower legions; and Caeſar himſelfe with two Pretorian cohorts: and a choiſe troupe of horſmen. After them ſo many legions more, with light horſemen, & bow men on horſeback: and the reſt of the confederates: all of them, moſt carefull to keepe their order and

aray. Germanicus perceiuing the Cheruſcians troupes to come fiercely toward thē; commanded the ableſt horſmē, to charge him on the flanke, and Stertinius with the other ſquadrons of horſmē, to enuiron him, and ſet on him behind: promiſing to be himſelfe at hand if neede required. In the meane ſeaſon, eight Eagles (a very luckie ſigne) were ſeene to flee towards the entrance of the wood. Which the Emperour perceiuing; cried that they ſhould march on, & follow the Roman birds; the peculiar gods of the legions. Wherupon the footmen brake in, & the horſmen ſent before charged them on the flanke and on the backe. And which is ſtrange to report, two companies of the enemie tooke a contrary flight: thoſe which kept the wood, ran to the plaine: and thoſe which held the plaine, haſtened to the wood. The Cheruſci being betweene both, were thruſt downe from the hils: amongſt whom with great valour, Arminius maintained the battell, with his hands, voice, and wounds. All his might he bent againſt the archers, to haue burſt out that way, if the cohorts of Gallia, of Raetia; and the Vindelicians, had not oppoſed themſelues with their enſignes. Neuertheles, by ſtrength of bodie, and courage of his horſe, he eſcaped; hauing firſt died his face with bloud, leaſt he ſhould be knowne. Some report that he was knowne to the Cheruſci, which were among the auxiliarie bands of the Romans, and let paſſe by them. The ſame either valour or guile, gaue Inguiomerus meanes to eſcape; the reſt were ſlaine on euery ſide. And moſt of them endeuoring to ſwim ouer Viſurgis, were either with the darts throwne after them, or force of the riuer, or waight of ſuch as lept after, or with the banks which fell, killed or ouerwhelmed. Some cowardly fleeing away, ſought to clamber the tops of trees, and there hiding themſelues in the boughes, were ſhot through by the archers in a mockerie: and others bruſed by the ouerturning of the trees. The victory was great, and vnto vs not bloudie. From fiue of the clock, vntill night, the enemies were ſlaine, which filled ten miles of ground with dead carcaſſes, and armour. Some chaines were found among their ſpoiles; brought to empriſon the Romans: as not doubting a proſperous ſucceſſe. The ſouldiers ſaluted Tiberius by the name of Emperour, in the ſame place where the battell was fought: and erected a mount of earth, as a token of victory: and put on it the armour of the enemie: and vnderneath the names of the nations which they had conquered.
            
            
               
                  V. A ſecond battellvvoon by the Romans against the Germans.
               THe wounds which the Germans receiued, and their ouerthrow, did not ſo much fret and greeue them as this ſpectacle: in ſo much that thoſe which were on the point to abandon their dwellings, and make preparation to paſſe the riuer Albis; catche vp their weapons, and demaund battell. The common ſort, the chiefe Gentlemen, yong and old, aſſaile and endanger the Romans. At laſt they choſe a place; enuironed with woods and a riuer, which had a narrow wateriſh plaine within it. The woods were enuironed likewiſe with a deepe marſh: ſauing on one ſide, where the Angriuarians had raiſed vp a broad cauſey, by which their territories were ſeparated from the Cheruſci. The footemen ſtayed there: the horſemen hid themſelues in the woods adioyning: that when the legions ſhould enter the wood, they might charge them on the back. Caeſar was informed of all their plots: he knew their deſeignments, their places, their open and ſecret deuiſes, and turned the enemies fraud to his owne deſtruction. The charge of the horſemen and the plaine he committed to Seius Tubero Lieutenant: part of the footemen marched

in order of battell to the wood: and part went about to win the cauſey: the hardeſt he vndertooke himſelfe; and the reſt he committed to the Lieutenants. They vnto whom the plaine fell, did eaſily enter it: but thoſe which were to aſſault the cauſey were ſore gaulded, & put backe, with blowes from aboue as if they had ſcaled a wall. The Captaine perceiuing that the enemy had the aduantage by fighting ſo neere, cauſed the legions to retire a little: and commaunded the ſling-caſters and ſtonecaſters to let freely at them, and driue them from their fence. Many darts and ſpeares were ſhot out of engins; and the more the enemies were in ſight, the more wounds they receiued. The cauſey being taken, Caeſar himſelfe with his gard, couragiouſly entered the woods, and fought with the enemy hand to hand: who had behinde him a marſh; and the Romans a riuer or mountaines: the place brought a neceſſitie of fighting to both partes: their hope conſiſted in their manhoode: and their ſafetie in the victory. The Germans were no leſſe couragious: but they were ouercome by the aduantage of weapons, and manner of fight. For being a great multitude, and the place narrow, they could neither thruſt out, nor draw back thoſe long pikes; nor vſe any nimblenes of body in running in, and ſtepping back: but were forced to fight, and not mooue a foote. Contrarily the Roman ſouldier, his ſhield cloſe to his breaſt: his ſword in his hand: gored the wide ſided, and open faced barbarian: and by their ſlaughter opened a way through them. Arminius being now courageles, by reaſon of continuall danger, or freſh bleeding wound lately receiued: but Inguiomerus flue vp and downe the army, wanted rather fortune then courage. And Germanicus to be the better knowne, vnlaced his helmet, and beſought them to continue the ſlaughter: captiues there was no neede of: only the generall butchery of the nation, would make an end of the warre. And in the euening he draweth out one legion from the army; to make ready the camps: the reſt filled themſelues vntill night with the bloud of the enemie. And for the horſemen, it is hard to geſſe which had the better. Then Caeſar hauing praiſed the valour of the conquerors in an aſſembly, made a great heape of armour with this prowd title. The people betwixt Rhene and Albis being vanquiſhed, Tiberius Caeſars army doth dedicate thoſe monuments to Mars, Iupiter, and Auguſtus.
                   Of himſelfe he added no word, for feare of enuie: or becauſe the memory of the fact was ſufficient teſtimonie for him. Immediately after he commaunded Stertinius to make warre againſt the Angriuarians, vnleſſe they would preſently yeeld: who humbly intreating and yeelding to all that was demaunded, receiued generall pardon. But the ſommer being now far ſpent, ſome of the legions were ſent back to the ſtanding camps; and Germanicus embarking many, conueyed them to the Ocean, by the riuer Amiſia. At the firſt they had a quiet & calme ſea: no noiſe heard, but the noiſe of the oares of a thouſand veſſels; which ſomtimes likewiſe were driuen with ſailes: by and by haile powring downe out of blacke and thicke clouds; and ſundry ſtormes and tempeſts, ariſing from all parts; and vncertaine raging ſurges depriued them of all foreſight, and skill in gouerning their ſhipping. And the ſouldier fearfull and vnacquainted with the dangerous aduentures of ſea, whileſt he troubleth the mariners, or vnſeaſonably goeth about to helpe; hindered the office of the more skilfull. In the ende, the heauen, and all the ſea gaue place to the ſouthwind: which more and more preuailing, through the mountaines of Germanie, deepe riuers, and huge clouds; and growing more violent and boiſterous through the cold of the North, neer which it is: toſſed and ſcattered the ſhipping into the wilde Ocean, or rockie Ilands, or dangerous and vnknowen quickſands. Which being a little, but with much a doe eſcaped, by the changing of the ſea, they went whither the wind droue them. They

could neither caſt anchor; nor pumpe out the water which came in on them. Horſes of ſeruice and cariage; bag and baggage; yea their armour, they threw into the ſea; that the ſhips might be lightened, which leaked at the ſides; the billowes ſwelling more and more. By how much the Ocean is more violent, then any other ſea; and Germany exceedeth other countries in roughnes and ſharpnes of aire: by ſo much that misfortune exceeded others, in ſtrangenes and greatnes: happening at the ſhores of the enimies land, or in ſo deepe and wide a ſea; that it hath beene beleeued to be the laſt, and beyond which there is no land. Some of their ſhips were drowned; many caſt vpon Ilands far off: the ſouldiers, the countrey being vnhabited, periſhed by famine: vnleſſe it were ſuch as releeued themſelues with the horſes as were caſt a land. Germanicus gallie onely arriued at the Chauceans countrey: who ſeeing himſelfe all thoſe daies and nights vpon rocks, and points; crying that he onely was guiltie of the caſting away of ſo many perſons: could hardly be kept and ſtaied by his friends, from caſting himſelfe into the ſame ſea. At length the ſea growing lower, and the wind more fauourable; the lame and vntackled ſhippes, with a fewe oares, or their garments ſpread in ſtead of ſailes, or drawen at the taile of ſtronger, returned. Which Germanicus mending in haſte, ſent to ſearch the Ilands: by which care many of the ſoldiers were gathered togither and recouered. The Angriuarians lately receiued into protection, deliuered ſome, which they had redeemed, of ſuch as dwelt further in the land: ſome were caſt into Britany, and ſent backe by the petie Kings. As euerie man returned from far countries; he reported ſtrange woonders; tempeſtuous ſtormes; birdes neuer before heard of; ſea-monſters; doubtfull ſhapes, whether of men or beaſts: which they had either ſeene, or imagined through feare.
            
            
               
                  VI. Germanicus being returned, waſteth the countrey of the Chatti: and recouereth an enſigne, loſt with Varus.
               
               BVt the fame of the nauie loſt; as it did put the Germans in a hope, of beginning a new warre: ſo did it giue Germanicus ſtomack to curbe them. Wherupon he comanded C. Silius to goe againſt the Chatti, with thirtie thouſand footemen, and three thouſand horſmen: and himſelfe inuaded the Marſi with ſtronger forces. Their Captaine called Malouendus; who not long before had yeelded himſelfe, gaue notice how, that not far off, an enſigne of Varus legion was buried, and kept but with a ſlender guarde. A band of men was ſent thither out of hand: with direction, that ſome ſhould toll them out, and aſſaile them in the front; and others by inuironing them behind, to open the earth and take out the enſigne: fortune ſhewing hir-ſelfe fauourable to both the companies. This made Caeſar more forward, and entereth further into the land: waſteth, forrageth, rifleth the countrey; the enimie not daring to encounter him: or if at any time he did reſiſt; he was ſtraight driuen back: neuer (as they vnderſtood by certaine captiues) fearing more in their liues. For they gaue out, that the Romans were inuincible, and not to be daunted with any misfortune; ſeeing that hauing loſt their nauie, and armor; and after that the ſhores were couered, with the carcaſſes of their men and horſes; they inuaded them a freſh, with the ſame courage, and like fiercnes: yea as if they had increaſed their number. From thence the ſouldiers were brought backe to their winter ſtanding camps: glad that they had recompenſed their misfortune by ſea, with ſo proſperous a victorie. Caeſar vſed great largeſſe, recompenſing euerie man, to the value of the loſſe he had

ſuſtained. Little doubt, but the enimie grew faint harted, and began to conſult, how he might intreat a peace: and that if the next ſommer the wars ſhould haue beene continued, there would be an ende of all. But Germanicus was ſollicited by often letters from Tiberius, to returne and receiue the triumphe which was ordained for him: that he had paſſed through many chaunces and accidents: that he had had proſperous ſucceſſe in many battels: that he ſhould remēber what grieuous and cruell loſſes he had ſuſtained, not by any ouerſight of the Captaine, but by the winds & waues of the ſea: that he had bin ſent nine times into Germanie by Auguſtus of famous memorie: where he had atchieued more noble exploites by counſel then force. So he had receiued the ſubmiſſion of the Sigambri: ſo the Sueuians, and the King of the Maroboduans were inforced to make peace: that the Cheruſci and other rebellious nations, ſeeing the Romans had had a ſufficient reuenge on them, might be left to war one againſt another. But Germanicus intreating for one yeere longer, to finiſh the enterpriſes he had begun; Tiberius aſſaulted his modeſtie more earneſtly; offering him the conſulſhip once more: which he ſhould execute in perſon. He added further, that if there were any more wars to be enterpriſed, he ſhould reſerue that ſubiect, for the glorie of his brother Druſus: who no other enimy being left, could not but by warring againſt the Germans, get the title of Emperor, or win the crowne of laurell. Germanicus made no longer ſtay, although he knew well that thoſe were but colours, ſought through enuie, to draw him from the glorie he had alreadie purchaſed.
            
            
               
                  VII. Libo accuſed of treaſon, killeth himſelfe.
               ABout the ſame time Libo Druſus, one of the Scribonian familie, was accuſed for practizing againſt the ſtate. The beginning, the order, and the end of that buſines, I will ſet downe: becauſe thoſe things came then firſt to light, which for ſo many yeares had conſumed and eaten the common-wealth. Firmius Cato a Senator, and one of Liboes inward friends, induced this vncircumſpect yong man, and eaſily led to vanities, to giue credit to the Chaldeans promiſes, Magicians ceremonies, and interpreters of dreames: vainely and boaſtingly putting him in minde, that Pompey was his great grandfather; Scribonia, who had been Auguſtus wife, his aunt; the Caeſars his coſen germans: and that his houſe was full of images and monuments of his predeceſſors. He incited him further to licentious riot: to take vp and borrow money, making himſelfe a companion of his want on luſts and familiarities, the better to wrap and conuince him with many euidences. When he had found witneſſes ſufficient, and ſuch alſo of his ſeruants which were priuie to the whole matter, he deſired he might be admitted to the ſpeech of the Prince: and by meanes of Flaccus Veſcularius, a Gentleman of Rome, and one of Tiberius familiars, diſcouered the matter, and the man. Caeſar was content with the accuſation, yet denied conference with Firmius the accuſer: ſaying, that by the ſame meſſenger Flaccus, their ſpeech might paſſe from one to the other. In the meane ſeaſon he honoreth Libo with the Pretorſhip, inuiteth him to his table, neuer changed his countenance towards him, nothing paſſionate in words (ſo skilfull he was in concealing his anger) and although he could haue preuented both his words and enterpriſes; yet he deſired rather to know the manner of his proceedings: vntill one Iunius, ſollicited to conuince and raiſe infernall ſpirits by inchantments, vttered the matter to Fulcinius Trio, one amongſt the promoters, compted quick and readie witted, and careleſſe of diſcredit. This Trio accuſed immediately the partie: went to the Conſuls:

and required that the Senators would heare the matter. The Senators were aſſembled, and giuen to vnderſtand that they were to deliberate of an important and waightie affaire. Libo in the meane time changing his attire, went with certaine noble women from one houſe to an other, intreated his coſens, and craueth their good word in his extremitie: but all of them refuſed; ſome pretending one excuſe, ſome another; fearing leaſt they ſhould be thought partakers of the ſame crime. The day come that the Senate ſate; being through feare, or as ſome report, faining himſelfe ſick, weake and weary, was brought to the court gates in a chariot, leaning on his brother, and holding vp his hands, craued pardon of Tiberius; who receiued him, neuer once changing countenance. Then Caeſar read the libels alowd, & their authors; ſo moderating himſelfe, that he was not thought either to mitigate or aggrauate any way the crimes. Beſides Trio and Catus, there ſtepped foorth two other accuſers, Fonteius Agrippa, and C. Liuius, ſtriuing which had beſt right to pleade againſt him; vntill Liuius (becauſe they would not yeeld the one to the other, and Libo came without any aduocate) promiſed that he himſelfe would ſet downe ſeuerally euery crime by him committed. Then he produced ſuch ſottiſh declarations, that among other things, they contained, how Libo had conſulted with the Magicians, whether he ſhould euer haue money enough, to be able to couer the Appian way, from Rome to Brunduſium; with many ſuch ſimple & friuolous matters, and more mildly to tearme them, pitifull. Yet the accuſer enforced one thing more: that in one writing of Liboes owne hand, there were added certaine dangerous and vnknowne characters, to the names of the Caeſars and Senators. And the partie arraigned denying it; it was thought good, that his bondmen which knew his hand, ſhould be examined vpon the rack. And becauſe that by an ancient decree of Senate, it was not lawfull to torture a bondman againſt the life of his Lord; Tiberius a ſubtile deuiſer of new lawes, commaundeth them all to be ſold to a publick Actor, that without preiudice of the decree, they might be tortured, as not being Liboes bondmen. Whereupon Libo deſired that the matter might be deferred to the next day. And being at his houſe, intreated his neere kinſman P. Quirinius, to make the laſt interceſſion for him to the Prince: who had anſwere giuen him that he ſhould intreate the Lords of the Senate. In the meane ſeaſon his houſe was beſet with a gard of ſouldiers, who in the entry made ſuch a noiſe, that they might eaſily be both heard and ſeene. When as Libo loathing the very ſight of the dainties miniſtred for his laſt comfort, began to call for ſome one to murder him: and taking his bond-mens right hands, and putting a ſword in them; whileſt they trembling with feare, and refuſing to do it, ran from one place to another: ouerthrew the light on the table: in that mortall and deadly darknes, he thruſt himſelfe twiſe in the guts. At the grone when he fell, his freed men came running about him: but the ſouldiers ſeeing the murder, ſtoode aloofe. Notwithſtanding, the accuſation was proſecuted with like aſſeueration, and Tiberius ſwore, that if he had not voluntarily haſtened his owne death, he would haue begged his life, although he had beene guiltie. His goods were diſtributed among the accuſers, and Pretors roomes were extraordinarily giuen to ſuch as were of the Senate. Then Cotta Meſſallinus, gaue his opinion, that Liboes image ſhould not be carried in the funerals of his poſteritie. C. Lentulus, that none of the Scribonian familie ſhould take vpon him the ſurname of Druſus. By the aduiſe of Pomp. Flaccus, certaine daies of generall proceſſions were ordained. L. P. and Gallus Aſinius, and Papius Mutilus, and L. Apronius, were of opinion, that gifts ſhould be offered to Iupiter, Mars, and the goddeſſe of Concord; and that the Ides of Septemb. when Libo killed himſelfe ſhould be kept holy day. The dignities

and flatteries of theſe men, I haue thought good to regiſter, that it might be knowne that that was alwayes an old diſeaſe in the common-wealth.
            
            
               
                  VIII. An expulſion of Mathematicians. Areformation of abuſes.
               DEcrees of Senate were ordained, for the expulſing of Aſtrologers, and Magicians Vide annotat. li. 1. hiſt. nu. 40. cap. 7. out of Italie: among whom L. Pituanius was throwen headlong from the Tarpeian rocke: and the Conſuls puniſhed P. Martius without the Eſquilin gate, with the ſound of trumpets, according to the auncient cuſtome. At the next meeting of the Senate, L. Haterius once Conſull, and Octauius Fronto, who had beene Pretor, ſpake much againſt the ſuperfluous exceſſe of the citie. Where it was decreed, that they ſhould not ſerue at their tables veſſell of beaten gold, nor men weare ſilke aboue their degree. Fronto went further, and demaunded that there might be an order ſet downe touching their plate, houſhould ſtuffe, and number of ſeruants: for it was yet a thing in vſe; for the Senators to lay downe that for a decree, which they thought expedient for the common wealth. Gallus Aſinius ſpake to the contrary: ſaieng, that with the greatnes of the Empire, priuate mens wealth was increaſed: which was no new matter, but of old times receiued likewiſe: that the wealth in Fabricius time differed from that in Scipioes; and yet all referred to the common wealth: which being but in meane eſtate, the citizens houſes were thereafter. But now that it is growen to that magnificence; the eſtate of particular men is bettered alſo. Neither is there anything too much or too little, either in plate, number of ſeruants, or other furniture of houſhold, but in reſpect of the qualitie of the owner. The reuenewes of a Senator were diſtinguiſhed from a gentlemans: not bicauſe they differed in nature; but as they were preferred in place, degrees, and dignities, th'one before th'other. Theſe things are procured for the recreation of the minde, or health of bodie. Vnles peraduenture they would that the moſt noble, ſhould take moſt cares vpon them, and hazard their perſons in moſt dangers; and yet want thoſe pleaſures and comforts, which beſt ſerued to lenifie and make them more eaſie. The acknowledging of vices vnder honeſt termes, and the likenes of affections in the hearers mindes, cauſed Gallus to haue an eaſie aſſent. Tiberius added, that that was no time for reformation: & if there were any diſſolutiō in maners, there ſhould not want one to redreſſe it. Among theſe things, L. Piſo reprehending the ambition vſed in places of iudgement, corruption of iuſtice, crueltie of aduocates, the threats of accuſers; proteſted he would be gon & forſake the citie, and lead his life far off in ſome retired and ſolitarie place in the countrie: and in ſo ſaying went out of the Senat houſe. Tiberius was mooued at this; and did what he could to pacifie him with faire words: and withall, was earneſt with his neereſt kinſmen to ſtay him, either by intreatie or authoritie. Not long after the ſame Piſo, gaue no leſſe free teſtimonie of his griefe, by ſommoning Vrgulania to appeere in iudgement; whom the fauour of Augusta had priuiledged aboue the courſe of lawes: But Vrgulania diſobeying the ſommonce being conueied into Caeſars houſe, made ſmall reckoning of Piſo: yet he deſiſted not, although Auguſta complained her credit was touched therein, and her calling embaſed. Tiberius thinking it a part of curteſie, ſo far to yeelde vnto his mothers requeſt, as to promiſe he would goe to the Pretors Tribunall to defend Vrgulania: went out of the pallace, the ſouldiers being commanded to follow a far off. The people which met him in the face, marked with what a ſetled countenance he went forward, protracting the time & the way with diuers

diſcourſes, vntill that (Piſoes friends labouring in vaine to diſſwade him from the ſuite) Auguſta had commaunded the money which was demaunded to be brought to the Tribunall. That matter was ſo ended, not without ſome glory to Piſo, and greater fame to Caeſar. But Vrgulaniaes credit and authoritie was ſo ouer great in the citie, that ſhe diſdained to come, and giue witnes in a matter which was handled before the Lords of the Senate. And therefore the Pretor was ſent to examine her in her houſe: when as the auncient cuſtome was, that euen the Veſtall virgins were examined as witneſſes, in the common place of pleading and iudgement. I would not recite the matters propounded that yeare, but that the diuerſitie of opinions, betwixt Gn. Piſo, and Aſinius Gallus in that point is worthie the knowing. For Piſo was of opinion, that although Caeſar had promiſed he would be preſent, that ſo much the rather he would proſecute his cauſe againſt Vrgulania: and that in the abſence of the Prince, the Senators and Gentlemen might execute their charge, as a thing well beſeeming the dignitie of the common wealth. Gallus, becauſe Piſo had firſt taken vpon him the colour of libertie, held, that there was nothing done with maieſtie, and anſwerable to the dignitie of the people of Rome; but what was done in Caeſars preſence: and therefore, the aſſemblies of Italie, and meetings of Prouinces, were to be reſerued vntill he would be preſent. Theſe things were debated very hotly on both ſides, Tiberius giuing them the hearing, and holding his peace, and in the end they were deferred. There aroſe another controuerſie betwixt Gallus and Caeſar. For Gallus was of opinion, that the aſſemblies for creation of Magiſtrates, ſhould be from fiue to fiue yeares: and that the Lieutenants of the legions, who had executed that charge before they had been Pretors, ſhould then be choſen Pretors elect: and that the Prince ſhould euery yeare nominate twelue. Little doubt but this aduiſe went deepe, and reached to a ſecret of ſtate. Caeſar neuertheleſſe, as though his authoritie ſhould thereby be made greater, ſaid, that it ſtoode not with his modeſtie to chooſe ſo many, and defer ſo many. And if the election ſhould be euery yeare, hardly could it be choſen, but ſome would be offended, although ſuch as had the repulſe, might be comforted with hope to be choſen the next yeare. And how would they hate me, which ſhould be deferred aboue fiue yeares? how could it be knowne in ſo long a time, what euery mans minde is, what his houſe, and fortune: If men grow too prowd in one yeare, what would they be if they ſhould be cōtinued for fiue yeares? Magiſtrates ſhould ſo be multiplied fiue for one: and lawes ſubuerted: which haue preſcribed a time for ſuters to exerciſe their induſtrie, and to procure and inioy dignities. With this ſpeech, in ſhew plauſible, he confirmed the ſtate to himſelf: he bettered the reuenews of certain of the Senators: and therefore it was the more to be maruelled that he accepted no better of the requeſt of M. Hortalus, a noble yong man, fallen into manifeſt pouertie. This Hortalus was nephew to Hortenſius the Orator, and by the liberalitie of About 7812. li. 10. s. ten hundred thouſand ſeſterces giuen him by Augustus, perſwaded to marry, and haue children, leaſt ſo worthy a family ſhould be extinguiſhed. Standing therfore with foure of his ſonnes before the entry of the Senat houſe, in ſtead of his opinion, in a full aſſembly of the Senat in the pallace, caſting his eyes ſometimes on the image of Hortenſius, placed among the orators, and ſometimes on that of Auguſtus, began as followeth. Theſe children, Lords of the Senat, whoſe number and tender yeeres you ſee; I haue not begotten of mine owne accord: but bicauſe the Prince did ſo exhort me: and bicauſe my predeceſſors had deſerued to haue iſſue to ſucceede them. As formy owne part, ſeeing I could neither attaine to wealth, nor win the peoples fauour through the alteration of times; nor yet eloquence, which is the proper ornament

of our houſe: I contented my ſelfe if my ſmall abilitie, were neither a reproch to my ſelfe, nor a burden vnto others. By the Emperors commaundement I tooke a wife: behold the ofspring and progenie, of ſo many Conſuls and Dictators: which I ſpeake not for enuie to anie, but to mooue pitie. They ſhall inioie O Caeſar whileſt thou doſt flouriſh, ſuch honours as thou wilt beſtow vpon them. In the meane ſpace defend from pouertie L Hortenſius nephewes ſonnes, brought vp by Auguſtus. Tiberius perceiuing that the Senators were inclined to his ſpeeches, was the more readier to gainſaie him almoſt in theſe words. If all ſuch as are needie begin to come hither, and craue for money for their children, they ſhall neuer be all ſatisfied, and the common-wealth vnable to ſupplie their neceſſities. Neither haue our predeceſſors permitted vs to digreſſe, from the matter put in deliberation; and when we ſhould intreat of ſomewhat to the benefit of the common-wealth, debate how to better our priuate eſtates: and increaſe our ſubſtance with the hatred of the Senat, and Princes, whether they graunt or denie our requeſts. Theſe are not petitions, but vnſeaſonable, importunate, vnlooked for crauing: to riſe vp in this place and with the number and age of children, when the Lords are aſſembled to handle other matters, to aſſaile the modeſtie of the Senate, and vſe the like violence vnto me, and as it were forciblie to breake open the publicke treaſury: which if we waſt by ambition, muſt be ſupplied by vnlawfull meanes. Augustus of famous memorie, hath giuen thee money Hortalus, vnasked: yet not vpon condition that it ſhould alwaies be giuen thee: for in ſo dooing, induſtrie would decay, and idlenes increaſe: if men had not a feare and a hope in them. And if all men ſhould careleſlie expect reliefe from others, they would be to themſelues vnprofitable, and to vs burdenſome. Theſe & the like ſpeeches, although they were heard with the approbation of ſuch, whoſe cuſtome is to applaude all the Princes actions, be they honeſt or diſhoneſt: yet manie held their toong, or ſecretly muttered: which Tiberius perceiued; and hauing pauſed a little: ſaide that he had anſwered Hortalus: Neuertheleſſe if it ſo ſeemed good vnto the Lords of the Senat, he would giue euerie one of his male children * two hundred thouſand ſeſterces. The reſt gaue him thankes: Hortalus helde his toong, either for feare, or as retaining ſomewhat of the nobilitie of his aunceſtors, About 1562. li. 10. s. euen in extremitie of fortune. Yet Tiberius had no compaſſion afterward on him, although the Hortenſian familie fell into ſhamefull pouertie.
            
            
               
                  IX. Clemens a bondſlaue, counterfeiteth himſelfe to be Agrippa: and his bold anſwere.
               THe ſame yeere, an audacious part of a bondſlaue had ſhaken the whole ſtate with ciuill wars and diſcord; had it not beene preuented in good time. A bondman of Agrippas called Clemens, vnderſtanding of Augustus death: with a courage more then ſeruile, purpoſed to go to the Iland Planaſia, and by fraud or force bring away Agrippa to the German campe. But his enterpriſe was hindered by the ſlownes of a ſhip of burden: and in the meane ſeaſon Agrippa being murdered, bending his mind to greater and dangerouſer attempts; ſtealeth away his aſhes: and being come to Coram, a promontorie of Ethruria, in vnknowen places hideth himſelfe, vntill his beard and haire were growen out; being in fauour and yeeres not vnlike his Lord. This done, he whiſpereth it abroad, by fit companions of his ſecrets: firſt (as in things forbidden commonly it is wont to be) by priuie rumors, that Agrippa was yet aliue: then openly, in the credulous eares of the

weaker ſort; or buſie headed and turbulent: and therefore moſt deſirous of nouelties. His manner was towards night to go to ſmall townes; ſhewing himſelfe abroad, but ſeldome: nor ſtay long in a place. And bicauſe time, and the eie trie out truth; and falſhood winneth credit on a ſudden, and by vncertainties, he either left ſome ſpeech of him where he had beene, or preuented it, before any was begun. In the mean time it was commonly reported throughout Italy, and beleeued at Rome, that Agrippa by the goodnes of the gods was preſerued aliue. In ſo much that being arriued at Hoſtia: there great multitudes, and in the citie ſecret aſſemblies ſhewed ſignes of ioy: Tiberius being doubtfull and perplexed, whether he ſhould make away his bondman by ſouldiers; or ſuffer that vaine credulouſnes to vaniſh away with time. Thus wauereing betwixt ſhame and feare: ſometimes thinking it no policie to make light of any thing: and ſometime leſſe to feare all things: in the end committed the matter to Salluſtius Criſpus. He chuſeth two of his followers (or as ſome ſaie ſouldiers) and perſwadeth them, as though they had fled for ſome offence to goe to him; offer him money; promiſe him loyaltie; and that they would ſtand to him in all dangers. They fulfilling his commaundement, eſpieng a night when he had no guarde: with aide ſufficient, bound him, ſtopped his mouth, and drew him to the pallace. And when Caeſar asked him, How he was made Agrippa: it is reported hee anſwered, As thou waſt made Caeſar. He could not bee brought by any meanes to diſcloſe his confederates. Neither durſt Tiberius puniſh him openly; but in a ſecret part of the pallace commaunded him to be murdered; and his bodie priuily to be conueied away. And although many of the Princes own houſe, Senators, and gentlemen, were reported to haue ſuſtained him with their goods, & aided him with their counſell; yet there was no further enquirie made. In the end of this yeere a triumphall arch was erected neere to Saturnus Temple, for the recouerie of the enſignes loſt with Varus, vnder the conduct of Germanicus, and Caeſars good fortune. And a Temple built alſo of ſtrong fortune, neere Tyber in the gardens which Caeſar the Dictator had bequeathed to the people of Rome: and a Chappell dedicated to the Iulian familie; and an image to Auguſtus at Bouilles.
            
            
               
                  IX. Germanicus triumpheth: is ſent to the Eaſt. The death of Archelaus King of Cappadocia.
               C. Coelius, and L. Pomponius being Conſuls, the ſeuenth Kalends of Iune, Germanicus Caeſar triumphed for the victories gotten againſt the Cheruſci, Chatti, and Angriuari, and all other nations inhabiting to the riuer of Albis. In which triumph were caried the ſpoiles, and captiues, and counterfeit of the mountaines, riuers, and battels; and ſo the warre was taken as ended, becauſe he was forbidden to proſecute it any further. The comlines of his perſon, and triumphall chariot, loaden with fiue of his children, made the ſhew more gallant. But when they thought with themſelues how vnluckie the peoples fauour was in his father Druſus: that his vncle Marcellus was taken from them in the flowre of his youth, & heate of the peoples loue: that the affection of the people of Rome was vnfortunate, and of ſmall continuance, they were all ſecretly ſtriken into a feare. And although Tiberius gaue in Germanicus name, to euery one of the people * three About 46. 1. 10. d. ob. hundred ſeſterces a man, and made him his copartner in the Conſulſhip; yet could neuer be accompted a ſincere friend, but that he went about to remoue the yong man, vnder colour of honor, and forged pretences; or greedily taking hold of ſuch

as were offered by chaunce. King Archelaus had now fiftie yeares enioyed Cappadocia, greatly diſliked of Tiberius, becauſe that during his being at Rhodes, he had vſed no ſhew of dutie towards him: which Archelaus did not omit through pride, but becauſe he was ſo admoniſhed by Auguſtus familiareſt friends. For whileſt C. Caeſar yet flouriſhed, and managed the affaires of the Eaſt, Tiberius friendſhip was ſuſpected, as dangerous. The houſe of the Caeſars was no ſooner extinguiſhed, and that himſelfe was in poſſeſſion of the Empire, but he tolleth Archelaus by his mothers letters to Rome: who not diſſembling her ſonnes diſpleaſure, offered him all gentle intreatie, if he would come to him with ſubmiſſion. He then ignorant of the trechery, or miſdoubting violence if he ſeemed to perceiue it, maketh haſte to the citie: where being churliſhly receiued, and anon after accuſed in Senate; not for the crimes which were pretended, but by anguiſh of minde, or feeblenes of age; and becauſe not only baſe, but alſo things indifferent are ſtrange and vnuſuall to kings; he either willingly or naturally ended his life. The kingdome was afterward reduced into a prouince: and Caeſar declaring, that with the reuenews thereof, the tribute of one in the hundred might be eaſed; made a decree, that from thence forward one ſhould be leuied in two hundred. At the ſame time Antiochus, king of the Comageni, and Philopater, king of the Cilicians being dead, thoſe nations were deuided among themſelues, ſome deſiring to be gouerned by the Romans, and others by Kings. And the prouinces of Syria and Iudaea, ouercharged with taxes, made ſupplication that their tributes might be diminiſhed. Theſe things therefore, with thoſe which I haue rehearſed of Armenia, Tiberius ſheweth to the Lords of the Senat: and that the tumults of the Orient, could no way be pacified but by Germanicus wiſedome. As for himſelfe, he was ſtriken in age, and Druſus was not yet of ripe yeares. And thereupon by decree of Senate, Germanicus had the charge giuen him ouer all the prouinces, deuided by ſea, and a greater commaunde whither ſoeuer he went, then any, which either by lot or Princes ſending receiued gouernment. Now Tiberius had before remoued from Syria Creticus Silanus, who was by marriage allied to Germanicus, his daughter being promiſed in marriage to Nero Germanicus eldeſt ſon; & in his roome had appointed Gn. Piſo to be Lieutenant, a man both raſh and headſtrong: not knowing what it was to obey, as hauing that fiercenes of courage naturally from Piſo his father: who during the ciuill warres, ayded in moſt eager manner the ſides which roſe in Affrike againſt Caeſar: then following Brutus and Caſsius faction; and licence graunted him to returne, forbare all dignities, vntill he was wooed to accept the Conſulſhip, offered him by Augustus Caeſars owne motion. But beſides the hereditary courage of his fathers, the nobilitie and wealth of Plancina his wife, made him grow ſo inſolent, that he would ſcarſe yeeld to Tiberius, and contemned his children as far inferior to himſelfe: not doubting at all but that he was choſen gouernor of Syria, to bridle and keepe vnder Germanicus hopes. And ſome beleeued that he had had ſecret commaundement by Tiberius ſo to do: and without all peraduenture Auguſta had put it into Plancinaes head, (emulation being a vſuall matter amongſt women) to contend and quarrell with Agrippina. The court was deuided, ſome ſecretly fauouring Druſus, ſome Germanicus. Tiberius did leane to Druſus, as his owne, and of his bloud: but the ſmall affection Germanicus vncle caried him, was cauſe that others loued him the more: and becauſe that by the mothers ſide he was more nobly deſcended, hauing M. Antonius for his grandfather, and Augustus for his vncle: whereas Pomponius Atticus, a Gentleman of Rome, great grandfather to Druſus, did not anſwere the honorable memories of the Claudians. And Germanicus wife Agrippina, did go beyond Liuia

Druſus wife, in fruitfulnes, fame, and name. Neuertheles the brothers did exceedingly well agree, nothing at all moued with the emulation and contentions of their kindred.
            
            
               
                  X. The Germans are at variance betweene themſelues: an earth-quake in Aſia.
               NOt long after, Druſus was ſent to Illyrium, to be trained vp in feates of warre, and to win the ſouldiers harts. And Tiberius thought it better, that the yong man luſtly giuen, by the wanton laſciuiouſnes of the citie, ſhould be better faſhioned in the camp, and himſelfe in more ſecuritie, both his ſonnes being commaunders ouer the legions. But the colour was, that the Sweuians did craue aide againſt the Cheruſci: for being rid of the Romans, and voide of forren feare, through emulation of glory, a thing vſuall in that countrey, they turned their armes againſt themſelues. Ods there was none in the ſtrength of the nations, or valour of Captaines, but that the name of a king, which Maroboduus tooke vpon him, was odious to the common people: and Arminius fauoured becauſe he fought for libertie. And therefore not only the Cheruſci, and their confederates: Arminius olde ſouldiers tooke armes: but the Sweuian nations alſo of Maroboduus kingdome. The Semnones and the Longobards tooke part: and ioyning with Arminius had preuailed; if Inguiomerus with a ſtrong companie of his vaſſalles, had not fled to Maroboduus for no other cauſe, but onely being old and vncle to Arminius, diſdained to obey him being but yoong and his brothers ſonne. They pitcht their battell with like hope on both ſides: not vſing rouing incurſions, or skirmiſhing in ſcattered troupes, as the manner of the Germans in times paſt had beene: but by long warring againſt vs, they had accuſtomed themſelues to follow their enſignes, ſtrengthen and aide one another, and obey their Captaines. Then Arminius viewing his armie on horſebacke vaunted to all he met, that their libertie was recouered; the legions ſlaine: & ſhewed in the hāds of many of the ſoldiers, the ſpoiles and armour which by force they had taken from the Romans. Contrarily he called Maroboduus a runnagate, vnskilfull in warres; that he had ſaued himſelfe in the lurking holes of Hercynia: and then by gifts and embaſſies, entreated an agreement: that he was a traitor to his countrey, and one of Caeſars followers: therefore that they ſhould thruſt him out; with no leſſe hatred then they had ſlaine Varus Quinctilius: that they ſhould now call to minde ſo many battels: by ſucceſſe of which; hauing in the ende driuen out the Romans; it is eaſilie ſeene who ſhould haue the vpper hand. Neither did Maroboduus on his ſide forget to vaunt himſelfe, or inueigh againſt his enimie: but taking hold of Inguiomerus, told them that all the honours of the Cheruſci conſiſted in that body: and that all that fell out luckily, was atchieued by his counſell. That Arminius a ſot; vnexpert in matter of warre; attributed others glorie to himſelfe: becauſe he had entrapped by guile, three vnfurniſhed legions with their Captaine, nothing miſdoubting their fraude; to the great loſſe of Germanie, & his owne ignominie; ſeeing his wife, & his ſon do yet endure ſeruitude. But as for him, he had maintained the honor of Germanie vnſtained, being aſſailed by twelue legions, vnder the conduct of Tiberius; and in the ende parted with reaſonable conditions. Neither did it repent him that it was yet in their choiſe; either to make war againſt the Romans, or accept of peace without bloudſhed. Both parts being incenſed with theſe ſpeeches; yet other peculiar cauſes did more inflame them. Conſidering that the Cheruſci, and the Longobardi, did fight for their auncient

honours, or freſh libertie: and contrarily the others to inlarge their dominions. A fiercer encounter then this there was neuer ſeene: nor a more doubtfull iſſue: the right wings on both ſides being ſlaine. And a new fight was hoped for, if Maroboduus (an euident token of a faint hart) had not retired to the hils: and being ſomwhat weakned, by the back ſliding of Traitors, withdrew himſelf to the Marcomans, and ſent Ambaſſadors to Tiberius to craue aide. Vnto whom it was anſwered, that he had no reaſon to craue the Romans aide againſt the Cheruſci; ſeeing he aided the Romans nothing at all, when they fought againſt the ſame enimie. Yet as we haue ſaid, Druſus was ſent to make a peace. The ſame yeere twelue famous cities of Aſia, were deſtroied by an earthquake in the night: a calamitie ſo much the greater, by how much the leſſe looked for. The vſuall meanes of ſauing themſelues in in like caſes, by fleeing to the open fields, doing them no good at all; bicauſe they were ſwallowed vp by the opening of the earth. It is reported that huge mountaines were laide flat, and plaines raiſed vp into high hils: and fier flaſhed out among thoſe ruines. And the diſaſtre being more grieuous among the Sardians, then elſewhere; greater cōpaſſion was had on them: for Caeſar promiſed them About 78 125 pound. an hundreth hundred thouſand ſeſterces: and releaſed thē for fiue yeeres ſpace of all that they were to pay to the common treaſurie. Next vnto them endomaged and relieued, were the Magnetians, neere vnto Sipylus. It was thought expedient for the ſame ſpace, to diſcharge of all tributes, the Temnians, Philadelphians, Aegetians, Appolonienſes and ſuch as are called Moſcenians, or Macedonians, of Hyrcania, and Hierocaeſarea, Myrina, Cymen, Tmolum; and to ſend ſome of the Senators, to view and relieue their preſent eſtate. This charge was committed to M. Aletus once Pretor; leaſt if one who had been once Conſull ouer Aſia, ſhould haue beene deputed; there might ſome emulation haue riſen betwixt equals; and thereby the buſines hindered. Caeſar did with no leſſe gratefull bountie, ſhew his liberalitie when he beſtowed the goods of Aemilia Muſa, a rich woman, fallen to the fiſque; vpon Aemilius Lepidus, of whoſe houſe ſhe ſeemed to haue been. And the like when he gaue the inheritance of Patuleius, a rich gentlemā of Rome (albeit he was inſtituted heire in part) to M. Seruillius, whom he found to haue beene written in the firſt not ſuſpected teſtament: hauing declared before, that both their nobilities were to be holpen with money. Neither did he at any time take any inheritāce, vnleſſe he had deſerued it by friendſhip. He did reiect all ſuch, as being vnknowen to him; and for hatred vnto others, declared the Prince to be their heires. And as he did relieue the honeſt pouertie of the innocent: ſo the prodigall and needie through their owne behauiour, he put from the Senat, or gaue licence to depart: as to Vibidius Varro, Marius Nepos, Appius Appianus, Cornelius Sulla, Q. Vitellius. At the ſame time, the Temples of the gods, begun by Auguſtus, and fallen to ruine by age or fire: he dedicated to Bacchus, Proſerpina, and Ceres, neer to the great Circus; which A. Poſthumius had vowed. And in the ſame place the Temple of Flora, built by Lucius and Marcus, Publicius, Aediles: And alſo Ianus Temple, which C. Duillius had built neere the herbe market; who firſt of all others, had a proſperous fight by ſea for the Romans: and deſerued a triumphe by ſea ouer thoſe of Carthage. The Temple of hope, which in the ſame war Atilius had vowed, was dedicated by Germanicus.
               
            
            
               
               
                  XII. The accuſation of Apuleia. Tacfarina maketh war in Affrica.
               IN the meane ſeaſon, the law againſt treaſon grew ſtrong: and a pickthanke accuſed Apuleia Varilia, Auguſtus ſiſters neece; that ſhe had reprochfully ſcoffed at Auguſtus, Tiberius, and his mother: and that nothing regarding that ſhe was by mariage allied to Caeſar, ſhe had abuſed her bodie. But as for the adulterie, there was ſufficient order taken by the law Iulia: yet Caeſar requeſted that the treaſon might be diſtinguiſhed from the other crime: and that ſhe might be puniſhed, if ſhe had ſpoken irreligiouſly againſt Augustus. As for that which ſhe had ſpoken againſt himſelfe, he would not haue it brought into examination. And being asked by a Conſull, what he thought of thoſe things ſhe was accuſed of, againſt his mother; he held his peace. But the next time the Senate met, he intreated in his mothers name, that ſuch words as ſhe had vttered againſt her, might not be conſtrued for a fault. Of treaſon alſo he acquited her: and intreated that the puniſhment of adultery, might not be ſeuerely enforced againſt her: perſwading her friends, that according to the example of their auncetors, they would remoue her from her kindred aboue two hundred miles: and Manlius the adulterer was baniſhed Italie and Affrike. When Vipſanius Gallus was dead, there aroſe a ſtrife in ſubrogating a Pretor in his roome: Germanicus and Druſus both then being at Rome, fauoring Haterius Agrippa, neere kinſeman to Germanicus: and ſome laboring to the contrary, deſired that according to the lawes, amongſuters ſuch ſhould preuaile as had the greateſt number of children: Tiberius reioycing, that the Senate debated the matter betwixt his children and the lawes. Without doubt the law was ouercome: but neyther by and by; nor with a few ſuffrages; but after the ſame manner, as when the lawes were in greateſt force. The ſame yeare the warre began in Affrike, Tacfarinas being the captaine of the enemies. This Tacfarinas was a Numidian borne; and being an aide ſouldier, receiued pay vnder the Romans: then a forſaker of them gathered together certaine wandering companions, inured to robberies, thefts, and pillage: whom he marſhalled into companies, and deuided into enſignes, according to the manner of ſeruice: and at laſt was reckoned a leader not of a diſorderly multitude, but captaine of the Muſulanians: which being a ſtrong nation neere vnto the deſert of Affrike, hauing no dwelling in townes, tooke armes, and drew their neighbours the Moores with them, vnder their captaine Mazippa. Their armie was ſo deuided, that Tacfarinas ſhould encamp himſelfe with choſen men, armed after the Roman manner, and traine them vp in diſcipline and obedience. Mazippa with a companie lightly armed, ſhould roue vp and downe, burne, ſlay, & terrifie. They had alſo perſwaded the Cinithians, a nation not to be deſpiſed, to the like: When as Furius Camillus Procōſul of Affrike, hauing gathered a legion, & the confederates which were vnder enſignes (a ſmall power if you reſpect the multitude of Moores and Numidians) and lead them againſt the enemie: and doubting nothing more then leaſt they ſhould ſhift off the battell for feare, with a hope of victory tolled them on, and in their hope ouerthrew them. Furius placed a legion in the middle, the cohorts lightly appointed, and two companies of horſemen in the wings. Tacfarinas refuſed not to ioyne battell: but the Numidians were vanquiſhed; and the Furian name, after ſo many yeares recouered the reputation of warriors. For euer ſince that Furius, which recouered the citie from the Galli, & his ſon Camillus; the glory of being captaines hath remained in other families. And this

man whom wee haue ſooken of, not being a man of action, his exploites were the more willingly ſet foorth by Tiberius to the Lords of the Senate: who decreed, that he ſhould be honored with triumphall ornaments; which to Camillus, by reaſon he was of a modeſt behauiour, could no way be a cauſe of enuie.
            
            
               XIII. Germanicus peregrination.
               
               THe yeere following, Tiberius was the third time made Conſull, and Germanicus the ſecond. But Germanicus tooke that dignitie at Nicopolis, a citie in Achaia, whither he came by the coaſt of Illyrium; hauing firſt viſited his brother Druſus, then making his abode in Dalmatia: and hauing had an vnproſperous voiage by the Adriaticall and Ionian ſea. By reaſon whereof he ſpent ſome daies in repairing his nauie: and in viſiting the coaſts, which by the victorie of Actium were made famous; and the ſpoiles dedicated by Auguſtus: with the place where Antonie had camped; by thoſe meanes renewing the memorie of his aunceſtors; for as I haue ſaide before, Augustus was his vncle, and Antonie his grandfather: and therefore in that place he ſawe repreſented, things both ioifull, and dolorous. From thence he went to Athens; which being an ancient citie, and a confederate with the Romans: he woulde haue but one Lictor before him. The Graecians receiued him with moſt exquiſite honors, and repreſented the ancient exploites, and ſaiengs of his predeceſſors: that their flatterie might be ſo much the more gratefull and acceptable. And going from thence to Euboea, hepaſſed by Lesbos: where Agrippina in hir laſt deliuerie, had Iulia. Then deſirous to viſite places of antiquitie and fame, he went to the confines of Aſia, Perinthum, and Byzans; cities of Thrace: then he entered the ſtraites of Propontis: and the mouth of the Pontion ſea. Withall he releeued the prouinces, which were wearied with ciuill diſcordes, and oppreſſions of magiſtrates. In his returne deſirous to viſite the ſacrifices of the Samothracians, and ſundrie other things; for change of fortune, and our beginning from thence woorthie of honor. The northren windes droue him backe againe. Then he coaſted Aſia, and came to Colophona, to conſult with the oracle of Clarius Apollo. There is no woman as at Delphos; but a prieſt, vſually choſen out of certaine families, and for the moſt part from Miletum: doth heare onely the number and names of ſuch as come to conſult: then going downe to a den, and drinking a draught of the ſecret fountaine; giueth anſwer (being commonly ignorant in learning and verſes) in verſes touching thoſe things, which a man hath fore-thought in his minde. It is reported, that by circumſtances of darke ſpeeches, as the manner of the oracles is, he prophecied that Germanicus death was not farre of. But C. Piſo, to the ende he might more ſpeedily begin to effectuate his determination, ſharpely rebuked the citie of Athens, alreadie amazed with his turbulent behauiour, indirectly carping at Germanicus, that contrarie to the dignitie of the Roman name, he had vſed too great curteſie: not towards the Athenians which had beene waſted by ſo manie miſeries; but towards a rif-raffe of other nations: and thoſe which were Mithridates confederates againſt Sulla; and Antonies againſt Augustus of famous memorie. Other ſtale matters he obiected alſo againſt them; as that they had not proſperous ſucceſſe againſt the Macedonians; and vſed violence againſt their owne citizens: bearing them alſo a ſpeciall grudge, bicauſe that at his requeſt they woulde not deliuer on Theophilus condemned of forgery, by the counſel of the Areopagites. From thence ſailing with all celeritie by the Cyclades, and ſeeking out the ſhorteſt cuts, at the Iland of Rhodes, he ouertooke Germanicus: nothing ignorant how he

had backbitten him: yet neuertheleſſe ſuch was his milde diſpoſition, that when Piſo was driuen through tempeſt againſt the rocks, and that his miſcarieng might haue beene imputed to chance, he ſent gallies to ſuccour him, and ſo deliuered him from danger. But all this did not mollifie Piſoes hart, but ſcarſe enduring one daies ſtaie, forſaketh and preuenteth Germanicus. For being come to the legions in Syria; winning the baſeſt of the common ſoldiers with gifts: he began to diſplace the old Centurions, and ſeuere Tribunes: and beſtowe their roomes on his followers, or to the moſt lewdeſt: ſuffered idlenes in the campes: licentiouſnes in the citie: vagrant and riotous ſouldiers to range the countrey: whereby they grew to ſuch corruption, that among the common ſort, he was called the father of the legions. Neither did Plancina containe hir ſelfe within the bounds of womanly modeſtie: but woulde be preſent at the horſemens exerciſe, as the running of the cohorts: and vſe reprochfull ſpeeches againſt Agrippina, and Germanicus: ſome of the better ſort of ſoldiers, readie to follow hir humour, in bad actions; bicauſe there was a ſecret rumour ſpred that thoſe things were not done with diſlike of the Emperour. Germanicus knew all this: but his greateſt care was to preuent the Armenians. That nation was in times paſt doubtfull and vncertaine to the Romans, not onely through their diſpoſition and affection; but alſo through the ſituation of their countrey: which ſtretching into our prouinces, reacheth euen to the Medes. And being ſeated betwixt great kingdomes, are often in wars, through hatred to the Romans, and enuie to the Parthians. King at that time they had none; Vonones being expulſed. But the nation fauoured Zeno, Polemon king of Pontus ſonne, bicauſe that from his infancie, he had imitated the cuſtomes and attire of the Armenians; their hunting and banqueting, and other exerciſes of the Barbarians greatly eſteemed: thereby winning the fauour as wel of the nobilitie, as cōmon people. Germanicus then in the city Artaxata, the noble men approouing it, in the preſence of a multitude, crowned him King: & the reſt doing him honor as their King, ſaluted him after the name of the city by the name of Artaxias. The Cappadocians being reduced to the forme of a Prouince; receiued Q Veranius for their Lieutenant: and to giue them a good hope of the Roman gouernment, ſome of the tributes vſually before paid to the Kings, diminiſhed: & ouer the Comageni, then firſt reduced vnder the regiment of a Pretor, Q. Seruaeus was made gouernor.
            
            
               
                  XIIII. Germanicus, and Piſoes iarring.
               ALbeit, all the affaires of the allies were ſetled in good order: yet Germanicus was nothing the more at his eaſe; by reaſon of Piſoes pride: who being commanded either by himſelfe, or by his ſonne, to conduct part of the legions to Armenia, neglected both. At length they both met at Cyrrum, where the tenth legion wintered: Piſo with a reſolute countenance againſt feare: and Germanicus as I haue ſaid the milder of the two, leſt he ſhould be thought to threaten. But his friends their crafts maſter in prouoking hatred; made the moſt of that which was true, & ſuggeſted much which was falſe, laying diuers things to his own charge, Plā
                     cinas, & his childrens. In the end, Caeſar in the preſence of a few of his familiars, vttered ſom ſuch ſpeech to Piſo, as anger & diſſimulation doth ſuggeſt, & Piſo anſwered with a proud ſubmiſſion, & ſo they departed open enemies. After that time Piſo was ſeldome ſeen at Caeſars tribunal; & if he did aſſiſt at any time, he ſhewed himſelfe froward, and alwayes diſſented openly from him. In a banket made by the king of the Nabateans, when there were preſented crownes of great waight to Caeſar and Agrippina;
                  
and light ones to Piſo and the reſt: He was heard to ſay, that that banket was made to the ſonne of a Romane Prince, and not to the ſonne of a king of Parthia: and withall threw away his crowne, vttering many ſpeeches againſt the ſuperfluitie of the banket: which although Germanicus could hardly digeſt, yet indured all patiently. Whileſt theſe things were adoing, Embaſſadors came from Artabanus, king of the Parthians, calling to minde their friendſhip and alliance with the Romans, and deſiring that they might renew right hands: and that in honor of Germanicus, he would come to the banke of Euphrates. And requeſted in the meane time, that Vonones might not remaine in Syria, leaſt he ſhould by meſſengers, draw the noble men of the countrey round about, to ciuill diſſentions. Touching the alliance, Germanicus anſwered magnificently: but concerning the kings comming, and the honor done to himſelfe, he anſwered ciuilly, and with great modeſtie. Vonones was remoued to Pompeiopolis, a ſea towne in Cilicia; not ſo much at Artabanus requeſt, as to ſpite Piſo; vnto whom he was moſt acceptable, for many benefits and gifts beſtowed vpon Plancina.
               
            
            
               
                  XV. Germanicus voiage to Aegypt and Thebes. Maroboduus and Catualda, both expelled, flee to the Romanes.
               WHen M. Silanus, and L. Norbanus were Conſuls, Germanicus went to Aegypt, to ſee the antiquities of the countrey; but pretended a care of the prouince: where he opened their ſtorehouſes, and brought downe the price of corne: and did other things, to win the fauour of the people: as to go without ſouldiers; weare open ſhoes: apparell himſelfe like the Grecians: imitating P. Scipio, whom we haue heard to haue done the like in Sicily, when the war was hotteſt againſt the Affricans. Tiberius hauing lightly blamed him for his behauior and apparell, did moſt ſharply rebuke him, that contrary to Augustus order, & without the princes licence, he had entered Alexandria. For Augustus amongſt other ſecrets of ſtate, had reſerued Aegypt; and forbidden all Senators, Noblemen, and Gentlemen, to enter into it, but with permiſſion, leaſt Italy ſhould be oppreſſed with famine: who ſoeuer ſhould be maiſter of that prouince: being the key of the ſea and land: and eaſily defended with a ſmall power, againſt a ſtrong hoſt. But Germanicus, not knowing that his voiage was miſliked, went vp Nilus, beginning at the towne Canopus, which the Lacedemonians built: becauſe Canopus the gouernor of their ſhip was buried there, when Meuelaus going backe to Greece, was carried to a contrary ſea, and land of Libya. The next mouth of the riuer from thence, is dedicated to Hercules; the firſt of which name was borne there, as the inhabitants do report; and of whom all which come after him, of like valour and vertue, tooke their ſurname. After that, he viſited the great monuments of auncient Thebes: where yet were to be ſeene Aegyptian letters in old buildings, which contained their ancient wealth. And one of their auncienteſt Prieſts, being commaunded to interpret thoſe letters in the countrey language; related, that in times paſt there had dwelt in that citie, ſeauen hundred thouſand perſons, of age fit to beare armes: and that with that armie King Rhamſes had conquered Libya, Aethiopia, Media, and Perſia, Bactria, and Scythia, and the countries which the Syrians, and the Armenians, and the Cappadocians, their next neighbours inhabited: and that their dominion reached from the Bithynian to the Lycian ſea. There were alſo read the tributes impoſed ouer nations, the weight of ſiluer and gold, the number

and furniture of horſes and armour: the gifts giuen to the Temples, the Iuory, ſweete ſauours: and what plentie of corne; what vtenſiles euerie nation was charged to furniſh; which were no leſſe magnificall, then are now commaunded, by the forces of the Parthi: or power of the Romans. But Germanicus was yet tied to other miracles: whereof the chiefeſt was, the image of Memnon made of ſtone; when it was ſtroken with the ſunne beames yeelding a ſound like a mans voice: and the Pyramides as great as mountaines, on the not paſſable ſandes; built a vie by Kings in times paſt to ſhew their riches: and the ditches wrought by handie worke to receiue the ouerflowing of Nilus; ſo narrow in ſome places, and ſo deepe in others, that the bottome cannot be found by any ſearch. From thence he came to Elephantines, and Syenes, in times paſt the bounds of the Roman Empire, which now openeth to the red ſea. Whileſt Germanicus ſpent that ſommer, in viſiting many Prouinces, Druſus gate no ſmall honour, by ſowing ſedition in Germanie: and incenſing them to purſue Maroboduus already weakened, euen to his vtter ruine. Among the Gotones, there was a noble yoong man called Catualda, who through Maroboduus violence hauing before fled his countrey; things ſtanding nowe in doubtfull termes; ventured a reuenge. And with a ſtrong power, entered the frontiers of the Marcomans: and hauing corrupted the chiefe noble men to his confederacie, forceth the Kings pallace, and a caſtle hard by. Where he found the olde ſpoiles of the Sueuians and the baſe raſcals of our Prouince: and certaine marchants; whom intercourſe of Marchandice, and a deſire of increaſing their wealth; or laſt of all a forgetfulnes of their countrey; had drawen from their own dwellings to the enimies countrey. Maroboduus being forſaken of all hands: had no other refuge left, but the mercie of the Romans. And hauing paſſed the riuer of Danub, where it coaſteth the Prouince of Notica; wrote vnto Tiberius, not as a fugitiue and ſuppliant, but putting him in minde of his former fortune and eſtate: alleaging that when ſundrie nations inuited him to their alliance, being ſometimes a renowned King, he preferred the amity of the Romans before them al. Caeſar anſwered him, that he ſhould haue a ſure and honorable dwelling in Italie, if he liſted to remaine there: but if any thing of greater aduauncement ſhould happen vnto him, that he ſhould depart with the ſame ſafe conduct he came thither. Afterward he declared in Senat, that the Athenians had no ſuch cauſe to feare Philip; nor the people of Rome, Pyrrhus and Antiochus, as this man. An oration of his is yet extant, wherein he extolleth his power; the ſtrength of the nations he had vnder him; and how neere an enimie he was to Italie; and what plots he had deuiſed to roote him out. Maroboduus was receiued at Rauenna; that if at any time the Sueuian ſhould waxe inſolent; he was in ſight as it were alwaies readie to returne. But he departed not Italie the ſpace of eighteene yeeres, and grew old with loſſe of reputation, through ouer great deſire of liuing. The like hope had Catualda, and no other refuge: for not long after being driuen out by the Hermunduri, vnder the conduct of Vibilius, he was receiued and ſent to Forum Iulij, a colonie of Gallia Narbonenſis. The barbarous people which followed both theſe; leſt being mingled among others, ſhould diſturbe the quiet Prouinces: were placed beyond Danubium betwixt the riuers Marus, and Cuſus; and a King giuen them of the Quadian nation.
            
            
               
               
                  XVI. Wars betwixt Rheſcuporis and Cotys. Rheſcuporis is ſent to Rome.
               NEwes being come that Artaxias, was by Germanicus made King of Armenia: the Lords of the Senat ordained that Germanicus and Druſus ſhould enter into the citie ouant, or with a ſmall triumphe; and that arches ſhould be erected about the ſides of the Temple of Mars the Reuenger, with the images of the two Caeſars: Tiberius being more glad that he had eſtabliſhed a peace by wiſedome; then if he ſhould haue ended the war by a maine battell. Now he determined by ſome ſubtiltie to ſet vpon Rheſcuporis King of Thrace. That countrey once hauing beene vnder Rhoemetalces: after his death, Auguſtus gaue part of it to his brother Rheſcuporis, & part to his ſonne Cotys. In that partition, the erable grounds, the cities, and places adioining to Greece fell to Cotys ſhare. That which was vnhabited, wilde, and lying neere the enimie; to Rheſcuporis. The diſpoſitions alſo of thoſe Kings were ſuch, that the one was tractable and of a milde condition; this ſtout, coueteous, and impatient of a companion: and both at the firſt liuing in cunning and diſſembled concord. Then Rheſcuporis began to exceed his bounds; and draw that to himſelfe which was giuen Cotys, and vſe violence if he reſiſted: but not ſo hotly in Augustus time; whom he feared being the author of both kingdomes, would reuenge if he were deſpiſed. But vnderſtanding of a chaunge of the Prince, he ſent in troups of theeues, beat downe his caſtles, and ſought occaſions of warre. Nothing did more trouble Tiberius, then that thoſe things which were once ſetled, ſhould now be diſturbed: and therefore making choiſe of a Centurion diſpatcheth him away to ſignifie to the Kings, that they ſhould not in any caſe enter into armes: and thereupon Cotys diſmiſſed preſently the aide he had prepared. Rheſcuporis with a fained modeſtie, requeſteth a place of meeting, to ende their controuerſie by conference: neither did they long doubt of the time, place, and conditions; the one yeelding to all with a facilitie of nature; the other accepting all with a fraudulent meaning. Rheſcuporis as he pretended to conclude this agreement; maketh a banket: & whē the night was far ſpent with great myrth, much eating & quaffing of wine; he loaded vncircumſpect Cotys with chaines: who perceiuing the treaſon, beſought him by the ſacred ceremonies of the kingdom, the gods of the ſame familie, & by the entertainment of his table, he would vſe no ſuch violence. Hauing thus made himſelfe maiſter of all Thrace, he wrote to Tiberius, that there were conſpiracies wrought againſt him, and the contriuer of them preuented. And withall, pretending warre againſt the Baſtarnians, and the Scythians, maketh himſelfe ſtrong with a new power of footemen and horſemen. Tiberius wrote to him coldly againe, that if there were no fraude in his doing, he might truſt to his innocencie: but neither he nor the Senate could diſcerne the right from wrong, vnleſſe they knew the cauſe: & therefore that he ſhould deliuer vp Cotys, and come to them, and purge himſelfe of the enuie of the crime. Thoſe letters Latinius Pandus Propraetor of Moeſia ſent with the ſouldiers, vnto whom Cotys ſhould be deliuered. But Rheſcuporis balancing betweene anger and feare, and deſirous to be guiltie rather of the fact committed, then only attempted; commandeth Cotys to be ſlaine: and vntruly gaue it out, that he had killed himſelfe. Yet for all this, Caeſar altered not his intended courſe, but after Pandus deceaſe, whom Rheſcuporis accuſed to haue beene his back friend, made Pomponius Flaccus an old ſouldier, and with whom the king was very inward, and therefore a more fit inſtrument to deceiue, for the ſame cauſe eſpeciall gouernor

of Moeſia. Flaccus being gone to Thrace, by way of great promiſes, perſwaded him, although doubtfull, and calling to minde his owne wickednes: to enter into the Romane garriſon, where he was garded with a ſtrong companie, vnder colour of honor. He had Tribunes and Centurions at hand to counſell and perſwade him: and the further he went, the greater gard: and at laſt knowing in what termes of neceſſitie he ſtoode, they brought him to the citie: where being accuſed in Senate by Cotys wife, he was condemned to be kept far from his countrey. Thrace was afterward deuided betwixt Rhaemetalces his ſonne, who was knowne to be an enemie to his fathers proceedings, and Cotys children: which not being of full age, Trebellienus Rufus, who had beene Pretor in the meane ſeaſon, was made gouernor of the kingdome: following the example of our predeceſſors, who ſent M. Lepidus into Aegypt, to be gardian to Ptolemeus children. Rheſcuporis was caried to Alexandria, and there going about to eſcape, or becauſe it was ſo fathered on him, was killed. At the ſame time Vonones, who (as we haue ſaid) was confined in Cilicia, hauing corrupted his keepers, vnder colour of going a hunting; attempted all meanes to eſcape to the Armenians; from thence to the Albanians, and Heniochians, and to his Coſen the king of Scythia. And forſaking the ſea coaſts, gote into bywayes and forreſts: and by the ſwiftnes of his horſe, poſted with all ſpeede to the riuer Pyramus. The borderers vnderſtanding the kings eſcape, hauing broken down the bridges, & he not able to paſſe at any foord, was taken by the riuers ſide, and bound by Vibius Fronto, captaine of the horſemen. Anon after Remmius Euocatus, vnto whoſe charge the king was firſt committed, as it had bene in an anger, thruſt him through with his ſword. Wherupon it was the eaſlier beleeued that he had ſo ſlaine Vonones, as one guiltie and conſenting to his eſcape, and therefore fearing he ſhould be bewraied and accuſed.
            
            
               
                  XVII. Germanicus ſicknes and death. The variance betwixt him and Piſo.
               
               BVt Germanicus returning from Aegypt: and perceiuing that all which he had commaunded, either in the legions or townes, left vndone, or changed cleane contrary; began to vſe grieuous and contumelious ſpeeches againſt Piſo: and he to requite Caeſar with no leſſe dangerous attempts. Whereupon Piſo determined to depart Syria: but ſtaying a time by reaſon of Germanicus ſicknes; when he heard of his amendment, and that the vowes were accompliſhed for his health: he droue away by his ſergeants the beaſt brought to the altar, and diſturbed the preparation made for the ſacrifice, and the ſolemne meeting of the people of Antioch. Then he went to Seleucia, expecting the euent of his ſicknes which he fell againe into: the rage thereof ſo much the more greeuous, through an opinion that Piſo had poiſoned him: for there were found pulled out of the ground, and wals, charmes, verſes, and enchantmēts: and Germanicus name engrauen in ſheetes of lead: aſhes halfe burned, and tempered with corrupt bloud, and other ſorceries, by which it is thought, that ſoules are dedicated to the infernall powers. Some alſo were accuſed to haue bene ſent from Piſo, to eſpie in what ſtate he was in. That droue Germanicus both into anger and feare, conſidering with himſelfe: if his houſe ſhould be beſieged; if he ſhould loſe his life in the ſight of his enemies: what ſhould happen after to his wofull wife, and his yong children? he ſaw that the poiſon ſeemed ſlow in working: but Piſo haſtened, that he might alone haue the gouernment of the legions and the prouince. But Germanicus was not ſo deſtitute of friends,

that the murderer ſhould inioy the rewards of the murder. And hereupon enditeth a letter to him, in which he renounceth his friendſhip. Some adde, that he commaunded him to depart the prouince. Piſo made no longer delay, but looſeth anker, and moderated his courſe to returne the ſooner, if Germanicus death ſhould open him a way to Syria. Germanicus being a little amended, and in ſome hope: then growing feeble againe; when his end was at hand, he ſpake to his friends about him in this manner. If I ſhould die a naturall death, yet ſhould I haue iuſt cauſe of griefe againſt the gods: that by an vntimely death, they ſhuold take me in my youth from my kinsfolks, children, and countrey. But now being brought to this paſſe by the lewde practiſe of Piſo and Plancina, I leaue in your breaſts for my laſt prayers; that you ſignifie vnto my father and my brother, with what crueltie torne, with what fraude circumuented, I haue ended my miſerable life, with a moſt naughtie death. If the hopes conceiued of me haue moued any; if neerenes in bloud any: yea, if enuie towards me when I liued: they will weepe, that he who hath ſometimes flouriſhed, and eſcaped ſo many battels, ſhould now end his life by the guile and treachery of a woman: you ſhall haue occaſion to complaine to the Senate, and demaund the execution of lawes. This is not the chiefeſt dutie of friends, to ſhew their affection towards the dead, by a ſlow and dull complaint; but remember and execute that which they commanded. Yea, ſuch as knew not Germanicus, wil weepe for him: If you did rather loue me then my fortune, you will reuenge my death. Shew the people of Rome Augustus neece, and the ſame my wife, and my children which are ſixe in number: the accuſers themſelues will haue compaſſion; and thoſe which pretend wicked commaundements, ſhall either not bee beleeued, or not pardoned. His friends taking him by the right hand, ſwore they would rather loſe their life, then omit reuenge. Then turning to his wife, intreated hir by the memorie of him, and by the children common betweene them, that ſhe would lay aſide all haughtines, and ſubmit her courage to raging fortune: leſt returning to the citie, ſhe ſtirred not with emulation of greatnes more powerable then her ſelfe againſt her. Thus much he vttered openly, and other things in ſecret; whereby it was coniectured he ſtoode in feare of Tiberius. Not long after he yeelded vp the ghoſt, with great lamentation of the Prouince and countries about; forren nations and Kings lamented alſo: ſo great was his courteſie to his allies; and mildnes to his enimies. He was no leſſe venerable to thoſe which ſawe him, than to thoſe which heard of him: and did ſo well temper the greatnes of high eſtate & grauitie; that he auoided both enuie & arrogancie. His funerals although he had neither images nor pompe: yet by the commendation and memorie of his vertues, were honoured of all men. Some there were which compared his fauour, his age, and manner of death, by reaſon of the vicinitie of the places wherein they died, vnto Alexander the great. For being both of a comely ſtature, noble parentage, not much aboue thirtie yeeres of age: they died in ſtrange countries, by the trecherie of their owne people. But this man was courteous towards his friends, moderate in pleaſures, & his children certaine, begotten in marriage by one woman. Neither was he to be counted a leſſe warrior then the other: although he were not raſh, & hindered to reduce vnder the yoke of ſeruitude the Germans daunted with ſo many victories. And if he alone had, had the ſupreme managing of affaires, and power, & a name of a King: ſo much the ſooner he would haue carried away the priſe & renowne of warfare, by how much he did excel him in clemencie, temperancie, & other good vertues. His bodie before it ſhould be burned, was laid naked in the market place of Antioche, which was the place appointed for his buriall. Whether he

ſhewed any tokens of being poiſoned or not, it is vnknowen: for diuers did diuerſly interpretit; either as they were inclined to pitie Germanicus, or ſuſpected to fauour Piſo. This being done, the Lieutenants & the Senators which were preſent, cōſulted amōg themſelues, whom they ſhould make gouernor of Syria; & the reſt not greatly contending: it was long debated betwixt Marſus & Gn. Sentius; & in the end Marſus yeelded to Sentius being his elder, & proſecuting the ſuite more eagerlie. He ſent to Rome one Martina, a woman infamous in that Prouince for empoiſoning, but deerly beloued to Plancina, at the ſuite of Vitellius & Veranius, & others, which framed their acuſations, as againſt one already guilty of the fact. But Agrippina waſted with ſorrow & feeble of body: yet impatient of delaying reuenge; took ſhipping with Germanicus aſhes with her, and her children: all men taking compaſſion, that a woman ſo nobly deſcended, and who not long ſince in regarde of her ſtately marriage, was honored and reuerenced by all men: ſhould now carrie in her lap, thoſe lamentable relickes of her husband: incertaine of reuenge; doubtfull of herperſon; ſo oft expoſed to fortunes mercy by her vnluckie fruitfulnes.
            
            
               
                  XVIII Piſo is doubtfull vvhether he ſhould returne to Syria or not. And prepareth an armie againſt Sentius.
               
               IN the meane ſeaſon a meſſenger, ouertaketh and aduertiſeth Piſo, at the Iland Cous, that Germanicus was departed. Which tidings he receiued intemperately, offered ſacrifices, viſited the temples, nothing moderating his ioy; and Plancina growing more inſolent, then firſt changed the mourning weede, ſhe ware for the death of hir ſiſter, into a ioifull attire. The Centurions flocking about him, told him, that he had the good will of the legions, at his deuotion; that it was his beſt to returne to the prouince, wrongfully taken from him, and now voide of a gouernour. Whereupon taking aduiſe what was beſt to be done; his ſonne M. Piſo, was of opinion that he ſhoulde make all haſte to the citie: that there was nothing yet done which might not be anſwered: and that weakeſuſpicions, and vaine reports were not to be feared. The variance betweene him and Germanicus, was woorthie perhaps of ſome rebuke, but not puniſhment: and by taking the prouince from him, his enimies were ſatisfied. But if he ſhould returne, Sentius being againſt him, a newe ciuill warre would begin. Neither would the Centurions and ſouldiers continue on his ſide; with whom the freſh memory of their captaine, and the loue deepely printed in their harts towards the Caeſars woulde preuaile. Domitius Celer, one of his inwardeſt friends, perſwaded the contrarie. That he ought to take the time when it was offered: that Piſo and not Sentius was made gouernour of Syria: vnto him were the faſces, and dignitie of Pretor giuen, to him the legions committed. If any violence ſhould be offered by the enimie, who ſhould more iuſtly oppoſe his armes againſt them, then he, who hath receiued the authoritie of a Lieutenant, and ſpeciall commiſſion? Rumors grow ſtale and vaniſh away with time: and often the innocent are borne downe with freſh enuie: but if he had a power at hand, and his forces increaſed, many things which could not be foreſeene, by meere chaunce might turne to the better. Do we haſten to come to Rome, with Germanicus aſhes: that Agrippinas lamentation, and the vnskilfull multitude, at the firſt rumor, ſhould laie hands on thee, vnheard and vndefended? Thou haſt for thee Augustas conſcience, and Caeſars fauour, though in ſecret. And none bewaile more braggingly Germanicus death in outward ſhew, then ſuch as in their harts are moſt glad. Piſo being

forward enough of himſelf to haughtie attempts, was with ſmall adoe drawen to this opinion. And ſending letters to Tiberius, accuſeth Germanicus of riot and pride: and that himſelfe was driuen out of the prouince, bicauſe there might be a way made open to innouation: that he had againe taken charge of the armie, with the ſame fidelitie, as he had alreadie gouerned it. Withall, he commanded Domitius, with a galley to ſaile into Syria: and auoiding the coaſting of the ſhoare, and letting paſſe the Ilands, take wide and open ſea. Then marſhalling and arming runnagates, and raſcall baſe companions, and ſailing ouer to the continent, he intercepted an enſigne of yoong and rawe ſouldiers, which were going to Syria. And writeth alſo to the Lords of Cilicia, to ſend him aide: the yoong man Piſo being nothing ſlacke in the ſeruice, although he was againſt the vndertaking of the warre. Wherefore paſſing by the coaſt of Lycia, & Pamphylia, meeting with the ſhips which had conueied Agrippina to Rome, each ſide hating one another; made themſelues readie to fight: yet both ſides fearing the one the other, they proceeded no further then to hard words. Mirſus Vibius ſommoned Piſo to come to Rome to anſwere for himſelfe: who ſcoffingly anſwered him againe, that he would come and appeere, when the Pretor which was to inquire of poiſonings, would appoint a day as well for the plaintif, as defendāt. In the meane time Domitius being ariued at Laodicea, a citie in Syria; and going to the ſtanding camp of the ſixt legion, as moſt fit for new enterpriſes, was preuēted by the Lieutenāt Pacuuius. Sentius openeth that by letters to Piſo; warning him not to go about to tempt the armie with corrupters, nor raiſe any war in the Prouince. And ſuch as he knew to haue Germanicus in minde, or were aduerſaries to the enimies, he aſſembled togither: putting them oftē in mind of the greatnes of the Emperor, and how the common-wealth was aſſailed; and thereupon gathereth a ſtrong power readie to fight. Yet neither Piſo, nor his ſide, although his enterpriſes fell out otherwiſe, than he expected; did let ſlip that which was of moſt ſafetie for the preſent; but putteth himſelfe in a verie ſtrong caſtle in Cilicia, called Celenderis. For by ſorting and medling togither the runnagates, the new and raw ſoldier lately taken, his owne and Plancinaes ſlaues, and the aides which the Lords of Cilicia ſent, he marſhalled them in forme of a legion. And then affirmed that he was Caeſars Lieutenant: but drouen out of the Prouince committed to him; not by the legions, for they called him thither; but by Sentius, which cloaked his priuate malice with falſe crimes: therfore that they ſhould ſtād ſtoutly to the battel; bicauſe the ſoldiers would not fight, when they ſhould ſee Piſo whom heretofore they called their father. If they would proceed by order of iuſtice, the right was on his ſide: if by armes, he wanted not ſtrength. Then he diſplaied his companies in order of battell, before the caſtle on a ſteepe craggie hils ſide: the reſt being inuironed with ſea. On the contrarie ſide the old ſoldiers, with their ſupplies were marſhalled into rankes. On this ſide was the ſtrength of ſouldiers: one that of place. In courage and hope there was great oddes alſo: and on their ſide no weapons, but rude and clowniſh, prepared for a preſent ſhift. And when they came to handie ſtrokes; there was no lōger doubt who ſhould haue the vpper hand, but til the Roman cohorts could win the plaine ground: which done, the Cilicians ſhewed their backs, & ſhut themſelues in their fort. In the meane ſpace Piſo went about, but in vaine, to aſſaile the nauie which waited not farre off. Then returned to the caſtle againe, now tormenting himſelfe vpon the wals; now calling to euerie ſouldier by his name, and offering rewards: aſſaied to raiſe a mutinie, and did ſo much preuaile, that the ſtandard bearer of the ſixt legion, went with his enſigne to his ſide. Then Sentius commaunded the cornets and trumpets to ſounde; gaue an aſſault to the rampiers; cauſed laddres

to be put vp; and the ableſt men to follow; and the others out of engines to ſhoote dartes, ſtones, and fire brands. In the end Piſoes obſtinacie being ouercome; entreateth that hauing yeelded vp his weapons, he might remaine in the caſtle, vntill Caeſar were conſulted, who ſhould be gouernor of Syria. The conditions were not accepted; nor any thing graunted him: but onely, that he ſhould haue ſhipping and ſafe conduct to the citie.
            
            
               
                  XIX. Great bewailing for Germanicus death: ſtrange religions ſuppreſſed: looſe life reſtrained in women of account.
               BVt when Germanicus ſicknes was noiſed at Rome; and as in newes it falleth out, the farther it goeth, augmented to the worſer: all men burſt out into anger, griefe, and complaints: ſaying, that therefore he was ſent to forren countries: that was the reaſon why Piſo had the prouince committed to him: this was the effect of Augustaes ſecret conference with Plancina: that the auncient men ſaid moſt truly of Druſus, that the courteous and modeſt diſpoſition of children doth diſlike ſuch as raigne. Neither were they made away for any other reaſon, but becauſe, libertie reſtored; they had a meaning to reduce the people of Rome to a certain equalitie. Theſe ſpeeches of the common people, the newes of his death did ſo much kindle; that before any edict of Magiſtrates, before any decree of Senate was made, vacation being taken of themſelues; the places of iudgement were abandoned; houſes ſhut vp; ſilence and mourning euery where: nothing of all this counterfeited or done for oſtentation. And although they did not abſtaine from outward tokens of mourning, yet in their harts they mourned much more. Certaine Merchants returning by chaunce out of Syria, Germanicus yet liuing, bringing ioyfull tidings of his health, were preſently beleeued, and ſpread abroad: and as they met one another (although they had ſcarſe heard the tale to the end) yet they reported it againe, and they againe to others, ſtill making it more, and increaſing their ioy. They ran vp and downe the citie, went about to wreſt open the gates of the temples: the night furthered their credulouſnes, and in the darke euery man more readie to affirme. Neither did Tiberius gainſay theſe falſe reports, but let them vaniſh away with time. But then the people, as though he had beene a ſecond time taken from them, greeued more bitterly. Such was his funerall pomp done in memory of him, as either mens loue, or pregnancie of conceipt could inuent: as that his name ſhould be ſung in a Salarian verſe, which Mars prieſts were wont to ſing: that in the roomes of the Auguſtall prieſts, chaires of eſtate ſhould be placed, with garlands of oake: that his image grauen in Iuory, ſhould be caried before the Circenſian plaies: and that none ſhould be created Flamen or Augur in Germanicus place, vnleſſe he were of the Iulian familie. At Rome, and at the banke of Rhene, and on the hill Amanus in Syria, were erected arches, with an inſcription of his exploites: and that he died for the common wealth: a ſepulchre at Antioch where his bodie was burnt: a tribunal at Epidaphna, where he ended, his life. It would be hard to number the images and places in which he was honored. And when ſome thought it conuenient that he ſhould haue a ſheeld of exquiſite gold and greatnes, dedicated him among the authors of eloquence: Tiberius ſaide he ſhould haue none but ſuch as was vſuall, and equall to the reſt: for neither was eloquence to be iudged of by fortune: and that it was a ſufficient honor for him, if he were put in the number of auncient writers. That which before was called the band of yong men,

the Gentlemen called Germanicus cuneum, or pointed battell: and ordained that the ſquadrons of horſemen ſhould follow his image the Ides of Iuly. Many of theſe ceremonies yet remaine; ſome were preſently left off; and ſome, time wore out. But whileſt this griefe was yet freſh in euery mans memorie; Liuia Germanicus ſiſter, and Druſus wife, was at once deliuered of two ſonnes: which being a thing rare, and welcome, euen to meane families, did ſo reioice the Prince, that hee could not containe (for euen caſuall things he attributed to his glorie) but muſt needes bragge before the Lordes of the Senate, that no other of the Romans of his greatnes, had euer before had two male children at a birth. But in ſuch a time euen that alſo, brought griefe vnto the people; as though that Druſus increaſe of children, would the rather depreſſe Germanicus houſe. The ſame yeere womens laſciuious life, was puniſhed by ſeuere decrees of Senat; and ordained that none ſhould put their bodies to ſale, whoſe grandfather, father, or husband had beene a gentleman of Rome. For Vistilia deſcended of a pretorian familie, had made hir looſe licentious life knowen to the Aediles; according to a receiued cuſtome among the auncients; who thought it a ſufficient puniſhment for vnchaſte women, if publickly they confeſſed their lewdnes. And Titidius Labeo, Viſtilias huſband, was called into queſtion, bicauſe he had not inflicted the puniſhment of the law, on his wife manifeſtly taken in the offence. But he for his excuſe, alleaged that the three ſcore daies giuen to deliberate, were not yet paſt; and therefore thinking it enough to puniſh Vistilia; ſhe was confined in the Iland Seriphon. It was debated in Senat touching the rooting out of the Aegyptian & Iudaical ceremonies: & a decree made that fower thouſand libertines of competent age, infected with that ſuperſtition, ſhould be conueied into the Iland Sardinia, to ſuppreſſe robberies committed there: and if they ſhould die through the vnwholeſomnes of the aire, the loſſe were but vile and ſmall: and that the reſt ſhould depart Italie, if before a certain day they would not forſake thoſe prophane rites. When thoſe things were done, Caeſar propounded, that another virgin ſhould be receiued in the roome of Oecia; who with verie great integritie, ſeuen and fiſtie yeeres, had beene gouerneſſe of the ceremonies of the Veſtall virgins: and gaue thankes to Fonteius Agrippa, and Domitius Pollio; who offering their daughters, ſtroue in dutie to the common wealth. But Pollios daughter was preferred for no other reaſon, but bicauſe her mother had continued wife to her firſt husband: Agrippa hauing diminiſhed the reputation of his houſe with diuorcement. Yet Caeſar in regard the other was preferred, did comfort her with About 78. 2. pound. 10 ſhil. ten hundred thouſand ſeſterces for her dowrie. The people complaining of a dearth of corne, he put downe a price for the buier; promiſing to paie of his owne in euerie buſhell Three pence ob. q. two nummos. Yet for all this, he would not take vppon him, the title of father of his countrey, before offered him: but did ſharplie rebuke them, who had called his affaires diuine, and him Lord. And therefore vnder a Prince which feared libertie, and hated flatterie; all ſpeeches ought to be briefe; and yet can hardly eſcape captious conſtruction. I finde in auncient writers of that time, that Adgandeſtrius Prince of the Chatti, letters were read in Senat, promiſing Arminius death, if poiſon were ſent him to commit the deed. And that it was anſwered him, that the people of Rome vſed not to reuenge on their enimies by treachery and priuie meanes; but openly and armed. Wherein Tiberius equalled himſelfe to the old Roman Captaines, which did forbid king Pyrrhus to be poiſoned, but diſcloſed it vnto him. Now Arminius, the Romans being departed, and Maroboduus expulſed, earneſtly coueting the kingdome, had the people as defending their libertie againſt him: and being aſſailed, and fighting with doubtfull

fortune, was ſlaine by the fraud of his own neerſt familiars. Doubtleſſe the deliuerer of Germanie; and who prouoked, not as other Kings & Captaines had done, the firſt ſpringing vp of the people of Rome; but when they flouriſhed moſt in rule and Empire. In his battels, he had doubtfull fortune, ſometimes luckie, ſometimes vnluckie; but neuer was ouercome in war. He liued full ſeuen and thirtie yeeres, and was Prince twelue. To this day he is famous amongſt barbarous nations; but in the Annales of the Greeks, which admire nothing but their own dooings vnknown; and not greatly ſpoken of among the Romans. Who whileſt we extoll auncient things, are careles of our owne time.
            
         
         
            
            THE THIRD BOOKE OF THE ANNALES OF CORNELIVS TACITVS.
            
               I. Agrippina commeth to Rome: Germanicus funerals.
               
                  
                     AGrippina although it were winter, yet ſtil continuing her voiage by ſea, arriued at laſt at the Iland Corcyra, ouer againſt the coaſt of Calabria: where as one without meane in mourning, and vnable to endure, ſhe reſted a few daies to ſettle her mind. In the meane time, her arriuall knowen, her deereſt friends, and eſpecially ſouldiers which had ſerued vnder Germanicus; and manie alſo which ſhe knew not, from the townes round about: ſome thinking it to be their dutie towards their Prince; and many following them flocked to Brundiſium, being the neereſt and ſafeſt place of landing. And as ſoone as her ſhips were diſcerned a far off: not onely the hauen and places neere the ſea ſide; but the walles and houſe tops, and other places, from whence a man might fartheſt kenne; were filled with a mourning and heauie multitude of people: asking (as not knowing what was fitteſt for the time) one another, whether they ſhould receiue her with ſilence, or acclamation, when ſhe came out of her ſhip. But when by little and little the ſhips drew neere, they ſawe no cheerefull rowing, as the manner was wont to be: but all of them compoſed to ſadnes. But being come to land with her two children; holding the funerall pot with her husbands aſhes in her hand, and her eies fixed on the ground: all men began to bewaile and lament alike. Neither couldeſt thou haue diſcerned the lamentation of kinsfolkes from the ſtanger; nor the women from the men: ſauing, that the freſh griefe of ſuch as went to meete her, exceeded the lamentation of her traine, alreadie wearied with long continuance of ſorrow. Caeſar had ſent two companies of his guarde to meete them: and gaue further charge, that the magiſtrates of Calabria, the Apuleians, & Campanians, ſhould ſolemniſe the laſt obſequies in memorie of his ſonne. The aſhes were carried on the Tribunes and Centurions ſhoulders; the enſignes vntrimmed; and the faſces or knitch of rods, turned downewards, went before: and when they paſſed by any colonies, the common people in mourning weede, and gentlemen in their attire called Trabea, according to the wealth of the place, burnt garments, ſweete odors: with other accuſtomed funerall ſolemnities. Yea ſuch whoſe townes were far off, yet met them; erected altars; offered ſacrifices to the infernall gods; witneſſing their dolour with teares and cries. Druſus went to Terracina with his brother Claudius, & Germanicus children, which had remained in the citie. The Conſuls, M. Valerius, & M Aurelius (who began then to enter into office) the Senat and a great part of the people filled vp the way, ſcattered hither & thither, weeping, as euery mans affection was. Flattery there was none: all men knowing, that the death of Germanicus, ioyfull to Tiberius; could badly be diſſembled, howſoeuer he counterfeited the contrary. Tiberius and Augusta, abſtained from mourning in publicke: iudging it a thing, vnder their maieſtie, if they ſhould be ſeene openly to lament: or leaſt, the eies of all men obſeruing their countenance, ſhould eſpie they did but counterfeit. I finde not in any author, or diurnall regiſter, that his mother Antonia
                  
did any thing woorthie memorie in that ſole
                     〈…〉
                   when as beſides Agrippina, Druſus, and Claudius, the reſt of his bloud, are by name written of: either hindered by ſicknes, or in minde ouercome with ſorrow, coulde not endure the ſight of ſo heauie a griefe. I ſhould eaſlier haue beleeued, that Tiberius and Augusta, which kept within doores, made hir do the like: that their griefe might be iudged equall: and that the grandmother and vncle, ſhould ſeeme to haue kept in, by the example of the mother. The day that the aſhes were put in Augustus tombe, was ſometimes with ſilence deſolate and ſtill; and on the ſudden vnquiet with weeping: all paſſages of the citie were full: Campus Martius ſhined with burning torches. There the ſoldier with his weapons; the magiſtrates without the markes of their dignitie and calling; and the people gathered into tribes and companies cried: that the common-wealth was fallen to ground; and no hope left: and that ſo openly, and boldly, that thou wouldeſt haue beleeued, they did not remember by whom they were gouerned. Yet nothing went ſo neere Tiberius hart, as the ardent affection men bare Agrippina: calling hir the honour of their countrey; the onely bloud of Augustus; the patterne of antiquitie: and turning towards the heauen, and the gods, praied that hir iſſue might long continue, and ouerliue the wicked. Some deſired that the funerals might be celebrated with publike pompe: comparing the magnificence and honors that Augustus had vſed for Druſus, Germanicus father. And, that he in the hardeſt time of winter, went as farre as Ticinum: and how neuer once departing from the bodie, accompanied it to the citie. That about the coffin were the images of the Claudians and Iulians: that he was bewailed in the place of publike aſſemblies: praiſed with an oration before the people: and all honors done him, which either our aunceſtors or later times could inuent. But Germanicus had not ſo much as the vſuall ſolemnities done for him: his body through diſtance of place, was in ſome ſort burnt, in ſtrange lands: but by ſo much the more, honours ſhoulde nowe haue beene beſtowed vpon him, bicauſe fortune had denied him the firſt. His brothers went to meete him but one daies iourney: his vncle not ſo farre as to the gate. Where are the auncient cuſtomes become? why was not his image put before the Beere; and verſes ſung in memorie of his vertues? why was he not praiſed, and bewailed, with the vſuall repreſentation of mourning? All this was well known to Tiberius; and to ſuppreſſe the ſpeech of the common people, he admoniſhed them by edict. That although many notable Romans had died for the common-wealth: yet none had euer beene bewailed with ſuch an ardent affection. Which was to him and vnto others alſo honorable, ſo as there were a meane vſed. For the ſelfe ſame things are not ſeemly for noble men, the Emperor and the common people. It was conuenient that ſmall houſes, or cities ſhoulde mourne and lament, in freſh griefe; and after their griefe take comfort againe: but now it was time to confirme the minde, as Iulius Caeſar, hauing loſt his onely daughter; and Augustus his nephewes: did caſt off all ſorrow. It was needleſſe to alleage auncient examples, to ſhew how oft the people of Rome, had ſuffered conſtantly the loſſe of armies; death of captaines; and the vtter ouerthrow of noble families. That princes are mortall, and the common-wealth euerlaſting. Therefore that they ſhould take their ſolemnities againe: and bicauſe the ſhew of the Megalenſian plaies was at hand, returne to their pleaſures.
               
            
            
               
               II. Piſo commeth to Rome, vvhere he is accuſed: and killeth himſelfe.
               THe vacation ended, euery man returned to his buſines: and Druſus went to the armie of Illyricum: the people bent to demaund a reuenge of Piſo; complained that he in the meane time now here, now there, in the pleaſant countrey of Aſia, and Affrike, with a prowd and ſubtill delay, did ſhift off the proofes brought againſt his lewdnes. For it was commonly rumored, that Martina, as I haue before ſaid, a woman infamous for poiſoning, was ſent to Rome by C. Sentius, and being ſuddenly dead at Brundiſium, had no token vpon her that ſhe had taken her owne bane; and that the poiſon was found hidden in a knarle of her haire. But Piſo hauing ſent his ſonne before him to the citie, with leſſons how to pacifie the Prince, went towards Druſus, not hoping to finde him cruell in his behalfe, for the death of his brother, but rather fauorable, as being rid of ſuch a concurrent. Tiberius to make a ſhew of vpright dealing, hauing entertained the yong man courteouſly, vſed the like liberalitie towards him as he was accuſtomed to do to the noble mens children of ſuch as he was familiar with. Druſus anſwered him, that if the accuſations layd againſt him were true, the greateſt griefe ſhould be his: and for his owne part he could wiſh they ſhould be falſe and vaine; and that Germanicus death might be preiudiciall to none. Theſe words were openly vttered, and not in ſecret; neither was it doubted at all, but that Tiberius had before hand taught him his leſſon; when as being plaine, ſimple, and yong, yet ſhewed the cunning of the old man. Piſo hauing paſt ouer the Dalmatian ſea, and left his ſhips at Ancona, went by Picenum, and after by the Flaminian way, ouertooke the legion which was brought from Pannony to Rome, to lye in garriſon in Affricke: being common in euery mans mouth, how in the campe and in the way he did often ſhew himſelfe to the ſouldiers. From Narnia (whether it were to auoide ſuſpition, or becauſe ſuch as ſtand in feare are irreſolute in their determinations) being conueyed by Nare, and anon after by Tiber, he increaſed the euill will of the people towards him, becauſe he landed neere the Caeſars tombe: on a day when the ſhore was full of people: many followers after him: and Plancina accompanied with a traine of women, both, pleaſant and cheerefull in countenance. Among other cauſes of enuie and hart-burning, Piſoes houſe was one, looking on the market place, trimmed to feaſt and banket in, where nothing could be hidden. The next day Fulcinius Trio, accuſed Piſo before the Conſuls. Vitellius and Veranius, and the reſt which had followed Germanicus, alleaged that that was their office, and that Trio had no part therein: and that as witneſſes and openers of the cauſe; and not as accuſers, they were to report that which Germanicus had giuen them in charge. Trio relinquiſhing the accuſation, obtained licence to accuſe his former life: and the Prince intreated to receiue the hearing of the cauſe to himſelfe: which the defendant refuſed not, as miſdoubting the Senators, and peoples good will: and contrary, being well aſſured that Tiberius regarded not rumors, but would leane to his mothers conſcience: and that the truth; or things beleeued and wreſted to the worſt, might eaſilier be diſcerned by one iudge: whereas hatred and enuie beare the ſway where there are many. Tiberius was not ignorant, how waightie a cauſe he vndertooke, and how diuerſly he was cenſured: and therefore calling ſome of his familiar friends about him, hearing the menaces of the accuſers; then the requeſt of the partie arraigned, referred the whole cauſe to the Senate. In the meane ſeaſon, Druſus returning from Illyrium: although the Senators had decreed, that for receiuing of Maroboduus,
                  
and exploits done the ſommer paſt, he ſhould enter the citie, ouant, or with a ſmall triumph: yet deferring that honor for the time, he entered priuately. After that Piſo had demauded T. Arruntius, Fulcinius, Aſinius Gallus, Aeſerninus, Marcellus, Sext. Pompeius for his aduocates; and all of them alleaging diuers excuſes, M. Lepidus, L. Piſo, and Liueneius Regulus vndertooke his defence: the whole citie being attentiue to know how Germanicus friends would ſtick vnto him; what hope the partie arraigned had; whether Tiberius were able to maiſter his affections, or would ſhew himſelfe. All theſe things were greedily expected of the people: neuer ſhewing themſelues more attentiue, nor at any time licencing themſelues a more ſecret ſpeech of the Prince, or ſuſpicious ſilence. The day that the Senat met, Caeſar made a premeditate oration, tempered in this ſort, ſaying: That Piſo had beene his fathers Lieutenant and friend, and giuen by him to Germanicus as a coadiutor, by the authoritie of the Senate, in the adminiſtration of the affaires of the Eaſt: but whether he had there exaſperated the yong Prince, through diſobedience and contention: and whether he had ſhewed himſelfe glad of his death: or villanouſly had made him away; that they ſhould iudge of that with vpright conſciences. For if being Lieutenant, he hath gone beyond the bounds of his office: and ſhaken off his dutie to his lord generall: and reioyſed in his death, and my griefe: I will hate him, and eſtrange him from my houſe, and reuenge, not the Princes, but priuat grudges. If any villanous deede be detected in him worthie of reuenge, euen in the death of any priuat perſon, affoord your ſelues, and Germanicus children, and vs, his father, reaſonable and iuſt comfort. And examine alſo whether ſeditiouſly and mutinouſly Piſo hath ſtirred vp the armie: whether by ambition he hath ſought to win the fauour of the ſouldiers: whether he returned into the prouince by force of armes: or whether theſe things be falſe; and made greater then they are, by the accuſers: with whoſe ouergreat affection I haue iuſt cauſe to be offended. For to what purpoſe ſhould his body be ſhewen naked; be handled of the common people; and bruted abroade among ſtrangers, as though he had beene empoiſoned; if theſe things be yet vncertaine, and are to be inquired of? I lament truely, and am greeued for my ſonne, and alwaies ſhall. But I hinder not the defendant, to alleage all he can, for the purgation of his innocencie: or if Germanicus had any fault woorthie of reprehenſion. And I beſeech you, not to take the crimes as already prooued, bicauſe the cauſe is ioined with my ſorrow. If either his neernes in bloud, or his owne faithfulnes, hath yeelded him anie to defende his cauſe; helpe him, as much as in you lieth, either by your eloquence or care, in this his extremitie. To the ſame labour and conſtancie, I exhort the accuſers. Germanicus this onely priuiledge we will affoord aboue the lawes: that his death ſhall be rather inquired of in the Curia, then in the Forum: before the Senat, then other Iudges. Let all the reſt be debated with like modeſtie, nothing regarding Druſus teares: or my griefe: or if anie ſlaunders be forged againſt me. After that, the accuſers had two daies giuen them to bring in their accuſations; & after ſixe daies were paſt, the defandāt had three more to iuſtifie himſelfe. Then Fulcinius began with ſtale and friuolous matters: as that he had gouerned Spaine ambitiouſly, and couetouſly. Whereof being conuicted, he could not be intereſſed; if he could purge himſelfe of the later crimes: nor if he could defend himſelfe from that accuſation; yet was he not acquitted, if greater matters were laide to his charge. After him Seruaeus, and Veranius, and Vitellius with like affection; but Vitellius with greater eloquence obiected that Piſo, for hatred to Germanicus and deſire of innouation, had ſo farre corrupted the common ſoldier with licentiouſnes and iniuries towards the confederates: that of the

lewdeſt ſort, he was called the father of the legions. Further, that he had vſed crueltie againſt euery good man; and eſpecially againſt Germanicus followers & friends: in the end, that he had killed him with poiſon and inchantments. Then, that he and Plancina vſed wicked ceremonies and ſacrifices: that he had borne armes againſt the common-wealth: that he woulde neuer haue appeared in iudgement, had he not been ouercome in battell. In manie things his defence was weake: for he coulde not denie but that he had woone the ſoldier by ambition: or that he had not expoſed the prouince as a praie, to the lewdeſt ſort: nor the iniurious ſpeeches againſt the generall. Onely he ſeemed to haue purged himſelfe of the empoiſoning: which indeed the accuſers did not ſufficiently prooue: accuſing him to haue empoiſoned Germanicus meate with his hand, which was infected, as he ſate aboue him at a banquet. For it ſeemed abſurd, that he ſhould dare ſo bold an attempt, amongſt other mens ſeruants, in the ſight of ſo many ſtanders by, and in Germanicus owne preſence. And thereupon he offered his familie, and was verie earneſt that his ſeruitors might be examined vpon the racke. But the Iudges were implacable for diuers reſpects: Caeſar bicauſe he had made warre againſt the prouince: the Senators, bicauſe they could neuer beleeue, but that Germanicus died by trechery: and that they had expoſtulated the matter by letters the one to the other. Which Tiberius did no leſſe denie then Piſo. Withall, the outcrie of the people was heard before the Senate houſe, that they woulde not temper their hands, if he eſcaped by ſentence of the Senate. And they had drawen Piſoes images to the Gemonies; and broken them in peeces, if they had not beene ſaued, and put in their places againe, by the princes commaundement. Piſo was caried backe in a chariot, by a Tribune of the Pretorian band, diuerſly rumored: whether he followed him as a garde for his ſafetie, or executioner of his death. The like hatred was toward Plancina, but greater fauour: and therefore it was doubted, how farre Caeſars authoritie woulde reach in hir behalfe. As long as there was any hope left for Piſo, ſhe promiſed to take part of whatſoeuer fortune with him: and if it ſo fell out, to be his companion in death. But ſhe was no ſooner pardoned through Auguſtaes ſecret intreatie, but ſhe began by little and little, to ſeparate hir-ſelfe from hir husbande, and bring hir defences apart. The which when Piſo perceiued, to aboade his vtter deſtruction: doubting whether he ſhould make any further triall in iudgement: his ſons perſwading him, he hardneth himſelfe, and goeth once againe to the Senate. Where his accuſation being renewed, and the Senators voices againſt him; and hauing endured all things aduers and cruell: he was amazed at nothing more, then that he ſaw Tiberius without pitie, without anger, reſolute, and not ſwaied with any affection. Being brought home from thence, as though he had premeditated ſome iuſtification for the next day: he writeth, ſealeth, and deliuereth ſome fewe lines vnto a freed man. This done, he gaue himſelfe to the accuſtomed care of his bodie. Then the night being farre ſpent, his wife going out of the chamber; he commaundeth the doores to be ſhut: and the next morning earely, he was found with his throte cut, the ſword lying on the ground. I remember I haue heard of auncient men, that Piſo was often ſeene to haue a little booke in his hands which he publiſhed not: but as his friends ſaid, it contained Tiberius letters, & Commiſſion againſt Germanicus: and that he had purpoſed to diſcloſe it to the Lords of the Senat, and accuſe the Prince; had he not beene deluded by Seianus vaine promiſes: and that he killed not himſelfe, but that ſome one was ſent to murder him. But I will not aſſure, either of thoſe things: although I ought not to conceale it to haue been vttered by thoſe, which liued vntil I came to mans eſtate.
            
            
               
               III. Piſoes letters to Tiberius: Plancina is quit.
               
                  CAEſar hauing changed his countenance into ſadnes; perſwading himſelfe that, that death of Piſoes would breede him enuie: queſtioned oft in Senat how Piſo had behaued himſelfe, the day before he died; & how he had paſſed the laſt night. And he anſwering moſt things wiſely; and ſome inconſiderately; reciteth the cōtents of the writing made by Piſo almoſt as followeth. Being oppreſſed by the conſpiracies of my enimies, & enuie of a falſe crime: ſo far, that there is no place left to my innocencie and truth: I call the immortall gods to witnes O Caeſar, that I haue liued with all loyaltie towards thee; and no leſſe dutie towards thy mother. And I beſeech you, that you would be an aide and ſtaie vnto my children. Among which Cn. Piſo is guiltles of my fortune whatſoeuer it be: ſeeing he hath liued all this while in the citie. M. Piſo did alwaies diſſwade me from returning to Syria. And I would to God, I had rather yeelded to the counſell of my yoong ſonne, then hee to his olde father. And therefore I beſeech you moſt earneſtlie, that being innocent, hee ſuffer not the puniſhment of my demerit. By the ſeruice of fiue & fortie yeares, by the fellowſhip of the Conſulſhip which we bore together, once liked of Augustus the father, and a friend to thee; I recommend vnto thee as my laſt requeſt, my vnfortunate ſonnes life. Of Plancina he added no word. After this, Tiberius excuſed the yong man of the ciuill warres, becauſe the ſonne could not diſobey the fathers commaundement: withall, he had compaſſion on the noblenes of his houſe, and his owne heauie fortune, howſoeuer he had deſerued. Of Plancina he ſpake with ſhame and diſcredit: pretending his mothers intreatie: againſt whome euery good man was incenſed, and ſecretly complained, ſaying: Is it lawfull then for the grandmother to looke vpon the murdereſſe of her nephew, talke with her, and take her out of the hands of the Senat, that iuſtice might not be executed? Shall not that haue place in Germanicus, which the law doth permit all other citizens? Caeſar was bewailed by Vitellius and Veranius: Plancina defended by the Emperour and Augusta: that now ſhe might conuert her skill and poiſons which ſhe had ſo happely experimented, againſt Agrippina and her children, and ſatiat the good grandmother and vncle with the bloud of a moſt miſerable houſe. Two dayes were ſpent vnder colour of examining the cauſe: Tiberius vrging Piſoes children, to defend their mother: and when the accuſers and witneſſes, had ſpoken a vie againſt her, and no man anſwered for her, pitie increaſed more then enuie againſt her. Aurelius Cotta being firſt demaunded his opinion (for Caeſar propounding the caſe, the magiſtrates ſpake firſt) gaue his cenſure that the memory of Piſo ſhould be blotted out of the Chronicles: that part of his goods ſhould be confiſcated; and part beſtowed vpon Gn. Piſo his ſonne; with condition that he ſhould change his name: that M. Piſo being depoſed from his dignitie, and receiuing About 39060 pound. fiftie hundred thouſand ſeſterces, ſhould be exiled for ten yeares: and Plancinaes life pardoned at the ſuite of Augusta. Diuers points of that ſentence were mitigated by the Prince, as that Piſoes name ſhould not be wiped out of the Faſti: ſeeing that M. Antonius, who had made warre againſt his countrey; and Iulius Antonius name, who had violated Augustus houſe, remained: and M. Piſo he deliuered from infamie, and graunted him his fathers goodes, neuer as I haue often ſayd, greedie of money: and at that time more eaſilier pleaſed, for ſhame that Plancina was quit. And when Valerius Meſſallinus propounded, that there ſhould an image

of gold be ſet vp in Mars their reuengers temple: and Cecina Seuerus an altar erected to reuenge. He hindered both, alleaging that thoſe things were to be dedicated and offered for forren victories, and that domeſticall aduerſities ought to be buried in ſorrow. Meſſallinus added, that thanks ſhould be giuen to Tiberius and Augusta, to Antonie and Agrippina, and to Druſus for Germanicus reuenge, not once mentioning Claudius. And L. Aſprenas asking Meſſallinus before the Senate, whether he had willingly omitted him? Claudius name was then firſt added. The more I meditate with my ſelfe of things done both in old and later times; the more the vncertainties and vanities of fortune in mortall affaires come to my remembrance: for in fame, hope, eſtimation, all men were rather deſtined to the ſoueraigntie, then he, whom fortune had kept hidden for the future monarch. A few dayes after Caeſar perſwaded the Lords of the Senate to beſtow the dignitie of Prieſthood vpon Vitellius, Veranius, and Seruaeus: and hauing promiſed his voice to Fulcinius for the obtaining of any dignitie, aduiſed him not to ouerthrow his eloquence with raſhnes. And that was the end of reuenging Germanicus death: many things diuerſly reported; not only among ſuch as then liued, but in times conſequent. So doubtfull are all waightie matters; whileſt ſome take all as certaine, howſoeuer they heare it: others report a truth otherwiſe then it is: poſteritie adding to both.
            
            
               
                  IIII. Wars renewed in Affricke vnder Tacfarinas: who is defeated by Apronius: Lepida condemned for changing a childe.
               BVt Druſus being gone out of the citie, once more to learne future things by the flieng of birds; entereth in againe, with a ſmall triumphe. And a fewe daies after, Vipſania his mother died, onely of all Agrippas children, of a naturall death: becauſe it was certainely beleeued, that ſome died by the ſword; others by poiſon or famine. The ſame yeere Tacfarinas, who as I haue ſaide was the laſt ſommer driuen out by Camillus, renueth the warre in Affricke: at the firſt by rouing pillages; vnreuenged by reaſon of his ſudden comming; then by waſting of villages; and carrieng away great booties; and laſt of al not far from the riuer Pagyda he beſieged a Roman cohort. One Decrius was Captaine of the fort, a luſtie man, and of good skill in matters of warre: who taking that beſieging as a diſgrace to himſelfe; encourageth his ſouldiers to fight in open fielde; and marſhalled his armie in order of battell before the fortreſſe. The cohort being beaten backe at the firſt brunt: he runneth in among the weapons of ſuch as fled; rebuking the ſtandard bearers, that a Roman ſouldier would ſhew his back, to a few vntrained raw traitors. And hauing receiued wounds, and an eie ſtroken out; yet put himſelfe in the face of the enimie; neuer leauing of fighting, vntill he was forſaken of his companie and ſlaine in the place. Which when L. Apronius (who ſuceeded Camillus) vnderſtood: being more perplexed with the ſhame of his own people; then glory of the enemie: he draweth out by lot (a rare matter in thoſe daies though in old times practiſed) euerie tenth perſon of the diſhonorable band, & beateth him with cudgels to death. Which ſeueritie wrought ſo great good, that an enſigne of old ſouldiers, in number not aboue fiue hundred; defeated Tacfarinas armie, going about to aſſault a fort called Thala. In which battell Ruffus Heluius, a common ſouldier, got the credit of ſauing a citizens life: on whom L. Apronius beſtowed chaines and a ſpeare. Caeſar added a ciuicall crowne to them: finding fault rather then offended, that Apronius
                  
had not giuen it by his proconſularie authoritie. But Tacfarinas perceiuing the Numidians to be daunted, & refuſing to beſiege any longer, ſcattered his war; giuing ground when he was purſued: and following a freſh when their backes were turned. Which maner of fight vſed by the Barbarian, moleſted and kept the Roman plaie, to no purpoſe. But after that greedy of pray, he drew to the ſea coaſtes, and there encamped. Apronius Ceſianus being ſent thither by his fathers appointment, with a troupe of horſmen and aid cohorts; adding vnto them the rudeſt of the legions; had a proſperous fight, and droue the Numidian to the deſarts. Lepida, who beſides the honor of the Aemilian familie, from which ſhe was deſcended; had L. Sulla, and Cn. Pompeius for hir great grand-fathers, was accuſed at Rome, for faining hir ſelfe to haue had a childe, by P. Quirinius, a rich man and without children: and alſo of adulteries and empoiſonings: and that ſhe had conſulted with the Chaldeans againſt the houſe of Caeſar: hir brother Manius Lepidus defending hir cauſe. Quirinius being offended, and ſeparated from hir; yet had commiſeration on hir, although ſhe were both infamous and faultie. In the hearing of that cauſe, it was harde to geſſe the princes minde; he did ſo turne and winde himſelfe, and interlace tokens of anger with clemencie: hauing firſt of all requeſted that matters of treaſon ſhould not be debated at that time. Then he drew M. Seruilius, once Conſull, and other witneſſes to broach ſuch matter, which he woulde ſeeme to haue ſuppreſſed: and ſent to the Conſuls Lepidaes ſeruants, whom he had garded before with a companie of ſoldiers: & would not ſuffer them to anſwer by torture, to ſuch interrogatories as did appertaine to his houſe. Neither that Druſus Conſull elect ſhould firſt yeeld his opinion: which ſome conſtrued to be a point of ciuilitie; that others ſhoulde not be forced to do the like: others did wreſt it to crueltie: and that he ſhould neuer haue giuen place, but to condemne the partie called in queſtion. Lepida, the day of hearing falling out when the plaies were to be ſhewen; entering the Theater with a companie of noble women: calling on hir aunceſtors with a dolefull lamentation; and Pompey himſelfe, whoſe monuments and images were there in view: mooued ſuch great compaſſion, that the people guſhing out in teares, began to curſe Quirinius: wiſhing him all crueltie and misfortune: vpon whom being old and without children, and of baſe parentage, ſhe was beſtowed, who had once beene deſtined a wife for L. Caeſar, and daughter in law to Augustus. Not long after hir lewde behauiour was diſcouered; by torturing hir ſlaues: and all of them condeſcended vnto Rubellius Blandus opinion, which was that ſhe ſhould be baniſhed. Druſus yeelded vnto his opinion, although others were mildlier bent. Then Scaurus, who had had a daughter by hir, obtained, that hir goods ſhould not be confiſcate. At laſt Tiberius declared, that he was aſſured alſo by P. Quirinius ſlaues, that ſhe ſought to poiſon him, as being an enimie alwaies to noble houſes. And ſo in a ſhort compaſſe of time, the Calphurnians loſt Piſo: and the Aemilians Lepida. But D. Silanus being reſtored to the Iunian family, was a comfort vnto it: whoſe fortunes I will lay downe.
            
            
               
                  V. Decius Silanus touched vvith adulterie: Papias Poppaeus lavve against ſingle life.
               AS fortune was fauourable to Auguſtus in gouernment of ſtate: ſo in houſehold matters vnluckie and improſperous: his daughter and Neece which he baniſhed the citie, being both of incontinent life: and the adulterers puniſhed with death or exile. For perceiuing the offence to be common in the mouth both of man and woman; and terming it by a rigorous name, of religion

violated, or treaſon; he paſſed the bondes of his aunceſtors clemencie, and his owne lawes. But I will lay downe the endes of others, and what hath hapned in that age: if hauing finiſhed this which I haue begun I ſhall haue longer life, to vndertake farther matter. Decius Silanus, who was accuſed to haue committed adulterie with Augustus Neece, although there was no ſeuerer puniſhment decreed againſt him, then that he ſhoulde be depriued of Caeſars friendſhip; yet interpreting that to be a baniſhment, durſt neuer intreate pardon of the Senate and the Prince, vntill Tiberius came to be Emperour; and that by his brother M. Silanus credit and authoritie, for his great nobilitie and eloquence highly eſteemed. But Silanus thanking Tiberius: he anſwered before the Lords of the Senate, that he was glad of his brothers returne from a long peregrination: and that he might lawfully ſo do, becauſe he was not expulſed by decree of Senate or law: yet that the offence committed againſt his father, was entire: and that by Silanus returne, thoſe things were not made fruſtrate which Augustus had decreed. He remained after this in the citie, but as a priuat man without office. After this, they debated the matter concerning the moderation of the law Papia poppaea, which Augustus ſtroken in yeeres, had ordained after the Iulian lawes, for augmenting the puniſhment of ſingle life, and enriching the publick treaſure. Neither for all that, were marriages and education of children the more frequented: the ſingle life hauing taken ſtrong roote: whereby the multitude of the endangered by the law, growing greater, moſt houſes were ſubuerted by the interpretations of enformers: and as heretofore through lewdnes of life; ſo now by lawes the eſtate of many was ouerthrowne. This giueth me occaſion to ſpeake more at large of the beginning of lawes; and by what meanes we are come to ſuch an infinite multitude and varietie of them. In moſt auncient times no diſordinate deſire raigned: euery man liued without reproch and vice; and therefore without puniſhment and reſtraint of lawes; neither was there any neede of reward, when as euery man deſired honeſt things of his owne will: and where nothing was demanded againſt cuſtome, nothing was forbidden by feare. But after that equalitie was baniſhed, and that ambition and violence crept in, in ſtead of modeſtie and ſhame; rule and dominion tooke footing, and continued for euer among many nations. Some preſently, or after they were weary of kings, deſired rather lawes: which at the firſt were ſimple, mens minds being yet rude. And aboue the reſt, fame commended thoſe of the Cretenſians which Minos gaue: and thoſe of the Sparteans, which Lycurgus: and not long after Solon preſcribed more, and more exquiſite, to the people of Athens. Romulus ruled vs as pleaſed himſelfe: then Numa bound the people with ceremonies, and diuine lawes: ſome were found out by Tullus and Ancus: but the chiefeſt law-maker was Seruius Tullius, which kings themſelues were bound to obey. Tarquinius being driuen out; the people made many againſt the factions of the Senators, to defend their libertie and eſtabliſh concord. Then ten men were choſen, to collect all the beſt lawes of other countries; out of which they compoſed twelue tables: the end of lawe and equitie. As for the lawes which followed, although they were ſometimes made againſt malefactors for their miſdemeanors; yet notwithſtanding for the moſt part, they were brought in, through the diſſention of the communaltie and noble men: for getting of vnlawfull dignities: or driuing out of noble men; or other diſorders. By this occaſion, the Gracchi, and the Saturnini were diſturbers of the people: and Druſus no leſſe prodigall vnder pretence of the Senators name, corrupted his companions with hope, or mocked them by ſundrie oppoſitions againſt them. Neither did they omit in the warre of Italie, nor in

the ciuill warre, to make many lawes: vntill L. Sulla the Dictator, the former lawes either aboliſhed or changed: after he had added many vnto them; forbare ſometime from making any more, though not long by reaſon of Lepidus turbulent demaunds: and becauſe that not long after, licence was yeelded the Tribunes to mannage the people, as themſelues luſted. And now not in generall, but againſt particular men lawes were ordained: and thereby in a common wealth moſt corrupt; lawes vpon lawes were multiplied. Then Cn. Pompeius being a third time Conſull, and choſen for reformation of manners; being more ſeuere in puniſhing then the offence deſerued; was the author and ouerthrower of his owne lawes: and loſt thoſe things by armes, which he had defended by armes. From that time forward there was continuall diſcord twentie yeares together: no cuſtome; no law obſerued: the moſt lewdeſt enterpriſes eſcaped vnpuniſhed: and many vndone for well doing. At length Augustus Caeſar being the ſixt time Conſull, and ſetled in the ſtate, aboliſhed thoſe things, which being Triumuir himſelf had commaunded: and gaue new lawes to be obſerued in time of peace and vnder a Prince. Straighter lawes were made by him; and ſpies appointed to watch the trāſgreſſors: and many induced through recōpenſes graunted by the lawe Papia poppaea; that if any forbare from the priuileges of parents, ceaſt from marriage, and had no children: that then the people who was the common father of all, ſhould inherit their goods. But the pickthanks went farther, and informed againſt many, not only in the citie, but alſo through all Italie, and where ſoeuer elſe the citizens were: and ouerthrew many mens eſtates, and droue a terror into all: if Tiberius in prouiding a remedie had not choſen by lot, fiue ſuch as had beene Conſuls, fiue as had beene Pretors, and ſo many of the reſt of the Senators, which ſoluing many intricate quirks of this lawe, were ſome eaſe for the preſent time.
            
            
               
                  VI. Nero is recomended by Tiberius to the Senat: and marrieth with Iulia, Druſus daughter.
               ABout the ſame time, he recomended Nero, one of Germanicus children, now entered into his youth, to the Lords of the Senat: and requeſted that he might be diſpenſed with for the office of Vigintiuirat: and (which to all men ſeemed ridiculous) be lawfull for him to demaund the Queſtorſhip, fiue yeeres ſooner then the lawes did permit: pretending that the ſame was graunted him and his brother at Augustus requeſt. But I doubt not, but at that time, ſome ſecretly laughed at that demaund. Yet theſe were the firſt beginnings of Caeſars riſing; and the auncient cuſtome more in euerie mans eies: and a lighter band of alliance, helde to be betwixt the father in lawe, and his wiues children; then the granfather and his nephew. The Pontificall dignitie was likewiſe beſtowed vpon him: and the firſt time he entered the place of common aſſemblies; he gaue the people a donatiue: verie ioyfull to ſee Germanicus ofspring now of full age. Their ioy was augmented by Neroes marrieng of Iulia, Druſus daughter. And as theſe things were gratefull to the people; ſo went it againſt their ſtomacks, that Seianus ſhould be deſtined father in law to Claudius ſon, as a diſparagement to their nobility: & that at their own motion they exalted Seianus, who cōceiued ouer great hopes in his mind. In the end of that yeere died L. Volutius, & Sal. Criſpus, two noble perſonages. Voluſius was deſcended of an auncient ſtocke; but neuer higher then a Pretors roome: himſelfe obtained a Conſuls roome: & was made Cenſor for the chuſing of bands of horſmen; & the

firſt gatherer of riches, whereby that houſe roſe to that greatnes. Criſpus was a gentleman borne, and ſo called and adopted by that excellent writer of the Roman Hiſtorie C. Sallustius, bicauſe he was his ſiſters nephew. But he, although he had a readie entrance for obtaining of dignities; yet following the example of Maecenas neuer once being Senator, had greater authoritie and power, then many which had triumphed and beene Conſuls. Yet differed from his aunceſtors in manner of life; as being neat, fine, and bountifull, very neere riotouſnes; and was of a great capacitie, and in courage able to performe great matters: and ſo much the more liuely; by how much in vtter ſhew he ſeemed drouſie and heauie metled. Therefore whileſt Maecenas liued, next vnto him his credit was beſt: and after his death, truſted with greateſt ſecrets of ſtate; and priuie to the murdering of Posthumus Agrippa; and growne into yeeres, helde rather a ſhadowe of the Princes friendſhip, then the ſubſtance. Euen ſo fell it out with Maecenas; either ſo by the courſe of the heauens decreed, that Princes fauour is ſeldome euerlaſting; or bicauſe both haue their fill: thoſe when they haue giuen all they can; theſe when there is nothing left to deſire. Now followeth the fourth time Tiberius; and the ſecond that Druſus was made Conſull: a thing woorthie of remembrance, that the father and the ſon were fellow officers: for two yeeres before, Germanicus had the ſame dignitie with Tiberius: but that was no ioie to the vncle; neither he ſo neere in blood vnto him. In the beginning of that yeere Tiberius went to Campania, vnder colour of getting his health; yet indeed by little and little to abſent himſelfe; or elſe that the father being away, Druſus might alone mannage the whole Conſulſhip. It fell out by meere chance, that a matter of ſmall moment growing to a waightie contention, brought the yoong man to great credit. Domitius Corbulo, who had beene Pretor, complained before the Lords of the Senat, on L. Sulla a noble yoong man, that he gaue him not the place at a play of fencers. For Corbulo, made his age; the cuſtome of the countrey; and the fauour of the auncient men: on the other ſide, Mamercus Scaurus, and L. Arruntius, and other of his kinred, ſtucke vnto Sulla. Orations were made on both ſides: and examples of old times brought, ſharpely rebuking the irreuerence of youth: vntill Druſus qualified the matter with a fit diſcourſe; and Corbulo ſatisfied by Mamercus the moſt excellent Orator of his time, and vncle, and father in law to Sulla. The ſame Corbulo exclaiming that many high waies of Italie were broken, and not paſſable; by reaſon of the fraude of the vndertakers of the worke, and negligence of magiſtrates in great; accepteth willingly the finiſhing of that buſines. Which did not ſo much turne to à publick benefit, as the deſtruction of many: whoſe wealth and fame he tyranniſed by condemning them, and ſetting their goods to ſale.
            
            
               
                  VII. Whether Captaines and Gouernors of prouinces ſhould haue their vviues vvith them.
               NOt long after, Tiberius ſent letters to the Senate; aduertiſing them that by Tacfarinas incurſions, Affrike was againe in armes: and that with the aduiſe of the Lords it were needfull, that a Preconſull were choſen, skilfull in matters of warre; of an able bodie, and a ſufficient man for this war. Which entrance Sextus Pompeius hauing gotten, of vttering his malice againſt M. Lepidus; accuſed him to be a coward, beggerly, and a diſhonour to his aunceſtors; and therefore not to be admitted to lot, for the gouernment of Aſia. The Senators were on his ſide; who thought Lepidus rather meeke then a coward; and the ſmall wealth

left him by his father; and his nobilitie paſt without reproch, rather they iudged a credit, then an ignominie. And therefore he was ſent into Aſia. And touching Affrica, it was decreed that Caeſar ſhoulde chuſe one himſelfe for that charge. Whileſt theſe things were a dooing, Seuerus Caecina was of opinion, that no magiſtrate vnto whom ſhould fall the gouernment of a Prouince, ſhoulde haue his wife follow him: hauing firſt often repeated, the good agreement betwixt him and his wife: that he had ſixe children by hir: and that he propounded nothing publikely to be executed, which he had not obſerued at home: not ſuffering his to go out of Italie, although he had had commanderie in wars fortie yeeres in many prouinces. It was not in vaine, ſaid he, ordained in times paſt, that womē ſhould not be drawen to cō
                     federates and forrein nations. For it was incident where women followed, that in peace they were a hinderance by riot and ſumptouſnes: in warre by feare; and made the Romane armie, like the Barbarians going to warre. That ſexe was not onely weake and vnable to take paine; but if it got the bridle, cruell, ambitious and greedy of rule. To marche among the ſouldiers, to haue the Centurions at command; we haue ſeene a woman of late: and to ouerſee the cohorts exerciſe, and the legions horſeraces. That they ſhould conſider, that as oft as any were accuſed of extortion and polling, more was obiected againſt their wiues, then themſelues. That the lew deſt perſons of the prouinces, did by and by cleaue vnto them. They woulde intermeddle and conclude of all affaires: by this meanes two were courted, and two iudgement ſeats. Women being wilfull, commaund proudly; and brideled by the Oppian and other lawes; now hauing gotten the raines in their hands, rule houſes, places of iudgements, and armies. This was heard but with the good likin of a fewe: many interrupting him, and ſaying, that that was not the matter propounded: nor Caecina a fit cenſurer to ſwaie a matter of ſo great importance. Valerius Meſſallinus, ſonne vnto Meſſalla, in whom appeared the image of his fathers eloquence, anſwered immediately as followeth. Many hard and irkſome cuſtomes of our predeceſſors, haue beene changed into the better and pleaſanter. Neither was the citie beſieged as in times paſt: or the prouinces at defiance with vs; and ſome few things are graunted to womens neceſſities: which are ſo farre from ouercharging the confederates; that they are not burdenſome to their husbands houſes. Other things were common as well to the husband as the wife; and no hinderance at all therein to peace. True it is, that warres are to be vndertaken by armed men: but vnto ſuch as returne after their labours, what more honeſter ſolace then a mans wife? But ſome haue fallen into ambition and couetouſnes. What? of magiſtrates themſelues, are not many of them ſubiect vnto ſundry affections? yet it cannot be, that none ſhould be ſent into the prouince. But oftentimes the husbands haue beene corrupted by the naughtines of their wiues: are therefore all ſingle men vncorrupt? The Oppian lawes were once in vſe, the ſtate of the common wealth ſo requiring; but afterward ſomewhat of their rigor was remitted and mitigated, becauſe it was then expedient. It was in vaine to couer our cowardlines with new names; for it was the husbands fault, if the woman exceeded the meane. In fine, it were not well done for the weakenes of one or two, to take from husbands their companion in proſperous and aduerſe fortune: and withall, a ſexe 
                        •••
                     ake and fraile by nature, to be left alone, and expoſed by her owne licentiouſnes, to the luſt of others. Matrimony could hardly be kept vndefiled, their husbands being preſent: what would become of them, if they ſhould be forgotten for many yeares, as it were by diuorcement? therefore they ſhould ſo preuent faults committed abroad, that they forget not the diſhonors of the citie. Druſus added ſomewhat of his owne matrimony,

and that Princes moſt often viſit the remoteſt parts of their Empire. How oft had Augustus of famous memory gone to the Eaſt and Weſt, accompanied with Liuia? That himſelfe, had gone to Illyrium; and if it were expedient, was readie to go into other countries: but yet not alwayes willingly, if he ſhould be drawne from his moſt deere wife, and mother of ſo many children, common betweene them both. And ſo Caecinas ſentence tooke no effect.
            
            
               
                  VIII. What abuſes were committed by running to the Princes images. Warres in Thrace.
               THe next day that the Senat met, Tiberius hauing courtly rebuked the Lords of the Senate by letters, becauſe they did caſt all the cares on the Princes neck, nominated M. Lepidus, and Iunius Blaeſus, one of them to be choſen Proconſull of Affrike. And both of them being heard, Lepidus very earneſtly excuſed himſelfe; pretending the feeblenes of his bodie; his childrens age; and a daughter mariageable: reſpecting alſo (though thereof he made no mention) that Blaeſus was Seianus vncle; and therefore ſure to carry it away. Blaeſus anſwered as though he would haue refuſed, but not with the like aſſeueration as the other; yet had a fauourable hearing of flatterers. Then many ſecret complaints were made knowne: for euery lewd companion, if he could catch hold on Caeſars image, might freely, and without puniſhment, iniury honeſt men with opprobrious ſpeeches, and rayſe enuie againſt them: yea, freed men and bondſlaues alſo, were feared, threatning with words and fiſts their patrons and maiſters. Whereupon C. Cestius a Senator vttered theſe ſpeeches: That in deed Princes were like vnto gods: but yet the gods heard no ſupplications but iuſt: neither had any refuge to the Capitol, or other temples of the citie, that they ſhould vſe that as a defence againſt all miſdemeanor. That the lawes were aboliſhed and vtterly ouerthrowne: ſeeing that Annia Rufilla, whome he had condemned of fraude before the iudge, did threaten, and vſe reprochfull ſpeeches againſt him, in the place of aſſemblies and before the Curia: he not daring to trie the lawe with her, becauſe ſhe had Caeſars image ouer againſt her. Others muttered the like, or bitterer ſpeeches then theſe; and beſought Druſus that he would ſhew exemplarie puniſhment vpon her: and being called and conuicted, was condemned to priſon. Likewiſe Conſidius AEquus, and Coelius Curſor Gentlemen of Rome, were by commaundement of the Prince, and order of the Senate puniſhed, for forging crimes of treaſon againſt the Pretor Magius Caecilianus. Both turned to Druſus commendation, bicauſe that by him who conuerſed in the citie with all companies, in familiar communication; the ſecret deſeigments of his father were qualified. Neither did the yoong mans riot greatly diſlike them; reputing it a leſſer fault, to employ the day in buildings, and the night in banquetting; then giuen to no pleaſures, alone heauily to paſſe the daie in lewde practiſes and deuiſes. For Tiberius and the accuſers were not yet wearied. But Ancharius Priſcus accuſed Caeſius Cordus, Proconſull of Creete, of powling the countrey: and added treaſon, which was a ſupplie when all other accuſations failed. When Caeſar perceiued that Antistius Vetus, one of the chiefe noble men of Macedonia, was acquited of adulterie laid to his charge: hauing rebuked the iudges, drew him in againe, to purge himſelfe of treaſon; as being ſeditious and a confederate with Rheſcuporis in his counſels: when as hauing ſlaine his brother Cotys, he intended warre againſt vs. Whereupon he was baniſhed into an Iland; neither commodius for Macedonia, nor Thrace. For Thrace, the kingdome

being diuided betwixt Rhoemetalces and Cotys children; vnto whom by reaſon of their infancie, Trebellienus Rufus was made Tutor; through the ſtrangenes of our manners, fell to rebell afreſh: no leſſe blaming Rhoemetalces then Trebellienus, bicauſe they ſuffred the iniuries done to their people to eſcape vnpuniſhed. The Coelaletae, and the Odruſetae, all ſtrong nations; tooke armes vnder diuers Captaines, for baſenes of birth not vnlike: and therfore could not grow to any cruel battel. For ſome troubled the preſent ſtate; ſome paſſed the hill Haemus, to draw ſuch to them as dwelt a far off: moſt of them, and thoſe of better gouernment, beſieged the King and the citie Philippopolis, built by Philip King of Macedon. Which when P. Velleius vnderſtood, who was Captaine of the next armie: he ſent a certaine companie of horſemen, and a band of footmen lightly appointed, againſt thoſe which romed about for pillage; or to ſeeke more ſuccour: himſelfe brought his ſtrength of footmen to raiſe the ſiege; all ending proſperouſly; the forragers ſlaine; and a diſſention growing amongſt the beſiegers: the King ſallied out againſt theſe; the legions arriued in ſeaſonable time. This deſerued not the name of an armie or battell: in which a few vnfurniſhed ſtraglers were ſlaine without any blood-ſhed on our ſide.
            
            
               
                  IX. The Galli vnable to pay their taxations rebell: Iulius Florus and Iulius Sacrouir being their Captaines.
               THe ſame yeere the cities of Gallia, by reaſon they were greatly indebted, began a rebellion: the chiefeſt firebrand among the Treueri being Iulius Florus, and with the Aedui Iulius Sacrouir: both nobly deſcended, and whoſe aunceſtors had atchieued valiant acts; and therfore made citizens of Rome: then a rare thing, and a guerdon onely of vertue. They by ſecret conferences, hauing drawen to them the moſt audacious; or ſuch whoſe pouertie, or feare of puniſhmēts for their miſdeeds, were ready to plunge themſelues into any enterpriſe: reſolued that Florus ſhould ſtir vp the Belgi, and Sacrouir the French neerer at hand. In their conuenticles therfore & meetings; they began to caſt out ſeditious ſpeeches of their cōtinual tributes; the greatnes of vſury; the cruelty & arrogancy of gouernors; & that the ſoldiers fell togither by the eares when they heard of Germanicus death. That that was a notable time offered, of recouering their libertie: if now in their flouriſhing eſtate they woulde weigh, howe poore Italy was; howe weake the citie ſouldier; and no ſtrength in the armies, but what was in ſtrangers. There was almoſt no citie which was not infected with the ſeedes of that commotion. The Andecauians, and the Turonians were the firſt which burſt out: of which the Andecauians were ſubdued, by the Lieutenant Acilius Auiola; with a bande of men which laie in garriſon at Lugdunum. The Turonians were ouerthrowne by the legionarie ſouldier; which Viſellius Varro, Lieutenant of lower Germanie, ſent vnder the ſame captaine Auiola: and certaine of the chiefe gentlemen of Gallia, which brought him aide; the better thereby to cloake their reuolt, and when occaſion ſerued, rebell with more aſſurance. Sacrouir was ſeene to demaund battell of the Romans bare headed, as he ſaide to ſhewe his valour: but the captaines ſaid he did it to make himſelfe the better knowne; thereby to be ſpared from their darts. Tiberius being conſulted vpon that point, made no reckoning of the diſcloſing of it; but nouriſhed the warre by doubting. Florus in the meane time helde on his purpoſe; enticed a wing of horſemen, enrowled at Treuers, and trained vp in our ſeruice & diſcipline; that hauing ſlaine the Roman merchants, which there vſed trafficke; he might begin the warre: fewe of the horſemen were corrupted; but moſt continued in their alleageance. Other rude indebted perſons, or followers, tooke armes; and

went towarde the forreſt called Arden: but the legions from both armies; which Viſellius, and C. Silius had ſet to croſſe them, droue them backe. Iulius Indus being of the ſame citie; and an enimie to Florus (and therefore more foreward to ſhew his valour) being ſent before with a choiſe power; ſcattered and defeated that diſordered multitude. Florus eſcaped the conquerours hands, by vncertaine lurking holes; and at laſt perceiuing the ſouldiers to ſet on his places of refuge, ſlewe himſelfe with his own hands. And that was the end of the rebellion of thoſe of Treueri. It was a matter of great difficultie to ſuppreſſe the Aedui; by reaſon their city was more wealthie; and the aide which ſhould haue ſubdued them farther off. Sacrouir had with certaine armed cohorts, gotten poſſeſſion of Auguſtodunum, the chiefe citie of the countrey; and taken the nobleſt mens children of all Gallia, which there followed their ſtudies; as a pledge to win and binde their parents and kindred: and withal, ſecretly diſtributed weapons which himſelfe had cauſed to be made, to al the youth. They were in number forty thouſand; the fift part armed as the legions were: the others with hunting ſtaues, hangers, & ſuch other weapōs, as hūters vſe. To theſe were added certaine ſlauiſh fencers; couered according to the countrey faſhion, from top to toe, in armour of iron; vnapt and vneaſie to ſtrike; but to withſtand impenetrable, whom they call Crupellarij. Theſe forces were augmented, though not by any open cōſent of cities adioining; yet with euery mans particular good wil: the Roman captaines ſtriuing & doubting who ſhould haue the conducting of the warre; both deſiring it. But Varro being old and feeble, yeelded to Silius, who was in his prime. It was currant in Rome, that not onely the Treueri, and the Aedui, but alſo that threeſcore and fower cities of Gallia had reuolted; and the Germans ioined with them: that Spaine was wauering; and all (as the nature of a report is) beleeued, more then it was. Euery good man with a care of the common-wealth was greatly grieued: many diſliking the preſent ſtate, and deſirous of alteration, reioyſed euen in their owne harmes: and blamed Tiberius that in ſo great a hurlyburly, he woulde ſtill ſpende his labour in hearing accuſers libels. What (ſaide they) ſhall Iulius Sacrouir bee condemned of treaſon in Senate? at laſt ſome were founde, which with armes woulde ſuppreſſe theſe bloudy libels of accuſers: that a miſerable peace was well changed for warre. Tiberius ſo much the more compoſed to a careles ſecuritie, changed neither place nor countenance; paſſed ouer thoſe dayes after his accuſtomed woont, either through haughtines of courage; or becauſe he knewe the matter to be lighter then the report. In the meane time Silius marching on with two legions, hauing ſent a power of allies before, waſteth the villages of the Sequans, which were borderers and confederates with the Aeduans. Anon after he marcheth ſpeedily with his armie towardes Auguſtodunum: the ſtandard-bearers ſtriuing who ſhoulde make moſt haſte: and the common ſouldier fretting, and chaſing likewiſe, leaſt he ſhould reſt the night as he was wont: only that they might ſee the enemie, and be ſeene, that would be enough for the victorie. Twelue miles off, Sacrouir appeared in the champian countrey. In the front he had placed his men couered with iron: his cohorts on the wings: and thoſe which were halfe armed in the rereward: himſelfe mounted on a goodly courſer, amongſt the chiefeſt of the citie; went to the ſouldiers, and put them in minde of the ancient glory of the Galli; and how oft they had defeated the Romans. How honorable a thing libertie was to the conquerors: and how intollerable ſeruitude would be, if they ſhould be vanquiſhed againe. This exhortation was not long nor pleaſing: for the legions drew neere in battell aray: the towneſmen wanting diſcipline, and ignorant of ſeruice, did neither ſee nor

heare what was beſt for them. Silius on the contrary ſide, although his hope had taken away all occaſions of encouraging them, yet cried: That it was a ſhame for them, being conquerors ouer the Germans, to be brought againſt the Galli, as againſt enemies: and that of late one cohort had vanquiſhed the rebellious Toronians; one wing the Treueri: a few troupes of horſemen of this ſame armie, had put to flight the Sequans. By how much the richer the Aedui are in money, and abounding in pleaſures, the leſſer courage they had. Breake then in vpon them, and binde them, and flee to thoſe which run away. At that all of them giuing an outcry, the horſemen compaſſed them in: the footemen ſet on the point: and the wings made ſmall reſiſtance. Thoſe in complet yron harnes, ſtuck ſomewhat to it: their plates reſiſting, and beating back the darts and ſwords: but the ſouldier ſnatching his hatchets and axes, as though he were to breake through a wall, hewed their couering and carcaſſes. Some with poles or forks ouerthrew this ſluggiſh lump: leauing them for halfe dead lying on the ground, not once going about to riſe. Sacrouir goeth firſt to Auguſtodunum; then, for feare leaſt it ſhould be yeelded, to the next village, with a few of his truſtieſt friends; where he ſlew himſelfe with his owne hands, and the reſt one another: and the village being ſet on fire ouer them, they were all burnt together. Then at laſt Tiberius wrote to the Senate, that the warre was begun and ended: neither adding nor taking away from the truth. And that the Lieutenants had behaued themſelues faithfully and valorouſly; and himſelfe directed them with counſell. And withall yeelded the reaſons, why neither he nor Druſus went to the war; magnifying the greatnes of the Empire: and that it was not meete that Princes, if ſome one or other towne rebell, ſhould forſake Rome; from whence all other gouernment was deriued. Now bicauſe there was no cauſe of feare, he would goe ſee and ſettle the preſent eſtate of things. The Lords of the Senat derceed vowes and proceſſions for his returne, with other conuenient ceremonies. Dolabella Cornelius onely whileſt he went about to exceed others, falling into abſurd flatterie, thought it meete that he ſhould from Campania enter into the citie, ouant. Wherupon Caeſar wrote, that he was not ſo needie of renowne, that hauing vanquiſhed moſt ſtout and prowde nations; and receiued or refuſed in his youth ſo many triumphes; he would in his old age hunt after a vaine reward of a voiage neere the citie.
            
            
               
                  X. Lepidus maketh an oration in defence of C. Lutorius accuſed of treaſon.
               ABout the ſame time, he made requeſt vnto the Senat that Sulpitius Quirinius death, might be ſolemniſed with publicke funerals. Quirinius was not of the auncient patritian familie of the Sulpitians; but borne at Lanuuium a free towne: a valiant warrior; and forwards in all his charges: was Conſull vnder Augustus of famous memorie. Then hauing won by aſſault the fortreſſe of the Homonadenſians in Cilicia; the markes of triumphe were awarded him; then giuen as a guide to C. Caeſar in the regiment of Armenia: and when Tiberius was at Rhodes, ſhewed him all duties of loue; which Tiberius did open in Senat, praiſing his dutifulnes towards him; and accuſed M. Lollius, to haue perſwaded C. Caeſar to ſeditions and lewdnes. But vnto the reſt, the memorie of Quirinius was nothing pleaſing, by reaſon as I haue ſaide, of the danger he brought Lepida into, and miſerable niggiſhnes, and powerable old age. In the end of the yeere a cari-tale, accuſed C. Lutorius Priſcus a gentleman of Rome; who had compoſed notable funerall verſes vpon

                  Germanicus death, and receiued money of Caeſar for them: obiecting that he had made them in honour of Druſus being ſicke: to the ende that if he had died, they ſhould haue beene publiſhed for greater reward. Thoſe verſes Lutorius, vpon vaine glorie had read in P. Petronius houſe, in the preſence of Vitellia, his mother in lawe, and many other noble women. As ſoone as the pickthanke had ſhewed himſelfe; the reſt forced by feare to giue witnes: onely Vitellia ſtood to it, that ſhe had heard nothing. But more credit being giuen to ſuch as teſtified to his ouerthrow: ſentence of death was pronounced againſt him, by Haterius Agrippa Conſull elect. Againſt whom M. Lepidus began to ſpeake in this manner. If we conſider, Lords of the Senat, with what a wicked toong Lutorius Priſcus hath polluted his minde, and mens eares: neither priſon, nor halter, nor any ſeruile torments, could ſuffice to puniſh him. But if lewd and heinous facts be without meane: yet the moderation of a Prince; your own and your aunceſtors examples do mollifie the puniſhments and remedies of them: vaine things do differ from wicked; and words from villanous deedes. And therefore iudgment may be giuen; by which neither this mans offence goe ſcot-free; & we not repent vs, either of our clemencie or ſeueritie. I haue often heard our Prince complaine, if any by killing himſelfe hath preuented his clemēcy; Lutorius life is yet in ſafety: who being kept aliue, will neither breed danger to the cōmon-wealth; nor put to death, ſerue for example to others. As his ſtudies were full of follie and without ſence, ſo they are likewiſe vaine, and quickly at an end. Neither is there any cauſe to feare any great or ſerious matter in him; who bewraying his owne imperfections; doth creepe not into mens, but womens breaſts. Yet let him be expulſed the citie. Which I iudge to be all one as if he had been conuicted of treaſon. Among all the Conſuls onely Rubellius Blandus agreed with Lepidus: the reſt following Agrippaes opinion; Priſcus was lead to priſon; and immediately depriued of his life. The fact Tiberius with his accuſtomed ambiguitie of words, blamed in Senate: extolling the zealous affection of ſeuere puniſhments of princes iniuries, though ſmall: yet entreated them that they woulde not ſo raſhlie puniſh wordes: praiſed Lepidus, and rebuked not Agrippa. Whereupon a decree of Senate was made; that their orders ſhoulde not be caried to the treaſurie before ten daies were expired: and that ſo long the condemneds life ſhould be prolonged. But the Senators had no licence to repent, and reuoke their ſentence; and Tiberius not to be pacified by tract of time.
            
            
               
                  XI. Tiberius letter touching reformation of abuſes.
               THe yeere following, C. Sulpitius, and D. Haterius, were created Conſuls: all being quiet from forrein troubles: but ſeueritie againſt ſuperfluities ſuſpected at home: which was growen to exceeding exceſſe in all things, wherein money is lauiſhly ſpent. Some of their expences, although more vnreaſonable; yet were cloaked, by diſſembling their prices: but gluttonie and belly-cheere, euerie man commonly ſpeaking of; put them in feare, leaſt the prince ſhoulde rigorouſlie proceed according to the ancient prouident frugalitie. For C. Bibulus beginning; the other Aediles ſhewed alſo, that the law cōcerning exceſſe of expences, was nought ſet by; and the ſumptuouſnes of moueables which was forbiddē, daily increaſed: and that it coulde not be redreſſed by any reaſonable meanes. And the Lordes of the Senate being demanded their aduiſe, referred the whole matter to the prince. But Tiberius often pondered with himſelfe, whether ſuch exorbitant luſtes coulde bebrideled or not: whether the brideling of them would not bring more hurt, then benefit

to the common-wealth: how vnſeemely and diſhonorable it would be, to vndertake that which could not be effected: or if it could, with the ignominie or infamie of noble men: and in the end he ſent letters to the Senate to this purpoſe. It would be peraduenture conuenient, Lords of the Senate, that in other matters, I ſhould be demaunded my opinion in your preſence: and ſpeake what I thought to be behouefull for the common wealth: but in this relation it was better to withdraw mine eyes; leaſt that you, noting the countenāce, and the feare of euery one of ſuch, which ſhould be deprehended of this ſhamefull lauiſhing; I ſhould alſo ſee them, and take them as it were in the fault. If the Aediles vigilant and carefull men, had before hand asked my aduiſe; I know not whether I ſhould rather haue perſwaded them, to let paſſe ſtrong and rooted vices, then go ſo far; that it ſhould be knowne how vnable we be to redreſſe ſome kinde of abuſes. But they truly haue done their dutie, and I wiſh that other magiſtrates would alſo fulfill theirs. To me it is neither honeſt to hold my tongue; nor eaſie to ſpeake: becauſe I haue neither the office of an Aedile, Pretor, nor Conſull. Some greater matter is required of a Prince, and of greater importance: and when as euery man attributeth to himſelfe the prayſe of things well done: the faults of all men in generall redounde to the diſlike of the Prince alone. What ſhall I begin firſt to forbid, and reduce to the auncient cuſtome? your huge and ſpacious countrey houſes? the number of your ſeruitours of diuers nations? the quantitie of ſiluer and gold? your painted tables, and braſen images of maruellous and exquiſite workemanſhip? ſuperfluouſnes of apparell both in men and women? and thoſe things which are proper vnto women, as pretious ſtones, for which our money is tranſported to forren nations, or enemies? I am not ignorant that theſe things are blamed in bankets and meetings, and a meane wiſhed for. But if any would make a lawe, or lay downe a puniſhment for them; thoſe themſelues which complaine, will exclaime that the citie is ouerthrowne; that the ruine of the nobilitie is ſought for: and that there is none free from this crime. But we ſee that old inueterate diſeaſes of the body cannot be cured, but by ſharp and rough remedies: the corruptor and the corrupted; the weake and burning deſire, is to be quenched with no lighter remedies; then the diſordinate appetites were, which kindled the minde. So many lawes inuented by our aunceſtors; ſo many made by Augustus; thoſe by obliuion, theſe (which is a greater offence) aboliſhed by contempt, haue cauſed all ſuperfluities, to be more bold, and practiſed. For if thou wouldeſt do that which is not yet forbidden, feare leaſt thou be forbidden it. But if thou haſt without puniſhment tranſgreſſed things forbidden, there is neither further ſhame nor feare left. Why then in times paſt was prouident ſparing vſed? becauſe euery man did moderate himſelfe: becauſe we were citizens of one citie: and our dominions not reaching out of Italy, we had not the ſame prouocations: by victories had againſt ſtrangers, we haue learned to conſume other mens goods; by ciuill wars our owne. How ſmall a matter is that whereof the Aediles do admoniſh vs? how little to be reckoned of, if we regard other things? But truly no man doth put vs in minde, that Italy doth want the ayde of forren nations; that the life of the people of Rome, is toſſed with the incertaintie of ſea and tempeſt: and if the ſtrength of the prouinces ſhould not aide and ſuccour the Lords, ſlaues, and poſſeſſions: our woods forſooth, and our farmes, would they maintaine vs? This burden, Lords of the Senate, the Prince doth ſuſtaine: which being omitted, the common-wealth would fall to the ground. In other things, euery man muſt giue himſelfe a lawe: let ſhame amend vs: neceſſitie the poore; ſacietie the rich. Or if there be any of the magiſtrates, which doth promiſe vs ſo much induſtrie, and ſeueritie, that he

can preuent and redreſſe theſe things: I do both praiſe him, and confeſſe that I ſhall be vnburdened in part of my labour. But if they will accuſe faults; and hauing gotten glory thereby, raiſe priuie hatred, and leaue it on me: beleeue me, Lords of the Senate, I am not deſirous of diſpleaſures: which although I run into, and that very greatly, and for the moſt part vniuſtly, for the common wealth: yet by good reaſon, I refuſe them, and intreate that thoſe be not thruſt on me, which will be neither profitable for me, nor you.
               
            
            
               
                  XII. Examples do more then lawes in reformation of abuſes: the Flamines are hindered for being gouernors of Prouinces.
               
                  CAEſars letters being heard, the Aediles were diſcharged of that care: and the ſumptuouſnes of their tables, which from the end of the war at Actium, vntill the wars in which S. Galba got the ſoueraigntie for an hundred yeeres, lauiſhingly vſed, began by little and little to be left off. The cauſes of this chang it ſhall not be amiſſe to ſeeke out. In times paſt, rich and great houſes of noble men fell to decay through their magnificence; being then lawfull to winne the fauour of the people, of confederates, and Kings, to court and be courted. And as euerie man was moſt ſumptuous in his houſe, furniture, and prouiſion: ſo he was accounted moſt honorable, and followed with a greater traine. But after they began to murder one another, for priuat quarrels, proceeding of this pompe; and that their greatnes was their ruine; the reſt tooke a wiſer courſe. And withall, new men which were often taken out of free townes, colonies, and Prouinces, and choſen to be Senators; brought in with them the frugalitie, which they had vſed before in their owne houſes. And albeit, many of them either by fortune, or their owne induſtrie; grew to wealth in their age: yet they kept the ſame minde and cuſtome they brought with them. But Veſpaſian was the chiefeſt author of this ſtrict kinde of life; himſelfe obſeruing the auncient manner of liuing: for then a deſire of pleaſing and imitating the Prince, wrought more, then either puniſhment of lawes, or feare. Vnleſſe peraduenture, we thinke that there is in all things a certaine change: and as there is an intercourſe and change of time; ſo alſo an alteration of cuſtomes and manners. Neither were all things in auncient times better then ours; but our age hath left vnto poſteritie manie things worthie of praiſe and imitation. But let ſuch honeſt contentions between vs and our predeceſſors, ſtil continue amongſt vs. Tiberius hauing gotten the fame of moderation, by repreſſing the accuſers: ſent letters to the Senat, requeſting the Tribuniciall authoritie for Druſus. That terme of higheſt dignitie Auguſtus inuented, to auoide the name of King or Dictator: and yet vnder another title ſignified a ſoueraigntie aboue other magiſtrates. After this he choſe M. Agrippa, as an aſſociat of that dignitie: and after his death Tiberius Nero, leſt the ſucceſſor ſhould be vnknowen; thinking thereby to cut off others vnlawfull hopes; truſting to Neroes modeſtie, and his owne greatnes. By which example, Tiberius did then aſſure the ſoueraigntie to Druſus, when as whileſt Germanicus liued, he held his iudgment indifferent betweene them both, not preferring the one before the other. But in the beginning of his letters, hauing humbly prayed vnto the gods, that they would proſper his counſels to the good of the common-wealth: he ſpake ſome few words, and thoſe truly, of the yoong mans behauiour; as that he had a wife and three children; and was of the age that he himſelfe was called by Augustus of famous memorie, to vndertake the ſame charge. Neither could it be

ſaide that haſtily, but after eight yeeres triall; hauing ſuppreſſed ſeditions, and ſetled the wars, and triumphed, and beene twiſe Conſull: he was taken to be an aſſociat of a knowen labour. The Lords of the Senat conceiued the drift of his oration; whereby their flatterie towards him was the more artificiall. Yet notwithſtanding there was nothing newly inuented: but ordained onely, that the images of the Princes; the altars of the gods; Temples and arches; and ſuch vſuall honours ſhould be erected for him. Sauing that M. Silanus demaunded and opined that in publicke and priuate monuments, the Conſuls names ſhould not be prefixed; but theirs who had Tribuniciall authoritie; a thing greatly diſhonoring and debaſing the Conſulary dignitie. Q. Haterius, who had counſelled that the decrees made that day in Senat, ſhould be written in letters of gold; was mocked for his labour: that an olde man ſhould vſe to his infamie ſuch filthie flatterie. Whileſt theſe things were a doing, the gouernment of Affrica was continued in Iunius Blaeſus. Seruius Malugineſis a Flamen Dial, or Iupiters Prieſt; ſued that he might draw lots for the gouernment of Aſia: ſaying, That it was vainely ſpread abroad, that it was not lawfull for Iupiters Prieſts to go out of Italie. And that they had no other law then the Prieſts of Mars and Quirinus. And if theſe had gouerned the Prouinces, why was it vnlawfull for the Diales? that there was no law of the people, touching that matter, found in the bookes of ceremonies. The high Prieſt had often celebrated Iupiters ſacrifices; if the Flamen had beene hindered by ſickenes or publicke affaires. Seuentie and two yeeres, after that Cornelius Merula was murdered, no man was put to ſupplie the place; and yet the ceremonies neuer ceaſed. And if his creation could be omitted for ſo many yeeres, without any hinderance to the ſacrifices: how much eaſlier might a man be abſent, with the Proconſularie dignitie for a yeere? In times paſt they were forbidden to goe out of the Prouinces, through the priuat grudges of the high Prieſt: now through the fauour of the gods; the high Prieſt was the ſoueraign aboue all men; not ſubiect vnto emulation, malice, or priuat affection. Againſt which when Lentulus the Augur, and others had diuerſly ſpoken; in the ende they reſolued to expect the cenſure of the high Prieſt. Tiberius hauing deferred the hearing of the Flamins right, moderated the ceremonies, which were decreed in honor of Druſus Tribuniciall dignitie: rebuking by name the inſolencie of that ſentence, which would haue had the decree written in letters of gold, againſt the cuſtome of the countrey. Druſus letters were alſo read; which although they ſeemed to tend to modeſty, yet were reputed moſt proude. They complained that things were growen to that paſſe; that the yoong man hauing receiued ſo great honour, yet vouchſafed not to viſit the gods of the citie; nor ſhew himſelfe in Senat; or begin at leaſt his authoritie in his owne countrey. But forſooth, he is let by warre, or hindered in ſome ſtrange countrey; when indeed he ſolaceth himſelfe at his pleaſure, in the ſhores and lakes of Campania. This leſſon had the ruler of the world taught him; this did he firſt learne of his fathers Counſels. Although the olde Emperour ſhould diſdaine, to come and ſhewe himſelfe to the citizens; and pretend his yeeres, and trauell for an excuſe: yet what impediment hath Druſus, but onely his arrogancie?
               
            
            
               
                  XIII. A reformation of Sanctuaries.
               BVt Tiberius ſtrengthening in himſelfe the ſoueraigntie: left the Lords of the Senate a ſhadow of their auncient eſtate, by ſending the requeſts of the prouinces to their examination. The licence and impunitie of ordaining Sanctuaries,

and priuiledged places increaſed throughout the cities of Greece. The temples were filled with moſt lewd bondſlaues: in the ſame refuges, were receiued debtors againſt their creditors; and ſuſpected of capitall crimes. Neither was there any authoritie able to bridle the ſedition of the people; protecting all villanies, no leſſe then the ceremonies of the gods. Whereupon it was concluded, that the cities ſhould ſend their Embaſſadors with their priuiledges, which ſome left off of their owne accord as falſly vſurped: many truſted to old ſuperſtitions or pleaſures done to the people of Rome. The pomp of that day was great in ſhew: in which the Senators conſidered of the prerogatiues of their predeceſſors; the agreements of confederates; the decrees of kings, which had bene before the Romans had gotten ſuch great power and authoritie: and the religions of the gods themſelues, being yet in the diſpoſition of the Senate, to confirme or alter all; as in times paſt they could haue done. The firſt which ſhewed themſelues in Senate, were the Epheſians; declaring that Diana and Apollo, were not borne in the Iland Delos, as the common people did beleeue: and there was in their countrey a riuer called Cenchrius: and a wood called Ortygia, where Latona being great with childe; and leaning againſt an oliue tree which is yet in the place, brought forth thoſe two gods: and that by the commaundement of the gods that wood was made ſacred. And that Apollo himſelfe did in that place flee from Iupiters anger, after he had ſlaine the Cyclopians. After that Bacchus the conqueror in warre, pardoned the Amazones, which humbling themſelues there, caught hold of the altar. And that the ceremonie of that temple increaſed by Hercules permiſſion, when he inioyed Lydia: which was not diminiſhed when the Perſians had dominion ouer it. After that the Macedonians; then we had maintained the ſame priuiledges. Next vnto thoſe came in the Magneſians, building their reaſons on L. Scipio, and L. Sullaes conſtitutions: the one driuing out Antiochus; and the other Mithridates: and extolled the loyaltie and vertue of the Magneſians; and commaunded that Diana Leucophrynes priuiledges ſhould not be violated. Then followed the Aphrodiſienſes, & Stratonicenſes, alleaging an order made by Caeſar the Dictator; and another later decree of Augustus of famous memory, for the pleaſures done them, in taking part with their ſide, during the time of their faction: prayſing them, that they had ſuſtained the aſſaults of the Parthians; nothing at all changing their conſtancie towards the people of Rome. But the Aphrodiſienſes maintained the priuiledges of Venus temple: and the Stratonicenſes Iupiter and Triuias ceremonies. The Hierocaeſarienſes fetchte their matter from a farther beginning, inducing their Dianaperſica, and a temple dedicated by king Cyrus: and told a tale of Perperna, of Iſauricum, and many other Emperours; which graunted that holines not only to the temple, but to two miles compas. Then followed the Cyprians, declaring that they had three temples: whereof the moſt auncient was builded by Aerias, and conſecrated to Venus Paphia: the ſecond by his ſonne Amathus, and dedicated to Venus Amathuſia: the third to Iupiter Salaminius, built by Teucer, when hee fled from his father Telamon. The Embaſſadors of other cities were heard likewiſe: with whoſe multitude the Lords of the Senate being wearied, ſome fauoring one ſide; ſome another: and becauſe they contended which had merited moſt, they referred the matter to the Conſuls: that looking into the right of the cauſe, if they contained any ſecret abuſe, they ſhould bring the whole cauſe againe to the Senate. The Conſuls beſides thoſe cities which I haue aboue named, ſpake of another priuiledged place for malefactors, dedicated to Aeſculapius at Pergamum: affirming that the reſt were grounded vpon obſcure beginnings, in reſpect of their antiquitie. The Smyrnaeans

alleaged an oracle of Apollo, by which they were commaunded to dedicate a temple to Venus Stratonicis: the Tenians a verſe of the ſame Apollo, commaunding them to offer an image and temple to Neptune. The Sardians brought in matters of later memory; that to be Alexander the conquerors gift: and the Mileſians did the like, vſing king Darius name for their franchiſe; but both of theſe did worſhip Diana and Apollo. The Cretenſians made requeſt that the image of Augustus might haue ſome priuiledge: and decrees of Senate were made, by which with great honor, yet moderation was preſcribed vnto all; and commaundement giuen in thoſe very temples to erect altars for a ſacred memorie: yet ſo, that vnder colour of religion, they ſhould not fall into ambition.
            
            
               
                  XIIII. Iulia Auguſta falleth ſick: Seianus called into question.
               ABout the ſame time, a grieuous ſicknes which Iulia Augusta fell into, cauſed the Prince (perfect amitie being yet betwixt the mother and the ſonne, or elſe ſecret hatred) to haſten his returne to Rome. For not long before, when Iulia had dedicated an image to Augustus of famous memory, not farre from Marcellus theatre, ſhe had ſet Tiberius name vnder her own: which he (as it was thought) taking as an vnder-valuing of the maieſtie of a Prince, ſmothered vp with a great, but a ſecret hartburning againſt her. But then the Senat had decreede, that there ſhould be proceſſions made to the gods, and the playes called Magni, exhibited by the chiefe Prieſts, the Augurs, the fifteen, togither with the ſeuen, and thoſe of the fellowſhip of Augustus, called Auguſtales. L. Apronius was of opinion, that the Heraulds ſhould be ouerſeers of thoſe plaies: which Caeſar ſpake againſt, making a difference in the rights of the Prieſts, alleaging examples for it. For the Feciales or Heraulds neuer had ſuch high authoritie; and that therefore the Auguſtales were put to them, bicauſe it was a peculiar Prieſthood of that houſe, for which the vowes were made. My meaning is not to laie downe any other opinions; but ſuch as are either notable for their honeſtie, or ſhamefull for their infamie: which I ſuppoſe, to be the chiefeſt point belonging to Hiſtories; that vertues be not ſlightlie paſſed ouer with ſilence; and that men haue a feare of bad ſpeaking and dooing, leaſt he become infamous with poſterity. But thoſe times were ſo corrupted with filthie flatterie: that not only the chiefeſt of the citie were forced in that ſeruile maner to keepe their reputation; but all ſuch as had beene Conſuls; the greateſt part of ſuch as had bin Pretors; & alſo many pedary Senators roſe vp & ſtroue, who ſhould propound things moſt baſe and abiect. It is written, that as Tiberius went out of the Curia, he was woont to ſaie in Greeke. O men ready to ſeruitude! as though he, who could of all things leaſt ſuffer publicke libertie; did yet abhorre ſuch baſe and ſeruile ſubmiſſion: falling by little and little from vnſeemely flatteries, to lewder practiſes. C. Silanus Proconſull of Aſia, being accuſed for polling the Prouince; was alſo proſecuted by Mamercus Scaurus, who had beene Conſull; by Iunius Otho Pretor; by Brutidius Niger Aedile; all of them layeng to his charge, that he had violated Augustus diuinitie, and ſet nought by Tiberius maieſtie. Mamercus alleaged old examples, how L. Cotta had bin accuſed by Scipio Africanus: S. Galba by Cato the Cenſor: and P. Rutilius by M. Scaurus. A matter verie vnlikely, that Scipio and Cato ſhould vſe any ſuch reuenge; or Scaurus great grandfather to this Mamercus, the diſhonor and reproch of his aunceſtors, by ſo diſhonorable and infamous a trade. Iunius Othos old occupation was to keepe a ſchoole; then made a Senator by

                  Seianus authoritie, brought his obſcure beginning, into obloquie by impudent enterpriſes. Brutidius, a man well qualified; and if he had taken a right courſe, likely to haue come to honorable preferment; ouer much haſte pricked forwardes: and at the firſt went about, to out go his equals; then his ſuperiors; and laſt of all to flee aboue his owne hopes: which hath beene the ouerthrow of good men; who contemning that which by a little patience, is had with ſecuritie; haſten to that which gotten before his time, breedeth their ruine and deſtruction. Gellius Poplicola, and M. Paconius, increaſed the number of informers: the one being Silanos treaſurer; the other his lieutenant. Little doubt but Silanus was blame woorthie for his crueltie, and rauenous dealing: but many other matters came togither, dangerous euen to the innocent: for beſides that, he had ſo many Senators againſt him; he was to anſwere alone, the eloquenteſt of all Aſia: and for that cauſe choſen to accuſe: being himſelfe vnskilful, and appalled with his own danger: cauſe ſufficient, to haue daſht the beſt practized out of matter. Tiberius himſelfe not refraining to preſſe him with words and countenance, asked him many queſtions; not giuing libertie to refell or replie: yea oftentimes he muſt confeſſe, leſt Tiberius ſhould ſeeme to haue asked in vaine. And withall, the publike actor had bought Silanus bondmen, to the end they ſhoulde be examined by torture. And bicauſe none of his kinſmen nor friends might helpe him in his danger, accuſations of treaſon (a bonde and neceſſitie to ſtop euery mans mouth) were thruſt among. Whereupon certaine daies of delay being demanded, he let fall his defence: and taking courage ſent letters vnto Caeſar, interlaced with intreatie and odious termes. Tiberius, that the cauſes he charged Silanus with, might haue an example of excuſe; commandeth Augustus recordes, touching Voleſus Meſſalla, Proconſul of the ſame Aſia, to be recited, and a decree of Senate made againſt him. Then demanded L. Piſoes opinion: who making a preamble of the princes clemencie; was of aduiſe that he ſhould be baniſhed to the Iland Gyarus. The reſt gaue the like verdite: ſauing that C. Lentulus, thought it meet, that the goods which came by Silanus mother (for he was by another mother) ſhould be ſeparated from the reſt, and giuen the ſonne: Tiberius according therto. But Cornelius Dolabella, hauing rebuked Silanus for his behauiour; followed the vaine of his flatterie further: and added. That none, who liued a reprochfull and infamous life, ſhould draw lots for the gouerment of any prouince: & that the prince ſhould be iudge thereof. The lawes did puniſh crimes committed: but howe much better would it be for vs, and our confederates, if we did prouide that no offences ſhoulde be committed? Againſt which, Caeſar himſelfe ſpake; and ſaid: That he was not ignorant what the ſpeech had beene of Silanus: but that no iudgements ought to be giuen at the rumour of the people. Many had behaued themſelues in the prouinces, better then was hoped for; and others not ſo bad as it was feared: for ſome by managing of weightie matters, haue beene ſtirred vp to a better carriage and behauiour: and others haue become more ſlothfull and laſie. And that a prince coulde not comprehend all things in his owne knowledge: neither was it expedient, that he ſhould be drawen to this, and that, by others ambition. That lawes were ordained againſt factes alreadie committed, bicauſe future things are vncertaine. So it was ordained by our aunceſtors, that when the offences had gone before, puniſhment ſhould follow: Therefore they would not alter thoſe things, which were inuented by wiſedome, and alwaies obſerued. That princes had charge ſufficient, and power inough: if their power grew great, the lawes grew weake. That abſolute authoritie was not to be vſed; as long as the lawes were open. By how much the ſeldomer Tiberius ſhewed any popular behauiour; by ſo much the more ioyfully it was

accepted. And being wiſe (if he were not carried away with anger) in moderating the rigorous cenſures of others: added that the Iland Gyarus was barbarous, and vnhabited: and therefore that they woulde ſhew ſo much fauour to the Iunian familie; and to one who had beene of the ſame colledge with them; that he ſhoulde rather be ſent to the Iland Cythera: which was alſo the requeſt of Torquata, Silanus ſiſter, a virigin of good life: vnto which cenſure they all condeſcended.
            
            
               
                  XV. More accuſations proſecuted. A decree touching Iupiters prieſts. Tacfarinas driuen by Blaeſus out of Affrike.
               AFter this, the Cyrenenſes were heard: and Caeſius Cordus condemned of polling the prouinces, at the ſute of Ancharius Priſcus. L. Ennius a gentleman of Rome, accuſed of treaſon, bicauſe he had conuerted the image of the prince, to common vſes in plate; Caeſar forbad to be receiued amongſt the criminall perſons. Ateius Capito openly complaining, and by a kinde of libertie ſaieng: That power of determining ſuch a matter, ought not to be taken frō the Senate, nor ſo heinous a crime paſſe vnpuniſhed. That the Emperour might be as ſlowe as he luſted, in puniſhing iniuries done to himſelfe: yet that he ought not to pardon ſuch as were done to the common-wealth. Tiberius vnderſtood theſe things as they were indeed, rather then as they were ſpoken: and ſo perſiſted in oppoſing himſelfe. Capito was ſo much the more noted; bicauſe that knowing what appertained to diuine and humane lawes; diſcredited the common good: and the commendable arts he had learned at home. Then there grew a ſcruple: in knowing, in what temple the gift ſhould be placed, which the gentlemen of Rome had vowed to fortune Equeſtris, for the health of Augusta. For although there were many temples in the citie, of that goddeſſe: yet there was none which bare that ſurname. In the ende there was one ſo called found at Antium: and all the ceremonies in the townes of Italie, and temples, and images of gods, to be vnder the right, and empire of Rome: and therupon the gift was placed at Antium. And ſeeing the matter was debated touching the religions; Caeſar declared the anſwere: which not long before he had deferred, againſt Seruius Maluginenſis: and recited the decree of the chiefe prieſtes; which was: That as oft as the Flamen, Dial, or Iupiters prieſt, fell into any ſicknes, he might be abſent from the city; with licence of the chiefe prieſt: ſo as it were not aboue two nights; or in daies of publike ſacrifice: nor oftner then twiſe in one yeere. Which being ordained in Auguſtus time, did manifeſtly ſhew, that the abſence for a yeere, or adminiſtration of prouinces, was not graunted to the Diales. And the example of L. Metellus the high pontife, was alleaged, who in the like caſe had kept Aulus Posthumus the Flamen in the citie. And thereupon the lot of Aſia was beſtowed vpon him; who of the Conſuls was next vnto Maluginenſis. At the ſame time Lepidus made requeſt vnto the Lords of the Senate, that he might at his owne charges, reedifie, and adorne Paulus Aemilius temple, the ornament of his memorie: for at that time publike munificence was in vſe: neither did Augustus blame Taurus, Philippus, Balbus, for beſtowing ſpoiles taken from enimies: or the ouerplus of their wealth, to the ornament of the citie, and glorie of poſteritie. By which examples, Lepidus although he had no great ſtore of money, did renewe the honor of his aunceſtors. Pompeius theatre, conſumed by caſuall fire; bicauſe there was none left of the familie, of abilitie to performe it; Caeſar promiſed to build at his own charges, and leaue it ſtil the old name. And withall he highly extolled Seianus, as though through his labour and watchfulnes, the violence of that fire had beene

ſtaied, from hurting any more then that one thing: and the Senate ordained an image to be erected in honour of Seianus in Pompeius theatre. And not long after when Caeſar had honored Iunius Blaeſus, proconſull of Affrike, with the ornaments of triumph: he ſaid that he attributed that to Seianus honour, whoſe vncle he was. Yet Blaeſus owne acts deſerued that honour. For although Tacfarinas had beene often put to the woorſt: yet renewing his aide in the middle of Affrike, he grewe to that arrogancie, as to ſend embaſſadors to Tiberius, and require a place for himſelfe, and his armie to inhabite: or elſe threatned an endles warre. It was reported that Caeſar neuer more grieued, at any diſgrace done vnto himſelfe, or the people of Rome; then that a traitor, and theefe, ſhould deale like an enimie. There was neuer ſo much graunted Spartacus; after he had defeated ſo many armies of Conſuls; and burnt Italie vnreuenged; yea when the common-wealth was greatly weakned, by Sertorius and Mithridates great warres: that he ſhoulde be receiued by couenant into ſafe conduct: & therefore much leſſe that Tacfarinas a theefe; the Roman empire being in moſt flouriſhing ſtate, ſhould be hired with a peace and lands to inhabite. He committed the whole matter to Blaeſus, with charge that he ſhoulde induce the reſt, to lay down their armes; with warrant that they ſhould ſuſtaine no hurt; yet that he ſhould lay holde on the captaine by all means poſſible: through which pardon many came in. Not long after they vſed the ſame maner of fight, againſt Tacfarinas, as he had vſed againſt others: for bicauſe he, inferior to the Romans in ſtrength, though better in theeuery; made many inroades; by ſcattered companies, deceiued his enimie: and laid many traines to intrap him. Their companies were therefore ſet in order, and marched againſt him: of which the lieutenant Cornelius Scipio was the chiefe: who lay in waite in that coaſt where Tacfarinas did waſte and trouble the Leptins, and the Garamantes, places of refuge: On another ſide Blaeſus ſon lead his owne power; leaſt the Cirtenſien villages ſhoulde be entiſed to take part with Tacfarinas, In the middle, placing fortreſſes and ſtrong holdes, in conuenient places; with choiſe ſoldiers: the captaine himſelfe brought the enimie to a narrowe ſtraight, and diſaduantage: bicauſe that which way ſoeuer he ſhould bend; ſome of the Romane ſoldiers were in his face; ſome in his ſides: and often ſome in his backe, and ſo, many ſlaine and intrapped. Then diuideth the three armies againe into many other companies: with centurions of knowen valour ouer them. Neither did he as the cuſtome was; retire his forces in the ende of ſommer; or put them in ſtanding campes of the old prouince: but as it had been in the beginning of warre; his fortreſſes well manned, by light horſemen, and skilfull in thoſe deſerts; he gaue Tacfarinas often changing his cabbins ſmall reſt: vntill his brother being taken, he retired in the end with more ſpeede, then was for the allies profit: ſuch being left behinde by whom the warre might riſe againe. But Tiberius taking this to be an ende of this warre, gaue Blaeſus that honour, that he ſhould be ſaluted Emperour by the legions: being an old cuſtome towards ſuch Captaines, as had ſhewen valour for the common-wealth, with ioy and acclamations to be ſaluted by that name by the conquering armies. There were many Emperours at one time, but none aboue an other. Augustus had graunted that name to ſome; and Tiberius at that time to
Blaeſus. That yeere died two notable men, Aſinius Salonius, nephew to M. Agrippa; and Pollio Aſinius, and brother to Druſus, and deſtined to be Caeſars neeces huſband; and Capito Ateius of whom we haue ſpoken before; by the ſtudies of the ciuill lawes riſen to the higheſt dignitie in the citie: but his grandfather Sullanus was but a Centurion, and his father Pretor. Auguſtus haſtened the Conſulſhip vpon him; that by the dignitie of that office, he might be preferred before Labeo Antistius
                  
skilfull in the ſame ſtudie: for that age had at once two ornaments of peace. But Labeo was more deſirous of incorrupted libertie; and therefore held in greater eſtimation: and Capitoes pleaſing humor better accepted of Princes. To him, the iniurie of not being higher than a Pretor, was a commendation: to this, becauſe he gate the Conſulſhip, grew of enuie hatred. And Iunia, whoſe vncle was Cato, and was C. Caſſius wife, and M. Brutus ſiſter, died threeſcore and fower yeeres after the Philippenſen warre. Her Teſtament was much talked of among the people; bicauſe that being verie wealthie, when ſhe had named all the peeres and noblemen, and beſtowed ſome legacie vpon them, ſhe omitted Caeſar: which he tooke in good part; not hindering but that her funerals ſhould be ſolemniſed with an oration before the people aſſembled, with all other ceremonies. The images of twentie noble houſes, were caried before her; and the names of the Manlians, the Quinctians, and others of like nobilitie. But Caſſius and Brutus did ſhine aboue the reſt, bicauſe their images were not ſeene.
            
         
         
            
            THE FOVRTH BOOKE OF THE ANNALES OF CORNELIVS TACITVS.
            
               
                  I. Of Seianus beginning; his qualities; and by what meanes he aſpired to the Empire.
               
                  
                     CAſinius, and C. Antistius being Conſuls; Tiberius had nine yeeres managed the affaires; and aduanced his houſe to a flouriſhing eſtate: (for the death of Germanicus he reckoned amongſt his proſperities) when as fortune began on a ſudden to worke alteration: in him waxing cruell; or giuing authoritie to ſuch as were. The beginning proceeded from AElius Seianus Captaine of the guarde; of whoſe power and authoritie I haue before ſpoken. I will now lay downe his beginning, and qualities: and by what ſiniſter meanes he went about to clime to the ſoueraignty. He was borne at Vulſinium, ſonne of Seius Strabo, gentleman of Rome; and in his firſt youth followed C. Caeſar, Auguſtus nephew: not without a rumor, that for money he had ſuffered his bodie to be abuſed by Apicius, a rich man and a prodigall. Then by ſundrie ſleights he had ſo wrought Tiberius, that being cloſe and ſecret towards others: yet to himſelfe had made him open and vncircumſpect. Not ſo much by his cunning and fraude (for ſuch deuiſes were his owne ouerthrow) as by the anger of the gods againſt the ſtate of Rome; by whoſe ruine and riſing it fell alike. He was of body able to endure labour; of mind bold; in his owne actions ſecret; an informer againſt others; as proud as flattering; in ſhew modeſt; but inwardly greedie of aſpiring: for which cauſe, he vſed ſometime largeſſe and lauiſhing; but more oftner induſtrie and diligence; meanes dangerous alike, when they are diſſemblingly vſed to win a kingdome. His forces, which at the firſt were ſmall, he augmented by reducing the cohorts into one campe, which before were ſcattered abroade in the citie; that they might receiue their charge togither, and by their number & ſtrength, and ſeeing one another, breed a confidence to themſelues; and a feare to others. He pretended that the ſouldier liuing ſcattered, grew riotous: and if any ſudden attempt ſhould be enterpriſed, their ſtrength would be greater vnited, then ſeparated: and that they would liue more ſeuerely, if their garriſon were lodged far from the wanton allurements of the citie. As ſoone as his trenches were finiſhed, he began to creepe into the ſouldiers mindes by going vnto them, and calling them by their names: withall, made choiſe himſelfe of Centurions & the Tribunes. Neither did he abſtaine from ambitiouſly courting the Senators; aduauncing his followers with honours, and rule of Prouinces: Tiberius being ſo facile and prone to allow of his dooings, that not onely in priuat ſpeeches; but in Senat alſo and before the people, extolled him as an aſſociat of his labours: and ſuffered his image to be ſet in the Theaters, and publike places of aſſemblies, and enſignes of the legions. But Caeſars houſe being full; a yoong ſonne; nephewes of full age; hindered his plots: And bicauſe it was not ſafe making away of ſo many at once by violence; his trecherie required time to accompliſh his wickednes. He reſolued then to vſe the couerteſt way; and begin with Druſus; againſt whom through freſh quarrels he was greatly incenſed. For Druſus being impatient of a concurrent, and therefore eaſily mooued:

a contention riſing by chance betweene them, bent his fiſt to ſtrike Seianus; and he his to ſaue himſelfe: Druſus daſht him on the mouth. Hereupon leauing nothing vntried, he thought it the readieſt way to addreſſe himſelfe to Liuia Druſus wife. She was Germanicus ſiſter, in her youth of a hard fauour; but afterward excelled in beautie. Her Seianus counterfeiting an ardent and burning loue enticed to adulterie: and after he had obtained the firſt breach of honeſtie (for a woman hauing once loſt her chaſtitie, what will ſhe refuſe to do?) put her in hope of mariage, and fellowſhip in the Empire; and perſwadeth her to kill her husband. Thus ſhe, who was Augustus neece, and Tiberius daughter in law; and had children by Druſus; defiled herſelfe, her aunceſtors, and poſteritie with adulterie by a meane man; leauing an honeſt and preſent eſtate for the hope of a wicked and vncertaine. Eudemus a friend and Phiſition of Liuias, was made priuie to theſe plots; who vnder colour of his arte was often vſed in ſecret conferences. He putteth away Apicata his wife, by whom he had three children, leaſt his lemmon ſhould haue her in iealouſie. But the greatnes of the enterpriſe droue them into a feare; bred prolongings; and ſometimes diuers ſorts of counſels. In the meane ſpace in the beginning of the yeere, Druſus one of Germanicus children, was come to mans eſtate; and thoſe things renewed vpon him, which the Senat had ordained for Nero his brother. Tiberius made an oration tending to the great commendation of his ſonne; bicauſe he tendered his brothers children with a fatherly affection. For Druſus (although it be a hard matter for rule and concord to dwell together) ſhewed himſelfe indifferent to the yoong men; or at the leaſt, was not an enimie to them.
            
            
               
                  II. A ſuruey of the legions and ſouldiers: Druſus poiſoned by Seianus.
               
               
                  TIberius old, but fained determination of going to the Prouinces, is put on foote againe: pretending that there were a great number of old ſouldiers; and that the armies were to be ſupplied with a new muſter. For voluntarie men now wanted: or if there were anie; they were not of ſo vertuous and modeſt a cariage: bicauſe that for the moſt part, they are needie and vagrant perſons which voluntarily follow the wars. Withall, he tooke a ſhort viewe of the legions, and what Prouinces they defended: which giueth me occaſion to declare, what ſtrength the Romans had then in armes; what Kings their confederates; and how much leſſe the Empire then was. Italie had in both ſeas two nauies; the one at Miſenum, and the other at Rauenna; & certaine Galleies called roſtratae to defend the coaſt adioining to Gallia: which Auguſtus had taken in the victorie at Actium; & ſent to Foroiulienſe, well appointed with ſea men. But the principall ſtrength conſiſted of eight legions neere vnto Rhene; a ſtaie as well to the Germans, as Galli. Spaine newely ſubdued had three legions. King Iuba had the Mauritanians, as a gift giuen him by the people of Rome: the reſt of Affricke had two legions; and Aegypt the like number. Then all from the beginning of Suria vnto the riuer Euphrates, which contayneth a great countrey, receiueth fower legions: Hybero, and Albanus, and other Kings being borderers, which by our greatnes are protected againſt forrain Kings. Thrace was vnder the gouernment of Rhoemetalces, & Cotys children: and the banck of Danubium, two legions garded in Pannonia; and two in Maeſia. The like number was in Dalmatia, which by the ſituation of the countrey lie behinde them: that if on the ſudden Italie ſhould neede aide they were at hand. Albeit the citie had her proper ſouldiers; three citie cohorts, and nine Pretorian; almoſt all choſen out of

Etruria, Vmbria, old Latium, and old Romans, ſent thither to dwell. The Galleies of confederats lay in the moſt commodious places of the Prouinces; the companies of horſemen; and aides of cohorts; not much inferiour in ſtrength: though not eaſilie laide downe, through their vncertaine flitting hither and thither; ſometimes moe, ſometimes leſſe; as time and neceſſitie required. I thinke it alſo expedient to diſcribe the other partes of the common wealth, and howe they had beene gouerned vntill that daie: being the yeare, in which the ſtate beganne to decline, by Tiberius growing woorſe and woorſe. In the beginning, publicke and priuat affaires of greateſt importance, were handled before the Lords of the Senate: and the chiefeſt licenced to opine and debate matters: Tiberius himſelfe rebuking them if they fell to flattery. In beſtowing of offices he had regard to their aunceſtors merite in ſeruice abroad; or lawdable acts at home: ſuch only preferred: due authoritie reſerued vnto the Conſuls and to the Pretor: the meaner officers, each one exerciſing his owne function: and the lawes, (matter of treaſon excepted) duly executed. But for prouiſion of corne, and leuying of tributes, and other publick commodities; certaine ſocieties of gentlemen of Rome had charge of. Caeſar committed his owne affaires to honeſt and tried perſons: and to ſome vnknowne, if they were wel ſpoken of: and ſuch as were once choſen, continued ſtill, and grew old in the ſame charge. The people were diſtreſſed with a great dearth of corne; yet no fault thereof in the Prince: but with as great care and diligence as he could, remedieth the ſterilitie of the ground, and rough paſſages of the ſea: and gaue order that the prouinces ſhould not be oppreſſed with new taxations; and the old be borne, without couetouſnes and crueltie of magiſtrates. Caeſar had ſmall poſſeſſions in Italie; and a reaſonable number of ſeruitours; and in his houſe a few freed men; and if he had a ſute againſt any priuate perſon, he tried it by law in the place of iudgement: all which he maintained, not with any courteous and mild courſe, but ſternely and feared; vntill by the death of Druſus all was turned vpſide downe. For whileſt he liued there was no alteration; becauſe Seianus beginning to riſe, ſought meanes to win credit, and feared leaſt Druſus would reuenge, who neuer diſſembled his hartburning, but often complained: That his ſonne being aliue, he had another coadiutor in the Empire: and what wanteth that he is not his companion? That the firſt ſteps to ſoueraigntie are hard; but once entred into, there will want no fauorers, nor followers: forts he had built as he liked beſt: charge giuen him ouer ſouldiers: his image was placed amongſt C. Pompeius monuments: and that he ſhould haue his nephewes common to the Druſian familie: that hereafter Modeſtie muſt be prayed vnto, that he would be contented with his greatnes. He did not vtter theſe ſpeeches ſeldome or to a few; and his wife being corrupted, his ſecrets were bewrayed. Seianus therefore thinking it time to make haſte, chooſeth a ſlow working poiſon; the better to father his ſicknes vpon ſome caſuall diſeaſe; which was giuen Druſus by Lygdus an Eunuch: as eight yeeres after it was knowne.
            
            
               
                  III. Germanicus children are in Senate recommended to the Lords by Tiberius. Druſus funerals, and how he vvas empoiſoned.
               BVt Tiberius all the time of Druſus ſicknes, ſhewed no ſigne of feare; perhaps becauſe he would ſhew his conſtancie: yea being dead, but not buried, he entered into the Senate, and put the Conſuls which ſate on a lowe ſeate, as

a token of their ſorrow, in minde of their honors and calling. And hauing maſtered his owne griefe, comforted the Lords of the Senate, which powred downe teares with a continuall ſpeech, ſaying: That he knew well he might be blamed, for ſhewing himſelfe in Senate, in ſo freſh a griefe: when the communication of deereſt friends and kinsfolks was ſcarſe ſeene, nor hardly the day, by many which lamented and mourned. Neither were they to be condemned of weakenes; yet he for his part had ſought for ſtronger comforts, out of the boſome of the common wealth. And hauing compaſſion on the Empreſſe old age, and tender yeeres of her nephewes, and of his owne decaying age, intreated that Germanicus children, the only comfort of preſent miſeries, might be brought before them. The Conſuls went out, and emboldening the yong men in that which they ſhould ſay, brought them before Tiberius, who taking hold of them, ſaid. Lords of the Senate, I deliuered theſe fatherles children to their vncle; and beſought him, although he had iſſue of his owne, that he would bring them vp and cheriſh them, as if they were his owne bloud: and make them worthy for himſelfe and poſteritie. Druſus being taken from among vs, I turne my prayers to you, and beſeech you in preſence of the gods, and our countrey, that you would receiue, and gouerne Augustus nephewes ſonnes, deſcended of worthie progenitors; and accompliſh therein my dutie and your owne. Theſe Nero and Druſus, ſhall be in ſtead of fathers vnto you. You are ſo borne, that all your good and euill appertaine to the common wealth. With great weeping were theſe words heard, and prayers made that the yong men might proſper: and if he had then ended his oration, he had filled the harts of the hearers with compaſſion towards himſelfe, and glory. But being fallen into vaine diſcourſes; as ſuch as had beene often laughed at, of yeelding vp the gouernment: and that the Conſuls or ſome other ſhould take the care vpon him, he diſcredited that which was both honeſt, and true. The ſame ſolemnities which were ordained for Germanicus, were appointed for Druſus; and as the manner is of the laſt flattery, ſomethings added. His funerall in pomp of images was very magnificent: hauing before him in a long proceſſion Aeneas, the beginning of the Iulian familie: all the kings of the Albani: and Romulus the founder of the citie. After him followed the nobilitie of the Sabins, Appius Clauſus, and the images of the reſt of the Claudians. In deliuering Druſus death, I haue followed that which many true writers haue vttered: but I will not omit a very ſtrong report of thoſe times, yet currant in euery mans mouth, which is, that Liuia being alreadie corrupted to all diſhoneſtie of bodie by Seianus: he was ſayd to haue abuſed Lygdus bodie likewiſe: in age and beautie highly pleaſing his maiſter, and of all his ſeruitours of beſt credit; who being made priuie to the practiſe, the place and times agreed when the poiſon ſhould be giuen, grew to that audaciouſnes, that he turned all vpon Druſus head: and by ſecret aduertiſement, accuſed him to haue gone about to poiſon his father; and gaue Tiberius warning, to take heede of the firſt drinke his ſonne ſhould offer him at the table. Whereupon by that fraud, the banket being begun, the old man preſented Druſus the cup which he had receiued; who ignorant of the practiſe, like a raw yong man dranke it vp, increaſing thereby the ſuſpition, as though for feare and ſhame, he had ſwallowed that death which he had prepared for his father. This was the common rumor, which wanting a ground, and certaine author, thou mayeſt eaſily refute: for who is he though but of meane wiſedome, much leſſe Tiberius, experienced and beaten in waightie affaires, not hearing his defence, would haue offered his ſonne his death, and that with his owne hands; a thing remediles if he ſhould repent it? Why had he not rather tortured the miniſter of the poiſon?

ſought out the author, and vſed that delay, which vſually he did euen againſt ſtrangers, towards his owne ſonne; neuer before detected of any lewd fact? But becauſe Seianus was thought to be the inuentor of all bad actions, through the great good will Caeſar bore him, and the hate which the reſt bare to both; things were beleeued, although fabulous, and vncredible; report ſpeaking alwayes the worſt of Princes deaths. The order of this fact hath been otherwiſe diſcouered by Apicata, Seianus wife, and by torturing of Eudemus and Lygdus: and no writer found ſo great an enimie to Tiberius, although all hath beene ſought that may be ſayd, and inforced againſt him, that hath obiected any ſuch matter. The cauſe why I layd downe and blamed the common rumor, was, that vnder a manifeſt example, I might diſcredit falſe reports; and pray ſuch into whoſe hands our labours ſhall come, that they would not eſteeme more of common, vncredible tales, greedily receiued, then of truth not falſified into miracles.
            
            
               
                  IIII. Seianus practiſes to deſtroy Agrippina, and Germanicus children: ſtage-plaiers expulſed Italie.
               BVt whileſt Tiberius praiſed his ſonne before the people aſſembled; the Senat and the people rather for a ſhew, then from the hart, put on a mourning countenance: yet in their mindes reioyced, that Germanicus houſe began to flouriſh againe: which beginning of fauour, and Agrippina their mother not well diſſembling her hope, haſtened their ouerthrow. For when Seianus perceiued that Druſus empoiſoners eſcaped vnpuniſhed; and no publicke mourning of the people for his death; emboldned in wicked actions, bicauſe his firſt attempts had good ſucceſſe; began to caſt with himſelfe, by what meanes he might extinguiſh Germanicus children, the vndoubted ſucceſſors to the Empire. For all three poiſon he could not, by reaſon of their keepers faithfulnes, and Agrippinas inuincible chaſtitie. He began therefore to inueigh againſt her obſtinacie, and ſtirre Augusta hating her of olde, againſt her; and incenſed Liuia with the memorie of her late fact; ſuggeſting that her pride; bearing it ſelfe vppon her fruitfulnes in children, by the fauour of the people gaped after the ſoueraigntie. This plot of his he proſecuted by the helpe of craftie accuſers; amongſt whom he had choſen Iulius Posthumus, a man noted of infamous life with Mutilia Priſca, a principall fauorite of the grandmother, and fit inſtrument for his practiſes, being highly in Augustas bookes: an old woman of her owne diſpoſition deſirous of rule, and therefore eaſily eſtranged from her daughter in law Agrippina. He had likewiſe inueighled Agrippinas neere kinred, to puffe vp her haughtie ſpirits, and vſe hard ſpeeches of Augusta. But Tiberius intermitting no care of publicke affaires; and embracing buſines for ſolace; heard the cauſes of citizens, and the ſuites of confederates: and by his perſwaſion, decrees of Senat were made, that the citie of Cibyratica in Aſia; and Aegiris in Achaia, damnified by an earth-quake, might be relieued by remitting them three yeeres tributes. And Vibius Serenus Proconſull of farther Spaine, being condemned for publicke violence, through the crueltie of the time, was baniſhed into the Iland Amorgus. Carſius Sacerdos accuſed, as though he had helped the enimie Tacfarinas with corne, was quit; and C. Gracchus for the ſame crime. This Gracchus being verie yoong, was carried by his father Sempronius to the Iland Cercina, as a companion of his exile: where growing to mans eſtate amongſt baniſhed men, and ignorant of liberall artes; by turning and winding baſe marchandiſe in Affrica and Sicilia, he gayned his liuing: and yet he eſcaped not the dangers of greater fortune. And if AElius

Lamia, and L. Apronius, which gouerned Affrica, had not defended his innocencie; through the nobleneſſe of his vnfortunate ſtocke, he had taſted of his fathers calamities. That yeere came Ambaſſadors from cities of Greece; requeſting that the auncient right of priuiledged places, might be confirmed at Iunos Temple at Samium, and AEſculapius Temple, at Cois. The Samians grounded themſelues on a decree of the Amphictyons; to whom belonged the principall examination of all matters; when the Grecians building cities through Aſia, were Lords of the ſea coaſts. The antiquitie of the Coi was not vnlike; hauing withall the merite of the place: for when by King Mithridates commaundement, all the Romans were ſlaine throughout all the cities and Ilands of Aſia: they ſaued in the Temple of AEſculapius as many as they found. After this the Pretors hauing made many complaints, though in vaine againſt the ſtage-players: at laſt, Caeſar ſpake of their vnrulines and immodeſt behauiour; as hauing ſeditiouſly attempted many things in publicke, and many vndecently in priuate houſes. And the Oſcian play, a light ſport pleaſing the peoples humor, grew to ſuch inſolencie, that the Lords of the Senate were faine to interpoſe their authoritie, for the ſuppreſſing of it; and then the ſtageplayers were expulſed Italy. Caeſar had further griefe the ſame yeere, partly by the death of one of Druſus children, and partly by the death of Lucillius Longus his friend, and partaker of all his fortunes, proſperous or aduerſe: and among the Senators, his only companion, when he withdrew himſelfe to Rhodes. In regard whereof, the Senate ordained, that although he were but of meane parentage, yet that he ſhould haue the funerals of a Cenſor, and an image in Augustus forum: at the charge of the common purſe. For at that time the Senat managed all the affaires; in ſo much, that Lucillius Capito, Procurator of Aſia; the Prouince accuſing him, was forced to purge himſelfe before them: the Prince aſſuredlie auouching that he had giuen him no authoritie; but ouer ſlaues, and money matters between partie & partie. But if he had vſurped the authoritie of a Pretor, or vſed the ſtrength of ſouldiers, he had therein contemned his cōmaundement; & therefore that they ſhould heare the allies: and ſo the matter being heard, he was condemned. For which cauſe; and by reaſon that the yeere before C. Silanus was puniſhed: the cities of Aſia decreed that a Temple ſhould be built in honour of Tiberius; his mother; and the Senat; which they perfourmed after they had licence. And for the ſame cauſe Nero gaue thankes to the Lords of the Senat, and to his grandfather: with the ioyfull acceptance of the hearers; as repreſenting Germanicus, yet freſh in memorie to their mindes: thinking that him they had both heard and ſeene. The yoong man was of great modeſtie, and comelines, woorthie of a Prince: the more gratefull, through the danger he was in, by Seianus knowen hatred againſt him.
            
            
               
                  V. How Iupiters Priests were choſen: Tiberius ſmall affection to Germanicus children.
               ABout the ſame time of chuſing a Flamen Dial, in Seruius Maluginenſis place, who was dead: and of making a new law, Caeſar himſelfe ſpake. For the olde cuſtome was, that three patriciens ſhould be named togither; borne of parents which had been married with a ſolemnitie called confarreation; of which one ſhoulde be choſen for the Prieſt. And it fell out that, that iuſt number coulde not bee founde, the vſe of confarrcation, or marriage with a cake of Wheate, either not vſed, or only of a few: whereof he alleaged many reaſons, though the

chiefeſt was, the careleſnes of men and women: and withall the difficulties of the ceremonies, which were willingly let ſlip. And when ſhould he go out of his fathers authoritie, which ſhould obtaine that Prieſthood, or ſhe who was married vnto him? therefore that was to be redreſſed by decree of Senate, or by a law, as Auguſtus himſelfe had changed ſomewhat of that rude antiquitie, and reduced it to the preſent vſe. Thoſe things therefore being debated which touched the ceremonies, it was determined that nothing ſhould be altered in the makings of thoſe Prieſts: but a law was ordained, that ſhe who was married vnto a Flamen, by reaſon of the ſacrifices, ſhould be vnder the power of hir husband: and that in other caſes ſhe ſhould be as others were. And Maluginenſis ſonne was choſen in his fathers place. And that the prieſtly dignitie ſhould better be regarded, and they the readier to vndertake the ceremonies; it was ordained that to Cornelia the virgin, who was choſen in Scantias place, ſhoulde bee giuen About ſeauen ſcore and ſixteene pounde, and fiue ſhilliugs. 
                  L L. S. xx. ſeſterces: and that as oft as Augusta entered the theatre, ſhe ſhould ſit among the Veſtals. Cornelius Cethegus, and Viſellius Varro being Conſuls, when the Pontifes, and following their example, the other Prieſts, made certaine vowes for the health of the Prince, they commended Nero and Druſus to the ſame goddes: not ſo much for loue of the yong men, as for flattery, which in corrupt times is dangerous alike; either not at all, or too much. For Tiberius neuer a friend to Germanicus houſe, grieued impatiently that the yong men ſhould then be equalled vnto him in his old age: and ſending for the chiefe Prieſts, asked them whether they had done that at Agrippinas intreaties or threates: and although they denied it, yet were ſomewhat rebuked: the greateſt part being his neereſt friends, and kin, or chiefe gentlemen of the citie. Neuertheles in Senate he admoniſhed them in an oration, that none ſhould hereafter puffe vp the fickle minds of the yong men to pride, by vntimely and ouer-haſtie dignities. Seianus vrged eagerly, that the citie was no leſſe deuided into factions, then in time of ciuill warres; ſome terming themſelues to be of Agrippinas ſide; and more would if they were not preuented: and no way to redreſſe a waxing diuiſion, but by cutting off ſome one or two of the forwardeſt. Hereupon he beginneth with C. Silius, and Titius Sabinus, Germanicus friendſhip being dangerous to both: to Silius, becauſe that hauing had charge of a great armie ſeauen yeeres together, and vanquiſhed Sacrouir in Germanie, and obtained the ornaments of triumph, the higher his fall, the greater the feare in others would be. Many were of opinion that Tiberius was the more vehemently incenſed, by reaſon of his owne lauiſhing toong, ouermuch vaunting that his ſouldiers had alwayes continued dutifull, when as others had growne to mutinies: and that Caeſars ſtate had bene ſhaken, if thoſe legions had bene deſirous of innouation: which Caeſar conſtrued as an embaſing to his greatnes, and diſabling him of abilitie to requite: for good turnes are no longer well taken, then they may be recompenſed: when they grow greater, then hope of requitall; in ſtead of thankfulnes they breede hatred and ill will. Soſia Galla, was Silius wife, badly thought of by the Prince, becauſe ſhe loued Agrippina. It was therefore thought conuenient to begin with theſe two, and not meddle with Sabinus for a time. The Conſull Varro being thruſt in, to accuſe them, vnder colour of a quarrell betwixt his father and Silius, became an inſtrument to gratifie Seianus with his owne diſcredit. The defendants intreating ſome delay, vntill the accuſers Conſulſhip were expired, Caeſar denied it, affirming it to be a vſuall matter for magiſtrates to call priuate perſons into queſtion: and that the authoritie of the Conſull was not to be infringed, through whoſe watchfulnes the common-wealth was kept without danger. That was a common tricke with Tiberius,
                  
alwaies to cloake new coyned miſchiefe with old words. Therefore with great proteſtation, as though he had proceeded with Silius by order of law; or the matter belonged to Varro as Conſull; or therein conſiſted the ſafetie of the common-wealth: the Senate was called, the partie accuſed not once opening his mouth; or if he began to purge himſelfe, ſtuck not to vtter by whoſe malice he was oppreſſed. He was accuſed to haue had intelligence with the beginners of the warre: that he had diſcredited his victorie by his couetouſnes; and other things againſt Soſia his wife, nothing a long time ſpoken of Sacrouir. And doubtles the accuſation of polling the prouince could not haue ſerued their turne, had they not proſecuted all vnder treaſon: but Silius preuented his imminent condemnation, by his owne voluntarie death. Neuertheleſſe that contented not, but were greedie his goods ſhould be confiſcate, not to pay the ſtipendaries; for none of them demaunded ought: but becauſe Augustus liberalitie was at an end, he tooke a particular accompt of all that was due to the publick treaſure: which was the firſt time that Tiberius ſhewed himſelfe greedie of other mens money. Soſia was driuen into baniſhment by Aſinius Gallus Conſull: who alſo aduiſed that part of the goods ſhould be confiſcate; & part left vnto his children. But Lepidus contrarily, that the fourth part of the goods ſhould be giuen to the informers, according to the law; and the reſidue to his children. I finde that this Lepidus was in thoſe dayes a graue and wiſe man: who altered into the better many things, which others by cruell flatterie had ordained: which he did with ſuch moderation, that he kept in, with Caeſar in no leſſe fauour then authoritie. Which cauſeth me to doubt, whether it happen as in other things by fatall deſtinie and natiuitie, that Princes are fauorably enclined to ſome, and to others hardly bent; or whether anything conſiſt in our counſels, to ſingle out a courſe free from ambition and danger, betweene ſelfewill ſtubbornes, and filthy flattery. But Meſſallinus Cotta being no leſſe nobly deſcended, differing from Lepidus, was of opinion; that by decree of Senat it ſhould be ordained, that gouernors of prouinces, though faultles themſelues; yet ſhould be puniſhed for their wiues crimes, no leſſe then for their owne.
            
            
               
                  VI. Calphurnius Piſo accuſed and condemned. The last vvarre vvith Tacfarinas, and his death.
               AFter this, they debated Calphurnius Piſos caſe, a noble man and of a fierce courage. He as I haue ſaid, ſeeing what credit pickthanks were in, openly proteſted in Senate that he woulde depart the citie: and little regarding the authoritie of Augusta, was ſo bolde as to ſommon Vrgulania, out of the princes houſe: which Tiberius for the preſent ſeemed not to take in euill part. But bearing it in minde although the heate of diſpleaſure was cooled, yet he forgat it not. Granius alſo accuſed Piſo of ſecret ſpeeches, vſed againſt the maieſtie of the emperour: adding that he had poiſon in his houſe; and that he entered the Senate houſe with a weapon. This of the weapon was paſt ouer as not credible: but for other things aggreuated againſt him, he was arrained, but not conuicted; bicauſe he was preuented by death. Afterward Caſsius Seuerus cauſe was handeled; a baniſhed man, of baſe parentage, and lewde life; but a great Orator. Who had raiſed ſo many enimies againſt him, that by the iudgement of the Senate ſworne, he was confined to Creet: where following the like practiſes, drew on his head old and new hatred: and at laſt being depriued of all his goods, and baniſhed; ſpent the reſt of his life in the Ilande Seriphium. About the ſame time, Plautius Siluanus Pretor; the cauſe why, not

knowen; threwe his wife Apronia downe headlong from a high place. And being brought before Caeſar by L. Apronius his father in lawe, as a man troubled in minde, anſwered as though ſhe had killed hir-ſelfe, when he was a ſleepe, and wholy ignorant of the matter. Tiberius goeth foorthwith to his houſe, and ſearcheth the chamber; where he perceiued by the print of hir feete, tokens of hir ſtriuing againſt him, and the thruſting of hir foreward: which he reported to the Senate: And Iudges appointed to examine the fact. Vrgulania Siluanus grandmother, ſent hir nephewe a poniard to diſpatch himſelfe: which ſome thought to haue beene done by the princes counſell; by reaſon of the league of friendſhip betwixt Augusta and Vrgulania. Siluanus hauing tried in vaine to kill himſelfe with the poniard, in the end cauſed his vaines to be cut. Not long after, Numantina his firſt wife accuſed, by charms and witchcrafts to haue put hir husband out of his wits, found innocent, is quit by the prince. That yeare the people of Rome was deliuered of a long warre againſt Tacfarinas the Numidian. For the captaines which till then had beene ſent againſt him, hauing obtained the markes of triumph: ſought no further how to extinguiſh the enimie. For there were now three images in the citie crowned with baies: and Tacfarinas ſtill continued ſpoiling and forraging Affrica; and augmented his forces by the aide of the Moores: which vnder Ptolemy, Iubaes ſonne, a careleſſe youth, changed their ſeruile ſtate, and gouerment of freed men, into warre. The king of the Garamantes was a receiuer and partaker of his booties, and pillages: not that hee marched with an armie, but onely by ſending light horſemen, which a farre off were thought to be more then indeed they were. And in the prouince it ſelfe; ſome for need; and ſom of a turbulent humor ioined with him: bicauſe Caeſar conſidering how well Blaeſus had beſtirred himſelfe, called home the ninth legion; as though there had beene no enimies left at all in Affrica. And Dolabella Proconſull for that yeere, durſt not ſtaie them; fearing more the commandement of the prince, then the incertaintie and danger of the warre. Vpon this, Tacfarinas gaue it out, that the Romans had their hands full; were diſtracted with other nations: and therefore purpoſed by little and little, to retire out of Affrike. And then that the reſt might eaſilie bee ouercome, if all which preferred libertie before ſeruitude, woulde ioine and couragiouſly bend their forces againſt them: and gathering more ſtrength, encampeth before Thubuſcum, and laieth ſiege to it. But Dolabella drawing all the forces hee could make into one: partly the name of the Romans ſtriking a terror into their harts; partly bicauſe the Numidian is not able to indure the force of the footemen; at the firſt encounter, leuied the ſiege; fortified the moſt conuenient places: and withall, beheaded the chiefeſt of the Muſulani, which began to reuolt. In the end taught by experience of ſo many battels, that this fleeting enimie was not to be purſued with a maine campe; Dolabella ſent for King Ptolemy with his countriemen; and diuided his forces into fower companies; vnder the charge of ſeuerall Lieutenants and Tribunes. The out-riders and forragers were conducted by certaine choſen Moores: himſelfe at hand to giue direction to all. Not long after tydings came that Tacfarinas had encamped and erected cabins at an old ruinous fort, which himſelfe had once burnt, called Auzea; truſting to the place being inuironed with mightie great woods. Then the light horſemen and wings; not knowing whither, were lead away withall ſpeed. And at the dawning of the day, with the ſound of trumpets, and a dreadfull noiſe ſet on the enimies, halfe ſleeping, halfe waking; their horſes vnreadie, or diſperſed abroad at paſture. The Romans footemen were cloſe ranked; the troupes of horſemen in good order; all things in a readines for battell. The enimie on the other ſide in all things vnprouided;

had neither weapons, order, nor counſell, among them: but were haled, taken, and ſlaine like beaſts. And euerie ſouldier irked with the remembrance of his labours; and how oft deſirous to cope with the enimie he had beene deluded; fild himſelfe with reuenge and blood. Aduertiſement was brought from one companie to another, to purſue Tacfarinas well knowen to them all: and that there would be no ende of that warre, if the Captaine were not ſlaine. But he with a choſen guard about him; ſeeing his ſonne alreadie taken, and the Romans on euerie ſide of him, ruſhing in among their weapons, with the loſſe of his life, eſcaped captiuitie. And that was the end of that warre. Dolabella deſiring the honour of triumphe, Tiberius denied it him: and gaue it Seianus, leaſt his vncle Blaeſus commendation ſhould be obſcured. But Blaeſus was neuer the more eſteemed; and the denying of the honour to Dolabella, augmented his honour: bicauſe that with a leſſer armie he had taken manie notable priſoners; ſlaine the Captaine, and caried away the fame of ending the warre. The Ambaſſadors of the Garamantes, a people ſeldome ſeene in the citie, came after the death of Tacfarinas, all aſtonied, as being of the conſpiracie to ſatisfie the people of Rome. After this, Tiberius vnderſtanding of Ptolemaeus diligence in his warres, renuing the old cuſtome, ſent one of the Senators to him with an Iuorie ſtaffe, and embrodered or wrought gowne; which were woont to be the auncient gifts of the Lords of the Senat; and to giue him the greater honor called him King, companion, and friend of the people of Rome.
            
            
               
                  VII. A rebellion of bond-ſlaues ſuppreſſed: Serenus accuſed by his owne ſonne.
               THe ſame ſommer beginnings of warre, attempted in Italie by bond-men, were ſuppreſſed by meere chaunce. The beginner of this tumult was T. Curtiſius, ſometimes a ſouldier of a Pretorian band; who at the firſt in ſecret conuenticles, in Brundiſium and townes adioyning; then by writings publikly ſpread abroad, tolled to libertie, the rude and fierce bond-ſlaues diſperſed in the woods: when by the fauour of the gods, there arriued three Galleies for the vſe of paſſengers in that ſea. And Curtius Lapius rent gatherer in thoſe countries; vnto whom by lot fell the Prouince Cales, according to the auncient cuſtome, hauing in a readines a power of ſea ſouldiers; diſcomfited the conſpirators, who then did but begin their enterpriſe. Caeſar ſent out of hand Staius a Tribune, with a ſtrong Power; who brought the Captaine himſelfe, and the ringleaders of this bold attempt to the citie; greatly afeard of the multitude of bond-men, which increaſed to a huge number; the free borne decreaſing dayly more and more. The ſame men being Conſuls, there happened a bloodie example of calamitie and crueltie, the ſonne accuſing the father: both called Q. Vibius Serenus; both brought before the Lords of the Senat: the father out of baniſhment deformed, poore and vnhandſome, bound in chaines; and his ſonne pleading againſt him: who finely and featly attired with a cheerefull countenance; affirmed that ſecret practiſes had beene wrought againſt the Prince; and certaine firebrands of war ſent into Gallia to raiſe a rebellion; himſelfe being both accuſer and witnes. He charged Caecilius Cornutus once Pretor, to haue furniſhed them with money: who through the weariſomnes of trouble, accounting the danger his bane, haſtened his owne death. But contrarily the defendant, ſtoutly turning towards his ſonne; ſhaking his irons, called the gods to reuenge; praying that they would ſend him to exile againe; to lead his life far from ſuch cuſtoms; and inflict condigne puniſhment vpon his ſon. And affirmed conſtantly

that Cornutus was innocent, and frighted with a falſe accuſation; which ſhould eaſily be perceiued if ſome others were appeached alſo: for himſelfe could not practiſe the death of the Prince, and an innouation with one only companion. Then the accuſer named Gn. Lentulus, and Seius Tubero: Caeſar himſelfe being aſhamed, to heare the chiefe of the citie, and his deereſt friends, Lentulus very aged, and Tubero of a weake body, accuſed of raiſing a rebellion, and diſturbing the common-wealth: and therefore both were incontinently acquited. The fathers bondmen were put to the racke, which made againſt the accuſer: who through the wickednes of his fact, growing halfe frantick, and terrified with the ſpeech of the people, which threatned either to caſt him headlong from the Robur, A place in the priſon from whence malefactors were throwne headlong. Festus.
                   or draw him in peeces; or puniſh him as a parricide, departed the citie: but brought back from Rauenna, was forced to end his accuſation: Tiberius nothing at all diſſembling the old grudge he bare Serenus the baniſhed. For after Libos condemnation, by letters he vpbraided Caeſar, that his ſeruice only was vnrecompenſed; with ſome other things, more peremptorily, then ſafely, to prowd eares, and readie to take offence. Eight yeeres after, Caeſar caſt this in his diſh, many waies carping his actions in the meane ſpace: although contrary to his expectation, through the conſtancie of his bondmen, the rack could extort nothing againſt him. When all had giuen ſentence that Serenus ſhould be puniſhed, according to the auncient cuſtome; Tiberius to bleare their eyes, and diſſemble his grudge, would not allow of the ſentence. Gallus Aſinius was of opinion, that he ſhould be confined in Gyarum or Donuſa; which he miſliked alſo, ſaying, that both thoſe Ilands wanted water: and that to whome life was graunted, things neceſſary for life ought to be graunted: whereupon Serenus was caried backe to Amorgum. And becauſe Cornutus had ſlaine himſelfe, it was propounded in Senat whether the informers ſhould looſe their rewards; if any arraigned only of treaſon and not condemned, ſlew himſelf. Which they had all followed, if Caeſar had not ſharply and openly, contrary to his accuſtomed manner, complained in defence of the informers, ſaying: that by that meanes the lawes would be brought to nothing, and the common wealth run to ruine; and that it were more tollerable to aboliſh the lawes themſelues, then take away the keepers of them. By this meanes the promooters, a race of men found out for a common ouerthrow and deſtruction, and neuer duly puniſhed, were allured with rewards. Theſe continuall cauſes of ſorrow, were ſauced with ſome ſmall contentment: for C. Cominius a gentleman of Rome, conuicted of ſcandalous verſes againſt Tiberius, was pardoned at the intreatie of his brother a Senator. A ſtrange caſe, that knowing what was beſt (for ſottiſh or ſenſeles he was not) and what fame followed clemencie; yet he deſired rather cauſe of heauines and ſorrow. Neither is it a matter of deepe inſight to know the peoples affection, when they extoll Princes actions from the hart; and when from the teeth outward. And Tiberius himſelfe at other times, cunningly premeditating his words, and with ſtaggering and ſtammering deliuering his minde: yet when he meaneth good in deed vnto any, findeth his toong readie and looſe. But when P. Suilius ſomtimes rent gatherer to Germanicus, was conuict for taking of money for giuing iudgment, & therfore expulſed Italie: his opinion was that he ſhould be baniſhed into ſome Iland, and that with ſuch vehemencie, that he bound it with an oath, to be profitable for th ecommon wealth. Which for the preſent time was taken for a rigorous ſentence; but after Suilius returne, turned to his commendation; whome ſubſequent times ſawe mightie, but a ſlaue to money: a long time as he luſted, but neuer as he ought vſing Prince Claudius friendſhip. The ſame puniſhment was ordained againſt Catus Firmius a Senator, as falſly accuſing his ſiſter of

treaſon. Catus as I haue alreadie ſaid, had inueighled Libo; then betrayed him and brought him to deſtruction. Which ſeruice Tiberius not forgetting, though pretending other cauſes, intreated that he might not be baniſhed; but that he ſhould be depoſed from the Senate, he hindered not. I am not ignorant that many of thoſe things which I haue rehearſed, and which I ſhall rehearſe hereafter, will ſeeme of ſmall moment, and not worthy the writing. But I wiſh not that any ſhould compare our annales with the writings of the auncient hiſtoriographers of the people of Rome: for they reported with a free diſcourſe, of mightie great warres, winning of townes, of Kings taken and ſlaine: or if they came to domeſticall affaires, they recorded the diſcords betwixt the Conſuls and the Tribunes; lawes concerning diſtribution of lands among the common people; and iarres betweene the communaltie and nobilitie. But the ſcope of our diſcourſe is ſtreight, and our labour inglorious: the times I write of being peaceable and quiet, or no great warres: the ſtate of the citie dolefull; and the Prince careleſſe in dilating the Empire. Yet it ſhall not bee loſt labour to looke into thoſe things, which at the firſt ſeeme light; oft yeelding inſtruction of greater matters. For all Nations and Cities are gouerned by the people; or Peers; or one alone. A forme of common-wealth conſtituted of one of theſe, may better be praiſed, then found: or if it chaunce to be found, it cannot long continue. Therefore as in times paſt the people bearing ſwaie, or the Lords of the Senate; the humor of the communaltie was to be knowen: and the meanes how with greateſt diſcretion they were to be dealt withall: and they iudged moſt wiſe and experienced; who had deeplieſt entered into the diſpoſition of the Senators & nobilitie: ſo the ſtate being now changed; and the regiment conſiſting in one alone; it ſhall be conuenient to note thoſe things, which vnto that forme of gouernment doth beſt appertaine. For there are but few, which by wiſedome, diſtinguiſh honeſt things from diſhoneſt; and profitable from hurtfull; but moſt men are taught by others euents. And my writings bring more profit then delight; for ſituation of countries; varietie of battels; the death of famous Captaines; do feede and recreat the readers mindes. But we heape vp bloodie commaundements; continuall accuſations; deceitfull friendſhips; the ouerthrow of innocent perſons; and cauſes bringing the like end; matters tedious for want of varietie. The old writers had alſo this aduantage, that they had no detractors of their writing or fewe: not being materiall to any, whether he had praiſed the Affrican or Roman armies. But many are yet aliue, whoſe predeceſſors ſuffered puniſhment or infamie vnder Tiberius gouernment. And although their familie be extinguiſhed; yet thou ſhalt find many, which for conformitie of manners, thinke that others miſdeedes are obiected againſt themſelues. Glorie and vertue haue enimies likewiſe, according to the diſpoſition of euerie mans minde; framing reaſons contrarie to that which his own inclination is neereſt vnto. But I will returne to my firſt purpoſe.
            
            
               
                  VIII. An oration of Cremutius in defence of his Annales: Tiberius would not ſuffer the Spaniards to build a Temple in his honour.
               
                  COrnelius Coſſus, Aſinius Agrippa being Conſuls; Cremutius Cordus was accuſed of a new crime neuer before heard of, that in certaine Annales by him publiſhed, he had praiſed M. Brutus, and ſaid that C. Caſſius was the laſt of the Romans. His accuſers were Satrius Secundus, and Pinarius Natta, Seianus clients,

which was his ouerthrow. Caeſar with a ſterne looke hearing his purgation; which Cremutius being aſſured to loſe his life, began in this manner. I am accuſed for words (Lords of the Senate) bicauſe in deedes I am innocent. But they were neither againſt the Prince, nor his father, whom the lawe of treaſon doth comprehend. I am ſaid to haue commended Brutus and Caſſius; whoſe acts manie haue written, and all in honorable termes. T. Liuius an excellent writer, as well for eloquence as truth; did ſo much extoll Gn. Pompeius, that Augustus called him a Pompeian: yet that no breach of friendſhip at all. Scipio Afranius, did neuer call this ſelfe ſame Caſſius, this Brutus, theeues and parricides, as now adaies they are termed, but often worthie & famous men. Aſinius Pollioes writings do deliuer an honorable memorie of them: Meſſalla Coruinus extolleth Caſſius as his Captaine: and both flouriſhed in wealth and honour. When M. Cicero had in a booke extolled Cato to the heauens; what did Caeſar the Dictator, but anſwere him in an oration as if he had beene before the iudges? Antonies epiſtles, Brutus orations, haue I confeſſe many vntrue and bitter ſpeeches againſt Augustus. Men read Bibaculus and Catullus verſes, which are ſtuffed with reproches againſt the Caeſars. But yet Iulius and Augnstus of famous memorie winked thereat: whether with greater moderation or wiſedome, I know not: for things of that qualitie neglected vaniſh of themſelues; but repined and greeued at, argue a guiltie conſcience. The Grecians, whoſe not onely libertie, but vnreſtrained licence eſcaped vnpuniſhed, I ſpeake not of: or if any felt himſelfe greeued, he reuenged words with other words. It hath bin alwaies a matter of free libertie, and leaſt ſubiect vnto detraction, to ſpeake of thoſe whom death had exempted from hatred and fauor. Do I incenſe the peope by orations to ciuill warre, with Caſſius and Brutus alreadie in armes, and maſters of the Philippian fields? Do not they (who ended their life aboue ſeauentie yeeres agone) as they are knowen by their images which the Conqueror himſelfe hath not pulled downe, ſo retaine ſome remembrance of them by writings? Poſteritie doth render vnto euery man the commendation he hath deſerued. Neither will there want ſome if I be condemned, which will make mention, not onely of Caſſius and Brutus, but of me alſo. Hauing thus ſaide, he went out of the Senat, & ended his life by abſtinence. Order was giuen by the Senators, that the Aediles ſhould burne his bookes, which notwithſtanding were ſtill extant; ſome ſecretly; ſome publickly: which maketh me the willinglier to laugh at the witles vncircumpection of ſuch as thinke with the power and authoritie they haue in their own time, they can alſo extinguiſh the memory of future times. But it falleth out contrary, that when good wits are puniſhed, their credit groweth greater: neither haue forraine Kings, or ſuch as haue vſed the like crueltie purchaſed any other thing, then diſcredit to themſelues, and to ſuch wits, glorie. This yeere accuſations were ſo hotly purſued, that euen on the feſtiuall daies of the Latines, Calphurnius Saluianus went to accuſe Marius before Druſus, Proueſt of the citie; as he was entering into the Tribunall to begin his charge: for which cauſe Saluianus being publikely blamed by Tiberius, was ſent into baniſhment. Great negligence was openly layd to the Cyzicenians charge, in not ſolemniſing Augustus ſacrifices; and that they had vſed violence againſt the citizens of Rome. For which cauſe they loſt the freedome which they had gotten in the warre when they were beſieged by Mithridates, chaſing away the King, no leſſe by their owne manhood, then Lucullus aide. But Fonteius Capito who had beene Proconfull of Aſia, was quit of the accuſation falſely forged againſt him by Vibius Serenus. And yet Serenus eſcaped vnpuniſhed, being odious generally to all, and therfore in greater ſafetie. For the more bitter an accuſer he was, the leſſe touched, and as it

were a ſacred perſon; but the light and baſe were puniſhed. At the ſame time farther Spaine ſent Ambaſſadors to the Senat, requeſting that by the example of Aſia they might build a Temple in honour of Tiberius and his mother. Tiberius taking hold of this occaſion, though otherwiſe not greedie of honors, thought it conuenient to anſwere thoſe who had rumored abroad that he was carried away with ambition, as followeth. I know (Lords of the Senat) that many will accuſe me of vnconſtancie, for not deniyng the ſame requeſt vnto the cities of Aſia. I will therefore now declare vnto you the defence of my former ſilence, and what I would haue done hereafter. Seeing that Augustus of famous memorie did not hinder thoſe of Pergamum to erect a Temple in honour of himſelfe, and the citie of Rome: I who obſerue all his deedes and wordes in ſteed of a law, did the willinglier follow that approoued precident; bicauſe the honor done vnto mee, redounded likewiſe to the Senate. But as it deſerueth pardon, once to haue accepted that honour: ſo throughout all the Prouinces with images like vnto gods to be reuerenced, ſauoreth of ambition and pride: and Augustus honor would come to naught, if it ſhould by flatterie vſed euerie where be made common. I for my part (Lords of the Senat) proteſt before you all, and deſire that poſteritie know, that I am mortall, and do like vnto men; and take it for honour ynough to be Prince. And they ſhall attribute enough to my memorie, which will beleeue that I haue not degenerated from my anceſtors; that I haue beene carefull in your affaires; conſtant in dangers; not fearfull of diſpleaſure for the profit of the common-wealth. Theſe things ſhall be for me, temples in your mindes; theſe beautifull and laſting images: for thoſe which are built of ſtone, if in iudgment of poſteritie they become odious: are contemned for ſepulchers. Therefore I pray our allies, citizens, gods and goddeſſes; theſe, that they would giue me vntill the ende of my life, a quiet minde with the vnderſtanding of diuine and humane lawes; thoſe, that whenſoeuer I ſhall depart out of this life, they would haue me in remembrance with an honorable memory of my deeds, & renown of my name. And in priuate places afterward diſliked ſuch adoration, which ſome interpreted to proceed of modeſtie; many of diſtruſt; and ſome for baſenes of mind and want of courage; becauſe of mortall men the beſt aſpire higheſt: ſo Hercules and Bacchus among the Grecians; Quirinus among vs, were added to the number of the gods. Augustus had done better in hoping to be one. Princes haue all other things at will; one thing they ſhould inſatiably ſeeke for, which is to leaue a happie memorie after them: for by contemning of fame, they contemne the vertues which engender it.
            
            
               
                  IX. Seianus requesteth of Tiberius that he might marry Liuia, Druſus vvidow. And perſwadeth Tiberius to vvithdraw himſelfe from the Citie.
               BVt Seianus ſottiſhly mad with ouergreat fortune, and enflamed with a burning deſire of Liuia: importunately demaunding a performance of a promiſed marriage, inditeth and ſendeth letters to Caeſar: becauſe the cuſtome was, that although the Prince were preſent, yet to preſent their petitions by writing: the contents were as followeth. That the good will of his father Augustus was ſuch towards him, and Tiberius alſo, by diuers ſignes did ſhew him ſuch fauour, that he would not ſooner offer his hopes and vowes vnto the gods, then vnto the eares of Princes. That he neuer thirſted after high and eminent dignities; but choſe rather to watch and trauell like a common ſouldier for the ſafetie of the Emperour:

notwithſtanding that he had obtained that which ſeemed to be of all other the greateſt honor: that is, that he ſhould be thought worthy of Caeſars alliance; from whence ſprang the beginning of his hope. And becauſe he had heard that when Augustus in the beſtowing his daughter, had thought euen of gentlemen of Rome; ſo he beſought him, if a husband were thought vpon for Liuia, that he would haue him as a friend in minde, who would be content with the glory only to be allied to him: neuer purpoſing thereby to giue vp the charge impoſed vpon him, nor relinquiſh his vſuall care: but would hold himſelfe ſatisfied, if his houſe might be aſſured againſt Agrippinas wicked malice, and that in regard of his children: and as for himſelfe, he deſired to liue no longer then he could employ himſelfe in the ſeruice of his Prince. Tiberius hauing praiſed Seianus great loue and zeale, and chiefely run ouer the benefits he had receiued of him, demaunding time as it had bene fully to deliberate on the matter, added; That other men conſulted of that only which was for their profit: but the conditions of Princes was of a different qualitie, whoſe ſpeciall drift was to direct their actions to fame: and therefore would not fall into that which was eaſie for him to haue written. That Liuia could determine with her ſelfe whether ſhe would marry againe or not, or remaine in the ſame familie: that ſhe had a mother and grandmother as neerer counſellers: he therefore would deale more ſimply, and ſpeake firſt of Agrippinaes enmities, which would be farre more incenſed, if Liuiaes marriage ſhould deuide Caeſars houſe as it were into parts, and breede emulation betweene the women; and conſequently the ouerthrow of his nephewes. What if any variance ariſe in that marriage? Thou art deceiued Seianus, if thou thinkeſt to continue in the ſtate thou art now in, if thou marry Liuia, who hath beene wife vnto C. Caeſar, and afterward to Druſus; and imagin that ſhe beareth the minde to paſſe the reſt of her life with a Gentleman of Rome. And if I ſhould agree vnto it, doeſt thou thinke that they would ſuffer it, who haue ſeene her brother, her father, our auncetors in greateſt dignities? Thou wilt continue in the calling thou art now in; but thoſe magiſtrates and noble men which maugre thy teeth mount to authoritie, and determine of all matters, do report it, and that not in hugger mugger, that a long time ſince thou haſt climed higher then the degree of a gentleman, and gone beyond my fathers friendſhip; and for the hatred they beare vnto thee, blame me. But Augustus thought once to marry his daughter to a gentleman of Rome. Truly it was to be maruelled, that being diſtracted with ſo many cares, and foreſeeing that he who ſhould match in that place, ſhould by that alliance riſe to great aduancement, he would in familiar conference thinke vpon Proculeius and ſome others, which liued a notable quiet life, not medling at all with matters of eſtate. But if we be moued becauſe Augustus did doubt, only whether he ſhould beſtow her vpon a gentleman, how much more ought we to conſider that he gaue her to M. Agrippa, and then after vnto me. Theſe things I would not hide from thee for the friendſhip which is betwixt vs: but I will not be againſt thine nor Liuiaes deſeignments: and will forbeare at this time to ſpeake what I had caſt in minde, and how neerely I purpoſed to linke thee vnto me. I will only ſay, that there is nothing ſo excellent, but thy vertues and good will towardes me doth deſerue it; and when opportunitie ſhall ſerue, I will vtter it either in Senate, or before the people. Seianus hearing this anſwere was nothing pleaſed, not ſo much in regard of the marriage, as becauſe he feared Tiberius ſecret ſuſpitions; the rumor of the people; and enuie which grew faſt vpon him. Yet fearing if he ſhould caſt off thoſe great troupes which daily came to court, him he ſhould weaken his authoritie; and by entertaining them, miniſter matter of crime: the marke he ſhot at was, to perſwade

                  Tiberius to leade his life in ſome pleaſant place far from Rome; wherein he foreſaw many things, as that there could be no acceſſe to the Prince but by him; that all letters being conueied by ſouldiers which were at his deuotion, ſhould paſſe through his hands: that Caeſar declining now to age, and growen ſlothfull and effeminat through the quietnes of the place, would disburden himſelfe of cares of ſtate, and commit them to another: and that the enuie borne to himſelfe ſhould be diminiſhed, acceſſe to the Prince being leſſer: and by that meanes all vaine ſhadowes remoued, he ſhould grow mightie in true power and authoritie. Therefore by little and by little he findeth fault with the buſines of the citie, the concourſe of people, the flocking together of multitudes; extolleth highly a quiet and ſolitarie life; a life without anguiſh of minde, and free from enuie: moſt fit to thinke on important and waightie affaires. And falling out by chance that Votienus Montanus cauſe was to be heard, a man of a readie wit; Seianus perceiuing Tiberius not reſolued to leaue the citie, perſwaded him to be a very inconuenient matter to be preſent at the aſſemblies of the Senate; leaſt he ſhould heare railing and reprochfull ſpeeches, but yet true, vttered of himſelfe in his owne hearing. For Votienus being accuſed of contumelious words againſt Caeſar, whileſt Aemylius a witnes and a ſouldier laboured earneſtly to prooue his aſſertion, rehearſed from point to point, though the hearers buzzed and made a noiſe about him, all Votienus words: in which Tiberius heard many ſpitefull and reprochfull ſpeeches backbitingly vttered in ſecret againſt himſelfe: which ſo moued him, that he cried he would either preſently, or when the cauſe was heard, purge himſelfe; and was hardly pacified either with intreatie of his neereſt friends, or flattery of all; and ſo Votienus was puniſhed as for treaſon. Caeſar perſiſting ſtifly & vſing hard and rough dealing, though that was one of the crimes obiected againſt him, condemned to exile Aquilia, for adulterie with Varius Ligur: although Lentulus Getulicus Conſull elect, had alreadie condemned her by the Iulian law: and put Apidius Merula from his Senators roome, becauſe he had not ſworne to obſerue Augustus actes.
            
            
               
                  X. Acontrouer ſie betvvixt the Lacedaemonians, and Meſſenians touching the rights of the Temple of Diana: Piſo Pretor of Spaine, ſlaine by a villagois.
               AFter that were heard the Embaſies of the Lacedaemonians and Meſſenians, concerning the right of the Temple of Diana Limenetidis; which the Lacedaemonians auowed by the records of their Annales, and profices to haue beene dedicated by their predeceſſors in their countrey: but taken from them by Philip of Macedon, with whom they warred; and afterward reſtored vnto them by the ſentence of C. Caeſar, and M. Antonius. The Meſſenians on the contrarie ſide alleaged an old diuiſion of Peloponeſus betweene Hercules ſucceſſors; and that that territorie Dentheliate wherein the Temple was, fell to their King; whereof there remained auncient monuments engrauen in ſtones and braſſe. And if it were neceſſarie to produce the teſtimonie of Poets and Chronicles, they had more then they of good credit: neither had Philip ſo done by force, but according to equitie. King Antigonus, and the Captaine Mummius gaue the like iudgement. So the Mileſians being publikely made arbitrators of the cauſe; and laſt of all, Atidius Geminus Pretor of Achaia determined the ſame. Whereupon iudgment was giuen on the Meſſenians ſide. The Segeſtani likewiſe demaunded that Venus Temple built on the hill Eryce, and fallen downe with age might be reedified: calling to remembrance

many things of her beginning pleaſing vnto Tiberius eares, which mooued him to vndertake willingly the charge, as being of her blood. After that the Maſſiliens requeſts were heard, and the example of P. Rutilius allowed, who, hauing by law been expulſed Rome, the Smyrnaeans receiued and made a citizen in their citie. By which right alſo, the Maſſiliens receiued Vulcatius Moſchus a baniſhed man, who left all his goods to their common-wealth, as to his countrey. Two noble men Gn. Lentulus, and L. Domitius died the ſame yeere. It was to Lentulus a great honour, ouer and beſides that he was Conſull, and triumped ouer the Getuli, that he endured his pouertie patiently; then that hauing gotten great riches without iniuriyng of any, he vſed them temperatly. Domitius credit grew by his father, who was lord of the ſea in the ciuill wars; vntill he thruſt himſelf into Antonies faction; and after that into Caeſars. His grandfather was ſlaine in the Pharſalian battell, taking part with the nobilitie: and himſelfe choſen to marrie Antonia, Octauius yoongeſt daughter. After that he paſſed ouer the riuer Albis with his hoſt, and entered farther into Germanie, than any other before him; for which cauſe, he obtained the honour of triumphe. L. Antonius of great, but vnfortunat nobilitie died likewiſe: for his father Iulus Antonius being put to death for committing adulterie with Iulia: Augustus ſent him being verie yoong, and his ſiſters nephewe, to Marſilles, where he cloked the name of baniſhment with the pretence of ſtudie. Notwithſtanding he had great honor done him at his funerals, and his bones buried in the tombe of the Octauians by decree of the Senat. The ſame men being Conſuls, a bloodie fact was committed in hither Spaine by a peſant of Termeſtine, who aſſayling vpon the way L. Piſo Pretor of the Prouince, at vnawares and vnprouided, as being careles by reaſon of peace, killed him with one ſtroke; then fled in poſt to the woods; and forſaking his horſe, ſtealing by dangerous bie-waies, beguiled his followers; though not long: for his horſe being taken and brought to the next villages, it was knowen whoſe he was. And being found and put to the racke to bewraie his complices, cried alowde in his countrey language, that that was a vaine queſtion to aske him; and that his companions might boldly come, and behold him on the torture; for no torment or griefe ſhould be able to draw the truth from him. And being the next day brought againe to the torture, by violent force breaking from his keepers, ſo daſht his head againſt a ſtone, that immediately he yeelded vp the ghoſt. Some were of opinion that Piſo was ſlaine by the treacherie of the Termeſtines, by reaſon he exacted more of thoſe barbarous people, then they were able to beare.
            
            
               
                  XI. Poppaeus Sabinus defeateth the Thracians: and their obſtinacie.
               
                  LEntulus Getulicus, and C. Caluiſius being Conſuls, triumphall ornaments were awarded Poppaeus Sabinus for defeating certaine Thracians, which wildly liued in high mountaines; & therfore more ſauage & fierce. The cauſe of their rebellion, beſides their naturall diſpoſition, was, bicauſe they would not that any muſter ſhould be made of their ſtrongeſt and ableſt men for ſeruice: neuer accuſtomed to obey their Kings farther then themſelues liſted; or if they did ſend any aide, they appointed the conductor of them; and would make no warre but againſt the borderers. There was alſo a rumor then ſpread, that they ſhould be diſperſed and brought into other nations and mingled with them. But before they began to beare armes, they ſent Ambaſſadors to Sabinus declaring their amitie and obedience to the people of Rome; and that they would ſo continue if they were not oppreſſed with

new taxations: but if like vanquiſhed men they ſhould liue in ſeruitude, they had both weapons and youth, and a reſolute courage ether to die or liue in libertie. And therewithall, ſhewed their fortreſſes built on rocks, whither they had conueied their parents and wiues, and threatened an intricat, hard & bloody war. But Sabinus giuing milde anſweres, vntill he had gathered his forces together: and when Pomponius Labeo was come with a legion out of Moeſia, king Rhoemetalces with the aid of his countreymen, which continued ſtill in their alleageance; with the forces he had at hand, he marched toward the enemie poſſeſſed of the ſtreights of the woods; ſome of the forwardeſt ſhewing themſelues in open place: which, the Romane captaine hauing ſtole vpon, were eaſily put to flight, with ſmall bloudſhed of the barbarians, by reaſon of their refuges at hand. Then fortifying in the ſame place, ſeaſeth on the mountaine, which was narrow and euen ridged vnto the next fort: garded with great, but vnorderly and confuſe ſtrength; and immediatly ſendeth before of his choiſe archers againſt the fierceſt of them before the trench, as the manner of the countrey is, ſinging ditties and verſes. They wounded many with ſhot a far off, and drawing neere, by a ſuddaine irruption of the enemie had bene driuen to the worſt; if the Sugambrien cohort which lay not far off, in dangers venturous, & no leſſe fierce & dreadfull in noiſe of ſongs & clattering of armes, had not receiued them at a pinch. After this, Sabinus encamped neerer the enemie, leauing the Thracians, which (as I haue alreadie ſaid) came to our ſide at the firſt fort, with warrant to waſt, burne, carry away booties, ſo as they tooke no longer time then the day, and returne at night to ſet a ſure watch and a vigilant ouer the camp. Which at the firſt was obſerued: but afterward through riot, wantonnes, and deſire of riches, neglecting their wards, hunting after belly cheere, and ouertaken with wine, fell heauily all to ſleepe. The enemie vnderſtanding their retchles negligence, deuided his men into two ſquadrons; the one to ſet on the forragers, and the other to aſſaile the Romain camp; not with hope of any ſurpriſe, but by their clamors, and claſhing of weapons, euery man intentiue to his owne danger, they ſhould not heare the noiſe of the other skirmiſh: chooſing the night withall to make the fear the greater. But thoſe which aſſaied the trench of the legion were eaſily repulſed: the aid of the Thracians in the other fort terrified with a ſuddaine aſſault; part of them lying aſleepe within the trenches; and part ſeeking prouiſion and ſtouer abroade, were ſo much the more cruelly ſlaine, becauſe they were reckoned to be as fugitiues and traitors, which bare armes to bring themſelues and their countrey into ſeruitude. The next day Sabinus ſheweth himſelfe in a place without aduantage to either ſide, to ſee whether the barbarians, glad of the nights ſucceſſe, durſt venter a battell. But ſeeing they went not out of their fortreſſes or hils adioyning, he began to lay ſiege to them with a ſtrong companie, caſting a trench and a parapet foure miles compas about them: after that by little and little, to barre them of water and forrage, ſtreightened his encloſure, the firſt enuironing the laſt: and raiſed vp a bulwarke ſo neere the enemie, that from thence they might throw ſtones, darts, and fires into the enemies camp. But nothing annoyed the enemie more then thirſt, a huge multitude of rawe fighting ſouldiers, hauing but one fountaine left them for their vſe: withall, their cattell (as the cuſtome is among barbarous people) ſhut vp with them, died for want of ſtouer: dead carcaſes of men lay along, as well with wounds as thirſt; all corrupted with putrefaction, ſtench, and infection. And to make their troubled eſtate more miſerable, they fell at diſcord among themſelues; of all calamities, the full meaſure: ſome readie to yeeld, ſome to die, ſome to ſtrike and kill one another: ſome perſwading couragiouſly to ſallie out, and not periſh without reuenge;

and theſe not of the baſeſt alloy, though deuided in opinions. But among the captaines, Dinis, a man ſtroken in yeares, and who by long experience had tried as well the ſtrength as clemencie of the Romaines; counſelled them to lay downe their armes, as the only remedie in their diſtreſſe: and was the firſt which yeelded himſelfe, with his wife and children, to the conquerors: the reſt which were weake, either through age, or ſexe, and deſired rather life then renowme, did the like. But the youth betweene Tarſa and Tureſis, both reſolued to die with libertie, were doubtfully diſtracted: but Tarſa crying that death was to be haſtened, and hope and feare to be cut off at once; and giuing example vnto others, thruſt himſelfe through the breaſt, many following the ſame death. Tureſis with his companie expected the night: our captaine not being ignorant thereof, and thereupon reenforced the watch. The night being ſtormie and tempeſtuous, the enemie now making a fierce outcry, and on the ſudden vſing a maruellous ſilence; droue the beſiegers into vncertainties: when as Sabinus went about from one place to another, exhorting them not to lay chance open to ſuch as by their doubtfull clamors, and fained ſilence, layde traines to intrap them; but that euery man ſhould keepe his ſtanding, and take heed he threw no dart in vaine. In the meane ſpace the barbarians cluſtering together by troups, now threw hand-ſtones againſt the rampire, iauelins burnt at the end, and troncheons of oake, now filled vp the ditches with ſhrubs, hurdles, and dead carcaſſes. Some of them hauing before made bridges, and ladders, planted them before the bulwarks, catched hold of them, labored to pull downe the defence, grapled, fought hand to hand with ſuch as reſiſted: contrarily the Romaine ſouldier beate them downe with ſpeares, thruſt them back with the pikes of their bucklers, lanced darts, and rowled heapes of ſtones from the wall vpon them. The hope of victory alreadie gotten, and that if they ſhould now faint and be ouercome, ſhame and reproch put life and courage into our; in them deſperate hope of life; many hauing their mothers and wiues bewailing and lamenting about them. The night animated ſome to boldnes; droue ſome into a feare: blowes flew on all hands; wounds giuen and taken vnlooked for; no man knowing his fellow from the enemie, and the found of the voices as if it were an eccho rebounding behinde them in the turning and winding of the mountaine, brought ſuch a confuſion, that the Romaines abandoned their ſtandings and holds, as though they had been battered and broken downe: howbeit, a ſmall number of the enemies eſcaped aliue: the reſidue (the moſt couragious either ſlaine or wounded) at the opening of the day, were chaſed to their fortreſſes, and at length forced to yeeld; willing to accept the firſt conditions the winner would offer: to the reſt, a cruell and timely winter by reaſon of the hill Haemus was a ſafegard, that they could neither be ſubdued by force, nor ſiege.
            
            
               
                  XII. The ſharpe vvords vvhich Agrippina vſed to Tiberius for accuſing Claudia Pulchra her coſen: vvhat good vvill vvas borne the Smyrnaeans aboue the other tovvnes of Aſia, and the cauſe.
               BVt at Rome, the Princes houſe being greatly troubled, to begin the courſe of Agrippinaes future ruine; Claudia Pulchra her coſen german was called into queſtion by Domitius Aſer: who hauing beene lately Pretor, of ſmall reputation, and eager by what meanes ſoeuer to winne credit; laid to her charge that ſhee leade an vnhoneſt life with Furnius, and practiſed to poiſon, and vſed inchantments

againſt the Prince. Agrippina being of a fell and haughtie diſpoſition, and then more then euer kindled through the danger of her neere coſen, haſteneth to Tiberius, whom by chance ſhe found ſacrificing to his father: and taking hold of that of occaſion, told him: it was two mens office to offer ſacrifice in memorie of Augustus, and perſecute his poſteritie: that the diuine ſpirite was not transfuſed into dumb ſtatuaes & images: but the true image deſcended of celeſtiall blood felt the ſmart of his poſteritie: and therefore ſhe would take vpon hir the perſon of the partie accuſed: that it was in vaine to take exceptions againſt Pulchra, whoſe onely ruine was, that vnconſideratly ſhe had loued and reuerenced Agrippina: forgetting what had fallen to Soſia for the ſame cauſe. Thoſe words prouoked Tiberius, although ſeldome vſing to open the ſecrets of his breaſt: and rebuking her in a Greeke verſe, ſaid, that therefore ſhe was diſpleaſed, bicauſe ſhe could not raigne. Pulchra and Furnius are condemned: and Afer, the excellencie of his wit knowen; and Caeſar attributing vnto him praiſe of eloquence, held among the chiefe orators. After this practiſed in accuſing and defending of parties; he was better knowen for eloquence, then honeſtie of life: ſauing that when his eloquence in his latter age decaied, and his ſpirits failed; yet was neuer quiet when if his toong walked not. But Agrippina frowardly perſiſting in anger, and incumbred with ſicknes, when Caeſar went to viſit her, powring downe in a long ſilence manie teares, at laſt burſt into enuie and entreatie; that he would redreſſe her ſolitarie life: and being yet but a yoong woman, prouide her a husband: Marriage being the only comfort of minds honeſtly giuen: that there were ſome in the citie which would vouchſafe to receiue Germanicus wife and his children. But Caeſar not ignorant of what importance this requeſt was to the common-wealth; yet leaſt he ſhould openly ſeeme to diſpleaſe or feare her, gaue her though moſt earneſtly demaunding, no anſwere at all. That I finde not in the writers of Annales, but in the Commentaries of Agrippina her daughter, who being Neroes mother, hath deliuered to poſteritie her life and calamities which fell to her friends. But Seianus in this dumpe, ſent her a meſſage vnlooked for, and vnder colour of friendſhip; which was that there was, poiſon prepared for her; and that ſhe ſhould auoide to eate or drinke with her father in lawe. But ſhe not knowing how to diſſemble, ſitting by him at table could not be woon to looke cheerefully, or ſpeake a word, or touch any meate: vntill at laſt Tiberius marked it either by chance, or bicauſe he had had ſome inckling of it. And to trie that more certainely, praiſing certaine apples as they were ſerued in, gaue of them with his owne hand to his daughter in law; which augmented Agrippinaes ſuſpition, and not once taſting of them, deliuered them to the waiters. Yet openly Tiberius ſpake not one word; but turning to his mother, ſaid, that it was no maruell, if he had proceeded ſeuerely againſt her, ſeeing ſhe had an opinion, he went about to poiſon her. Thereupon a rumor was ſpread, that her deſtruction was ſought for; and that the Emperour durſt not openly attempt it: and therefore ſought ſecret meanes to compaſſe it. But Caeſar to ſtop that rumor ſhewed himſelfe often in Senat, and gaue the Ambaſſadors of Aſia audience manie daies togeither, when they doubted in what citie they ſhould erect a Temple in honor of him. A eleauen cities of different power, ſtroue with like ambition for that honour, alleaging that there was not any great difference betwixt them; in antiquitie of time; loue and affection to the people of Rome; in the warres againſt Perſus and Ariſtonicus, and other Kings. The Hypaepeni & Tralliani, togeither with the Laodiceni, & Magnetiens were ſent away as not ſufficiently grounded. No nor the Ilienſes producing that Troy was the mother of Rome, had any foundation of their reaſonſauing onely antiquitie. But

ſome doubt was made of the Halicarnaſſi; bicauſe that for the ſpace of a thouſand and two hundred yeeres, their cities had neuer beene ſhaken with any earthquake; and that the foundation of their Temple was built vpon liuely ſtrong ſtone. The Pergameni were anſwered that they had receiued honour enough, in that they had Auguſtus Temple amongſt them; ſeeing that thereon they grounded their reaſon. It ſeemeth that the Epheſians and Mileſians had their cities occupied, the one in the ceremonies of Apollo, and the other of Diana: In ſo much that all the contention reſted betwixt the Sardinians and Smyrnaeans. The Sardinians recited a decree of the Etrurians, as being of their blood: for Tyrrhenus and Lydus King Atyes ſons, diuided the land betwixt them, by reaſon of the increaſe of the people. And Lydus remained in his countrey, and Tyrrhenus went to ſeeke newe countries to inhabit; which were called by the names of their Captaines: they in Aſia, and theſe in Italie: and in progreſſe of time the Lydians growing to farther wealth, ſent people into Greece, which were afterward called Peloponeſians. They told vs alſo of letters ſent them by our Captaines, of treatiſe made with vs in the warre of Macedon; of the number of riuers; the temperature of their countrey; and what a rich territorie they had round about them. But the Smyrnaeans fetching their antiquitie a farre off; either that Tantalus from whence they came, was deſcended from Iupiter; or from Theſeus, iſſued alſo from the ſtocke of the gods; or elſe that ſome one of the Amazons had founded them: alleaged farther the ſeruice they had done to the people of Rome; in which they moſt of all relied, and that they had giuen them ſu cour by ſea; not only againſt forreine wars; but alſo the wars of Italie. And that they firſt of all had dedicated a Temple in honor of Rome, M Porcius being Conſull. The people of Rome indeed then flouriſhing; but yet not lifted vp to the height of their greatnes: the citie of Carthage yet ſtanding, and many ſtrong Kings liuing in Aſia. They brought in L. Sulla for a witnes, whoſe armie being fallen into great danger through the roughnes of the winter, and want of apparell: when newes was brought thereof to the Smyrnaeans as they were aſſembled vpon occaſion; all which were preſent ſent the apparell from their owne backes vnto our legions. Thereupon the Lords of the Senats opinion being demaunded, they preferred the Smyrnaeans. And Vibius Marſus counſelled farther, that ouer and aboue his charge, M Lepidus vnto whom the gouernment of that Prouince fell, ſhould haue a deputie appointed to take care of that Temple. And bicauſe Lepidus through modeſtie refuſed to accept it, Valerius Naſo who had beene Pretor, was by lot choſen and ſent.
            
            
               
                  XIII. Why Tiberius abſented himſelfe from the Citie.
               WHileſt theſe things thus paſſed, Caeſar hauing deepely thought vpon, and after protracted his determination, at laſt goeth into Campania, vnder colour of dedicating a temple to Iupiter Capua, and another to Augustus at Nola: but indeede reſolued to leade his life far from the citie. The occaſion of his departure, although following ſome authors, I haue attributed vnto Seianus wiles: yet becauſe that after Seianus death he continued ſixe yeares in the like retired life, I am often induced to doubt, whether the cauſe be more truly to be referred to himſelfe, as going about to cloake by the place, his crueltie and looſe behauior. Some were of opinion, that being through age, ſlender, tall, and crooked, bald headed, and his face ſpect with plaiſters and ointments, was therefore aſhamed to ſhew himſelfe in publick. And at Rhodes he was wont to ſhun companie,

liue ſecretly, and hide his laſciuious diſſolute life. Some gaue out that his mothers inſupportable inſolēcie droue him away, whom as a companiō in ſtate he could not indure; nor yet be rid of her, bicauſe the ſoueraigntie it ſelf was her gift. For Auguſtus was determined to leaue the Empire to Germanicus his ſiſters nephew, who had a good report of all men: but being ouercome by his wiues importunate intreatie, he adopted Tiberius; and Tiberius, Germanicus: which Augusta did vpbrayd vnto him, and demanded the Empire againe which ſhe had beſtowed vpon him. He departed with a ſmall traine with him: one Senator who had bene Conſull, which was Cocceius Nerua, skilfull in the lawes; one gentleman of Rome beſides Seianus; and of noble men only Curtius Atticus. The reſt were men indued with liberall ſciences, moſt of them Grecians, with whoſe conference he purpoſed to paſſe the time. Some Aſtrologers gaue out that Tiberius departed Rome vnder ſuch a conſtellation, that he ſhould returne no more; which was cauſe of manies ouerthrow, which coniectured and diuulged that he had not long to liue: for they could not foreſee ſo incredible a matter, as that he ſhould want his countrey willingly eleuen yeeres together. Wherein did appeare not long after how neere coſens their arte and falſhood are; and how truth is diſguiſed and hidden vnder obſcuritie. For it was not ſpoken at aventure that he ſhould not returne againe, although they were ignorant of other things which ſhould happen vnto him: or whether he ſhould quickly die, or not, which was not ſignified by thoſe words of theirs; becauſe he ended his latter yeeres in ſome village not farre off, or on the ſea ſhore, or neere vnto the wals of the citie. At that time a doubtfull and dangerous perill, which by meere chance Caeſar fell into, augmented the vaine rumor alreadie ſowne; and gaue him occaſion to put more truſt in Seianus friendſhip and conſtancie, then euer he had done before. For as they were eating in a countrey houſe called Spelunca, betwene the ſea Amuclanum, and the hils of Fundani, in a naturall grot or caue, certaine ſtones falling ſuddenly from the mouth of it, ſlew ſome of his ſeruitors; which ſo affrighted the reſt, that they fled all away. But Seianus with his knees, his face and hands leaning and hanging ouer Caeſar, ſet himſelfe againſt the other ſtones which were falling, and in that plight was found by the ſouldiers which came to ſuccour them. This made him greater then he was: and although he ſhould haue giuen moſt pernitious counſell, yet ſhould haue had fauorable audience, as one nothing caring for ought which might happen to himſelfe. He tooke vpon him the office of a iudge againſt Germanicus iſſue, ſuborning ſome to play the parts of accuſers, and inueigh eſpecially againſt Nero next in ſucceſſion; although a modeſt yong man, yet oftentimes forgetfull of that which was requiſit for the preſent time, pricked forward by his freed men and followers, which thought it long till he were Emperour, to ſhew himſelfe bold and ſtout of courage: perſwading him that that the people of Rome deſired, the armie couered, and that Seianus durſt do nothing to the contrarie; though now he inſulted alike ouer the patience of the old man, and ſloth and cowardlines of the yong. Nero hearing theſe or the like ſpeeches, yet dreamt of no bad practiſe: although ſome wilfull and vnconſiderate ſpeeches ſlipt now and then from him: which when the ſpies ſet ouer him had augmented & carried to Caeſar, and Nero not ſuffered to purge himſelfe; droue manie into ſundrie doubtes. Some ſhunned to meete him; ſome hauing ſaluted him, turned preſently from him; many brake off abruptly their talke. Seianus fauorers on the other ſide laughed in their ſleeues to ſee it. Tiberius, whether the yoong man ſpake vnto him, or held his toong, caſt a malicious eye, or ſmiled diſſemblingly vpon him: and whether he ſpake or helde his toong, it was alwaies a

crime in him. Neither was he ſecure from treaſon in the night; his wife bewraying his watchings; his dreames; his ſighes to Liuia her mother, and ſhe to Seianus: who drew Druſus, Neroes brother, to his ſide with a hope of the Empire, if he could remooue his elder brother which was alreadie downe and out of credit. Druſus was of a cruell and fell diſpoſition; and beſides the deſire of rule, and hatred which vſually raigneth betwixt brothers: he was incenſed with enuie to ſee Agrippina their mother readier bent to do Nero good, then himſelfe. And yet Seianus did not ſo much tender Druſus, but that he proiected in his minde ſome meanes of his ruine: knowing well that he was verie fierce and head-ſtrong; and therefore eaſilie intrapped. In the ende of this yeere two famous men died, Aſinius Agrippa, rather of a renowned then auncient ſtocke, himſelfe not degenerating from them; and Q. Haterius deſcended from Senators, whileſt he liued greatly eſteemed for eloquence: but monuments of his wit there are none; bicauſe he was eſteemed rather for vehemencie and quicke deliuerie, then diligence and premeditation. And as others induſtries and labours are had in eſtimation after their daies; ſo Haterius fluent vaine was extinguiſhed with him.
            
            
               
                  XIIII. The falling of an Amphitheater, and the hurt which enſued: Tiberius reedifieth certaine houſes burnt in the hill Caelius.
               WHen M. Licinius, and L. Calphurnius were Conſuls, a ſudden and vnlooked for miſchance as ſoon ended as begun, might haue been compared to the calamitie of mightie warres. For an Amphitheater begun at Fidena, one Atilius a freed man, to ſet foorth a play offencers; as one hauing neither abundance of wealth, nor ambitious in winning fauour of the people; but by niggardly ſparing to make a baſe gaine in the workmens hire; did neither laye a ſounde foundation, nor faſten the timber frame erected vppon the ſame. Thither flocked many, verie deſirous of ſuch ſhewes, both men and women of all ages; partly by reaſon it was ſo neere vnto them; and partly becauſe that, during Tiberius empire, they were barred from ſuch paſtimes; whereby the miſchiefe was the greater. For the pile being great, and filled full with a throng of people, then falling aſunder, whether it fell inwards, or ſpred outwards, it carried downe headlong, and ouerwhelmed a huge multitude of people, intentiue on the ſhew within, or gazing round about. Thoſe which at the beginning were cruſht to death by that hap, eſcaped languiſhing torment. They moſt of all were to be pitied, which being bruſed and broken, yet liued, and in the day knew their wiues & children by ſight, and in the night by lamentable howling & crying. Thoſe which were abſent moued with this report, one lamented his brother; another his neere kinſeman, another his parents: yea they were afraide if their friends and coſens were out of the way, although for other occaſion; doubting ſtill they had been there; and becauſe it was not certainely knowne whom that violent ruine had beaten downe, the vncertaintie ſpread the feare the farther. As ſoone as they began to remoue the frame, they flocked about the dead bodies, ſome kiſſing, ſome imbracing them; and fell often at debate, in miſtaking one for another, by reaſon they were diſſigured, through ſome reſemblance of countenance, and likenes of yeeres. Fiftie thouſand perſons were ſlaine or maimed by that miſchance: and a decree layd downe by the Senate, that from thence forward no man ſhould exhibit the play of Fencers, who was leſſe worth then About 3130. pound. foure hundred thouſand ſeſterces: nor that any amphitheater ſhould be built but in a firme and ſound place: and Atilius
                  
was baniſhed. After that freſh calamitie, the houſes of the chiefe gentlemen were open; medicines and phiſitions appointed for the bruſed and mangled: and the citizens, although heauie and ſad, yet then were like their aunceſtors, which after great battels, did relieue and comfort the wounded with all care and liberalitie. That miſfortune was ſcarſe paſt, but the rage and violence of a fire conſumed the citie more then euer, and burnt the hill Caelius. That was reported to be an vnluckie yeere, and that the princes abſence was begun in a diſmall houre; as the manner of the people is, to draw caſuall miſhaps to blame, if Caeſar had not preuented them, by beſtowing of money to euery man according to his loſſe. For which liberalitie, thanks in Senat were giuen him by the noble men: and the people gaue him a good report, becauſe that without ambition or intreatie of friends, he had of his owne motion helped and called ſtrangers vnto him. And diuers were of opinion, that the mount Caelius ſhould after that bee called mount Augustus: becauſe that when all was waſted with fire round about; onely the image of Tiberius which was in Iunius a Senators houſe, remained vntouched. The ſame happened in times paſt to Claudia Quinctia; and therefore her image twice eſcaping violent rage of fires, our aunceſtors did conſecrate in the Temple to the mother of the gods: an argument, that the Claudians are accounted ſacred, and receiued among the number of the gods: and therefore the ceremonie ought to be augmented in the place, where the gods haue ſhewen ſo great fauour towards ſo mightie a Prince. It ſhall not be amiſſe to ſhew, how that hill was in old time called Querquetulan, bicauſe it was fertill and abundant with oakes: then Caelius of Caele Vibenna, who being Captaine of the Etrurian nation, and ſuccoured the Romans, obtained that ſeat of Tarquinius Priſcus, or of ſome other King; for in that point writers do varie. As for the reſt, it is without controuerſie, that thoſe great companies of ſouldiers did inhabit alſo the plaines, and places adioyning to the place of aſſemblies: and thereupon that was called the Thuſcian ſtreet, of the name of the ſtrangers which came thither to inhabit. But as the beneuolence of noble men, and largeſſe of the Prince, was a great comfort in their aduerſitie; ſo the credit and authoritie of informers more and more increaſing, wrought the ouerthrowe of manie. Domitius Afer accuſed Varo Quinctilius, a wealthie man and neere kinne to Caeſar, hauing before condemned Claudia Pulchra his mother: no man maruelling that being long a needie companion, & hauing waſtfully conſumed his late recompence, ſhould arme himſelfe to farther miſchiefe. But that P. Dolabella was his ſellow picthanke, iſſued of noble kinred, and allied to Varus, was a miracle ouerthowing by that action himſelfe, and diſtained his nobilitie and blood. Yet the Lords of the Senat would not agree thereto, but thought it conuenient to expect the Emperours comming: which for the time was the onely ſhift againſt imminent miſchiefes. But Caeſar hauing dedicated his temples in Campania, albeit he had giuen warning by edict, that no man ſhuld diſturbe his quietnes; & hindered the concourſe of townſmen by placing of ſouldiers in the way: yet being awearie of townes and colonies, and all places ſituated in the cōtinent, withdrew himſelfe to the Iland Capreas, three miles diſtant by ſea from the fartheſt part of the promontorie of Surrentum. I eaſily beleeue that, that Iland did fit his humor, hauing neither hauen nor cō
                  modities, & thoſe conueied in very little veſſels: no man landing but the watch was preſently acquainted with it. The temperature of the aire is in winter milde, by reaſon that a hill oppoſite vnto it, beateth back the force of the windes. In the ſommer ſeaſon it is open to the Weſternwinde, and hath verie pleaſantly the ſea on euerie ſide, and a goodly proſpect towardes the hill Veſuuius, vntill by fire the face of the

place was changed. The report goeth that the Greekes did poſſeſſe that place, and that the Theleboians inhabited the Iland Capreas. But at that time Tiberius occupied the place, and ſeated himſelfe in twelue countrey houſes of pleaſure: and how much more in former times he was earneſtly bent vpon the publick good, ſo much the more, now ſecretly he abādoned himſelf to looſe life & naughtie idlenes. He was neuer more ſuſpitious & credulous then now: a qualitie which Seianus whileſt he was abiding in the citie whetted on; and which did now more then euer diſquiet him: and no longer vſing ſecret treacherie to intrap Agrippina and Nero, put ouer then ſouldiers as it were to record in Chronicles what meſſages they receiued; who reſorted to them; what they did either ſecretly or openly. Farther there were others ſuborned to counſell them to flie to the armie of Germanie; or when the place of aſſemblies was beſt repleniſhed with people, catch hold of Auguſtus image, and crie for fuccour of the people and Senat. And albeit, they gaue no eare to thoſe deuiſes; yet they were layd to their charge, as though they had intended them.
            
            
               
                  XV. A treacherous practiſe of three Senators to intrap Sabinus a gentleman of Rome, and Agrippaes friend: the death of Iulia Auguſtus neece.
               
                  IVnius Silanus, and Silius Nerua being Conſuls, the yeere had a foule beginning; by reaſon Titius Sabinus an honorable gentleman of Rome was drawn to priſon, onely becauſe he was a friend to Germanicus: neuer omitting to ſhew all tokens of dutie to his wife and his children; and of all Germanicus followers the onely man which viſited them at her houſe, and accompanied them abroad: and therfore commended by the good, and diſliked by the bad. Againſt him Latinius Latiaris, Porcius Cato, Petitius Rufus, and M. Opſius, who had beene ſometimes Conſuls, bent their malice, through a greedines of the Conſulſhip; which they could not obtaine but by Seianus meanes: and Seianus liking could not be purchaſed, but by ſome notable peece of villanie. They had ſo complotted betweene them, that Latiaris, who was ſomewhat allied to Sabinus, ſhould lay the ſnare; and the reſt be preſent as witneſſes; and then begin the accuſation. Hereupon Latiaris, at the firſt began to caſt out ſpeeches at randon; then to extoll his conſtancie, that he did not as others did, fawne in proſperitie, and ſhrinke from a houſe in aduerſitie; with other honorable ſpeech of Germanicus; and bewayling and pitiyng Agrippinaes eſtate. And ſeeing Sabinus (as mens minds are ſoft and tender in calamitie) to powre downe teares and complaints; Latiaris began more boldly to touch Seianus crueltie, pride, & the hope he gaped after: not forbearing vnreuerent ſpeeches againſt Tiberius. Theſe ſpeeches as though they had beene ſauced with ſomewhat which durſt not be auouched, made ſhew of ſtreight friendſhip betweene them: ſo far that Sabinus often times ſought out Latiaris; frequented his houſe; vttered his griefes vnto him, as to a muſt truſtie & faithful friend. Thoſe whom I ſpake of before, conſulted of ſome meanes how theſe ſpeeches mightbe heard of manie; for the place of their two meetings moſt be priuat: and if they ſhould ſtand behinde the doore, they were afraide of being ſeene, or of a noiſe; or leaſt ſome ſuſpition ſhould growe by ſome chance. Betweene the roofe and the ſeeling, the three Senators (the place no leſſe vnſeemly then the treaſon deteſtable) hid themſelues, and laid their eares cloſe to holes and chinkes to liſten what was ſaide. In the meane ſpace Latiaris hauing found Sabinus in the market place, as if he had ſome new matter to tell him, draweth him home, and into his chamber; beginneth to rip vp things paſt and preſent, which

yeelded ſtore of matter, and inforceth new occaſions of feare. Sabinus doth as much, and more at large: the nature of griefes being ſuch, that when we once enter into thē, hardly can we finde an end. This done, they began immediately their accuſatiō, and ſent letters vnto Caeſar, declaring the order of their owne lewde practiſe, and ſhamefull act. The citie was neuer in greater perplexitie and feare, then at that time; euery man eſtranging himſelf euen from his neereſt kindred and acquaintance: they auoided all meetings, conferences, eſchuing as well knowen friends, as ſtrangers: yea they haue an eie to mute and ſenceleſſe things, and ſearched the roofes and wals of their houſes. But Tiberius requeſting by writing that the ſolemnities of the new yeere might be celebrated in the Kalends of Ianuarie; turned his talke to Sabinus, charging him that he had corrupted ſome of his freede men, to attempt ſomewhat againſt his perſon; and therefore boldly demaundeth a reuenge, which without delay was graunted: and being condemned, he was drawne and haled with his garments turned ouer his head, & almoſt throtled, cried alowd. Is this the beginning of the new yeer? be theſe the ſacrifices which are ſlaine in Seianus honor? which way ſoeuer he did caſt his eies, or vnto whō ſoeuer he directed his ſpeech, they al fled: the place of aſſemblies & the ſtreets were emptie; ſom came back & ſhewed thēſelues againe, afeard for that they were ſeene to be afeard. For what daie was paſt free from executions; if betwixt the ſacrifices and the vowes, at what time the cuſtom was to abſtaine from prophane ſpeeches, fetters and cordes are ſpoken of? And it was ſaid that Tiberius could not through ignorance incur this hatred; but contrarie, that he ſought to haue it knowen, that without any let, new magiſtrates might as well open the priſons, as Temples and altars. After that he ſent letters of thankſgiuing, that they had puniſhed an enimie to the ſtate; adding withall, that he ſtoode in feare of his life, and was ielous of his enimies practiſes, though naming none: yet no man doubted but he aimed at Nero and Agrippina. If I had not purpoſed to declare the occurrents of the yeeres as they fell out, I could willingly in this place haue ſet downe before his time, what ends Latinius, and Opſius, and the other contriuers of that lewd practiſe had com vnto; not only after that C. Caeſar was come to the Empire, but whileſt Tiberius was yet aliue: who, as he would not ſuffer the miniſters of his wickednes to be puniſhed by others; ſo oftentimes hauing had of their ſeruice his fill, and freſh offered to continue the trade; he ſought all meanes to extinguiſh the olde, as perſons odious vnto him. But what puniſhment theſe and others of the like conditions, endured, ſhall be declared in his place and time. Then Aſinius Gallus whoſe children Agrippina was aunt vnto, thought it conuenient that Tiberius ſhould vtter vnto the Senators of whom he ſtoode in feare, and ſuffer them to be remooued. But as it was thought Tiberius of all his vertues was fond of none ſo much as of his diſſimulation: and therefore diſliked much that he ſhould be vrged to diſcloſe that which he went about to conceale. But Seianus tempered the matter; not for any loue he bare Gallus; but bicauſe he would haue the Princes lingring delaies come to light; knowing well that he was ſlow in his deliberations: but if he had once ſet them abroch, that his bad ſpeeches were ioyned with cruell deeds. The ſame time Iulia died, whom Augustus hauing conuicted of adulterie, had exiled into the Iland Trimerus, not farre from the Apulian ſhores: where ſhe indured twentie yeers exile, ſuſtained by Auguſta; whoſe maner was by ſecret practiſes to ſubuert her ſonnes in lawe when they were in proſperitie, and openly ſhew them pitie when they were in miſerie.
            
            
               
               
                  XVI. The Friſians rebellagainst the Romans: Agrippina, Germanicus daughter is married to C. Domitius.
               
               THe ſame yeere the Friſians beyond Rhene forſooke their obedience, rather through our couetouſnes, then impatiencie of liuing vnder our ſubiection. Druſus in regard of their ſmall abilitie, had impoſed a ſmall tribute on them which was a certaine of oxe hides for the war, no man reſpecting what ſtrength or largenes they were of; vntill Olennius a Captaine of a principall enſigne and gouernor of the Friſians, made choiſe of the skins of the beaſt called Vrus, & of that hignes. As that had beene a heauie burden for other nations; ſo the Germains could leaſt of all others endure it: whoſe woods although full of huge ſauage beaſts; yet at their houſes haue but ſmall heards: firſt therefore they deliuered theſe oxen; then their poſſeſſions; and laſtly the bodies of their wiues and children into bondage. From hence grew their griefe and complaints: and ſeeing that no man relieued them, they ſought a redreſſe by warre; laid hands on ſuch ſouldiers as receiued the tribute, and hanged them vp. Olennius eſcaped the furie of the enimie by flying to a Caſtle called Fleuus, ſtrengthened with no ſmal power of citizens and conſederats; which held the coaſtes of the Ocean in ſubiection. Which when L. Apronius Propretor of lowe Germanie vnderſtood, he ſent for the chiefeſt enſignes of the legions of higher Germanie, & aides as wel of the horſmē as footmē, & broght both the armies ouer Rheine, into the Friſian land: the rebels forſaking the ſiege of the Caſtle to defend their owne. Then Apronius maketh cauſeies and bankes, and ſtrong bridges ouer the next arme of the ſea, for the huge armie to paſſe ouer. And in the meane time hauing found ſom foords, commādeth the wing of the Caninefates, & ſuch footmen as ſerued vnder vs, to hem in the enemie behind. Who raunged into battle aray to fight, droue back the confederates, & legionarie horſmen ſent as an aide. After that were ſent three cohorts lightly armed; then two more: & a little after a ſtrong companie of horſmen. Strength ſufficient, if they had charged couragiouſly togither; but comming ſome after ſome, & dropping in by companies; they neither gaue courage to the fearfull, but carried away themſelues with like feare, ran all away for company. The reſidue of the aides he committed vnto Cethegus Labeo, Lieutenant of the fift legion: who perceiuing things to go doubtfull on his ſide, ſent to demaund more aide of the legions. The fift legion couragiouſly iſſuing firſt out with a hot skirmiſh, put the enimie to flight; receiued into them the wounded and wearied cohorts. The Roman Captaine ſought neither to reuenge, nor burie the dead bodies; although there had been ſlaine manie Tribunes, Prefects, and diuers Centurions of marke & fame. It was after knowen by the fugitiues, that the fight held on vntil the next day, and that there were nine hundred Romans ſlaine in a wood called Baduhenna: and that another power of 400. which had taken the village of Cruptorix, (which ſometime had receiued pay of the Romains) fearing treaſon, ſlewe one another. This got the Friſians great renowme among the Germains: Tiberius diſſembling his loſſes, leaſt hee ſhould commit the charge to ſome other: and the Senate, beeing poſſeſſed with domeſticall feare, regarded not much whether the remote part of the Empire went diſhonorably to wracke or not: but ſtroken (as I haue ſayde) into a feare, ſought a remedie by flatterie. And albeit they had propounded many matters to deliberate on, yet they decreed, that all layde aſide, there ſhould be two altars erected, one vnto Clemencie, and another vnto Friendſhip: and that Caeſars and Seianus images ſhould be ſet

about them: and intreated moſt earneſtly they would vouchſafe them ſo much fauour as that they might ſee him. Neuertheleſſe they went neither to Rome, nor any place there about, but thought it ſufficient if they went out of the Iland, and be ſeene in Campania next adioyning vnto it. Thither reſorted the Lords of the Senate, Gentlemen, and many of the common people, heauie for Seianus; vnto whom, acceſſe was hardlieſt obtained, and that with great crouching, by approouing and participating his deſeignments. It well appeared his arrogancie grew greater, ſeeing he bluſhed not to ſee ſuch open, baſe, and filthie ſeruilitie vſed. For at Rome it was a vſuall matter for men to walke the ſtreetes, and by reaſon the citie is great, no man knew anothers buſines: but there ſome lying night and day in the field, ſome on the ſea ſhore, without any difference, endured either the pride of the porters, or had fauour as pleaſed them; vntill that that was alſo denied them. Then they returned to the citie with diſcontented feare: and Caeſar not hauing vouchſafed either to looke, or ſpeake vnto them: and ſome, whoſe vnfortunate friendſhip with Seianus portended their imminent death, were glad in an ill time. Tiberius hauing publickly giuen his neece Agrippina, Germanicus daughter vnto Gn. Domitius, commaunded that the marriage ſhould be ſolemniſed in the citie. He made choiſe of Domitius, as well for the antiquitie of his ſtocke, as neereneſſe in bloud to the Caeſars: for Octauia was his grandmother, and by her, Augustus his vncle.
            
         
         
            
            THE FIFT BOOKE OF THE ANNALES OF CORNELIVS TACITVS.
            
               
                  I. The death of Iulia. Tiberius crueltie increaſeth. His practiſes to make away Nero, and Agrippina.
               
               
                  WHen Rubellius and Fuſius, both of them ſurnamed Geminus, were Conſuls, Iulia Augusta died; being very aged, and of the noble familie of the Claudians; and beſides, into the houſe of the Liuians and Iulians adopted. She was firſt married vnto Tiberius Nero, and had children by him: who being driuen out of his countrey in the warre of Peruſium, and a peace after confirmed betwixt Sext. Pompeius, & the Triumuiri, returned to the citie againe. After that Augustus rauiſhed with her beautie (whether againſt her will or not it is vncertaine) tooke her from her husband, ſhewing himſelfe ſo luſtfull of her, that not giuing her time to be deliuered of her firſt husbands childe, brought her great as ſhe was to his owne houſe. After that ſhe had no iſſue, but being vnited to Augustus bloud, by the mariage of Germanicus and Agrippina, they had nephewes children common to them both. Her behauior was, according to the carriage of auncient times; yet more courteous then women of former ages could well allow; an vntollerable mother, a tractable wife, with the ſubtletie of her husband, and diſſimulation of her ſoone, well medled and compoſed. Her funerals were not ſumptuous, her teſtament long voide. She was praiſed in a funerall oration before the Roſtra, by C. Caeſar her nephewes ſonne, who not long after ſucceeded in ſoueraigntie. But Tiberius omitting no part of his pleaſures, excuſed by letters his abſence from his mothers obſequies, as though he had been hindered by important affaires; and vnder colour of modeſtie, cut off many honorable ceremonies, which the Lords of the Senate had decreed ſhould be done in memory of her; and eſpecially that no diuine ceremonie ſhuld be ordained for her, becauſe (ſaid he) ſuch was her will. And in part of the ſame letters he found fault with ſuch as went about to win womens fauor & good will: therein couertly carping the Conſull Fuſius, a man highly in Augustus grace, & his crafts-maſter in winning of womens fauor, a ieſting mate, & oft accuſtomed bitterly to skoffe at Tiberius; a thing which great potētates keepe long in memory. But now Tiberius began to grow worſe and worſe, & his rule tyranous: for whileſt his mother liued, there was ſome refuge left, becauſe he had a long time accuſtomed to ſhew himſelfe dutifull vnto her; and Seianus durſt not croſſe her: but then hauing as it were the bridle in their owne hands, they brake looſe at once, and letters were ſent againſt Agrippina and Nero; which the common people iudged to haue been ſent before, but kept back by Augusta: for not long after her death they were read in Senate, containing bitter and ſharp words; yet neuer obiected that he had borne armes, or ſtirred any rebellion againſt him, but only vnnatural loues to yong men, and incontinēt life. But againſt his daughter in law he durſt not obiect ſo much, but only her arrogant and prowd ſpeeches, and obſtinate minde. The Senators were ſtroken into a feare and ſilence, vntill ſome few whoſe hopes depended not on honeſt meanes, but made publick calamities occaſion of priuat benefits; demaunded that the matter might be referred to voices:

                  Cotta Meſſallinus ſhewing himſelfe moſt forward with a cruell ſentence. But the other chiefe gentlemen, and eſpecially the magiſtrates were afraid; for although Tiberius had angerly inueighed againſt them, yet he left other things in doubt. There was in the Senat one Iunius Rusticus, choſen by Caeſar to ſet downe the actes of the Senators (and therefore was thought to know beſt his intent and purpoſe) who either by fatall deſtinie (for before he had giuen no token of his conſtancie) or ſubtle deuiſe, forgetting imminent perils, whileſt he feareth vncertainties, thruſteth himſelfe among the Conſuls yet wauering and doubting what to do; and aduiſeth them not to put the matter to deliberation, ſaying: that greateſt matters might be turned in a moment: and that ſome ſpace of time ought to be giuen the old man to repent himſelfe: and the people withall carying Agrippinaes and Neroes images with them, enuiron the Senat houſe, and wiſhing all proſperous fortune to Caeſar, crie, that thoſe letters were falſe; and that the ouerthrow of the Princes houſe was intended againſt the Princes will: and ſo there was nothing concluded that day in preiudice of the parties. Certaine counterfeit iudgements were ſpread abroad againſt Seianus vnder the Conſuls names. Some men ſecretly, and therefore the more ſaucily practiſing their wits as their fancie lead them, which yeelded Seianus farther matter of calumniation, and kindled his anger: ſaying, that the Princes diſpleaſure was nothing regarded: that the commons were at iarre with the Senate: that new orations and new decrees of Senate were heard and read now adayes. What remaineth but to take armes in hand? and chooſe thoſe for their Captaines and Emperours, whoſe images they had followed for their enſignes? Whereupon Caeſar reiterating his iniurious ſpeeches againſt his nephewe and daughter in lawe, and rebuking the people by edict; complained to the Senate, that the imperiall maieſtie had bene openly deluded and skorned through the fraude of one of the Senators: and therefore required that the hearing of the cauſe might be reſerued wholy vnto himſelfe. They conſulted no farther on the matter, but condemned the parties, but not to death, becauſe they were forbidden: and proteſted they were readie to execute reuenge, if the Prince had not hindered them.*
               
                  * There wanteth very much of the ſtory in this place, which hath periſhed through time.
               
            
            
               
                  II. The death of Seianus; of his friends and children. One faineth himſelfe to be Druſus Germanicus ſonne.
               
                  WHether it be a more lamentable caſe to be accuſed for breach of friendſhip, or to accuſe his friend, I can not well iudge: * no mans crueltie or clemencie will I trie *: but free and bearing my ſelfe on my owne conſcience, I will preuent danger. I beſeech you, that you would not haue me in remembrance rather in mourning and ſad then ioyfull manner and cherefull, reckoning me in the number of thoſe which haue eſcaped publick calamities by an honorable end. Then talking now with one, now another, as by chance they were neere vnto him, he ſpent a great part of the day either in entertaining, or taking leaue of them. And hauing many about him, which noted how reſolute & aſſured he was in countenance, no man dreaming any ſuch matter, with a ſword which he had hidden vnder his garments, ſlew himſelfe: and after he was dead, Caeſar vſed no ſuch reprochfull

and iniurious ſpeeches, nor obiected any ſuch heinous matter againſt him, as he did againſt Blaeſus. After this, P. Vitellius, and Pomponius Secundus cauſe was heard. Vitellius they accuſed, that he had offered the cofers of the publicke treaſury whereof he had charge, and the money which was in them for ſouldiers pay, to ſtirrers vp of new broiles. The other Conſidius, who had been once Pretor, accuſed for hauing had great friendſhip and amitie with Velius Gallus, who after that Seianus was puniſhed, fled to Pomponius gardens, as to a place of ſafe refuge: both of them in their diſtreſſe hauing no other comfort left but the conſtancie of their brothers, who became baile for their life. Shortly after, Vitellius through many delaies betwixt hope & feare wearied out, vnder colour of vſing it in his ſtudie, asking for a penknife, lightly prickt a vaine; and ended his life, with griefe and anguiſh of minde. But Pomponius being a Gentleman of a gallant carriage and excellent wit, bearing aduerſe fortune patiently, ouerliued Tiberius. Then was there order taken though the peoples anger were mitigated, and many others pacified with the former puniſhment, that the reſt of Seianus children ſhould be puniſhed. Whereupon they were carried to priſon, the ſonne hauing ſome feeling of the danger which hung ouer his head; but the daughter was ſo ſimple, that ſhe often asked, whither they would leade her, and for what? that ſhe would do no more ſo; and that it was ſufficient to chaſtice her with the rod like a childe. The writers of that time affirme, that becauſe it was neuer heard of before, that a virgin ſhould be put to death according to the cuſtome of the Triumuiri: that ſhe was deflowred by the executioner immediatly before the halter was put about her neck: and both ſtrangled. The bodies of theſe yong and tender children were caſt into the Gemonies, a place where condemned perſons were throwne downe headlong. About the ſame time, Aſia and Achaia were put into a very great fright, though it continued not long, with a rumor that Druſus, Germanicus ſonne, had beene ſeene firſt in the Ilands Cyclades, and afterward in the continent. But it was a yong man of like age, whome ſome of Caeſars freed men by a ſubtile practiſe followed, bearing men in hand, they knew it to be him. Such as knew him not, were drawne by the fame of his name, and the Greekes eſpecially, prone to all new and ſtrange wonders. It was reported he had eſcaped out of priſon and fled to his fathers armie, ſome both faining and beleeuing withall that he would inuade Aegypt or Syria. Youth flocked alreadie to him very cheerefully; many ſignes of loue publickly ſhewen him, feeding themſelues with the preſent vaine hope of what might happen. When as Poppaeus Sabinus had tidings thereof, who was then occupied in the affaires of Macedonia, had charge alſo ouer Achaia: he therefore, were the report true or falſe, to preuent all things, haſtning ouer the Toronaean and Thermaean cut, and paſſing by Euboea, an Iland of the Aegean ſea, and Piraeum a coaſt of Attique, the Corinthian ſhore, and the ſtreights of Iſthmum; by another ſea came to Nicopolis, a colonie of the Romaines: and there after a carefull examination vnderſtandeth who he ſhould be. He ſaid he was M. Silanus ſonne, and that many of his followers hauing forſaken him, he embarked himſelfe, as though he meant to trauell into Italie. Theſe things he ſignified to Tiberius by writing: neither haue we found any thing more of the beginning or end of this matter. Towards the end of the yeere a quarrell of certaine Conſuls burſt forth, which had beene a long time a breeding. For Trio little regarding what enemies he procured, and well practiſed at the barre, vnderhand carped Regulus, as being careles in oppreſſing Seianus miniſters. Regulus, vnleſſe greatly prouoked, of a temperate

and cold humor, did not only anſwere and quaile his fellow Conſull, but brought him within the compaſſe of conſpiracie, and to be examined for it. And although many of the Lords of the Senate intreated them that they woulde ſurceaſe their quarrell, which would grow to their owne ouerthrow; yet they continued their grudge and menaces one againſt the other, vntill they went both out of office.
            
            The end of the fift Booke.
         
         
            
            THE SIXT BOOKE OF THE ANNALES OF CORNELIVS TACITVS.
            
               
                  I. Of Tiberius laſciuious life. Purſuing of Liuia and Seianus. Cotta accuſed.
               
                  
                     CN. Domitius and Camillus Scribonianus entered the Conſulſhip, when Caeſar hauing paſſed the ſtreight betwixt Capreas and Surrentum, coaſted Campania, doubtfull whether he ſhould enter into the citie or not: perhaps becauſe he had otherwiſe reſolued in his minde, though making ſhew he would come: oftentimes approching neere the citie, and to the gardens along Tiber, and returning back againe to the rocks, and deſerts of the ſea, to couer the ſhame of his laſciuious life: which ſo vnſtayedly he wallowed in, that, as the manner of the kings was, he defiled and abuſed noble mens ſonnes vnder age; and not only the welfauored and comelyeſt, but the modeſt and well nurtured, and whoſe modeſt behauiour ſhewed the ſtock from whence they grew, ſerued him for prouocation of filth. Then firſt of all were thoſe vnknowen words of Sellaries and Spintries found out of the filthines of the place, and ſundrie ſorts of ſufferance of abuſe. Some of his ſlaues had charge to ſeeke them out, and bring them to him; alluring ſuch by gifts as ſhewed themſelues willing and readie; and threatning ſuch as refuſed: and if either their neere friends or parents went about to detaine them, they vſed violence, and caried them away perforce; and exerciſed their willes on them as if they had been captiues. But at Rome in the beginning of the yeare ſeuere iudgements were giuen againſt Liuia, and againſt her images, and other memories conſecrated in her honor; as if her lewdnes had then firſt come to light, and had not been alreadie puniſhed. The Scipioes gaue their opinion, that Seianus goods ſhould be taken from the publick treaſury, and put in the Princes priuat cofers. The Silanians and Caſſians were of the ſame opinion, and vrged it with the ſame tearmes, or not greatly changed: when on the ſudden and vnlooked for, Togonius Gallus among thoſe noble men, thruſting himſelfe forward, being but of baſe and low calling, had the hearing giuen him, as a matter to laugh at: for he deſired the Prince to chooſe twentie by lot out of a certaine number of Senators, to gard and defend his perſon with weapon, as oft as he went to the Senate. He beleeued peraduenture that Tiberius had meant good earneſt when he required that one of the Conſuls might conduct and aide him from Caprea to the citie. Tiberius neuertheleſſe accuſtomed ſometimes to interlace ſerious matters with skoffes, thanked the Lords for their good will: yet demaunded whom he might omit? or whom he might chooſe? whether alwaies the ſame, or ſometimes others in their ſteede? ſuch as had borne office, or yong men: priuate perſons or magiſtrates? what a goodly ſight it would be to ſee them take a ſword in hand at the entrie of the councell houſe? neither would he make ſuch accompt of his life, if he were to maintaine it by armes. This he anſwered to Togonius, tempering his words, and perſwaded no farther the diſallowing of that opinion. But he rebuked Iunius Gallio very bitterly, who propounded that the ſouldiers of the gard after their ſeruice was ended, might haue a roome in the fortieth ranke of ſeates: and asked

him as it had been in their preſence, what he had to do with ſouldiers? for whom it was not lawfull either to receiue commaundement or gift, but of the Emperour: or whether he had found out that which Augustus of famous memory could not prouide for? It was rather a matter of diſcord and ſedition, ſought for by one of Seianus followers, to ſtirre vp rude mindes vnder title of honor to corrupt the cuſtome of ſeruice. This was the reward which Gallio receiued for his artificiall flatterie; and anon after was driuen out of the councell houſe, and then out of Italy. And becauſe it was obiected that he could eaſily indure exile, hauing made choiſe of the famous and noble Ile of Lesbos, he was recalled to the citie, and kept in the magiſtrates houſes. In the ſame letters, to the great contentment of the Lords of the Senate, Caeſar touched Sestius Pagonianus, who had been ſometimes Pretor, to the quick: audacious, malignant, and prying into all mens ſecrets; beloued of Seianus, and by him employed to lay ſnares to intrap C. Caeſar: which being once layd open, all the hatred a long time hatched againſt him burſt foorth; and ſentence of death decreed againſt him, if he had not promiſed to bewray the complices. But when Acreus had accuſed Latinius Latiaris hated both alike, it was a moſt gratefull ſpectacle vnto all. Latiaris, as I haue rehearſed before, was the principall agent of circumuenting Titius Sabinus; and then the firſt that receiued puniſhment for it. Among theſe accuſations Haterius Agrippa ſetteth vpon the Conſuls of the laſt yeere, asking them why they are now ſo ſtill, and ceaſe from the accuſations begun the one againſt the other? it was feare, and guilt of conſcience which made them friends; but the Lords of the Senate would not ſo put vp that which they had heard. Regulus ſaid, he would ſtay for a time of reuenge, and that he would proſecute the matter before the Prince. Trio anſwered, that emulation and enuie betwixt collegues were better forgotten; and iniurious words if any had paſſed. Agrippa vrging on ſtill, Sanquinius Maximus one of the Conſuls, deſired the Senators that they would not increaſe the Emperours cares by hunting after matter of diſlike, and that he himſelfe was able to redreſſe theſe things; and ſo Regulus life was ſaued, and Trioes ruine deferred. Haterius was ſo much the more odious, becauſe that withered and vnluſtie with ſleepe, or laſciuious watchings, and through his dull drouſie diſpoſition, nothing fearing the Prince, though cruell, euen in his brothell houſes, and looſeſt laſciuiouſnes, dreamt of nothing but how to ſubuert the nobilitie. After that, Cotta Meſſalinus, the author of euery cruell ſentence, and hated of old, as ſoone as occaſion was offered, was accuſed to haue vttered certaine things againſt Caeſar; and among others, that he was in his ſecret parts both man and woman, and after a banket on the birth day of Augusta among the Prieſts, he tearmed that a Nouendinale ſupper, or belonging to a mortuary: & that repining at M. Lepidus, and L. Arruntius power and authoritie, hauing a ſute depending againſt them for a money matter, he ſhould ſay, that them the Senate would defend, but me my little Tiberius will ſupport. The chiefe of the citie conuicted him without any delay, and purſuing him eagerly, he appealed to the Emperour. And not long after letters were brought from Tiberius, in which in manner of a defence, calling to minde the beginning of friendſhip betweene him and Cotta, and his many good turnes and ſeruices, requeſted that words might not be hardly wreſted, and that the ſimplicitie of table talk might not be imputed to him as a crime. The beginning of theſe letters
of Caeſars was worth the noting, which was this: What I ſhall write vnto you Lords of the Senate, or how I ſhall write, and what I ſhall not write at all, at this time the gods and the goddeſſes confound me worſe then I feele and know my ſelfe daily to periſh, if I know. So far his villanous demeanor turned to his own ſcourge & puniſhment.

And therefore that moſt deepe wiſe man did not ſay without cauſe, that if tyrants minds were laid open, a man ſhould ſee them torne & rent in ſunder: for as the bodie is rent with ſtripes; ſo the mind is tormēted with crueltie, wanton affectiōs, & euil counſels. For neither his great fortune, nor ſolitarie places could defēd Tiberius, but that himſelf confeſſed the torments & puniſhmēt which lay hidden in his breaſt. Then the Senators hauing receiued authoritie to determin of Caecilianus according to their wils, who had vttered manie things againſt Cotta: their iudgmēt was that he ſhould receiue the ſame puniſhmēt, that Aruſeius & Sanquinius had, who were L. Arruntius accuſers. Then the which nothing euer hapned more honorable to Cotta: who being indeed of noble birth, but through riot needie, and infamous for his vices, in honorable puniſhmēt is made equall to Arruntius, a man of ſincere and honeſt life.
            
            
               
                  II. Terentius defences, why he ſhould not be puniſhed like vnto other of Seianus friends.
               
                  QVintus Seruaeus after this, and Minutius Thermus were brought in. Seruaeus had beene Pretor and Gerusanicus companion. Minutius a gentleman, and who in Seianus friendſhip had carried himſelfe modeſtly; and therefore both the more pitied. But Tiberius contrariwiſe blaming them as principall agents, commaunded C. Caestius an old Senator, to report vnto the Senators what he had written vnto him: whereupon Caeſtius vndertooke the accuſation: a miſerable calamitie of thoſe times that the chiefeſt of the Senators, ſome openly, ſome ſecretly, played the part of baſe promooters: and further, no man able to know the ſtranger from the kinſman; nor friends from ſuch as he neuer ſawe before; nor things lately committed from ſuch as through continuance of time were almoſt forgotten. They were accuſed of all they had ſpoken whereſoeuer, either in the place of aſſemblies, or at their table; euerie man making haſte to preuent, and be before another in carriyng of tales; ſome of them to ſaue themſelues; other ſome infected as it were with a diſeaſe gotten by conuerſing with others. But Minutius and Seruaeus were condemned, and their goods giuen the accuſers. Iulius Africanus borne at Santon a towne in Gallia, and Seius Quadratus were drawen into the like miſhap; but the occaſion why, I haue not found. I am not ignorant that the dangers and puniſhment of many haue beene omitted by writers being ouer-wearied with multitude; or fearing leaſt thoſe things ſhould be tedious to the readers, which ſeemed ſuperfluous and lamentable to themſelues in rehearſing. There haue come many things to our eares woorthie the knowledge: although other haue not once touched them. For at the ſelfe ſame time that the reſt colourablie ſeemed to ſhake off the amitie they had with Seianus, M. Terentius a gentleman of Rome, although arraigned for his labour, durſt auouch it, beginning his ſpeech for his defence before the Lords of the Senate in this maner. It would be peraduenture leſſe behoouefull for my eſtate to acknowledge, then denie the crime I am charged with: but hap what hap may, I will confeſſe that I haue beene Seianus friend, and that I deſired ſo to be; and that after I had obtained his friendſhip I was glad of it. I had ſeene him ioynt officer with my father in the gouernment of the Pretorian cohort, and not long after in managing of citie affaires and matters of warre. His kinſmen and allies were aduaunced to honor: as euerie man was inward with Seianus, ſo was he grace by Caeſar. And contrariwiſe, ſuch as were not in his fauour, liued in feare and diſtreſſed with pouertie. Neither do I alleage any man for an example of this: all of vs who were not priuie to his laſt attempts, with the danger of my onely eſtate I will defend. Not Seianus
                     
the Vulſinienſis; but a part of the Claudian and Iulian familie, which by alliance he had entered into; thy ſonne in law Caeſar, thy companion in the Conſulſhip, and him who tooke vpon him thy charge of adminiſtring the common-wealth, we did reuerēce and honour. It is not our parts to iudge of him whom thou doſt exalt aboue the reſt, nor for what conſiderations. To thee the higheſt iudgement of things the gods haue giuen; and vnto vs the glorie of obedience is left. We looke vnto thoſe things which wee ſee before our eies; whom thou doſt inrich; whom thou doſt aduance to honours; who haue greateſt power of hurting or helping; which Seianus to haue had no man will denie. The Princes hidden thoughts, or if he go about any ſecret drift, it is not lawfull to ſound, and dangerous: neither ſhalt thou in the end reach vnto them. Thinke not onely (Lords of the Senat) of Seianus laſt day, but of ſixteene yeeres; in which we did likewiſe fawne vpon and court Satrius and Pomponius: and to be knowen to his freed men and partners, was reckoned as a high fauour. What then? Shall this defence be generall, and not diſtinguiſhed, but a confuſion made of times paſt, and his later actions? No: but let it, by iuſt bounds and termes be diuided. Let the treaſons againſt the common-wealth; the intentions of murdering the Emperour be puniſhed: but as for the friendſhip, duties, pleaſures and good turnes; the ſame ende ſhall diſcharge and quite thee (O Caeſar) and vs. The conſtancie of his oration, one being found to deliuer that, which they all thought in their mindes: preuailed ſo much, that his accuſers by ripping vp their old faults, were puniſhed, either with exile or death.
            
            
               
                  III. The occaſion of making a Prefect at Rome: an examen of ſome of the Sibyls bookes.
               AFter that Tiberius ſent letters againſt Sext. Vestilius ſometime Pretor, and welbeloued of Druſus his brother, & choſen to be one of his garde. The cauſe of diſpleaſure againſt Vestilius; was either bicauſe he had compoſed certaine writings againſt Caeſars vncleane life; or falſly fathered vpon him, gaue credit to the reporters: and therupon being baniſhed the Princes court & familiarity, hauing firſt gone about with his owne olde feeble hand to ſlaie himſelfe bound vp his vaines: and in the meane ſpace hauing entreated the Princes fauour, and receiued arigorous anſwere, did at laſt open them. Then at once were accuſed of treaſon, Annius Pollio, Appius Silanus, Scaurus Mamercus Sabinus Caluiſius, & Vicinianus alſo brought in with his father for companie, all of them well deſcended and ſome in authoritie. The Lords of the Senat quaked for feare; for how manie was there which was not either allied, or a friend of one of thoſe noble men? But Celſus Tribune of the citie-cohort, and then an informer deliuered Appius and Caluiſius from danger. Caeſar deferred Pollioes, Vicinianus, & Scaurus cauſe, that himſelfe might haue the hearing of it with the Senators: hauing giuen out alreadie tokens of heauie diſpleaſure againſt Scaurus. Not ſo much as women but were partakers of danger: and if not attainted for attempting to aſpire to the Empire; yet brought in queſtion for their teares: and Vitia an old woman Fuſius Geminus mother was put to death, bicauſe ſhe bewailed the death of her ſonne. Theſe things were done in Senat. And where the Prince was, the like was practiſed: Veſcularius Atticus, and Iulius Marinus two of his moſt familiar friends, which accompanied him to Rhodes, and at Capreas neuer departed from him, were put to death. Veſcularius was the Meſſenger to and fro when the treacherie was wrought againſt Libo. Marinus was of Seianus counſell when he put Curtius Atticus to death; moſt men being glad to ſee them taken in the ſnare they

laid for others. About the ſame time L. Piſo high Prieſt died a naturall death, which was a rare matter in thoſe times in a man of ſo great nobilitie: He neuer of himſelfe propounded any matter which ſmelled of flatterie or baſe minds; & if he were forced thereto, he vſed great moderation in doing it. His father, as I haue alreadie ſaide, had beene Cenſor; he liued to the age of fowerſcore; hauing in Thrace deſerued the triumphall ornaments. But his greateſt credit roſe in that, that being newly created Prouoſt of the citie, he did gouerne exceeding moderately all the time of his continuall rule: irkeſome through vnwontednes of obedience. For in times paſt when the Kings or Conſuls went out of the citie, leaſt ſhe ſhould be left without gouernment, there was one choſen for a time able to giue euery man right, & prouide for all ſudden accidents. And it is ſaid that Dentres Romulius had the ſame charge giuen him by Romulus; after that Numa Marcius by Tullus Hostilius, and Spurius Lucretius by Tarquinius Superbus. Then that the Conſuls had the charge of committing this office; and a ſhadow of it continueth vnto this day; as oft as the Latine feaſts are folemniſed, one is appointed ouer the reſt to exerciſe the roome of a Conſull. But Augustus in the time of ciuill warres, made Cilnius Maecenas a gentleman, Prouoſt ouer Rome and all Italie. Then being Lord and Maſter of the Empire, by reaſon of the greatnes of the people, and ſlow aide which the lawes affoorded; he choſe out one, of ſuch as had been Conſuls, to bridle the bondmen and ſuch citizens as through audaciouſnes would grow troubleſome, vnleſſe they ſtood in awe. The firſt that receiued that authoritie, but kept it but awhile, was Meſſalla Coruinus, as vnable to diſcharge it. Then Taurus Statilus although he were verie aged, went through it with great commendation. After that Piſo was well liked for the ſpace of twentie yeeres; and by order of the Senat honoured with publick funerals. It was afterward propounded before the Lords of the Senat by Quinctilianus Tribune of the people, concerning the Sibyls booke, which Caninius Gallus one of the fifteene, requeſted might be receiued among other books of the ſame propheteſſe; and demanded it might be ſo eſtabliſhed by decree of Senat: which being giuen by common conſent, Caeſar ſent letters ſomewhat reprehending the Tribune, as ignorant of the old cuſtome by reaſon of his youth; and vpbraided Gallus that being old and practiſed in the ſcience and ceremonies; neuertheles had demanded the opinion of the Senators not fully aſſembled; the author being vncertain, and before the colledge had yeelded their iudgment; neither as the cuſtome was, the verſes hauing been read and waighed by the maiſters. Withall he aduertiſed them, becauſe that many vaine things were publiſhed vnder the name of famous men, that Augustus had vnder penaltie ſet downe a day, within which ſuch bookes ſhould be brought to the citie-Pretor; and that it was not lawfull for any to haue them in their priuat poſſeſſion. The like decree was eſtabliſhed by our predeceſſors alſo; and after that the Capitol was burnt in the ciuill war, their verſes were ſought in Samum, in Ilium, Erythrum; through Affrike alſo, Sicily, and the colonies of Italie, whether they were one or many: the buſines being committed to the Prieſts to diſtinguiſh the true prophecies from the falſe, as neere as might be by the iudgement of man. And then alſo the booke was referred to the examination of the fifteene. When the ſame men were Conſuls, through a dearth of corne and other prouiſions, they grew almoſt to a commotion: and many things for many dayes together were in the Theater more licentiouſly demaunded with great eagernes, then the manner had beene to demaund things of the Emperour. Whereat being moued, he blamed the magiſtrates and Senators that they had not by publike authoritie brideled the inſolencie of the people: and added withall, how farre greater quantitie of corne he had cauſed to be

brought then Augustus, and out of what prouinces. Whereupon a decree of Senate was enacted, to reſtraine the people, according to the auncient ſeueritie, the Conſuls being no leſſe forward to publiſh it: his owne ſilence in the cauſe was not conſtrued to be a point of ciuilitie as he looked it ſhould be, but was imputed to his pride. In the end of that yeare, Geminius, Celſus, Pompeius, Gentlemen of Rome, were put to death for conſpiracies; among which, Geminius through prodigalitie and looſenes of life, and a friend to Seianus, was a man of nothing. And Iulius Celſus a Tribune, looſing the chaine he was bound with at large; then winding it about, and forcing himſelfe a contrary way, brake his owne neck. But Rubrius Fabatus deſpairing of the Roman affaires, and fleeing to the Parthians, and brought back ſafe from the ſtreights of Sicilie by a Centurion, had keepers appointed him, not able to alleage any probable cauſes of his long voiages; yet he eſcaped vnpuniſhed rather through forgetfulnes then clemencie.
            
            
               
                  IIII. Tiberius marrieth his neeces. Vſurers accuſed, and the inconuenience that enſued.
               
                  SEr. Galba, and L. Sulla being Conſuls, Tiberius hauing a long time bethought himſelfe what husbands he ſhould prouide his neeces, whoſe age now came on, made choiſe of L. Caſsius, and M. Vinicius. Vinicius kindred came out of a ſmall towne, himſelfe borne at Calles: but his father and grandfather were Conſuls: the reſt of his kindred were Gentlemen: he was of a milde diſpoſition, and very eloquent. L. Caſsius was deſcended of one of the common people at Rome, but auncient and noble, and brought vp vnder the ſeuere diſcipline of his father; and oftner commended for his courteſie, then induſtrie. To him he giueth Druſilla; to Vinicius Iulia, both Germanicus children: and writeth to the Senate touching that matter, with a light commendation of the yong men. Then hauing yeelded ſome cauſes of his abſence, but very extrauagant, came to matters of greater moment, and the diſpleaſures and diſlikes he had incurred for the common wealth: and requeſted that Macro the Prouoſt, and ſome few of the Tribunes and Centurions, might, as oft as he came to the Senate, enter into the Curia with him. And albeit the Senate made a decree very generall, without preſcribing any number, or qualitie of perſons, he was ſo farre from comming to any publick counſell, that he neuer came ſo much as to the citie; coaſting about it, and for the moſt part in by-wayes, and ſtill auoiding his countrey as much as he could. In the meane ſeaſon, a great rabble of informers roſe vp againſt ſuch vſurers as tooke more for conſideration of their money, then they might by the law made by Caeſar the Dictator, concerning the manner of lending, and holding poſſeſſion within Italie; long neglected heretofore, becauſe the publicke good is leſſe ſet by, then priuate commoditie. Vſury in very deede hath beene an old diſeaſe in the citie; and often a cauſe of ſeditions and diſcords; and for that cauſe hath been reſtrained in auncient and leſſe corrupted times. For firſt it was ordained by the law of the twelue tables, that no man ſhould take aboue one in the hundred; when as before that time, it was as pleaſed the monied men. After that, by a Tribunitian law it was brought vnto halfe one in the hundred; and in the end vſury was wholy forbidden: and many lawes made by the people to cut off all fraud; which often repreſſed, reuiued againe by ſtrange ſleights and deuiſes. But then Gracchus being Pretor, vnto whom the examining of that queſtion fell, conſtrained by the multitude of ſuch as were indangered thereby; propounded the matter before the Lords of the Senate: who

daunted thereat (for there was not one of them free from that fault) craued reſpite of the Prince: he graunted them a yeere and ſixe moneths: within which time, euery man according to the preſcript of law ſhould ſettle his eſtate, and make vp his domeſticall accompts. Hereupon euery man calling in his debts, on a ſudden enſued a great want & ſcarcitie of money; and by reaſon ſo many were condemned, and their goods ſold, all the money ready coined wēt either to the princes, or publick treaſury. Beſides this, the Senat ordained that two parts of the vſurie money ſhould be beſtowed vpō lands in Italie: but the creditors diſliked that, and vrged the paiment of the whole, as a matter impayring the credit of the parties conuented, to goe from their word. So at the firſt there was great running hither and thither, and entreaties: then they flocked about the Pretors tribunall: and thoſe things which were founde for a remedie, as ſelling and buying of ſuch mens goods, turned to a contrarie effect, bicauſe the Vſurers had hoorded vp all their money to buie land. And bicauſe the multitude of ſellers, was cauſe that the value of landes was rated at a verie lowe and vile price: how much the more a man was indebted, the loather he was to ſell. And manie were thruſt out of all they had: and the decaie of their wealth carried their credit and fame headlong after; vntill Tiberius relieued them by putting a About 781250. pound. hundred million ſeſterces in bancke, and lent it for three yeeres ſpace without conſideration or intereſt; if the debtor could giue ſecuritie to the people of Rome in landes double the value of the debt. By that meanes their credit was reſtored, and other particular creditors by little and little found: neither was the buying of landes practiſed according to the forme of the decree of Senat, hotly at the beginning purſued, as almoſt all ſuch things are; but in the ende careleſly neglected.
            
            
               
                  V. C. Caeſar marieth Claudia, daughter vnto M. Silanus: what proofe Tiberius made of Traſullus skill.
               AFter that, the olde feares returne againe, Conſidius Proculus being accuſed of treaſon: who celebrating his birth day not doubting any thing, was drawen to the Curia, and at the ſame time condemned and put to death; and his ſiſter Sancia baniſhed, Q. Pomponius being accuſer; who being of an vnquiet and buſie diſpoſition, pretended he had done this and that, and all to currie fauour with the Prince, thereby to ſteed his brother Pomponius Secundus, who was then in danger. Baniſhment is likewiſe decreed againſt Pompeia Macrina, whoſe husband and father in law, the one of Argos; and the other of Lacedaemon, men of marke and reputation among the Achaeans, Caeſar had alreadie afflicted and brought to ruine. Her father likewiſe a famous gentleman of Rome, and her brother, who had beene Pretor; ſeeing that their condemnation was at hand, ſlewe themſelues. It was imputed vnto them for a fault, that Gn. Magnus made reckoning as of a ſpeciall friend of Theophanes Mytilenaeus their great grandfather: and that the Grecian flatterie after his death had giuen him diuine honour. After theſe Sext. Marius the richeſt man of all Spaine, was accuſed to haue committed inceſt with his daughter, and was caſt healong from the Tarpeian rocke. And little doubt but his exceeding wealth was his ouerthrow: for although his gold mines were confiſcated; yet Tiberius reſerued them for himſelfe: and by much blood ſhedding growing more bloody, commanded al thoſe to be executed which were in priſon, and accuſed of confederacie with Seianus. The butcherie was great in all ſexes, and all ages, noblemen, common people, ſcattered here and there, or gathered into heapes. Neither was it lawfull for neere

kinſmen and friends to be preſent, to bewaile their caſe; nor yet to come oft to ſee them: but there were watches and ſpies on euery ſide, intentiue to prie what lamentation euerie man made; which followed the putrified bodies, vntill they were throwen into the riuer of Tiber. And if any of them were found floting on the water, or driuen to the bankes, no man durſt burne them nor touch them: all familiar ſocietie and intercourſe of humanitie was loſt through feare and violence: and how much crueltie increaſed; ſo far pitie was baniſhed. About the ſame time C. Caeſar bearing his grandfather companie from Capreas, tooke to wife Claudia daughter of M. Silanus, cloking his cruell and bloodie diſpoſition with a counterfeit modeſtie; not once vttering ſo much as a word of the condemning of his mother; the baniſhing of his brothers: but whatſoeuer minde Tiberius had put on, of the like habit he ſhewed himſelfe; and not much differing from him in words. Wherupon a wittie ſaying of the orator Paſſienus was commonly applied to him: That there was neuer better ſeruant then he, nor woorſer maſter. I will not omit Tiberius propheſie of Sergius Galba then Conſull: who hauing ſent for him, and ſounded him of ſet purpoſe with diuers ſpeeches; at laſt in Greeke vttered vnto him this ſentence: And thou Galba at ſometime ſhalt taſte of the Empire. Signifiyng that his rule ſhould be long a comming, and dure but a ſhort time; as learning that skill of the Chaldaeans arte; for attayning of which he had idle time at Rhodes, and Traſullus for his maſter; whoſe cunning he tried by this meanes. As oft as he would conſult with them touching any matter, he went vp to the higheſt part of the houſe with onely one freede man in his companie, vnlearned, but of a ſtrong and able bodie; whom he cauſed to leade him, the way ouer hard and difficult paſſages and broken rockes (for his houſe did hang ouer the rockes) whoſe cunning and arte Tiberius did purpoſe to trie: that in returning backe, if any ielouſie of vanitie or treacherie had entered into his minde, he ſhould throw him headlong into the ſea which was vnder him, leaſt he ſhould bewray his ſecrets. Traſullus being then brought into thoſe rocks, & moouing Tiberius which mooued him many queſtions, & foretelling him verie skilfully future things, and that he ſhould be Emperour; Tiberius asked him farther, whether he had found out the howre of his owne natiuitie; and what ſhould happen to himſelfe that yeere, and that ſame day. Who hauing conſidered the aſpects of the ſtars, and meaſured their diſtances, beganne firſt to doubt; and then to feare: and the more he viewed them; ſo more and more he was ſurpriſed with admiration and feare: and at laſt cried out, that he was readie to fall into moſt doubtfull and imminent danger. Then Tiberius embracing him, reioyced that he had foreſeene his owne dangers, and promiſed he ſhould eſcape them: and taking thoſe things which he had ſaide for oracles, held him afterward among the number of his deereſt friends. When I heare of theſe and the like things, I can giue no certaine iudgement, whether the affaires of mortall men are gouerned by fate and immutable neceſſitie; or haue their courſe and change by chaunce and fortune. For thou ſhalt finde, that as well thoſe which were accounted wiſe in auncient times, as ſuch as were imitators of their ſect, do varie and diſagree therein: ſome do reſolutelie beleeue that the gods haue no care of mans beginning or ending; no, not of man at all. Whereof it proceedeth that the vertuous are toſſed and afflicted with ſo many miſeries; and the vitious and bad triumphe with ſo great proſperities. Contrarilie others are of opnion, that fate and deſtinie may well ſtand with the courſe of our actions; yet nothing at all depend of the planets or ſtars, but proeeede from a connexion of naturall cauſes as from their beginning. And theſe graunt withall, that we haue free choiſe and election what courſe of life to follow; which being once

choſen, we are guided after, by a certaine order of cauſes vnto our end. Neither do they eſteeme thoſe things to be good or bad which the vulgar ſort do ſo call; for many which ſeeme to be oppreſſed with miſerie, are happie if they endure their aduerſitie with conſtancie: and many which flow in wealth, in moſt miſerable eſtate, if they vſe their proſperitie vnaduiſedly. And yet of ſome it may be ſaide, that their deſtinies are knowen at their birth: and if they fal out otherwiſe then hath beene foretolde, it proceedeth of the ignorance of the deceitfull reporter; and ſo the arte is diſcredited; whoſe cleere and euident proofes, former and preſent times haue tried: for by the ſonne of the ſame Traſullus, Neroes Empire was foretold, as in conuenient time it ſhall be declared, bicauſe I will not now digreſſe from my purpoſe.
            
            
               
                  VI. Tiberius crueltie againſt Druſus: the death of Agrippina and others: Iulia, daughter vnto Druſus, is married vnto Rubellius Blandus.
               
               THe ſame men being Conſuls, Aſinius Gallus died; and no man doubting, but for want of taking ſuſtenance; but whether willingly, or of neceſſitie, that is vncertaine. And Caeſar being asked, whether he would ſuffer him to be buried, was not aſhamed to permit it; & further to accuſe chance & fortune, that had taken away the criminall perſon before he had beene openly conuinced; as though that in three yeeres ſpace there wanted time of proceeding to iudgement againſt an old Conſull, and father of ſo many Conſuls. After that, Druſus was made away, hauing ſuſtained himſelfe the ſpace of nine daies with a miſerable foode, by eating the flocks of his bed. Some haue written, that Macro had order ſent him, that if Seianus ſhould attempt to take armes, the yong man ſhould be fetcht out of priſon (for he was kept in the Pallace) and made captaine ouer the people: but becauſe it was incontinently rumored that Caeſar would be reconciled to his daughter in law, and nephew, he ſhewed that he deſired rather crueltie, then be ſory for that he had done: yea and hauing inueighed againſt him after he was dead, obiected, he was looſe of life, hurtfull and dangerous to his, and euilly affected toward the common wealth: and withall commaunded all that to be recited, which he had cauſed day by day to be put in writing, both of his words, and deedes: a thing ſo cruell that nothing more, that he ſhould ſo many yeeres haue appointed ſpies to obſerue his countenance, his lamentation, yea priuat murmurings: and ſcarce credible, that the grandfather could indure to heare it, reade it, and publiſh it, were it not that the letters of Actius the Centurion, and Didymus his freed man did declare the names of ſuch bondſlaues, which had either ſtroken Druſus, or put him in a fright, as he went out of his chamber. Yea the Centurion added his owne words, full of crueltie againſt Druſus, as a matter worthy praiſe; and Druſus anſwere againe as he fainted and drew towards his end: in which, faining as though he had been diſtracted of his wits, wiſhed Tiberius all ill luck and misfortune: and then ſeeing himſelfe paſt all hope of life, curſed him moſt deadly, praying the gods, that as he had ſlaine his daughter in law, his brothers ſonne, and his nephewes, and filled all his houſe with bloud; ſo they would reuenge and puniſh him for an example to his name, his ſtock, predeceſſors, and poſteritie. The Lords of the Senate were troubled with theſe ſpeeches, making ſhew of deteſting them, but they were ſtricken into a feare and admiration; that he, who had been ſo cunning and craftie heretofore in cloking his lewdnes, ſhould now become ſo confident, that (as though the walles were throwne down) he durſt ſhew that his nephew beaten by his Centurion, and ſtrooken by his

ſlaues, ſhould aske for meate in vaine to ſaue his life. This griefe was ſcarſe gone, but the next newes were of Agrippina, whom I thinke ſince Seianus death vntill now liued with hope; and ſeeing that crueltie was no whit remitted, willingly ended her life; vnleſſe that famiſhed for want of ſuſtenance, it was falſely giuen out ſhe died that death of her ſelfe. For Tiberius layde grieuous crimes to her charge, accuſing her of vncleanes of life; and that Aſinius Gallus was the adulterer; and that ſeeing him dead, ſhe loathed any longer to liue. But in very deede Agrippina not contented with reaſon, and greedy of rule, taking vpon her cares fit rather for men then women, had ſhaken off all vices incident to her owne ſexe. She died the ſelfeſame day that two yeeres before Seianus died; which Caeſar thought worthy of record; and vaunted that ſhe had neither been ſtrangled, nor throwne headlong from the Gemonies. For this he had thanks giuen him by the Senate; and order taken that the fifteenth Kalends of Nouember, which was the day they both died, ſome gift ſhould be offered vp to Iupiter. Not long after Cocceius Nerua, who was continually at the Princes elbow; a man very expert in diuine and humane lawes; being in perfect diſpoſition of body, reſolued with himſelfe to die: which when Tiberius vnderſtood, he went to viſit him, ſate by him, and inquired the cauſes of his intention, and intreated him; confeſſing at laſt that it would be a burden to his conſcience, and a diſcredit, if the chiefeſt of his friends ſhould without cauſe of death ſhew himſelfe weary of life. But Nerua diſliking his ſpeech, would take no more ſuſtenance. Thoſe which beſt knew his meaning gaue out, that deepely ſeeing into what calamities the common wealth was like to fall into, moued with anger and feare, whileſt his credit was vntouched, and his perſon vnattempted, would end his life with that honeſt death. Agrippinaes ruine drew with it (which is ſcarſe credible) Plancinaes deſtruction. She had beene once wife vnto Gn. Piſo, and reioyſed openly at Germanicus death; and when Piſo was ſlaine, ſhe was ſaued no leſſe by Augustaes prayers, then ill will ſhe bare Agrippina. As ſoone as hatred and fauour failed, right tooke place; and being accuſed of knowen crimes with her owne hand receiued rather late then vndeſerued puniſhment. Among other griefes in a dolefull and ſad citie, this was one; that Iulia, daughter vnto Druſus, once Neroes wife, married againe into Rubellius Blandus familie, whoſe grandfather Tiburtes a gentleman of Rome moſt men knew. In the end of this yeare, the death of Aelius Lamia was celebrated with funerals proper to a Cenſor, who at laſt being diſcharged of the gouernment of Syria which he had in ſhew only, was made gouernor of the citie. He was deſcended of a noble ſtock, and was a ſtrong liuely old man; and the gouernment of the prouince denied him, augmented his woorth. Then Flaccus Pomponius Propretor of Syria being dead, Caeſars letters were recited, in which he complained, that if there were any notable man, and fit to rule an armie, he refuſed the charge: and therefore he was forced through that neceſſitie to intreate ſuch as had beene Conſuls, to take vpon them the rule of the prouinces; forgetting that Arruntius had beene hindered ten yeeres from going into Spaine. The ſame yeere died M. Lepidus, of whoſe moderation and wiſedome I haue ſpoken ſufficiently in other bookes; and his nobilitie needeth no farther proofe: for the Aemilian family hath brought foorth many good citizens; and although ſome of them haue beene of corrupt manners, yet liued in good and honorable eſtate.
            
            
               
               
                  VII. A Phoenix ſeene in AEgypt: how Getulicus eſcaped Tiberius crueltie.
               WHen Paullus Fabius and L. Vitellius were Conſuls, after manie ages were paſt, the birde Phoenix came into AEgypt, and miniſtred matter to the moſt learned of the countrey, and alſo Greekes, of diſputing many things concerning that miracle. Of which it ſeemeth good vnto me to laye downe ſuch things as they agree of, and manie which reſt doubtfull; yet notwithſtanding worthie the knowledge. That that birde is conſecrated to the ſunne; and that it differeth in the beake, and varietie of feathers from other birds; all do accord which haue deſcribed her ſhape and forme: but of the number of her yeeres there are diuers reports. The common opinion is that ſhe liueth fiue hundred yeeres; ſome affirme that ſhe liueth a thouſand foure hundred threeſcore and one yeere. And the firſt of theſe kindes of birdes flew to the citie called Heliopolis, with a great multitude of other birdes with her, woondering at her new ſhape in Seſostris time, after that in Amaſis and Ptolemaeus raigne, which of the Macedonians was the third King of Aegypt. But antiquitie is darke and obſcure. Betwixt Ptolemaeus raigne and Tiberius there were ſcarſe two hundred and fiftie yeeres. Whereupon ſome thought that this was no true Phoenix, nor come from the land of Arabia; and that it had nothing of that which antiquitie hath attributed and confirmed to be in that kind. For when they haue ended the number of their yeeres, and that their ende approcheth, they build their neſt in their countrey, and in it caſt ſeede of generation; of which a yong one doth riſe; whoſe firſt care is being growen to ripenes, to burie the olde. And that not at all aduentures, but hauing taken vp a certaine waight of the ſtone Murrha, and tried the carrieng of it a long iourney: when ſhe perceiueth her ſelfe able to indure and carrie ſuch a burthen, and to accompliſh the voiage, ſhe lifteth vp her fathers bodie, and carrieth it to the altar of the ſunne, and there doth burne and ſacrifice it. Theſe things are vncertaine, and fabulouſly augmented. But that that birde is ſeene ſometimes in Aegypt is not doubted. But murders continuing at Rome, Pomponius Labeo, whom as I haue ſaid, was gouernor of Moeſia, by cutting his vaines, let out with his blood his life, and Paxaea his wife followed his example. The feare they had of dying by the hand of the hangman, did cauſe them thus ſo readily to kill themſelues: bicauſe ſuch as were condemned, loſt their goods and wanted buriall: but their bodies which ſlew themſelues were buried, and their teſtaments ſtood good; which was the gaine and reward of making haſte. But Caeſar ſent letters vnto the Senat, declaring it to be a cuſtome among the auncients, that when they intended to breake off friendſhip with any, they forbad them their houſe, and that then the friendſhip ended, which he had done to Labeo: who blamed for euill gouernment in the Prouince, and other matters, couered his fault by accuſing others; vainely putting his wife in feare, who was out of danger, though not without fault. After this Mamercus Scaurus was accuſed againe, of a noble houſe, and a great orator; yet of reprochfull life. His friendſhip had with Seianus did nothing hurt him; but the hatred which Macro bare him was his ouerthrow; who practiſed the ſame artes that Seianus had done, but more couertly. The accuſation was an argument of a Tragedie written by Scaurus, contayning verſes which might be wreſted againſt Tiberius. But Seruilius and Cornelius his accuſers obiected againſt him, that he had abuſed his bodie with Liuia, and offered magicall ſacrifices. Scaurus as a thing worthie of the auncient AEmilian familie, preuenteth his condemnation

by killing himſelfe at the incouragement of his wife Sexitia; who was both an encourager and partaker of his death. Notwithſtanding if occaſion were giuen he puniſhed the accuſers likewiſe: as Seruilius and Cornelius famous by the death of Scaurus, bicauſe they had taken money of Varius Ligur to deſiſt from the accuſation, were perpetually baniſhed into certaine Ilands. And Abudius Ruſo once Acdile, whileſt he went about to procure danger vnto Lentulus Getulicus, vnder whom he had charge of a legion, bicauſe he had purpoſed to marrie his daughter to Seianus ſonne, was condemned without accuſation, and driuen out of the citie. Getulicus at that time had charge ouer the legions of higher Germanie, and had gotten exceeding loue for his clemencie and ſmall ſeueritie; and of the next army welbeloued by meanes of L. Apronius his father in law. Whereupon the conſtant report was, that he was ſo bould as to write vnto Caeſar: 
                  That the affinitie betwixt him and Seianus was begun, not of his owne motion and deſire, but through Tiberius counſell; and that as well he as Tiberius might be deceiued; and that the ſelfe ſame errour could not be to him alone dangerleſſe, and to others vtter ruine; for his part that his loyaltie was truſtie and ſure, and ſo would continue; if ſnares had not beene laide to intrap him; that he would accept of a ſucceſſor in his charge no otherwiſe than of a meſſenger of death: and therefore that they ſhould ſtrike as it were an agreement, by which the Prince ſhould be maſter of the reſt, and that he would keepe and hold the Prouince. Although theſe things ſeeme verie ſtrange; yet were they beleued, bicauſe he alone of all Seianus lieſmen eſcaped without danger, and continued in great fauour and grace. The reaſon why, was, bicauſe Tiberius thought with himſelfe being now aged and hated of all men, that his eſtate would rather continue by fame, then force.
            
            
               
                  VIII. The Parthians complained on Artabanus; in whoſe roome Tiberius placeth Phrahates: Pharaſmanes gaineth a battell againſt Orodes King of Armenia.
               WHen C. Ceſtius, and M. Seruilius were Conſuls, certaine noble men of Parthia came to Rome, without the priuitie of Artabanus their King. He for feare of Germanicus was faithfull to the Romans, and iuſt towards his ſubiects: but after Germanicus death became proude towards vs, and cruell towards his ſubiects; confident by reaſon of proſperous ſucceſſe in warres had againſt his borderers; and deſpiſing Tiberius as weake, old, and vnfit for warres; and greedy alſo of Armenia, into which after the death of King Artaxia he put his eldeſt ſon Arſaces as gouernor, iniuring them with contumelious ſpeeches. Then ſent to redemaund the treaſurie and riches left in Syria and Cilicia by Vonones; and withall, vaine-gloriouſly bragged and threatned that he would inuade and conquer the ancient bounds and limits of the Perſians and Macedonians, and recouer all that had beene poſſeſſed by Cyrus and Alexander. But the principall author and perſwader of ſending ſecret meſſengers to Rome was Sinnaces, a man both noble and wealthie; and next vnto him Abdus an Eunuch: a matter of no diſgrace among the Barbarians, nor barre to credit and authoritie. Theſe two drawing the principall noble men of the countrey to them, becauſe they could haue none of the blood of the Arſacides to be their King; moſt of them being ſlaine by Artabanus, or vnder yeeres; demaunded Phrahates King Phrahates ſonne which was at Rome: for ſaide they, there needed no more but the name and conſent of Caeſar, and one of the blood of Arſacis to ſhew himſelfe vpon the bankes of Euphrates. That did Caeſar deſire and

prouided for him accordingly with preparations and neceſſaries to ſeat him in his fathers kingdom, holding ſtill his ſecret drift by entertayning forraine countries, by ſleights and pollicie in warre, to keepe all quiet at home. In the meane ſpace Artabanus vnderſtanding what was wrought againſt him, at the firſt was ſlow, and lingered for feare; then boyled with deſire of reuenge. For barbarous people count temporizing and delay, as baſe and ſeruile; and to goe through preſently their deſeignments, a royall pointe. Yet profit tooke place, and thereupon ſending for Abdus vnder colour of amitie to a banket, gaue him a lingring poiſon; and entertained Sinnaces with fained friendſhip and gifts, and buſied him in other imployments. But Phrahates arriued in Syria, and laying aſide the Romans manner of liuing, in which he had beene ſo manie yeeres nouriſhed, giuing himſelfe to the Parthian vſage and vnable to brooke it, fell ſicke, and died. Yet Tiberius held on his determination, and choſe Tiridates one of the ſame ſtocke, and an enimie to Artabanus; and incited Mithradates Hiberus to recouer Armenia, and reconciled him to his brother Pharaſmanes, which then poſſeſſed that Empire; and maketh L. Vitellius general ouer all this preparation of the Orient. I am not ignorant what a ſiniſter report ranne of him in the citie, & with what infamous matters he was touched: yet in gouerning of the Prouinces he demeaned himſelfe according to the vertue of auncient times. But returning frō thence, through the feare of Caeſar, & familiarity of Claudius being changed into a baſe & abiect ſeruilitie, became a patterne vnto poſteritie of ſhamefull flatterie; and ſo his firſt vertues gaue place to his latter vices; and the vertuous acts of his youth, his infamous old age defaced. Of theſe pettie Kings Mithradates firſt induced Pharaſmanes to further his enduours by pollicie and force: and corrupters were found which for great ſums of gold entiſed Arſaces miniſters to kil him; and through Hiberus great power they entered Armenia, and tooke the citie Artaxata. When Artabanus vnderſtood of theſe dealings, he furniſheth his ſon Orodes with things neceſſarie to reuenge, and giueth him the ſtrength of the Parthians; and diſpatcheth others to leuie hired ſouldiers to giue him aide. On the other ſide, Pharaſmanes drewe the Albanians and Sarmates to his partie, whoſe Princes (called Sceptruchi) hauing receiued gifts on both ſides, according to the manner of their countrey, gaue aide to both ſides. But the Hiberi being maſters of the paſſages, thruſt ſuddēly the Sarmatian forces on the Armenians by the Caſpian way. But thoſe which came from the Parthians were eaſily driuen backe, bicauſe the enimie had ſhut vp all the other paſſages, one excepted; which was betwixt the ſea and the hils of the Albani, which could not ſerue their purpoſe, by reaſon it was ſommer: for the Eaſterne windes fill vp the ſhallow foordes and the ſhore: the South winter winde keepes backe the flood, and leaues the ſhallow ſhore bare and naked. In the meane ſpace Pharaſmanes hauing reenforced his ſtrength, challengeth Orodes to fight, being deſtitute of allies and vnfurniſhed of men: and if he refuſed or ſhifted off, he braued him vnder his noſe; and hard by his campe, waſted his ſtouer; and often compaſſed him about as if he had beſieged him: till the Parthians not accuſtomed to endure ſuch brauados, came about their King, and demaunded battell. Their ſtrength conſiſted in their horſemen, and Pharaſmanes in footmen and horſemen both. For the Hiberi and Albani inhabiting mountanous places, were better accuſtomed to hardnes and trauell. They ſaie they came out of Theſſalia at ſuch time as Iaſon, after he had carried away Medea and begotten children by her, returned to the emptie court of AEeta, and vnhabited Colchos: and reporte manie woonders of his name, and the oracle of Phryxus. Neither dare any man ſacrifice a ram, becauſe it is thought that Phryxus was carried on one, be it, this ram were a beaſt or a ſhipe

which bare thoſe armes. The battell pitched in order on both ſides: the Parthian put his ſouldiers in minde of the Empire of the Eaſt; and the renowned nobilitie of the Arſacides: and contrariwiſe debaſed Hiberus as ignoble, and flying to mercenarie ſouldiers. Pharaſmanes on the other ſide, declared that he was neuer yet ſubiect to the Parthian rule; and that the greater their enterpriſe, the greater their glorie if they were the conquerers: or if they turned their backes, the greater diſhonour, infamie and danger: withall he ſhewed them his owne hoſt dreadful, and the Medians painted with gold: on his owne ſide, men; on the other, bootie. Among the Sarmates the Captaine onely was not heard; but euerie man incouraged each other not to abide the ſhot, but preuent the enimie ruſhing in couragiouſly to handie ſtrokes. Diuers manners of fight were then ſeene in that battell: when as the Parthian accuſtomed with like skill to flie and follow, ſeuered his ſquadrons to make way for the arrowes to light. The Sarmates laying aſide their bowes which ſteeded them but a ſhort time, ran in to the enimie with their ſwordes and lances; ſometimes were in the front, ſometimes in their backes, as if they had beene horſemen: ſometimes cloſe ranked with their bodies and weapons thruſt backe, and bare down the enimie, and were borne downe againe. The Albani alſo and Hiberi behaued thēſelues in like maner; now catching hold of the enimie; now thruſting him down; the battell growing doubtfull on their ſide; the horſemen and footemen preſſing in and giuing them many wounds. Whileſt this fight thus continued, Pharaſmanes and Orodes, each incouraging his ſtouteſt, or comforting thoſe which beganne to ſtagger and wauer, being in ſight the one of the other: and therefore knowing the one the other, with a great clamor, armour and horſes ranne one againſt another; but more fiercly Pharaſmanes: for he wounded his enimie through the headpeece: yet being carried away with his horſe, was not able to redouble his ſtroke; the ſtowteſt of his followers preſently defending the wounded. Neuertheleſſe, a rumor falſly beleeued that he was ſlaine, appaled the Parthians, & cauſed them to yeeld the victorie.
            
            
               
                  IX. Sinnaces rebelleth against Artabanus King of Parthia: Tiridates is put in his place.
               IMmediatly after, Artabanus gathering together his whole ſtrength out of all parts of his countrey, purſueth a reuenge on the Hiberi, ſaying that they had the better of the battell, through skilfulnes of place; and therefore would neuer deſiſt; if Vitellius by aſſembling the legions, had not giuen out that he meant to inuade Meſopotamia, thereby ſtriking him into a feare of the Roman forces. Then Artabanus leauing Armenia, left all good fortune behinde him, Vitellius entiſing his ſubiects to abandon their King, as one in peace cruell, and in warres vnfortunate. Sinnaces whom, as I haue ſaid, was vtter enemie to Artabanus, had ſecret conference with Abdageſes his father and others: and by continuall ouerthrowes and loſſes which they ſuffered, drew eaſily vnto him ſuch as were moſt readie to reuolt: they alſo repairing to him by little and by little, which were ſubiect vnto Artabanus rather for feare then good will: very glad they had found captaines to follow, tooke courage vnto them. By this time Artabanus had no refuge left, ſaue only a few ſtrangers for the gard of his perſon, baniſhed from their owne dwellings: a people not vnderſtanding what is good, nor hauing a care of that which is naught; but hired for gaine, are inſtruments of what miſchieſe ſoeuer. Accompanied with theſe, he haſtneth his flight to the frontiers of his countrey, ioining vpon Scythia; hoping

for ſuccour, becauſe he was allied to the Hircanians and Carmanians; hauing a hope likewiſe, that the Parthians alwaies indifferently bent to the abſent, and vnconſtant and fickle to the preſent, would in the meane ſpace change their minde, and receiue him againe. But Vitellius ſeeing Artabanus fled, and the minds of the countrey people enclined to a new King, incouraging Tiridates to take that which was offered; conducted the legions and allies to the banks of Euphrates. And as they were ſacrificing and offering according vnto the cuſtome of the Romans, Suouetaurilia, a Boare, Ramme, and Bull; the others made readie a Horſe, to pacifie the god of that riuer: the inhabitants of Euphrates brought word, that without any great raine, of his owne accord the riuer was exceedingly riſen; and withall, that the white froth made circles as it were in forme of a diademe, which was a preſage of a proſperous paſſage: but ſome did interpret them more ſubtilly, gathering thereby that the beginnings of their attempts ſhould be luckie; but haue ſmall continuance, becauſe that there was more credit to be giuen to thoſe things which were portended by the earth and heauen; and that the qualitie and nature of riuers was vnconſtant, and running away; and would no ſooner ſhew a token of good luck, but take it away againe: but hauing made a bridge with veſſels, and paſled ouer his armie, the firſt which came to the camp was Ornoſpades, with many thouſand of horſemen. This Ornoſpades once a baniſhed man, brought no ſmall ayde to Tiberius when he made warre in Dalmatia, and for that ſeruice was made citizen of Rome. After this, entering anew into the kings fauour, he made him ruler of all that countrey which lieth betweene two famous riuers, Euphrates, and Tigris; and thereof tooke the name of Meſopotamia. Not long after Sinnaces augmented his forces, and Abdageſes the ſtay of that ſide ioyned vnto them the wealth and preparation of the king. Vitellius thinking it inough only to haue ſhewen the Romās power, aduertiſed Tiridates and the chiefe nobles of Parthia, but eſpecially Tiridates; that he would alwaies haue in minde as things worth remembrance, Phrahates his grandfather, Caeſar his bringer vp; the nobles to be dutifull to their king; ſhew a reuerence vnto vs; and euery man to haue a care of his credit, and fidelitie: and from thence turned back with the legions into Syria. I haue ioyned together things done in two ſommets, to recreate the minde of the reader, wearied with domeſticall aduerſities. But Tiberius although three yeeres were paſt and gone ſince the death of Seianus, could not be appeaſed neither by time, nor prayers, no nor by puniſhing his fill (things wont to mollifie other men) but would puniſh vncertaine and ſtale things gone and paſt, as manifeſt offences, and newly committed. Whereupon Fulcinius Trio fearing this dealing, and not able to indure the accuſers which were now bruing matter againſt him; in his laſt will and teſtament compoſed many cruell things againſt Macro, and certaine of the chiefe of Caeſars freed men: obiecting againſt himſelfe, that he had a fickle and vnconſtant head through age, and that by his cōtinuall abſence he differed little from a baniſhed man. Which things being concealed by Trios heires, Tiberius commaunded publickly to be recited; ſhewing thereby patience in another mans libertie, and ſmall regard of his owne infamie: or elſe becauſe he was ignorant of Seianus villanies vntill that time; and content that all things howſoeuer they were ſpoken, ſhould come to light, and haue the truth knowne (which flattery often hindereth) rather to his owne ſhame and reproch, then not at all. The ſame time Granius Martianus a Senator, being accuſed of treaſon by C. Gracchus, ſlew himſelfe. Tatius Gratianus likewiſe who had been Pretor, and condemned to die by the ſame law. Not vnlike deaths vnto the former had Trebellienus Rufus, and Sext. Paconianus: for Trebellienus killed himſelfe with

his owne hands; and Paconianus was ſtrangled in priſon, becauſe he had there compoſed certaine verſes againſt the Prince. Tiberius did not receiue theſe newes, deuided from Italie by ſea, or by meſſengers a farre off, as he was wont to do; but neere vnto the citie, where he might the ſame day or the next morning, anſwere the Senators letters, as it were looking vpon the bloud of the citizens, flowing in their houſes; and the hand of the executioners. In the end of this yeere, Poppaus Sabinus gaue vp his ghoſt; a man of meane parentage, yet through the fauour of Princes had beene Conſull and triumphed: and gouernor ouer the greateſt prouinces foure and twentie yeeres: not for any excellent skill that was in him, yet able to diſcharge the office, and no more.
            
            
               
                  X. The Clites rebell againſt Archelaus King of Cappadocia. Tiridates King of Parthia his conquests. Artabanus being recalled, driueth out Tiridates.
               
               
                  QVintus Plautius, and Sext. Papinius were Conſuls the yeere following. This yeere the people of Rome were ſo inured to calamities, that they thought it not hard dealing that L. Aruſeius and others were put to death: but they were greatly diſmayed to ſee Vibulenus Agrippa a gentleman of Rome immediatly after the accuſers had ended their oration in the Curia, to draw poiſon out of his boſome, and drinke it: and being fallen downe and yeelding vp his ghoſt, yet to be in all haſte caried by the ſergeants to priſon, and already halfe dead, incontinētly to be ſtrangled. No not Tigranes, who had been ſometimes King of Armenia, but then arraigned, could with his royall title eſcape the ſame puniſhment that was inflicted vpon bare citizens. C. Galba ſometime Conſull, and two of the Blaeſi died of a voluntarie death. Galba, bicauſe by Caeſars hard & rigorous letters he was forbidden to caſt lots for the gouernment of the prouince: the Blaeſi, becauſe that the prieſthoodes which were deſtined vnto their houſe whileſt it was in proſperitie; and now being decayed deferred, and beſtowed vpon others when they were vacant; which they conſtrued as a prognoſticate of death, and therefore did execute it themſelues. Aemilia Lepida, whom as I haue before told you, was married vnto yong Druſus, charging him with diuers crimes, although ſhe were moſt lewde and wicked, yet eſcaped ſcotfree and vnpuniſhed whileſt Lepidus her father liued; but afterwards ſhe was conuinced of manifeſt adulterie with one of her bondmen: and therefore laying aſide all defence, ended her life with her owne hands. At the ſame time the Clites, being a people of Cappadocia, and ſubiect to Archelaus, becauſe they were according vnto our cuſtome conſtrained to bring in the value of their yeerely reuenewes, and pay tributes, fled to the hill Taurus; and there by the ſtrong ſite of the place defended themſelues againſt the weake forces of their King; vntill M. Trebellius Lieutenant ſent thither by Vitellius Lord preſident of Syria, with foure thouſand legionaries, and certaine choiſe ayd-ſouldiers, had compaſſed and enuironed with engins and works two hils which the barbarians poſſeſſed, the leſſer called Cadra, the other Dauara; killing thoſe which durſt iſſue out with the ſword, and forcing the reſt to yeeld for want of water. But Tiridates ayded by the Parthians, recouered Nicephorium, and Anthemuſias, and other townes, which lying in Macedonia, yet are called by Greeke names: and Halum, and Artemita, townes of Parthia, ſtriuing who had beſt cauſe to reioyce. Artabanus being odious vnto them for his crueltie, as brought vp among the Scythians: and hoping that Tiridates would be courteous and gentle, as trained vp and faſhioned after the Romaine behauiour

and education. The Seleucians vſed great flatterie: their citie is very ſtrong, enuironed with walles, and not corrupted with barbarous faſhions, but retained ſuch as their founder Seleucus gaue them. Their manner is to chooſe three hundred either for wealth, or wiſedome, and of them make as it were a Senate. The people kept their part in gouernment, and as long as they agree among themſelues the Parthian they feare not, but falling to iarres and contentions, whileſt each ſide calleth for aide againſt his aduerſary: he who is called by one of the parties, maſtereth both. That hapned of late vnder Artabanus, who for his owne commoditie, made the people ſubiect to the chiefe gentlemen: where the people beare the ſway, that gouernment approcheth neereſt vnto libertie: but the rule of a few is neereſt vnto the will and pleaſure of a King. When Tiridates was come among them, they honored him with all thoſe inuentions which Kings had been honored with in times paſt, and with ſuch as later ages haue more abundantly inuented. Withall, they powred out many reprochfull ſpeeches againſt Artabanus; conſeſſing that he was indeede deſcended of the Arſacides on the mothers ſide, but in other points nothing ſutable. Tiridates committed the gouernment of the Seleucians to the diſcretion of the people; then conſulting what day he ſhould be crowned, receiued Phrahates and Hieroes letters, which had two the ſtrongeſt gouernments of that kingdome, intreating him that he would defer it for ſome ſmall time, which to ſatisfie thoſe great men he yeelded vnto. In the mean time he went to Creſiphon the royall ſeare of the kingdom, & perceiuing that they prolonged from one day to another, Surena with the good liking of many, in a great aſſembly crowned Tiridates, according to the cuſtome of the countrey. And if he had out of hand entered farther within the countrey, and other nations, thoſe lingerers had been put out of all doubt, and all yeelded obedience vnto one. But ſtaying too long at the Caſtell whither Artabanus had conueyed his money and his concubines, he gaue him time to leape back from their agreements. For if Phrahates and Hiero and ſome others came not at the day appointed to the coronation, ſome for feare, and ſome for malice and hate to Abdageſes, who then poſſeſſed the new King, and was the only fauorit in Court, turned to Artabanus, whom they found in Hyrcania meanely and euilfauoredly attired, killing with his bow foode for his ſuſtenance. At the firſt, he was greatly afraid, as though ſome traine had been laid to intrap him, but when they had giuen him their credit and faith, that their comming was to reſtore him to his kingdome, his ſpirits were reuiued, and inquireth what ſudden change had hapned. Then Hiero finding fault with Tiridates, ſaid, that he was but a child, and that the Arſacides gouerned not the kingdome, but the vaine name and title was in an vnwarlike perſon, ſoftly and tenderly brought vp among ſtrangers, & that Abdageſes was he which ruled and commaunded all. Artabanus knowing of old what it was to rule, perceiued well that thoſe which found falſhood in friendſhip, diſſembled not: and therefore making no longer delay then he could aſſemble the Scythians forces & aid, ſetteth forward with al ſpeede to preuent the wiles of his enemies, and keepe his friends from ſlipping back: yea, he did not ſo much as wipe off the filth and vncleanes of his bodie, becauſe he would moue the common people to compaſſion. There was no ſubtletie, no praier, nor ought elſe forgotten, whereby he might draw the doubtful to him; or confirme & aſſure the willing & readie. He came then with a ſtrong power vnto the places adioyning to Seleucia, when as Tiridates ſtroken into a feare with the fame and perſon of Artabanus, was diſtracted in minde, whether he ſhould encounter him, or draw out the warre by lingering. Such as deſired battell and quick worke, perſwaded that the enemie was diſperſed, & ſtragled, and wearied with their long iourney, and ſcarſe reſolued to obey Artabanus being ſo lately traitors

and enimies vnto him, though now his ſupport & aid. But Abdageſes thought it beſt to returne into Meſopotamia, that hauing the riuer as a defence betweene him & the enimie; calling in the meane ſpace, the Armenians & Elymaei, and the reſidue which were behind them; and their forces augmēted with allies & friends, & ſuch as the Romane captaine would ſend them; then to trie the chance of war. That aduiſe preuailed, bicauſe of Abdageſes authoritie, & Tiridates rawnes in matters of danger: yet that retiring differed not much frō fleeing: the Arabians firſt leading the dance, the reſt drawing to their houſes, or to Artabanus camp; vntill Tiridates returning backe into Syria with a ſmall company, acquited them all of the infamie of treaſon.
            
            
               
                  XI. Tiberius repaireth with his owne charges part of Rome which was burnt: how Macro wonne C. Caeſars fauour.
               THe ſame yeere Rome was greatly damnified with fire; that part of the Cirque which ioyned vnto the hill Auentine, and al the buildings alſo vpon Auentine, being waſted & conſumed to aſhes; which loſſe Caeſar conuerted to his glory by giuing the owners out of his purſe as much as the loſſe of their houſes and buildings came vnto, which munificence amounted to About 781250. pound. a hundred millions of ſeſterces; which was ſo much the more acceptable to the people, bicauſe that in his owne buildings he was alwaies moderate. Neither had he euer made aboue two publicke buildings, the one a Temple to Augustus; the other the ſtage of Pompeius Theater: which being finiſhed, yet he left vndedicated; either as deſpiſing ambitiō, or by reaſon of his age. And to make an eſtimate of euery mans loſſe, Tiberius fower ſons in lawe were choſen, Gn. Domitius, Caſsius Longinus, M. Vinicius, and Rubellius Blandus, & P. Petronius ioyned with them by the Conſuls appointment: euery man inuenting newe honours for the Prince, as his wit & capacity would giue him leaue: which whether he accepted or refuſed, was vncertaine, by reaſon of his death which followed ſhortly after. For not long after, the laſt Conſuls in Tiberius raign, G. Acerronius, & C. Pontius began their charge, when Macroes power & credit was growen ouer great, which he increaſed more & more with C. Caeſar, although before he was neuer negligent therin. And after Claudiaes death (who as I haue alreadie ſaid was married vnto that Caeſar) he egged and perſwaded his owne wife Ennia, to allure & draw the yoong man to her loue, & intangle him vnder promiſe of marriage, as one which would do whatſoeuer, to laie hold on the ſoueraigntie. For although he were of a turbulent and hot ſpirit; notwithſtanding he had as it were ſucked out of his grandfathers boſome the arte of cunning diſſembling. Tiberius knew this verie well, and therefore was not reſolued which of his nephewes he ſhould firſt make ſucceſſor to the ſtate. Of which the one was Druſus ſonne, neereſt vnto him in blood, & whom he tendered beſt; but was vnder age: and Germanicus ſonne the other, in the flower of his youth, and of the people welbeloued; & therefore the woorſe liked of his grandfather. And bethinking himſelfe of Claudius, ſeeing he was of ſtayed and ſetled yeeres, and deſirous of learning; yet altered his deliberation, bicauſe he was weake and ſlender witted. And yet if he ſhould ſeeke for a ſucceſſor out of his houſe, he feared leaſt the memorie of Augustus, & the name of Caeſars ſhould be had in reproch and contempt. For he was not ſo carefull to winne the fauour of the time preſent, as ambitious of fame with poſteritie. But in the end irreſolute what to conclude, and growing weake and feeble of bodie, that which was out of the compaſſe of his power he committed to fate: hauing notwithſtanding caſt out ſpeeches, whereby it might be perceiued that he had a care of things to come: for not going about the buſh, but in plaine termes he vpbraied Macro, that he turned his backe to the Weſt, and looked alwaies toward the ſun-riſing. And hapning by chāce that ſome ſpeech was had of L. Sulla, whom C. Caeſar
                  
was wont to ſcoffe & laugh at: Tiberius foretold him that he ſhould haue all his vices, but not ſo much as one of his vertues. And withall, imbracing the yongeſt of his nephewes with weeping teares; the other looking on with an enuious eye, ſayd vnto him; thou ſhalt kill him, and another ſhall kill thee. Yet his ſicknes growing more and more vpō him, he omitted not any part of his wāton & vncleane luſts, counterfeiting and putting on a face of courage euen in his weaknes and infirmitie: and was wont to mock at the Phiſitiōs skill, that after 30. yeers ſpace they wanted other mens counſell to know what was good or hurtfull for their own bodies. In the meane time, at Rome there were certaine ſeedes of murders ſowen, to take effect after Tiberius death. Laelius Balbus had accuſed Acutia, ſomtimes the wife of P. Vitellius, of treaſon, who being cō
                  demned; when a recompence was to be ordained for the accuſer, Iunius Otho Tribune of the people withſtood it; wherupon they two growing to a iarre, Otho was ſent into baniſhment. Then Albucilla infamous for looſe loue with many, & once wife to Satrius Secundus, the detector of the conſpiracie, was accuſed of certaine impieties and inchantments againſt the Prince: & with her as confederats, her adulterers Gn. Domitius, Vibius Marſus, L. Arruntius. Of Domitius nobilitie I haue ſpoken before. Marſus alſo was of an ancient ſtock, and endued with many good vertues. But the memoriall ſent vnto the Senate doth teſtifie that Macro had charge of the examinatiō of the witneſſes, & torture of the bondmen: and the Emperours letters gaue no token of ſuſpition againſt them; either becauſe he was weake & feeble; or bicauſe he knew nothing of it: & many crimes were forged by Macro knowen enimie to Arruntius. Domitius therefore premeditating his defence; & Marſus as though he had purpoſed to pine away by famiſhing himſelfe, prolonged their liues. Arruntius whileſt his friends perſwaded him not to be too haſtie, but linger on; anſwereth them; That the ſame things do not beſeeme all men alike: & that for his own part, he had liued long ynough; and had no other thing to repent him of, but that he had among ſo manie vaine mockeries & perils prolonged his heauie and carefull old age: hauing bin long hated of Seianus; now of Macro; & alwais of ſom one of the mightieſt: not through any fault of his; but bicauſe he could not endure wickednes. True it is, he might linger out during the ſhort time the Prince hath to liue: but how ſhould he eſcape the yoong Prince which is to come? If Tiberius after ſuch long experience in affaires, by the force of rule and dominion hath changed and altered: is it to be hoped that C. Caeſar, who is yet ſcarſe out of his childhood, vnexpert and vnacquainted with al things; or brought vp & trained in the lewdeſt; ſhuld follow a better courſe, hauing Macro for his guide? who being choſen to oppreſſe Seianus bicauſe he was woorſe than he, afflicted the common-wealth with greater calamitie. I foreſee (ſaid he) a heauier ſeruitude; and therfore I will flie as well from that which is alreadie paſt, as that which is at hand. Speaking theſe things as it had bin in maner of a Propheſie, he cut his vaines. It ſhal appeere by thoſe things which inſued, that Arruntius died in good time. Albucilla hauing wounded herſelfe with a blow giuē without effect, was carried to priſon. The miniſters of her whoredom Graſidius Sacerdos, who had been Pretor, was baniſhed into an Iland, and Pontius Fregellanus condemned to be put from the Senate: the ſaide puniſhments were decreed againſt Laelius Balbus, by theſe themſelues which were glad of it; bicauſe Balbus was thought to vſe his eloquēce cruelly, as one alwais at hād & ready againſt the innocēt.
            
            
               XII. Tiberius death.
               
               ABout the ſame time, Sext. Papinius deſcended of a Conſularie familie, choſe a ſudden & euilfauoured death, by caſting himſelfe headlong from a high place. The cauſe was attributed to his mother, who hauing bin long before put away from her husband, by flattering ſpeeches & laſciuious wantōnes, induced the yoong

man vnto that villanie, that to auoid the diſcredit with her he could finde no remedie but death. She being accuſed in Senate, albeit ſhe proſtrated hirſelfe at the Lords feet & long ſhewed her common griefe, & womens weaknes, in ſuch deſires, and other lamentable and pitifull monings, witneſſing hir dolour and griefe; yet was baniſhed the citie ten yeers, vntil her yoongeſt ſon was paſt the vnconſtant ſlipperines of his youth. Now Tiberius bodie & ſtrength began to forſake him; but not yet his diſſimulation. He had the ſame courage & vigour of minde; his countenance and voice was ſtrong; & deſiring ſomtimes to be pleaſant, cloked his manifeſt decay of ſtrength. And often changing, at laſt ſetled himſelfe in a promontorie of Miſenum, in a houſe which ſomtimes Lucullus had bin Lord of; where it was known that his death was at hand by this means. There was a Phiſition verie skilfull in his arte called Charicles; yet neuer accuſtomed to gouerne the Prince in his ſicknes, but to aſſiſt him with his counſell. This Phiſition departing from Tiberius, as it had bin about ſome buſines of his own, vnder colour of dutie taking him by the hand, felt the pulſe of his vains: but yet he could not vſe the matter ſo cunningly, but the emperor perceiued him. Whether Tiberius were offended with him or not, it was vncertaine; & if he were, ſo much the more ſuppreſſing his anger, cauſed meat to be made readie, & otherwiſe than his cuſtome had bin, ſitteth downe, as it had been in honor of his friends farewell. Charicles neuertheleſſe aſſured Macro that his ſpirits decayed, and that he coulde not liue aboue two daies. Whereupon great debating of matters paſſed among thoſe which were preſent; and meſſengers poſted away to the lieutenants & armies. The 17. of the Kalends of April, his breath being ſtopped, he was thought to haue ended this mortall life. Then C. Caeſar with a great multitude flocking about him, and congratulating his good fortune, went forth to take vpō him the Empire: when newes came on the ſudden that Tiberius was come to his ſpeech & ſight again, & that meate was called for to put him out of his ſwouning: vpon this they were all ſtroken into a great feare; and diſperſed themſelues ſome one way; ſome another; euerie man counterfeiting a ſad cheere and ignorance of all this. And C. Caeſar ſtroken dumbe in the top of his hope, expected his laſt doome. Macro reſolute and ſtout, commanded the old man to be ſmoothered, by caſting many clothes on him, and euerie man to depart from the doore. And ſo Tiberius ended his life, the 78. yeere of his age. He was Neroes ſonne, and on both ſides extracted frō the Claudian familie; although his mother went by adoption into the Liuian familie, and after that into the Iulian. He had doubtfull fortunes from his firſt infancie, for being a baniſhed man, he followed his father, who was proſcribed; and being brought into Auguſtus houſe as his ſon in law, was greatly maligned al the time that Marcellus and Agrippa, and afterward Caius & Lucius Caeſar liued. Yea his brother Druſus was better beloued then he, of the citizens; but after he had married Iulia, his ſlipperie eſtate was tied to two great inconueniences, which was either to indure the incontinencie of his wife, or go from her. After that, returning from Rhodes, he liued twelue yeeres in the Princes houſe which had no children; then poſſeſſed the Empire almoſt 23. yeeres. He changed his manners diuerſly according to the times. Whileſt he was a priuat man, he was of good life and credite, and had commendations vnder Auguſtus. He was cloſe and craftie in counterfeiting vertues whileſt Germanicus and Druſus liued: and whileſt his mother liued he kept a meane, ſomtimes good and ſomtimes bad. For crueltie he was infamous; but in laſciuious luſts, as long as he loued or feared Seianus, ſecret. In the end he burſt into all wickednes, diſhoneſtie, and reproch; after that hauing caſt away ſhame and feare, he gouerned himſelfe wholy according vnto his owne diſpoſition and nature.
            
         
         
            
            THE ELEVENTH BOOKE OF THE ANNALES OF CORNELIVS TACITVS.
            
               I. The death of Aſiaticus, and Poppaea.
               * The beginning of this Booke is wanting.
               FOr he beleeued, that Valerius Aſiaticus who had beene twiſe Conſull, had in times paſt committed adultery with Poppaea: withall, greedily gaped after thoſe gardens which he bought of Lucullus, and beawtified and trimmed moſt ſtately. Suilius was ſuborned to accuſe them both: Soſibius, Germanicus bringer vp, was ioyned with him; who vnder colour of friendſhip, counſelleth Claudius to beware of ſuch as were ſtrong and rich, as men dangerous vnto the ſtate: and that Aſiaticus the principall author of murdering Caeſar, feared not to auouch it in a full aſſemblie of the people of Rome, and challenge the glory of the fact vnto himſelfe. He was famous in the citie for it, and a rumor ſpread throughout the prouince, that he prepared a voyage toward Germanicus armie, becauſe that being borne at Vienna, and ſtrengthened with ſtrong and great kindred, he thought it an eaſie matter to ſtirre vp his countrey men. But Claudius making no farther enquirie, ſent Criſpinus the captaine of the gard with a band of readie ſouldiers, as though it had bene to ſuppreſſe a warre: who finding him at Baias, layd yrons vpon him, and drew him to the citie, where he was not licenſed to be heard of the Senate, but in the Emperours chamber, in the preſence of Meſſallina. There Suilius accuſed him, that he had corrupted the ſouldiers, and wonne them by money and looſe life to all wickednes. Then charged him with adultery with Poppaea, and vnnaturall diſhoneſtie of bodie. At that, although he were commaunded to ſilence, he burſt forth, and ſayd: O Suilius aske thy children, and they will confeſſe me to be a man. And entering into his defence, Claudius being wonderfully moued, drew teares likewiſe from Meſſallinaes eyes; who going out of the chamber to wipe them, giueth Vitellius warning not to ſuffer the partie arraigned to eſcape. She maketh haſte to ouerthrow Poppaea, ſending ſome through the terror of priſon, to perſwade her to kill her ſelfe: Caeſar being ſo ignorant therof, that a few dayes after he asked her huſband Scipio as he ſate at table with him, why he had ſate downe without his wife? who made him anſwere, that ſhe was dead. But whileſt Claudius conſulted of Aſiaticus deliuerance, Vitellius with teares declaring how long time their friendſhip had continued, and how they two did reuerence & honor Antonia the Princes mother: then running ouer briefely his ſeruices towards the common wealth, and that ſo lately done in Britannia, and what elſe might ſeeme to moue compaſſion; left it in the end to his owne choiſe what death he would chooſe; Claudius yeelding him the like clemencie with like words. After this ſome perſwading him, that to die with famine and abſtinence was an eaſie death; he anſwered, that he reiected ſuch fauour: and therefore hauing done thoſe exerciſes he was vſually wont to do, waſhed his body, and fed daintily, ſaying, that it had bene a more commendable death to haue died by Tiberius ſlienes and cunning, or C. Caeſars violence, then now by the treachery of a woman, and Vitellius vncleane mouth: cut his vaines, and hauing firſt ſeene the fire wherein his bodie was to be burned, commaunded it to be remoued

to another place, leaſt the thick tuffed trees ſhould be marred with the ſmoke: ſo ſmall reckoning did he make of death.
            
            
               
                  II. Certaine Romaines accuſed for a dreame. A treatiſe of aduocates.
               AFter this, the Lords of the Senate were called together, and Suilius goeth on, and accuſeth certaine noble and renowned gentlemen of Rome ſurnamed Petra. The cauſe of their death was, becauſe they had lent their houſe vnto Mnester and Poppaea, when they had any cauſe of conference. But there was a dreame alſo obiected againſt one of them, which was, that he dreamed he had ſeene Claudius crowned with a crowne of eares of corne, and the eares turned backwards; interpreting that viſion to ſignifie a dearth of corne. Some report it to haue beene a garlande of vine braunches with white leaues; which he ſawe in his dreame; and interpreted it to foretell, that the death of the Prince ſhoulde follow at the end of Autumne. Whatſoeuer the dreame was, it is not to be doubted, but that he and his brother were both put to death. Criſpinus had giuen him by decree of Senate About 11781 pound 15. ſhil. fifteen hundred thouſand ſeſterces; and ornaments of the Pretor. Vitellius added About 7812. pound. 10. ſhil. ten hundred thouſand ſeſterces to be giuen to Soſibius, bicauſe he had beene Britannicus Schoole-maſter, and Claudius Counſeller. Scipio being demanded his opinion, ſaid: Seeing I do thinke of Popaeus faults, that which all you do thinke; perſwade your ſelues that I do ſay that which all you do ſay; which was an excellent moderation and mean, ſhewing the loue he bare hir as his wife, and neceſſitie of giuing ſentence, being a Senator. Suilius neuer ceaſed from accuſations, but proſecuted them with al crueltie: and many followed his audacity: for the Prince drawing vnto himſelfe all the duties of lawes and magiſtrates, opened the way to robberie. Neither was there any marchandiſe more publikely bought and ſolde, then the perfidiouſnes of aduocates: inſomuch, that Samius a woorthy gentelman of Rome, hauing giuen Suilius 
                  About 3130. pound. fowre hundred thouſand ſeſterces, to pleade his cauſe; and after perceiuing his preuarication and colluſion; ran vpon his ſword in Suilius owne houſe. Then C. Silius Conſull elect (of whoſe authoritie and fall I will ſpeake in conuenient time) beginning to ſpeake, the reſt of the Senators roſe vp, and demanded earneſtly that the lawe Cincia might be ſet on foote: by which it is prouided of old, that for pleading of cauſes, no man ſhould take either money or gift. Then they whom that iniurie ſeemed to touch, making a noiſe; Silius was eager and earneſt againſt Suilius, and contradicted him, alleaging the example of Orators in times paſt. Which eſteemed fame with poſteritie, to be the faireſt rewarde of eloquence: otherwiſe, that the princeſſe of good arts ſhould be diſtained with the ſeruitude of baſe lucre; and that no faith could be ſincere and inuiolate, where exceſſe of gaine is regarded. And if cauſes ſhoulde be defended without rewarde, there would be fewer of them; where as now, enmities, accuſations, hatred, and iniuries are foſtered; and that as the multitude of diſeaſes brought the Phiſitions gaine; ſo the peſtilent infection of the bar, ſerueth now to inrich the lawiers. Let them call to minde C. Aſinius, and Meſſalla; and of later memorie Arruntius, and Eſerninus, which were lifted vp to the higheſt degree of dignitie, by their vpright life, and vncorrupted eloquence. The Conſull elect vttering theſe ſpeeches, the others approouing the ſame; they went about to giue iudgement, that ſuch ſhoulde be condemned vnto the like puniſhment as they were; who had by briberie and extortion polled and oppreſſed the commons. When as Suilius and Coſſutianus and

others, which perceiued that there ſhould be no generall decree ſet downe, but a puniſhment for thoſe which had beene openly conuicted; came about Caeſar, and beſought him pardon of that which was paſt. And after a little ſilence, nodding with his head vnto them, they began as followeth. Who was he ſo puft vp with pride, that would preſume or hope for eternitie of fame? that it was expedient men ſhould prouide for neceſſarie maintenance, leaſt through the want of aduocates, the poore be oppreſſed by the rich and mightie. Neither did eloquence come by chance, and gratis vnto any without paine and labor: the care of a mans owne familie was neglected, if he were occupied in another mans buſines: many maintained their life by warre; ſome by tilling the earth; no man laboured to attaine to any knowledge vnleſſe he had ſeene ſome commoditie in it. It was an eaſie matter for Aſinius and Meſſalla, which were inriched with great rewards betweene Antonies and Augustus wars, to ſhew a gallant and braue minde: and for Eſerninus and Aruntius, heires of rich houſes, to do the like. Examples were as readie for them to ſhew, for what great rewards P. Claudius, and C. Curio were woont to plead. As for themſelues, they were but meane Senators, which expected no gaine of the common-wealth, but ſuch as grew of peace. The meaneſt of the people endeuored what he could to better his eſtate; the rewarde of ſtudies being taken away, ſtudies do alſo decay, as hauing neither glory nor honor. The Prince thinking that this was not ſpoken without ground of reaſon, moderated the ſum which they ſhould take vnto About 78. pound 2. 1. 6. d. ten thouſand ſeſterces, and that they which paſſed this ſumme, ſhould be condemned of extorſion.
            
            
               
                  III. Mithradates recouereth his kingdome. Warres betweene Gotarzes and Bardanes for the kingdome of Parthia.
               ABout the ſame time, Mithradates, who as I haue ſhewed, gouerned Armenia, and was brought to Caeſar, returned into his kingdome at Claudius perſwaſion; truſting in the power of Pharaſmanes, King of the Hiberi, and Mithradates brother; who told him that the Parthians were at variance among themſelues, doubtfull what would become of the Kingdome, and matters of ſmaller importance vtterly neglected. For whileſt Gotarzes practiſed great cruelties (going about to kill his brother Artabanus; his wife and his ſonne; whereby the reſt were afeard) they called in Bardanes, who being a man of action and able to go thorow great enterpriſes, in two daies inuaded three thouſand Eight Stadia make an Italian mile. ſtadia, and chaſed out Gotarzes, all amazed and diſmayed, not once dreaming of his comming: and without any lingring ſeaſed on the next gouernments, the Seleucians onely refuſing to obey him. Whereupon inflamed with greater anger then the preſent occaſion miniſtred cauſe, bicauſe they had reuolted from his father; he beſieged their citie which was ſtrong, and well fortified with a wall, inuironed with a riuer and furniſhed with victuals and munition. In the meane time Gotarzes ſtrengthened with the Daharian and Hyrcanian power, renueth the war. And Bardanes enforced to abandon Leleucia, remooued his campe to the champion countrey of the Bracteri. Then the forces of the Orient being deuided and vncertaine which way to leane, Mithradates had oportunitie offered him by chance to ſeaſe vpon Armenia; and with the force of the Roman ſouldier, raſe and beat downe the ſtrong fortreſſes: the Hiberian campe at once waſting and ſpoiling the champion. Neither did the Armenians make heade at all againſt them: Demonactes their gouernour being ſlaine, who onely durſt haue waged

battell againſt them. Cotys King of leſſer Armenia did ſomewhat hinder them: ſome of the nobles ioyning with him. But afterward being rebuked by Caeſars letters, all turned vnto Mithradates ſide, more cruell then was expedient in a kingdome newly gotten. But the Parthian Emperours making preparation to fight, ſuddenly conclude a peace, hauing diſcouered the treacherie of their ſubiects, which Gotarzes bewraied vnto his brother. At the firſt meeting they had a ielous conceit the one of the other; then taking one another by the right hand before the altars of the gods, they promiſed and couenanted to reuenge the treaſon of their enimies; and agree and helpe one another. Bardanes ſeemed moſt meete to poſſeſſe the kingdome. And Gotarzes becauſe there ſhould remaine no ſparkle of emulation went to Hyrcania. And Bardanes returning againe: Seleucia yeeldeth the ſeuenth yeere after her reuolt: not without diſcredit to the Parthians, whom one bare citie had ſo long deluded. Then he inuadeth the ſtrongeſt Prouinces, and began to recouer Armenia; if Vibius Marſus Lieuetenant of Syria, had not hindered him by threatning to warre againſt him. In the meane time Gotarzes repenting that he had yeelded the kingdome; and the nobilitie vnto whom obedience in peace ſeemeth hardeſt, calling him backe againe, aſſembleth his forces togither, whom Bardanes met at the riuer Erindes; where skirmiſhing long on both parts for the paſſages: Bardanes had the vpper hand, and with proſperous battels ſubdued all the middle countries, vnto the riuer Gindes, which diuideth the Dahas from the Arij. There his fortunate ſucceſſes had an end: for the Parthians although they were conquerers; yet liked not to make warre ſo far off. Wherefore building monuments in token of his wealth and power: and that none of the Arſacides had euer before leuied any tribute of thoſe nations, he returned with great glorie: and therefore ſo much the more fierce and intollerable to his ſubiects; who hauing long before laide a ſnare to intrap him, killed him at vnawares as he was a hunting in the Prime of his youth: fewe of the old Kings to be matched in renowne with him; if he had as well ſought the loue of his ſubiects, as to be feared of his enimies. By the death of Bardanes, the Parthian affaires were in a hurly burly; whileſt they wauered, whom they ſhould receiue for their King, Many inclined to Gotarzes, ſonne to Meherdates, ſonne to Phrahates, who was giuen vs in hoſtage. In the ende Gotarzes preuailed; who inioying the Kings ſeate through crueltie and diſſolute life, forced the Parthians to ſend ſecretly to intreat the Roman Prince to releaſe Meherdates, and inueſt him in his fathers kingdome
            
            
               
                  IIII. Meſſalina falleth in loue with Silius.
               
               THe ſame men being Conſuls, the plaies called Seculares, were exhibited eight hundred yeeres after the foundation of Rome, and threeſcore and foure yeeres after thoſe which Augustus had cauſed then to be repreſented. I omit the reaſons which moued both theſe Princes, as ſufficiently declared in my bookes which I haue compoſed of the acts of Domitian the Emperour: for he likewiſe did ſet forth the ſame plaies, which I was preſent at, ſo much the more carefully, becauſe I was then one of the fifteene Prieſts, and Pretor. Which I ſpeake not to vaunt or brag thereof, but becauſe that charge in times paſt was committed to the colledge of the fifteene, and magiſtrates did chiefly execute the office of ceremonies. Claudius ſitting to ſee the race, when the noble mens children repreſented on horſeback the play of Troy; and among them Britannicus the Emperours ſonne, and L. Domitius, anon after adopted to the Empire, and ſurnamed Nero. The fauour of the people

was more affectionat to him then Germanicus, which was taken as a prefage of his future greatnes. And it was rumored abroad, that in his infancie dragons were found about him in manner of a gard, which are fables, not vnlike vnto ſtrange miracles: for he himſelfe, who neuer derogated from himſelfe, was wont to report but of one ſerpent which was ſeene in his chamber. But that affection of the people was a relick of the memorie of Germanicus, who left no other male behinde him but he: and the commiſeration towards Agrippina his mother was increaſed, by reaſon of Meſſallinaes crueltie, who alwaies hating her, and now more then euer kindled againſt her, was hindered no way from forging of crimes, and ſuborning accuſers againſt her, ſauing only by a new loue, and next coſen vnto madnes. For ſhe did ſo burne in loue with C. Silius the faireſt youth of all Rome, that to content her luſt, ſhe cauſed him to put from him his wife Iunia Syllana, an honorable dame, to enioy wholy to her ſelfe the adulterer, now vntied from the bands of matrimonie. Neither was Silius ignorant how lewd the practice was, and what perill he might incurre: but if he refuſed, certaine of his deſtruction, and hauing ſome hope to bleare the eyes of the world, and enticed with great rewards, he tooke it for the moſt expedient, to expect what might fall, and inioy the preſent. She not by ſtealth, but with a great retinue frequented his houſe; was alwayes at his ſide; beſtowed wealth and honor bountifully vpon him; and at laſt, as though fortune had transferred the Empire; ſlaues, freed men, and all princely ornamēts, and preparations were ſeene at the adulterers houſe. But Claudius not knowing what rule was at home, vſurped the office of a Cenſor; reprehended with ſeuere edicts the ouergreat licence the people vſed in the Theater; vſing opprobrious ſpeeches againſt P. Pomponius, who had bin ſometime Conſull (and gaue verſes to the ſtage) and other noble women. He made a law to reſtraine the crueltie of creditors, forbidding them to lend money to intereſt vnto mens ſonnes ſubiect to the fathers power, to be payed after their death. He brought water to the citie from the Simbruan hils. He added and publiſhed new letters and characters; being a thing moſt certaine that the manner of the Greekes writing was not begun and perfected at once. The Aegyptians firſt of all expreſſed the conceptions of their mind by the ſhape of beaſts; and the moſt auncient monuments of mans memory are ſeene grauen in ſtones: & they ſay, that they are the firſt inuēters of letters. Then the Phoenicians becauſe they were ſtrong by ſea, brought them into Greece, and had the glory of inuenting that, which they receiued of others. For there goeth a report, that Cadmus ſailing thither in a Phoenicean ſhip, was the inuentor of that arte among the Greekes, when they were yet vnexpert and rude. Some record that Cecrops the Athenian, or Linus the Theban, and Palamedes the Grecian, at the time of the Troian warre, inuented 16. characters; then others and eſpecially Simonides found out the reſt. But in Italie the Etrurians learned them of Corinthius Damaratus, and the Aborigenes of Euander the Arcadian: and the faſhion of the latine letters are like vnto the old greeke letters; but we had but a few at the beginning, the reſt were after added. By which example Claudius added three letters, which during the time of his raigne were in vſe, and afterward forgotten: and are yet to be ſeene ingrauen in braſen tables hanged vp in temples and places of aſſembly to ſhew the peoples lawes. Then he propounded in Senate touching the colledge of ſouthſayers, leaſt that the moſt auncient diſcipline of Italie ſhould come to naught by ſlothfulnes, ſeeing that in the hard and aduerſe times of the common wealth they haue been ſent for; and by their aduiſe the ceremonies haue been renewed, and better afterward looked into. And the chiefeſt noble men of Etruria, either of their owne motion, or at the perſwaſion of the Lords of the Senate,

haue continued their ſcience, and propagated it to their families, which now is very careleſly accompliſhed by a ſloth vſed towards commendable artes, and becauſe ſtrange ſuperſtitions preuaile and take deeper roote. All well for the preſent; thanks were to be rendered to the goodnes of the gods therefore, and heed taken, that ſacred rites in doubtfull times had in reuerence, be not in proſperous forgotten. Whereupon a decree of Senate was made, and order taken, that the high Prieſts ſhould conſider what was meete to be retained and eſtabliſhed concerning the ſouthſayers.
            
            
               
                  V. The Cheruſci craue Italus for their King.
               THe ſame yeere the Cheruſci came to Rome to demaunde a King, all their nobilitie being extinguiſhed by ciuill warres, and one onely left of the blood royall, called Italus, then being at Rome. He was ſonne vnto Flauius, Arminius brother; his mother was the daughter of Catumerus Prince of the Catti; and was of a comely perſonage; practiſed in armes and riding, as well according to the maner of our countrey, as his owne. Caeſar therefore hauing furniſhed him with money, and appointed him a guarde; encourageth him ſtoutely to take vpon him the honour of his houſe and aunceſtors: putting him firſt in minde that he was borne at Rome; where he remained not as an hoſtage, but citizen: and that now he was to goe to a ſtrange Empire. At the firſt the Germans were glad of his comming; and ſo much the rather, bicauſe he was not nuſled in factions and diſcords: and therefore would beare like affection vnto all. He was reuerenced and honoured of all men; ſometimes vſing curteſie and moderation miſliked of none; and oftentimes quaffing and drunkennes with other wanton behauiour, which well pleaſed theſe barbarous people. Now he had gotten reputation with his neighbours, and began to be famous among ſtrangers; when as ſuch as bare greateſt ſwaie in time of factions, ſuſpecting his power and greatnes, goe from him to the borderers of the kingdome; openly declaring that the auncient libertie of Germanie was taken from them, and that the Roman ſtrength maſtered al. Was their countrey ſo barren, that they could finde none borne among them to fill the place of the Prince; but that Flauius the ſpies broode muſt be lifted vp aboue them all? It was in vaine to make Arminius the pretence; whoſe ſonne being brought vp in the enimies land, might well be feared if he came to be King; as depraued and infected with education, ſeruilitie, attire, and all other ſtrange vſages. And if Italus bare the minde his father had done, no man euer hath borne armes more ragingly againſt his countrey, and houſhold gods than his parents. By ſuch and the like ſpeeches they gathered great forces togither; and there did no fewer follow Italus: 
                  All of them affirming that he had not thruſt himſelfe among them againſt their wils; but that he was ſent for by them: and ſeeing he was more noble than the reſt, they ſhould make a triall of his vertue; and whether he would ſhewe himſelfe woorthie of Arminius his vncle, and Catumerus his grandfather. Neither could his father be a ſhame and reproche vnto him, becauſe he would neuer violate his faith, which by conſent of the Germans he had promiſed the Romans. That the name of libertie was falſly pretended by them, who being baſe and degenerate of themſelues, and dangerous to the whole ſtate; haue no hope but in time of trouble and garboile. The common ſort came cheerefully about him, and the King became victorious in a great battell againſt the Barbarians: then through this proſperous fortune falling into pride, he was chaſed out of his countrey; and againe reenforcing his armie with the aide of the Lombards, now with luckie, now with vnluckie ſucceſſe, moleſted and annoyed the Cheruſci.
            
            
               
               
                  VI. The Chauceans are ariuen backe out of Germanie by Corbulo a Roman Captaine: his ſeuere diſcipline.
               ABout the ſame time, the Chauci liuing in peace at home, and incouraged by the death of Sanquinius; whileſt Corbuloes cōming was expected, made ſome incurſions vpon lower Germanie vnder Gannaſcus: who being a Caninefian by birth; an aide-ſouldier, and long receiuing pay vnder the Romans; and afterward become a fugitiue with light veſſels robbing and piracing; eſpecially waſteth the coaſt of Gallia, becauſe he knew them wealthie and cowards. But Corbulo entering into the Prouince, firſt with great care, then credit, eſpecially gotten by that ſeruice, thruſt into the riuer of Rhene certain Galleies, and other ſhipping as they were fit, into other armes and ditches of the ſea. And hauing with them ſuncke the ſmall veſſels of the enimie, and driuen out Gannaſcus: after he had ſetled the preſent eſtate of things, he reduced the legions which knew not what worke and labour meant, but deſirous to hunt after pillage and forreies, to the auncient diſcipline of ſeruice: commaunding that none ſhould depart from the campe, nor enter battell without commaundement: that the watch and warde; all charges both by day and night ſhould be executed in armes. And it is reported that one ſouldier was put to death, bicauſe he digged at a trench without his ſword by his ſide; and another, bicauſe he had nothing elſe but his dagger: which beeing ouer-hard and rigorous, and vncertaine, whether falſly ſpread abroad; yet had their beginning of the Captaines ſeueritie. Whereby thou maiſt know that he was inexorable in great faults, ſeeing it was thought he vſed ſuch rigour in ſmall. But that terrour wrought different effects in the ſouldiers and enimies: we thereby increaſed our valour; the Barbarians abated their courage. The Friſian nation which rebelled after the ouerthrow of L. Apronius, and euer after ſhewed themſelues enimies vnto vs, or nothing faithfull, hauing giuen hoſtages; inhabited the countrey alotted and appointed them by Corbulo. He gaue them alſo a Senate, magiſtrates and lawes. And bicauſe they ſhould not fall from their obedience, left them a ſtrong garriſon, and ſent ſome to draw the chiefeſt of the Chauci to yeeld; and withall, by a wile to ſurpriſe Gannaſcus. Neither were thoſe wiles imployed in vaine, or thought cowardly and ilbeſeeming vs, againſt a fugitiue and faith-breaker. But the Chauci were much troubled with his death, and Corbulo ſowed ſome ſeedes of rebellion among them: which as ſome conſtrued to the beſt; ſo others reported badly of it: for why ſhould he prouoke an enimie? If the ſucceſſe were bad, the hurt would redownd to the common-wealth: if fortune went on his ſide, he was a man to be feared in time of peace; and being valiant and couragious, and vnder a cowardly Prince, not to be ſuffered. Whereupon Claudius was ſo farre from forcing Germanie anew; that he commanded the gariſons to be brought backe on the hither ſide the Rhene. And whileſt Corbulo went about to encampe in the enimie land, theſe letters were deliuered him. He vnderſtanding of ſo ſudden a countermaunde, although many things at once troubled his braines; feare of the Emperour; the contempt the Barbarians would haue him in; the ieſt his confederats would make at it: yet making no more wordes, but ſaying only; O how happie ſome Roman Captaines were, ſownded a retraite. Neuertheleſſe leaſt the ſouldiers ſhould grow lazie, he caſt a ditch betweene Moſa and Rhene, three & twentie miles long, to beare off the vncertain inundations of the Ocean. Yet Caeſar graunted him the honour of triumph, although he denied him licence to make war.
            
            
               
               
                  VII. How ſouldiers were employed out of warre.
               NOt long after Curtius Rufus had the ſame honor giuen him, who in the countrey of Mattiacum had found a ſiluer mine, of ſmall profit and ſhort continuance: but to the legions beſides the loſſe, it was great labour to dig the riuers, and mine vnder the earth, and draine waters, which in plaine grounds was laborious. The ſouldiers wearied with theſe toyles, and becauſe they had indured the like in many prouinces; ſent letters ſecretly to the Emperour in the name of the whole armie, and beſought him that from thence forward, he would beſtow the marks of triumph before hand, on ſuch, as he purpoſed to make commaunders of the armie. As for Curtius Rufus birth, whom ſome haue reported to be a fencers ſonne, I will neyther vtter any thing falſely, and am aſhamed to tell the truth. After he was come to mans eſtate, he was a follower of the Quaeſtor of Affrica; and in a towne called Adrumetum, as he walked ſecretly about midday in a gallery where were no people, there appeared vnto him the likenes of a woman, greater then the ſtature of any other, and a voice was heard, ſaying: Thou art he, Rufus, which ſhalt come Proconſul into this prouince. Puffed vp with hope of this preſage of good fortune, he returneth to the citie, and by the bountie of his friends, and his owne wit and induſtrie, obtaineth the Quaeſtorſhip; and anon after the Praetorſhip, among many men of note which ſued for the ſame, only by the ſuffrage and fauor of the Prince: Tiberius hiding the baſenes of his birth, with theſe words: Curtius Rufus ſeemeth to me to be borne of himſelfe. After this, liuing vntill he was very aged, 
                     •
                  n odious flatterer to his ſuperiors, arrogant to his inferiors, crabbed among his equals; he became Conſull, obtained the honor of triumph, and in the end the gouernment of Affrike; and there dying, fulfilled his fatall deſtinie. In the meane ſpace, for no cauſe then openly knowne, nor afterward diſcouered, Gn. Nouius a worthy gentleman of Rome, was found with his ſword by his ſide in the aſſemblie of thoſe which came to ſalute the Prince: for being broken on the torture, he confeſſed nothing either of himſelfe or others; not knowen whether he purpoſed obſtinately to conceale the matter, or whether he were innocent. The ſame men being Conſuls, P. Dolabella propounded in Senate, that the ſhew of Fencers might be euery yeere ſet foorth at the charges of thoſe which obtained the Queſtorſhip. Which was a charge in our anceſtors times, giuen as a reward of vertue; and was then lawfull for all citizens which truſted to their merites and vertues, to ſue for all kinde of offices, without any regard had of their age; being a thing lawfull for yong men to be Conſuls or Dictators. But the Quaeſtors were inſtituted when the Kings bare the ſway, as the law of the Curies declare, renewed by L. Brutus: and the power of chooſing them continued in the Conſuls, vntill the people would alſo haue a ſhare therein; who firſt created Valerius Potus, and Aemilius Mamercus, threeſcore and three yeeres after the Tarquines were driuen out, to the end they ſhould follow the warres. Then affaires multiplying more and more, two were added for the buſines of the citie. Not long after, the number was doubled, when Italie and the prouinces were ſubiect to pay taske and tallage. After that, by Syllaes law twentie were created to furniſh the Senate, vnto whom he had giuen authoritie of iudgement. And although the gentlemen of Rome had recouered their power of iudgement, notwithſtanding the Quaeſtorſhip was graunted according to the worth of the ſuters, or courteſie of the giuers, and that gratis, vntill that by Dolabellaes aduiſe it was as it were put to ſale.
            
            
               
               
                  VIII. Certaine gentlemen of Gallia made Senators. How the Senate was purged of naughtie men.
               A. Vitellius and L. Vipſanius being Conſuls, when the matter was debated concerning the furniſhing of the number of Senators, and that the chiefe gentlemen of Gallia called Comata, who long before were in league with the Romans, and inioyed the priuileges of a citizen, deſired alſo the right of bearing offices in the citie: great rumors were ſpread, and the matter was debated before the Prince by men diuerſly affected: ſome affirming. That Italie was not fallen to ſo low an ebbe, that it could not furniſh their citie of a Senate: that the home-borne with their kinſemen did in times paſt ſupplie that want, and no cauſe why they ſhould be ſory to imitate the cuſtome of the auncient common wealth. Yea, there might examples be alleaged, by which it might appeare that the vertuous inclination of the Romans at this day, was not inferior to the vertue and glory of their anceſtors. Is it a ſmall matter that the Venetians and Iuſubrians haue thruſt into the Curia, vnleſſe a companie of ſtrangers be alſo put in, as it were to keepe vs in captiuitie? what other dignitie is there left for the reſidue of the nobles? or if any of the Latian Senators fall to decay? that thoſe rich men would fill and poſſeſſe all, whoſe grandfathers and great grandfathers being captaines of enemie nations, haue ſlaine with the ſword, and violence our armies, and beſieged Iulius of famous memorie at Aleſia. Theſe things are freſh in memorie. What if we ſhould call thoſe to memorie which beſieged the Capitoll, and broke downe the altar of Rome with their owne hands? That it was ſufficient to inioy the name of a citizen: and that the ornaments and marks of the Lords of the Senate; the dignitie of Magiſtrates ought not to be made common. But with theſe and the like ſpeeches the Prince was nothing moued, but immediatly ſpake againſt it, and calling the Senate together, began as followeth. My aunceſtors (among which the moſt auncient was Clauſus, taking his beginning of the Sabins, and was at once made citizen of Rome, and receiued into the familie of the Patricians) gaue me counſell to gouerne the common wealth with ſuch counſels and cares as they had done, and transfer into it all that is good and commendable, from whence ſoeuer it be brought. Neither am I ignorāt that the Iulij came from Alba, the Coruncani from Camerium, the Porcians from Tuſculum; and that we may not ſearch out farther antiquities, there hath been men called into the Senate from Etruria, Lucania, and all Italie. At laſt the citie was extended euen to the Alpes, in ſo much that not only men ſeuerally, but countries and nations vnited thēſelues to our name, and grew as one whole bodie. Then had we a ſure and firme peace at home, and flouriſhed againſt forraine nations, when the Tranſpadani receiued the freedome of the citie; when vnder colour of leading our legions throughout the world, and adding vnto them the ſtrongeſt forces of the prouinces, we eaſed the weake and wearied Empire. Doth it repent vs, that the Balbians came out of Spaine, & the worthieſt men of Gallia Narbonenſis to vs? Their poſteritie remaine with vs, neither do they giue place vnto vs in loue towards this our countrie. What other thing was the deſtruction and ouerthrow of the Lacedaemonians and Athenians, although they were ſtrong and puiſſant in armes, but that they reiected thoſe they conquered, as ſtrangers? But our founder Romulus caried himſelfe ſo diſcreetly, that he had many which the ſame day, were his enemies and citizens. Strangers haue ruled ouer vs: offices haue been giuen to the ſonnes of ſuch as haue bin freed frō bondage, and not as ſome haue bin deceiued as a newe

precident, but it hath bin practiſed by our firſt people. But we haue fought with the Senonians. I pray you, haue the Volci & Aequi neuer prepared an army againſt vs? we haue beene taken of the Galli: and we haue giuen hoſtages likewiſe to the Tuſci, and paſſed vnder the yoke of the Samnites. If thou wilt reckon vp all the warres, none hath beene ſooner ended than that againſt the Galli: ſince that time we haue had a continuall and faithfull peace. Now that in conformitie of manners, artes, and alliances, they are mingled with our people, let them rather bring to vs their gold and wealth, then inioy it by themſelues. All things (Lords of the Senate) which are thought now to be moſt auncient, haue beene new. The Patricians had firſt all offices in their hands; after them the people; after the people, the Latines; after the Latines, all the nations of Italie. This will grow olde likewiſe, although it ſeeme newe; and that which to day we maintaine by example, ſhall be reckoned amongſt examples. A decree of the Senate giuen according vnto the Princes oration, the Eduans firſt of all receiued the rights and priuileges of Senators in the citie. This was graunted them in conſideration of their auncient alliance: and becauſe they onely among the Galli, called themſelues brothers of the people of Rome. The ſame time Caeſar made the auncienteſt of the Senators patriciens, or ſuch whoſe fathers were famous; fewe of thoſe families remaining, which Romulus called of the greater; and L. Brutus, of the leſſer familie: thoſe alſo being decayed & extinguiſhed, which Caeſar the Dictator ſubſtituted by the lawe Caſſia: and Prince Augustus by the lawe Senia. All theſe things were gratefull vnto the people; and done with the good liking of Caeſar. It troubled him very much howe he might remooue ſuch from the Senate, as were notoriouſly infamous; and at laſt bethought himſelfe of a newe and gentle courſe; yet grounded on the rigour of auncient time: which was to admoniſh euerie man to examine his owne conſcience: and craue licence to giue vp his roome, if he thought himſelfe touched; which ſhould eaſily be graunted; and promiſed them to propound togither, as well thoſe as were remoued, as thoſe as reſigned their roomes; that the iudgement of the Cenſors, and the moderation of thoſe which willingly renounced interlaced togither, might couer the diſcredit. For this cauſe the Conſull Vipſanius propounded, that Claudius might be called the father of the Senate: becauſe that the title of father of the countrey, being common, newe merites towards the common-wealth, ſhould not be honoured with old titles. But he himſelfe brideled the Conſull as ouer-much flattering; and appointed a view to be taken of the citie which is called Luſtrum, and the number of the citizens to be inrolled, which came to threeſcore eight hundred, & foure & fortie thouſand. Then began he to haue better intelligence how matters went at home: and not long after he was conſtrained to know, and puniſh the diſſolute and licentious life of his wife, immediately after to burne in an vnlawfull deſire of inceſtious matrimonie.
            
            
               
                  IX. Meſſallinaes looſeloues: her marriage with Silius.
               
               NOw Meſſallina through the eaſie inioying of her adulterers, as it were loathing them, grew more licentious in vnknowen and ſtrange ſenſualitie: when as Silius himſelfe, either by a fatale ſottiſhnes, or thinking dangers themſelues to be the remedie againſt imminent dangers; began earneſtly to vrge her to breake off all diſſimulation: and make that knowen, which vntill then he went about to keepe ſecret; For the matter was not come to that, that they ſhould expect the princes death. Harmeleſſe counſels were good for the innocent; but in

open and manifeſt villanies there was no hope of ſafetie, but in audacious attempts. There were others in the ſame fault & feared the like puniſhmēt: he was a ſingle man without children, readie to marrie her, and adopt Britannicus. Meſſallinaes authoritie would continue the ſame, and with greater ſecuritie, if they could preuent Claudius; as vncircumſpect againſt ſnares and wiles, ſo haſtie & ſoone mooued to anger. Theſe ſpeeches ſhe ſeemed not much to like of: not for the loue of her husband; but leaſt Silius hauing gotten the ſoueraigntie, would reiect her as an adultereſſe, and fall to a iuſt conſideration of her lewd life, which with his danger he had tried. Neuertheleſſe ſhe deſired the name of matrimonie, becauſe of the greatnes of the infamie; which with prodigall and diſſolute perſons is the laſt contentment. They expected no longer, then Claudius went to Hoſtia to do ſacrifice, but ſhe accompliſhed all the ſolemnities of marriage. I am not ignorant, but it will ſound like a fable, that there ſhould be any man ſo blockiſh and careleſſe; much leſſe that a Conſull elect ſhould in a citie where all thing is knowen, and nothing kept ſecret; a day appointed; companie aſſembled to ſeale the agreement; contract marriage as it were for iſſue and children, with the Princes wife: and that ſhee ſhould heare the words of the Auſpices, or hand-faſters; attire herſelfe bride-like, ſacrifice vnto the gods; ſit downe amongſt the gueſts, kiſſe, embrace; and in the ende paſſe the night in all libertie of marriage. But there is nothing fained, to make the thing ſeeme miraculous; but I will deliuer you that which hath been heard and written by auncient writers. Then the Princes houſe began to quake for feare; and eſpecially thoſe which were in higheſt credit and fauour: and if there ſhould fall an alteration more afeard; they began now not in ſecret whiſperings, but openly to murmur, ſaying: That as long as the adulterers did vſe the matter ſecretly, true it was that the Prince was diſhonored; but yet he was in no danger of his eſtate: where as now this yong man of a noble birth, of a manly repreſentation, in the prime of his youth and ſhortly to be Conſull, aſpired no doubt to greater hope. For it was eaſilie knowen what was to be expected after ſuch a marriage. Doubtleſſe a feare poſſeſſed them to thinke how blockiſh Claudius was, how thrall vnto his wife, and how many murders had beene committed by Meſſallinaes commaundement. On the other ſide, the facilitie of the Princes nature emboldned them, and gaue them hope, that if they could beate into his head the enormitie of the fact, ſhe might as one alreadie condemned, be brought to confuſion before ſhe were arraigned. But the danger was, that if ſhe ſhould be admitted to her defence, yet the Princes eares would be buttened and deafe, although ſhe ſhould confeſſe. And firſt of all Calistus, of whom I haue ſpoken in the death of C. Caeſar, and Narciſſus the contriuer of Appius death, and Pallas the greateſt fauor it at that time, debated: whether diſſembling all other matters by ſecret threates they ſhould diſſwade Meſſallina from Silius loue; but they altered their mindes, leaſt they ſhould draw on, their owne ruine; Pallas for want of courage; Calistus as practiſed in the eſtate of the former court, and knowing that credit and authoritie was ſafelier maintained with circumſpect, then raſh counſell; Narciſſus perſiſted in his purpoſe, altering that only point, which was, to take heede, leaſt by any word ſhe ſhould haue an inkling who was her accuſer, and of what.
            
            
               
               
                  X. Narciſſus, Claudius freed man aduertiſeth him of the marriage. The ſottiſhnes of the Emperour.
               
                  NArciſſus then earneſtly watching all opportunities, during Caeſars long ſtay at Hoſtia, induced two concubines with whom the Emperour licentiouſly conuerſed, by faire promiſes and gifts, and eſpecially ſhewing them to what greatnes and credit they might come vnto, if his wife were put from him; to vndertake the diſcouering of this crime. Then Calphurnia (for ſo one of them was called) as ſoone as ſhe found him alone, falling at Caeſars knees, crieth out that Meſſallina had married Silius; and withall asketh Cleopatra who was there preſent of purpoſe, to be asked the queſtion; who nodding with her head in token that ſhee had, commandeth Narciſſus to be called for: he, crauing pardon of that which was paſt, and that he had concealed the adulterie betweene Meſſallina and Vectius, and betweene her and Plautius; added further, that the beſt way was not to reproch him of his adulteries, nor demaund his houſe, his ſeruants, & other princely ornaments embezeled away; but let him (ſaid Narciſſus) inioy them, ſo as he would reſtore thee thy wife, and cancell the writings of marriage. Doeſt thou know (ſaith he further) of thy diuorſement? for Silius marriage the people ſaw, the Lords of the Senate, and the ſouldiers, and if thou make not haſte, the new married man will be Lord of the citie. Hereupon Claudius calleth for the chiefeſt of his friends, and firſt of all for Turranius chiefe officer for prouiſion of corne; then Luſius Geta captaine of the gard, asking them what they knew of the matter: who confeſſing it, all the reſt came cluttering about him, crying that he ſhould haſte away to the camp, ſtrengthen his gard, prouide firſt for his ſafetie, then reuenge. Sure it is that Claudius was ſo ſurpriſed with feare, that he did eftſoones aske whether he were yet ſoueraigne of the Empire? whether Silius were yet a priuat man without charge? But Meſſallina neuer more looſe and diſſolute in luſts, the Autumne being well ſpent, celebrated in her houſe the feaſt of grape gathering; the preſſes were wrung, the veſſels flowed with wine, women danced about girt with skins, like vnto mad women, ſolemnizing the feaſts of Bacchus; ſhe her ſelfe, her haire hanging looſe about her eares, ſhaking a iauelin wrapped about with vine leaues; Silius hard by her couered with Iuie, with buskins on his legs, caſting the head hither and thither, with a ſhameleſſe companie of dancers ſhouting and ſinging about them. It is reported that Vectius Valens toying and ieſting, climed vp a high tree; and being demaunded what he ſaw there, made anſwere; a cruell tempeſt comming from Hoſtia. Whether any ſuch thing did appeare, or whether it were a word ſlipt by chance; it was turned to a preſage of future danger. Not a rumor any longer, but meſſengers come from all parts, bringing them tidings that Claudius knew all, and was comming, readie to reuenge. Meſſallina then conueyeth her ſelfe into the gardens which ſometimes belonged to Lucullus: Silius diſſembling his feare, went to his buſines in the Forum. The reſt, ſome ſlipping one way, ſome another, the Centurions layd hold on and bound with yrons, as they were found either abroad or in corners and lurking places. Meſſallina albeit this ſudden croſſing had almoſt put her beſides her ſelfe, yet thought it beſt as a ſhift which neuer failed at a pinch, to meete her husband, and ſhew her ſelfe vnto him; and commaunded Britannicus and Octauia to go before, and caſt themſelues betwixt their fathers armes; and prayed Vibidia the auncienteſt of the virgins Veſtall to go to the high Prieſt, and intreate him he would ſhew clemencie in her behalfe. And in the meane time accompanied with three perſons only (ſo naked was

ſhe left on the ſudden) hauing gone afoote ouer all the citie, at laſt in a tumbrell which caried away the riddings of gardens, ſhe taketh her way towards Hoſtia, no one pitying her, becauſe the filthines of her wicked life ſwayed downe all compaſſion. Neuertheleſſe Caeſar trembled, becauſe he diſtruſted Geta captaine of his gard, a man as lightly carried to bad as to good. Whereupon Narciſſus, hauing taken thoſe with him which had the like feare, aſſured Caeſar, he had no other hope of ſafetie left, then to transferre the whole commaundery of the ſouldiers that one day vnto ſome one of his freed men; and offereth himſelfe to be the man. And fearing leaſt, whileſt he were brought vnto the citie, he might be induced by L. Vitellius or P. Largus Caecina, to repent him, he deſireth & taketh a place in the ſame chariot with the Emperour. The fame was common afterwards, that among diuers of the princes ſpeeches, now blaming his wiues lightnes, now calling to minde the band of matrimonie, and infancie of his children; Vitellius neuer vſed other ſpeech, then ô wickednes, ô ſhame. Narciſſus vrged him to ſpeake plainely, and go no more about the buſh; yet he could not winne ſo much of him, but would ſtill anſwere in doubtfull tearmes, and ſuch as might be conſtrued as euery man liſted to draw them; and Largus Caecina did the like.
            
            
               
                  XI. Silius and Meſſallina puniſhed, with others her adulterers.
               NOw Meſſallina was in ſight, and cried that he would heare Octauia and Britannicus mother: when as the accuſer made a noiſe on the other ſide naming Silius and the marriage: and withall preſented vnto him certaine writings, bewrayers of her luſts and laſciuiouſnes, to the ende he might turne Caeſars ſight from her. And not long after, the children had betweene them, had beene preſented vnto him, as he entered the citie; if Narciſſus had not commaunded them to be conueied away. But Vibidia could not be driuen away, but requeſted importunately with nipping termes, that his wife vnheard might not be put to death. Hereupon Narciſſus anſwered that the Prince ſhould heare her, and that ſhe ſhould haue libertie to purge herſelfe. In the meane ſpace, that ſhe ſhould depart, and attende her ſacrifices. Claudius vſed a woonderfull ſilence whileſt all thoſe ſpeeches paſt. Vitellius was as one that knew little; all obeied the freed man: he commaunded the adulterers houſe to be opened, and the Emperor to be brought thither. And there firſt of all in the entrie he ſhewed the Emperor the image of Silius father, defaced by decree of Senate. Then told him that whatſoeuer the Neroes or Druſi had, rich and Princely, had beene giuen to Silius for a reward of his reptochfull adulterie: then ſeeing Claudius inflamed and burſting into threats, leades him to the ſoldiers camps, verie readie to heare an oration: vnto whom as Narciſſus had before aduiſed him, he vſed ſome fewe words. For although he had iuſt cauſe of griefe; yet ſhame hindered him. Immediately all the bands cried togither continually, demaunding the names, and puniſhment of the offenders. And Silius brought to the barre, neither went about to iuſtifie himſelfe, nor craue reſpite; but intreated that his death might be haſtened. The ſame conſtancie made other famous gentlemen of Rome deſire the haſtening of their death. He commaunded Titius Proculus guard vnto Silius and Meſſallina, and Vectius Valens offering to detect other crimes, and confeſſing the ſame, and Pompeius Vrbicus, and Saufellus Trogus, all of counſell to the fact, to be brought to execution. Decius Calphurnianus likewiſe Captaine of the watch, Sulpicius Rufus ouerſeer of the plaies, Iuncus Virgilianus a Senator, receiued the like puniſhment. Onely Mnester delayed his puniſhment, renting his clothes and crying,

that he would looke vpon the markes of the ſtripes, and call to mind his own words, which were that he ſhould be readie to obey Meſſallinaes commaundements. Alleaging that others had offended for rewards and hope of aduancement, but he of neceſſitie: and that no mans caſe ſhould haue beene harder than his, if Silius had become Emperour. Caeſar mooued with theſe ſpeeches and proue to mercie; yet the freed men altered his minde, affirming that ſeeing ſo manie notable perſonages had beene put to death, he ſhould not ſpare a ſtage player: and that it was all one whether conſtrayned or voluntarily he had committed ſo lewd a fact. Traulus Montanus a gentleman of Romes defence, was not receiued. This yoong man being of modeſt behauiour, and comely feature of bodie, not thinking on any ſuch matter, was ſent for by Meſſallina, who inioying him onely one bare night, would afterward no more of him, being of nature as readie to loath, as to like and luſt. Suilius Ceſoninus, and Plautius Lateranus onely had pardon graunted them. This in regard of his vncles great merits: Ceſoninus through his impuritie and vnnaturall abuſing of his bodie. All this while Meſſallina in Lucullus gardens, prolonged her life; made her ſupplications; ſometimes with hope, and ſometimes with anger: ſo proudly ſhe ſhewed her ſelfe euen in her extreameſt danger. And if Narciſſus had not haſtened her death, ſhe had turned the miſchiefe vpon the accuſers head. For Claudius being returned home againe, and his choler well cooled in a banket; after he had waxt warme with wine, commaunded that one ſhould goe and tell that wretch (for that terme they ſay he vſed) that ſhee ſhould appeere the next day to plead her cauſe. Which being vnderſtoode, and fearing leaſt his anger ſhould relent; and his loue, (if they ſhould defer the matter that night which was alreadie come) & the remembrance of his wiues chamber ſhould reuiue and returne: Narciſſus ruſht out, and told the Centurions and the Tribune which were preſent, that they ſhould put her to death; and that the Emperour had ſo commaunded: and Euodius one of his freed men, was appointed to aſſiſt and ſee it executed. Who haſtening to the gardens, found her along on the earth, and Lepida her mother ſitting by her; alwaies at iarre with her daughter whileſt ſhe flouriſhed in proſperitie; yet in her laſt extremities ouercome with compaſſion, perſwaded her not to tarrie for the executioner; that her life was paſt; & that ſhe ſhould looke for no other honor, then by killing her ſelfe. But her minde corrupted with filthy ſenſualitie, there was no ſparke of honeſty left; her teares and lamentations were in vaine: Then the doores being violently broke open: the Tribune ſtoode in amaze, and in a great dumpe without one word ſpeaking; & the freed men rebuked her with many ſeruile reproches. Meſſallina then firſt of all conſidering of her eſtate, tooke a ſword, which in vaine through trembling feare, ſhe put to her throat, & then to hir breaſt; which at laſt was thruſt through with a blow which the Tribune lent her, and her bodie graunted her mother. Then word was brought Claudius as he was a banquetting, that Meſſallina was dead, not telling him whether by her owne hand, or any mans elſe: neither did he aske ſo much; but called for the cup, and went forward as he was woont to do at his banket. Neither the daies following gaue he any tokens of hate, ioie, anger, ſorrow, or of any other humane affection; not when he ſaw the accuſers ioyfull; not when his children ſad. The Senate helped him to forget her, by giuing order that her name and image ſhould be pulde downe from all publicke and priuate places. It was ordained that the ornaments of the Queſtorſhip ſhould be beſtowed vpon Narciſſus; the lighteſt point of his authoritie, ſeeing he was the chiefeſt after Gallus and Calistus, an honeſt degree and priuiledge; but of which roſe very many lewd actions, which eſcaped vnpuniſhed.
            
         
         
            
            THE TWELFTH BOOKE OF THE ANNALES OF CORNELIVS TACITVS.
            
               
                  I. Three of Claudius freedmen deliberat vpon a wife for him.
               
                  THe Emperours houſe being diuided through the death of Meſſallina, his freed men fell into contention, which of them ſhould chooſe Claudius a wife, alreadie thundering againſt a ſingle life, and thrall to his wiues will. The women on their ſide burnt with no leſſe ambition, eache of them comparing their nobilitie, beautie, and wealth, ſet foorth themſelues and vaunted they were woorthie of ſo great a match. But the chiefeſt doubt was betwixt Lollia Paullina, daughter to M. Paullinus once Conſull, and Iulia Agrippina, Germanicus daughter: Pallas fauoured her, and Calistus the other. AElia Petina of the houſe of the Tuberoes was fauoured of Narciſſus. The Emperour himſelfe was eaſily carried, now hither, now thither, according as he had heard euerie of their perſwaſions; and diſagreeing the one from the other, calleth them to a conſultation; and commaundeth each of them to vtter and yeelde a reaſon of his opinion. Narciſſus beginneth with his old marriage, and familie common to them both (for he had had Antonia by Petina) and that he ſhould haue no new chaunge in his houſe, if his olde wife ſhould returne againe; who would not with the eie of a ſtep mother looke vpon Britannicus and Octauia, the neereſt pledges vnto her owne children. Calistus ſheweth that being reiected by a long diuorſement, if ſhe ſhould be taken againe, ſhe would become prowd and haughtie: therefore it were far better to take Lollia, ſeeing ſhe was without emulation and children; and therefore would be in ſteed of a mother to hir husbands children. But Pallas extolled in Agrippina aboue other qualities, that ſhe ſhould bring with her Germanicus nephewe, woorthy in all regards of the imperiall highnes; extracted of a noble race, and Claudian familie, which ſhould vnite their poſteritie; leaſt a woman fruitfull in child-bearing, and in the flowre of her youth ſhould carrie with her the glorie of the Caeſars to another houſe. This perſwaſion with ſome helpe of Agrippinaes allurements ſuncke deepeſt: who often comming to viſit him vnder colour of kindred, ſo wonne her vncle; that being preferred before all others, though yet not his wife, tooke vpon her the authoritie of his wife. For as ſoone as ſhe was aſſured of the marriage, ſhe beganne to laie plots for greater matters, and vndertooke a match betweene Domitius, whom ſhee had had by Gn. AEnobarbus, and Octauia, Caeſars daughter: which without ſhame and diſcredit could not be accompliſhed, becauſe Caeſar had betrothed Octauia to L. Silanus a yoong man, beſides other vertues, of noble parentage; and on whom Caeſar had beſtowed the markes of triumphe, and licenced to ſet foorth a playe of fencers withall pompe and magnificence, to win the loue and fauour of the people. But nothing ſeemed hard to the Princes minde, who had neither iudgment nor malice, but what was put into him or commaunded. Vitellius therefore cloking vnder the name of a Cenſor baſe and ſeruile deuiſes; fore ſeeing into whoſe handeling rule and dominion would ſhortly come, to winne Agrippinaes fauour, began to intermedle and thruſt himſelfe into her counſels, and carrie tales againſt Silanus: who

had a ſiſter in deede comely, but a ſhameleſſe dame, called Iunia Caluina: who not long before had beene Vitellius ſons wife. From hence roſe the beginning of his accuſation, by drawing her into ſuſpition, not of inceſt with her brother; but of other looſe loues redounding to their ſhame and infamie. Caeſar gaue eare vnto him, as one readie through the loue he bare his daughter, to harken to all ſuſpitions againſt his ſonne in law. But Silanus doubting nothing what ſnares were laide for him; and by chaunce that yeere Pretor, was on the ſudden by an edict publiſhed by Vitellius, put from his Senators roome; although the roule of the Senators were made vp, and the number taken not long before. Claudius thereupon brake off his alliance with him; and Silanus was forced to renounce his office by othe; and the reſt of the time of his Pretorſhip was beſtowed vpon Eprius Marcellus.
               
            
            
               
                  II. Vitellius oration for the marriage of the vncle and the neece. The marriage betweene Claudius and Agrippina. The death of Silanus.
               
               C. Pompeius, and Q. Verannius being Conſuls, the marriage was concluded betweene Claudius and Agrippina, and held as certaine in euery mans mouth through tokens of vnlawfull loues, though they durſt not as yet celebrate the ſolemnities, hauing no precident that the brothers daughter ſhould be brought into the vncles houſe as wife; for it was inceſt: and if not looked into, it was to be feared that it would turne to a publike miſchiefe. Neither was that doubt out of Caeſars head, vntill Vitellius by his drifts and ſleights vndertooke the matter. And asking the Emperour whether he would yeeld to the commandemēt of the people, or authoritie of the Senate? and he anſwering that he was one of the citizens, and not able to withſtand their agreement, Vitellius willed him not to ſtirre out of his pallace, but goeth himſelfe to the Curia, and proteſting that he had a matter to debate which touched the welfare of the whole ſtate, craueth licence to ſpeake firſt, and began as followeth: That the heauie and great toiles of the Prince in gouerning the whole world, wanted ſupport; that being vnburdened of domeſticall cares, he might the better prouide for the common good. And what honeſter ſolace of a Cenſors mind, then to take vnto him a wife, a companion in proſperous and doubtfull fortune? vnto whom he might impart his inward thoughts, commit his ſmall children; he eſpecially not nuzled vp in riot and wanton luſts, but who had beene obedient to lawes from his firſt youth. After he had made this preamble with a gloſing ſpeech, and that it was accepted with great flattery of the Lords of the Senate, he began anew and ſayd. Seeing that all of them did exhort the Prince to marry, it was conuenient a wife were choſen for him, renowmed for her nobilitie, child-bearing, and honeſtie of life. Neither was it needefull to go farre for ſuch a one, ſeeing Agrippina did excell the reſt in noblenes of bloud; & had giuen a proofe of her fruitfulnes, and was indued with other honeſt qualities. That was a matter worthy remembrance, that by the prouidence of the gods, a widow ſhould be ioyned to a Prince, who had tried no matrimonie but his owne. They had heard of their forefathers, and ſeene themſelues, mens wiues to haue beene taken by force at the will of the Emperour; a thing farre from the modeſtie of the preſent time: yea he ſhould be a precident how hereafter the Emperour ſhould take a wife. But it is a ſtrange precident to marry our brothers daughters: but it is a vſuall matter among other nations, and by no law forbidden. And marriages betweene coſen germaines a long time not knowne, in progroſſe of time grew common. A cuſtome is to be applied

according as it is profitable and expedient: and this marriage likewiſe in time to come will be among things commonly practiſed. There wanted not ſome which proteſted, if Caeſar would protract his reſolution, they would force him to it, and ſo ruſht who firſt might out of the Curia: and afterward by multitudes flocked together, crying that the people of Rome deſired the ſame. Claudius expected no longer, but went and met them at the Forum, and ſhewed himſelfe to ſuch as were glad thereof. And entering into the Senate, demaunded that a decree might be inacted, by which, marriage betweene the vncles and nieces, daughters to their brothers, ſhould from thence forward be accompted iuſt and lawfull. Yet for all that onely one there hath beene, called Talledius Seuerus, a gentleman of Rome, who hath greatly deſired to marry in that ſort, whom moſt men thinke to haue done it to win Agrippinaes fauour. By that marriage all was turned vpſide downe in the citie, and al men obeyed this woman; yet not as when Meſſallina abuſed the gouernment through licentiouſnes: but as it were with as great and ſeuere ſubiection, as if they had beene vnder a man. Openly ſhe ſhewed ſeueritie, and often pride; nothing done in her houſe diſhonorably, vnleſſe it were ſo expedient for the furthering of rule and gouernment: her exceeding greedines in raking of money had a cloake, which was the maintenance of the ſtate. The day of the marriage Silanus killed himſelfe, either becauſe vntill that time he had hope of prolonging his life; or elſe choſe that day to make the marriage more odious. Caluina his ſiſter was expulſed Italie. Claudius added certaine ſacrifices according to the lawes of King Tullus, and certaine ſatisfactions by the chiefe prieſt in Dianaes wood, all men laughing Claudius to skorne, that puniſhment and purging ſacrifices of inceſt ſhould be ſought at that time.
            
            
               
                  III. Betrothing of Domitius Agrippinaes ſonne with Octauia, Claudius daughter. Seneca is recalled out of exile. The Parthians demaund that Meherdates may be their King.
               BVt Agrippina, leaſt ſhe ſhould be famous only for infamous actions, got remiſſion of Annaeus Senecaes baniſhment, and withall obtained him the Pretorſhip; perſwading herſelfe it would be gratefully accepted of the communaltie, by reaſon of his great fame in learning, and becauſe Domitius childhood might be trained vp vnder ſuch a maiſter, and vſe his aduiſe and counſel to attaine to the Empire which ſhe hoped after. Becauſe it was thought Seneca would be truſtie to Agrippina, for the remembrance of this benefit receiued of her, and an enemie to Claudius for the griefe of his iniurie. Then thinking it conuenient not to delay the matter any longer, Memmius Pollio Conſull elect was induced through great promiſes to propound, and perſwade Claudius to handfaſt Octauia to Domitius, a thing nothing inconuenient, both their ages conſidered; and might be an entrance to greater matters. Pollio gaue his opinion in words, not vnlike vnto thoſe which Vitellius of late vſed, and thereupon Octauia was betrothed. Now Domitius beſides the kinred which was betweene them before, being betrothed and ſonne in law to the Emperour, began to be made equall to Britannicus, by his mothers practiſes, and pollicie of ſuch as feared the ſonne would reuenge vpon thoſe which procured Meſſalinaes accuſation. About the ſame time the Embaſſadors of the Parthians ſent as I haue ſaid before, to demand Meherdates for their King, entered into the Senat, ;and began to vtter their charge as followeth. They came thither not ignorant of the league betweene them and the Romans, nor diſloyall to the familie of the Arſacides;

but to aske for Vonones ſonne, Phrahates nephew; againſt Gotarzes tyrannie, alike intollerable to the nobilitie and communaltie. Now that his brothers are extinguiſhed by murder, his neereſt kinſemen, and ſuch as were fartheſe off; he would do the like to women with child, and ſmall children; thinking it a meanes being vnfortunate in warres abroad, to couer with that cowardlines his crueltie at home. That their amitie with vs was auncient, and publickly confirmed; and therefore reaſon we ſhould ayd our allies, which might in ſtrength compare with the Romans, but in deede yeeld for reuerence. Therefore the Kings children were giuen for hoſtages, that if they grew weary of their domeſticall gouernment, they might haue recourſe to the Prince and Lords of the Senate, vnder whoſe manner of liuing the King being brought vp, ſhould be preſumed to be the better. When they had vttered theſe and the like ſpeeches, Caeſar began his oration with the greatnes of the Roman Empire, and dutifulnes of the Parthians, and maketh himſelfe equall to Augustus; declaring that a King had beene demaunded of him alſo, not mentioning Tiberius at all, notwithſtanding he had ſent ayd likewiſe. He gaue certaine precepts to Meherdates, who was there preſent, aduertiſing him that he ſhould not thinke himſelfe a Lord and maiſter to commaund ouer his ſubiects as ſlaues; but a guide; and they citizens: and that he ſhould vſe clemencie and iuſtice, vertues ſo much the more gratefull vnto theſe barbarians, by how much the leſſe knowne among them. Then turning himſelfe to the Embaſſadors, he highly commended the youth which had beene brought vp in the citie, as one, whoſe modeſtie had beene well tried: that the diſpoſitions of Kings were to be borne withal, becauſe often changes are not profitable. That the Romane eſtate was growne vnto that height with fulnes of glory, that it deſired peace and quietnes euen to forren nations. After he had thus ſayd, he commaunded C. Caſsius gouernor of Syria, to conduct the yong man to the riuer of Euphrates. Caſsius at that time did excell the reſt in the knowledge of the lawes. For militarie skill is vnknowne in time of reſt and quietnes: and peace eſteemeth alike of the coward and couragious. Neuertheles, as much as thoſe quiet times gaue him leaue, he renewed the auncient diſcipline; kept the legions in practiſe with care and foreſight, as if the enemie had beene at hand; thinking it a thing worthy of his anceſtors, and Caſsian familie, renowned among thoſe people. Hauing therefore ſent for them, through whoſe conſentment the King was demaunded, and planted his camp at Zeugma, where the riuer is moſt paſſable: after that the noblemen of Parthia, and the King of the Arabians called Abbarus was come, he ſhewed vnto Meherdates, that the firſt brunt of the barbarians was fierce and hote; but by delay and lingering became cold, or turned into treaſon; and therefore he ſhould couragiouſly go through his enterpriſe. But his aduiſe was contemned through Abbarus fraude, who detained him like an vnexperienced yong man in the towne of Edeſſa; as though the higheſt degree of fortune and princely felicitie had conſiſted in riot and wantonnes. And when Carrhenes called them in, and aſſured them, that all was in a good readines if they would make haſte, they did not march ſtraight to Meſopotamia, but turned to Armenia in an vnſeaſonable time, becauſe the winter was begun. Then wearied with ſnowes and mountaines, comming neere to the plaine, they ioyned with Carrhenes forces. And hauing paſſed the riuer of Tigris, they entered into the countrey of the Adiabeni; whoſe King Iuliates in open ſhew profeſſed himſelfe a confederate of Meherdates, but vnderhand was more faithfully bent to Gotarzes.
               
            
            
               
               
                  IIII. Gotarzes ouercommeth Meherdates, and cutteth off his eares: Mithradates vſurpeth the kingdome of the Dandarides: and goeth about to driue out Cotys.
               
               NEuertheleſſe in paſſing by, Meherdates tooke the citie of Ninos, the moſt ancient ſeat of Aſſyria, and a famous Caſtle; becauſe that in the laſt battell betwixt Darius and Alexander there, the Perſian power was brought to vtter ruine. In the meane time Gotarzes at a hill called Sambulos, offered vowes to the gods of the place, among which Hercules was chiefly honoured: who at a certaine time admoniſheth his Prieſtes in a dreame, that neere vnto the Temple, they ſhould haue horſes readie prepared for hunting: the horſes loaden with quiuers full of arrowes prawnſing vp and downe the woods, returne at night breathing and panting with their quiuers emptie. The god again declareth to them in a dreame what woods they haue courſed vp and downe in; whither they goe and finde wild beaſts killed in many places. But Gotarzes not hauing ſufficiently ſtrengthened his armie, vſeth the riuer Corma for a defēce. And although he were ſummoned by diuers meſſēgers & hard ſpeeches to battel: yet he ſought delayes; changed place; and ſent ſome to corrupt the enimie, and draw them to forſake their obedience. Among which Ezates Adiabenus, and anon after Abbarus King of the Arabians, with their armie began to ſhrinke through a certaine lightnes incident to that nation: and bicauſe it is tried by experience that the Barbarians had rather come to Rome to demaund a King, then when they haue him keepe him. Now Meherdates ſeeing himſelfe ſtripped of his ſtrongeſt ſuccour, and ſuſpecting leaſt the others would betraye him, determined for his laſt refuge to commit the matter to chaunce, and hazard it in a maine battell. Gotarzes being verie fierce, that his enimies forces were diminiſhed, refuſed not to fight. They met with great ſlaughter and a doubtfull iſſue; vntill Carrhenes making cleare way before him, and driuing and purſuing the enimies too farre, was compaſſed behind with a freſh companie and ſlaine. Then all hope being loſt, Meherdates truſting the promiſes of one Parrhacis a follower of his father, by his falſhood was taken priſoner, and deliuered to the Conquerour. Who intreated him not like a kinſman, or one of the Arſacis ſtocke; but reuiled him like a ſtranger and a Roman: and hauing cut off his eares, gaue him his life, as a ſhew of his clemencie; and diſhonour and reproch vnto vs. Not long after Gotarzes died of a diſeaſe; and Vonones then gouernour of the Medes, was called to be King. There happened nothing in his raigne either proſperous or vnproſperous, worthie the telling: he liued but a ſhort and an inglorious time; and the kingdome of the Parthians was tranſlated to his ſonne Vologeſes. But Mithradates the Boſphoran wandering vp and downe after he had loſt his forces; vnderſtanding that Didius the Roman Captaine with the ſtrength of his armie was departed: and that onely Cotys a raw and rude youth, was left in the new kingdome with ſome few bandes vnder the conduct of Iulius Aquila gentleman of Rome; contemnig both of them, began to ſollicite the countries about him, and allure fugitiues: and at laſt, hauing aſſembled an armie, chaſeth out the King of the Dandarides, and inioyeth his kingdome. Which being vnderſtoode, and looking euerie hower that he would inuade the Boſphoran: Aquila and Cotys diſtruſtring their owne forces, becauſe Zorſines King of the Soraci had taken armes againe, ſought for forreine aide, and ſent Ambaſſadors to Eunones King of the Adorſian nation: being no hard matter to draw him to their

fellowſhip, after he had declared what oddes there was between the Roman forces, and the rebell Mithradates. Whereupon they agreed that Eunones ſhould haue charge of the horſemen, and the Romains beſiege townes. Then hauing muſtered their armie in order, they marche in battell aray; the Adorſi defending the front and the rereward; the cohorts and Boſphorani the middle battell, armed after our faſhion. And ſo driuing backe the enimie, we came to Soza the chiefe towne of Dandarica, which Mithradates forſooke; where we left a garriſon, as being doubtfull of the inhabitants fidelitie. From thence they marched to the Soraci: and hauing paſſed the riuer Panda, they beſieged the citie Vſpe, ſituated on a high place, & fortified with wals and ditches; ſauing that the wals not being made of ſtone, but of hurdles ioyned togither, & earth in the middle, were too weake againſt the beſiegers: who hauing erected towres higher than the wals, with fire and dartes diſordered they beſieged: and had not the night broken off the battell, the towne had beene aſſaulted and taken the ſame day. The next day they ſent Ambaſſadors to intreat for the free men; but of ſlaues they offered ten thouſand, which the Conquerours refuſed. And becauſe that to ſlaie ſuch as yeelded, would be a cruell part; and to keepe ſo great a multitude, hard; they thought it beſt to hold on the ſiege, and kill them by right of warre: and thereupon the ſigne was giuen to ſuch ſouldiers as had ſcaled the wals to put them to the ſword.
            
            
               
                  V. Mithradates being forſaken by Zorſines King of the Soraci, ye eldeth to Eunones King of the Adorſi, and came to Rome after he had made a peace.
               THe ſlaughter of the Vſpenſiens ſtroke the reſt into a feare, thinking now that there was no ſafetie in any thing: ſeeing their armes; their fortreſſes; high and hard places; riuers and townes, were forced alike. Zorſines then long waighing with himſelfe, whether he ſhould ſuccour Mithradates deſperate caſe; or prouide for his fathers kingdome: at length the loue of his countrey ſwaying him, hauing giuen pledges, he proſtrated himſelfe before the image of Caeſar, to the great glorie of the Roman armie; which without any loſſe of bloodſhed on his ſide came (as it is moſt manifeſt) victorious, within three daies iourney of the riuer Tanais. But in returning fortune was not alike; bicauſe ſome of the ſhippes carried on the Taurian ſhores, were by the Barbarians ſurpriſed, & the prefect of the cohorts, and moſt of the Centurions ſlaine. In the meane time Mithradates finding no ſafetie in armes, debateth with himſelfe whoſe mercie he ſhould trie: He feared his brother Cotys, becauſe he betrayed him once, and was now his enimie. There was none of the Romans of ſuch authoritie, that their promiſes ſhould greatly be regarded: in fine, he addreſſeth himſelfe to Eunones his enimie for priuate grudge; but great, and of better credit through the friendſhip newely contracted with vs. Therefore compoſing his countenance, and attiring himſelfe ſutable to his preſent eſtate, goeth to the Kings pallace, and caſting himſelfe at his knees, ſaith: Behold here Mithradates, whom by ſea and by land you haue ſo manie yeeres ſought. Behold I am here of my owne voluntarie will. Vſe as thou wilt the ſonne of great Achemenes, which is the onely thing which the enimies haue not taken from me. But Eunones moued with the nobilitie of the man & the change of his fortune; at his prayer which argued no baſe minde; lifteth vp the ſuppliant, and commendeth him that he had choſen the Adorſian nation, and his right hand for obtayning of pardon. And withall ſendeth Ambaſſadors and letters to Caeſar with theſe contents. That the firſt friendſhip, betwixt

the Emperours and Kings of other mightie nations, proceeded of conformitie and likenes of fortune: but Claudius amitie and his, of a victorie common to them both. That the end of warre were moſt notable, when peace was made with pardoning. So when Zorſinus was conquered nothing was taken from him: for Mithradates although he had deſerued woorſe; no power, no kingdome was intreated for; but onely that he might not be lead in triumphe, and loſe his life. Neuertheleſſe Claudius, although he were milde and gentle towards forreine nobilitie; yet doubted, whether it were beſt for him to receiue the captiue vnder condition of life, or demaund him by force of armes. For on one ſide the griefe of iniuries receiued, and deſire of reuenge pricked him; and on the other, reaſons to the contrarie: That he ſhould take a warre in hand in a hard conntrey, and a hauenleſſe ſea: withall that the Kings were fierce and the people ſcattered, and the ſoile fruitleſſe, and needy of victuals; then that lingering would bring tediouſnes, and haſte danger: the praiſe ſhould be ſmall to the conquerers; the infamie great if they tooke the repulſe: therfore it were beſt to take the offer, and keepe the exiled: who being poore, how much the longer he liued; ſo much the more puniſhment he ſhould indure. Mooued with theſe reaſons he wrote to Eunones. In verie truth, that Mithradates deſerued examplarie puniſhment; neither wanted he power to execute it: neuertheleſſe it hath ſeemed beſt vnto our predeceſſors, to vſe as great benignitie towards humble ſuppliants, as hard and rigorous dealing towards the enimie: for triumphes were gotten of whole nations and kingdomes. Then Mithradates was deliuered and carried to Rome by Iunius Celo Procurator of Pontus; and thought to haue ſpoken more boldly to Caeſar, then his eſtate required. His ſpeech was carried to the people in theſe termes. I am not ſent backe vnto thee, but am come; and if thou beleeue me not, let me goe and trie. There appeered no ſigne of feare in his countenance, when as garded with keepers neere vnto the court, he was ſhewen vnto the people. The Conſularie ornaments were giuen to Colo; and the Pretorian to Aquila:
               
            
            
               
                  VI. The death of Lollia Paulina, through Agrippinaes iealouſie. Calpurnia driuen out of Italie.
               VNder the ſame Conſuls Agrippina boiling with deadly hatred and malice againſt Lollia, becauſe ſhe had contended with her for the marrying of the Prince, left no meanes vnſought, vntill ſhe had ſtirred vp ſome to accuſe her of conference had with the Chaldeans, and Magicians, and counſell asked of the idoll of Apollo Clarius, concerning the Emperours marriage. Hereupon Claudius, the defendant vnhard, hauing ſpoken much before the Senate of her noblenes of birth, that ſhe was L. Voluſius ſiſters daughter; that Cotta Meſſallinus was her great vncle; and ſhe once wife to Mennius Regulus, (for of purpoſe he left out that ſhe had beene married to C. Caeſar) added in the end; that ſhe had practiſed dangerous things againſt the ſtate; and that all occaſion and matter of euill was to be taken away: therefore he was of aduiſe that ſhe ſhould loſe her goods, and depart out of Italy; leauing the baniſhed woman of the infinite wealth which ſhe was miſtres of, but About 39062 pound 10. ſhil. fiftie hundred thouſand ſeſterces. And Calpurnia, a woman of great birth was ouerthrowne, only becauſe the Prince had praiſed her beawtie; not for any amorous affection, but by chaunce: yet Agrippina ſtretched not her malice to the vttermoſt againſt her, but ſent a Tribune to make away Lollia. And Cadius Rufus was condemned for bribery, and extorſion, at the inſtance of the Bithynians. And in conſideration of the great reuerence the inhabitants of Gallia Narbonenſis bare the

Lords of the Senat, it was graunted to the Senators of that prouince, that without licence of the Prince they might go viſit their houſes, & diſpoſe of their goods with the like priuiledge, as they which were of the prouince of Sicilia. The Ituraei and Iewes, after their Kings Sohemus and Agrippa were dead, were ioyned to the prouince of Syria. It was ordained that the ceremonies of the auguration of health, intermitted fiue and twenty yeeres, ſhould be renewed, and continued from thenceforth. Caeſar inlarged the circuit of the citie, according to the auncient cuſtome; by which licence was giuen them which had inlarged the bounds of the Empire, to inlarge the bounds of the Citie. Neuertheles none of the Roman captaines L. Sylla and Augustus excepted, although they had ſubdued mightie nations, had vndertaken to do it: but whether the Kings which then ruled the citie did it for ambition or vaine-glory, there run diuers reports. But it ſhall not be impertinent, as I thinke, to lay downe the beginning of the foundation of Rome, and what circuit Romulus firſt aſſigned. He therefore began the circuit at the oxe market called forum boarium, where we ſee ſet vp a picture of a braſen Bull (becauſe that kinde of beaſt is broken to the plough) from thence drawing a furrow as a plat of the circuit of the citie, which contained within it the great altar of Hercules. From thence by certaine diſtances ſtones were put by the foote of the hill Palatine, vnto the altar of Conſus; then to the old Curies; then to the chappell of the houſhold gods. For ſome haue thought, that the forum Romanum, and the Capitoll, were not added to the citie by Romulus, but by T. Tatius. After that, the circuit or pomoerium was augmented, according to the fortune and riches of the Kings. And for the limits that Claudius then put, they are eaſily knowne, and are written in the publike actes.
            
            
               
                  VII. Domitius ſonne of Agrippina is adopted by Claudius. The Catti ſend hostages to Rome. Vannius driuen out of his countrey, goeth to Rome.
               
                  CAntistius, and M. Suilius being Conſuls, the adoption of Domitius was haſtened through Pallas credit, who being wholie at Agrippinaes deuotion, as a principall meane of working the marriage betweene Claudius and her, then bound vnto her, for vnlawfull companie of her bodie; vrged Claudius 
                  to prouide for the common wealth, and ſtrengthen Britannicus eſtate whileſt he was yong. So Augustus wiues children did flouriſh, although he had nephewes of his owne for a ſtay to his houſe: and Tiberius hauing iſſue of his owne, adopted Germanicus: therefore that he ſhould alſo ſtrengthen himſelfe with this yong man, who would take part of the care vpon him. Claudius yeelding to this perſwaſion, preferreth Domitius being but two yeeres elder, before his owne ſonne; and maketh an oration before the Lords of the Senate, which he receiued of his freed man Pallas. The skilfull and wiſe did note, that there had neuer beene any adoption before that time in the Patrician familie of the Claudians, & that the ſucceſſion had neuer failed from Atta Clauſus. Neuertheles great thanks were rendred the Prince, and exquiſite flatterie vſed to Domitius, and a decree ſet downe, by which he ſhould be accompted one of the Claudian familie, and be called Nero. Agrippina alſo was magnified with the ſurname of Augusta. Both which done, there was no man ſo voide of pitie, which was not grieued and ſory for Britannicus fortune: for by little and little he was abandoned and skorned of his baſeſt ſeruants, by ſhewing an vnſeaſonable dutie to his ſtepmother, which he well perceiued, as not dull witted, but of good conceipt, as it is reported; either becauſe he was ſo indeede, or attributed to him in

his diſtreſſe, the ſame and opinion continued without triall. Agrippina to make her credit and power knowen among the confederates alſo, commaunded the old ſouldiers, and a colonie to be brought to the citie of Vbiumw, here ſhe was borne, which was afterward called of her name Agrippina. It hapned by chaunce, that when that nation paſſed the Rhene, her grandfather Agrippa tooke them into his protection. About the ſame time vpper Germanie quaked with feare, through the comming of the Catti, which robbed and ſpoiled all where they came. Whereupon L. Pomponius Lieutenant, gaue aduertiſement to the aide Vangiones, & Nemetians, adding vnto them a company of horſemen, to get before thoſe forragers; or if they ſlipped away, compaſſe and ſurprize them on a ſudden. The diligence of the ſouldiers followed the captaines counſell, and diuiding themſelues into two companies, thoſe which tooke the left hand came vpon them, and ſlew them, as they newly returned from pillage, riotouſly abuſing their bootie, and heauie aſleepe. Their ioy was increaſed, becauſe they had deliuered from ſeruitude ſome of their fellowes, which fortie yeeres before had beene taken when Varus was defeated. But thoſe which tooke the right hand, and the neereſt way, meeting the enemie in the face, and daring to encounter, made a greater ſlaughter, and loaden with bootie & fame, returned to the hill Taunus; where Pomponius was expected with the legions, if the Catti deſiring a reuenge, would offer occaſion to ſight. But they fearing leaſt the Romanes would ſet on them on one ſide, and the Cheruſci with whom they are alwayes at iarre, on the other; ſent Embaſſadors and hoſtages to Rome; where the honor of triumph was awarded Pomponius, a ſmall part of his fame with poſteritie, being more renowmed for skill in poetrie. About the ſame time Vannius made King of the Sweuians by Druſus Caeſar, was driuen out of his kingdome: in the beginning of his rule well liked and accepted of the people; but in the end growing prowde, partly by the hatred of the borderers, and partly by ciuill diſcords, was put to the worſt. The authors of this practiſe were Iubillius King of the Hermunduri, and Vangio, and Sido, Vannius ſiſters children: yet Claudius although often intreated, whileſt theſe barbarous people were together by the eares, would no way intermeddle; only he promiſed Vannius refuge if he were driuen out: & wrote vnto P. Attilius Histrus gouernor of Pannonie, to lodge a legion, and all the ayd he could leuie in the prouince, on the banke of Danubium; as an ayd to the conquered, and a terror to the conquerer, leaſt puffed vp with proſperous fortune, they would ſo diſturb our peace. For an infinite power of the Ligians and other nations were comming, drawen with the fame of the wealth of Vannius kingdome, which for thirtie yeeres ſpace he had enriched with pillages and tributes. Vannius owne forces conſiſted in footemen, his horſemen were of Sarmates, called Iazygiens, vnable to encounter the multitude of the enemies power, and therefore defended himſelfe in fortreſſes, and purpoſed to protract the warre. But the Iazygiens not able to indure to be beſieged, but wandering and waſting the champion adioyning, droue Vannius to a neceſſitie of fighting, becauſe Ligius and Hermundurus were preſſing in, on the backs of them. Vannius therfore iſſuing out of his fort, loſt the battell, but not without honor, euen in his diſtreſſe: becauſe in perſon he ſhunned not the battell, and face to face receiued wounds in his bodie; and at laſt fled to his ſhipping which waited for him in Danubium: by and by his vaſſals following him, hauing receiued land to dwell in, planted themſelues in a part of Hungaria. The kingdome Vangio and Sido parted betweene them, ſhewing great loyaltie towards vs. Their ſubiects either for their deſert, or ſuch being the diſpoſition of thoſe which are kept vnder, whileſt they were yet a getting the kingdome, ſhewed them all tokens of loue and affection: but

after they had gotten it, as the greater their loue before, ſo the greater their hatred after.
            
            
               
                  VIII. Oſtorius gouernor of great Britannia, gaineth a battell againſt the Iceni, and tooke Caractacus King of the ſame countrey, and ſent him to Rome. The warres of the Romaines against the Siluri.
               
                  POstorius Propretor of Britannia, at his landing found all in an vprore: the enemie ranging the allies countrey, and vſing ſo much the greater violence, bicauſe he thought the new captaine, as vnacquainted with his armie, and the winter alſo begun, would not come foorth to encounter him. But he knowing well that the firſt ſucceſſe breedeth either feare or confidence; gathered with ſpeede his readieſt cohorts, made toward the enemie, ſlaying thoſe which made head againſt him; purſued the reſidue ſtragled abroad, for feare leaſt they ſhould ioyne againe: and leaſt a faithles and cloaked peace ſhould neither giue the captaine nor the ſouldier any reſt, he diſarmed thoſe he ſuſpected, and hemmed them in with garriſons betweene Antona and Sabrina Nen, at Northhampton and S
                        •
                     
                     uerne. Vice Camdenum
                  . Which the Iceni Sffolke, Norfolke, Cambrid eſhire, and Hunting onſhire. firſt of all refuſed, a ſtrong people, and vnſhaken with warres; becauſe that of their owne motion they had ſought our alliance and amitie: and at their inſtigation the people adioyning choſe a place to fight, compaſſed in, with a rude and common trench, and narrow entrance, to hinder the comming in of horſemen. That fence the Roman Captaine, although he wanted the ſtrength of the legions, went about to force with the aide of the allies alone: and hauing placed his cohorts in rankes, ſetteth the troupes of horſemen in alike readines to their buſines: then giuing the ſigne of battell brake the rampire, and diſordered the enimies in their owne fortreſſes. Who ſtroken in conſcience with a remorſe for their rebellion; and ſeeing all paſſages of eſcaping ſtopped vp; ſhewed great courage and valoure in defending themſelues. In which fight M. Ostorius the Lieutenants ſonne, deſerued the honour of ſauing a citizen. But by the ſlaughter of the Iceni, thoſe which wauered betweene warre and peace were quieted, and the armie lead againſt the Whether So
                        ••
                     merſetſhire men or Chesſhire, Conſul. Camd.
                   Cangi. Whoſe countrey they waſted and ſpoiled; the enimie not daring to ſhew himſelfe in fielde: or if priuily and by ſtealth they attempted to cut off any which dragged behind, they payed for their comming. Now the Roman armie was come neere vnto the ſea coaſt which lookes towards Ireland, when as certaine tumults ſproong vp among the Yorkeſhire, Lancaſhire, B. of Durham Weſtmerlād, Cumberland, Brigantes brought backe the Captaine, certainly reſolued not to attempt any new matter, vntill he had ſetled the old. But as for the Brigantes, ſome fewe put to death which firſt began to take armes; the reſidue being pardoned, all were quieted. The Southwales as Herefordſhire, Radnorſhire, Brecknockſhire, Monmouthſhire, and Glamorganſhire, Siluri could neither by crueltie nor faire meanes, be hindered from making warre: and therefore no remedie left to keepe them vnder, but with a garriſon of legionarie ſoldiers. The which to performe more eaſily, a colonie called Maldon in Eſſex, Camalodunum, of a ſtrong companie of old ſouldiers, was brought into the ſubdued countrey, as an aide and ſafegard againſt the rebels; and inducement to the confederates, to the obſeruation of lawes. From thence they marched againſt the Siluri; beſides their owne courage truſting to Caractacus ſtrength: who hauing waded thorow manie dangers, and in manie aduentures proſperous and luckie, had gotten ſuch reputation, that he was preferred before all the Britiſh Captaines. But in craft, and skilfulnes of the countrey, hauing the aduantage on vs, but weaker in ſtrength, remoueth the war to the Northwales Montgomery ſhire, Merionythſhire, Carnaruonſhire, Denbighſhire, and Flintſhire Ordouices: and there all thoſe ioyning to him which feared our peace, reſolued

to hazard the laſt chaunce; chuſing a place for the battell, where the comming in and going out was verie incommodious to vs; and to his, great aduantage. Then they got to the top of a hill: and if there were any eaſie paſſage vnto them, they ſtopped it vp with heapes of ſtones, as it were in maner of a rampire. Not farre off, ranne a riuer with an vncertaine foord, where a great troupe of his beſt ſoldiers were readie in order before the rampire. Beſides this, the leaders went about, exhorted and incouraged the ſouldiers, taking all occaſion of feare from them, and putting them in hope, with all other inducements of warre. And Caractacus courſing hither & thither, proteſted: That that day, and that battell ſhould be either the beginning of the recouering of their libertie, or perpetuall ſeruitude. He called vpon the names of his aunceſtors, which chaſed Caeſar the Dictator out of the Ile; by whoſe valour they were deliuered from hatchets, and tributes; and inioyed freely their wiues and childrens bodies vndefiled. Whileſt he vttered theſe or the like ſpeeches, the people made a noiſe about him; and euerie man ſwore according to the religion of his countrey, that he would yeeld, neither for wounds nor armes. That courage and cheerefulnes greatly aſtonied the Roman Captaine: and conſidering the riuer before his face; the forte they had caſt vp; the high hils which hanged ouer them; all things deadly to thē, and commodious for the enimie; droue him into a doubt of the ſucceſſe. Neuertheleſſe the ſouldier demaunded battell, crying that there was nothing which valour could not ouercome. The Prefects and Tribunes vſing the like ſpeeches, greatly incenſed the ardour and courage of the reſt. The Ostorius hauing viewed what places were of hard paſſage, and which of eaſie; leadeth his armie boiling with choler, with ſmall difficultie ouer the riuer. But when we were come to the rampire, as long as we fought with throwing of dartes, we receiued moſt wounds, and many of our men were ſlaine: but after we had made our target fence Vide annot in hist. lib. 3. num. 7. thicke, and broken downe thoſe rude compacted heapes of ſtones; and that the fronts of both the armies came cloſe to handie ſtrokes, without ods the Barbarians fled to the hill tops. But thither alſo as wel the light harneſſed ſouldier, as the corſlets brake in: after whom the one galding them with darts and Iauelins; and the others marching thicke and cloſe togither, brake the ranks, and diſordered the Britaines; hauing neither head-peece, nor coate offence. If they thought to reſiſt our aid-ſouldiers, they were beaten downe with ſwords and Iauelins by the legionaries; if they turned to make head againſt them, they were ſlaine with the pikes and two hāded ſwords of the auxiliaries. That victory was famous; Caractacus wife & daughter were taken, and his brothers yeelded themſelues. He himſelfe (as generally all ſuccour failes in aduerſitie) crauing defence and protection of Cartiſmandua, Queen of the Brigantes was by her taken priſoner and deliuered to the conquerers, nine yeeres after the warre was begun in Britannia. Whereupon his fame being carried ouer the Ilands, and ſpread abroade throughout the Prouinces adioyning, was alſo renowmed in Italie: and they deſired to ſee who he was, that ſo manie yeeres had contemned our forces. Neither was his name meanely eſteemed of at Rome. And whileſt Caeſar extolled his owne woorth, he made the conquered more glorious. The people was aſſembled, as to ſee a notable ſpectacle. The Emperours guard was all in armes, and good order, in the field before their campe: then Caractacus vaſſals and retinue going before, the capariſſons, his chaines and all other things gotten in warre againſt ſtrangers, were brought after; then his brothers; his wife and daughter; and laſt of all, he himſelfe was ſhewen to the people. The prayers of the reſt were baſe for feare: but Caractacus neither hanging downe the head; nor in words crauing mercie, when he ſtoode before Caeſars tribunal, ſpake as followeth.

                  If my moderation in proſperitie had beene as great as my nobilitie and fortune, I had come rather as a friend into this citie, then a captiue: neither wouldeſt thou haue diſdained to haue receiued me with couenāts of peace, being deſcended of ancient progenitors, and commaunding ouer many nations. My preſent lot, as it is to me diſhonorable; ſo is it to thee magnificent. I haue had horſes, men, armes, wealth: What maruell is it if vnwillingly I haue loſt them? for if you will commaund all men, it followeth that all men become bondmen. If preſently I had yeelded and beene deliuered into thy hands; neither my fortune, nor thy glorie had beene renowned; and obliuion would haue followed my puniſhment. But if thou keepe me aliue, I ſhall be for euer an example of thy clemencie. Hauing ſpoken theſe words, Caeſar pardoned him, his wife, and his brothers. And being all vnbound, they did their reuerence likewiſe vnto Agrippina, who ſate aloft in another high chaire; and gaue her the like praiſes and thankes, as they had giuen the Prince. Surely a new and ſtrange thing, and of our anceſtors neuer vſed, that a woman ſhould ſit and commaund the Roman enſignes; but ſhe carried herſelfe as a fellow and aſſociate of the Empire gottē by hir anceſtors. After this the Lords of the Senat being called togither, they made long and glorious diſcourſes touching Caractacus captiuitie: affirming it to be no leſſe honorable then when P. Scipio ſhewed Siphaces vnto the people, and L. Paullus, Perſes; or if any other had exhibited to the view of the people Kings, vanquiſhed and ouercome. Then publike honours of triumphe were ordained for Ostorius, his fortunes vntill then proſperous; but not long after doubtfull: either bicauſe that Caractacus being remooued, as though thereby all had beene vanquiſhed and ſubdued, ſeruice was careleſly intertained; or els bicauſe that the enimies hauing compaſſion of ſo mightie a King, were more feruently enflamed to reuenge. For they inuironed the campe-maſter, and the legionarie cohorts, which were left behinde to build fortreſſes in the Silures countrie: and if they had not been ſpeedily reſcued by the villages and fortes adioyning, they had been put to the ſword euerie man. Neuertheleſſe the campe-maſter, and eight Centurions, and the forwardeſt common ſoldiers, were ſlaine: and anon after they put to flight our forragers, and the troupes of horſemen which were ſent to reſcue them. Then Ostorius ſendeth abroade certaine light harneſſed companies; which yet could not ſtaie their flight, if the legions had not vndertaken the battell. By their ſtrength they fought with ſmall oddes on either hand, till at length we had the better of it; and the enemie betooke him to his heeles with ſmall loſſe, becauſe the day beganne to faile. After that time they had diuers skirmiſhes, though for the moſt part in woods and mariſhes, according as occaſion was giuen, in manner of roades, either by chance, or of valoure; ſometime raſhly, ſometimes with foreſight; now for anger, now for bootie; ſometimes by their captaines commaundement; and ſometime without warrant: but principally by the obſtinacie of the Siluri, exaſperated with a ſpeech which the Roman Emperour ſhould haue vſed: which was, that as the Sugambri were deſtroyed, and tranſported into Gallia; ſo the name of the Siluri ſhould vtterly bee extinguiſhed. And in this heate they intercepted two aidebandes, vncircumſpectly waſting and ſpoiling through the auarice of the captaines; and by diſtributing the ſpoiles and priſoners, drew the reſidue of the nations to reuolt; when as Ostorius wearied with care and trauell yeelded vp his ghoſt: the enemie reioyſing thereat, as at the death of a captaine not to be deſpiſed, though not in battell, yet ſpent by reaſon of the warre. But Caeſar being aduertiſed of the death of his Lieutenant, leaſt the Prouince ſhould be deſtitute of a gouernor, ſent A. Didius in his place. He being gone thither with great ſpeede, yet found not all

quiet: Manlius Valens in the meane ſpace hauing had with a legion committed to his charge an vnluckie fight. The fame whereof the enemie made greater then it was, to terrifie the captaine which was comming: and he vſed the like pollicie, and augmented the fame of that which he had heard, to win more praiſe by appeaſing the ſturres; or if he could not, to purchaſe pardon more eaſily. The Siluri did therein endomage vs, and waſte and ſpoile farre abroad, vntill by Didius comming they were driuē back. But after that Caractacus was taken, Venutius a very expert man in militarie affaires, borne at the citie of the Iugantes; E
                        〈…〉
                     itate Brigantum ſaith Camd. & as I haue ſaid before, a long time truſtie vnto vs, and defended by the Roman power, as long as the marriage betwixt him and Cartiſmandua continued; rebelled againſt vs, by reaſon of a diuorſe and warre betweene them. But at the firſt the ſtrife was onely betweene them two, vntill Cartiſmandua by pollicie had taken priſoner Venutius brother and neereſt kinſmen. Whereupon the enemies kindled with rage, and ignominie pricking them forward, leaſt they ſhould be brought vnder the yoke of a woman, they inuaded her kingdome with a ſtrong power of armed and choiſe youth. Which was foreſeene by vs, and the cohorts ſent to ſecond her, fought a hote battell; which at the beginning was doubtfull, though the end more ioyfull. A legion alſo which Ceſius Naſica commaunded, fought with the like ſucceſſe: for Didius being ſtroken in yeeres, and hauing receiued many honors, thought it ſufficient to execute his charge, and driue away the enemie by the help of others. Theſe exploites although they were atchieued by two Propretors Ostorius and Didius in many yeeres; yet I thought good to ioyne together, leaſt being ſeuered, they ſhould not ſo well haue beene remembred.
            
            
               
                  IX. Nero Agrippinaes ſonne, is preferred before Britannicus, ſonne to Claudius.
               
               NOw I will returne to the order of times. Ti. Claudius beeing the fift time Conſull, and Ser. Cornelius Orfitus, great haſte was made to make Nero of full yeeres, Toga virilis in oppoſition to praetexta, which noble mens childrē wore till 17. then tooke togam virilem: tenes vtique memoria quantum ſenſeris gaudium, cum praetexta poſita, ſumſiſti virilem togam. Senec. that he might ſeeme more capable of the gouernment. And Caeſar willingly yeelding to the flattery of the Lords of the Senate, conſented that Nero ſhould be Conſull at twentie yeeres of age: and being elect, in the meane ſeaſon, haue the Proconſulary authoritie out of the citie; and be called prince of youth. There was alſo giuen in his name a donatiue to the ſouldiers, and a liberalitie to the people. The Circenſian playes being exhibited to win the fauour of the people, Britannicus in his pretext, and Nero in triumphing attire; becauſe the people ſhould ſee the one in the magnificence of an Emperour, and the other in the habite of a child; thereby to preſume what fortune to either of them ſhould hereafter fall. Withall, if any of the Centurions or Tribunes bewayled Britannicus hap, they were remoued either by fained pretences, or vnder colour of preferment: yea of the freed men, if any were faithfull he was not ſuffered about him. As theſe two met vpon occaſion, Nero ſaluted Britannicus by his name, and Britannicus rendred him the like by the name of Domitius. Which Agrippina taking hold of, as a beginning of a quarrel, carieth to her husband with a grieuous complaint, ſaying: that the adoption was nought ſet by, the decree of Senate, the ordinance of the people broken and abrogated in his owne houſe: and if ſuch contemptuous frowardnes of Britannicus teachers were not ſeuerely looked vnto, it would burſt out into ſome publike miſchiefe. Claudius moued with theſe complaints, as though they had beene faults indeede, either baniſhed, or put to death the chiefeſt bringers vp

of his ſonne, and placed ſuch ouer him as his ſtepmother would appoint. Neuertheleſſe Agrippina durſt not leuell at her chiefeſt marke, which was, that her ſonne ſhould ſucceede in ſtate, vnleſſe Luſius Geta, and Rufus Criſpinus captaines of Caeſars gard were firſt diſcharged; whom ſhe thought would be mindfull of Meſſallinaes fauours towards them, and therefore bound vnto her children. Agrippina therefore beareth the Emperour in hand, that the gard was deuided into factions through ambition of the two captaines ſtriuing for ſuperioritie; that the diſcipline of ſeruice would be better kept if the ſouldiers were commaunded by one alone. The charge of the cohorts was transferred vnto Burrhus Afranius, a man of great fame for matter of ſeruice, yet knowing well by whoſe practiſe and fauour he came to the place. Agrippina began alſo to raiſe her owne eſtate to a higher degree, by entering into the Capitol in a chariot, which in times paſt was a cuſtome only lawfull for the Prieſts in ſacred rites; which augmented the more the ſtate of this woman, becauſe ſhe was the onely example vnto this day of any one, who being daughter of an Emperour, hath been alſo ſiſter, wife, and mother of an Emperour. In the meane ſeaſon her chiefeſt buckler Vitellius, being in higheſt fauour, and very old (ſo ſlipperie is the ſtate of great perſonages) was accuſed by Iunius Lupus Senator, of treaſon, and aſpiring to the Empire; and Caeſar readie to giue eare to the accuſation, if he had not rather changed his opinion by Agrippinaes threates then intreaties, and ſo to baniſh the accuſer, which was the puniſhment Vitellius beſt liked. That yeere many prodigious ſights hapned: as that many birds portending euill luck lighted vpon the Capitol; many houſes ruined by often earthquakes, and the feare ſpreading among the aſtonied people, many in throngs were ſmothered. The want of corne, and the famine which inſued thereof was alſo conſtrued as a preſage of euill luck. Neither did they complaine in ſecret only, but came about Claudius as he gaue audience, with turbulent clamors, and hauing thruſt him to the end of the forum, followed him, vntill that with a band of ſouldiers he brake through the preaſe. It was moſt certaine that the citie was not victualled for aboue fifteene dayes: but by the great goodnes of the gods, and mildnes of the winter, the citie was relieued in neceſſitie. But truly in times paſt prouiſion of corne hath beene tranſported out of Italie into other prouinces farre diſtant. And at this preſent we ſtand not in want through the barrennes of the countrey, but we do rather manure Afrike and Aegypt, and hazard the life of the people of Rome by ſea, whereof depends want or abundance.
            
            
               
                  X. Warres betweene the Romans and the Parthians.
               THe ſame yeere a warre begun betweene the Armenians and Hiberi, was cauſe of great troubles betwixt the Romans and the Parthians. Vologeſes was King of the Parthians, deſcended by his mothers ſide of a Greek concubine, yet got the kingdome by conſent of his brothers. Pharaſmanes hath a long time poſſeſſed the Hiberians countrey as a King; and his brother Mithradates the Armenians through our forces. Pharaſmanes had a ſonne called Rhadamistus of a comely tall ſtature, and of a verie ſtrong and able bodie, trained vp in the qualities and practiſes his father before him had beene, and greatly renowned among his neighbors. He was woont to ſay that the kingdome of Hiberia was ſmall; and yet kept from him by his father, who was verie olde: and ſo oft he did caſt foorth thoſe ſpeeches, and ſo fiercely, that it was eaſily ſeene how greedie a deſire he had to raigne. Pharaſmanes then ſeeing this yoong man ſo deſirous and readie to rule, miſdoubting the peoples affection bent towardes him, by reaſon of his declining yeeres; thought it

beſt to feede him with ſome other hope, and ſet Armenia before his eies, telling him that he had giuen that kingdome to Mithradates, hauing firſt expulſed the Parthians. Yet that it was not his beſt courſe to ſet on it by force; but vſe policie againſt Mithradates and intrap him when he leaſt looked for it. Rhadamistus vnder colour of ſome diſcontent with his father, through the inſupportable dealing of his ſtepmother, goeth to his vncle: where being intreated with all courteſie as if he had been his owne childe, ſolliciteth the chiefe noble men of Armenia to rebellion: Mithradates knowing nothing, but ſtill entertaining him with all fauour and kindnes. Rhadamistus vnder colour of reconciliation returned vnto his father, and declared vnto him, to what a forwardnes he had brought matters by pollicie; and that the reſt was to bee accompliſhed by armes. In the meane time Pharaſmanes ſeeketh occaſions of warre: and faineth that when he made warre againſt the King of the Albani, and demaunded ſuccour of the Romans, his brother was againſt him, which iniurie he would reuenge to his vtter ruine and ouerthrow. And therewithall giueth his ſonne a ſtrong power; who hauing terrified Mithradates with a ſudden irruption and driuen him out of the field, forced him to flee into a forte called Gorneas, ſtrong by ſituation, and garded with a garriſon of ſouldiers: Caelius Pollio being their Captaine, and Caſperius their Centurion. The barbarous people know nothing leſſe then engines and ſubtile deuiſes in beſieging and aſſayling of fortreſſes: and to vs that part of ſeruice is moſt familiar. And Rhadamistus in vaine, yea with his loſſe hauing tried to approche the forte beginneth the ſiege; and ſeeing how little good was to be done that waie, trieth what marchandiſe he could make with the Captaine for money: although Caſperius proteſted that a King confederate, or Armenia the gift of the people of Rome, ought not to be bought and ſold by corruption and money. In the ende, becauſe Pollio pretended the multitude of enemies, and Rhadamistus his fathers commaundement; Caſperius hauing agreed to a ſuſpenſion of armes, departed: with intention that if he could not withdraw Pharaſmanes from making war againſt Mithradates, he would informe T. Vinidius Quadratus preſident of Syria in what ſtate Armenia ſtoode. By the departure of the Centurion, the prefect being as it were deliuered of a keeper, began to exhorte Mithradates to make a peace: Shewing him the vnitie that ſhould be betweene brothers, that Pharaſmanes was his elder brother; with other reſpects of friendſhip and alliance; as that he had married Pharaſmanes daughter, and how he was Rhadamistus father in law. The Hiberi refuſed not to make a peace, although at that time they were ſtrong, and the perfidiouſnes of the Armenian well knowen; & Mithradates had no other refuge but the Caſtle deſtitute of munition: & therfore that he ſhould not doubt rather to accept conditions of peace without blood, then trie the hazard of war. Mithradates reſolued not on the ſudden, ſuſpecting the Captaines counſels; becauſe he had lewdly behaued himſelfe with the Kings concubines, was a man eaſily corrupted with money to all lewdnes. Caſperius in the meane ſpace goeth to Pharaſmanes, and is verie inſtant that the Hiberi ſhould depart from the ſiege of Gorneas. But the King giuing him openly vncertaine anſwers, and for the moſt part gentle and milde; by ſecret meſſengers aduertiſeth Rhadamistus by all poſſible meanes to haſten the aſſault. The price of the treaſon is augmented, and Pollio ſecretly corrupting the ſouldiers, perſwadeth them earneſtly to demand a peace, and threaten that they would abandon the fortreſſe. Through which neceſſitie Mithradates taketh a day and place to treate of a peace, and goeth out of the fortreſſe. Rhadamistus running immediately to imbrace him; faineth great obedience; calleth him father in lawe, and father; and ſweareth he would vſe no violence towards

him, neither by ſword, nor poiſon. And withall draweth him into a wood hard by, ſaying: that there he had cauſed a ſacrifice to be prouided, to conclude and confirme the peace in the preſence of the gods. The cuſtome of thoſe Kings is, that when they make any attonement, to ioyne their right hands, and binde their thumbs togither, and draw them hard with a knot; then when the blood is runne to the outward parts, with a ſmall pricke let it out, and then licke the one the others: that attonement is counted ſecret, as it were hallowed with their mutuall blood. But he which ſhould haue tied their thumbs togither, faining as if he had fallen, catcheth hold of Mithradates knees, and ouerthroweth him: immediately many ranne in and bound him in chaines and fetters, and ſo drewe him away, which the Barbarians repute a great ignominie and diſhonor. The common people whom he had rigorouſly tyranniſed, reuiled him, and offered to ſtrike him. But contrariwiſe there were ſome which had compaſſion of ſo great a chaunge of fortune: and his wife following with her little children filled all with lamentation; who were all thruſt into ſundrie couered wagons, vntill Pharaſmanes pleaſure was knowen. But the Kingdome was deerer vnto him, then his brother and daughter; and therefore his mind was readie bent to all wickednes: onely he tooke order that they ſhould not be murdered in his ſight. And Rhadamistus as it were mindefull of his othe, vſed neither ſword nor poiſon againſt his ſiſter & vncle; but laying thē on the ground couereth and ſtifeleth them with a heauie burden of clothes. And Mithradates children were ſlaine likewiſe, becauſe they wept and bewailed the murdering of their parents. But Quadratus vnderſtanding that Mithradates was betrayed, and that the murderers inioyed the kingdome; calleth a councell, declareth the matter, and conſulteth whether he ſhould reuenge or not. Few had care of the publick credit; moſt were of opinion that they ſhould imbrace the ſureſt way. That they ſhould be glad of all wickednes committed among forraine nations: yea that they ſhould caſt ſeedes of ſedition and hatred among them: as oft the Roman Princes had beſtowed the ſame Armenia vnder colour of liberalitie, now to one, now to another, as an occaſion to put thoſe Barbarians togither by the eares. That Rhadamistus might inioy his ill gotten kingdome, ſo as withall he be odious and infamous: ſeeing that it was better ſo for the Romans, than if he had gotten it with credit. They all condeſcended vnto this aduiſe. And yet leaſt they ſhould ſeeme to approoue that wicked fact, and leaſt Caeſar ſhould commaund the contrarie, meſſengers were ſent to Pharaſmanes, aduiſing him to depart Armenia, and withdraw his ſonne away likewiſe. At that time Iulius Pelignus a daſtardly coward, and no leſſe deſpicable a ieſting ſtocke for miſhape and deformitie of bodie, was Procurator of Cappadocia; but of inward familiaritie with Caeſar; when being a priuate man in times paſt, in his companie he ſpent his idle time with delight and contentation. This Pelignus hauing gathered togither the forces of the Prouinces, as if he would recouer Armenia, but waſting and ſpoiling the allies more then the enimies; his owne reuolting from him, and the Barbarians making incurſions; being without ſuccour came to Rhadamistus, who with gifts ſo wonne him, that of his own motion he exhorted him to crowne himſelfe King, and aſſiſted him as the author and approouer of the action. Which diſhoneſt fact being bruted abroade, leaſt the credit of the reſt ſhould be meaſured according to this fact of Pelignus; Heluidius Priſcus, Lieutenant was ſent with a legion to redreſſe thoſe ſturres as the preſent occaſion required. Who hauing withall conuenient ſpeed paſſed ouer the hill Taurus, and ſetling the affaires there, rather with moderation, then force; was cōmaunded to returne to Syria; leaſt he ſhould be a beginning of warre againſt the Parthians. For Vologeſes thinking there had fell out iuſt

occaſion of inuading Armenia, which poſſeſſed of his anceſtors, a forraine King now occupied by a lewde practiſe, aſſembleth his power: and becauſe none of his houſe ſhould liue without rule and ſoueraigntie, goeth about to inueſt his brother Tiridates in the kingdome. By the comming of the Parthians, the Hiberi were driuen out without ſtroke ſtriking: and the cities of the Armenians, Artaxata, & Tigranocerta, ſubmitted themſelues to the yoke. But the ſharpe and hard winter, or elſe ſcarſitie of victuals & other prouiſion, & the ſicknes proceeding of both; cōſtrained Vologeſes to forſake his pretended enterpriſe: and Rhadamistus inuadeth Armenia a freſh, hauing none to reſiſt him; more cruell then before, as againſt rebels, readie at all times to rebell if occaſion were offered. In ſo much that they, though accuſtomed to bondage: yet breake all patience, and beſiege the Kings houſe; Rhadamistus hauing no other refuge, then the ſwiftnes of his horſes, ſaued both himſelfe and his wife. But his wife being great with childe, endured the firſt flight ſo ſo, for feare of the enimie and loue of her husband: afterward by continuall haſte and ouer-much iogging and ſhaking, ſhe began to pray her husband, that with an honeſt death ſhe might be deliuered from the reproch of captiuitie. He at the firſt embraced her, comforted her, encouraged her; then admiring her ſtoutnes, then ſicke with griefe, leaſt leauing her behinde him, any ſhould enioy her: at laſt ouercome with loue; and being no babe in wicked atrempts, draweth his cymetter; and hauing giuen her a wound, drew her to the banke of Araxis, and committed her to the riuer, leaſt her bodie ſhould bee carried away; and poſteth himſelfe to Hyberia his fathers kingdome. In the meane time the ſhepheards eſpied Zenobia (for ſo was Rhadamistus wife called) drawing breath and aliue, vpon the quiet ſhore of the riuer: and iudging her by the comelines of hir perſon of ſome noble race, bound vp hir wound, & applied ſuch medicaments as the countrie affoordeth. Then vnderſtanding her name & chaunce, carried her into the citie Artaxata: from whence at the charge of the common purſe ſhe was conducted to Tiridates, who entertained her with ſuch curteſie as beſeemed a Kings wife.
            
            
               XI. A decree against the Mathematicians. Cumanus and Felix, gouernours of Iudaea be at variance: War againſt the Clītes.
               WHen Faustus Sylla, and Saluius Otho were Conſuls; Furius Scribonianus was baniſhed, as ſearching out by the Chaldeans the time when the Prince ſhould die. And Iunia his mother who before exiled was touched with the ſame crime, as bearing impatiently her former fortune. Camillus, Scribonianus father had heeretofore ſtirred vp warres in Dalmatia: and therefore Caeſar thought it a point of clemencie to keepe aliue the progenie of his enimie. Neuertheleſſe the baniſhed man enioyed not any long life after this: but ended his daies, either by naturall death, or by poiſon; euery man giuing out as he beleeued. Ofbaniſhing the Aſtrologers out of Italie, there was a ſtraight decree of Senat made, but tooke no effect. After this the Prince cōmended ſuch in an oratiō, who knowing their own eſtate decaied, gaue vp their Senators roome of their own accord; & thoſe put from it, which continuing in it, ioyned impudencie to their pouertie. Among other things the matter was debated in Senat touching the puniſhmēt of ſuch womē as married with ſlaues: and an order ſet down that ſhe who without the priuity of his Lord, had fallen into that folly, ſhould as if ſhe had conſented therto, become herſelfe a bond-ſlaue, and the children borne of them be taken as Libertini. And Pallas whom Caeſar
                  
publickely confeſſed to haue beene author of this relation, was by the aduiſe of Barea Soranus Conſull elect, honored with the Pretorian ornaments, & receiued further About 11718 pound 15. ſhil. a hundred & fiftie hundred thouſand ſeſterces: and it was added by Scipio Cornelius, that thankes ſhould be publickly giuen him, that being deſcended from the Kings of Armenia, he would prefer the publike good before his auncient familie, and vouchſafe to be accounted one of the Princes officers. Claudius affirmed that Pallas was contented with the Pretorian dignitie onely, and would continue in his former pouertie. Whereupon a decree of Senate was publikely engrauen in braſſe in commendation of this freed man, who being poſſeſſor of About 2343750. lib. three hundred millions of ſeſterces, was content to liue according to the prouident maner of ſparing of our anceſtors. But his brother ſurnamed Felix of late made gouernour of Iudaea, vſed not the ſame moderation; but bare himſelfe vpon his authoritie as a ſufficient warrant for all lewdnes whatſoeuer. The Iewes made ſhew of a rebellion through a ſedition * after they vnderſtood of the death of Caius: they were ſtill afearde leaſt ſome other Prince, ſhould commaund them the like things. In the meane ſeaſon, Felix going about to redreſſe all by vnſeaſonable puniſhments, exaſperated them the more. And Ventidius Cumanus vnto whom part of the Prouince was committed, and was his ſecret enimie, egged him forward. For the countrey was ſo diuided, that the Galileans were gouerned by Cumanus; and the Samaritans by Felix, enemies of olde; and now more then euer ſhewing themſelues through the contempt of the gouernors. And therefore made inroades one againſt the other; ſet in companies to rob and ſpoile; laide ambuſhes: and ſometimes they met in battell, and carried the booties and ſpoiles to their gouernours. Who at the firſt were glad of it; but in the end perceiuing the miſchiefe to grow greater, they ſent in ſouldiers to quiet them, which were all ſlaine. And the whole Prouince had been in an vprore; if Quadratus the gouernor of Syria had not found meanes of redreſſe: who ſtayed not long vntill he had reuenged the death of the Roman ſouldiers, which the Iewes had ſlaine. Cumanus & Felix drew the matter at length, becauſe Claudius hauing vnderſtoode the occaſions of the rebellion had giuen authoritie to the Gouernor to determine, & puniſh the Procurators Cumanus and Felix, if their demerit had ſo required. But Quadratus cauſed Felix to ſit among the iudges, and receiued him into the tribunall to him, to the end the heate of the accuſers ſhould therby be cooled: and condemned Cumanus for all the miſdemeanor which both of them had committed; and by that meanes he ſet the Prouince at quietnes. Not long after the peaſants of the Cilician nation ſurnamed Clites, which at diuers other times had rebelled, hauing Troſobor for their Captaine, encamped on a rough and high hill. And frō thence running downe to the ſea ſhores & cities, ventured on the husbandmen and citizens; and often ſet on marchants and ſea men. And then hauing beſieged the citie of the Anemurienſes; the horſemen ſent out of Syria to ayde them, were put to flight with Curtius Seuerus their Prefect, by reaſon the difficulties and vncleannes of the place round about fit for footemen, was moſt incommodious for horſmen to fight. Then Antiochus King of that quarter, vſing faire words to the countrey people, & craft & ſubtiltie towards the Captaine, when he had ſeuered the forces of the Barbariās, hauing ſlaine Troſobor, & a few of the ring-leaders; appeaſed the reſidue by clemēcy. The ſame time between the lake Fucinus & the riuer Lyris, the better to behold the ſight & magnificence of the ſpectacle, a mountaine was cut thorough, & in the verie lake a ſea fight was repreſented. Augustus in times paſt had done the like, by making a ſtanding poole on this ſide Tibris, but with light boates & fewer in number. Claudius armed galleies with three and foure oares on a

ſeat, and nineteen thouſand men, & enuironed the lake with frames of timber work, bicauſe they ſhould not runne out at randome, yet left ſpace enough for the rowers and pilotes to ſhew skill, and ſuch encounters as had beene accuſtomed in a ſea fight. On the buildings about the lake ſtood certaine companies of footemen and troupes of horſemen of the Emperours guard, with fences before them to ſhoote with warlike inſtruments & engines. The reſt of the lake, ſea ſouldiers occupied with couered ſhips: the ſhore and ſmall hill tops as it had beene a Theater, an infinite number of people filled, as well out of the townes adioyning, as the citie, through deſire of ſeeing the paſtime, or to pleaſe the Prince. He himſelfe in a rich and princely cote armour, and Agrippina not farre off ſate aloft, in a garment wrought with gold. They fought although they were malefactors and condemned perſons, with great courage and valour; and after many wounds, were parted & hindered from killing one another. But after that the ſhew was ended, & the water let out: the inſufficiēcie of the work which was not thruſt down, nor digged deepe ynough to the bottome, was diſcouered. Whereupō not lōg after the ditches were digged deeper, & to draw the people againe togither, a ſhew offencers was made on bridges built ouer the lake to repreſent a land-fight. And at the mouth of the lake a banket prepared, droue them all into a great feare through the violent guſhing out of the water, which carried with it all that was by, and things farther off breaking downe, with the craſh and noiſe, ſtroke them all into amaze. Whereupon Agrippina taking aduantage of the Princes feare, rebuked Narciſſus who had charge of the worke, of couetuouſnes and theft. And he for his part helde not his toong, but caſt in her teeth her intollerable pride, and ouer haughtie hopes.
            
            
               XII. Nero marrieth with Octauia: the inhabitants of Cous exempted from ſubſidies: the like is graunted to Byſance.
               
               WHen D. Iunius and Q. Haterius were Conſuls, Nero at the age of ſixteene, married Caeſars daughter, Octauia. And to winne credit and reputation by honorable ſtudies and glorie of eloquence, vndertaking the Ilienſes cauſe, declared that the Romans were deſcended from Troy, and that AEneas was the roote of the Iulian familie, and many other matters, not farre vnlike olde fables; which being deliuered with a good grace and fit words, obtained that the Ilienſes ſhould be releaſed from all publicke duties and charges. He pleaded alſo for the Bononian colonie which was waſted with fire, and obtained for their reliefe About 78125. pound. ten millions of ſeſterces. The inhabitants of Rhodes are reſtored to their libertie, often taken from them, or confirmed, according as they had merited by ſeruice abroade, or demerited by ſedition at home. The Apameans ruined by an earth-quake were diſcharged of tribute for fiue yeeres. Claudius was incenſed to much crueltie by Agrippinaes practiſes; who gaping after Statilius Taurus gardens, eſteemed verie rich, neuer ceaſed vntill ſhe had ouerthrowen him, Tarquitius Priſcus being his accuſer. This Priſcus had beene Taurus Lieutenant, when he was Proconſull in Affricke: and when they returned, obiected that in ſome things he had vſed extorſion and bribery; and withall, that he conſulted with Magicians. But he not able to endure ſuch an indignitie by a falſe accuſer, ſlewe himſelfe before the Senators had giuen ſentence: yet notwithſtanding all the ſute Agrippina could make, this Tarquitius was expulſed the Curia: ſo odious he was to the reſt of the Lords of the Senate. The ſame yeere the Prince was often heard to ſay, that the cauſes adiudged by his Procurator, ſhould be of the ſame validitie, as if himſelfe had giuen ſentence.

And leaſt thoſe words might ſeeme to haue eſcaped him by chaunce, a decree of Senate was inacted thereon, fuller and amplier then before any had beene conceiued. And Augustus of famous memorie had graunted, that all cauſes might be heard before the gentlemen which gouerned Egypt; and commaunded that the ſentences ſet down by them ſhould be kept, as if they had bin giuen by a magiſtrate of Rome. After that, in other Prouinces and in the citie, many things were graunted, which in times paſt belonged to the hearing onely of the Pretor. Claudius yeelded them all the right and iuriſdiction, for which there had beene ſuch wars and ſedition: as when the order of gentlemen by the Sempronian lawes, were eſtabliſhed in the poſſeſſion of Iudicature; or when the Seruilian lawes on the other ſide, had giuen the Senate power iudicially to determine cauſes: and for which Marius and Sylla in times paſt more then all the reſt, made warres the one againſt the other. But in thoſe daies factions raigned among the citizens; and the conquerers bare publicke ſway, hauing all power in their hands. C. Oppius and Cornelius Balbus were the firſt, which with authoritie from Caeſar could handle conditions as well of peace, as of ware. It were to ſmall purpoſe to ſpeake of the Matians and Vedians after theſe, which were gentlemen of marke, and of noble families: ſeeing that Claudius hath made freed men, vnto whom he had committed the charge of his houſholde affaires equall to himſelfe, and to the lawes. After that, Caeſar propounded, whether thoſe of Cous ſhould be releaſed of tributes, alleaging manie things concerning their antiquitie: as that the Argiui and Ceus, Latonaes father, were the old inhabitants of the Ile; and that after by Aeſculapius arriuing there, the Arte of Phiſicke was brought in; a man highly eſteemed of poſteritie; naming them by their names, and in what age euery one of them flouriſhed. Further, hee affirmed that Xenophon whoſe skill himſelfe vſed in Phiſicke, deſcended from the ſame familie; and that in regarde of his deſire, the Ile of Cous deuoted to the ſeruice of ſo great a god, ſhoulde be diſcharged of all tributes. Neither was it to be doubted, but there might be alleaged many merits of theirs, towards the people of Rome; and many victories obtained by their alliance. But Claudius according to his accuſtomed facilitie and ſimplicitie, went not about to ſhadowe that with external helpes, which he had beſtowed in fauour of one alone. The Byzantines hauing obtained audience, deliuered how greeuous their impoſitions and tributes were; and deſired they might be releaſed; and ripped vp all reaſons they coulde, euen from the firſt alliance which they made with vs, when we warred againſt the king of Macedonia; who for baſenes of minde, and want of courage, was called the falſe Philip. How after that, they had ſent their power againſt Antiochus, Perſes, Ariſtonicus: and howe they ſuccoured Antonie, in the wars againſt the pyrats: calling to minde likewiſe that which they offered Sylla, or Lucullus, or Pompey: then the late good turnes & ſeruices done to the Caeſars, when they came into thoſe parts; where there is a moſt conuenient paſſage both by land and by ſea, for the captaines and armies; with al carriages of neceſſarie prouiſiōs. For the Greeks ſited Byzance in the vtmoſt part of Europe, in a very narrow ſtreight, which diuideth Europe from Aſia: for hauing conſulted with Pythius Apollo, in what territory they ſhould build their citie; the oracle anſwered them that they ſhould ſeeke out a ſeate which was oppoſite to the lande of Blind-men. By that darke ſpeech, the Chalcedonians were pointed at; bicauſe that hauing firſt arriued in that place, not iudging aright of the commodiouſnes of it, made choiſe of the woorſt: for Byzance is ſeated in a fertile ſoile, and a plentifull ſea; bicauſe great abundance of fiſh going out of Pontus, and frighted with the rockes and ſtones vnder the water, forſaking the creekes of the other

ſhore, is brought all to theſe hauens. Whereby, firſt all the citie became rich and wealthie: but then oppreſſed with charges and impoſitions; and therefore intreated they might either haue an end or a meane of ſo heauie a burden. The Prince was readie to do them good, alleaging that they were to be helped, as people wearied with late wars againſt the Thracians, and Boſphorans: and therupon they were exempted from tributes for fiue yeeres ſpace.
            
            
               13. Why Agrippina ſeeketh Claudius death: the Emperour dieth empoiſoned by the Phiſition Xenophon.
               
               WHen M. Aſinius, and M. Acilius were Conſuls, a change of ſtate to the woorſe was portended, and foreknowne by many prodigious ſignes. For the enſignes and ſouldiers tents were burnt with fire from heauen. A ſwarme of Bees lighted on the top of the Capitol: monſters and children borne with two ſhapes: and a Sowe brought foorth a Pigge with talons of a hauke. It was accounted a prodigious matter, that the number of magiſtrates was ſo ſmall; a Queſtor, Aedill, Tribune, Pretor, and Conſull dying but a fewe monethes before. But Agrippina of all others was moſt afeard, by reaſon of a word which Claudius caſt foorth being drunke; which was, that it was fatall vnto him, firſt to beare the lewdnes of his wiues; then to puniſh them. Thereupon ſhe beſtirreth hir-ſelfe, and that with all ſpeed: but firſt hauing made away Domitia for light cauſe, and womens quarrels. For Domitia Lepida, being daughter to the yoonger Antonia, and neece to Augustus, & coſen germane to Agrippina, and ſiſter to Gn. Agrippinaes firſt husband; thought hir-ſelfe to be of as great nobilitie as Agrippina, and as well deſcended: neither was there any great difference betweene them in beautie, age, and wealth. And being both vnchaſte, infamous, peremptory & proud; they no leſſe hated one the other for their vices, then for the graces & gifts of fortune. The ground of this bitter and deadly hate was, which ſhould haue more credite, and greater intereſt in Nero, the aunt or the mother. For Lepida had woone the yoong mans hart by gifts, and faire words: Agrippina contrariwiſe cruell, and threatning, coulde giue hir ſonne the Empire; but not indure that he ſhoulde rule. The crimes imputed to hir were, that ſhe went about to deſtroy the princes wife by incantatious, and deuiliſh inuocations: and that by not brideling and puniſhng hir ſwarmes of ſlaues in Calabria, ſhe had diſturbed the quietnes of Italie: for theſe cauſes ſhe was commanded to die: Narciſſus mightily repining and grudging at it, who began more and more to ſuſpect Agrippina; and was ſaid to haue vttered vnto his neereſt friends, that he was ſure to die, whether Britannicus or Nero came to be Emperour. Yet he had receiued ſo much good at Caeſars handes, that he eſteemed more of the princes ſafetie then his owne life: Meſſallina and Silius had beene conuicted; the like occaſions of accuſations will be offered againe, if Nero ſhoulde raigne. If Britannicus ſhould ſucceede, he had deſerued no fauour of him; and the whole houſe woulde bee ſhaken, and vtterlie ouerthrowne with the diueliſh deuiſes of his ſtepmother; and with more wicked practiſes, then if he had concealed the impudicitie and vncleane life of his other wife: although the houſe be as ſhamefully defiled by Pallas adulterie as then it was; becauſe no man ſhould doubt what ſmall accompt ſhe made of her credit, reputation, ſhame, bodie and all whatſoeuer, ſo as ſhe might rule and commaund. After he had vttered theſe or the like ſpeeches he embraced Britannicus, wiſhed he were come to ripe yeeres, lifteth vp his hands ſometimes to the gods, ſometimes to him; praying that he might grow in yeeres,

driue out his fathers enemies, & reuenge on the murtherers of his mother. Claudius in this great heape of cares was ſtroken with ſicknes, and to recouer his ſtrength with the temperatenes of the citie, & wholeſomnes of the waters, went to Sinueſſa. Then Agrippina long before reſolued in her villanous deſeignments, and deſirous to haſten the occaſion offered, wanting no miniſters, began to thinke with her ſelfe what kinde of poiſon ſhe were beſt to vſe: for by a ſpeedie and quick working poiſon, ſhe feared leaſt her wickednes ſhould be diſcouered; yet if ſhe ſhould chooſe a lingering ſlow working one, leaſt Claudius drawing by little and little to his end, and vnderſtanding the treacherie, ſhould turne his minde, and ſhew loue and affection to his owne ſonne: in the end ſhe reſolued to thinke on ſome ſingular thing which ſhould trouble his braines, and not worke his death ouer-haſtely. A ſchoolemiſtris of ſuch practiſes was choſen of purpoſe, called Locusta of late condemned for empoiſoning, and long reſerued among other inſtruments of ſtate. The poiſon was prepared by this womans skill, and the miniſter to giue it was Halotus, an Eunuch, one accuſtomed to carrie in and taſte his meate: all came afterward ſo cleerely to light, that the writers of thoſe times haue affirmed, that the poiſon was infuſed into a Muſhrome which Claudius tooke pleaſure to eate of; which then he perceiued not, either by reaſon of his blockiſhnes, or ouer-much quaffing of wine; and hauing a ſolublenes of bodie withall, it was thought the receipt would not worke his effect. Whereupon Agrippina greatly aſtonied, and fearing her vtter deſtruction, nothing regarding what enuie ſhe might preſently incurre, conferreth with Xenophon the Phiſition, whoſe conſcience beforehand ſhe had wrought to ſerue her turne. He as though he would help the Prince, endeuoring to vomit, was thought to haue put down his throte a feather dipped in a ſtrong and ſpeedie poiſon; knowing well that foule attempts are begun with danger, and accompliſhed with reward. In the meane time the Senate was aſſembled, and the Conſuls and Prieſts made vowes for the health of the Prince: and being alreadie dead, he was couered and cheriſhed with cloathes, whileſt things neceſſarie to aſſure the Empire vpon Nero were a preparing. And firſt of all Agrippina, as one ouercome with griefe, and ſeeking comfort, helde Britannitus betweene her armes, calling him the very image of his fathers face, and by diuers policies entertained him, for feare he ſhould go out of the chamber: and with like practiſes helde Antonia and Octauia his ſiſters; and at euery dore and paſſage placed a ſtrong gard: and often gaue out that the Prince waxed better and better, to the end the ſoldier ſhould liue in good hope, and ſhe enterpriſe her attempt at ſuch a time as the Magicians ſhould thinke luckie and proſperous. Then about the middeſt of the day, the third before the Ides of October, the Pallace gates being ſuddenly layd open, Nero accompanied with Burrhus, goeth forth to the cohort, who kept warde according to cuſtome; where at the commaundement of the captaine of the gard he was receiued with ſhoutes, and acclamations of ioy, and put into a Chariot. It is reported that ſome were in a doubt, & looking about them, and asking where Britannicus was? then ſeeing no beginner of any attempt to the contrary, they followed that which was offered: and ſo Nero being brought to the reſt of the gard, and hauing made a ſpeech fit for the time, and promiſed a donatiue according to the example of his fathers largeſſe, was ſaluted Emperour. A decree of Senate confirmed the ſentence of the ſouldiers; neither was there any doubtmade of it in the prouinces. After that, honor due to the gods was ordained for Claudius, and the funerals as ſolemnely celebrated as when Augustus of famous memorie was buried, Agrippina imitating the magnificence

of her Grandmother Liuia. Claudius teſtament was not publickly read, leaſt the people ſhoulde bee incenſed to diſdaine and enuie againſt Nero, by ſeeing him who was onely a ſonne in lawe, to be preferred before the Emperours naturall ſonne.
            
         
         
            
            THE THIR TEENTH BOOKE OF THE ANNALES OF CORNELIVS TACITVS.
            
               
                  I. Silanus is put to death, and Narciſſus. Neroes good beginning.
               
                  THe firſt whoſe death was contriued in this new gouernment, was Iunius Silanus Proconſull of Aſia, and that without the priuitie of Nero, by Agrippinaes treachery and malice; not becauſe he had by any ſeditious demeanor procured his owne ruine: for he was ſo heauie and dull ſpirited, and the other Emperours did ſo ſmally regard him, that C. Caeſar was wont to call him a golden ſheepe. But Agrippina hauing wrought the ruine of his brother L. Silanus, feared reuenge; being a common ſpeech among the people that this man deſerued to be preferred to the Empire before Nero, yet ſcarſe out of his childhood, and hauing gotten it by wicked meanes: for he was a man of a ſetled age, ſincere and iuſt in his dealing, noble of birth, and which at that time was greatly eſteemed, deſcended of the Caeſars, being in the fourth degree to Augustus. This was the cauſe of his death, the miniſters being P. Celer, a gentleman of Rome, & Aelius a freed man, both hauing charge of the Princes peculiar reuenues in Aſia. By them the poiſon was giuen the Proconſull in his meate, and that ſo openly, that it could not be denied. With no leſſe ſpeede Claudius freed man, Narciſſus (of whoſe iarring with Agrippina I haue alreadie ſpoken) was brought to his end, by hard impriſonment, and extreame neceſſitie, againſt the Princes will; whoſe vicious humors yet vnknowne, he did exceedingly well fit in couetouſnes and prodigalitie; and had gone forward in murders, if Afranius Burrhus, and Annaeus Seneca had not ſtayed them. Theſe two were the yong Emperors guides and gouernors; and in equall authoritie, well agreeing, bare equall ſtroke in diuers faculties. Burrhus in militarie diſcipline and grauitie of manners; Seneca in precepts of eloquence, and courteous carriage; helping one the other in their charge, the eaſier to bridle the youths ſlipperie age with honeſt and lawfull pleaſures, if he contemned vertue. Their care was both alike in keeping vnder Agrippinaes fierce humor, who boyling with all deſires of wicked rule and dominion, had Pallas for her counſeller; by whoſe aduiſe Claudius through his inceſtuous marriage, & pernicious adoption, wrought his own ruine. But Neroes diſpoſition was not to be ruled by a ſlaue; and Pallas with an odious arrogancie exceeding the moderation of a freed man, bred his owne diſlike. Neuertheleſſe, all honors were openly heaped vpon Agrippina, and the Tribune according to the order of ſeruice asking the watch-word, had this giuen him by Nero, Of the verie goodmother. The Senate decreed ſhe ſhould haue two ſergeants, & Claudius a colledge of Prieſts called Claudians: & withall, that he ſhould haue the funerals of a Cēſor, & be after deified & put amōg the gods. The day of his funerals, Nero made the oration in his praiſe, & as long as he ſpake of the antiquitie of his ſtock, of the Conſulſhips, & triumphs of his anceſtors, he & the reſt were attentiue: and likewiſe whileſt he ſpake of the loue he bare to liberall ſciences, and that during the time of his gouernment the common wealth was not moleſted by forren powers, all men gaue good eare: but after he deſcended to his prouidence and wiſedome,

no man could forbeare laughing; although the oration compoſed by Seneca ſhewed the exquiſite skill of that mans pleaſant vaine, fitted and applied to the eares of that time. The old men (which were at leaſure to compare things paſt with the preſent) noted that Nero was the firſt Emperour that needed another mans eloquence. For Caeſar the Dictator, was equall with the famous orators: and Augustus had a readie fluent and eloquent ſpeech, ſuch as well becommed a Prince. Tiberius had great skill in waighing his words, vttered much in few words, but was obſcure of ſet purpoſe. Yea, C. Caeſars troubled minde hindered not his eloquence: neither wanted Claudius elegancie when he had premeditated. Nero in the beginning of his childiſh yeeres bent his liuely ſpirit to other matters, as to ingraue, to paint, to ſing, to mannage horſes, and ſometimes in compoſing a verſe he ſhewed ſome ſmattering of learning. When the funerals were ended, he entered the Curia, and hauing firſt ſpoken of the authoritie of the Lords of the Senate, loue and concord of the ſouldiers, he reckoned vp certaine deſeignments and precidents he intended to follow in the gouerning of the Empire, adding: that not hauing beene nuſled vp in ciuill warres, nor domeſticall diſcords, he would bring with him neither hatred, nor grudge, nor deſire of reuenge. Then he layd downe a platforme of his future regiment, eſpecially auoiding thoſe things, the hate whereof did yet freſhly boile in mens hearts; that he would not be the iudge of all matters, leaſt the accuſers and defendants being as it were ſhut vp in one houſe, the power of a few might haue full ſway to worke their will: there ſhould nothing be ſet at ſale in his court, or expoſed to ambition; his houſe ſhould be deuided from the common wealth; the Senate ſhould retaine his old preheminence; Italie and publicke prouinces ſhould make their appearance before the Conſuls tribunall, and they giue audience like Lords of the Senate, and he himſelfe would looke to the armie committed to his charge. Neither did he faile in his promiſe. For many things were ordained by the arbitrement of the Senate: As that no man ſhould be bought for reward or gift to pleade a cauſe. That the Queſtor elected ſhould not be conſtrained to ſet forth the ſhew of Fencers, which was a matter the Senators obtained contrary to Agrippinaes will, vnder colour that Claudius acts were thereby infringed. And thereupon ſhe cauſed the Senate to be called to the Pallace, to the end that ſhe might ſtand in a ſecret place, ſeparated from the Lords by ſome vaile, which might not hinder the hearing of them, and yet not be ſeene. Yea, when the Embaſſadors of Armenia came to pleade the cauſe of their nation before Nero, ſhe was readie to pearch vp to the chaire of audience, and by his ſide to giue anſwere with him, if (the reſt ſurpriſed with a great feare) Seneca had not aduiſed him to meete his mother, as ſhe came; and ſo vnder colour of doing his dutie, preuented the diſcredit.
            
            
               
                  II. Neroes preparatiues to defend Armenia.
               IN the end of the yeere, it was a common rumor that the Parthians had burſt out againe, and waſted Armenia, driuen out Rhadamistus, who hauing beene firſt King, and after a fugitiue, had then giuen vp this warre. Whereupon in the citie greedie of talke, they began to enquire, how the Prince which was yet ſcarſe paſt ſeuenteene yeeres of age, could either vndertake or acquit himſelfe of ſo great a burden: what helpe could be expected at his hands, who was led by a woman: whether battels and warres alſo, and beſieging of townes, and other duties of ſeruice, could be accompliſhed by his maiſters? Contrarywiſe others ſaid it had fallen out better, then if Claudius a weake and cowardly old man, ſhould haue beene

called to the labors of warre, readie to obey the commandements of his ſlaues. Yet Burrhus and Seneca had beene proued by experience of many matters: and what wanted to the Emperors full ſtrength? ſeeing that Cn. Pompeius at eighteene yeeres of age, and Caeſar Octauianus at nineteene, ſuſtained ciuil warres. Moſt things in high fortune are atchieued rather by good luck, conduct and counſell, then weapons and hands. That he ſhould giue an euident proofe, whether he vſed honeſt friends or not, if he would rather make choiſe of a notable and valiant captaine, enuie layd aſide, then a rich, graced and fauored by ambitious ſute. Whileſt the people thus diſcourſed, Nero commaunded a muſter to be made of the youth in the prouinces bordering vpon the Parthians, to ſupplie the legions of the Eaſt; and the legions themſelues to be planted neere vnto Armenia: and withall, wrote to the two old Kings, Agrippa, and Iocchus, to prepare their forces, and enter the bounds of Parthia, and make bridges ouer the riuer Euphrates: and gaue charge of leſſer Armenia to Aristobulus, and the Sophenian nation to Sohemus, honoring them both with royall marks and ornaments. And in very good time, it fell out that Vardanes ſonne began to rebell and beard Vologeſes, which cauſed the Parthians to depart Armenia, as though they woulde deferre the warre. But all things were made more then they were to the Senate, amplified by thoſe who gaue aduiſe that Proceſſions ſhould be made in honor of the Prince: and that that day he ſhould weare a triumphall garment, and enter into the citie ouant: and that his image of the ſame greatnes that Mars the reuengers was, ſhould be placed in the ſame temple; being beſides their ordinarie flatterie, ioyfull and glad, that he had made Domitius Corbulo gouernor of Armenia: perſwading themſelues, that the way was now made open to vertue. The forces of the Eaſt were ſo deuided, that part of the aid-ſouldiers with two legions ſhould remaine in the prouince of Syria, with the Lieutenant Quadratus Vinidius; and that the like number of citizens and allies ſhould be vnder Corbuloes charge, with other cohorts and cornets of horſemen, which wintered in Cappadocia. The Kings which were confederate with the Romans, were warned to be in a readines as occaſion of warre ſhould require. But their affections were bent more vpon Corbulo, who to purchaſe fame (which in new enterpriſes is of great importāce) making a way with all ſpeede at Agas, a citie of Cilicia, met Quadratus; who was come ſo farre, leaſt if Corbulo ſhould haue entered into Syria to receiue the forces, all mens eyes would haue been caſt vpon him, being of a comely and tall ſtature, magnificall in words; and beſides his experience and wiſedome, in ſhew of vaine hope and promiſes, woon the people to what he luſted. In fine, both of them by meſſengers admoniſhed King Vologeſes to deſire rather peace then warre; and giuing hoſtages, continue the like reuerence to the people of Rome as his predeceſſors had done. And Vologeſes to make preparations of warre with more aduantage, and ſuch as might match the Romans, or to remoue thoſe he ſuſpected as concurrents vnder the name of hoſtages; deliuereth the nobleſt of the Arſacides familie, whom Hostorius the Centurion ſent before by Vinidius for other occaſions receiued. Corbulo vnderſtanding this, commaundeth Arrius Varus, captaine of a companie of footemen, to goe and receiue them: from whence grew a quarrell betweene the Captaine and Centurion (which becauſe they would no longer be a ieſting ſtock to the ſtrangers) they referred to the arbitrement of the pledges themſelues, and Lieutenants which conducted them: who preferred Corbulo before the other, partlie through the freſh renowne which was yet in euery mans mouth; and partly through a certaine inclination which the enemies themſelues bare him. Hereupon grew a iarre betweene the captaines,

                  Vinidius complaining, that, that was taken from him which was compaſſed by his aduiſe: Corbulo proteſting on the contrarie part, that the king was neuer drawen to offer pledges, vntill that he being choſen captain of the warre, had turned his hopes into feare. Nero to ſet them at one, cauſed it to be publiſhed: that Quadratus & Corbulo, for their proſperous ſucceſſes, ſhoulde haue baies added to the bundle of rods, which was carried before great captaines of warre. I haue ioined theſe things togither, although they were done vnder other Conſuls. The ſame yeere Caeſar demaunded of the Senate that there might be an image dedicated to his father, and the Conſularie ornaments giuen Aſconius Labeo, who had beene his tutor; and forbad that any image of maſſiue gold or ſiluer, ſhould be offered in honor of himſelfe. And although the LL. of the Senate had decreed, that the yeer ſhould begin on that day of December that Nero was borne: yet he retained the olde ceremonie of beginning the yeere the Kalends of Ianuarie. Neither were Carinas Celer a Senator, accuſed by a ſlaue, or Iultus Denſus gentlemen, called into queſtion, although it was laide to their charge, that they fauoured Britannicus.
               
            
            
               
                  III. Nero beginneth to hate his mother: and falleth in loue vvith Acte.
               
               
                  CLaudius Nero and L. Antistius being Conſuls, when the magiſtrates tooke an oath of obſeruing the ordinances of the princes; he would not ſuffer Antiſtius his fellow officer to ſweare to the obſeruation of his: which the LL. of the Senate did highly commende in him; to the ende, that the youthly minde of the prince being ſturred vp with the glorie of ſmall things, ſhoulde continue in matters of greater moment. After this followed his lenitie towards Plautius Lateranus, who being remooued from the order of Senators, for adulterie committed with Meſſallina, was reſtored by him to his roome; binding himſelfe to continue this clemencie, with many orations: which Seneca, to teſtifie in what honeſt precepts he inſtructed him, or for a bragge of his owne wit, publiſhed by the voice of the prince. But Agrippinaes credit and authoritie by little and little began to waine: and Nero caſt a liking to a freed woman called Acte: two comely youthes, Otho deſcended from a Conſularie houſe; and Claudius Senecio, ſon of one of Caeſars freed men, being partakers of his counſels: his mother being at the firſt a ſtranger to the matter, and in vaine at laſt ſtriuing to the contrarie. So far ſhe had poſſeſſed him by diſſolute behauiour, and riot & ſecret conuerſation, that his greateſt friends & ſeuereſt, ſeemed not to know it: conſidering that this woman ſatisfied his luſts, without the offence of any. For Octauia his wife, a womā of noble birth, & of approued good life, either by ſome ſecret deſtinie, or bicauſe things vnlawfull are moſt greedily deſired, he vtterly diſliked. And ſome feared alſo that if he were brideled of that loue; he would luſt after the defiling of noble women. But Agrippina fretted and fumed that a freed woman ſhould beard her, & a bond woman become her daughter in law; with other ſuch like womaniſh complaints; not hauing patience to ſee whether her ſonne woulde either repent or be filled: and the more opprobriouſlie ſhe vpbraided him, the more ſhe inflamed him; till at laſt ouercome with the rage of loue, he ſhaked off all dutie & reuerence towards his mother, and committed himſelfe wholy to Seneca. Amongſt his familiars was Annaeus Serenus, who faining loue to the ſame freed woman, couered & cloked with his owne name, the firſt heats of this yoong prince: and ſuch things as the prince had beſtowed on hir by ſtealth, he openly aduouched to be his gifts. Then Agrippina changing her ſtile ſeeketh to win the yoong man by

faire alluring ſpeeches, offereth rather hir own chamber and boſome to hide thoſe things which his youth & high fortune deſired. Yea ſhe cōfeſſed her vntimely ſeuerity; & offered him the vſe of al her wealth, which was little inferior to the Emperors: as before too ſeuere in correcting her ſonne; ſo now vnreaſonably humbled and caſt downe in courage. The which change did neither deceiue Nero, and gaue his neereſt friends cauſe of feare; and prayed him to beware of the trecherie of this woman, alwaies fell and cruell; and then falſe and diſſembling. Nero hauing by chaunce ſeene the wardrop where the apparell laye, which Princes wiues and parents were wont to ſhine in, made choiſe of a garment and iewels, and ſent them his mother moſt bountifully: ſeeing he ſent of his own the chiefeſt, and which by others were moſt of all deſired. But Agrippina exclaimeth that theſe ornaments were not ſo much giuen her to adorne and trim her ſelfe, as to exclude her from the reſt; and that her ſonne would diuide thoſe things with her, which came wholly from her. Neither wanted there ſome to carrie theſe ſpeeches, and make them woorſe then they were. Whereupon all ſuch growing odious vnto Nero, vpon whom this womans pride chiefly relied, diſplaceth Pallas from the charge which Claudius had giuen him; in which he carried himſelfe as if he had beene chiefe Lord and maſter of all. It is reported that when Pallas departed with a great retinue following him, Nero verie aptly ſaid that Pallas went to reſigne his office. True it is, that Pallas had couenanted with the Prince not to be called in queſtion for any act paſt; and that he had made euen with all accounts of the common-wealth. Agrippina, after this, more mad and wilfull then euer, gaue out threatning and thundering ſpeeches: yea not forbearing the Princes eares, but criyng, that Britannicus was now growen to mans eſtate: a true and woorthie plant to receiue his fathers Empire, which a graffed ſun by adoption now poſſeſſed by the iniury and trumperie of his mother. There ſhould be no let in her, but that al the villanous practiſes of that infortunate houſe ſhould be layde open: and firſt of all her owne marriage, and her impoiſoning of Claudius. That only thing was prouided by the gods to her good, that her ſonne in law was aliue. She would goe with him to the campe, where on one ſide Germanicus daughter ſhould be heard: on the other ſide that baſe companion Burrhus, and Seneca the baniſhed; the one his hand cut off; and the other with his profeſſors eloquence quarelling and debating of the rule and gouernment of the whole world. In vttering of this ſhe bent her fiſt towards him; heaped one iniurie vpon another; called Claudius, and the infernall ghoſts of the Silaniens; and ſo many fruitleſſe wicked attempts, which ſhe had beene author of. Nero troubled with theſe ſpeeches, and the day now at hand, on which Britannicus had accompliſhed the full age of foureteen yeeres; began to ponder with himſelfe, ſometimes the violence of his mother; ſomtimes the towardlines of Britannicus knowen of late by good proofe; & which hath won him great fauour and good will. On a feſtiuall day dedicated to Saturne, amongſt other paſtimes of his equals, drawing lots who ſhould be King; the lot fell to Nero: who commanding diuers things vnto others, which could not turne to their ſhame; commaunded Britannicus to riſe vp and ſtand in the middle and begin a ſong, hoping the childe ſhould be laughed to skorn, as one ignorant how to carrie himſelfe in ſober companie; much leſſe in drunken. But he verie conſtantly began a verſe, which ſignified that Nero had thruſt him from his fathers ſeate, & gouerment of the Empire: which mooued them all to open compaſſion; becauſe the night and laſciuious wantonnes had taken away all diſſimulation.
            
            
               
               
                  IIII. Britannicus empoiſoned. Agrippina chaſed from the Emperours houſe.
               
                  NEro feeling himſelfe toucht, augmented his hatred; and incenſed with Agrippinaes threats, becauſe he could lay no iuſt cauſe againſt him, nor openly durſt not commaund the murdering of his brother, practiſeth ſecret meanes, and commaundeth poiſon to be prepared; Pollio Iulius tribune of the Pretorian cohort being his miniſter in the action. Vnder whoſe charge Locusta, a woman infamous for lewd practiſes, and before condemned for empoyſoning, was kept priſoner. For it was long before prouided that ſuch as were neereſt about Britannicus ſhould haue no regard either of honeſtie or faith. He tooke the firſt poiſon of his bringers vp; which not being ſtrong enough, he voided by ſiege; or els becauſe it was tempered, leaſt it ſhould worke immediatly. But Nero impatient of lingring & long working wickednes, threatned the Tribune, cōmanded the poiſonereſſe to be put to death, bicauſe that whileſt they reſpect the rumor, and forge excuſes for their owne ſafty, they droue off his ſecurity. They then promiſing as ſpedy a death, as if he ſhold be ſlaine with a ſword, neere vnto Caeſars chamber a poiſon was ſod ſtrong and violent, by proofe of poiſoning. The cuſtome was for Princes children to ſit with other noble mens, of the ſame age, in preſence of their neere kindred, with a ſpare diet at a table by themſelues: Britannicus there taking his repaſt, becauſe one of the ſeruitours did taſte his meates and drinkes, leaſt the cuſtome ſhould be omitted, or the villanie diſcloſed by both their deaths, this pollicie was deuiſed: A drinke yet not hurtfull, but very hote, and taſted of, was preſented to Britannicus; then that being refuſed by reaſon of the heate, the poiſon was powred into cold water, which ſo ſpread throughout all the parts of his bodie, that his ſpeech and ſpirits were at once taken from him. Thoſe which ſate about him were in a maze; the other which knew nothing ran away: but they which were of deeper iudgement ſtirred not, but looked Nero in the face; he leaning on the table like one that knew nothing of the practiſe, ſayd: he was often wont to fall into ſuch fits, through the falling ſicknes, which Britannicus had been greeuouſly afflicted with from his infancie; and that his ſight and ſpeech by little and little would come to him againe. But Agrippina was poſſeſſed with ſuch a great feare, & an aſtoniſhment of ſenſes, although ſhe indeuored to hide it in countenance, that ſhe was eaſily iudged to be as ignorant of the fact, as Britannicus ſiſter Octauia: for ſhe ſaw that ſhe was bereaued of her greateſt ſtay, & perceiued well that it was a beginning of parricide. Octauia alſo although of yong yeeres, yet had learned to hide her griefe, her loue and all affections; and ſo after a little ſilence, the mirth of the banquet began againe. Britannicus bodie was burnt the ſame night he died, all funerall preparation hauing beene prouided before hand, which was but ſmall: neuertheles he was buried in Campus Martius, in ſuch ſtormes & ſhowres, that the people beleeued they portended the wrath of the gods againſt ſo heinous a fact: which yet many excuſed in Nero, calling to minde the auncient diſcord of brothers in termes of ſoueraigntie, and how Kings admit no companions. Many writers of that time do deliuer, that Nero many dayes before had abuſed Britanicus bodie; and therefore that now his death could not ſeeme either vntimely or cruell, although it happened in the ſacred libertie of his table, his ſiſter not hauing ſo much as time to imbrace him, haſtned before his enemies face againſt the laſt of Claudius bloud, and his bodie defiled before he was poiſoned. Caeſar excuſed the haſtines of the obſequies by an edict, ſaying, that the cuſtome of auncient times

was to celebrate in ſecret manner, and not openly dolefull and bitter funerals, without either ſolemnities or praiſes. As for himſelfe hauing loſt the ayde and comfort of his brother, the reſt of his hopes were anchored wholy in the common wealth: and that the Lords of the Senat & people ſhould ſo much the more fauour & maintaine that Prince, which was only left of the familie borne to rule and abſolute dominion. Then he enriched with gifts the chiefeſt of his friends. Neither wanted there ſome which blamed men pretending grauitie, that they deuided houſes and poſſeſſions, as though they had beene booties. Some thought the Prince forced them thereto, as guiltie of his fact, and hoping for pardon if he could bind vnto him the mightieſt and ſtrongeſt in power. But his mothers wrath could by no munificence be appeaſed, but ſhe embraced Octauia, and had often ſecret conference with her friends: and beſides her naturall couetouſnes, ſcraping money together of all hands as it were for ſome purpoſe on a pinch, ſhe entertained the Centurions and Tribunes with all courteſie: ſhe honored the names and vertues of the nobilitie which then were in towne, as though ſhe had ſought for a head to make a faction. Nero perceiuing that, commaundeth the gard of ſouldiers which heretofore was appointed to gard the Emperors wife, and now her, as his mother, to be taken from her; and certaine Germans which ſhe had, beſides the former appointed to gard her, to depart and be gone. And leaſt ſhe ſhould be frequented with multitudes of ſaluters, he deuideth his houſe, & ſendeth his mother to that which was Antoniaes; and as oft as himſelfe came thither, garded with a companie of Centurions, after a ſhort ſalutation, departed againe.
            
            
               
                  V. Agrippina accuſed for conſpiring againſt Nero. Silana puniſhed. Pallas, and Burrhus accuſed.
               THere is no mortall thing more mutable and flitting, then the fame of greatnes, not ſuſtained by his owne force and ſtrength. Agrippinaes houſe was now vtterly forſaken; no man went to comfort her; no man to viſite her, ſauing a few women: and vncertaine of them, whether for loue or hatred. Among which Iunia Silana was one, who as I haue alreadie declared, at Meſſallinaes inſtigations was ſeparated from hir husband C. Silius; a woman of great parentage, of alluring and wanton beautie, and a long time welbeloued of Agrippina. Yet afterwards there was a priuie grudge betweene them two, bicauſe Agrippina had dehorted Sext. Africanus a noble yoong gentleman from marriyng of Silana: ſaying, ſhee was vnchaſt and growne into yeeres; not becauſe ſhe meant to reſerue him for hir ſelfe; but fearing leaſt he ſhould enioy Silanaes goods if ſhe died without iſſue. Silana hauing a hope of reuenge offered, ſollicited Iturius and Caluiſius, followers of her owne, to accuſe Agrippina: yet not for any old and ſtale matter, as that ſhe bewailed the death of Britannicus, or publiſhed the iniuries done to Octauia; but that ſhe intended to ſtir vp Rubellius Plautus (by the mothers ſide, as neere to Augustus, as Nero was) to new enterpriſes againſt the ſtate, & by marriyng, of him & Empire gotten by her meanes, afflict & inuade the common-wealth afreſh. Theſe things Iturius and Caluiſius diſcouered to Atimetus a freed man of Domitia, aunt vnto Nero. Who glad of the occaſion offered (for betweene Domitia and Agrippina there was deadly hatred) vrged the ſtage player Paris a freed man likewiſe of Domitia, to goe withall ſpeed to Nero, and enforme moſt bitterly againſt her. The night was well ſpent, and Nero well tippled, when Paris entereth as one accuſtomed at other times to entertaine the Prince with ſports and ieſtes: but then his countenance ſetled to

ſadnes, and declaring the whole order of Atimetus tale, did ſo terrifie and daunt the Prince, that he determined to kill not onely his mother, and Plautus; but diſcharge Burrhus of his office, as aduaunced by Agrippinaes fauour; and readie therefore to requite her with as good a turne. Fabius Rusticus reporteth, that letters were written to Caenina Tuſchus, to come and take charge of the guard; but that Burrhus credit was ſaued, and kept in his office by Senecaes meanes. Plinie and Cluuius ſeeme there was no doubt made of Burrhus loyaltie: and in verie deede Fabius inclineth much to the commendation of Seneca, as one of his preferment. But our meaning is to follow the conſent of authors; and if any affirme contrarie, we will deliuer it vnder their names. Nero trembling for feare, and exceeding deſirous of the death of his mother, could not indure the delay, vntill Burrhus had promiſed to performe it, if ſhe were conuicted of the crime. But euerie man might alleage what he could for his defence; much more a mother. Neither were there any accuſers preſent, and nothing to ground on but one mans report out of an enimies houſe. He was to cōſider that it was night, and that ſpent in banqueting; and therefore all would ſeeme to ſmell of raſhnes and folly. The Princes feare ſomewhat lightened by theſe ſpeeches and the day come, one went to Agrippina to let her vnderſtand of the accuſation, & to purge her ſelfe, or looke to ſuffer. Burrhus was to do the meſſage in preſence of Seneca, with ſome freed men as witnes of the ſpeeches. Then Burrhus hauing declared the accuſation, and the authors of it, vſed threatning termes: and Agrippina not forgetting her old fiercenes, returned him his anſwere: ſaying, I maruell not if Silana neuer hauing had childe, know not what the affections of mothers are: neither are children changed by their parents, as adulterers by ſhameleſſe women. Neither if Iturius and Caluiſius, hauing waſted their ſubſtance, beſtow this their laſt labour in vndertaking this accuſation: therefore am I to ſuſtaine the infamie of parricide, or Caeſar haue ſcruple of conſcience, that I would commit it: as for Domitia I would thanke her for the hate ſhe beareth me, if ſhe would likewiſe in good will and loue towards my Nero, ſtriue with me. Now by her concubine Atimetus, and Paris the ſtage player ſhe doth as it were compoſe fables for the ſtage. She was buſie about her fiſh pooles of Baia, when by my counſels, Neroes adoption; proconſularie authoritie; election to be Conſull; and other ſteps to mount to the Empire were procured. Or elſe let ſome one be brought foorth to make it appeere, that I haue practiſed with the citie-cohorts; corrupted the loyaltie of the Prouinces; or ſollicited bond-men, or freedmen to rebellion. I might haue liued if Britannicus had beene ſoueraigne: but if Plautus or ſome other ſhould get the rule of the common-wealth, forſooth there ſhould want accuſers to laye to my charge, not wordes ſometimes vnaduiſedly eſcaped thorough feruencie of loue; but ſuch crimes alſo from which I could not be acquited, but as a mother by hir ſon. The aſſiſtance moued with theſe ſpeeches and endeuoring to appeaſe her anger; ſhe requireth to ſpeake with her ſonne: before whom ſhe ſpake nothing in defence of her innocencie, as if ſhe had diſtruſted; or of her benefits, as to vpbrayd him: but obteined reuenge of her accuſers; and rewards for hir friends. The charge and office of prouiſion of corne was giuen to Senius Rufus; the commiſſion of plaies which Caeſar was a preparing, to Aruntius Stella: Aegypt to C. Balbillus: Syria was appointed to P. Anteius, then abuſed with diuers deuiſes, and in the ende detained in the citie. But Silana was baniſhed; Caluiſius alſo and Iturius: Atimetus was executed: Paris being in greater credit (by reaſon of pleaſures miniſtred to the Prince) then that he ſhould be put to death. Plautus was ſent away for the time with ſilence. Pallas after this and Burrhus were accuſed to haue practiſed to call Cornelius Sylla, for noblenes of birth

and affinitie with Claudius, whoſe ſonne in lawe he was by marriage of Antonia, to the Empire. The author of that accuſation was one Paetus, a man infamous, by cauſing debters to forfeit their goods: and then manifeſtly conuicted of vanitie and falſhoode. Neither was Pallas innocencie ſo gratefull, as his pride inſupportable: for when ſome of his freed men were ſaide to haue beene priuie to the practiſe; he made anſwer that in his houſe he appointed nothing to be done, but with a nod of his head or hand; or by writing, if he had much to ſay, leaſt if he ſhoulde haue ſpoken vnto them, he ſhould ſeeme to haue made them his fellowes. Burrhus although accuſed, yet gaue ſentence among the iudges. Paetus the accuſer was baniſhed, and the writings burnt, by which he went about to renewe the recordes of the treaſurie alreadie cancelled. In the end of the ſame yeere, the gard of the ſoldiers which was woont to be at the plaies, was taken away, for a greater ſhew of libertie: and bicauſe the ſouldier being abſent from the diſorder of the Theater, ſhoulde be leſſe corrupt; and the people ſhewe by proofe, whether they would vſe modeſtie if the guarde were away. The prince hallowed and purged the citie with ſacrifices, by aduiſe of the ſouthſaiers, bicauſe Iupiters and Mineruaes temples were ſet on fire with lightning.
            
            
               
                  VI. Neroes diſorders: the caſe of the franchiſed debated: an order for certaine magistrates.
               Q. Voluſius and P. Scipio being Conſuls, there was peace abroad, & filthie laſciuiouſnes at home: during which, Nero gadded vp & down the ſtreetes, to infamous brothell houſes, & by-corners, in ſlaues attire, to be vnknown; accompanied with ſuch as ſnatched away wares from mens ſtales, wounded ſuch as met them, and with ſuch ſmall regard whome, that Nero himſelfe hath receiued and carried away blowes and marks on the face. And when it was knowne to be Caeſar which played thoſe pranks, the diſorder grew greater againſt both men and women of accompt; and with like licentiouſnes abuſing Caeſars name, many practiſed the ſame inſolencies, gathered together in particular companies, and ſo ſpending the night as it had been in taking a towne, and captiuitie. One Iulius Montanus a Senator, who had not yet taken vpon him the dignitie, by chaunce coping with the Prince in the darke, and rudely thruſting him backe as he offered him violence; then knowing him, and crauing pardō, was inforced to die, as though therby he had reproched him of folly. Nero more wary and fearefull after that, went not without a rabble of ſouldiers and fencers; which medled not at the firſt, and whileſt the prince made his party good: but after, if he were ouermatched, by ſuch as he abuſed, they layd hands immediately on their weapons. He turned the diſordered licence at plaies, and part-taking in fauor of ſtage players, almoſt to a mutinie, by giuing impunitie and rewards, himſelfe priuily or for the moſt part openly looking on; vntill the people growing to ſedition, and fearing greater ſtirres, no other remedie was found then to expell the ſtage-players out of Italie, and place a gard of ſouldiers againe on the theater. At the ſame time the deceit and vngratefull behauior of freed men was debated in Senat; and inſtant ſute made that the patrons might haue authoritie to reuoke the freedome giuen to ſuch as deſerued it not: for many there were of that opinion. But the Conſuls not daring to determine the matter; without the priuitie of the Prince; yet wrote the common conſent vnto him: And that he ſhould be the author of the decree, few being of a contrary opinion, and ſome grudging that the irreuerence of their late bondmen, by reaſon of libertie was

growen to that, that they cared not whether they carried themſelues towards their patrons dutifully or not: nothing at all waying what they ſayd vnto them: yea, bende their fiſts towards them; thruſt and elbow ſuch as would haue any lawe made to bridle them. For what other redreſſe was there graunted vnto patrons offended, but to baniſh his freed man aboue twentie miles off, to the coaſt of Campania? all other actions were indifferent and equall to both. Some weapon therefore ſhould be giuen the patron, which the freed man ſhould not deſpiſe. Neither could it ſeeme hard if the manumiſed ſhould with the ſame obedience keepe their liberty, by which they got it. And ſuch as were openly conuicted of crimes, were woorthily brought againe to ſeruitude; that ſuch might be brideled by feare, whom benefits could not change. Some ſpake to the contrarie, ſaying: That, that fault of a fewe ſhould be preiudiciall but to themſelues; and not derogate from the priuiledges, common to them all; bicauſe it was a bodie farre ſpred abroad. From them were taken many Tribes and Decuries, fit men for magiſtrates & prieſts, and citie cohorts: and many gentlemen and Senators could deriue no beginning but from thence. If the freed men ſhould be ſeuered from the reſt, the number of the free borne woulde appeere very ſmall. Not without cauſe our aunceſtors when they diuided the citizens into degrees and callings, left libertie in common. Yea they had inſtituted two kindes of manumiſing their bondmen, bicauſe it might be in their choiſe to repent or yeelde newe fauour. Thoſe whome the patron did not manumiſe Vindicta before the magiſtrate, remained ſtill as it were in the bonds of ſeruitude. That euerie man ſhould looke into the merits of his ſlaue; and graunt that ſlowly, which being once giuen coulde not be taken away. This opinion caried it away. And Caeſar wrote to the Senate that they ſhould priuately examine the cauſe of the freed men, as oft as they were accuſed by their patrons: and derogate nothing from the whole bodie of them. Not long after, Paris the late bondman was taken from Domitia, Neroes aunte, vnder colour of ciuill lawe; not without a diſgrace to the Prince: by whoſe commandement iudgement of free condition was giuen him. Neuertheleſſe there remained a certaine ſhew of a free common-wealth. For a contention being growen betweene Vibullius the Pretor, and Antistius tribune of the people, for releaſing out of priſon certaine vnruly fauourers of the Stage-plaiers, committed by the Pretor: the Lords of the Senate approoued the Pretors fact, and blamed Antiſtius boldneſſe. Withall the Tribunes were forbidden to vſurpe any thing belonging to the Pretors or Conſuls authoritie; or call ſuch before them out of Italie, whoſe right was to be determined by law. L. Piſo Conſull elect added further, that they ſhould not exerciſe their authoritie in puniſhing of any in their own houſes: & that the Quaeſtors of the treaſury ſhould not enter into record before foure months were paſt, the mercements adiudged by them: and that in the mean time it might be lawfull to ſpeake againſt them; and the Conſuls determine the matter. The authoritie of the Aediles is alſo reſtrained, and order ſet down how much the Curules, and the people might take to pawne, and how farre they might puniſh. Thereupon Heluidius Priſcus, Tribune of the people, ſhewed his priuate grudge againſt Obultronius Sabinus Quaeſtor of the treaſury, as though he had too ſeuerely enforced the execution of open ſales of goods againſt the poore. Then the Prince transferred the records of publicke debts from the Quaeſtors to the Prouoſts of the citie: albeit, the forme of that office hath beene diuerſly vſed, and often chaunged. For Augustus gaue the Senate licence to chooſe the Prouoſtes; then canuaſing of voices being ſuſpected, they were drawne by lot out of the number of the Pretors. Neither did that long continue, becauſe the lot fell oft vpon the vnmeeteſt. Then Claudius
                  
reſtored againe the Quaeſtors to the office, and beſtowed extraordinarie promotion vpon them, leaſt for feare of offence they ſhould be ſlacke in their dutie. But bicauſe there wanted authoritie of age in manie which were in that office, as being the firſt they were poſſeſſed of; Nero choſe ſuch as had beene Prouoſtes, and tried by long experience. Vipſanius Lenas was condemned vnder the ſame Conſuls, for behauing himſelfe too rauenouſly in the Prouince of Sardinia. Cestius Proculus was acquited of extorſion, his accuſers letting fall the ſute. Clodius Quirinalis, Captaine of the galli-ſlaues at Rauenna, accuſed for moleſting Italie with riot and crueltie, as the leaſt of all nations, preuented his condemnation by poiſoning himſelfe. Aminius Rebius a principall man for the skill of the lawes and of great wealth, eſcaped the griefes of ſickely olde age by letting himſelfe blood in the vaines, although he was thought to be too cowardly to kill himſelf; by reaſon he was giuen too effeminately to luſtes. But L. Voluſius died with great fame, hauing liued ninetie three yeeres, verie rich by good meanes, and neuer once hurt by any of thoſe vniuſt Emperors, vnder whom he liued.
            
            
               
                  VII. What Annales ought to intreate of: plaies forbidden.
               
                  NEro being the ſecond time Conſull, and L. Piſo, few things happened worthy of memorie; vnleſſe ſome would thinke it well done to fill vp volumes in praiſing the foundations and timber imployed by Caeſar in the huge building of the Amphitheater in Campus Martius, ſeeing it is meet for the dignitie and honor of the people of Rome to commit famous actes to their annales, and ſuch as thoſe to the diurnall of the citie. Capua and Nuceria both colonies, were reenforced with a ſupplie of old ſouldiers. There was beſtowed a gift of Sixe ſhil. 3. d. fortie ſeſterces by powle to the people, and About 31250. pound. foure hundred thouſand ſeſterces to the publike treaſurie to maintain the people faithful vnto him. The tribute of the fift, & of the twentieth for the ſale of ſlaues was releaſed in ſhew rather then in deed: for when the ſeller was commaunded to pay it, he enhanſed the price ſtill to the buiers loſſe. Caeſar commaunded by an edict, that no magiſtrate, procurator of any prouince, ſhould ſet foorth a ſhew of fencers, or wilde beaſts, or any other paſtime. For heretofore the ſubiects were no leſſe endomaged by ſuch-liberalities, then by taking their money from them, whileſt they cloaked with fauor gotten by ſuch ſpectacles, their faults committed by robbing the people. A decree of Senate was made as well for reuenge as ſecuritie, that if any man had been ſlaine by his bondmen, thoſe alſo who being manumiſed by teſtament, & continued in the ſame houſe, ſhould be puniſhed as the other bondmen. L. Varius ſomtimes Conſull was reſtored to his dignitie, remoued before for couetous dealing and extortion. And Pomponia Graecina a noble woman, and wife to Plautius, who returned with a ſmall triumph out of Britannia, and accuſed of ſtrange ſuperſtition, was remitted to the iudgement of her husband; and he according to the auncient cuſtome, in the preſence of her neereſt kindred, heard her cauſe of life and death, and pronounced her innocent. This Pomponia liued long, and in continuall ſorrow: for after that Iulia, Druſus daughter was murdered by Meſſallinaes trecherie, ſhe was not ſeene for forty yeers but in mourning apparel, and very ſad & doleful. Which ſhe might lawfully do whileſt Claudius raigned, & afterward turned to her glory. Many citizens were accuſed that yeere, of which number P Celer being one, at the information of the inhabitants of Aſia, becauſe Caeſar could not acquit him, he prolonged his cauſe till he died of age. For Celer (as I haue alreadie ſayd) hauing beſturred himſelfe in the murdering of Silanus the Proconſull,

cloaked all other villanies vnder the greatnes of that lewd action. The Cilicians accuſed Coſſutianus Capito, criminally noted and diſcredited with many vices, thinking he had had the ſame priuilege of vſing inſolent behauiour in the prouince, as he had done in the citie. But turmoiled and moleſted with an ouerthwart accuſation, in the end letting fall his defence, was condemned of extorſion. Great ſuings preuailed ſo much for Eprius Marcellus, of whom the Lycians demaunded reſtitution, that ſome of the accuſers were baniſhed, as though they had indangered an innocent man.
            
            
               
                  VIII. A liberalitie of Nero towards certaine decaied gentlemen. The warre of Armenia renewed. Tiridates departeth the countrey.
               WHen Nero was the third time Conſull, Valerius Meſſalla entered the ſame office, whoſe great grandfather Coruinus an orator, ſome old men remember to haue beene companion in office with Augustus of famous memorie, Neroes great grandfathers father. But the honor of this noble familie was bettered by giuing Meſſalla by yeare About 3906. pound 5. 
                        •
                     . fiue hundred thouſand ſeſterces to relieue his harmeleſſe pouertie. To Aurelius Cotta likewiſe, and Haterius Antoninus, the Prince graunted that an annuall ſum of money ſhould be giuen, although they had waſted riotouſly the wealth their anceſtors had left them. In the beginning of that yeere, the warre which was drawne at length with ſoft and milde beginnings vntill then, betweene the Parthians and the Romans for obtaining of Armenia, was nowe hotly purſued: becauſe Vologeſes would neither ſuffer his brother Tiridates to be depriued of the kingdome in which he had inueſted him, nor that he ſhould enioy it as a gift from another Lord; and Corbulo thought it woorthie of the greatnes of the people of Rome to recouer that which by Lucullus and Pompey had beene once gotten. The Armenians being doubtfull, and faithfull to neither ſide, inuited both: yet by the ſite of their countrey and conformitie of conditions, being more neere vnto the Parthians, and intermingled with them by mariages, and not knowing what libertie was, inclined rather to that ſeruitude. But Corbulo had more adoe with the ſlothfulnes of the ſouldiers, then perfidiouſnes of the enimies: for the legions remoued from Syria, by a long peace grown lazie and idle, could hardly endure the labor and paines of the Roman diſcipline. Certaine it was there were old ſouldiers in that campe, which had neuer kept watch nor ward; a rampire or trench they gazed at, as at a new and ſtrange deuiſe: without head-peeces; without curaſſes; neate and fine; hunting after gaine; hauing ſpent all their ſeruice in townes. Whereupon the olde and feeble being diſmiſſed, he deſired a ſupplie, which was had out of Galatia and Cappadocia. And to them was added a legion out of Germanie with wings of horſemen, and all the armie kept in campe; although the winter were ſo hard, and the earth ſo couered with yce that they could not pitch their tents, vnleſſe they had firſt digged the ground. Manie of their limmes grew ſtarcke with extremitie of cold; and many died in keeping the watch. And there was a ſouldier noted carriyng a faggot, whoſe hands were ſo ſtiffe frozen, that ſticking to his burden, they fell from him as though they had beene cut from his armes. Corbulo ſlightly apparailed, bare headed, was with them when they marched; when they laboured, praiſed the ſtout; comforted the feeble; and gaue example vnto them all. Then bicauſe many refuſing to endure the hardnes of the ſeaſon, & ſuch rigor of diſcipline, forſooke him; he ſought a redreſſe by ſeueritie: for he did not pardon the firſt and ſecond fault as in other armies, but he ſuffered death preſently who forſooke his enſigne:

which by experience proued more profitable, then clemencie. For fewer forſooke that campe, then where there was much mercie ſhewen. In the meane ſeaſon Corbulo hauing kept the legions in campe vntill the ſpring, and diſpoſed the aydcohorts in conuenient places, charged them not to giue the onſet. The charge of the garriſons he committed to Pactius Ophitus, once Captaine of the firſt enſigne: who although he wrote to Corbulo that the Barbarians were careleſſe and diſordered, and a fit occaſion offered of atchieuing ſome exploite; yet he was commaunded to keepe within his garriſon, and expect greater power. But breaking his commandement when he ſaw a few troupes of horſemen iſſue out of a caſtle hard by, and vnskilfully demaund battell; he encountered the enimie, and went away with the loſſe. And thoſe which ſhould haue ſeconded them, terrified with that diſcomfiture, fled as faſt as they could euerie man to his hold; which to Corbulo was an exceeding griefe. Who rebuking Pactius and the Captaines, and the ſouldiers, commaunded them all to pitch their tents out of the campe: and there kept them in that diſgrace, vntil they were deliuered by the interceſſion & ſute of the whole armie. But Tiridates beſides his own followers, ſuccoured by his brother Vologeſes; not now by ſtelth, but with open warre moleſteth Armenia, ſpoiling all ſuch he thought faithfull to vs: and if any forces were brought againſt him, he deluded them, by flying hither and thither, terrifiyng more by fame then fight. Corbulo therefore ſeeking occaſion to ioyne battell, but in vaine; and conſtrained to make war now in one place, now in another, as the enimy did; ſeuered his forces, to the end that the Lieutenants & Captaines might inuade diuers places at once. Withall, he aduertiſed King Antiochus to ſet on the gouernment next adioyning to him. For Pharaſmanes, his ſonne Rhadamistus being ſlaine, as a traitor towardes him, to teſtifie his loyaltie towards vs, ſhewed more willingly his inueterate hatred againſt the Armenians. Then the Iſichians, a nation neuer before confederate with vs, being nowe brought to our ſide, inuaded the hardeſt paſſages of Armenia; whereby all Tiridates deſeignments were croſſed. He ſent Embaſſadors to expoſtulate in his owne, and the Parthians name, Why hauing of late giuen hoſtages, and renewed amitie, which opened the way to new benefites, he ſhould be driuen from the auncient poſſeſſion of Armenia? therefore Vologeſes was not yet moued to warre, becauſe he had rather debate the matter by reaſon, then by force. But if they would perſiſt in warre, the Arſacides ſhould neither want courage nor fortune, often experimented to the loſſe of the Romans. Hereupon Corbulo knowing well that Velogeſes was troubled with the Hircanians rebellion, perſwadeth Tiridates to deale with Caeſar by intreatie; that he might obtaine a firme poſſeſſion of a kingdome without bloudſhed; if leauing of a long and ſlow hope, he would imbrace that which was preſent and more ſure. Then they reſolued, becauſe by entercourſe of meſſengers they profited nothing, for the full knitting vp of peace, to appoint time and place for a parlie. Tiridates ſayd, that he would come with a thouſand horſe for his gard: how many of whatſoeuer ſort of ſouldiers Corbulo ſhould bring, he weighed it not; ſo as they came without curaſſes & helmets, as a better ſhew of peace. The barbarous treacherie was palpable to all men, much more to an old circumſpect captaine: therfore a ſmall number was limited on one part, and a greater permitted to the other, that the treaſon might be the better effected: for to oppoſe againſt practiſed horſemen archers, vnarmed men, the multitude would auaile nothing. Yet Corbulo making as though he had not perceiued the treaſon, anſwered, that publick affaires would better be debated in the face of both the whole armies. And for the purpoſe choſe a place whereof the one part had hils of an eaſie aſcent fit for ranks of footemen;

the other ſtretched out into a plaine, conuenient to diſplay troupes of horſemen. And the day agreed on, Corbulo appeared firſt in this order: He placed the cohorts of allies, and ſuccours ſent by Kings, in the wings: and in the middle, the ſixt legion; among which he had intermingled three thouſand of the third, ſent for by night from other garriſons, with one enſigne, as if all were but one legion. Tiridates the day being well ſpent, ſhewed himſelfe aloofe, where he might better be ſeene then heard: ſo the Romaine captaine without parlie, commaunded his ſouldiers to depart euery man to his owne camp. The King either ſuſpecting fraude, becauſe our men went at once to diuers places, or to intercept our prouiſion of victuals, comming from the ſea of Pontus, and the towne Trapezunt, maketh away with all ſpeede. But he could not hinder the comming of the victuals, becauſe it was brought through mountaines poſſeſſed by our owne garriſons; and Corbulo becauſe the warre ſhould draw to an end, and the Armenians conſtrained to defend their owne, goeth about to raze their Caſtels.
            
            
               
                  IX. Corbulo hauing taken the Castles, destroyeth Artaxata the chiefe towne of the countrey.
               
                  COrbulo choſe to himſelfe the ſtrongeſt place of the countrey called Volandum to aſſault; the leſſer he committeth to Cornelius Flaccus Lieutenant, and Isteus Capito camp-maiſter. Then ſurueying his forces, and ſeeing all things in a readines for the aſſault, incourageth his ſouldiers to vnneſtle the vagabond enemie, neither readie for peace nor warre; acknowledging by his fleeing away his perfidiouſnes and cowardiſe; and ſo win at once both glory and wealth. After this, hauing deuided his armie into foure parts, he lead ſome cloſe and thicke ranked together, for a target fence to vndermine and beate downe the rampire: others to ſcale the walles: others to let flee fire and darts out of engins of warre: the ſling-caſters and ſtone-throwers had a place appointed them, from whence they might a farre off throw pellets of yron and ſtone, that the beſieged might haue no refuge or comfort of one another, all places being full of like feare. The courage of the aſſailants was ſo great, that within the third part of the day the wals were naked of defendants; the gates broken downe; the fortreſſe ſcaled; and all of lawfull yeeres put to the ſword; no one ſouldier loſt on our ſide, and verie few hurt: the weake and vnable people were ſold in a portſale and made ſlaues; the reſt of the bootie fell to the Conquerours ſhare. The Lieutenant and camp-maſter had the like fortune; three caſtles taken in one day; the reſt for feare and by conſent of the inhabitants yeelded: which encouraged the Romans to ſet on Artaxata the chiefe towne of the countrey. Yet the legions were not brought the next way, bicauſe that paſſing the riuer Araxis which waſheth the wals, by the bridge they ſhould haue come vnder the danger of blowes; but went ouer a farre off at broade foordes. But Tiridates aſſailed with ſeare and ſhame, leaſt if he ſhould ſuffer the beſieging, he might ſeeme not to be able to ſuccour it; if hinder it encomber himſelfe and his horſemen in dangerous and difficult places, reſouled in the end to ſhew his armie in battell aray, and a day appointed, giue the onſet; or making as though he would flee, dreſſe an ambuſh. Whereupon on a ſudden he enuironeth the Romans; our Captaine not ignorant thereof, who had marſhalled his armie in ſuch aray, that it might both march on, and fight. On the right ſide the third legion; on the left the ſixt marched; in the middle a companie choſen out of the tenth; the carriages betweene the rankes, and a thouſand horſemen in the rereward, with

commaundement that they ſhould reſiſt and make head againſt the enimie if they paſſed in; but if they ſled, not to follow. In the wings went the footemen archers with the reſidue of the horſemen; the left wing ſtretched ſomewhat longer to the bottome of the hils; that if the enimie ſhould enter on them, he ſhould haue beene receiued both in the front and middle. Tiridates on the contrarie ſide, came about the Romans freely; yet not within a darts caſt; now threatning; now making as though he were afraide; and ſo retiring, to ſee whether we would open or breake our rankes to follow, and ſo entrap vs being ſcattered. But not ſeeing any thing diſordered, nor any ranke broken by raſhnes; and onely one vnder Captaine of horſemen ventring boldlier then the reſt to haue beene ſlaine with an arrow, and the reſt by his example to obey, the night being almoſt come, he departed. Corbulo hauing pitched his campe in the ſame place, conſidered with himſelfe, whether he ſhould goe by night to Artaxata, and beſiege it with light and vncumbered legions, ſuppoſing that Tiridates had retired thither. Then the ſcouts hauing brought intelligence that the King had taken a longer iourney, doubtfull whether to the Medes or Perſians, he ſtaied vntill it was day: ſending before a companie lightly armed, to enuiron the wals, and beginne the aſſault a farre off. But the towneſmen opening the gates of their owne accord, yeelded themſelues and all they had to the Romans; whereby their liues were ſaued. But Artaxata was burnt and raced to the ground, becauſe it could not be kept without a ſtrong garriſon, by reaſon of the compaſſe of the wals; and our forces were not ſo great that we could leaue there a ſufficient garriſon, and withall, keepe the field: or if ſhe ſhould be left ſtanding and vngarded, there would be neither profit nor glorie that ſhe had beene taken. There is a miracle reported, as it were by ſome diuine power happened: for all things out of the houſes were lightened by the ſun; but that which was inuironed with the wals, was on ſuch a ſudden couered with a darke cloud & ſeparated with lightning, that it ſeemed the will of the gods was, it ſhould be deſtroyed. Hereupon Nero was ſaluted Emperor, & proceſſions made by decree of Senat; and images & triumphall arches ſet vp, and the Conſulſhip continued on him: and ordained that the day the victorie was gained, the day of the newes, the day wherin they talked of it in Senat ſhould be kept holie, & other ſuch like; ſo far beyond meaſure, that C. Caſsius cōſenting vnto the reſt of the honors giuen him, touching the proceſſions; ſaid, that if they would giue the gods thanks for ſo many fauours of fortune, al the yere would not be enough to make them proceſſions. And therefore they ſhould diſtinguiſh working daies from holie daies, in ſuch ſort that the gods might be honoured, and temporall buſines not hindered.
            
            
               
                  X. Suilius is baniſhed. Octauius tribune of the people killeth Pontia, with whom he was in loue.
               ABout that time, P. Suilius, a man croſſed with many aduerſities, and iuſtly incurred the hatred of many, was called in queſtion, and condemned; not without ſome touch of Senecaes credit. This Suilius in Claudius raigne was both cruell and corrupt, and by alteration of times brought lowe, though not ſo much as his enemies deſired; and who rather would ſeeme culpable, then as a ſuppliant craue pardon. For it was thought that the penaltie of the law Cincia, againſt ſuch as pleaded cauſes for money was ſet on foote againe, only to ſubuert and ouerthrow him. Yet Suilius neuer forbare complaints and hard ſpeeches, beſides his natural fiercenes, more free by reaſon of his old age: laying in Senecaes diſh that he was

an enemie to Claudius friends, vnder whom he had ſuſtained a moſt iuſt baniſhment: withall, that with his idle and dead ſtudies, applying himſelfe to the vnskilfulnes of raw youth, he enuied ſuch as vſed a liuely and vncorrupt eloquence in defending the citizens. He had beene Queſtor to Germanicus; and Seneca, an adulterer of his houſe. Was it to be iudged a greeuouſer offence to receiue a ſuters reward freely offered for a mans honeſt trauell, then to defile the beds of Princes wiues? with what wiſedome, with what precepts of Philoſophers within foure yeeres friendſhip with the King, had he gotten About 2343750. lib. three thouſand times three hundred thouſand ſeſterces? At Rome he coozened men of their legacies, and ſuch as died without children, as if he had layd a ſnare to intrap them. Italy and the prouinces were drawne dry by his exceſſiue vſurie. As for himſelfe, he had but ſmall ſtore of wealth gotten by his labour and ſweate. He would ſuffer the accuſation, perill, and what elſe might fall, rather then ſubiect his old credit and eſtimation to a new vpſtart. Neither wanted there ſuch as reported theſe or worſer ſpeeches to Seneca againe: and other informers were found, which accuſed Suilius that he had pouled and pilled the allies when he was gouernor of Aſia, and purloined the common treaſure. Then becauſe he had obtained a yeeres ſpace for to make enquirie of theſe matters; it ſeemed to be the ſhorter courſe, to begin with crimes committed neere about the citie, becauſe of ſuch, witneſſes were at hand. They obiected againſt him, that the bitternes of his accuſation droue Q. Pomponius to a neceſſitie of ciuill war: that he had brought Iulia the daughter of Druſus, and Sabina Poppaea to deſtruction; & falſly accuſed Valerius Aſiaticus, L. Saturninus, & Cornelius Lupus: yea a great companie of gentlemen of Rome had beene condemned by his meanes: in fine, all Claudius crueltie was imputed to Suilius. He for his defence anſwered, that he had vndertooke none of thoſe things of his owne will, but to obey the Prince, vntill Caeſar cauſed him to hold his toong, ſaying, that he was aſſured by his fathers memoriall, that he neuer inforced any man to accuſe another: then he pretended Meſſallinaes commaundement, and his defence began to faile him. Why was there no other choſen to ſpeake for that cruell vnchaſt dame? the inſtruments of cruell actions are to be puniſhed, when as hauing receiued the reward of their lewdnes, yet go about to lay it to others charge. Therefore part of his goods being taken from him (for part was left his ſonne and his neece, and that alſo was excepted which was giuen them by their mothers or grandfathers teſtament) he was baniſhed into the Ilands of Baleares, neuer loſing courage either in the time of his danger, or after condemnation. And it is reported that he ſuffered that ſeparation from company, liuing both aboundantly and delicately. The accuſers had ouerthrowne his ſonne Nerulinus, for the enuie they bare the father, and his owne extortions, if the Prince had not oppoſed himſelfe, as though the reuenge had beene ſufficient. About the ſame time Octauius Sagitta, Tribune of the people, mad in loue with Pontia a maried wiſe, by great gifts brought her vnlawfull loue, and vſe of her bodie; then to forſake her huſband, promiſing her mariage, and inducing her to the liking of him. But when this woman was free from her husband, ſhe began to finde delayes, ſhifting it off that her father was vnwilling, and in the end finding a hope of a richer husband, went from her promiſe. Octauius on the contrary ſide ſomtimes complained, ſometimes threatned, proteſting his credit was loſt, and his money conſumed; finally put his life which only remained in her hands. But being reiected, craueth one nights pleaſure for his ſatisfaction, then promiſed he would deſiſt. The night was appointed, and Pontia gaue charge of watching the chamber to a maide which was priuie to their dealings. He with one freed man conueyeth in a weapon vnder his garment,

Then as the manner of louers is, ſometimes angrie, ſometimes chiding, ſometimes intreating, ſometimes vpbraiding, & ſpending ſome part of the night in voluptuous pleaſures, at laſt kindled with griefe and complaints, with his ſword ran through this woman, which feared no ſuch thing, and wounded the maide which ran in, and ſo ruſheth out of the chamber. The next day the murder was knowne, and the murderer not doubted of, being knowne manifeſtly that they had beene together. But a freed man proteſted it was his doing, in reuenge of the iniuries done to his patrone, and moued ſome with the ſtrangenes of that example to beleeue him, vntil the maid, recouered of her wound, diſcouered the truth. Then Octauius accuſed of the murder before the Conſuls by Pontias father, at the end of his Tribuneſhip was condemned by the Senat, according to the lawe Cornelia againſt murderers.
            
            
               XI. Nero taketh away Sabina Poppaea from her husband.
               
               THe ſame yeere, an vntemperate life, no leſſe infamous then the former; was a beginning of greater miſchiefes in the common wealth. There was in the citie one Sabina Poppaea, daughter of T. Ollius: but ſhe had takē the name of Sabinus Poppaeus, her grandfather by the mothers ſide; a man of worthie memorie, honored with the Conſularie dignitie, & ornaments of triumph: for Seianus friendſhip did ouerthrow Ollius before he came to any dignities. This woman was graced with all things ſauing an honeſt mind: for her mother ſurpaſſing other women of her time in beautie, gaue her both glorie & beautie: wealth ſhe had ſufficiēt to maintain her nobilitie: her ſpeech affable & gratious, nor no groſſe wit; but knowing wel how to pretend modeſtie, & liue laſciouſly: ſhe came little abroad, and then part of her face couered with a vaile; either not to fill the eie of the beholder, or bicauſe it becōmed her beſt: of her credite regard ſhe had neuer; making no differēce betweene hir huſbands & adulterers: neither ſubiect to her owne will, nor anothers; but where profit was offered, thither ſhe carried her affection. This woman then being wife to Rufus Criſpinus, a gentleman of Rome, by whom ſhe had a ſonne; Otho ſeduced through his youth & riot; & bicauſe he was moſt inwarde in friendſhip with Nero: It was not long but they ioined marriage to adulterie. Otho either bicauſe he was vncircumſpect in loue, or bicauſe he would enflame the princes luſt; praiſed his wiues beautie and comely feature in his preſence; that both enioying one woman, his credite and authoritie might by that bond grow greater. He hath bin often heard to ſay, as he hath riſen from banquetting with Caeſar, that he woulde go to her in whom was all beautie and nobilitie; and to her who kindling all mens deſire, was able to make them moſt happie. Through theſe and the like prouocations, there was no long delaie made. Nero then finding acceſſe vnto her, Poppaea at the firſt by allurements and cunning, began to inueigle him; ſaying, that ſhe was not able to withſtande his loue, and that ſhe was ouercome with his beautie. Then perceiuing the princes luſt to be growen hot; ſhe began to grow proud; and if ſhe entertained him aboue a night or two, it was all ſhe coulde affoorde him; ſaying, ſhe was a married wife, and that ſhe could not abandon her husband as being bounde vnto Otho, for his manner of cariage and behauiour, which fewe came neere vnto: that he was in courage and demeanour magnificent; and in all reſpects woorthie of higheſt fortune. As for Nero vſing a bond-ſlaue for his concubine, and tied to Actes familiaritie, he had learned nothing of that ſeruile companie, but baſenes and niggardice. Otho after this was barred of the accuſtomed familiaritie with the Prince; then of his companie and retinue: and laſt of all, leaſt he ſhould be his concurrent in the citie, he

made him gouernour of the prouince of Portingall. Where he liued vntill the ciuill wars, not as before diſorderly; but honeſtly and vncorruptly, as one looſly giuen when he had little to do; but in office and rule more ſtayed and temperate. All this while Nero ſought to cloke his vitiouſnes and licentious life. Afterward he beganne to be iealous of Cornelius Syllaes dull and heauie diſpoſition, interpreting it contrarie to that which it was, deeming him a craftie and ſubtle deſſembler. Which iealouſie Graptus a freed man of Caeſars by age, and experience and time, vntill then well practiſed in Princes houſes, augmented with this lie. The Miluian bridge in thoſe daies was notorious for a haunt, of diſſolute and vnruly perſons in the night. Whither Nero reſorted alſo to inioy his licentious pleaſures more freely, being out of the towne: and returning backe by the Flaminian way; Graptus put him in the head that there had bin wait laid for him, which he eſcaped by deſtinie, becauſe he went another way to Sallustius gardens, & falſly accuſed Sylla to be the author thereof: Bicauſe that ſome of the Princes ſeruitors returning that way by chaunce, were, by ſome licentious behauiour of youth, which in that place was verie cōmon, put in greater fright than danger. Yet there was no one of Syllaes ſeruitours or vaſſals knowen. His faint hart and not daring any enterpriſe being well knowen to be farre from any ſuch fact: yet neuertheleſſe as though he had been conuicted, he was commaunded to depart his countrey, and liue within the wals of Marſiles. Vnder the ſame Conſuls the Embaſies of the Puteolanians were heard, which the Senators on one ſide, and the communaltie on the other, ſent to the Senate: the Senators charging the communaltie with inſolencie; and the people charging the magiſtrates & chiefe gentlemen with couetuouſnes. And when the ſedition was alreadie growen to throwing of ſtones, and threatning to fire one another, and like to drawe on murder and war, C. Caſsius was choſen to order the matter; but knowing that they could not endure his ſeueritie at his requeſt, that care was committed to the brothers the Scribonians, with a band of the Emperours guarde: through the terrour of which, and puniſhment of a fewe, the towneſmen were ſet at quietnes againe. I would not ſpeake of the very common decree of Senate, by which the citie of Syracuſa was licenſed to exceede the number prefixed in the ſhew of Fencers: If Paetus Thraſea had not ſpoken againſt it and giuen matter vnto backbiters to reprehend his iudgement: For ſaid they, if he beleeued that the common-wealth wanted the libertie of Senators, why did he meddle in ſuch trifles? He ſhould rather haue perſwaded or diſſwaded matters of warre or peace; of tributes, of lawes, and other things wherein conſiſted the eſtate of Rome. It was lawfull for the Lords of the Senate as oft as they thought conuenient to giue their opinion, to propounde what they liſted, and aske for a conſultation vpon it. Was it onely woorthie of correcting, that at Syracuſa the plaies ſhould not be ſo long? Be all other things in the Empire, as well as if, not Nero, but Thraſea had the gouerment thereof? The which if they were let paſſe with great diſſimulation; how much more ſhould they forbeare vaine trifles? Thraſea on the contrary, his friends demaunding him a reaſon why he contradicted the decree, made anſwere; that he did it not as being ignorant of the preſent eſtate of things; but for the greater honour of the Lords of the Senat: and ſhew manifeſtly that they would not diſſemble in important affaires, which would looke into ſuch ſmall matters.
            
            
               
               
                  XII. Matters of policie redreſſed. The Senators withſtand Nero touching ſubſidies.
               THe ſame yeere, through the often and importunate ſute of the people, blaming the couetouſnes of the farmers of the common rents; Nero doubted whether it were beſt to command that there ſhould no more ſubſidies and tributes be leuied; and giue ſo faire a gift to the worlde. But this ſudden pang, hauing firſt commended the bounteouſnes of his minde; the LL. of the Senate ſtaied, affirming it to be the diſſolution of the Empire, if the reuenewes by which it was ſuſtained ſhould be diminiſhed: for if cuſtome were taken away, it would follow that the aboliſhing of tributes woulde be demaunded. Manie ſocieties of tributes and tallages were eſtabliſhed by the Conſuls and Tribunes of the people, euen when the communaltie had greateſt libertie. Things afterwarde were ſo proportioned, that the receits and reuenues ſhoulde be anſwerable to the layings out. Indeede the couetouſnes of the farmers was to be moderated; leaſt things tolerated ſo many yeeres without complaint, ſhould turne to further miſchiefe and hatred, by their ſtrange greedines. The prince therefore by edict commanded, that the taxation of euerie cuſtome which hitherto hath bin concealed, ſhould now be publiſhed: and that the farmers ſhould not after the yeere was expired demaund any thing, let ſlip, or forgottē, during that time. That in Rome the Pretor; in the prouinces, thoſe which ſupplied the places of the pretors & Conſuls, ſhould extraordinarily determine againſt the farmers of common rents. That ſouldiers ſhoulde keepe their immunitie: thoſe things excepted wherin they trafficked: and many other iuſt things, which obſerued a ſhort time, afterward came to nothing. Neuertheleſſe the aboliſhing of one in fortie, and one in fiftie continueth, and what other names the farmers had inuented for their vnlawfull exactions. The carriage of corne to partes beyond the ſeas was moderated. And ordained that marchants ſhips ſhould not be valued in the generall eſtimate of their goods, nor tribute paied for them. Caeſar diſcharged Sulpitius Camerinus, and Pomponius Siluanus, who had beene Proconſuls in Affrike; and accuſed by the prouince; obiecting againſt Camerinus, rather cruell dealing againſt a few priuat men, then extortion in generall. A great number of accuſers came about Siluanus, and required time to produce witneſſes: but the defendant deſired his defences might preſently be hearde: which being rich, childleſſe, and old, he obtained; and ouerliued thoſe by whoſe ſuite he had eſcaped. The eſtate of Germanie was quiet vntill then, through the induſtrie of the captaines, who ſeeing the honor of triumph common, hoped for greater glory if they could continue peace. Paullinus Pompeius, and L. Vetus had charge of the armie at that time: yet leaſt they ſhould keepe the ſouldier in idlenes, Paullinus finiſhed a banke begun threeſcore and three yeeres before by Druſus, to keepe in the riuer of Rhene. Vetus went about to ioyne Moſella and Araris by a ditch caſt betweene them, that the armies conueyed by ſea, then by Rhodanus and Araris by that ditch, anon after by Moſa into Rhene, in the end ſhould fall into the Ocean: that all difficulties of the paſſages taken away, the weſt and north ſeas might be nauigable from the one to the other. Aelius Gracilis Lieutenant of Belgia enuied the worke, dehorting Vetus, leaſt he ſhould bring the legions into anothers prouince, & ſeeke to win the harts of the Gallois, affirming it to be dangerous to the Emperour: a pretext which often hindereth honeſt indeuours. Through the continuall reſt of the armies a rumor was ſpred, that the Lieutenants were forbidden to leade them againſt the

enemie. Whereupon the Friſians placed their youth in the woods and mariſhes; ſent their feeble old men to the banks of Rhene, planting them in voide grounds appointed out for the vſe of ſouldiers; Verritus and Malorigis being the authors thereof, who then gouerned the countrey which the Germains were Lords of. Now they had built houſes, ſowed the ground, and tilled it, as though it had been their natiue countrey: when Dubius Auitus hauing receiued the prouince of Paullinus, threatning to ſend the Roman forces, vnleſſe the Friſians would returne to their old homes, or obtaine a new place of habitation of Caeſar; enforced Varritus and Malorigis to fall to intreatie. And taking their iourney to Rome whileſt they attended for Nero, buſied in other matters, among other things woont to be ſhewen to barbarous people, they went to Pompeius Theater to behold the multitude of people. There at their leiſure (for being vnskilfull in thoſe plaies, tooke no great delight in them) whileſt they inquired of many things touching the aſſemblie, skaffolds, differences of degrees, which were gentlemen, where the Senators ſate, they perceiued ſome in a ſtrange attire in the Senators roomes: and asking who they were, when they vnderſtoode that that honour was done to the Embaſſadors of thoſe countries which excelled in vertue, and friendſhip with the Romans; they cried that There were none in the world more valiant and faithfull than the Germans; and ſo went and ſate among the Lords of the Senate, which was courteouſly taken of the beholders, as a forwardnes of their old good nature, and a commendable emulation of vertue. Nero gaue them both the priuileges of a citizen of Rome, and commaunded the Friſians to depart the countrey they had poſſeſſed: who refuſing to obeie, a troupe of ayde horſemen ſent on the ſudden forced them to it, and thoſe taken and ſlaine which moſt obſtinately reſiſted. The Anſibariās entered the ſame territories, a ſtronger nation then the other: not onely by their owne ſtrength, but by the pitie their neighbours take on them; bicauſe that being driuen out by the Chauci, and wanting dwelling places, they deſired they might haue it as a ſure place of exile. They had for their conductor a man of great reputation in that countrey, and vnto vs likewiſe truſtie, called Boiocalus: who declared, how by the commaundement of Arminius he had beene taken priſoner, when the Cheruſcirebelled: then how he had ſerued the Romans fiftie yeeres vnder Tiberius and Germanicus. He ſaid further, He would put his nation vnder our dominion. What neede was there of ſuch ſpatious waſte grounds, to put at ſometimes onely the ſouldiers heards and cattell to feed? That they might reſerue thoſe grounds they had receiued for their ſtocks (albeit men died with famine) ſo as they deſired not rather a wildernes than an habitation of people their confederates. In times paſt thoſe fields belonged to the Chamauorians; then to the Tubantians; and in the ende to the Vſipians. As the heauen was giuen the gods, ſo the earth to makind; and that which was not poſſeſſed, was common. Then beholding the ſunne, and calling vpon the reſt of the ſtars, he asked as it were in their preſence, whether they would ſee the land naked? That they would rather ouerwhelme the takers away of the earth with the ſea.
                  Auitus mooued with theſe ſpeeches; aunſwered that the commaundement of their betters was to be obeied. It was the will of the gods whom they called vpon, that the arbitrement ſhould belong to the Romans, what they ſhould giue, and what take away; neither would they ſuffer any iudges but themſelues. Theſe things he aunſwered the Anſibarians in publicke, to Boiocalus he would giue grounds in memorie of his friendſhip. Which he as if it had beene a reward of treaſon contemning added: We may want land to liue in; but to die in we cannot: and ſo they parted both diſcontented. They called the Bructeri, and Tencteri, and other nations further off, their

confederates to ioine in warre with them. Auitus hauing written to Curtilius Mancia Lieutenant of the vpper armie, that he ſhould paſſe ouer Rhene, and ſhew the forces behinde them; conducted the legions himſelfe into the Tencterans countrey, threatning their deſtruction vnles they would breake with the Anſibarians. Theſe therefore deſiſting, the Bructeri daunted with the like feare, and the reſt fleeing from others perils, the Anſibarian nation alone retired back to the Vſipians and Tubantians: from whoſe territories being expulſed, as they went to the Catti, then to the Cheruſci, by long wandering, ſtrangers, poore, enemies, in a ſtrange countrey, that youth that was left was ſlaine: thoſe that for age were vnfit for warre, diuided for a pray. The ſame ſummer there was a great battell fought betweene the Hermunduri, and Catti, each ſide ſtriuing by force to be maiſter of a riuer which yeelded aboundance of ſalt, ſited in the confines of both their countries. And beſides a deſire of ending all ſtrifes by warre, they had a religion rooted in them, that thoſe places are aboue others neere heauen; and the prayers of mortall men no where ſooner heard, then from thence. For they were of opinion, that by the goodnes of the gods in that riuer, and in thoſe woods came increaſe of ſalt, not as in other countries, of the wooes of the ſea, when the water is dried vp; but by that water caſt vpon a pile of wood ſet on fire, by the vertue of two contrary elements, fire and water, which becommeth thick and congealed. The warre was proſperous on the Hermundurians ſide, but the vtter ruine of the Catteans, becauſe of a vow they made, that if they were conquerors, they would dedicate the contrary army to Mars and Mercury, proteſting, horſes, men, all things ouercome, ſhould be put to the ſword; and truly thoſe deadly threats were turned againſt themſelues. But the citie of the Iuhonians confederate with vs, was afflicted with a ſudden diſaſter: for fires iſſuing out of the earth, burned townes, fields, villages euery where, and ſpread euen vnto the walles of a Colonie newly built; and could not be extinguiſhed, neither by raine, nor riuer water, nor any other liquor that could be employed, vntill for want of remedie, and anger of ſuch a deſtruction, certaine peaſants caſt ſtones a farre off into it; then the flames ſomewhat ſlakning, drawing neere, they put it out with blowes of clubs, and other like, as if it had been a wilde beaſt. Laſt of all, they threw in clothes from their backs, which the more worne and fouler, the better they quenched the fires. The ſame yeere, the Fig tree called Ruminalis, in the place of aſſemblies, which aboue eight hundred and fortie yeeres before had couered Remus and Romulus infancie, hauing his boughes dead, and the bodie beginning to wither, was held as a prodigious ſigne, vntill it began to flouriſh againe, and thruſt out new ſhootes.
            
         
         
            
            THE FOVR TEENTH BOOKE OF THE ANNALES OF CORNELIVS TACITVS.
            
               
                  I. Nero abuſed by Poppaea, determineth to put to death Agrippina his mother. Agrippinaes vnchaſt life to maintaine her greatnes.
               
                  
                     CVipſanius and Fonteius being Conſuls, Nero deferred no longer his long before intended wickednes; his boldnes by long rule being increaſed, and his luſt to Poppaea more and more enflamed: who caſting off all hope of marrying Nero, or ſeeing a diuorce betweene him and Octauia whileſt Agrippina liued, ſometimes tauntingly, and ſometimes merily, began to find her ſelf grieued with the Prince, and calling him a ward, & ſubiect vnto others controulement, ſaid he was ſo far from the gouerment of the Empire, that he wanted his owne libertie. For why was the marrying of her delayed? forſooth her beautie did not pleaſe his eye, nor the noblenes of her grand-fathers, who had ſo oft triumphed? Or did he miſdoubt her childbearing and true affection? or leaſt being his wife, ſhe ſhould diſcouer the iniuries done to the Senat, and the anger of the people againſt the pride and couetouſnes of his mother. But if Agrippina could indure no daughter in lawe but ſuch as her ſonne can worſt away withall, let her be reſtored againe to Otho her husband. She was content to go any whither, where ſhee ſhould rather heare of the contumelies done to the Prince, then ſee them, and take part of his dangers. Theſe and the like pearcing ſpeeches with teares and cunning by the adultereſſe vttered, no man hindered: all men deſiring that the mothers authoritie were taken lower; and no man beleeuing that the ſonnes hate would extend to her death. Cluuius doth report that Agrippina through a burning deſire of continuing her authoritie and greatnes grew to that ſhameleſnes, that in the midſt of the day, when Nero was well tippled and full of good cheere, ſhe offered herſelfe to him drunke as he was, trimly decked, and readie to commit inceſt: and the ſtanders by noted her laſciuious kiſſes, and other allurements, meſſengers of her vnchaſt meaning: And how Seneca hauing recourſe to another woman for a remedie againſt theſe intiſments, ſent Actes a freed woman priuilie to him; who carefull as well of her owne danger as Neroes infamie, gaue aduertiſment, that the inceſt was commonly ſpoken of, by reaſon his mother bragged thereof; and that the ſouldiers would not endure the gouerment of ſo profane a Prince. Fabius Rusticus reported that not Agrippina, but Nero luſted after that: but was diſcouraged by the cunning of the ſame freed woman. But what Cluuius had reported, is confirmed by other authors: and the fame inclineth that way; either becauſe Agrippina had conceiued indeede ſo heinous a fact in her minde, or that an intention of ſtrange luſt ſeemed more credible in her, who in her yongyeeres blinded with hope of rule, forfeited her honeſtie with Lepidus; and with the like luſt abandoned her bodie euen to Pallas will, as one hardned and ſhameles in all looſenes of life, by marrying her owne vncle. Therefore Nero eſchued her ſecret companie. And when ſhe went to her gardens, or to Tuſculanum, or Antiates, he praiſed her that ſhe droue away idlenes. At laſt, whereſoeuer ſhe beſtowed

her ſelfe, thinking her troubleſome to him, determined to make her away, whether by poiſon or by the ſword, or any other violence, that only was his doubt; and firſt he reſolued to do it by poiſon. But if it ſhould be giuen her at his table, it could not be attributed to chance, Britannicus alreadie dying the ſame death: and to ſound the minds of her ſeruants, ſeemed dangerous; and being a woman long practiſed in wickednes, was alwayes armed againſt the like; and by taking counterpoiſons before hand, it was to be feared it would take no effect. To kill her with the ſword, there was no inuention how to conceale the murder; and Nero feared leaſt any choſen to ſo dangerous attempt, ſhould refuſe to obey.
            
            
               
                  II. Anicetus worketh a meanes how to make away Agrippina Neroes mother.
               
                  ANicetus a freed man, captaine of the nauie at Miſenum, one which had brought vp Nero in his childhood, hating, and hated of Agrippina, found out an inuention for the purpoſe: which was, that there might a gallie be made looſe by arte in the bottome, that ſhould let her fall into the ſea when ſhe ſuſpected leaſt. There is nothing more ſubiect to chance then the ſea, and if ſhe ſhould periſh by ſhipwrack, who is ſo vnreaſonable as to aſcribe that to any vngracious inuention, which was the fault of the windes and waues? And to colour the matter withall, the Prince ſhould build a temple in honor of the dead, erect altars, and inſtitute other ceremonies, to ſhew a loue and reuerence towards her. This ſubtile inuention pleaſed the Princes humor, and fell out at a fit time, becauſe Nero then celebrated the feaſt of Minerua fiue dayes together at Baias. Thither by faire words he brought his mother; affirming, that the diſpleaſure of parents was to be borne with, and meanes to be ſought to pacifie their anger: which hee did to giue out a reconciliation betweene them, and ſo receiue Agrippina (as women by kinde are of eaſie beliefe) willing enough to ſee the ſport. Then going to meete her on the ſhore of Antium, tooke her by the hand and embraced her, and lead her to Baulos, which was a countrey houſe betwixt the promontorie of Miſenum and the Baian lake, hard by the ſea ſide, where a gallie trimmer than the reſt was readie prepared, as a thing among others to honour his mother: for ſhe had beene accuſtomed to the gallie, and to be carried by force of rowers. After that, ſhe was inuited to a banket, bicauſe the night might the better cloke the deuice. But ſure it was ſome one or other had bewraied the plot, and Agrippina vnderſtanding the practiſe, and doubtfull whether ſhe ſhould beleeue it, cauſed herſelfe to be carried to Baias in a bearing-chaire: there Neroes careſſes leſſened her feare, being courteouſly entertained, and placed aboue him; entertayning her with much communication; ſomtimes with a youthfull familiaritie, againe as it were recalling himſelfe, and interlacing it with ſerious talke, made the banket holde a long time: and his eies fixed on her as ſhe departed, embraced her more ſtreightly then he was accuſtomed; either becauſe he would omit no complement of diſſimulation; or elſe becauſe the laſt ſight of his mother euen readie to periſh, did mollifie his hart though fell and cruell. A bright ſtar-light night and quiet with a calme ſea, as it were to manifeſt the wicked practiſe, the gods themſelues did yeeld. The gallie not farre gone, and Agrippina hauing onely two of her owne perſons with her, the one Crepereius Gallus, which ſtood not far from the ſterne, & Aceronia lying at Agrippinaes feete, with great ioy diſcourſed of her ſonnes repentance, and the fauour ſhe had recouered. But the watch-woord being giuen the

couering of the place heauily loaden with lead, fell downe vpon Crepereius and preſt him to death immediately. Agrippina and Aceronia, the vppermoſt bearing of the couering, by fortune being ſtronger then the reſt though it ſhrunke with the waight, were ſaued, & the veſſel not looſed aſunder: all being amazed, and ſome which were ignorant of the practiſe, hindered others which were priuie to it. Then the rowers thought beſt to way the gallie on one ſide, and ſo to ſincke her. Yet they could not agree vpon ſo ſudden an aduiſe; but ſome ſwaying to the contrary way, cauſed the veſſell not to ſinke on the ſudden, but by little and little. But Aceronia vnaduiſedly crying that ſhe was Agrippina, and that they ſhould helpe the Princes mother, with poles and oares, and ſuch implements in the gallie as came firſt to hand, was ſlaine. Agrippina not ſpeaking a word, therefore not knowen, receiued onely one wound in the ſhoulder: then ſwimming towards the banke, was ſuccoured by ſmall barkes, and carried by the lake Lucrinus to her owne houſe. There caſting in her mind how ſhe had beene ſent for by craft and falſe letters, entertained with eſpeciall honour: how the veſſell neither toſſed by winds, nor carried vpon rockes, the vpper part fell as it had beene a land-frame: noting Accroniaes death, and beholding hir own wound, thought it the only remedy againſt the treachery, to make as though ſhe perceiued it not. And thereupon ſent Agerinus a freed man to tell her ſonne, how by the goodnes of the gods and his good fortune, ſhe had eſcaped a great danger: and prayed him that although he were affrighted with his mothers daunger; yet that he would forbeare a time from viſiting her, bicauſe that for the preſent ſhe had need of reſt. And in the meane while making ſhewe of ſecuritie, healeth her wound, and cheariſheth hir bodie. And commaunded Aceroniaes teſtament to be ſought for, and her goodes to be ſealed vp, which was the onely thing wherein ſhe ſhewed no diſſimulation. But whileſt Nero expected meſſengers to certifie him that his plot had taken effect; tidings cam that ſhe had eſcaped lightly wounded, but paſſed through great dāger, the author therof not once doubted. Nero ſtroken dead with feare, and crying ſhe would reuenge out of hand, either by arming her ſlaues, or ſturring vp the ſoldiers, or run to the Lords of the Senat, or people, there cōplaine of the ſhipwrack, her wound, & the murder of her friends; knew no ſhift, vnles Burrhus & Seneca would beſtur themſelues, whom immediatly he ſent for, doubtful whether they had vnderſtoode the matter before or not. They ſtoode mute a long time, fearing leaſt their perſwaſions ſhould take no effect; in the end concluded, that vnleſſe Agrippina were preuented, Nero ſhould periſh. Then Seneca hitherto forwarder of the two, looked vpon Burrhus, as though he ſhould haue asked, whether the ſouldier ſhould be commaunded to execute the murder? but he anſwered, that the gard being bound to all Caeſars houſe, and ſo mindfull of Germanicus, would not vndertake ſo cruell an enterpriſe againſt his progenie, and that Anicetus ſhould accompliſh his promiſe. He nothing at all ſtaggering, demandeth the whole charge of the execution. At which ſpeech, Nero profeſſed openly, that that day the Empire was beſtowed vpon him, and that the author of ſo great a gift was his freed man; and therefore that he ſhould make ſpeede, and take with him ſuch as were readieſt to fulfill his commaundement. He hearing that Agerinus, Agrippinaes meſſenger was come, maketh a colour of his enterpriſe in this ſort: Whileſt Agerinus deliuered his meſſage, Anicetus let fall a ſword betweene his legs, and as it were taking him in the manner, as though he had come to kill the Prince, commaundeth him to be caſt in priſon, that he might make the world beleeue that the mother had pretended her ſonnes death, and killed her ſelfe, for ſhame that the plot was diſcouered. In the meane ſeaſon, Agrippinaes danger being ſpread abroad, as though it had hapned

by chance, euery man as he vnderſtoode it, ranne to the ſea ſhore; ſome clammered vp the ſea dammes, ſome gate into the next boates, ſome waded as farre as they could into the ſea, ſome ſtretched out their hands to her. The coaſt was filled with complaints, vowes, and cries, of ſuch as either asked diuers queſtions, or anſwered doubtfully. And a great multitude flocked thither with torches, who vnderſtanding that ſhe was eſcaped, ſet themſelues in a readines, as it were to haue welcomed her, vntill they were diſperſed by the ſight of a threatning armed companie of ſouldiers. Anicetus beſetteth her houſe with a gard, and hauing broken the gate, layeth hand on all the ſeruants he meeteth, vntill he came to the chamber dores, where there ſtoode but a few, the reſidue terrified with thoſe which burſt in. There was but little light in the chamber, and one mayde only, Agrippina more and more perplexed that ſhe heard not from her ſonne, no nor of Agerinus. The face of the ſhore was now almoſt quite changed, euery man gone, and on the ſudden a great noiſe, and tokens of extreme danger. Then that one mayde going away, ſpeaking theſe words, Thou doeſt alſo for ſake me, ſhe eſpieth Anicetus, accompanied with Herculeus captaine of the gallie, and Oloaritus a Centurion of ſea ſouldiers, vnto whom ſhe ſayd, that if he came to viſit her, he ſhould go and ſay that ſhe was well recouered; if to execute any villanie ſhe ſuſpected her ſonne no way, and that the parricide was not by him commanded. The murderers came about her bed, and the captaine of the galley firſt ſtroke her on the head with a cudgell. For to the Centurion drawing his weapon to kill her, thruſting out her belly ſhe cried; ſtrike my belly, and ſo hauing receiued many wounds, ſhe was ſlaine. Thus many report with one cōſent. Whether that Nero beheld his mother when ſhe was dead, & praiſed the feature of her bodie, ſome there are which affirme, ſome which denie. She was burnt the ſame night in a banketting bed with baſe funerals; and whileſt Nero raigned, neuer buried. Not long after by the care of her friends, ſhe had a tombe of ſmall expenſes neere the Miſenian way, and Caeſar the Dictators houſe, which from a high place looked vpon a gulphe of the ſea vnderneath. When the funerall fire was kindled, Mnester her freed man thruſt himſelfe thorough; but whether for loue of Agrippina, or feare of death, doubtfull. That this ſhould be her ende Agrippina many yeeres before did beleeue, but contemned it. For conſulting of Neroes fortune, the Chaldaeans tolde her that he ſhould be Emperour, and kill his mother: and ſhe aunſwered, let him kill her, ſo as he be Emperour.
            
            
               
                  III. Neroes excuſes in Senate for murdering his mother: the flatterie of the people.
               BVt after this vnnaturall fact was committed, Caeſar began to waigh how heinous it was: and the reſt of the night, now in dumme ſilence, often riſing vp as affrighted, and out of his wits, looked for day as if it had beene a meſſenger of death. But at Burrhus perſwaſion the firſt flatterie of the Centurions and Tribunes did animate him to hope: who taking him by the hand, reioyced that he had eſcaped an vnlooked for danger, and his mother wicked practiſes. Then his friendes frequented the Temples, and the example begun the free townes adioining to Campania, witneſſed their ioy with ſacrifices and Embaſſadours. He counterfeiting the contrarie, ſad and as it were an enemie to his life, wept and bewailed the death of his mother. Yet becauſe the face of places is not chaunged like vnto the countenances of men, the grieuous ſight of that ſea and ſhore comming oft to his remembraunce (and ſome there were which beleeued that there was heard a ſound of a

trumpet in thoſe high hils adioining, and lamentations at his mothers tombe) he went to Naples and ſent letters to the Senate, with contents as followeth. That Agerinus one of Agrippinaes deereſt freed men, was found with a ſword to kill him, and that ſhe with the ſame remorſe of conſcience, had ſuffered the puniſhmēt, with which ſhe had prepared her lewd enterpriſe againſt him. He added farre fet crimes, as that ſhe would haue beene equall with him in the Empire, and that his guarde ſhould haue ſworne allegeance to her being but a woman, hoping to haue done the ſame diſhonor to the Senate and people. And that perceiuing theſe deuiſes to want effect, offended with the ſouldiers, the Senators, and the people; ſhe hindered a gift which ſhould haue beene giuen the people, and ſought the ruine of many noble men. How greatly laboured he, that ſhe ſhould not ruſh into the Senate, and giue fortaine nations their anſweres? And by a by-glancing at Claudius raigne, caſt vpon his mother all the lewd actions of his gouernment, affirming that ſhe was dead for the common good of the eſtate. He declared hir ſhipwracke likewiſe; the which to haue happened by chaunce, who was ſo blockiſh as to beleeue? or that one man alone ſhould be ſent from a woman that had ſuffered ſhipwracke to force a guarde and Emperors nauie? Therefore now not Nero whoſe crueltie ſurpaſſed all complaints, but Seneca was hardly ſpoken of, as one confeſſing the fact by that oration. Neuertheleſſe proceſſions were ordained with a woonderfull ſtrife of forwardnes in euerie Temple, and a bed made in the Temples in honour of their gods; and alſo that the fiue daies feaſtes of Minerua called Quinquatrus, in which the trecheries were diſcouered, ſhould be celebrated euerie yeere. And that an image of gold of Minerua ſhould be ſet in the Curia and the Princes by it. And that the day of Agrippinaes natiuitie ſhould be accounted among the diſmall daies. Thraſea Paetus with ſilence or ſhort aſſent accuſtomed to paſſe ouer others flatteries, went out of the Senate, and procured danger to himſelfe, and opened not the way of libertie vnto others. Many prodigions ſignes happened likewiſe, but of no effect. A woman brought forth a ſnake, and another companying with her husband, was ſtriken dead with lightning. The ſun was darkened on a ſudden, and fourteen places of the citie damnified with tempeſt from heauen: which chaunced ſo without the care of the gods, that Nero many yeeres after continued the Empire and wickednes. But to make his mother more odious, and ſhew his owne lenitie was augmented by her death, he recalled from baniſhment two noble women Iunia and Calpurnia, and Valerius Capito, and Licinius Gabolus, who had beene Pretors long before, baniſhed by Agrippina. He permitted alſo that Lollia Paullinaes aſhes ſhould be brought backe, and a ſepulchre to be built her, and releaſed the puniſhment of Iturius and Caluiſius, whom not long before he himſelfe had baniſhed. As for Silana ſhe died in comming backe at Tarentum; Agrippinaes malice which was her ouerthrow, either appeaſed, or her credit beginning to waine. Whileſt he lingered in the townes of Campania, doubtfull how he ſhould enter into the citie: whether his beſt way were to ſeeke the fauour of the Senat, or good will of the people; the lewdeſt conditioned, whereof there was no court better ſtored, perſwaded him that the name of Agrippina was odious, and that by her death the fauour of the people was more bent towards him than euer: therefore that he ſhould goe boldly, and with his preſence trie how he ſhould be reuerenced. And withall they earneſtly entreated him to ſet forward: and found all things in a greater readines than they had promiſed: the Tribes came to meete him; the Lords of the Senate in their holy-daie robes, wiues and children placed according to their age and ſexe: and all the way he ſhould goe builded with ſtaires as in publicke ſhewes or triumphes. Thereupon puffed vp with

pride, as a conquerour of publicke ſeruitude, he went to the Capitoll, and gaue thanks to the gods: letting looſe the raines to all luſts and licenciouſnes of life, which before badly reſtrained, yet the reuerence towards his mother ſuch as it was, did in ſome ſort bridle.
            
            
               IIII. Neroes exerciſes.
               
               IT was an old practiſe of his neuer to be abſent from the race of chariots: and no leſſe vnſeemely was that other delight of his, at ſupper to ſing to the harp as minſtrels did, which he ſaid to haue beene a cuſtome of auncient Kings and Captaines; and a thing highly commended by Poets, and attributed to the honor of the gods. For melodie is ſure dedicated to Apollo, & in that attire he doth ſtand, not only in the cities of Greece, but alſo in the temples at Rome: a principall deitie, and knowing things to come. Neither could he now be remoued, ſeeming good alſo to Seneca and Burrhus to yeeld him the one, leaſt he ſhould perſiſt in both. And thereupon a ſpace was incloſed in the valley of the Vatican to mannage his horſes, and not to be ſeene indifferently of euery man: and not long after of his owne accord he called the people to ſee it, who highly extolled him; as the manner of the people is, to be deſirous of paſtimes, and very glad if the Prince draw them to it. And his ſhame publiſhed abroad, brought him not as it was thought it would, any loathing therin, but a farther prouocation, thinking that the diſcredit would be ſhaken off, if he could diſhonor many with the like. He brought to the skaffold many deſcended of noble houſes, bought for pouertie, which becauſe they be dead, I will not name, as hauing regard vnto their aunceſtors: being rather his fault to giue money for ill doing, then leaſt they ſhould commit that which is naught. He conſtrained alſo the chiefe gentlemen of Rome with mightie gifts to promiſe their labour in the Theater: vnleſſe you ſay that a reward giuen by him who may commaund, bringeth a neceſſitie in obeying. Yet leaſt he ſhould be diſcredited by the publick Theater, he inſtituted Playes called Iuuenalia, as it were for the health of youth, to which euery man willingly gaue his name; not any ones nobilitie, not his age, or office borne, being any hinderance vnto them, but that Greekes and Latins exerciſed the arte of a ſtage player, euen vnto geſtures and meaſures vnſeemely for men. Yea noble women practiſed many geſtures, and vnſeemely to their calling. And in the wood which Augustus planted about the lake, where he repreſented a ſea fight, Tauernes and meeting places were built, where all prouocations of wanton luſts were ſold, where money was giuen to the good to ſpend of neceſſitie, and to the intemperate to glory and brag of. From thence ſprang all lewdenes and infamie, neuer at any time (not when there was great corruption in manners in times paſt) more diſſolute laſciuiouſnes vſed then at thoſe impure aſſemblies. Shame is ſcarſe retained among men of honeſt example; much leſſe among ſuch which ſtriued who ſhould haue moſt vices, can chaſtitie and modeſtie, or any good behauior be maintained. Laſt of all, Nero himſelfe entereth on the ſtage, tuning and playing on his inſtrument with great care, and premeditating what to ſay; his familiars aſſiſting him, and beſides them a cohort of ſouldiers, Centurions and Tribunes, and Burrhus, both grieuing, and praiſing him. Then alſo were firſt inrowled the gentlemen of Rome called Augustani, men for their age and ſtrength of body highly eſteemed: part of them ſhameleſſe and ſaucy in behauior, and part hoping thereby to riſe to greater authoritie, day and night with clapping of hands made all to ring of them, commending the feature, and voice of the Prince with termes attributed to

the gods, and were reſpected by him as honorable perſonages for their vertue. And yet leaſt the Emperours skill on ſtage only and muſick ſhould be publiſhed, he deſired to be well accompted of for verſifying, hauing gathered about him ſuch as had any cunning therein, much more ſuch as were excellent. They ſate together *, and made thoſe verſes hang together which he made there or elſewhere, and ſupplied his words howſoeuer they were vttered, which the faſhion it ſelfe of his verſes doth declare, not running with one and the ſame vehemencie, and vaine of writing. He beſtowed alſo ſome time after meate with Philoſophers, taking pleaſure to heare how euery man defended his owne opinion, and ouerthrew the contrarie. Neither wanted there ſome, which with their voice and graue countenance deſired to be thought pleaſant with the Emperour.
            
            
               
                  V. A ſtrife betweene the inhabitants of Nuceria, and the Pompeians.
               ABout the ſame time, of a light quarrell roſe a great murder betweene the inhabitants of Nuceria, and Pompeians at a ſhew of fencers, which Liuineius Regulus put from the Senate as before I haue rehearſed, repreſented to the people. For firſt prouoking one another with bitter termes, as it is often ſeene in malapert and ſaucie towneſmen, they came to ſtones, and laſt of all to weapons; the Pompeians being the ſtronger, with whom the ſhew was ſet forth. Many of the Nucerians were brought lame and wounded to the towne, and many wept for the death of their children and parents: the determining of which the Prince referred to the Senate, the Senate to the Conſuls. And the cauſe being againe brought to the Senators, the Pompeians were forbidden to aſſemble any ſuch companies for tenne yeeres, and their corporations erected againſt the lawes diſſolued. Liuineius and ſuch others as rayſed the ſturre, were baniſhed. Pedius Blaeſus alſo was put from his Senators roome, at the information of the Cyrenenſians; who layd to his charge that he had robbed the treaſure of the god Aeſculapius, and muſtered ſouldiers for money and ſuite. The ſame Cyrenenſians accuſed Acilius Strabo ſometime Pretor, and ſent by Claudius as arbitrator of certaine lands which once belonging to King Apio, and left to the people of Rome with the kingdome, their neighbours poſſeſſed and occupied, and by long licence and iniurie defended them to be theirs by right and equitie. The lands therefore being giuen from them by ſentence, they enuied the iudge: and the Senate anſwered they were ignorant of Claudius pleaſure, and that they ſhould aske the Princes aduiſe. The Prince approuing Straboes ſentence, wrote neuertheles that he would ayde the allies, and giue them that which they had vſurped. There died not long after, Domitius Afer, and M. Seruilius, two notable perſonages, which flouriſhed with great honors and eloquence: he in pleading of cauſes, Seruilius famous for long frequenting the Forum, and then for writing the Romane hiſtories, carriage of himſelfe, and neatnes of life, which made him more renowned; as equall to the other in wit, yet different in conditions.
            
            
               
                  VI. Whether it be conuenient to haue often playes to entertaine the people.
               
                  NEro being the fourth time Conſull, and Cor. Coſſus, the play called Quinquennale was ordained to be played at Rome, after the maner of the Greeke

combate, whereof there went diuers reports, as almoſt it hapneth in all new things: for ſome there were which ſaid that Gn. Pompeius was blamed by the ancient men for building a permanent Theater. For in times paſt the playes were wont to be ſet forth on a skaffold built for that time, and ſeates to continue no longer then the play laſted. Or if thou wilt looke into more ancient times, the people beheld them ſtanding, leaſt if they ſhould ſit, they would continue in the Theater whole daies in idlenes. Neither ſhould the ancient faſhion of playes be obſerued, whē, * as oft as the Pretors ſhuld ſet them forth; no neceſſity was laid vpō any of the citizens to fight, or looke on. But the cuſtomes of the countrey being by little and little aboliſhed, were now vtterly ouerthrowne by diſorders ſet from ſtrange countries; that whatſoeuer elſewhere might corrupt, or was corrupted, was ſeene in the citie; and the youth vnlike to that it hath beene, through ſtrange manners, wreſtling naked, idlenes, and licentious loue, the Prince and the Senate being authors thereof, who haue not only giuen licence to vices, but alſo giuen them ſtrength and force. The noblemen of Rome vnder colour of making orations and verſes are diſcredited by ſtage-playing. What remaineth then but only to vncloath themſelues ſtarke naked, and take the caeſti in hand, and practiſe that fight in ſtead of armes, and exerciſes of warre? Or do they thinke they ſhall better vnderſtand the knowledge of ſouthſaying, be more skilfull in the decuries of gentlemen, accompliſh the honorable charge of Iudicature, if they vnderſtand cunningly broken tunes, and ſweerenes of voices? whole nights alſo were added to thoſe ſhames, becauſe no time ſhould be left honeſt: but in that confuſe multitude what euery perſon moſt diſſolute deſired by day, durſt venter on by night. That licence pleaſed many, and yet they cloaked it with honeſt termes. That the ancients likewiſe did not abhorre the delight of playes and ſhewes according to their calling at that time, and that ſtage-players were ſent for, from Thuſcia. The horſe-race was repreſented by the Thurians: but ſince Achaia and Aſia was poſſeſſed by vs, playes haue beene more exactly ſet foorth. Neither hath there beene any one in Rome nobly deſcended, which by reaſon of ſtage-playes hath diſcredited the ſtocke from whom he came theſe two hundred yeeres, ſince L. Mamius triumphed, who firſt ſet forth that kinde of ſhew in the citie. Farther, there was a regard had vnto thrift, in erecting a continuall ſtanding Theater, rather then with infinite charges euery yeere ſet vp and build a new. Neither ſhould the magiſtrates waſte their goods as they haue done; on the people haue cauſe to be importunate with them for the combates according to the Greekes manner, ſeeing the common-wealth did defray the charge. The victories of orators and poets would be an incouragement vnto wits: neither could it be offenſiue to any iudge to lend his eares to honeſt ſtudies, and allowable paſtimes. To mirth rather then laſciuiouſnes, a few nights in fiue yeeres were giuen, in which there is ſuch great light of fires, that no vnlawfull acte can be hidden. In very deede that ſhew paſt without any notable diſhoneſt part committed, neither did the people ſhew any great inſolencie, although the common vices were reſtored to the ſtage, and forbidden to ſhew themſelues in ſuch playes as were repreſented in honor of the gods. The praiſe of eloquence none caried away, but Caeſar was pronounced victor: and the Greekiſh attire which many wore in thoſe dayes, was layd aſide.
            
            
               
               
                  VII. Nero falleth ſicke.
               DVring theſe things, there appeared a blaſing ſtarre, which in the opinion of the common people, betokeneth the change of a Prince. Therfore as though Nero had alreadie beene driuen out, they were buſie to knowe who ſhould ſucceede him: Rubellius Plautus being famous in euerie mans mouth, by the mothers ſide deſcended from the Iulian familie. He was an obſeruer of the old manner of liuing, vpright, graue and ſeuere, liuing with all honeſtie, as one retired in his own houſe: and the more ſecret he was for feare of being accounted of; ſo much the more his reputation increaſed. An interpretation of a lightning begun by the like vanitie, augmented the rumor. For Neroes meate being ſtriken with lightning, and the table throwen downe at the lakes of Simbruinum, in a place called Sublaqueum, in the confines of Tiburtum, from whence Plautus had his beginning by his fathers ſide; all men beleeued that he was deſtined by the prouidence of the gods to the Empire: and thereupon many fawned and courted him: which by a greedie and for the moſt part deceiptfull ambition, admire new things, doubtfull and vncertaine. Nero moued with theſe rumors writeth to Plautus, aduiſing him to looke to himſelf and his aſſemblies, and rid his hands of thoſe which lewdly defamed him: and that in Aſia he had poſſeſſions by deſcent from his aunceſtors, in which he might paſſe his youth ſafely and without troubles. Whereupon he went thither with Antistia his wife, and a few of his familiars. At the ſame time too greedy a deſire of pleaſing his will in all he liked, bred Nero both infamie and danger: for ſwimming in the fountaine of the Martian water which was brought to the citie; it was conſtrued that he had defiled the holy drinkes, and ceremonie of the place with his whole bodie; and falling dangerouſly ſicke thereupon, it was conſtantly beleeued that it proceeded as a puniſhment from the wrath of the gods.
            
            
               
                  VIII. Corbulo conquereth all Armenia; ouer which Nero ſendeth Tigranes to be King.
               BVt Corbulo after the raſing of Artaxata, thinking it his beſt to make profit of the freſh terrour: for the eaſilier forcing of Tigranocerta, by deſtroying of which, he ſhould augment feare in the enimie; or by ſparing it, purchaſe the reputation of clemencie: marcheth thither, vſing no hoſtilitie by the way, leaſt he ſhould take from them all hope of pardon: yet with no remiſnes or careleſſe proceeding, as one knowing that that nation is eaſilie ſubiect to chaunge: as ſlow to perill, ſo faithles when occaſion is offered. The Barbarians euerie man according to his wit, ſome entreated; ſome forſooke their villages and conueighed themſelues to inacceſſible places; ſome hid themſelues, and the things they made moſt reckoning of in caues. The Roman Captaine therefore, vſing diuers policies, ſhewed mercie towards the humble; vſed celeritie in purſuing thoſe which ranne away; and crueltie againſt thoſe which fled to the dennes and caues, ſtopping the mouthes of them with vine branches and ſmall wood, and after ſet them on fire. And paſſing by the confines of the Mardians, a people well practiſed in theeuing and robbing; they ſet on him, but fled to their mountaines for their defence, when they ſaw he turned towards them. But Corbulo ſent an armie of Hiberians to waſte them, reuenging by that meanes with the blood of ſtrangers the audaciouſnes of the enemie. Himſelfe and his armie, albeit he receiued no hurt by the battell; yet began to faint for want of victuals and ouer great trauell, hauing no meanes to driue away hunger, but with the fleſh of beaſts. All this, with the want of water, feruent heat, long iournies, was mitigated by the onely patience of the Captaine; himſelfe induring more

than a common ſouldier. Then we came into tilled groundes, but where harueſt was in: and of two caſtles into which the Armenians had fled, the one was taken by force; and the other which had reſiſted the firſt aſſault was forced with ſiege. From thence paſſing into the countrey of the Taurantians he eſcaped an vnlooked for danger: for not farre from his pauilion, there was found a Barbarian of no ſmall reputation with a weapon; which by torture diſcouered the order of a treaſon (himſelfe the inuentor of it) and all his complices: and they were conuicted and puniſhed which vnder colour of friendſhip went about treaſon. Not long after Embaſſadors ſent frō Tigranocerta, bring tidings that the gates are open, and the inhabitāts willing to obey the Romans. Withall, they preſented him a crowne of gold as a gift to honour a ſtranger: which honorably he accepted, and tooke away no priuilege from the towne, bicauſe they ſhould more faithfully retaine their obedience. Neuertheleſſe the Kings fortreſſe, which the fierce youth had ſhut themſelues in, was not gotten but by fight: for they came foorth & skirmiſht before the wals, but driuē into their rampiers, & no lōger able to reſiſt, at the laſt yeeld to the forces of the aſſailers. All which the Roman atchieued ſo much the eaſlier, bicauſe the Parthians were hindered with warre againſt the Hyrcanians: who had ſent to the Romane Prince to craue their alliance, declaring that for a pledge of their frindſhip, they had ſtopped Vologeſes. Corbulo fearing leaſt thoſe Embaſſadors in returning backe, hauing paſt Euphrates ſhould be ſurpriſed by the ambuſhe of the enimie, with a good guard conducted them to the red ſea: whereby hauing eſcaped the confines of the Parthians, they retuned ſafe to their countrey. Beſides this, Corbulo droue away Tiridates farre off: and from all hope of warres entering the confines of Armenia by the Medes; by ſending before the Lieutenant Verulanus with the confederates, himſelfe following with vncombred legions: and hauing waſted with fire & ſword thoſe he knew to be our enimies, & adhere to the King, put himſelfe in poſſeſſion of Armenia: when as not long after came Tigranes choſen by Nero to take the kingdome, one of the nobilitie of the Cappadocians, and King Archelaus nephew: but by being kept a long time an hoſtage in the citie, was humble and lowly euen vnto ſeruile patience: neither accepted by conſent, ſome ſtill fauoring the Arſacides: but the moſt part hating the pride of the Parthians, deſired rather the King giuen by the Romans. He had alſo a garriſon ſent him by the Romans, a thouſand legionarie ſouldiers, three bands of allies, and two wings of horſemen. And to the end he might the eaſlier defend the new kingdome, part of Armenia, as it adioyned to Nipolis *, Ariſtobolus, and part Antiochus had charge of. Corbulo came into Syria, which by the death of the Lieutenant Vinidius was without a gouernor and committed to his charge.
            
            
               
                  IX. An earth-quake in Laodicea. An order for appellations.
               THe ſame yeere, Laodicea one of the moſt famous cities of Aſia, deſtroied by an earth-quake, without any helpe of ours by her owne wealth, recouered her ſelfe againe. But in Italie the auncient towne of Puteolum, got of Nero the priuileges and ſurname of a colonie. The old ſouldiers aſſigned to inhabite Tarentum and Antium, did not furniſh the lacke of people in thoſe places: many of them being ſent into Prouinces, where they ended their ſeruice. And not accuſtomed to marrie, nor bring vp children, they left their houſes without poſteritie: for whole legions, were not brought as in times paſt with Tribunes and Centurions and ſouldiers of the ſame band, that by conſent and loue they ſhould make a common-wealth:

but ſtrangers the on to the other, of diuers companies, without a gouernour, without mutuall loue, as it were gathered on the ſudden, of another kinde of people, rather a number than a colonie. The election of Pretors wont to be choſen at the will of the Senat, which was now done by ſuite and briberie; the Prince aſſumed to himſelfe, and gaue the charge of a legion to each one of the three which ſued extraordinarily. And augmented the honour of the Senate, by ordayning that ſuch as from ordinarie iudges appealed to the Senators ſhould incurre the ſame penaltie, as they did which appealed to the Emperour: for before, that was free for euerie man, and not puniſhable. In the ende of the yeere Vibius Secundus a Roman gentleman, at the ſuite of the Moores, was condemned of extortion and baniſhed Italie, and ſupported by the fauour of his brother Vibius Criſpus, that he had no grieuouſer a puniſhment.
            
            
               
                  X. Warre in England. Suetonius Paullinus conquered the Ile of Angleſey. The Queene Boudicea abuſed by the Romans.
               WHen Ceſonius Paetus, and Petronius Turpilianus were Conſuls, there was a verie great ouerthrow receiued in Britannie: where neither the Lieutenant Auitus as I haue alreadie ſaide, could do no more but keepe that which was alreadie gotten; and his ſucceſſor Verannius with ſmall inrodes hauing waſted the Siluri Southwales., was hindered by death from making any long warre: a man whileſt he liued, famous for ſeueritie, but in his laſt will ſhewed himſelfe openly ambitious. For after much flattering of Nero, added, that he would haue ſubdued the Prouince to his obedience, if he had liued the two next yeeres. At that time Paulinus Suetonius gouerned Britannie, in skill of ſeruice, & opinion of the people (which ſuffereth no man without a concurrent) comparable with Corbulo, deſiring to match his honour of recouering Armenia by ſubduing the enimie of this countrey. He maketh all preparation to inuade the Ile of Mona Angleſey. ſtrong with inhabitants, and a receptacle of fugitiues; and buildeth flat bottomde veſſels, becauſe the ſea is ſhallow, and landing vncertaine. So the footemen hauing paſſed ouer, the horſemen followed by the foord, or by ſwimming, if the waters were high. Againſt them the enemies armie ſtoode on the ſhore, thicke in aray, well appointed with men and weapons, and women running among, in mourning attire, their haire about their eares with fire-brands in their hands like furies of hell: and the Druides round about, lifting vp their hands to heauen, and powring out deadly curſes: with the newnes of the ſight amazed the ſouldier, and ſtood ſtocke ſtill cloſe togither, not once moouing a foote, as though they had preſented themſelues to the wounds. Then by the encouragement of the Captaine, and animating each the other, that they ſhould not feare a flocke of women, and franticke people, they diſplaied their enſignes and marched on; ouerthrew ſuch as encountered them, and thruſt them among their owne fires. Which being done, they placed garriſons in their townes, and cut down their woods; which through their execrable ſuperſtitions among them were reckoned holie. For they accounted it lawfull to offer ſacrifice at their altars with the blood of captiues, and aske counſell of their gods by the aſpect of mans intrailes and fibres. Newes came to Suetonius as he atchieued this enterpriſe, of a ſudden rebellion of the Prouince. Praſutagus King of the Icenians Suffolke, Norfolke, Cambridgeſhire Huntingtonſhire., verie famous for his riches a long time gotten, made Caeſar with two of his daughters his heire by will, thinking that by that flatterie his kingdome and houſe ſhould haue beene warranted from iniurie,

which fell out otherwiſe: for his kingdome by Centurions, his houſe by ſlaues was waſted & ſpoiled as lawfull booties. And to begin withall, his wife Boudicea was whipped, & his daughters defloured. And the chiefeſt of the Icenians as though they had receiued the whole nation for a pray, were diſpoſſeſſed of al their ancient inheritance, & the Kings kindred reputed as ſlaues. By reaſon of which contumely & feare of worſe (after that they were reduced into a forme of a prouince) they take armes againe: the Middleſex and Eſſex. Trinobantes being ſturred to rebellion alſo, & others not yet broken to the yoke of ſeruitude, by ſecret conſpiracies had vowed to recouer their libertie, bearing a bitter hatred againſt the old ſouldiers. For thoſe which were lately brought into the colonie of Maldon in Eſſex. Camalodunum, thruſt out of their houſes the auncient inhabitants, tooke their liuings from them, calling them captiues and ſlaues: the new ſoldiers fauouring the inſolent fiercenes of the old, as well for likeneſſe and conformitie of life, as hope of like licence. Beſides, a temple erected in honor of Claudius of famous memory, was an eye ſore, and an altar of perpetuall dominion ouer them: and the Prieſts which were choſen vnder colour of religion, waſted all the wealth of the inhabitants. Neither did it ſeeme any hard matter, to extirpate that colonie vndefenſed and vnfortified, which was not circumſpectly foreſeene by our captaines, whileſt they had a greater care of pleaſure then good gouernment. Amongſt theſe things the image of Victorie ſet vp in Camalodunum fell downe without any apparant cauſe why, and turned back, as though it would giue place to the enemie. And the women diſtempered with furie, went ſinging, that deſtruction was at hand. And ſtrange noiſes were heard in their court, and the Theater gaue a ſound like to a howling, and a ſtrange apparition in an arme of the ſea was a foretelling of the ſubuerſion of the colonie. Further, the Ocean bloudie in ſhew, and dead mens bodies left after an ebbe, as they brought hope to the Britaines, ſo they droue the old ſoldiers into a feare; who becauſe Suetonius was farre off, craued aide of Catus Decianus procurator. He ſent not aboue two hundred men, and thoſe badly armed, and the number not great which was there before, truſted to the franchiſe of the temple. And thoſe hindering which were confederates of the ſecret conſpiracie troubled their deſeignments: for they neither made trench nor ditch, nor ſending away the old men and women, and keeping the yong men only, being as ſecure as it had beene in a full peace, they were ſurpriſed with a multitude of barbarous people, and all ouerthrowne, and waſted with violence, or conſumed with fire: the temple only excepted, into which the ſouldiers had fled, which alſo within two dayes was beſieged, and taken. And the Britaine being thus conqueror, and meeting with Paetus Cerealis Lieutenant of the ninth legion which came to ſuccour them, put to flight the legion, and ſlew all the footemen. Cerealis with the horſemen eſcaped to the campe, and defended himſelfe in the fortreſſes. Through which ouerthrow, and hate of the prouince, driuen to take armes through the auarice of the Romaines, Catus the procurator being afraid, ſailed to Gallia. But Suetonius with wonderfull conſtancie paſſing euen among the enemies, went on to London, not greatly famous by the name of a colonie, but for concourſe of Merchants, and prouiſion of all things neceſſary, of great fame and renowme: and being come thither, ſtoode doubtfull whether he ſhould chooſe that for the ſeate of warre or not: and conſidering the ſmall ſtore of ſouldiers he had, and how Petilius had well payed for his raſhnes, he determined with the loſſe of one towne to preſerue the reſt whole. Neither was he won by weeping and teares to giue aide to ſuch as demaunded it, but gaue ſigne of remouing, and receiued ſuch as followed as part of his armie. If imbecillitie of ſexe, or weariſomnes of age, or pleaſantnes of the place kept any back, they were

all put to the ſword by the enemie. The free towne of S. Albons. Verulamium receiued the like ouerthrow, becauſe the barbarians forſaking their Caſtels and forts, and being well manned, ſpoiled the richeſt and fatteſt, and carrying it to a ſure place, glad of the bootie, went on to places more notable. It is certaine there were ſlaine in thoſe places I haue ſpoken of, to the number of ſeuentie thouſand citizens and confederates. Neither did they ſell or take any one priſoner, or vſe any entercourſe of traffick of warre, but kill, hang, burne, crucifie, as though they would requite the meaſure they had ſuffered, and as it were in the meane time haſten to anticipate reuenge.
            
            
               
                  XI. Suetonius vanquiſhed the Britaines, vvhich Boudicea conducted: her ſtoutnes and death.
               NOw Suetonius hauing with him the foureteenth legion, with the Standard bearers of the twentith, and the aides from places adioyning, which came all to the number almoſt of ten thouſand armed men, reſolued to lay aſide all delay, and trie the chaunce of a maine battell. And chooſeth a place with a narrow entrance, and incloſed behinde with a wood, being well aſſured that he had no enimies but before him; and that the plaine was wide without feare of ambuſh. The legionarie ſouldier then marſhalled togither in thicke and cloſe rankes, and the light harneſſed cloſely about them, the horſemen made the wings. But the Britaines forces triumphed abroade in troupes and companies, by ſuch multitudes that the like had not beene ſeene; and of ſuch fiercenes of courage, that they brought their wiues with them, and placed them in carts in the vtmoſt parts of the plaine, as witneſſes of the victorie. Boudicea hauing her daughters by her in a chariot, now going to one, now to another: Told them that the Britaines were woont to make warre vnder the conduct of women. But at that time not as though ſhe had deſcended of ſuch noble aunceſtors, ſhe ſought neither for kingdome nor wealth, but a reuenge as one of the common people, of their loſt libertie, of her bodie beaten with ſtripes, and the chaſtitie of her daughters violated. That the deſire of the Romaines was growen to that paſſe, that they left none, of what age ſoeuer, nor any virgin vndefiled. Neuertheles that the gods fauored iuſt reuenge; that the legion which durſt vndertake the battell was ſlaine; the reſt had either hid themſelues in their camp, or fought meanes by flight to ſaue themſelues: that they could not indure the noiſe and cry of ſo many ſouldiers, much leſſe their furie and ſtrength. If they would waigh with themſelues the ſtrength of the ſouldiers; if the cauſe of the warre, they ſhould reſolue either to vanquiſh in that battell or die. That, for her owne part being a woman, was her reſolution, the men might liue if they pleaſed, and ſerue. Suetonius held not his toong in ſo great danger, who although he truſted in the valour of his ſouldiers, yet enterlaced exhortations and prayers. That they ſhould contemne the lowde and vaine threates of the barbarians; that there were more women ſeene in their armie then yong men; that being vnwarlike, and vnarmed, they would preſently yeeld when they ſhould once come to feele the weapons and valour of the conquerors, who had ſo oft ouerthrowne them: yea where many legions haue beene, a few haue caried away the glory of the battell; and it ſhould be an augmenting to their glory, if with a ſmall power they could win the praiſe of a whole armie: that they ſhould only continue the ſlaughter and butcherie cloſe together, by throwing of darts; then with their ſwords and pikes of their bucklers, not thinking on bootie; for the victorie once gotten, all ſhould fall to their ſhare. Such

a feruencie and edge followed the captaines words; the old ſouldier experienced in many battels ſo beſturred himſelfe, and ſhewed ſuch forwardnes in lancing his darts, that Suetonius aſſured of the euent, gaue the ſigne of battell. And firſt of all the legion not ſtirring afoote, but keeping within the ſtreight, as in a place of defence; after that the enemie was come neerer, and had ſpent his darts to good purpoſe, the legion in the end ſallied out in a pointed battell. The auxiliarie ſouldier was of the like courage, and the horſemen with long lances breaking before them all they met, or made head againſt them. The reſidue ſhewed their backs, hardly fleeing away, by reaſon the carts placed about the plaine had hedged in the paſſages on euery ſide. And the ſouldiers ſpared not from killing ſo much as the women; and their horſes and beaſts thruſt through, increaſed the heape of bodies. That was a day of great renowme, and comparable to the victories of old times: for ſome there are which report, that there were ſlaine fewe leſſe in number then fourſcore thouſand Britaines, of our ſouldiers fower hundred ſlaine, and not many moe hurt. Boudicea ended her life with poiſon. And Poenius Posthumus, Campemaiſter of the ſecond legion, vnderſtanding of the proſperous ſucceſſe of the foureteenth and twentith legions, becauſe hee had defrauded his legion of the like glorie; and contrarie to the order of ſeruice, refuſed to obey the Captaines commaundement, ſlewe himſelfe. After this gathering the armie togither, they encamped againe, readie to end the reſidue of the warre. And Caeſar augmented his forces by ſending out of Germanie two thouſand legion aries, eight cohorts of auxiliaries, and a thouſand horſe; by whoſe comming the ninth legion was ſupplied. The cohorts and wings were lodged in newe winter garriſons, and all thoſe which were either openly againſt vs, or doubtfull, were waſted with fire and ſword. But nothing ſo much diſtreſſed that nation as famine, being negligent in ſowing of corne, and of all ages giuen to warre: and aſſuring themſelues to liue on our prouiſion, being a fierce nation ſlowly gaue eare to any peace. For Iulius Claſsicianus ſent to ſucceed Catus, and at variance with Suetonius, hindered the common good with pruate grudges: and had bruted abroad that the new Lieutenant was to be expected, who without any hoſtile rancor, & pride of a conqueror, would entreat ſuch as would yeelde with all clemencie. He ſent worde likewiſe to Rome that they ſhould looke for no ende of the warres, vnleſſe ſome other ſhould ſucceed Suetonius, attributing his aduerſe lucke, to his own ouerthwartnes; and the proſperous, to the good lucke of the common-wealth. Whereupon to ſee what ſtate Britannie ſtood in, Polycletus a freed man was ſent, Nero greatly hoping, that by his authoritie there ſhould not onely an agreement be made betweene the Lieutenant and Procurator; but alſo the rebellious mindes of the Barbarians be won to a peace. Neither failed Polycletus with his great hoaſt to ſeeme burdeſome to Italie and Gallia; and after he had paſſed the Ocean ſea, ſhew himſelfe terrible euen to our ſouldiers. But to the enimies he was but a laughing ſtocke, who being in ful poſſeſſion of libertie, knew not what the power of freed men was: and began to maruell that a Captaine, and an armie which had atchieued ſo many great exploits could yeeld to obey a bond-ſlaue: all things neuertheleſſe were made the beſt to the Emperour. And Suetonius being occupied in diſpatching of buſines, after he had loſt a fewe galleies on the ſhore, and the gallie-ſlaues in them, as though the warre did continue, was commaunded to deliuer the armie to Petronius Turpilianus, who had lately giuen vp his Conſulſhip: who neither prouoking the enimie, nor egged by him, gaue his laſie and idle life, the honorable name of peace.
            
            
               
               
                  XII. Balbus a Senators testament forged: and Pedanius Rufus killed by his bondmen.
               THe ſame yeere two notable lewd parts were committed at Rome: the one by a Senator; the other by an audacious bondman. Domitius Balbus ſometime Pretor, being aged, without children, and of great wealth, lay open to much treacherie. One of his neereſt kinſmen, Valerius Fabianus, and Conſull elect, forged a falſe teſtament in his name, hauing called thereunto Vicius Rufinus, and Terentius Lentinus gentlemen of Rome: and they aſſociated vnto them Antonius Primus, and Aſinius Marcellus. Antonie was readie and bold; Marcellus nobly deſcended, and nephewe to Aſinius Pollio, of a good cariage and behauiour; ſauing that he thought pouertie the woorſt of all things. Fabianus then ſealed the teſtament with thoſe which I haue named, and others of leſſer calling: whereof he was conuicted before the Lords of the Senat, with Antonius, & Rufinus, & Terentius, and condemned by the law Cornelia againſt forgerie. But Marcellus the memorie of his aunceſtors, and Caeſars entreatie, acquited rather from puniſhment, than infamie. The ſame day ouerthrew Pompeianus Aelianus, a yoong man, who had been Quaeſtor and priuie to Fabianus practiſe, and was baniſhed Italy and Spaine his natiue countrey. Valerius Ponticus ſuſtained the like ignominie, becauſe that eſchuing the iudgement of the Prouoſt of the citie, he had informed againſt ſome before the Pretor firſt vnder colour of ſom lawes, then by preuarication to eſcape puniſhment. Wherupon a decree of Senate was ordained, that he who ſhould either buy or ſell any ſuch actions, ſhould ſuſtaine the ſame puniſhment, as he who was publickly condemned for forging of crimes in falſe accuſations. Not long after Pedanius Secundus Prouoſt of the citie was ſlaine by his bondman, either becauſe he had denied him his libertie, which for woney he had couenāted; or hating him for the vnnatural luſt of a youth, as not induring his lord to be his riuall. But when all the bondſlaues of the houſe according to the old cuſtom ſhould haue bin condemned for that fact; through the flocking thither of people, which defended ſo many innocent perſons, they grew almoſt to a mutinie, and euen in the Senate it ſelfe; among which there was a faction, ſome contemning that ouergreat ſeueritie; and many on the contrary ſide holding it neceſſary that nothing ſhould be changed. Among which, C. Caſsius vttered his opinion as followeth. I haue oftentimes been preſent in this aſlemblie, Lords of the Senate, when new decrees haue beene demaunded, contrary to the lawes and ordinances of our aunceſtors: neither haue I euer gaineſaide them; not that I doubted but that in times paſt they foreſaw and tooke better and more vpright order for all affaires then now; and that thoſe things which were altered were changed into the worſe: but leaſt I ſhould ſeeme by ſticking too much to old cuſtomes, to extoll the thing I affected: with all I thought it not conuenient with often contradiction, to ouerthrow this our authoritie whatſoeuer it be, to the end it might remaine ſtrong and entire, if at any time the common wealth ſhould neede of counſell. Which this day hath appeered, a Conſull being murdered in his owne houſe, by treaſon of his ſlaues, which none either hindered or bewraied, although the decree of Senate be yet in force, which in this caſe threatned puniſhment to the whole familie. Decree in good truth impunitie. But whom ſhall any mans dignitie warrant, ſeeing the Prouoſtſhip of the citie auailed not? whom ſhall a multitude of ſlaues defend, ſeeing foure hundred haue not protected Pedanius Secundus? Whom ſhall any ones familie help, if ſtanding in feare of lawes our ſeruants care

not what danger we fall into. Shall we ſay, as ſome are not aſhamed to inuent, that this murderer reuenged his owne priuat iniurie, becauſe he had compounded for his fathers inheritance; or that ſome old ſlaue had beene taken from him? Let vs pronounce ſentence without any further adoe, that Pedianus ſeemeth to vs to haue bin iuſtly ſlaine. Giue me leaue to reaſon of that point, that hath been determined by wiſer men: If we were now firſt of all to conſider of the matter, do you thinke that a ſlaue had had the hart to murder his Lord, if no threatning word had before eſcaped him? if he had vttered nothing raſhly? forſooth he concealed his intention, he prepared a weapon amongſt ſuch as knew nothing of it. Could he paſſe the watch, open the chamber dores, bring in light, commit the murder, all of his fellowes ignorant of it? If ſlaues would bewraye ſuch attempts, they can giue many ſignes: which if they diſcouer, we alone may be ſafe among many lewde perſons: in the end if we muſt needes dye, yet not vnreuenged of the wicked. The diſpoſition of ſlaues hath alwayes beene feared by our aunceſtors; yea although they were borne in the ſame countrey and houſes, and haue iuſt occaſion preſently to loue their lords. But ſeeing we haue nations of them in our families, vſing diuers rites and cuſtomes, ſtrange or no ceremonies of religions at all, this raſcalitie thou ſhalt not be able to bridle but by feare. But ſome innocents ſhall be caſt away. When an armie is diſcomfited, and euery tenth ſouldier is culled out and beaten with a cudgell, the lot falleth alſo vpon the valiant. Euery exemplarie puniſhment hath ſomewhat in it which is vniuſt, which being in particular to the preiudice of ſome, yet is recompenſed by the generall good of the whole. As no one man durſt gainſay Caſsius opinion, ſo many confuſedly anſwered together, that there ſhould commiſeration be taken, of the number, age, ſexe, and vndoubted innocencie of many. Yet that opinion preuailed, which cōcluded they ſhould be puniſhed; but it could not be executed, a multitude being flocked together, threatning with ſtones and fire. Then Caeſar rebuked the people by an edict, & beſet al the way, by which the condemned parties were lead to puniſhment with a gard of ſouldiers. Cingonius Varro aduiſed that the freed men which liued vnder the ſame roofe with their maiſter ſlaine, ſhould be baniſhed Italie. But that was withſtoode by the Prince, leaſt the auncient cuſtome which clemencie had not diminiſhed, ſhould by crueltie be made worſe. The ſame men being Conſuls, Tarquitius Priſcus was condemned for extortion, at the ſuite of the Bithynians, the Senators greatly reioyſing thereat, who bare in minde that Statilius Taurus their Proconſull had beene accuſed by him. The people were numbred and valued in Gallia by Q. Voluſius, and Sext. Africanus, and Trebellius Maximus; and whileſt Voluſius and Africanus contended for woorth and nobilitie, and both diſdaining Trebellius, they preferred him before themſelues. That yeere died Memmius Regulus, in authoritie, conſtancie, fame, as much as might be, the imperiall highnes ſhadowing him, greatly renowmed: in ſo much that Nero being ſicke, and ſuch as were about him flattering him, and ſaying that the Empire was at an end if he ſhould miſcary, made anſwere; that the common wealth had a ſupport and ſtay. Then they demaunding him in whom eſpecially? he added, in Memmius Regulus. Neuertheles Regulus liued after this, ſhrowded by his quiet life, and becauſe he was of new nobilitie, and not enuied for his wealth. The ſame yeere, a place of all kinde of exerciſe called Gymnaſium was dedicated by Nero, and oyle giuen when they wreſtled naked to the gentlemen and Senate, according to the courteſie of the Greekes.
            
            
               
               
                  XIII. Libellers puniſhed: of Veiento which ſold Neroes fauour.
               P. Marius and L. Aſinius being Conſuls; Antistius the Pretor, who as I haue ſaid before behaued himſelfe licentiouſly when he was Tribune of the people, made opprobrious verſes againſt the Prince, and publiſhed them in a ſolemne banket at Ostorius Scapulaes houſe. Whereupon he was accuſed of treaſon by Coſſutianus Capito, not long before receiued into the number of Senators at the requeſt of his father in law Tigellinus. It was thought that then firſt of all that law was put on foote, which wrought not ſo great an ouerthrow to Antistius, as glorie to the Emperour: by which the condemned partie, by the Senate was deliuered from death, by the negatiue voice of the Tribune. And albeit Ostorius proteſted he had heard nothing to beare witnes off; credit was giuē to the teſtimonie of his aduerſaries, and Iunius Marullus Conſull elect gaue his cenſure, that he ſhould be depriued of the Pretorſhip, and put to death according to the auncient cuſtome. The reſt after that yeelding their aſſent, Paetus Thraſea hauing ſaid ſomewhat in the commendation of Caeſar, ſharpely rebuked Antistius, and declared: That it was not expedient, that the extremitie of puniſhment ſhould be vſed vnder a good Prince, and when the Senat was by no neceſſity bound to ordaine it: that there was no vſe now of an executioner and halter: and that there were penalties ordained by lawes, and puniſhmēts inflicted without note of the ſeuerity of the iudges, & infamy of times. With the loſſe of his goods he ſhould be confined in ſome Iland, where by how much the longer he drew his guiltie life, by ſo much the more miſerable it ſhould be to himſelfe in particular; and in time to come a notable example of publicke clemencie. Thraſeas libertie of ſpeech broke the ſilence of the reſt. And after that the Conſull had permitted the going aſide to agree in their opinions, all of them (a fewe excepted) condeſcended to Thrafeas opinion: amongſt whom the forwardeſt in flatterie was A. Vitellius, brauling and contending with euerie one of the better ſort, but neuer replying to an anſwere: a certaine note to know a timorous and faint hart. But the Conſuls not daring to put the decree in execution, with common conſent wrote to Caeſar: who wauering betwixt ſhame and anger, in the end wrote againe: That Antistius no iniurie before offered him, had vſed moſt contumelious ſpeeches againſt the Prince: whereof a reuenge was demaunded of the Senat. And it was conuenient that a puniſhment ſhould be ordayned anſwerable to the greatnes of the offence. As for himſelfe, as he would haue hindered the ſeueritie of their reſolution, ſo he would not be againſt the moderation of the puniſhment: therefore they might determine as they thought good, giuing them power if they luſted to acquite him. Theſe or the like ſpeeches recited, and his diſlike manifeſtly perceiued: yet for all that neither did the Conſuls alter their relation, or Thraſea ſhrinke from his opinion; or the reſt goe from that which they had once allowed; part of them leaſt they ſhould ſeeme to haue expoſed the Prince to enuie; many ſhrowding themſelues vnder the number of voices; Thraſea by his accuſtomed ſtoutnes of courage, and becauſe he would not fall from his glorie alreadie gotten. Fabricius Veiento was accuſed of the like crime, for vttering many ſlanderous ſpeeches againſt the Lords of the Senate, and Prieſts, in thoſe bookes which he called Codicillos. Talius Geminus his accuſer added further of him, that he had ſold offices and fauours of the Prince, and the right of obtaining honours: which was the cauſe why Nero vndertooke the hearing of that iudgement. Who after conuiction baniſhed Veiento out of Italie, and commaunded

his bookes to be burnt, which as long as the reading and getting of them was dangerous, were much ſought for; then libertie of hauing them graunted they were forgotten.
            
            
               
                  XIIII. The death of Burrhus: and who Tigellinus and Rufus his ſucceſſours were. The decay of Senecaes credit with an oration of his to Nero, with Neroes anſwere.
               AS publicke calamities daily increaſed; ſo the remedies againſt them grewe ſcarſe. And Burrhus ended his life, but whether by ſicknes or poiſon, vncertain. It was coniectured by ſickeneſſe, becauſe that his winde-pipe within ſwelling by little and little, and in the end ſtopped, he yeelded vp the ghoſt. Moſt men affirme that by Neroes commaundement, making as though he would haue applied a remedie to the palate of his mouth annointed it with poiſon: and that Burrhus vnderſtanding the practiſe, when Caeſar came to viſite him, turned his face from him: and aſking him how he did, anſwered onely, I am well. He was much lamented in the citie for the memorie of his vertue: and harmleſſe ſloth of one of his ſucceſſors, and enormous wickednes, and adulteries of the other. For Caeſar had made two Captaines of the garde: Fenius Rufus through the fauour of the people, becauſe he dealt in corne matters without gaine; and Sofonius Tigellinus, who helde on his old courſe of vncleane and infamous life, which by cuſtome was another nature in him. Tigellinus was more inward with the Prince, choſen as one priuie to his ſecret pleaſures. Rufus was of good reputation and fame with the people, and accepted of the ſouldiers, which he found by experience to breed Neroes miſlike. The death of Burrhus weakened Senecaes authoritie, bicauſe his good artes wanted the ſtrength they had: hauing loſt one as it were of their guides; & Nero inclined to the worſer ſort. Which with ſundrie ſorts of calumniations ſet vpon Seneca, ſaying: That he continually heaped vp wealth aboue the calling of a priuate man, and ſought to win the peoples harts; that in pleaſant gardings, and ſtately buildings he did almoſt exceede the Prince. They obiected alſo that he attributed to himſelfe onely, the praiſe of eloquence, and made verſes often, after he ſaw that Nero tooke a liking to them. For ſhewing openly a diſlike of the princes pleaſures; he detracted from his skil in riding, and ſcoffed at his voice when he ſang; to what other purpoſe, but that nothing ſhould ſeeme excellent in the common-wealth, which was not thought to be his inuention? Nero was now out of his childhood, and in the ſtrength of his youth; he ſhould ſhake off his maſter, being alreadie inſtructed with ſufficient teachers, to wit his anceſtors. But Seneca knowing of theſe accuſations, by ſome which had a care of honeſtie; and Caeſar more and more eſtranging himſelfe from his familiaritie: deſireth a time to be heard; and hauing obtained it, beginneth thus. It is foureteene yeeres Caeſar, ſince I haue beene put to thee as a guide to thy hope; and eight ſince thou haſt gouerned the Empire. From that time vntill this, thou haſt heaped on me ſo many dignities and ſo much wealth, that there wanteth nothing to my felicitie, but the moderation of them. I will alleage great examples; not of mine owne calling, but of thine. Augustus thy great great grandfathers father, licenſed M. Agrippa to withdraw himſelfe to Mitylenum to liue a priuate life, and C. Maecenas to abide in the citie; yet at eaſe as if he had beene in a forraine countrey. Whereof the one a companion of his warres; the other toſſed and wearied with many trauels at Rome, had receiued large rewards, but anſwerable to their manifold deſerts. As for my ſelfe, what was there in me for the requitall of thy munificencie, ſaue onely my ſtuas

I may ſay, nouriſhed in the ſhadow? By which I haue gotten credit and reputation, becauſe I ſeemd to haue beene at hand and directed thy youth with inſtructions: a great recompence in very deed of my trauell. But thou haſt done me beſides this, great fauours, and inriched me with infinite wealth; in ſo much that I do oft debate the matter with my ſelfe, ſaying: Am I, being but a gentleman onely, and borne out of the citie, reckoned among the chiefeſt peeres of the citie? Can it be that my new riſing can ſhine among noble men honored with the marks of ancient antiquity? Where is that minde of mine which once was contented with a little? What, doth he make ſuch goodly gardens & walke in ſuch manner houſes neer the wals of the citie: doth he abound in ſuch ſcope of grounds, and vſury in ſo many places? One defence commeth to minde for all, that is, that it was not my part to ſtriue againſt thy gifts, but both of vs haue filled our meaſure, thou by giuing as much as a Prince could beſtow vpon a friend, and I in taking as much as a friend could take of a Prince. That which is aboue this augmenteth enuie, the which no doubt, as all mortall things doth lye vnder thy greatnes, but lye heauily on my ſhoulders; therefore I neede help: and as wearie in ſeruice of warre, or on the way, I would craue ſuccour; ſo in this iourney of my life, old and vnable to wade through the ſmalleſt cares, ſeeing I cannot ſuſtaine the burden of my riches any longer, I craue thy aide and helping hand; commaund them to be mannaged by thy procurators, and be receiued as thy owne goods. Neither will I thruſt my ſelfe into pouertie, but giue vp thoſe things, whoſe brightnes dimmed and dazeled me: that time which I was wont to beſtow in my gardens and houſes of pleaſure, I will imploy in recreation of minde. Thou art in the floure of thy age, and the regiment of thy Empire eſtabliſhed and ſetled many yeeres, and we thy old friends may betake our ſelues to reſt. This alſo ſhall redound to thy glorie, that thou haſt raiſed ſuch to great honors as could haue contented themſelues with a meane eſtate. Vnto which, Nero anſwered almoſt as followeth. That I am able extempore to anſwere thy premeditated oratiō, I am principally indebted to thee, who hath inſtructed me how not onely to acquit & diſcharge my ſelfe of things premeditat, but alſo of ſuch as happen on the ſudden. My great great grandfathers father Augustus ſuffered Agrippa and Mecenas after great labour to take their eaſe; but in ſuch an age, that his authoritie might maintaine whatſoeuer had been beſtowed; yet he neuer tooke thoſe rewards from them he had once giuen them. In warre and dangers they had deſerued them, for in theſe things Augustus youth was employed: neyther would thy weapons and hands haue been wanting, if I had been in armes. But as the preſent ſtate of times required, thou diddeſt with reaſon, and counſell traine vp firſt my childhood, then my youth: and therefore the gifts which thou beſtowedſt vpon me, whileſt life laſteth ſhall remaine with me. Thoſe things which thou haſt receiued of me, thy orchyards, vſury, countrey houſes, are ſubiect to caſualtie; and although they ſeeme much, yet many not equall with thee in knowledge haue poſſeſſed more. I am aſhamed to ſpeake of ſuch as haue been ſlaues, which ſeeme richer then thou. And therefore I bluſh that thou, who in affection art deereſt vnto me, doeſt not ſurpaſſe all men in wealth and fortune. And thou art of thy age a luſtie man, and able to inioy thy wealth and commoditie thereof, and we enter into the firſt ſteps of the Empire; vnleſſe pardie thou doeſt preferre thy ſelfe before Vitellius thriſe Conſull, or me before Claudius. But how much Voluſius ſcraped by long ſparing, ſo much my liberalitie cannot fulfill towards thee. If the ſlipperines of our youth be ouerprone to that it ſhould not, thou draweſt it back, and tempereſt carefully with aduiſe our vnſeemely and vnruly courage. Not thy moderation if thou ſhouldeſt reſtore thy wealth, not thy eaſe if thou

ſhouldeſt forſake the Prince: but my couetouſnes, and the feare of my crueltie ſhall be in euery mans mouth. And although thy continencie ſhould be highlie commended, yet were it not ſeemely for a wiſe man, from whence he procureth infamie to his friend, from thence to ſeeke glorie to himſelfe. To theſe his ſpeeches he ioyned embracements and kiſſes, framed by nature, and practiſed by cuſtome, to cloake hatred with falſe flattering ſpeeches. Seneca (which is the concluſion of all ſpeeches had with Princes) gaue him thanks, but changed the courſe and manner of life which he vſed in authoritie, forbidding the multitudes which came to ſalute him, and auoiding ſuch as would follow him; ſhewing himſelfe ſeldome in the citie, as though he had kept home, either through ſicknes, or buſie at his ſtudie.
            
            
               XV. Tigellinus credit. Plautus and Syllaes death.
               
               
                  SEneca being thus puld downe, it was an eaſie matter to abate Rufus Fenius credit, by accuſing him of the friendſhip he had with Agrippina: but Tigellinus credit daily grew greater, and thinking that his lewde practiſes, wherein onely he was his craftsmaiſter, ſhould be more acceptable, if he could oblige the Prince by a league of naughtie dealing; he began diligentlie to ſearch out all his feares, and perceiuing that Plautus and Sylla were ſuſpected aboue others, Plautus being baniſhed of late into Aſia, and Sylla into Gallia Narbonenſis, he entereth into the conſideration of their nobilitie, and how the one was too neere the armie of the Eaſt, and the other that of Germanie. That he for his owne part had not in his head as Burrhus had, contrarie hopes to the Emperours, but regarded only his ſafetie, which in ſome ſort might be ſecured by his preſence from citie practiſes: but by what meanes could tumults far off be redreſſed? The Galli became prechant at the name of a Dictator, and the people of Aſia no leſſe to be ſuſpected through the renowme of Druſus, Plautus grandfather. Sylla was poore and needie, and therefore bold and venturous, and counterfeiting a lazines, vntill he found a fit oportunitie to ſhew his raſhnes. Plautus abounding in wealth, did not ſo much as pretend a deſire of a quiet life, but made open ſhew of imitating the old Romanes: hauing taken vpon him the arrogancie and ſect of the Stoicks, which maketh men buſie headed, and deſirous to be ſet aworke. Neither was there any further delay vſed but Sylla (thoſe which were to do the feate arriuing at Marſils the ſixt day) before feare or rumor, was ſlaine being ſet at table, and Nero skoffed when his head was brought him, as euilfauored by vntimely hoarines. But it was not ſo ſecretly kept that Plautus death was intended, becauſe many had a care of his ſafetie, and the diſtance of the iourney and ſea, and the time betweene, had ſpread it abroad; and giuen out among the common ſort, that he went about to ſturre vp Corbulo then lord generall ouer great armies, ſaying, that if noble and innocent perſonages were thus murdered, he was moſt likelie to come into danger. Further, Aſia had taken armes in fauour of this yong man, and the ſouldiers ſent to go forward with the enterpriſes, being neither ſtrong in number, nor in courage ſtout, ſeeing they could not performe that which they were enioyned, turned altogether to new hopes. Theſe ſpeeches were common in idle perſons mouths. But Plautus freed man hauing a proſperous winde, preuented the Centurion, and deliuered him a meſſage from L. Antistius his father in lawe, which was. That he ſhould auoide a cowardly death, and not truſt a lazie life, nor ſeeke ſtarting holes; as to thinke that he ſhould be pitied for his nobilitie: he ſhould finde good men and of courage readie to take his part: in the meane time that no aide was to be reiected. If he had driuen backe

threeſcore ſouldiers (for ſo many came) whileſt the meſſenger could returne to Nero, and another power be ſent back, many things will follow, which may proſper and grow euen to a warre. To be ſhort, either he muſt prouide for his ſafetie by ſuch counſell, or at all aduenture there can come no worſe to him by ſtoutnes then cowardiſe. But thoſe perſwaſions did nothing moue Plautus, either foreſeeing he wanted ſufficient meanes, as being vnarmed, and a baniſht man, or for the irkeſomnes of doubtfull hope, or for the loue of his wife and children, to whom he thought the Prince would be more milde, if he troubled him not with care. Some report, that other meſſengers came to aduertiſe him, that there was no cruell matter intended; and that two Philoſophers Coeranus a Greeke, and Muſonius a Tuſcane borne, perſwaded him to abide a conſtant death, for an vncertaine and fearefull life. True it is, as he was found naked in the middle of the day, exerciſing his bodie, the Centuturion killed him in the preſence of Pelago an Eunuch, whome Nero had made ouerſeer of the Centurion, and of a band of men which ſerued for the retinue of him which executed the Kings commaundement. His head being brought to Nero, at the ſight thereof he vttered theſe very words: Why doeſt thou not Nero (quoth he) haſten the marriage of Poppaea hitherto deferred by ſuch feares, and put from thee thy wife Octauia, although of good and modeſt behauior, yet for the memorie of her father, and affection of the people diſliked and ill thought of? Neuertheles he wrote letters to the Senate, not confeſſing the murdering of Sylla and Plautus, but that both of them were of a buſie and turbulent humor, and that he had a care of the ſafetie of the common wealth. Thereupon Proceſſions were ordained, and that Sylla and Plautus ſhould be put from the Senate, a matter of greater skorne and mockery then hurt.
            
            
               
                  XVI. Nero putteth away Octauia and marrieth Poppaea: and her complaints againſt Octauia: and her death.
               HAuing thus receiued a decree of Senate, and perceiuing that all his vngracious actes were taken for worthie exploites, he putteth away Octauia, ſaying ſhe was barren, and marrieth Poppaea. She, long a concubine, and hauing power ouer him as an adulterer, then as her husband, procureth one of Octauiaes ſeruitors to accuſe her that ſhe was in loue with one Eucerus a bondman, a minſtrell, borne at Alexandria. Thereupon many bondwomen were tortured, ſome of them ouercome by extremitie of torment, yeelded to falſhood; and many ſtood ſtoutly in defence of their miſtres innocencie. Amongſt whom, one of them, Tigellinus earneſtly vrging hir, anſwered, that Octauiaes ſecret parts were chaſter then his mouth: yet at the firſt ſhe was put from him vnder colour of a lawfull diuorſe, and Burrhus houſe and Plautus poſſeſſions aſſigned her, both preſages of ill luck. Then ſhe was driuen into Campania, with a gard of ſouldiers; whereof grew many complaints and lamentations, and thoſe not in ſecret among the people, as hauing ſmall wiſedome, and little to loſe, ſo ſubiect to fewer dangers: by reaſon whereof, though no whit ſory of that he had done, Nero recalleth his wife Octauia, and the people very ioyfully went vp to the Capitoll, and worſhipped and thanked the gods, threw downe Poppaeas images, and bare Octauiaes on their ſhoulders, ſtrawed flomes on them, and placed them in the Forum and Temples, prayſed and honored the Prince for taking her againe. And now they had filled the pallace with multitudes and cries, when as companies of ſouldiers ſent, with blowes and threates, thruſtand ſcattered them ſome one way, ſome another; and changed all that the people had done

by ſedition, and reſtored Poppaeas images to their places againe. Who alwayes fell and cruell with hatred towards Octauia; and then with feare, leaſt a more forcible violēce of the people ſhould fall vpō her; or Nero be changed, ſeeing how the people were affected, caſting herſelfe at his knees, ſayd: That ſhe ſtoode not now on thoſe termes that ſhe might reaſon of her marriage, (although ſhe eſteemed it more then her ſafty) but that ſhe was brought into dāger of her life by Octauias cliēts & ſlaues, which ſhadowing themſelues vnder the name of the people, durſt venter that in peace, which could hardly haue hapned in warre. Thoſe armes were taken againſt the Prince: there wanted only a Captaine, which in a tumult would eaſily be found. Octauia might now leaue Campania, and go to the citie, ſeeing that at a beck in her abſence ſuch tumults were raiſed. What fault had ſhe committed? whom had ſhe offended? Whether is it becauſe ſhe was likely to bring forth a true and lawfull progenie to the houſe of the Caeſars? would the people of Rome there ſhould be rather brought into the imperiall highnes the iſſue of a minſtrell of Aegypt? To be ſhort, if that be conuenient for the ſtate, he ſhould rather willingly then conſtrainedly call his miſtres, or looke to his ſafetie with iuſt reuenge. The firſt tumults are appeaſed by eaſie meanes: but if they did deſpaire of hauing Octauia for Neroes wife, they would prouide her a husband. This doubtfull ſpeech appliable to feare and anger, did both terrifie Nero, and incenſe him. But the ſuſpition of the ſlaue was of ſmall credit, and the torture of the bondwomen had made the matter cleere: therefore it was thought conuenient, to haue the confeſſion of ſome one, which might be charged with ſome practiſe againſt the ſtate. Anicetus the executioner of his mothers death ſeemed to be a fit inſtrument for the purpoſe, as I haue already ſayd, Captaine of the nauie at Miſenum, in ſome ſmall fauour after the villanie committed, but anon after moſt odious, becauſe the miniſters of great villanies are looked on as vpbraiders of the ſame. Caeſar then cauſing him to be ſent for, putteth him in mind of the former ſeruice, and telleth him that he only had been the ſafegard of his eſtate againſt his mothers treaſon, and that there was now an opportunitie of no leſſe fauor, if he could rid him of his wife, which greatly diſliked him. Neither ſhould he neede hand or weapon, but only confeſſe he had committed adultery with Octauia: and promiſeth him great rewards, though for the preſent the world ſhould not know them, and pleaſant dwellings; or if he ſhould denie it, threatned him death. He like a blockhead as he was, his firſt villanie making an eaſie way to this, inuenteth more then was commanded, and confeſſeth it vnto ſuch of the Emperors friends, whoſe counſell as it were he had vſed in the plot. Then he was baniſhed into Sardinia, where he indured no poore exile, and died naturally. But Nero accuſed her that ſhe had corrupted the captaine of the gallies, in hope of winning him to her deuotion: and forgetting that not long before he had accuſed her of barrennes, publiſheth by edict, that to hide her licentious life, ſhe had deſtroyed the children ſhe had had by others then by him, and that thereof he was aſſured, and therefore baniſhed Octauia to the Iland Pandateria. No baniſhed woman did euer moue the beholders to greater pitie then ſhe. Some did yet remember Agrippina exiled by Tiberius; and Iulia baniſhed by Claudius was freſher in memorie: but both beſides the ſtrength of age, had taſted of ſome pleaſure, and comforted their preſent cruell hap with the remembrance of a better eſtate. Vnto this woman, her firſt day of marriage was in ſtead of a graue, being brought into a houſe in which ſhe could finde nothing but what was dolefull and lamentable: her father poiſoned, and her brother anon after. Then the maid greater then the miſtres, and Poppaea married for no other end, but to ruine her; and laſt of all a crime obiected

more grieuous then any death. But this yong princeſſe of the age of twentie yeeres, being betweene the Centurions and ſouldiers as it were alreadie depriued of life, with the preſage of ſo many miſeries, yet could not yeeld to death. A few daies after ſhe was commanded to be put to death, although ſhe proteſted ſhe was no wife, but a widow only, and a ſiſter of the Emperours, calling to Germanicus ghoſt to aid her, and Agrippinaes likewiſe, in whoſe lifetime ſhe ſhould indeede haue indured an vnhappie marriage, but without danger of death. Notwithſtanding ſhe was ſhut vp in priſon, and all the vaines of her bodie opened; but becauſe the bloud ſtopped with feare iſſued forth ſlowly, ſhe was killed with the vapor of a very hot bath. And a deadlier crueltie alſo added, that Poppaea ſaw her head cut off, and brought to the city; for all which it was decreed, that gifts ſhould be offered in the temples. Which we haue vttered, that who ſoeuer ſhall either by vs, or other writers, vnderſtand the euents of thoſe times, may be aſſured, that as oft as the Prince commaunded either baniſhment, or murder, ſo oft thanks were giuen to the gods; and thoſe things which in times paſt were marks of proſperitie, were then badges of publick calamitie. Yet neuertheles we will not hold our toong if any decree of Senat hath beene ordained, new and ſtrange by flattery, or by baſe and abiect ſufferance. The ſame yeere, it was thought he empoiſoned his chiefeſt freed men, Doryphorus as being againſt Poppaeas marriage, and Pallas becauſe he kept from him infinite wealth by liuing too long. Romanus by ſecret informations accuſed Seneca as a confederate of Piſoes: but he was touched more neere the quick by Seneca for the ſame fault, which droue Piſo into a feare, and that commencement of great, but vnproſperous treaſons againſt Nero.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE FIFTEENTH BOOKE OF THE ANNALES OF CORNELIVS TACITVS.
            
               
                  I. Vologeſes King of Parthia crovvned King of Armenia by his brother. Tiridates is hindered by Corbulo to enioye it, and expulſed by Tigranes.
               
               
                  WHileſt theſe things thus paſſed, Vologeſes King of the Parthians, vnderſtanding what ſucceſſe Corbulo had in his affaires: and how Tiridates his brother being expulſed, and Tigranes a ſtranger made King of Armenia; reſolued to reuenge the contempt offered the greatnes of the Arſacides: yet conſidering the great power of the Romans, and alliance a long time continued, was diuerſly perplexed, as one of his owne diſpoſition ſlow and lingering; and then intangled with many warres by the reuolt of the Hyrcanians, a ſtrong and mightie nation. And as he thus wauered, he was further exaſperated by the newes of freſh iniurie: for Tigranes gone out of Armenia, had waſted and ſpoiled the Adiabenians, a nation bordering, farther and longer than any rodes of enemies heretofore. Which grieued not a little the chiefe noble men of that nation, that they were growen to that contempt, that they ſhould be forraged and robbed not of a Roman Captaine, but by the raſhnes of an hoſtage, ſo manie yeeres held and eſteemed no better than a bond-ſlaue. Monobazus gouernour of the Adiabenians augmented their griefe, asking them what remedie, or from whence? Armenia was alreadie gone, and the countrey adioyning would goe ſhortly after: and vnleſſe the Parthians would defend them, thoſe which yeelded to the Romans ſhould find an eaſier ſeruitude, then thoſe which were taken. Tiridates chaſed out of the kingdome, by ſilence complayning not a little; was no ſmall griefe, telling them that great Empires were not maintained by cowardlines; but they muſt trie the valour both of men and armes. For among great Princes, he ſeemed to haue moſt reaſon and right, who had moſt ſtrength. And it was the praiſe of priuate houſes to keepe their owne; but the glorie of a King to warre for other nations. Vologeſes being mooued with theſe ſpeeches, calleth a Councell, and placed Tiridates hard by him, and thus began. This man, borne of the ſame father that I am, hauing yeelded vnto me the name of the King in regard I am his elder, I did put in poſſeſſion of Armenia, which is reckoned the third part of my kingdome. For the Medes Pacorus had before poſſeſſed; making account that in ſo doing I had taken away the inueterate hatred which raigneth between brothers, and fully ſetled the ſtate of our familie. The Romans hinder this, and now breake the peace alſo to their owne ruine, which they neuer yet diſturbed but to their owne deſtruction. I will not deny but I had rather hold things gotten by my anceſtors, by equitie then blood, by reaſon then armes. If I haue offended by lingering, I will amend it with valour. Your ſtrength and glorie is intire with fame of modeſtie; which neither ought to be contemned of the higheſt, and is eſteemed of the gods. Hauing thus ſaid, he put the Diademe on Tiridates head; and gaue Moneſes a noble gentleman a gallant companie of horſemen, which vſually followed the King, and withall the aide of the Adiabenians;

and commaunded Tigranes to be chaſed out of Armenia: Whileſt he pacifiying the ſedition of the Hyrcanians, draweth his whole forces togither, and vtmoſt power of warre, threatning the Roman Prouinces. Whereof Corbulo being aduertiſed by certaine meſſengers, ſendeth two legions with Verulanus Seuerus, and Vectius Bolanus to aide Tigranes, with a ſecret charge they ſhould proceed rather orderly and aduiſedly, then haſtily: for he had rather entertaine, than make warre. And wrote to Caeſar that it was needfull to haue a Captaine of purpoſe to defende Armenia; and that Syria by Vologeſes approach was in greater danger. And in the meane time he lodgeth the reſt of the legions by the banke Euphrates: leuieth and armeth in haſte a power of the countrey people, and intercepteth the enimies paſſages with a garriſon. And bicauſe the countrey is ſcarce of water, he fortified hard by the fountaines, & couered certain ſmall brookes with mounds of ſand. Whileſt Corbulo vſed this preparatiō for the defence of Syria, Moneſes becauſe he would preuent the rumour of his comming, marched with all ſpeed: but yet found not Tigranes vnaduertiſed or vnprouided; who had put himſelfe into Tigranocerta, a verie ſtrong towne, well manned and walled. Beſides this, the riuer Nicephorius of a reaſonable breadth, enuironeth part of the wals, and a huge ditch caſt in length, where the riuer was diſtruſted as not ſufficient. There were ſouldiers within to man it, and prouiſion of neceſſaries: for conueiyng whereof, ſome hauing beene too forward in venturing, and on the ſudden ſurpriſed by the enemie, enflamed the reſt rather with anger, than feare. But the Parthian wanting courage to performe the aſſault at hand, ſpent a fewe arrowes a loofe; loſt his labour; and put the beſieged into no feare at all. The Adiabeni, as they began to raiſe ladders and other engines, were eaſily thruſt backe, and by a ſallie made by our men, hewd in peeces. Yet Corbulo, notwithſtanding things proſpered on his ſide, thinking it his beſt to vſe fortune moderately, ſent ſome to Vologeſes, finding himſelfe greeued, that violence ſhould be offered the Prouince: and that a King confederate and a friend ſhould beſiege the Roman cohorts; therefore that he ſhould giue vp the ſiege, or elſe he would incampe in the enimies countrey. Caſperius a Centurion choſen for that Embaſſie, went to the King at a towne called Niſibis, ſeuen and thirtie miles diſtant from Tigranocerta, and deliuered his meſſage verie ſtoutly. Vologeſes had long reſolued with himſelfe to auoide warres with the Romans: neither went things currantly with him for the preſent; the ſiege tooke no effect; Tigranes was ſtrong in men and prouiſion; the beſiegers put to flight; certaine legions were ſent to Armenia; and others in a readines for Syria to aſſaile him in his owne countrey. That he had but a weake companie of horſeſmen; want of ſtower; for a multitude of Locuſts had eaten vp all graſſe and leaues. Therfore concealing his feare, and making ſhew of more mildenes, anſwereth that he would ſend Ambaſſadors to the Emperour of Rome, to demaund Armenia and eſtabliſh a peace. And commaundeth Moneſes to depart from Tigranocerta, and himſelfe turned backe. Theſe things many extolled as proceeding from the Kings feare, and Corbuloes threatnings. Some conſtrued it that they had priuily agreed to forbeare warre on both ſides; and that Vologeſes departing, Tigranes ſhould alſo depart from Armenia. For why (ſaide they) went the Romans forces from Tigranocerta? Why were thoſe things abandoned in time of reſt, which they had defended in warre? Could they haue wintered better in the remote parts of Cappadocia, in cabbins erected on a ſudden, than in the chiefe ſeate of the kingdom lately poſſeſſed? Doubtles the warres were put off, that Vologeſes might rather fight with ſome other, then Corbulo. Corbulo would not indanger his glorie ſo manie yeeres alreadie gotten. For as I haue alreadie ſaid, he had demaunded a ſpeciall

Captaine to defende Armenia; and notice came that Ceſennius Paetus was at hand, and by that time he was come. Their forces were ſo diuided, that the fourth and twelfth legions, and withall the fift which was lately called from the Moeſians, and the aides of Pontus, Gallatia, and Cappadocia ſhould obey Paetus: the third, ſixt, and tenth legions, and the ſouldiers which before remained in Syria ſhould continue with Corbulo. The reſt they would ioyne or diuide as occaſion ſerued. But neither Corbulo could endure a concurrent, and Paetus vnto whom it was ſufficient glorie, if he were reckoned the ſecond, made ſmall account of the ſeruice alreadie done, ſaying: that there hath beene no ſlaughter made, no bootie gayned; and that he had woon townes only with words, and not with deedes. He would impoſe tributes and lawes vpon them, and inſtead of a ſhadow of a King, he would force them to liue like conquered people vnder the Roman lawe. About the ſame time Vologeſes Ambaſſadors, as before I haue rehearſed ſent to the Prince, returned and nothing done. And the Parthians openly made warre; neither did Paetus drawe backe, but with two legions, whereof the fourth Famiſulanus Vectonianus conducted, and the twelfth Calauius Sabinus, he entered Armenia with an vnluckie preſage. For hauing made a bridge and paſſing ouer Euphrates, without any manifeſt cauſe, the horſe which bare the conſularie ornaments fled backeward, and eſcaped. And the beaſt readie for ſacrifice, neere to the winter campes which were a fortifiyng, the worke halfe finiſhed, brake looſe, and leapt ouer the trench: and the ſouldiers iauelins and darts were on a fire; the woonder ſo much the more to be noted, bicauſe the Parthians fight with weapons throwen with the hand.
            
            
               
                  II. Paetus goeth into Armenia: and his vnskilfulnes in ſeruice.
               BVt Paetus ſetting nought by ominous ſignes, nor hauing ſufficiently fortified his wintering campes, nor prouiſion of corne made, conducteth his armie in all haſt ouer the hill Taurus, to recouer (as he ſaide) the Tigranocertians, and to forrage the countries which Corbulo had left vntouched. And ſome caſtles he tooke, and ſome glorie and ſome bootie he wanne, if he had vſed his glorie with moderation, and his bootie with circumſpection. Hauing by long iourneies ouerrun thoſe places which he could not keepe, and that the prouiſion of victuals was ſpoiled and corrupted which he had taken, and the winter now at hand, he brought his armie backe againe: and ſent letters to Caeſar as though the warre had beene ended, in wordes magnificent; but voide of matter. In the meane ſeaſon Corbulo hauing had alwaies a ſpeciall care of the bankes of Euphrates; lodged on them now a greater ſtrength of garriſons, then before he had: and leaſt the enimie troupes ſhould hinder the making a bridge (for they braued it with a gallant ſhew in the champion which lay vnder them) he brought vp the riuer veſſels of huge bignes, ioyned togither with timber worke, and built towres on them; beating off the Barbarians with ſtones and ſpeares out of Baliſtas and other engines, let flie farther, than that the countrey ſhot of arrowes, could match vs with the like againe. The bridge continued and finiſhed, the oppoſite hils were ſeaſed by the cohorts of allies, and afterward poſſeſſed by the campe of the legions, with ſuch great celeritie and ſhew of puiſſant forces, that the Parthians, all preparation of inuading Syria omitted, turned all their hope againſt Armenia. There Paetus ignorant what was at hand, had the fift legion far from him in Pontus: and had weakned the reſt by inconſiderate licenſing the ſoldiers to depart, vntill newes was brought that Vologeſes came with a great armie reſolutely bent to do great miſchiefe. The twelfth legion was ſent for, hoping

that thereby it would be noiſed that his forces were increaſed; but indeed that bewrayed his weakenes, with which neuer theleſſe he might haue incamped: and the Parthian deluded by drawing the warre in length, if P
                        •
                     ato had beene conſtant, either to follow his owne, or others counſels. But he by men experienced in warre being counſelled what was beſt againſt imminent caſualties, leaſt he ſhould ſeeme to haue neede of thers aduiſe, would do quite contrarie and much woorſe. And then forſaking his ſtanding campes, crying that he had no trench and rampire giuen him againſt the enimie, but bodies and weapons, iſſued out with the legions, as though he would fight a field. And hauing loſt a Centurion and a few ſouldiers, ſent before to view the enimies forces, came backe againe greatly affrighted. And bicauſe Vologeſes came on but coldly, reſuming againe a vaine hope, lodged three thouſand choiſe men on the top of the hill Taurus hard by, to hinder the King to paſſe. He placed alſo certaine cornets of Pannonians, which were the ſtrength and ſinewes of his horſemen, in one part of the plaine. His wife and ſonne were ſhut vp in a caſtle called Arſamoſata, and a cohort appointed to guarde them; and thus diſperſed the ſouldiers, which vnited in one, would much better haue made head againſt the ſtragled and rouing enimie. It is reported that he was hardly brought to confeſſe vnto Corbulo that the King was at hand: neither did Corbulo make any great haſte, to the end that the dangers growing great, his own praiſe in ſuccouring might be the greater. Neuertheleſſe he commaunded three thouſand to be ſet forwarde out of the three legions; eight hundred horſe, and the like number out of the auxiliarie cohorts. But Vologeſes although he had vnderſtood that the paſſages were ſhut vp by Paetus on the one ſide with footmen, and on the other with horſmen, nothing altering his determination; what with violence, what with threatnings, hauing put the horſemen to flight, broke the legionaries; one onely Centurion Tarquitius Creſcens hauing courage to defend himſelfe in a towre wherein he had a garriſon: making often ſallies, and ſlaying ſuch Barbarians as came neere, vntill he was forced by fire to yeeld. Of the footemen if any was vnhurt he fled to bye-places a farre off, the wounded returned to the campe; extolling the valour of the King; the crueltie and number of his ſouldiers, and all elſe for feare; ſuch eaſily beleeuing them as were in the like perplexitie. The Captaine himſelfe not once endeuoruing to remedie the calamitie, neglected all duties of ſeruice, and ſent againe to intreat Corbulo, that he would come away in all poſte haſte, to defend the enſignes and ſtandarts, and the onely name left of the vnfortunate armie: he for his owne part would whileſt life laſted remaine faithfull.
            
            
               
                  III. Corbulo goeth to Syria to aide Paetus: who in the meane ſpace maketh a diſhonorable peace with Vologeſes.
               
               
                  COrbulo daunted nothing at all, leauing part of his forces in Syria to defende the fortreſſes built vpon the ſhore of Euphrates, tooke his iourney as the neereſt way and plentifulleſt of victuals, by the Comagenians, then by Cappadocia, and from thence to Armenia. There followed the armie, beſides the vſuall furniture and prouiſion of warre, a multitude of camels loaden with corne, to driue away both the enimie and hunger. The firſt he met of thoſe which were throughly affrighted was; Pactius the Centurion of the firſt enſigne; then many other ſoldiers, who pretending diuers and ſundry cauſes of their flying away, he admoniſhed to returne to their enſignes, and truſt to Paetus clemencie. As for himſelfe he was rigorous to none, but to the conquerers. Withall, he went to his legions, encouraged

them, put them in minde of their old valour, and what occaſion they had to win new glory. That they ſought not now villages and townes of Armenia for a reward of their trauels, but Roman camps, and amongſt them two legions. If vnto euery common ſouldier, the crowne was giuen by the Emperors hands, as a ſpeciall honor to him who had ſaued one citizen only, how great and worthie an honor ſhall it be when the like number ſhall be ſeene of the ſuccourers & ſuccoured. And with theſe and the like incouragements generally cheered, (and ſome there were whom their brothers perils and neere kindred inflamed of their owne proper motions) they haſtned their iourney day and night. Vologeſes ſo much the more eagerly purſueth the beſieged, now aſſailing the trench of the legions, now the fort, where the fearefull or aged had fled for defence, approching neerer then the Parthians cuſtome is, to allure by temeritie his enemie to battell. But the Romans hardly haled out of their cabins, did but defend their rampires, part at the commaundement of the captaine, and others by their owne cowardlines, looking for Corbulo; and if they ſhould be put to any diſtreſſe, purpoſed to ſhift for themſelues by the example of the ouerthrowe at Caudina and Numantina. Neither had the Samnites people of Italie, nor the people of Carthage which contended for greatnes with the Romans, ſo great power as the Parthians. Their aunceſtors alſo, both valiant and commended of all, when fortune croſſed them prouided for their ſafetie. By which deſperation Paetus, the generall of the armie vtterly caſt downe, yet ſent not his firſt letters to Vologeſes in humble ſort, but in manner of a complaint: That he vſed hoſtilitie againſt the Armenians, ſubiect alwaies to the Romans, or to a King choſen by the Emperour. That peace was alike profitable to both. That he ſhould not regard things preſent only. That he was come againſt two legions with all the power of his kingdome, but the Romains had the whole world beſides at commandement to aide the warre. Vologeſes anſwered nothing touching the matter, but that he was to expect his brothers Pacorus and Tiridates, and that that place and time was appointed to conſult of Armenia. * And that the gods had fauored them ſo much, being a matter worthy of the Arſacides greatnes, that withall they could determine of the Roman legions. After that, Paetus ſent meſſengers to intreate a parly with the King, who commanded Vaſaces captaine of the horſe to go. Then Paetus beginneth with the Luculli, Pompei, and ſuch other Captaines as had conquered and giuen away Armenia. Vaſaces anſwered, that the Romaines had but a ſhadow of holding and giuing away of Armenia, and that the right and power was with the Parthians. And hauing ſufficiently debated the matter on both ſides, Monobazus Adiabenus the next day was called a witnes of their agreement: which was, that the legions ſhould no longer be beſieged, and all the ſouldiers depart out of the bounds of Armenia, and all forts and prouiſions to be deliuered to the Parthians: which done, that Vologeſes ſhould haue licence to ſend Embaſſadors to Nero. In the meane ſpace Paetus built a bridge ouer the riuer Arſamites, which ran by the camp, vnder colour of paſſing that way: but the Parthians had commanded it to be done as a token of the victorie, for it ſerued their turne, and our men went another way. And the rumor went, that the legions were ſent Speares pitcht acroſſe like gallowes, vnder which, enemies vanquiſhed were forced to go in deſpight. Sed vt exprimatur tandem confeſſio, ſubactam domitam
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         eſſe gentem ſub iugum abituros, &c. Liu. lib. 3. 
                  ſub iugum, with other diſgraces which the Armenians were wont to vſe againſt the vanquiſhed. For they entered the trench before the Romaine camp was departed, and beſet the way, challenging and leading away their horſes, and ſuch as had beene their ſlaues. Their apparell alſo and weapons were taken from them, and the ſouldiers yeelded them for feare, leaſt any occaſion of quarrell ſhould be giuen. Vologeſes hauing gathered together our weapons and dead bodies, to witnes the ouerthrow of our

people, forbare from ſeeing the running away of the legions. A fame of moderation was ſought for, after he had ſatisfied and filled his pride. He paſſed the riuer Arſamites on an Elephant, and euery man neere the King on horſeback, becauſe a rumor was ſpread that the bridge would fall vnder the burden, by the deceit of the makers. But ſuch as ventured to go ouer it, found it ſtrong and ſure.
            
            
               
                  IIII. Paetus cowardlines. Corbuloes diligence to ſuccour him. An agreement with the King of the Parthians.
               MOſt certaine it was, the beſieged had ſuch ſtore of corne left, that they fired their ſtorehouſes; and on the other ſide Corbulo declared, that the Parthians were in want of all neceſſarie prouiſion, and their ſtouer all conſumed, ready to haue forſaken the ſiege, and himſelfe but three dayes iourney off. He added farther, that Paetus had promiſed by oath before the enſignes, in the preſence of ſuch as the King had ſent to beare witnes, that no Romane ſhould enter into Armenia, vntill it appeared by Neroes letters whether he agreed to the peace or not. Which things as they haue beene inuented to increaſe infamie, ſo the reſt is not vnknowne, that Paetus went in one day fortie miles, leauing the wounded ſcattered behind him: which fear of the fleers away was no leſſe ignominious, then if in fight they had turned their backs to the enemie. Corbulo meeting him at the banke of Euphrates with his forces, made no ſuch ſhew of his enſignes and armes, that he ſhould ſeeme to vpbraide him of his cowardlines. For his common ſouldiers ſad, and bewailing the caſe of their fellowes, could not forbeare weeping. They ſcarſe ſaluted the one the other for teares. Strife of valour there was none, no ambition of glorie, the only deſire of men in proſperitie. Pitie only bare ſway, and moſt of all with the meaner ſort. The captaines vſed few words, and thoſe complaining that their labour was loſt, that the warre might haue beene ended with the flight of the enemie. Paetus anſwered, that all was whole and in good ſtate to them both, that they ſhould turne their enſignes, and iointly inuade Armenia, weakened by Vologeſes abſence. 
                     Corbulo anſwered he had no ſuch commiſſion from the Emperour: that he had gone out of the prouince moued with the danger of the legions; and ſeeing that the Parthians attempts were vncertaine, he would returne to Syria. And that he was to pray for good fortune, that his footemen wearied with trauelling ſo farre afoote, might ouertake the Kings horſemen going before cheerefully, hauing the aduantage of the countrey. From thence departed Paetus to winter in Cappadocia. But Vologeſes Embaſſadors ſent to Corbulo, warned him to pull downe his forts beyond Euphrates, and leaue the riuer indifferent to both. Corbulo demaunded on the other ſide, that the garriſons ſhould depart out of diuers parts of Armenia. And in the end the King yeelded to it, and the fortreſſes which Corbulo had made beyond Euphrates were pulled downe, and the Armenians left to their will. But at Rome, trophees and triumphant arches were erected in ſigne of victorie ouer the Parthians, in the middle of the Capitol, by order of Senate, the warre yet freſh and not finiſhed, only for a faire ſhew, no conſcience made whether by deſert or not. Yea Nero, to diſſemble the cares of forren affaires, did caſt corne into Tyber, corrupted by the peoples ouer-long keeping it, to ſhew thereby a ſecuritie and plentie of victuals: the price nothing enhanced, although almoſt two hundred ſhips were caſt away by tempeſt in the very hauen, and a hundred brought vp Tyber conſumed by caſuall fire. After that, he appointed three Conſuls, L. Piſo, Ducennius Geminus, Pompeius

Paullinus, to take charge of the tribute, with an inuectiue againſt other Princes, which by exceſſe of expenſes, ſpent more then the reuenewes came to, and he would beſtow yeerely on the common wealth * threeſcore millions of ſeſterces. There was a very bad cuſtome commonly practiſed at that time when the About 68750. pound. chooſing of officers was at hand, or caſting lots for gouerment of prouinces; which was, that many which were without children, colourably adopted ſome, and being thereby admitted amongſt the Lords to draw lots for Pretorſhips and Prouinces, immediately after manumiſed thoſe they had adopted. Whereupon, thoſe which had children went to the Senat with a great complaint, declaring the law of nature, the labour in bringing vp of children, againſt the fraud and deceit and ſhort time of adoption. That it was a ſufficient recompenſe to the childeleſſe, that with great ſecuritie, without charge, they had credit, honors, and all things elſe offered them. That to them the promiſes of lawes long expected were turned into a ieſt, when a man without care, a father, without mourning, childleſſe, would on the ſudden be equall with the long deſires of fathers. Whereupon a decree of Senate was made, that fained adoption ſhould not benefit in any part to any publicke charge, nor yet to ſucceede in others inheritances.
            
            
               
                  V. Magistrates ſent into Prouinces no more rewarded. The Gymnaſe burnt. Pompeius towne ſuncke with an earthquake.
               AFter this Claudius Timarchus of Candie, was accuſed of all the crimes, that rich gouernours of Prouinces are woont to be touched with; and growne inſolent with ouer great wealth to the oppreſſion of the meaner ſort. One ſpeech of his reached to the diſgrace of the Senate, which was, that it laye in him whether the Proconſuls of Candie ſhould haue thankes giuen them, or not. Which occaſion Paetus Thraſea turning to the common good, after he had giuen his opinion that the accuſed ſhould be baniſhed Candie; added theſe words. It is prooued by experience, Lords of the Senate, that moſt excellent lawes, and honeſt examples haue their beginning by good men, from others offences. So the licence of orators was cauſe of the lawe Cincia; the ſuing of competitors of the Iulian lawes; the couetuouſnes of magiſtrates of the Calpurnian decrees. For the fault goeth before the puniſhment, and the remedie commeth after the offence. Therefore againſt the new pride of Prouinces, let vs take ſome aduiſe woorthie of the Roman integritie and conſtancie, that nothing may be derogated from the protection of the allies, or the opinion conceiued of vs weakened, or a citizen be elſe where iudged, than before vs, or reputed other than he is eſteemed by vs. In times paſt not onely a Pretor or Conſull, but priuate men alſo were ſent to viſite the Prouinces, which ſhould report, what was thought of euery ones dutie and loyaltie: and the people were afraid of a particular mans eſtimation and iudgement. But now we adore ſtrangers and flatter them; and as at the pleaſure of one, thankes are now a dayes giuen, ſo the accuſation of one more redily receiued. Let the decree contiuue, and let the Prouinces haue power to ſhew their authoritie by ſuch meanes: but let falſe praiſe, and wroong out by praiers be reſtrained, no leſſe than malice and crueltie. For there are more offences committed whileſt we goe about to win fauour, than whileſt we do offend: yea ſome vertues are odious, obſtinate ſeueritie, and an inuincible minde againſt fauour. Hereupon the beginnings of our magiſtrates are for the moſt part better, and the end declineth, whileſt we hunt after ſuffrages: which if they were forbidden, the Prouinces would be gouerned more iuſtly and conſtantly. For as couetuouſnes

is brideled through feare of being accuſed of briberie and extortion; ſo thankes giuing being forbidden, ambition would be reſtrained. This opinion was appooued with great conſent of all: yet a decree of Senate could not be eſtabliſhed, the Conſuls denying the matter to haue beene propounded. Anon after by authoritie of the Prince they ordayned, that none ſhould propound it in the councell of the allies, that thankes ſhould be giuen before the Senate, the Propretors or Proconſuls, and that no man ſhould do that meſſage. Vnder the ſame Conſuls the place of exerciſe called Gymnaſium was burnt with a flaſh of lightning, and Neroes image melted to a ſhapeleſſe lumpe of braſſe. And by an earth-quake, the famous towne of Pompey in Campania was ruined in a great part. And Laelia a virgin Veſtall died; in whoſe place was choſen Cornelia of the Coſſian familie.
            
            
               
                  VI. The birth of Nero and Poppaeas childe. The death of the ſame daughter. The Parthian Ambaſſadors receiue no anſwere: and Corbulo made Lieutenant generall of the war.
               
                  MEmmius Regulus, and Verginius Rufus being Conſuls, Nero had a daughter by Poppaea, which he tooke as a matter aboue all mortall ioy, and called her Augusta, and gaue the ſame ſurname to Poppaea. The place where ſhe was brought to bed was Antium a colonie, where he himſelfe was borne. The Senate had alreadie commended Poppaeas wombe to the gods, and had made publick vowes; which were multiplied and performed. And there were added proceſſions, and a Temple to the goddeſſes Fecunditati; & combate ordained to the imitation of the Athenians. And that the golden images of Fortunes ſhould be placed in the throne of Iupiter Capitoline: & that as the Circenſian play ſhould be exhibited in the honor of the Iulian familie at Bouillas; ſo at Antium of the Claudian and Domitian: all which were vaine and fleeting things, the girle dying within fower moneths. Which gaue occaſion of new flatterings; ſome being of aduiſe that ſhe ſhould be honored like a goddeſſe, with a bed, a Temple, and a Prieſt. And Nero himſelf as before he was without meaſure glad; ſo now moſt ſorrowfull. It was noted that when all the Senate ranne to Antium at the new birth of the childe, and Thraſeas forbidden: he tooke the contumelious repulſe with a ſtout courage, as a preſage of his imminent ouerthrow. It was reported, that Caeſar bragged to Seneca, that he was reconciled to Thraſea, and that Seneca was glad thereof. From whence grew at once glorie and danger to woorthie men. In the meane time in the beginning of the ſpring, the Ambaſſadors of the Parthians brought King Vologeſes meſſage and letters to the ſame effect. That he would now forgoe all the former challenges ſo oft debated for obtayning of Armenia: bicauſe the gods, although arbitraters of puiſſant nations, had deliuered the poſſeſſion to the Parthians, not without the ignominie of the Romans: that hauing of late beſieged Tigranes, then Paetus, & the legions; when he could haue ruined them, yet ſuffered them to depart in ſaftie. His force was ſufficiently tried, & a proofe giuen of his lenity. Neither would Tiridates refuſe to come to the city to receiue the Diademe, if he were not hindered by a religion of prieſthood: he would go to the inſignes & images of the prince, where in preſence of the legions he would luckily begin his gouerment. Vologeſes letters being of this effect, becauſe Paetus had written the contrarie, as though al had bin wel, the Centurion which came with the Ambaſſadors was demanded, in what ſtate Armenia ſtood? He anſwered that al the Romans were departed from thence. Then the Barbarians ſcoffe beingvnderſtood, who demanded that which they had alreadie taken by force; Nero conſulted

with the chiefeſt of the citie, whether it were beſt to make a doubtfull war with the enemie, or peace. It was not doubted but warre. And Corbulo ſo many yeeres practiſed in warres, knowing the ſouldiers and the enimies, had the generall charge giuen him, leaſt there ſhould be a new errour committed by ſome others vnskilfulnes: for of Paetus bad gouerment, they were ſorrie and repented. Whereupon they were ſent backe without any concluſion, yet with gifts; whereby it might be hoped that Tiridates ſhould not aske in vaine, if he came by way of intreatie. The gouerment of Syria was committed to Cintius; the ſtrength of warre to Corbulo; and the fifteenth legion vnder the conduct of Marius Celſus was brought out of Pannonia. Letters were ſent to the Tetrarches, Kings, Prefects, and Procurators, and Pretors, which ruled Prouinces adioyning, that they ſhould obey Corbulo: augmented almoſt like vnto that, that the people of Rome gaue Pompey, when he was to war againſt the Pirates. When Paetus at his returne feared greater matters; Caeſar thought it inough to ſcoffe and ieſt at him almoſt with theſe words. That he would pardon him preſently; leaſt being ſo eaſily brought into a feare, he ſhould be ſicke with longer penſiuenes. But Corbulo ſent the fourth and twelfth legion, which ſeemed vnable for warre, becauſe they had loſt the valianteſt among them, and the reſt affrighted, into Syria; and conducteth the ſixt and third from thence into Armenia, all entire and whole, and accuſtomed to often and proſperous ſucceſſe: and added the fift legion, which was in Pontus not daunted with the ouerthrow of the others: Withall, the fifteenth newely arriued, and ſome choſen in Illyricum and Aegypt, and all horſmen and footemen with aides of Kings allies, drawen togither to Melitenes, where he purpoſed to paſſe the riuer Euphrates. Then hauing taken a ſuruey of the armie making an oration vnto them, beginneth with many ſtately & magnificall diſcourſes of the Emperours gouerment, and his owne exploits, auoiding the memorie of Paetus vnluckie vnskilfulnes; which he vttered with great authoritie, that it ſerued a warlike man in ſteed of eloquence. Then taketh his iourney that way which Lucullus had once paſſed, opening the paſſages which long continuance of time had ſhut vp. And not diſdayning Tiridates and Vologeſes Ambaſſadors comming to intreat of peace, ſent Centurions to accompanie them with no rough charge: For matters were not yet growne to that head, that they ſhould neede a maine battell. That to the Romans many things had ſorted luckily, and ſome to the Parthians; a leſſon againſt pride. Therefore it behooued Tiridates to accept as a gift the kingdome vnwaſted: and that Vologeſes ſhould better further the Parthians being confederate with the people of Rome, than mutually endomaging the one the other. He knew what diſcord they had within themſelues, and what a fierce and vnruly nation he had to rule: contrariwiſe, that his Emperour had euerie where a firme peace, and no warre but that. Beſides his counſell he ſtroke them into a feare, droue the Megiſtanas Armenians which firſt reuolted, out of their houſes: battered downe their caſtles; filled with like feare the plaines; the hils; the ſtrong and weake. Corbuloes name was not yet hatefull vnto the Barbarians, much leſſe did they purſue him like an enemie, and therefore credited his counſell as faithfull. Vologeſes therefore was not implacablie head-ſtrong *, and demaunded truce vnto ſome gouerments. Tiridates requireth place and day of parley. A ſhort time was aſſigned; the place, where of late the legions were beſieged with Paetus, ſeeing it was choſen by the Barbarians in remembraunce of their ioyfull hap, was not refuſed by Corbulo; that the diuerſitie of fortune might augment his glorie. Neither was Paetus infamie increaſed; which appeered plainely, in that he commaunded his ſonne who was Tribune, to appoint certaine bands to burie and couer the dead bodies of the vnfortunate conflict.
            
            
               
               
                  VII. Tiridates ſpeaketh with Corbulo: and yeeldeth vp the crovvne of Armenia in the Roman campe.
               THe day appointed, Tiberius Alexander, a noble gentleman of Rome, giuen as an aide to the warre, and Viuianus Annius, Corbuloes ſonne in lawe, not yet of age to be Senator; but aſſigned in the place of the Lieutenant of the fift legion, came to Tiridates campe to do him honour: and that hauing ſuch pledges he ſhould feare no treacherie. And then were taken twentie horſemen on each ſide. And the King ſeeing Corbulo, lighted firſt from his horſe; and Corbulo did the like immediately, and both of them on foote, ioyned right hands. Then the Roman praiſed the yoong Prince, that leauing dangerous vncertainties, he would imbrace ſure and wholeſome counſell. Tiridates hauing ſpoken much of the noblenes of his ſtocke, in the reſt was temperate, ſaying: that he would goe to Rome, and bring Caeſar newe glorie: Arſacides humblie intreating, the Parthians being daunted with no aduerſe encounter. Then ſeemed it good that Tiridates ſhould lay his royall crowne before Caeſars image, and not take it againe but at the hand of Nero; and ſo the ſpeech was ended with a ſhort ſalutation. A few dayes after, with a great pomp on both parts, they ſhewed themſelues, his horſemen ranged into troupes on one ſide, with the enſignes of his countrey; and on the other the armie of the legions marſhalled in order with glittering ſtandards, and enſignes and images of the gods in manner of a temple. In the middle was planted a tribunall, and in it a chaire of eſtate, with Neroes image; vnto which Tiridates went, and ſacrifices offered according to the cuſtome, taketh the crowne from his head, and laide it vnder the image; which troubled the minds of ſuch as had yet before their eyes the ſlaughter and beſieging of the Romane armies. But now fortune was changed, and Tiridates a ſpectacle to the people; how much better then a captiue? Corbulo added to his glorie courteſie and feaſtings: and as the King marked any ſtrange thing, and asked the cauſe; as the beginnings of the watches brought by the Centurion, the banket ended with a trumpet, the pile of wood before the Augural altar lighted with a torch: Corbulo made him anſwere, extolling euery thing more then it was, to draw the new Prince into an admiration of the old cuſtome. The laſt day when he was to take his iourney, he deſired time to viſit his brothers and mother before his departure, and left his daughter for an hoſtage in the meane ſpace, and letters of ſubmiſſion to be ſent to Nero. And departed thence, he found Pacorùs with the Medes, and Vologeſes at Ecbatanes, not vnmindfull of his brother: for he had requeſted of Corbulo by ſpeciall meſſengers, that Tiridates might not ſhew any token of ſeruitude, or deliuer vp his weapons, or be barred from imbracing the gouernors of prouinces, or attend at their dores; but haue the ſame honor at Rome that the Conſuls had. Being accuſtomed to forren pride, he was vnacquainted with our manners, with whom the lawe of rule and dominion beareth ſway, vanities being laid aſide. The ſame yeere Caeſar honored the nations of the ſea Alpes with the rights and priuiledges of the Latians, and in the Cirque placed the Gentlemen of Rome before the people. For vntill that day they ſate indifferently, becauſe the lawe Roſcian had taken no order but for foureteene orders. A ſhew of Fencers was repreſented that yeere with like magnificence as others before: but many noble women and Senators wiues were diſcredited in the Theater.
            
            
               
               
                  VIII. Nero ſingeth on the ſtage. The fall of the ſame ſtage. Torquatus Silanus death. Nero attired like a woman weddeth Pythagoras.
               
               C. Lecanius, and M. Licinius being Conſuls, Nero more and more deſired to frequent the ſtage without any reſpect: for as yet he had not ſong but in his houſe, and gardens in plaies of youth, which now he deſpiſed as not frequented, and too meane for ſuch a voice. Yet he durſt not begin at Rome, but choſe Naples as a Greeke citie, thinking that that might ſerue for a commencement to goe to Achaia, where hauing obtained the famous, and in times paſt reputed ſacred crownes, & by that meanes grown in credit, he thought he ſhould ſtur a great deſire in the citizens of Rome to heare him. The cōmón rabble flocked together, or ſuch as the fame of thoſe plaies had drawne frō the next colonies & townes, and ſuch as followed him either to do him honor, or ſundrie other occaſions; yea companies of ſouldiers filled the Theater of Naples. There hapned as moſt men thought, a dolefull chance, but yet as he conſtrued it, foretokening good luck, and ſent by the fauorable prouidence of the gods. For the people were no ſooner gone, and the Theater emptie, but it fell downe, without hurt done to any. Therfore with ſongs compoſed for the purpoſe, thanking the gods, and celebrating the fortune of the late chance, going to the Adriatike ſea, he ſtayed in the meane time at Beneuentum, where, by Vatinius was exhibited a notable play of Fencers. Vatinius was one of the ſhameleſt monſters of his court, brought vp in a coblers ſhop, miſhapen of bodie, and a ſcurrile ieſter: and therefore firſt emploied in that practiſe; then by pickthanking and informing againſt the better ſort, grew to ſuch authoritie, that in credit and wealth, and power of doing hurt, he was worſe then the worſt. Nero then comming to the play he had ſet forth, no not at their paſtime did they abſtaine from doing of miſchiefe. For the ſelfeſame daye Torquatus Silanus was conſtrained to dye, becauſe that beſides the noblenes of the Iunian familie, he ſayd, that he was in the fourth degree lineally deſcended from Augustus of famous memorie. The accuſers were commaunded to lay to his charge, that he was prodigall in gifts, and that all his hope lay in the alteration of the ſtate. And that he had noble men about him which he called his Secretaries, maiſters of requeſts, & Auditors, which were names of imperiall dignitie, and deſeignments of great attempts. Then the chiefeſt of his freed men were bound and caried away. And when Torquatus condemnation was at hand, he cut the vaines of his armes, and Nero as his manner was, made an oration after: that although he had beene culpable, and worthily diſtruſted his purgation, yet he ſhould haue had his life graunted him, if he would haue expected the Iudges clemencie. Not long after forſaking Achaia for the preſent (the cauſes were vncertaine) he came againe to Rome, hammering greatly with himſelfe of going to the prouinces of the Eaſt, and eſpecially Aegypt. Then by an edict witneſſing his abſence ſhould not be long, and that all ſhould go well with the common wealth, he went to the Capitol to worſhip the gods. And as he entered the temple of Veſta, taken ſuddenly with a ſhaking ouer all his bodie, either the goddeſſe of the place terrifying him; or the remembrance of his villanies alwaies accompanying him with feare, he changed his determination; affirming, that all cares, were nothing to him, in regard of the loue of his countrey; that he had ſeene the ſad countenances of the citizens, heard their ſecret complaints, why he ſhould go about ſo great a iourney, whoſe ſhort and reaſonable abſence they could not indure; as men wont to be

comforted with the ſight of the Prince againſt all croſſes and aduerſities. Therefore as in priuat friendſhips, the neereſt pledges and kindred are moſt deereſt; ſo the people of Rome had great power ouer him, and that he muſt obey them, ſeeing they kept him from going. Theſe and the like ſpeeches were pleaſing to the people, deſirous of paſtimes, and which was their chiefeſt care fearing want of corne if he ſhould be abſent. The Lords of the Senate and the nobilitie knew not whether he were more cruell farre off, or neere: then as the nature of all great feare is, they beleeued that which hapned to be worſt. He to win an opinion that he was no where ſo merrie as in the citie, made bankets in publick places, and vſed the whole citie as it had beene his owne houſe. Thoſe bankets were moſt ſpoken of for riot and fame, which Tigellinus prepared, which I will lay downe as a parerne of all, leaſt the ſame waſtfulnes ſhould be often repeated. In Agrippaes lake therefore he built a boate, whereon the banket was drawne with other boates. The boates were beſet with gold and Iuory. The rowers were ſtale Catamites, placed according to their age and skill of vnnaturall vncleannes. He had prepared Fowle, and wilde beaſts out of diuers countries, and out of the Ocean. On the brinke of the poole were brothell houſes, filled with noble women: and ouer againſt them were common ſtrumpets naked, vſing filthie geſtures and behauiour. And when the night was come, all the wood and houſes about rang with ſinging, and ſhined with lightes. Nero himſelfe defiled with lawfull, and vnnaturall luſts, left no wickednes vndone, becauſe he would be moſt corrupt. And a few dayes after, he was wedded as it had been ſolemnely to one of that polluted crew, called Pythagoras. The Emperour was couered with a yellow vaile. There went before him thoſe which gaue him in marriage, the wedding bed was prepared, and wedding torches: all was ſeene, which euen the night doth hide in a married woman.
            
            
               
                  IX. Diuers parts of Rome burnt by chaunce, or by the malice of Nero.
               
               THere followed a great misfortune, but whether by chaunce, or deuiſe of the Prince, vncertaine: for authors haue affirmed both: but of all, the greateſt and moſt grieuous that euer chanced to this citie, by violence of fire. It began in that part of the Cirque that ioyneth to the hils Palatine & Caelian: then taking in the ware-houſes wherein was marchandiſe, which nouriſhed the fire, increaſing more and more by the blowing of the winde, burnt all the length of the Cirque. Neither were the houſes compaſſed with any defences, or temples walled, or any thing elſe to ſtay the furie of it. But ſpreading with violence, conſumed firſt the plaine, then riſing to the hils, againe waſting the low places, by ſwiftnes of hurt preuented the remedies, the citie being ſubiect to it by reaſon of the narrownes of the ſtreetes, turning and winding lanes on euery hand, and vnorderly as it was in old Rome. Therewithall the lamentations of fearefull women, of aged men, and vnskilfull youth, helping themſelues, and ſuccouring and leading the weake and impotent, or tarrying for them, ſome haſtning, ſome abiding, encombred, and hindered all the reſt: and often whileſt they looked behinde them, the fire had hold on them, either on the ſide, or before them: or if they had eſcaped to the next places, there was all on a light fire likewiſe: yea, thoſe places which were thought farre from danger, were found to be in the ſame caſe. In the end, doubtfull what to eſchue, or whither to flee, they filled the ſtreetes, and lay in the fieldes: ſome all their goodes loſt, and wanting dayly foode; other for loue of ſome which they could not ſaue, caſt themſelues away, although they had eaſie meanes

to eſcape. Neither was there any man which durſt to quench it, through the often threatning of many which hindered them: yea ſome openly threw burning fire-brands into it, and cryed alowd, that they had a warrant for it, either becauſe they might rob and ſteale more licentiouſly, or becauſe they were ſo commaunded. Nero being then at Antium, came not to the citie vntill the fire was come neere his owne houſe, on that ſide that it ioyned with the pallace and Maecenas orchardes. Yet it could not be hindered from burning his houſe and pallace, and all elſe round about. But to giue ſome cōfort to the chaſed & fugitiue people, he opened Campus Martius, and the monumēts of Agrippa, and his own gardens: and erected buildings in haſte to receiue the needie multitude. Vtenſiles were brought from Hoſtia and other neere townes, and the price of corne brought downe vnto Fiue pence b. q. three nummos. All which although done in fauour of the people, yet was not accepted; bicauſe a rumor was ſpread, that at the verie time that the citie was on fire, he went to the ſtage in his houſe, and ſang the deſtruction of Troy, comparing preſent calamities with old diſaſters. At laſt, on the ſixt day, the fire ended at the bottom of the Eſquilin hill, by beating downe a huge number of buildings, that the fielde and as it were the open heauen, might withſtand and encounter the continuall rage. And before the feare was paſt, it began afreſh, but not ſo terriblie in open places of the citie, and therfore the hurt of people the leſſe: but the Temples of the gods, and galleries deuoted to pleaſure, were almoſt all ruined. The obloquie of that fire was the greater, bicauſe it burſt out to Tigellinus houſes of pleaſure, ſometimes belonging to the Aemylians. And it ſeemed that Nero ſought the glorie of building a new citie, and calling it by his name. For Rome was diuided into fourteene wardes: whereof fower were vntouched; three conſumed to the ground: of the other ſeauen, ſome markes of buildings remained, but rent and halfe burnt. It were no eaſie matter to reckon the number of houſes, and buildings ſtanding by themſelues, called Iles, and Temples which were conſumed: but the auncienteſt in regard of religion, as the Temple which Seruius Tullius built in honour of the Moone; and the great altar and Temple which Arcas Euander conſecrated to Hercules; the Temple of Iupiter Stator, vowed by Romulus; Numaes pallace; and the Temple of Vesta with the peculiar gods of the people of Rome, were conſumed and burnt to aſhes. Now wealth gotten in ſo many victories, excellent workes of the Greekes inuentions, then old and perfect monuments of rare wits, which in ſo beautifull a citie, and flouriſhing more and more, with manie other notable antiquities, auncient men haue obſerued and ſpoken of, which could not be recouered. Some there were which noted, that this fire beganne the fourteenth Kalends of Iulie, on which the Senones burnt the citie after they had taken it. Some were ſo diligent therein, that they counted iuſt ſo many yeeres, and moneths, and daies betweene both the fires.
            
            
               
                  X. Nero buildeth a ſumptuous houſe. Order taken for the building of houſes. Nero puniſhed the Chriſtians as though they had ſet the citie a fire.
               YEt Nero vſed the deſtruction of his countrey to his benefit; and built a houſe, in which precious ſtones and gold were not ſo much woondered at (as a thing long vſed, and by ſuperfluous riot common) as for the fields and pooles, in manner of wilderneſſes; on one ſide woods, on the other ſpatious fields, and proſpects. The maſters and contriuers of the worke were Seuerus and Celeris, men of wit

and audacitie to enterpriſe that by arte which nature had denied, and fooliſhly caſt away the Princes wealth. For they had vndertaken to make a nauigable ditch from the lake Auerne, vnto the mouth of Tyber alōg the rough and hard ſhore, or through the oppoſite mountaines. Neither is there any other moiſture to feede the waters, but the marſhes of Pomptina: other places being vneuen craggie grounds, or drie; and if they could be wrought through, it would be an intollerable labour, and no cauſe why. Nero notwithſtanding, deſirous to bring incredible things to paſſe, laboured to digge the hils adioyning to Auerne: where remaine the markes of his vaine hope to this day. But the houſes which were ruined were not built without order, here and there as when the Galli had fired them: but the ſtreetes drawen by meaſure and proportion, with ſpatious and large waies; the buildings reſtrained to a certaine height, and the courts made wide, and galleries added to defend the front of the houſes called Iles: which galleries Nero promiſed to builde at his owne charges, and deliuer them to their maſters, the courts and floores made cleane. And gaue rewardes according to euerie mans degree and wealth: and prefixed a time, within which the houſings finiſhed, or Iles, their maſters ſhould receiue them. The mariſhes of Hoſtia were appointed to receiue the rubbiſh: and that the veſſels which brought corne vp the riuer Tibris, ſhould be loaden downe with rubbiſh: and that ſome part of the buildings themſelues, without timber ſhould be built with ſtone of Gabi and Albanum, which cannot be damnified with fire. Now, that water intercepted by priuate men to their owne vſe from the citie, might more aboundantly flowe in manie publicke places, there were watchmen appointed to ouerſee it: and that euerie man ſhould haue ſome prouiſions to quench fires: and that euerie houſe ſhould be inuironed with his owne wals, and not common to his neighbour. Which being ordained for the publicke commoditie, brought ornament to the new citie. Yet ſome were of opinion that the old faſhion of building was more wholeſome, bicauſe the narrownes of the waies, and height of the houſes, could not ſo eaſily be pearced with the heat of the ſunne. But now the ſtreetes being open and wide, and vndefended from ſhadow they are ſcorched with greater heat. And theſe things were prouided by mans counſell. Anone after, purging ſacrifices were ſought for of the gods, & the Sibyls books peruſed; by aduertiſement of which, praiers were offered to Vulcane and Ceres, and Proſerpina; and Iuno made fauourable by the matrons, firſt in the Capitoll, then at the next ſea. From which hauing drawen water, the Temple and the image of the goddeſſe was ſprinkled, and the married wiues prepared banqueting beds, and watcht in the Temple in honour of the ſame goddeſſe. But the infamie was not wiped away, neither by mans helpe, nor largeſſe of the Prince, or pacifiyng of the gods; but that it was thought the fire came by commandement. Therefore to extinguiſh the rumour, Nero falſly accuſed and puniſhed moſt grieuouſly certaine people, hated for their wickednes The author being no Chriſtian, calleth Chriſtian religion Maleficium.
                  , which the common ſort called Chriſtians. The author of that name was Chriſt, who in Tiberius raigne was put to death vnder Pontius Pilat, Procurator of Iudaea. And their dangerous ſuperſtition ſuppreſſed for the time burſt foorth againe: not onely thorough Iudaea where it firſt began, but in the citie alſo: whither all wicked and ſhamefull things runne from all parts, and are ſolemniſed and eſteemed. Firſt they were apprehended which confeſſed that religion; then by their detection, an infinite multitude were conuicted, not ſo much for ſetting the towne on fire, as for the hate of all men againſt them. Such as were condemned, were skorned and mocked, and couered in wilde beaſts skins, and torne in peeces with dogs; or faſtened on croſſes; or burnt in fire: and when the day failed, they were burnt in the night to giue light.

                  Nero had made the proſpect of his gardens fit for that ſpectacle, and cauſed ſhewes to be ſet foorth in the Cirque, and himſelfe either apparailed like a wagoner, ſhuffeld among the people, or ranne the race with them. Whereupon pitie was taken on thoſe perſons, though guiltie and deſeruing exemplarie puniſhment; ſeeing they ſuffered not for any publicke good, but to ſatisfie one mans crueltie onely.
            
            
               
                  XI. Nero raketh money on all hands, and robbeth the Temples. Prodigious ſights, and their meaning.
               IN the meane time Italie was waſted by contributions and borrowing of money; the Prouinces ruined; and the confederats of the people of Rome empoueriſhed; and the cities which were called free. Yea the gods themſelues were not priuileged from being made a pray: but the Temples in the citie were robbed, and the gold carried away, which the people of Rome in all ages, either in triumphes or vowes, in proſperitie or feare, had dedicated to the gods. Yea in Achaia and Aſia, not onely gifts, but the images of the gods were taken away, Acratus, and Secundus Carinates being ſent thither of purpoſe. The one a freed man readie to all villanies: the other exerciſed in the Greekiſh learning, in words onely, but his minde not ſeaſoned with any good artes. It was reported that Seneca, becauſe he would ſhake from himſelfe the infamie of ſacriledge, deſired licence to depart to ſome countrey houſe a far off: which not being graunted, he fained himſelfe ſicke of the gout and kept his chamber. Some haue giuen out that poiſon was prepared him at Neroes commandement, by a freed man of his owne, called Cleonicus, and auoided by Seneca, as forewarned by the freed man, or by his owne feare, ſuſtained his life with a ſimple diet, Crabbes, and if he were a thirſt with running water. About the ſame time the Fencers at Preneſte offering to make an eſcape, were hindered by a guarde of ſouldiers which watched them: the people both fearful and deſirous of nouelties, & now muttering & whiſpering of Spartacus, and calling to minde the hurts which happened in times paſt. Not long after newes came of a great misfortune by ſea; not by warre (for a more firme peace was ſeldome ſeeme) but Nero had commaunded the nauie to returne by a certaine day to Campania, not excepting the hazards of the ſea. The Pilots therefore although the ſea were rough put from Formium; and the Southweaſt winde blowing ſtrongly, whileſt they ſtroue to winne the Promontorie of Miſenum, they daſht againſt the Cumanian ſhores, and loſt almoſt all the galleies, and many other ſmaller veſſels. In the end of the yeere prodigious woonders were noiſed as meſſengers of imminent misfortunes. Great and often flaſhes of lightnings, and a blazing ſtarre alwaies purged by Nero with the blood of noble men. Monſters of men and beaſts borne with two heads and caſt into the ſtreetes, or found in the ſacrifices when the cuſtome is to ſlaie them when they be great with yoong. And in the territorie of Placentia neere the way a calfe was brought forth with a head in the leg. The Soothſaiers interpretation of it was, that the Empire was to haue another head, but neither ſtrong nor hidden, bicauſe ſtifeled in the panche, and brought foorth by the way ſide.
            
            
               
                  XII. A conſpiracie against Nero by L. Piſoes friends.
               AFter that Silius Nerua, and Atticus Vestinus entered the Conſulſhip, a conſpiracie was begun, and growen ſtrong againſt Nero: vnto which Senators, gentlemen, ſouldiers, and women gaue their names auie, as well for the hatred

they bare Nero, as good will to L. Piſo. He was deſcended from the Calpurnians, and of great nobilitie by the fathers ſide; in high reputation with the people for his vertue, or apparances like vnto vertue: his eloquence he had imployed in defence of the citizens: vſed liberalitie towards his friends; and to ſtrangers courteſie and affabilitie. He had alſo the gifts of fortune: was of a tall ſtature, and comely countenance; but grauitie in behauior he was farre from, or moderation in pleaſures. He gaue himſelfe to courteſie, bountie, and ſometimes to diſſolutenes: which many allowed of, thinking it not neceſſarie, that in ſo great ſweetnes of vices, he, who was deſtined to higheſt rule, ſhould be ſtreight-laced, or ouer ſeuere. The beginning of the conſpiracie proceeded not frō his own deſire: yet can I not eaſily tell, who was the firſt author, or at whoſe inſtigation that was begun, which ſo many enterpriſed. The forwardeſt to haue bin Subrius Flauius, Tribune of the Pretorian cohort, & Sulpitius Aſprus, a Centurion, the conſtancie of their end doth ſhew. And Lucanus Annaeus, and Plautius Lateranus, Conſull elect, came with deadly hatred againſt him. Peculiar cauſes enflamed Lucan, becauſe Nero ſuppreſſed the fame of his verſes, and had forbidden him to publiſh them, vainely comparing his owne vnto them. Lateranus Conſull elect, no iniurie, but loue of the common wealth aſſociated vnto them. But Flauius Sceuinus, and Afranius Quinctianus, both Senators, vndertooke the action, contrary to the opinion which was had of them. For Sceuinus bare a laſciuious mind, and therfore led a lazie & drowſie life: Quinctianus infamous of his bodie, and defamed by Nero, by reprochfull verſes, ſought to reuenge his iniurie. Therefore diſcourſing among themſelues, or with their friends, of the Princes wickednes; that the Empire drew to an end; and that choiſe was to be made of one to ſupport the afflicted ſtate, aſſociated vnto them Tullius Senecio, Ceruarius Proculus, Vulcatius Araricus, Iulius Tugurinus, Munatius Gratus, Antonius Natalis, Martius Festus, gentlemen of Rome: among which Senecio hauing been of Neroes inward familiaritie, and then retaining a ſhadow of friendſhip, was perplexed with the imagination of many dangers. Natalis was a partaker of all Piſoes ſecrets. The reſt hoped after a change. Beſides Subrius and Sulpitius, whom I haue ſpoken of for greater ſtrength, there were drawne in Granius Siluanus, and Statius Proximus, Tribunes of the Pretorian cohorts, Maximus Scaurus, and Venetus Paullus Centurions. But for chiefeſt ſtrength, they relied on Fenius Rufus, captaine of the gard, who being for life and reputation worthie praiſe: Tigellinus through his crueltie and vncleane life, ſurpaſſed in credit and fauour with the Prince, and charging him with many falſe accuſations, brought Caeſar oft into a feare, as if he had plaied the adulterer with Agrippina, and therefore for loue of her, carefully plotting a reuenge. Therefore when the conſpirators were fully aſſured by his owne often ſpeeches, that the captaine of the gard was one of their faction, they were now more readie to conſult of the time and place of the murder. It is reported that Subrius Flauius had a ſudden motion to ſet vpon Nero ſinging on the ſtage, or running hither and thither in the night vngarded, his houſe being on fire: on the one ſide the opportunitie of finding him alone; on the other, the companie of people, witnes of ſo worthy an exploit pricked forward his moſt valiant courage, if the deſire of eſcaping (an enimie to all great attempts) had not kept him back. In the meane time, betweene hope and feare lingering and deferring, one Epicharis, vnknowne by what meanes ſhe came to the knowledge of the attempt (and before that time careleſſe of all that honeſt was) began to incenſe & blame the conſpirators: and in the end grieued with their ſlacknes, being then in Campania, went about to corrupt the chief of the nauie which lay then at Miſenum, and bind them to conſent to the practiſe with this

beginning. There was in that nauie one Voluſius Proculus, a coronell of a thouſand men, and among others an inſtrument in murdering Neroes mother, and as it was iudged not ſufficiently rewarded according to the greatnes of the fact. He acquainted of old, or newly growne into friendſhip with this woman, and ſhewing how much he had deſerued of Nero, and yet how his labour was loſt, complaining much, and declaring a purpoſe of reuenge, if meanes were offered; put Epicharis in hope he might be induced to conſpire and draw others with him to the ſame confederacie. Neither was the help of the ſea ſmall, but offered many occaſions, becauſe Nero tooke great pleaſure on the ſea at Puteolum and Miſenum. Whereupon Epicharis added more, and opened all the Emperours villanies: and that the Senate * had prouided, how he ſhould be puniſhed for ouerthrowing the common wealth: that he would only prepare himſelfe, beſtow all indeuour, draw to his ſide the valianteſt of the ſouldiers, and aſſure himſelfe of worthie recompenſe. Neuertheles, ſhe concealed the names of the conſpirators, whereby Proculus betraying the matter, tooke no effect, although he had caried all he had heard to Nero. For Epicharis ſent for, and brought face to face before the appeacher, ſupported by no witneſſes, eaſily confounded him. Neuertheles ſhe was kept in priſon, Nero ſuſpecting that thoſe things were not falſe which were not prooued true. Yet the conſpirators, for feare of being betraied, thought it conuenient to change the place of the murder, and execute it at Baias, in a houſe of Piſoes; whither Caeſar came oft, as delighted with the pleaſantnes of it; and there vſed to bathe and to banket without any gard, careleſſe of the greatnes of his eſtate. But Piſo refuſed, pretending it would breede him enuie, if the ſolemnities of his table, and gods of hoſpitalitie ſhould be diſtained with the murder of any Prince whatſoeuer. Therefore that it might be better performed in the citie, in that hatefull houſe built with the ſpoiles of the citizens, or in publick place, ſeeing it is vndertaken for the publick weale. Thus they debated the matter in common, but yet with ſecret feare, leaſt L. Silanus, a man of great nobilitie, and by C. Caſsius diſcipline, vnder whome he was brought vp to all renowne, ſhould lay hold on the Empire; all which were free from the conſpiracie ioining to help him, and ſuch alſo as would pitie Nero as ſlaine by treacherie. Some beleeued, that Piſo would not meddle with Vestinus the Conſuls fierce courage, leaſt he ſhould attempt the bringing in of libertie; or if another Emperour ſhould be choſen, aſcribe the beſtowing of the ſtate to himſelfe: for he was not priuie to the conſpiracie, although Nero to ſatiate his inueterate hatred layd it to his charge, though guiltles. At laſt, they reſolued to accompliſh their deſeignments on that day that the Circenſian plaies were repreſented in honor of Ceres; becauſe Caeſar ſhewing himſelfe then little abroad, or ſhut vp in his houſe or gardens, came to the plaies at the Cirque; and therefore might eaſilier be come vnto, becauſe he tooke delight in the paſtime.
            
            
               
                  XIII. The order of the conſpiracie. How it was diſcouered. Epicharis conſtancie: and cowardlines of ſome of the conſpirators.
               THey concluded the order of their conſpiracie to be, that Lateranus vnder colour of making requeſt for ſome aide of maintenance of his eſtate, ſhould fall at the Princes knees; and being of a ſtout courage, and great ſtature ouerthrow him vnawares, and keepe him downe. Then as he lay along and hindered from riſing, that the Tribunes and Centurions according to each mans boldnes ſhould run

in and murder him: Sceuinus requeſting to be firſt, who had taken a rapier out of the Temple of Health in Etruria; or, as others report of Fortune, in Ferentanum; and carried it about him as ſome ſacred thing to do ſome notable act. Piſo in the meane time ſhould ſtay in Ceres Temple, from whence the Captaine Fenius and the reſt ſhould carrie him to the campe; and Antonia, Claudius Caeſars daughter followed him, to winne the peoples fauour, as C. Plinius doth report. Our meaning was not to conceale this, howſoeuer it hath beene left vs; although it ſhould ſeeme abſurd and friuolous (vnleſſe the deſire of dominion ſurpaſſe all other paſſions and affections) that Antonia ſhould lend her name, or endanger herſelfe for him, or that Piſo (the loue towards his wife ſo well knowen) ſhould binde himſelfe in marriage to any other whatſoeuer. But it was ſtrange how all was kept cloſe, among ſo many of diuers callings, degrees, ages, ſexes, rich and poore; vntill the detection beganne in Sceuinus houſe: who the day before the feate ſhould be effected, long conferring with Antonius Natalis; then returning home, ſealed his teſtament: hauing drawen the rapier (of which I haue ſpoken) out of the ſcabberd; and angrie that it was dull with long keeping, commaunded it to be ſharpened at the point and ſcoured; giuing the charge of that care to his freed man Milichus. Withall he made a more ſumptuous banket than his cuſtome was: and made ſome of his bondmen he beſt liked free; and vnto others gaue money. And he himſelfe was ſad and eaſily ſeene, his head was fraighted with great imaginations, although he diſſembled mirth with impertinent talke. In the ende warned the ſame Milichus to prepare rowles to binde vp wounds, and things neceſſarie to ſtanch blood; either as one knowing the conſpiracie, and vntill then truſtie; or ignorant of it, and then firſt tooke hold of ſuſpitions, as ſome haue thought by the conſequents. For when this ſeruile minde, waighed with himſelfe the rewards of his falſhood, and repreſented to his owne imagination huge ſummes of money and great authority, honeſtie gaue place; and his maſters ſafetie, and the memorie of his receiued libertie. He tooke alſo the counſell of his wife (a womans counſell in deed, and the woorſer) which droue him into a further feare, affirming that manie freed men and ſlaues were by, which ſawe as much as he: the ſilence of one auailed nothing; but ones ſhould be the recōpence, if he preuented the reſt in detecting it. Whereupon as ſoone as it was daie, Milichus goeth to the Seruilian gardens: and being driuen from the doores, ſayed, he brought heinous and great matters to diſcouer, and thereupon lead by the porters to Epaphroditus Neroes freed man; and anon from him to Nero, declareth: that there was imminent and dangerous ſtrong conſpiracies at hand, and all the reſt which he had either heard or coniectured. He ſheweth alſo the weapon prepared to kill him, and commaunded the partie accuſed to be ſent for: who drawen by the ſouldiers, and beginning his purgation, anſwered: That for the rapier he was accuſed of, his father in times paſt made great reckoning of it, & therefore he had it in his chamber, and that it was ſtolne away by the fraude of his freed man. That his teſtament had beene often ſealed by him, not keeping the daies when in memorie. Money & liberties he had hereto fore giuen to his ſlaues: but then more bountifully, bicauſe his eſtate was decayed, and his creditors being eager on him, he diſtruſted his teſtament. Indeed he was alwaies wont to make liberall bankets, and lead a pleaſant life, not well liked of ſeuere and hard iudges. He commaunded no medicaments for wounds, but bicauſe the reſt of his accuſations were plainely vaine, he thought good to adde this crime, and make himſelfe accuſer and witnes. He confirmed his ſpeech with conſtancie, and rebuked Milichus as one not to be admitted to beare witnes, being a lewde and naughtie perſon; and that with ſuch a reſolution in words and

countenance, that the accuſation had come to nothing, if his wife had not put him in minde, that Antonius Natalis had had much ſecret conference with Sceuinus, both of them being moſt inward familiars of Piſo. Natalis therefore was ſent for, and both of them ſeuerally examined what their ſpeech was, and touching what matter. Then grewe a ſuſpition bicauſe their anſwers agreed not. And being put into irons, they were not able to endure the ſight and threatnings of the torture. Yet Natalis as better acquainted with the whole conſpiracie, and withall skilfuller in accuſing, firſt confeſſeth of Piſo: then added Annaus Seneca, either bicauſe he was a meſſenger betweene him and Piſo, or bicauſe he would purchaſe Neroes fauour: who bearing deadly hatred to Seneca, practiſed all inuentions to bring him to deſtruction. Natalis confeſſion knowen, Sceuinus with the like imbecillitie, or beleeuing that all had beene diſcouered, and that no profit could riſe by keeping counſell, appeached the reſt. Among which Lucanus, and Quinctianus, and Senecio long denied the matter. And afterward corrupted by promiſe of impunitie, to excuſe their backwardnes, Lucanus named Atilla his mother; Quinctianus, Glicius Gallus; Senecio, Annius Pollio their chiefeſt friendes. And Nero calling to minde in the meane while that Epicharis was in indurance through Voluſius Proculus information, thinking that a womans bodie was not able to endure much griefe, commaundeth her to be rent with tortures: but her; neither ſtripes, nor fires, nor the rage of the tortures, which ſo much the more cruelly racked her leaſt they ſhould be contemned by a woman, could ouercome: but ſhe denied the crimes obiected, and ſo the firſt day of torture was contemned. The next daie when ſhe was brought to the ſame tortures in a bearing-chaire (for her members out of ioint and broken, ſhe could not put foot to ground) faſtning a lace which ſhe drew from her breaſt to the bow of the chaire, in manner of a ſliding knot, put her necke into it: and weighing downe with the heft of her bodie ſtopped that little breath ſhe had left. A notable example that a freed woman ſhould defend in ſuch great crueltie of torture ſtrangers, and almoſt vnknowen to her; when as men, and free-borne, and gentlemen of Rome, and Senators not touched with tortures, detected the deereſt of their kindred. For Lucanus, Senecius, and Quinctianus, ſtucke not indifferently to bewray their confederates; Nero growing more and more fearefull, although he had doubled his guard. Further, he filled the citie and the wals with bands of ſouldiers, and beſet both ſea and riuer with watch and wards. And to and fro, by the Forum, the houſes, the fields, and townes adioyning, footmen and horſmen ſcoured vp and downe, intermingled with Germans, whom he beſt truſted, bicauſe they were ſtrangers.
            
            
               
                  XIIII. Accuſations continued. Piſo would not take armes: his death with Lateranus and Seneca.
               
               AFter that, continuall troupes one after another were drawen to their anſwere, which lay before the gates of the gardens. And when they had entered in, to defend themſelues euerie man triumphed ouer the conſpirators. If they had ſpoken togither by chance; if met on another on the ſudden; if at a ſhew, or banket, they had beene ſeene togither, it was accounted a crime: and beſides Neroes and Tigellinus bloodie interrogatories, Fenius Rufus not yet detected, vrged alſo vehemently: and to winne an opinion that he had not beene conſenting to the attempt, was cruell againſt his confederates. The ſame Fenius held backe Subrius Flauius then preſent, and nodding with the head, whether in the verie hearing of the matter he ſhould draw his ſword, and execute the murder; and brake his heate euen then

putting his hand to his weapon. Some there were which ſeeing the conſpiracie detected, whileſt Milichus was examining, and Sceuinus doubteth whether he ſhould confeſſe or not, perſwaded Piſo to goe to the fort of the guarde, or goe vp to the Roſtra, and found the affection of the ſouldiers and people, ſaying: That if the confederates would ioyne togither, the reſt which were not priuie would follow them: that the fame of an attempt was a great matter, and could do much in new enterpriſes. That Nero had made no prouiſion to withſtand him: ſtoutmen were daunted with ſudden enterpriſes; much leſſe would that ſtage-player, accompanied with Tigellinus and his concubines take armes againſt him. Manie things are done by venturing, which to the faint harted ſeeme hard. It was a folly to hope for ſilence and fidelitie in ſo many mindes and bodies of partakers: by torment or reward all things are made eaſie. And ſome would come to clap irons on him, and put him to a ſhamefull death. How much more commendable were it for him to die, embracing the common-wealth, and ſeeking aide for libertie. Although the ſouldier ſhould ſaile him, and the people ſhrinke frō him, if it ſhould coſt him his life, his death would be glorious as well to his aunceſtors, as his poſteritie? But nothing mooued with theſe ſpeeches, ſhewing himſelf little abroad, then keeping within doores, confirmeth his minde againſt death: vntill a band of ſouldiers came, which Nero had choſen among the yoong ſouldiers, and ſuch as lately were receiued into ſeruice: ſuſpecting that the old were made on Piſoes ſide. And cutting his vaines, yeelded vp the ghoſt. His teſtament was full of filthie flatteries toward Nero, through the loue of his wife, whom commendable only for her beautie, and nothing ſutable to his calling, he took from a friend vnto whom ſhe was married. Her name was Arria Galla; her firſt husband, Domitius Silius: he by patience, ſhe by vnchaſtnes ſpread abroade Piſoes infamie. Next followed the death of Plautus Lateranus Conſull elect, and that with ſuch haſte, that he ſuffered him not to imbrace his children, nor haue ſo much as that ſhort time of choſing his death: but lead away to a place where ſlaues were executed, was killed by the hand of Statius the Tribune: full of conſtant ſilence, neuer once reproching the guilt of the ſame fact to the Tribune. Then followed the death of Annaeus Seneca moſt ioiful to the Prince; not bicauſe he had found him manifeſtly priuie to the conſpiracie, but bicauſe he would ſhew crueltie with the ſword, ſeeing poiſon tooke no effect. Onely Natalis this farre did vtter: that he was ſent to Seneca being ſicke to viſite him and complaine, whie he barred Piſo from hauing acceſſe to him: and that it would be better to entertaine their friendſhip by familiar conuerſation. And Seneca to haue anſwered, that their interchaung of ſpeech, and often communication was profitable for neither of them: yet that his ſafetie did depend on Piſoes welfare. Theſe things Granius Siluaenus Captaine of the guarde, was commaunded to carrie to Seneca, and aske him whether he acknowledged Natalis ſpeeches, and bring Senecaes anſwere. Seneca by chaunce, or of purpoſe, returned that day from Campania, and remained in a countrey houſe fower miles from the citie. Thither came the Tribune the next euening, and beſetteth the houſe with a companie of ſouldiers: then openeth vnto him the Emperours charge as he ſate at meate with Pompeia Paullina his wife, and two other friends. Seneca anſwered, that Natalis had been indeede ſent to him, and complained in Piſoes behalfe that he was forbidden to viſit him: and that he excuſed himſelfe with ſickenes, as being deſirous of quietnes. Why he ſhould preferre the welfare of a priuat man before his owne ſafetie, he had no cauſe. Neither was his inclination much giuen to flatterie, as Nero beſt knew: who had oftner tried Senecaes libertie of ſpeech, then ſeruile pleaſing. When theſe ſpeeches were brought back by the Tribune in preſence

of Poppaea, and Tigellinus, who was of the cruell Princes inward counſell, he asketh whether Seneca prepared himſelfe any voluntarie death? The Tribune affirmed, he found no ſignes of feare in him, nor token of ſadnes in words or countenance: and thereupon he was cōmanded to go back, & giue him warning he ſhould die. Fabius Ruſticus doth report, that he returned not the ſame way he came, but turned aſide to Fenius the captaine: and hauing imparted vnto him Caeſars commandement, asked him whether he ſhould obey it or not; who aduiſed him to do his commandement; which was a cowardlines fatall vnto them all: for Siluanus was one of the conſpirators, and was now a furtherer of the crueltie, to whoſe reuenge he had before conſented: yet he ſpared both his toong and preſence, and ſent to Seneca one of the Centurions, to denounce him the laſt neceſſitie. He nothing amazed, called for his teſtament, and the Centurion denying it, turned to his friends, and ſaid: That ſeeing he was not ſuffered to requite their merites, he proteſted he left them yet one thing which of all other he held moſt precious, which was the patterne of his life: of which if they were mindfull, they ſhould carry away the fame of good learning, and of ſo conſtant friendſhip. Withall, hindereth their teares, now with ſpeech, now more earneſtly as it were rebuking them, and calling them back to conſtancie,  Aſking where were the precepts of wiſedome? where the reſolution ſo many yeares premeditated againſt imminent dangers? vnto whome was Neroes crueltie vnknowne? neither did there remaine any thing to be done after he had murdered his mother and his brother, but that he ſhould adde the death of his bringer vp and maiſter. When he had diſcourſed this or the like, as it were in generall, he imbraced his wife, and hauing ſomwhat confirmed her againſt preſent feare, prayeth & intreateth her to temper her griefe, lament no longer, but in the contemplation of her former life ſpent in vertue, beare the lack of her husband with honeſt comforts. She on the contrary ſide aſſured him, that ſhe was reſolued to dye, and demaundeth the hand of the executioner. Then Seneca loth to hinder her glory, and deerely louing her, leaſt he ſhould leaue her, whome ſo tenderly he affectioned to the iniuries of others, ſayd: I had taught the comforts of life, but thou haddeſt rather the glory of death. I will not enuie thy example; let there be of this ſo ſhort a death, an equall conſtancie in both; but thy renowme will be farre greater. After which words they both cut the vaines of their armes at one time. Seneca becauſe his old bodie, and leane with a ſlender diet, gaue the bloud ſlow paſſage, cut alſo the vaines of his legs, and hams; and being wearied with cruell torments, leaſt he ſhould diſcourage his wife with his griefe, and himſelfe deſcend to impatiencie, by ſeeing the torment ſhe indured, perſwadeth her to go into another chamber. And in the very laſt moment, his eloquence not failing him, calling ſome to dictat his ſpeech, deliuered many things, which publiſhed in his owne words, I purpoſe not to alter or change with other termes. But Nero, hauing no peculiar hatred againſt Paullina, leaſt the odiouſnes of his crueltie ſhould grow greater, commaundeth her death to be hindered. Whereupon her bonde and freede men at the ſouldiers commaundement, bound her armes, and ſtopt the bloud. But whether ſhe knew it or not, is vncertaine: for (the common people being alwaies readie to ſpeake the worſt) there wanted not ſome which beleeued, that as long as ſhe feared Nero to be implacable, ſhe ſought to haue the glory of accompanying her husbands death; then a milder hope offered, that ſhe was ouercome with the ſweetenes of life, vnto which ſhe added a few yeeres after, with a lawdable memorie towards her husband: but her face and other parts of her bodie were growne ſo pale and wan, that it eaſily appeared her vitall ſpirits were much diminiſhed. Seneca the meane time perceiuing himſelfe to linger

and pine away with a long death, intreateth Statius Annaeus his knowne friend, and expert Phiſition, to giue him of that poiſon with which the condemned by publick iudgement at Athens are put to death, whereof long before he had made prouiſion: which being brought him he dranke in vaine, the parts of his bodie alreadie cold, & the conduits ſtopped againſt the force of poiſon. In the end he went into a bath of hot water, and ſprinkling his ſlaues next about him, ſaying, That he offered vp that liquor to Iupiter the deliuerer. Then put into the bath, and with the vapour of it hauing yeelded vp the ghoſt, was burnt without any funerall ſolemnitie, as he had commaunded in his laſt will, when very rich and in authoritie he diſpoſed of his minde. The report was, that Subrius Flauius, with the Centurions in ſecret counſell, yet not without Senecaes priuitie, had determined, that after Nero ſhould haue been ſlaine by the help of Piſo, Piſo ſhould alſo haue been ſlaine; and the Empire deliuered Seneca, as one iuſt and vpright, choſen to that high authoritie only for the excellencies of his vertues: yea, and Flauius owne words were publiſhed to be theſe. It skilleth not for the ſhame of the matter, if a minſtrell be remoued, and an actor in a tragedie ſucceede him: for as Nero had ſung with the inſtrument, ſo Piſo in tragicall attire.
               
            
            
               XV. Many ſouldiers puniſhed. Fenius death. Flauius Subrius, and Sulpitius Afers anſwere to Nero.
               THe conſpiracie of the ſouldiers could be no longer kept cloſe, the detecters being very eager to bewray Fenius Rufus, whom they could not indure ſhould both be of counſell to the plot, and an examiner of others. Therefore vrging and threatning * Sceuinus, ſhewing himſelfe obſtinate, told him that no man knew more then himſelfe: and exhorted him, that he would ſhew himſelfe willing to requite ſo good a Prince. Fenius could neither anſwere this, nor hold his toong, but entangling himſelfe in his owne words, ſhewed a manifeſt feare; and the reſt, but eſpecially Ceruarius Proculus a gentleman, laboring all they could to conuict him, by commandement of the Emperour, Caſsius a ſouldier which ſtoode by, and was of exceeding ſtrength of bodie, laid hold on him, and bound him. Not long after, by their appeaching, Subrius Flauius Tribune was ouerthrowne, firſt alleaging the diſſimilitude of his maners and life for his defence, and that he being a man of armes, would neuer in ſo dangerous an enterpriſe, aſſociate himſelfe with vnarmed effeminate perſons: after that farther preſt, imbracing the glory of confeſſion, and demaunded of Nero for what reaſons he had proceeded ſo farre as to forget his oath. I hated thee (quoth he:) neither was there any of the ſouldiers more faithfull vnto thee then I, whileſt thou deſeruedſt to be loued. I began to hate thee after thou becameſt a parricide of thy mother, and wife; a wagoner, a ſtage-player, and a ſetter of houſes a fire. I haue reported his very words, becauſe they were not publiſhed as Senecaes were: neither was it leſſe conuenient to know the vnpoliſhed, but waightie words of this ſouldier. It is certaine there hapned nothing in all that conſpiracie more grieuous to Neroes eares: who as readie and prompt to all miſchiefes, ſo vnaccuſtomed to heare of that he had done. The puniſhment of Flauius was committed to Veianus Niger, Tribune. He in the next field commaunded a pit to be digged, which Flauius finding fault with as not deepe inough, ſayd to the ſouldiers ſtanding by, This is not according to the order of ſeruice. And being willed to ſtretch out his neck ſtoutly, I would to God (ſaid he) thou wouldeſt ſtrike ſo ſtoutly. Who

quaking very much, when he had ſcarſe cut off his head at two blowes, bragged to Nero of his crueltie, ſaying, that he was killed with halfe a blow. The next example of conſtancie the Centurion Sulpitius Aſper did ſhew; for Caeſar asking him why he had conſpired his death? anſwered briefely: That ſo many his villanies could not otherwiſe be redreſſed. Then he ſuſtained the puniſhment commanded. Neither did the reſt of the Centurions degenerate in bearing their puniſhments. But Fenius Rufus had not the like courage, but ſet downe his griefes and lamentations in his teſtament. Nero expected that Vestinus the Conſull ſhould alſo be drawen into the action, iudging him violent, and an enemie to him: but the conſpirators would not communicate their deſeignments with him; ſome by reaſon of old grudges; but more, becauſe they thought him raſh, headie, and inſociable. Furthermore, Neroes hatred againſt Vestinus proceeded of their inward familiaritie, the one contemning the Princes knowne cowardlines; and the other fearing the fell courage of his friend, often ieſting at him with bitter skoffes: which when they carry much truth with them, leaue behinde them a biting memorie. Beſides, there was a freſh cauſe of malice betweene them, becauſe Vestinus had married Statilia Meſſallina, not ignorant that Caeſar kept vnlawfull companie with her. Therefore no crime, no accuſer appearing, becauſe he could put on no ſhew of accuſation, he fled to his abſolute power, & ſendeth Gerelanus the Tribune with a band of ſouldiers, & inchargeth him to preuēt the Conſuls deſeignmēts, ſeiſe vpō his houſe, which was as it were his fortreſſe: and ſlew his choſen cōpanie of youth, becauſe Veſtinus had his houſe looking ouer the market place, and handſome ſlaues all of one age. He had fulfilled that day all the duties of a Conſull, and making a banquet, fearing nothing, or elſe diſſembling his feare, the ſouldiers entred in; and when word was brought him that he was called by the Tribune, he roſe without any delay, had all things prepared him in a trice, ſhut himſelf vp in his chamber, & had his Phiſition at hand which cut his vaines; and being yet luſtie, was caried to a bath, put in hot water, not once vttering a word, which could argue either griefe, or compaſſion on himſelfe. Thoſe which were at table with him, were in the meane time beſet with a gard, and not diſmiſſed till the night was farre ſpent; and then Nero imagining and laughing at the feare they were in, as looking for their imminent ruine, ſayd, they had paied enough for the Conſuls good cheere.
            
            
               
                  XVI. Lucanus and Quinctianus death. Neroes liberalitie to the ſouldiers. Who Nymphidius was. The Senators flattery toward Nero.
               
               AFter that, he commanded the death of M. Annaeus Lucanus, who perceiuing as his bloud went out, his feete and hands to waxe cold, and his ſpirites by little and little to forſake the exterior parts of his bodie: his hart yet ſtrong, & his wit freſh, remembring verſes made by himſelfe, in which he repreſented a ſouldier wounded, and dead with the like kinde of death, rehearſed the verſes themſelues, which were the laſt words he ſpake. After that Senecio and Quinctianus, not according to their former effeminat life, and the reſidue of the conſpirators, were put to death, neither ſpeaking nor doing any thing worthie memorie. But in the meane time the citie was filled with funerals, the Capitoll with ſacrifices, one hauing his brother, another his ſonne put to death, or friend, or neere kindred, gaue thanks to the gods, deckt his houſe with Bayes, fell downe at the Emperors knees,

and wearied his right hand with kiſſes. And he thinking it to be done for ioy, rewardeth with impunitie Antonius Natalis, and Ceruarius Proculus ſpeedie detection: and Milichus enriched with recompences, tooke vnto him a name, which in the Greeke ſignifieth a ſauiour. And Granius Siluanus the Tribune, although quit, yet ſlew himſelfe. Statius Proximus fruſtrated the pardon which he had receiued of the Emperour by the vanitie of his death. After this, Pompey, Cornelius Martialis, Flauius Nepos, and Statius Domitius, were depriued of the Tribuneſhip, not becauſe they hated the Prince, but yet ſuppoſed ſo to do. Nouius Priſcus, for the friendſhip he had with Seneca, and Glitius Gallus, and Annius Pollio, diffamed rather then conuicted, were ſent into baniſhment. Antonia Flacilla Priſcus wife followed him: Egnatia Maximilla did the like with Gallus: at the firſt all their wealth which was great, left them: then taken away, both which increaſed their glorie. Rufus Criſpinus was baniſhed alſo, vnder colour of the conſpiracie; but hated of Nero, becauſe he had beene Poppaeas husband. Verginius Rufus great reputation was cauſe of his exile: for Verginius furthered the ſtudies of youth with eloquence; and Muſonius with precepts of Philoſophie. Cluuidienus Quietus, Iulius Agrippa, Blitius Catulinus, Petronius Priſcus, Iulius Altinus, as it were an armie to make vp a number, were baniſhed to the Iles of the Aegaean ſea. But Cadicia Sceuinus wife, and Ceſenius Maximus were baniſhed Italie, knowing by the puniſhment only that they were called in queſtion. Annaeus Lucanus mother Atilla, though not acquited, yet was let go without puniſhment. Theſe things done by Nero, & calling the ſoldiers together to an oration, he beſtowed by pole vpon euery ſouldier vnder bands two thouſand Nummi About 15. li. 12, s. 6. d.; and corne without any price, which they had before, according to the rate it was ſould. Then as though he would declare ſome exploit done in war, aſſembled the Lords of the Senate, & beſtowed the ornament of triumphe vpon Petronius Turpilianus Conſull; Cocceius Nerua, Pretor elect; Tigellinus captaine of the gard: and ſo extolling Tigellinus and Nerua, beſides their triumphall images in the Forum, he placed their images alſo in the Pallace. He gaue Nymphidius alſo the ornaments of a Conſull, of whome I will ſpeake a little, becauſe now is the firſt occaſion offered: for he alſo was part of the Roman miſeries. He therefore ſonne of a freed woman, which had abandoned and made common her comely bodie to Princes bonde and freede men, affirmed he was begotten by C. Caeſar, becauſe by ſome chance he was tall of perſonage, and of a ſterne grim countenance: or elſe C. Caeſar being deſirous of lightwomen, had abuſed his mother alſo. But Nero, the Senators aſſembled, and an oration made among them, publiſhed an Edict to the people; and added the informations and confeſſions of the condemned; becauſe he was often diffamed in the peoples mouth, as though he had executed innocent perſons for enuie or feare. Neuertheleſſe, thoſe which had a care of knowing the truth, did neither then doubt, but the conſpiracie was begun, growne to ripenes, and ſet on foote againe; as thoſe which returned to the citie after Neroes death confeſſed. But in the Senate, all of them according to each mans griefe, abiecting themſelues to flatterie: Alienus Clemens bitterly inueighed againſt Iunius Gallio, amazed with the death of his brother Seneca, and intreating for his owne life, calling him enemie and parricide: vntill the whole Senate ſhewed their diſlike therein; leaſt hee ſhoulde ſeeme to abuſe publicke calamities, and make them occaſion of his priuate grudge; or drawe the Prince to new crueltie, forgotten, and tempered with clemencie. Then order was taken, that gifts and

thanks ſhould be rendered the gods, and peculiar honor done to the Sunne, vnto whome there is an old temple in the Cirque, in which the enterpriſe ſhould haue beene accompliſhed; who diſcloſed by his diuine power, the ſecrets of the confederacie: and that the Circenſian paſtime in honor of Ceres ſhould be exhibited with more horſe races; and that the moneth of Aprill ſhould beare the ſurname of Nero: that a Temple ſhould be built to Salus, in the place from whence Sceuinus had taken the rapier, which he himſelfe had offered vp in the Capitol, and wrote vnder it, To Iupiter the reuenger. Which preſently was not noted, but after that Iulius Vindex had taken armes, it was interpreted as a foretelling and preſage of future reuenge. I finde in the commentaries of the Senate, that Cerealis Anicius Conſull elect, gaue his cenſure, that a Temple ſhould be built with all ſpeede at the common charge to diuine Nero; which he thought conuenient, as though exceeding the higheſt mortall degree, he had deſerued to be worſhipped of men: which after was knowen to be a token and foretelling of his end. For the honor of the gods was neuer giuen the Prince vntill he were dead, and gone out this mortall life.
            
         
         
            
            THE SIXTEENTH BOOKE OF THE ANNALES OF CORNELIVS TACITVS.
            
               
                  I. Nero conſumeth much in ſeeking out a hidden treaſure which Ceſellius Baſſus dreamt of. The death of Baſſus. Nero contendeth on the Stage for the priſe of playing on the Harpe.
               
                  AFter that time, Fortune began to delude Nero through his own vanitie, taking hold of a promiſe made by Ceſellius Baſſus: who being an African borne, and buſie headed, built an aſſured hope vpon the ſhadow of a dreame which he had in the night. And come to Rome, hauing bought acceſſe to the Prince, declareth that there was a caue in his ground of a huge depth, wherein was contained great quantitie of gold vncoyned and vnwrought in a maſſe, as in old time it was wont to be hidden! For there lay a wall of very heauie bricks on the one ſide; and on the other, pillers ſtanding vpright: all which had laine hidden many yeeres to increaſe the wealth of the preſent time. And as coniecture doth ſhewe Dido the Feniſſian, fleeing from Tyrus, after ſhe had built Carthage, hid that treaſure there; leaſt the newe people with ouer-great wealth ſhould become wanton and riotous: or the King of the Numidians their olde enemie, for greedines of their gold ſometime be incenſed to make warre againſt them. Whereupon Nero, not well aſſured of the credit of the Author, or certaintie of the buſines, nor any ſent to view and learne whether a truth were reported: of himſelfe encreaſeth the rumour, and ſendeth ſome to bring away all, as it were a pray alreadie gotten. Galleies and choiſe veſſels were appointed to helpe to haſten the matter: the people hauing no other ſpeech in their mouth, but that treaſure, through the credulouſnes of the diſcouerer, though not reporting of it all alike. And it fell out by chaunce that the Quinquennale paſtime, which euerie fift yeere being repreſented, was then the ſecond time celebrated: which miniſtred the orators their chiefeſt ſubiect to commend the Prince; ſaying: That the earth did not now bring forth only the vſuall fruits, nor gold mingled with other mettals; but a new plentie: and that the gods themſelues beſtowed wealth in all aboundance: and manie other things with great eloquence, and no leſſe ſeruile and baſe flatterie they fained; being aſſured of eaſie beliefe in the hearer. Riotuouſnes in the meane time grew greater by vaine hope, and the old wealth was conſumed, as though the other had beene offered, prodigally to waſte many yeeres. Yea from thence largeſſes were beſtowed: and the expectation of that wealth, was a cauſe in part of the publicke pouertie. For Baſſus hauing digged his ground, and large fields round about; auouching boldly this or that to be the promiſed caue: not onely ſouldiers followed him; but the countrey people were taken to dig and labour; at length leauing his ſottiſhnes, and maruelling that his dreames neuer prooued falſe before, and that he was neuer deceiued vntill then, ridde himſelfe of ſhame and feare by killing himſelfe. Some haue reported that he was impriſoned, and ſet at libertie againe incontinently, his goods firſt taken to the Princes treaſure. In the meane time the Senate, the Quinquennale paſtime drawing neer, to ſhadow his ſhame, offereth him the victorie of ſinging,

and withall the crowne of eloquence to colour the reproch of his ſinging on the Stage. But Nero, ſaying that he needed not the authoritie and fauour of the Senat in that reſpect; as able of himſelf to make his partie good with his concurrents, & little doubting but that by the vprightnes of the iudges he ſhould obtaine his deſerued praiſe; ſang firſt of all a verſe on the Stage: then the people inſtantly crauing that he would publiſh all his ſtudies (for thoſe were their words) he entereth the Theater, and obſerueth all the orders of the Harpers: as that being wearie, yet he ſhould not ſit downe; that he ſhould not wipe off his ſweate, but with the garment he wore; that no excrements ſhould be ſeene at his mouth or noſe. And laſt of all kneeling, and ſhewing a reuerence to the aſſembly with his hand, expected the iudges ſentence with a counterfeite feare. And the citie-people accuſtomed alſo to approoue the geſtures of the players, anſwered him with a certaine meaſure and artificiall applauſe. Thou wouldeſt haue thought they had reioyced, and perhaps they did, for the iniurie of the publick diſcredit. But thoſe which from townes farre off, retaining as yet the auncient ſeueritie and cuſtome of Italie; and from remote Prouinces vnacquainted with diſſolute behauiour, came either as Ambaſſadors, or for priuate buſines, could neither indure that ſight, nor applaude any way ſo diſhonorable a labor: but awearie with their vnskilfull clapping of hands, and troubling the skilfull, were often beaten by the ſouldiers, placed in thicke aray, leaſt any moment of time ſhould be loſt by an vntuned and diſproportionable crie, or ſlothfull ſilence. It is certaine that many horſemen which laboured to paſſe through the crowd and thicke multitudes were troden vnder feete; and others whileſt they continued day and night in their places, were ſtriken with deadly ſicknes. And yet if they ſhould haue beene abſent their feare was greater; many openly, and more priuily obſeruing the names and countenances, cheerefulnes and heauines of the lookers on. Whereupon puniſhments were inflicted vpon the poorer ſort foorthwith; the hatred againſt noble men diſſembled for the time, ſhewed it ſelfe within a ſhort ſpace after. And it is reported that Veſpaſian was rebuked by Phoebus a freede man, as though he had beene ſomewhat drouſie with ſleepe, and was hardly defended by the intreatie of the better ſort: and afterward eſcaped imminent ruine by a greater chance.
            
            
               
                  II. The death of Poppaea. Baniſhment and death of others.
               AFter the paſtime was ended, Poppaea died by a ſudden anger of her husbands, ſtriking her with his foote being with childe. Neither do I beleeue that ſhe was poiſoned, although ſome writers do ſo report, of hatred rather than truth: for he was deſirous of children and blinded with the loue of his wife. Her bodie was not burnt as the Roman manner was, but embalmed according to the cuſtome of forreine Kings, ſtuffed with ſweete odors, and buried in the tombe of the Iulians. Yet publicke funerals were ſolemniſed, and he himſelfe praiſed her beautie before the people aſſembled; that ſhe had beene the mother of a diuine daughter; and other gifts of fortune he commended in ſteed of vertues. The death of Poppaea as in ſhew ſorrowfull; ſo to the remembrers of her looſe life and crueltie ioyfull; Nero made more odious by giuing new matter of hatred, by hindering C. Caſsius from being preſent at her exequies; which was the firſt token of his ruine, not long deferred. And Silanus bare him companie for no crime committed, but becauſe Caſsius for his auncient riches, and grauitie of manners, Silanus for noblenes of birth, and modeſt youth, were woorthie praiſe aboue the reſt. Hauing therefore ſent an oration to the Senate, declared that they were both to be remooued from the common-wealth.

And layd to Caſsius charge, that among the images of his aunceſtors, he had done honour alſo to the image of C. Caſsius, which had this written vnder it: To the Captaine of the parts. For ſeedes of ciuill warre, and a reuolt from the houſe of Caeſars might haue beene intended by thoſe words. And leaſt he ſhould vſe the memorie only of a hatefull name to ground a quarrell on; he ioyned L. Silanus a yoong man of a noble ſtocke, raſh and headie, vnder a pretence and colour of mouing newe broiles. Further, he rebuked Silanus for the ſame matters, as before he had done his vncle Torquatus, as though he did alreadie diſpoſe of the cares of the Empire, and giue his freed men charge of the accounts, requeſts and ſecretariſhips: things both vaine & falſe. For Silanus was warie & fearfull, and by the death of his vncle circumſpect in his actions. After this he induced ſome vnder the name of accuſers, which falſly charged Lepida, Caſsius wife, Silanus aunt, of inceſt with her brothers ſonne; and with certaine execrable rites of ſacrifices. There were drawen in as priuie thereto, Vulcatius Tullinus, and Marcellus Cornelius, Senators; and Calpurnius Fabatus, a gentleman of Rome: who appealing to the Prince, and diſappointing the preſent condemnation; anon after Nero being buſied about ſome great miſchiefes, were forgotten as men of ſmall reckoning. Then baniſhment was decreed againſt Caſsius and Silanus by order of Senate; and that Caeſar himſelfe ſhould diſpoſe of Lepida. Caſsius was exiled to the Iland Sardinia, * exſpecting their further order from the Lords of the Senate. Silanus conueighed to Hoſtia, as though he ſhould be carried to Naxus; was after ſhut vp in a towne of Apulia, called Barium. And there, wiſelie bearing his moſt vnwoorthie aduerſitie, a Centurion ſent to kill him laying hands on him; perſwaded him to cut his vaines: who anſwered, that he had a minde reſolute & readie to die, but he would not permit an executioner to haue the glorie of the ſeruice. But the Centurion, although ſeeing him vnarmed; yet ſtrong, and more inclining to anger than feare, commaunded his ſouldiers to diſpatch him. Neither did Silanus omit to reſiſt, and lay on blowes as well as he was able with naked hands, vntill he fell downe ouermatched with the Centurions wounds on his face as it had beene in a skirmiſh. With no leſſe courage died L. Vetus, and Sexia his mother in law, and his daughter Pollutia: hatefull to the Prince, as though by liuing, they ſhould vpbraid him with the murder of Rubellius Plautus, L. Vetus ſonne in law. But the firſt diſcouerer of his crueltie towards them, was one Fortunatus a freed man of Vetus, who hauing pilfred away his maſters goods and fearing an enquirie, began to accuſe him, aſſociating Claudius Demianus with him, who empriſoned by Vetus Proconſull of Aſia for his miſdeeds, Nero deliuered in recompence of the accuſation. Which being vnderſtood by the partie accuſed, and that there was no difference made betwixt him and his freed man, hedeparteth to Eormianum, where a ſecrete guarde of ſouldiers watched him. His daughter was with him, who beſides the imminent danger, through long griefe, fell and cruell, as ſoone as ſhe had ſeen the murderers of her husband Plautus, grew to further extremitie: and hauing caſt herſelfe about his necke embrued with blood, kept ſtill the blood, and her apparell beſprinkled with it, remaining a widow, drownd in continuall griefe, vſing no other foode, than was neceſſarie to keepe off death. Then her father exhorting her, ſhe goeth to Naples. And, becauſe ſhe was kept from the ſpeech of Nero, lying in waite for his going abroad, ſhe cried alowde that it would pleaſe him to heare the innocent, and not commit one who had beene his companion in the Conſulſhip to the diſpoſition of a freed man, ſometime with a womaniſh lamentation, ſometimes going beyond her ſexe, with angrie and bitter termes: vntill the Prince ſhewed himſelfe inflexible; and no way mooued, either with praiers or hatred he might incurre. And

warneth her father to caſt away hope, and reſolue himſelfe to the preſent neceſſitie. Withall newes came, that the matter ſhould be heard before the Lords of the Senate, and a cruell ſentence intended. Thereupon ſome aduiſed him to pronounce 
                     
                        〈…〉
                     ar his heire for the moſt part of his goods, and ſo helpe his nephewes with the reſt; which he refuſed, leaſt he ſhould diſhonour with this laſt ſeruile acte his life paſt almoſt in libertie: and gaue all his money among his bondmen, and if any thing could be carried away, that euerie one might ſerue himſelfe; three beds onely reſerued for his funerall obſequies. Then in the ſame chamber, with the ſame knife they cut their vaines, and with ſpeed each one couered with a ſimple garment, for modeſtie ſake, they were put into bathes. The father looking on the daughter, the grandmother on her neece, ſhe on both, praying a-uie for a ſpeedie end to leaue the others aliue, though to follow incontinently after. And fortune herein kept the order, the eldeſt dying firſt, then the next in age. And being accuſed after their buriall, and ordayned they ſhould be puniſhed according to the auncient manner: Nero was againſt it, ſuffering them to make choiſe of their manner of death, for ſuch kinde of ſcoffes were vſed after the murders committed. P. Gallus a gentleman of Rome, becauſe he was inward with Fenius, and not an enemie to Vetus, was baniſhed: the freed man and accuſer rewarded for his paines, and a place giuen him in the Theater among the beadles of the Tribunes. And the month of May which followed Aprill, and called Nero, was changed into the name of Claudius, and Iuly into Germanicus: and Cornelius Ofitus, whoſe cenſure that was, ſaide that therefore the month of Iune was paſt ouer, becauſe two of the Torquatus alreadie executed for their miſdemeanors, had made the name of Iune vnluckie. A yeere continued with ſo many lewd actions, the gods haue marked and made notorious by tempeſts and diſeaſes. Campania was deſtroied with boiſterous ſtormes of windes, which did euerie where beat downe houſes, woods, and graine, and brought the violence of it to places adioyning to the citie. Where the rage of the peſtilence ſpared none, although there was no manifeſt ſhew of corruption of the aire to be ſeene. Yet the houſes were filled with dead bodies, and the waies with funerals; no ſexe, no age, free from danger; as well bond, as free borne indifferently periſhed: amidſt the lamentations of their wiues and children; who whileſt they ſat by them and bewailed, were often burnt in the ſame funerall fire. The death of gentlemen and Senators although in different with others, leſſe lamented, as though they had by a common mortalitie preuented the Princes crueltie. The ſame yeere they muſtered in Gallia Narbonenſis, Affrick, and Aſia, to ſupplie the legions of Illyria, which worne out either with yeeres or ſickenes were freede from their oath. The Prince relieued the oalamitie of Lugdunum with About 31250 pound. fortie hundred thouſand ſeſterces to recouer the loſſes of their citie: which ſumme of money the Lugdunenſes had before beſtowed in troubled times.
            
            
               III. The death of certaine noble men, for deſire of their wealth or other iealouſies.
               C. Suetonius, and L. Teleſinus being Confuls, Antistius Soſianus baniſhed, as I haue ſayd before, for making ſlanderous verſes againſt Nero, vnderſtanding that pickthankes were ſo honored, and the Prince ſo forward to murders, buſie minded, and not ſlow in taking hold of occaſions, inſinuateth himſelfe through conformitie of fortune, into the fauour of Pammenes a baniſhed man of the ſame place; and for his skill in the Chaldean arte, ſupported by the friendſhip

of many. This Antistius ſuppoſing that meſſages and conſultations came not to him in vaine, vnderſtandeth withall that he had money yeerely ſupplied him by P. Anteius. Neither was he ignorant that Anteius through the loue he bare to Agrippina was hatefull to Nero; that his wealth, as it had beene of others, might be a motiue to procure his deſtruction. Whereupon hauing intercepted Anteius letters, and ſtolne his writings wherin the day of his natiuitie and things to come, were hidden among Pammenes ſecrets, and withall found thoſe things which had beene compoſed of the birth and life of Ostorius Scapula: writeth to the Prince, that he would bring him great newes touching his owne ſafetie, if he might obtaine a ſhort intermiſſion of his baniſhment: for Anteius and Ostorius watch for opportunitie to lay hold on the ſoueraigntie, and ſearched out their owne and Caeſars deſtinies. Therupon ſwift veſſels were ſent & Soſianus brought with all ſpeed. And his accuſation diuulged, Anteius and Ostorius were reckoned rather among the condemned than accuſed; in ſo much that no man would haue ſealed Anteius teſtament, if Tigellinus had not beene their warrant. Anteius was firſt admoniſhed not to delay the making of his teſtament: but he hauing drunken poiſon, weary of the ſlow working of it, by cutting his vaines haſtened his death. Ostorius at that time was farre off in the confines of Liguria, whither a Centurion was ſent to make him away with all ſpeed. The cauſe of the haſte proceeded of that, that Ostorius being for matter of warre of good reckoning, and deſerued in Britannie a ciuicall crowne, of a mightie ſtrength of bodie and skilfull in armes, droue Nero into a feare leaſt he ſhould aſſaile him; alwaies timorous & fearfull, but then more then euer, through the conſpiracie lately detected. The Centurion therfore when he had beſet al eſcaping places, openeth to Ostorius the Emperours cōmandement. He conuerted againſt himſelf his courage often tried againſt the enimy. And bicauſe his vaines whē they were opened, yeelded but little blood, vſing the hand of his ſlaue only to take out a rapier & hold it ſtedfaſt: he drew his right hand to him, and ranne himſelfe through the necke. If I ſhould haue written of forrein wars, and deaths ſuſtained for the common-wealth, with diuers other accidents & chances: yet I ſhould not only haue ſeemed tedious to my ſelfe; but to others alſo: abhorring the deaths of citizens, being dolefull and continuall, although honorable. But now a ſeruile patience, and ſo much bloode loſt at home, doth trouble my minde and oppreſſe it with griefe. Neither do I require any other defence or excuſe of thoſe who ſhall know theſe things, but that they hate them not, for dying ſo cowardly. That was certainely the anger of the gods againſt the Roman ſtate, which ought not ſo eaſily be runne ouer with once writing, as in the ouerthrow of armies, or taking of townes. Let this prerogatiue be giuen the poſteritie of worthie perſonages, that as how they are diſtinguiſhed from the confuſe multitude in the ſolemnitie of their funerals: ſo in the deliuerie of their laſt ends, that they may receiue and haue a proper and peculiar memorie. For within a fewe daies by the ſame violent courſe, Annaeus Mella, Cerialis Anicius, Rufus Criſpinus, and C. Petronius periſhed. Mella and Criſpinus were gentlemen of Rome, and equall in dignitie with Senators. Criſpinus once Captaine of the guarde, and honored with Conſularie ornaments, and of late through the conſpiracie, exiled into Sardinia, hauing receiued tydings he ſhould die; ſlew himſelfe. Mella borne of the ſame parents as Gallius and Seneca, forbare purchaſing of dignities, by a prepoſterous ambition, to the end that a Roman gentleman might be equalled in authoritie to the Conſuls. Withall he thought it a ſhorter courſe of getting wealth, to mannage the affaires of the prince in quality of a Procurator. The ſame Mella was Annaeus Lucanus father, which was a great credit to him: but after his death, ſeeking out too narrowly

his goods, ſtirred vp an accuſer againſt him, one Fabius Romanus, one of Lucans familiar friends: which falſly fathered vpō him & the father, the priuitie of the conſpiracie, by counterfeiting of Lucans letters: which Nero hauing peruſed, commanded to be caried him, gaping after his wealth. But Mella, which was then the readieſt way to death, looſed his vaines, hauing beſtowed in his teſtament a huge ſumme of money vpon Tigellinus, and on his ſonne in law Coſſutianus Capito, that the reſt might ſtand good. He added to his will as it were a complaint of the iniuſtice of his death: That he died for no cauſes deſeruing puniſhment: but Rufus Criſpinus and Anicius Cerialis enioyed their life, being the Princes enimies. Which words were thought to haue bin forged, of Criſpinus becauſe he was alreadie ſlaine; of Cerialis becauſe he ſhould be ſlaine. Who not long after killed himſelfe, leſſe pitied than the reſt: as bearing in minde that he had diſcouered a conſpiracie to C. Caeſar.
               
            
            
               IIII. The constant death of C. Petronius, and what life he led.
               OF C. Petronius, a few things aboue recited are heere againe to be repeated. He paſſed the day in ſleepe, and the night in delightfull ſports, or other affaires of life. And as others, induſtrie; ſo this man, ſlouth had raiſed to fame: a riotous and waſtfull ſpender he was, not accompted like many, which run through all, but vſing riot to his credit. And his words and deedes how much the freer, and ſhewing a certaine careleſnes; ſo much the more gratefully receiued, as ſauoring ſomewhat of ſimplicitie. Notwithſtanding being Proconſull of Bithynia, and anon after Conſull, he ſhewed himſelf quick & ſtout, and able to wade through great matters. Then falling againe to his vices, or elſe ſhew of vices, was receiued amongſt Neroes familiar friends, as a iudge and arbitrator of his daintieſt delights, eſteeming nothing pleaſant or delightfull, vnleſſe Petronius had approued it. Thereupon grew Tigellinus malice againſt him, as againſt a concurrent, or one more skilfull in pleaſures then himſelfe, whetting Neroes crueltie (vnto which all other luſts gaue place) againſt him: obiecting the friendſhip he had with Sceuinus, corrupting a ſlaue to be his accuſer: taking from him all meanes of defence, and the greateſt part of his familie drawne into priſon. By chance about that time Caeſar went to Campania, and Petronius gone as farre as Cumas, was there ſtayed; and not able any longer to indure the lingering betweene hope, or feare, yet did not raſhly kill himſelfe, but cutting his vaines, and binding them vp as pleaſed him, opened them againe, and talked with his friends, though not of any ſerious matter, or worthie to purchaſe the glorie of conſtancie: but gaue eare to thoſe which diſcourſed with him, yet nothing of the immortalitie of the ſoule, or opinions of wiſe men, but of light verſes, and eaſie ſongs. On ſome of his ſlaues he beſtowed gifts, and on ſome ſtripes. He went ſometimes abroade, and gaue himſelfe to ſleepe, that although his death was conſtrained, yet it ſhould be like a caſuall death. Neither in his teſtament (as moſt men were wont to do) did he flatter Nero or Tigellinus or any other fauorite, but wrote down the vncleane life of the Prince, vnder fained names of ſtale catamites, abuſed againſt nature, and of women, with the ſtrangenes of the abuſe of either of them; and ſealed vp, ſent it to Nero, and brake his ſeale, leaſt afterward it might ſerue to breede danger to others. And Nero doubting how the inuention of his night pleaſures ſhould come to light, Silia by being the wife of a Senator not vnknowne, and abuſed in all his licentious luſts, and very familiar with Petronius, came to his minde, whom he thruſt into baniſhment, as not hauing kept ſecret

thoſe things ſhe had ſeene and ſuffered: moued thereto by his owne particular hatred rather then reſt occaſion. He deliuered Numicius Thermus once Pretor, to Tigellinus priuie hatred, becauſe Thermus freed man had layd ſome criminall matter to Tigellinus charge, which he ſhould pay for by torment of torture, and his maiſter by vndeſerued death.
            
            
               V. Neroes hatred againſt Thraſeas Paetus, and Bareas Soranus.
               SO many worthie men being murdered, in the end Nero coueted to deſtroy vertue, it ſelfe, by killing Bareas Soranus, and Thraſeas Paetus, of old enemie to both; and new occaſions riſing againſt Thraſeas, becauſe he went out of the Senat, as I haue alreadie ſaid, when Agrippinaes cauſe was debated; & becauſe that in the paſtime of youth called Inuenales, he ſhewed not ſo acceptable indeuor as was expected: which grudge pearſed the deeplier, becauſe the ſame Thraſea at Padua where he was borne in the Ceſtian playes, inſtituted by Antenor the Troian, ſang in tragicall attire. The day alſo that Antiſtius the Pretor was condemned for outrages againſt Nero, he gaue a milder ſentence, and obtained it: and when the honor of the goddes was ordained for Poppaea, abſent of ſet purpoſe, was not at the conuoy of the funerall. Which things Capito Coſſutianus did not ſuffer to be forgotten, beſides his ouer-readie inclination to naughtines, enemie to Thraſea, becauſe that by his authoritie, countenancing the deputies of Cilicia, he loſt his cauſe, when they purſued Capito for vſing iniuſtice and extortion in his office. He obiected farther: That in the beginning of the yeere Thraſea did auoide the oath; was not preſent with the reſt at the offering vp of vowes, although he were one of the fifteene Prieſts, yet he neuer offered ſacrifice for the health of the Prince, or heauenly voice: that heretofore he hath beene often preſent, and diligent, ſhewing himſelfe a fauorer or an aduerſarie to the ordinarie conſultations of the Lords of the Senate, but hath not once entered the Curia this three yeeres: and very lately when euery man ran who firſt might, to puniſh Silanus and Vetus, he attended rather on his clients priuat buſines: that was now a reuolting, and a faction, and if many durſt do the like, it would breede to a warre. As in times paſt (ſayd he) the citie deſirous of garboile, ſpake of C. Caeſar, and M. Cato; ſo now of thee ô Nero and Thraſea, and hath his adherents or rather followers, which imitating, though not his obſtinacie of opinions, yet his behauior and countenance, ſeuere and ſterne, do caſt thy laſciuiouſnes in thy teeth. This man only is careleſſe of thy health, no way procuring thy honor, he little regardeth the Princes proſperous ſucceſſes. What, is he not filled with thy griefes, and ſorrowes? It proceedeth from the ſelfeſame minde not to beleeue Poppaea to be agoddeſſe, and not ſweare to obſerue the ordinances of Augustus and Iulius of famous memorie. He deſpiſeth holie things, abrogateth lawes. The diurnals of the people of Rome are curiouſly read in the prouinces and campe, that it might be knowen what Thraſea hath not done. Either let vs condiſcend to his ordinances if they be better: or let the captaine and author be taken away from deſires of nouelties. This ſect brought forth the Tuberones & Fauonians, vnpleaſing names to the auncient common wealth. That they may ouerthrow the ſtate, they pretend libertie: but if they ſhould ouerthrow it, they will giue an aſſault to ouerthrow libertis likewiſe. Invaine thou haſt extinguiſhed Caſsius, if thou wilt ſuffer the followers of Brutus to grow and take head. In fine, write thou nothing of Thraſea; leaue vs the Senate arbitrator of the cauſe. Nero extolleth Coſſutianus ſtoutnes, whet on

with choler, and ioyneth with him Marcellus Eprius, of a quick and liuely eloquēce. As for Barea Soranus, Oſtorius Sabinus, a Romaine gendeman had required he might accuſe him for matter committed in the Proconſulſhip of Aſia: in which he augmented the diſpleaſure the Prince bare him for iuſtice and induſtrie: and becauſe he had beene very carefull in opening the hauen of the Epheſians; and had left vnpuniſhed the violence of the citie Pergamena, which hindring Acratus Caeſars freed man to carry away their images and pictures. But the fault indeede laid to his charge, was his friendſhip with Plautus, and ambition in alluring the prouince to new hopes. The time choſen to condemne him, was, when Tiridates came to take the kingdome of Armenia: that domeſticall wickednes might be obſcured and hidden with the rumors of the ſtrangers arriuing; or elſe that he might ſhew the greatnes of an Emperour by the death of worthie men, as a royall act. Whereupon all the citie being run out to receiue the Prince, and behold the King, Thraſea forbidden to go to meete him, loſt not courage therefore; but wrote to Nero, demaunding his accuſations, boldly affirming that he would purge himſelfe, if he might haue knowledge of the crimes, and licence to cleere them. Theſe writings Nero receiued very greedily, in hope that Thraſea being terrified and deiected, would haue written ſomewhat ſounding to the magnificencie and excellencie of the Prince, and diſcredit of his owne reputation: which falling out otherwiſe, fearing the countenance, and courage and libertie of the innocent, commaunded the Lords of the Senate to be aſſembled. Then Thraſea conſulted with his friends, whether he ſhould aduenture his purgation, or let it paſſe. Thoſe which thought it beſt he ſhould enter into the Senat houſe, ſaid, they were aſſured of his conſtancie, and that he would ſay nothing but what ſhould augment his glory. Cowardly and timorous men did ſhut themſelues in ſecret places at the time of their death. The people ſhould ſee a man offering himſelfe to death; the Senate ſhould heare words more then humane, as it were of ſome diuine power, that Nero himſelfe might alſo be moued with the miracle: but if his crueltie ſhould continue, certes the memorie of an honorable death ſhould be diſtinguiſhed with poſteritie from the cowardlines of ſuch as periſhed with ſilence. Contrarywiſe, ſuch as thought it conuenient to expect within dores what might happen, ſaid the ſame of Thraſea: 
                  But yet that skoffes and iniuries were at hand: he ſhould therefore withdraw his eares from checks and reprochfull ſpeeches: not only Coſſutianus and Eprius are prompt to naughtines: ſome there are which peraduenture would let their hand walke and ſtrike, through the crueltie * of Auguſtus: yea the good do the like for feare. That he would rather deliuer the Senat whom he had alwaies honored, of the infamie of ſo great a villanie: and leaue it doubtfull, what, hauing ſeene Thraſea, the Lordes of the Senate would determine. That Nero ſhould be aſhamed of his wickednes, was to trouble himſelfe with a vaine hope: and that it was much more to be feared, leaſt he ſhould grow cruell againſt his wife, his familie, and the reſt of his children. Therefore that vndefiled and vncorrupted, whoſe ſteps and ſtudies he had imitated in his life, theirs alſo he ſhould follow in the honor of his death. There was preſent at this conſultation Rusticus Arulenus, Tribune of the people, a hot yongman, who for deſire of praiſe, offered to oppoſe himſelfe to the decree of Senate. Thraſea coold his courage: Leaſt he ſhould begin a vaine enterpriſe vnprofitable to the criminall, and dangerous to the oppoſer. As for himſelfe he had ended his yeeres, and that he ought not forſake the manner of his life ſo many yeeres continued: but he entred now into offices, and was in his choiſe to accept or refuſe ſuch as are behind. That he ſhould waigh well and ponder with himſelfe what courſe of gouerning he ſhould

enter into, of taking charge in the common wealth in ſuch a time as this. Whether it were fit for him to come into the Senate, or not, he would haue it reſt in his owne conſideration.
               
            
            
               
                  VI. Thraſeas accuſation and death.
               THe next day two armed Pretorian cohorts, beſet the Temple of Venus the mother: the waies to the Senate a companie of gownd-men had filled, not hiding their weapons: and a thicke aray of ſouldiers diſperſed in the place of aſſemblies and Temples; amidſt whoſe lookes and threats the Senators went into the court; where the Princes oration was heard by his Quaeſtors mouth. None noted by name, he blamed the Senators; That they neglected publicke duties, and that by their example the gentlemen of Rome were become lazie. For what maruell was it, if from Prouinces farre off they came not to Rome, when as the moſt part hauing obtained the Conſulſhip and prieſtly dignities, gaue themſelues rather to paſſe the time withall pleaſures in their gardens? Which the accuſers tooke hold of as it were of a weapon. And Coſſutianus leading the daunce, and Marcellus with greater vehemencie: Cried that this touched the whole ſtate, that through the diſobedience of the inferiours, the lenitie of the commaunder was made leſſer. The Lords of the Senate vntill that day had beene too milde in ſuffering Thraſea to forſake their ſide, his ſonne in law Heluidius Priſcus in the ſame madnes; Paconius Agrippinus, heire of his fathers hatred againſt Princes, and Curtius Montanus compoſing deſtable verſes to ſcoffe and abuſe men without puniſhment. He found a lacke of a Conſull in the Senate, of a prieſt in vowes, in an oath a citizen: but againſt the ordinances and ceremonies of our aunceſtors, Thraſea had openly put on the perſon of a traitour and an enemie. Finally, that he ſhould come and play the Senator, and as he was wont, protect the backbiters of the Prince, and giue his cenſure what he would haue amended or chaunged: for they could more eaſilie endure one finding fault with all things, then endure his ſilence now, condemning all things. Doth peace throughout the world diſpleaſe him, or victories without loſſe of the armies? That they would not ſuffer him haue the deſire of his ouerthwart ambition, who grieued at the common proſperitie, thought the place of aſſemblies, the Theater, and Temples, ſolitarie places, and threatned his owne baniſhment. Theſe things vnto him ſeemed not decrees, not magiſtrates: nor this the citie of Rome: that he would abandon, and ſeparate his life from that citie, whoſe loue in time paſt, and now whoſe ſight he had caſt off. When with theſe and the like ſpeeches Marcellus had inueighed, grim and threatning, in voice, countenance and eies kindled with rage: not that knowen, and by often vſe of daungers, vſuall heauines, but a new and a deeper feare ſeaſed the Lords of the Senate, beholding the hands and weapons of the ſouldiers. Beſides that, the reuerent repreſentation of Thraſea came to their imagination: and ſome there were which had compaſſion that Heluidius ſhould ſuffer puniſhment in regard of harmeleſſe affinitie. What was obiected againſt Agrippinus, but the lamentable fortune of his father? When as he innocent alſo, was ruined by Tiberius crueltie. Montanus, a vertuous yoong man was baniſhed, becauſe he made ſhew of his wit, though not with any diffamatorie verſes.
            
            
               
               
                  VII. Soranus daughters oration in Senate, and his death.
               IN the meane ſeaſon Ostorius Sabinus, Soranus accuſer, commeth in, and beginneth with his friendſhip had with Rubellius Plautus: and that being Proconſull of Aſia, he caried himſelfe rather as fitting his own nobilitie, than the cōmon good, by entertayning and nouriſhiug ſedition among the citizens. Theſe were ſtale matters, but as if they were freſh he ioined the daughter to the fathers alleaging that ſhe had beſtowed money vpon Magicians. So it was indeede, through the loue and affection Seruilia (ſo was ſhe called) bare her father, and vndiſcretion of age; yet ſhe conſulted of nothing but of the ſafetie of their houſe; or whether Neroes wrath would be pacified; or the Senators hearing of the cauſe, would be to the preiudice of her father. She was called into the Senate, and ſtoode one from the other before the Conſuls tribunal; the father very aged, the daughter vnder twentie yeeres, a widow, and deſolate, her husband Annius Pollio of late baniſhed; and not ſo much as looking towards her father, whoſe dangers ſhe imagined ſhe had increaſed. Then the accuſer asking her whether ſhe had ſould her dowrie ornaments, and taken her iewell from her neck, to get money to practiſe magicall ſuperſtitions? firſt proſtrating her ſelfe on the ground, with a long ſilence and weeping, then imbracing the altars, ſaid: I haue not called vpon any wicked gods, I haue made no diueliſh inuocatiōs, nor any thing elſe by my vnhappie praiers, then that this my very good father, thou ô Caeſar, & you Lords of the Senat, would ſaue aliue. So I haue giuen my iewels, and apparell, and ornaments of my dignitie, euen as I would haue done my bloud and life, if they had demaunded it. Let theſe men heretofore vnto me vnknowen, looke what names they carry, what artes they practiſe: I made no mention of the Prince, vnleſſe it were among the gods. Yet my moſt vnfortunate father knoweth it not: if it be an offence, I alone haue offended. Soranus tooke the words out of her mouth as ſhe was yet ſpeaking, and cried, that ſhe went not with him into the prouince: for her age Plautus could not know her; ſhe was not confederate with her husbands crimes; ſhe was guiltie only of ouer-great and tender loue: and therefore whatſoeuer ſhould ſort to his lot, he beſought them that they would ſeparate his cauſe from hers; withall, haſtned to caſt himſelfe in the armes of his daughter which came to meete him, if the ſerieants putting themſelues between them, had not hindered both. By and by the witneſſes were heard; and how much pitie the crueltie of the accuſer had moued, ſo much anger P. Egnatius the witnes ſturred. This man being a client of Soranus, and then hired to oppreſſe his friende, pretended grauitie of the Stoicall ſect, in demeanor and countenance to repreſent the patterne of honeſt exerciſes; but in minde was traiterous, and deceiptfull, couering auarice, and a lewd minde: which being diſcouered, and made knowne by money, hath taught vs to beware of ſuch, as vnder colour of liberall ſciences, are falſe in friendſhip: no leſſe then of thoſe which are notoriouſly noted for vice, and treacherous dealing. The ſame day was ſhewed a notable example by Caſſius Aſclepiodotus, who for wealth, being the chiefeſt among the Bithynians, vſed the ſame tokens of kindnes towards Soranus in his aduerſitie, as before he had done in time of proſperitie: for which cauſe being depriued of all his goods, and caſt into baniſhmēt, by the iuſtice of the gods * which lay before vs a precident as well of good as of bad. Thraſea, Soranus, & Seruilia had their choiſe giuen them what death they would haue. Heluidius and Paconius were baniſhed Italie. Montanus was granted to his father, with conditiō that he ſhould beare no charge in the common wealth. To

the accuſers Eprius & Coſſutianus, to each were giuen About 39062 pound 10. ſhil. 5. millions of ſeſterces; to Oſtorius 12. hundred thouſand About 9375. pound., & the ornamēts of a queſtor. Then toward the euening, the Cōſuls Queſtor was ſent to Thraſea, being then in his gardēs, viſited with a great companie of noblemen and women, very attentiuely hearing the doctor Demetrius, one of the Cynicall ſect, of whom as it was to be coniectured by his countenance, and heard if they ſpeake any thing lowd, he demaunded ſundrie queſtions of the nature of the ſoule, and of the ſeparation of the ſpirit from the bodie; vntill Domitius Cacilianus, one of his familiareſt friends came, and declared what the Lords of the Senat had decreed. Thoſe which were preſent, bewailing and moning Thraſea with all ſpeede were exhorted to depart, leaſt their lot ſhould be to partake the dangers of a condemned perſon, & perſwadeth his wife Arria, who would haue died with him, to follow the example of her mother Arria, to keepe her ſelfe aliue, and not bereaue their daughter of them both, & of her only ſtay and ſupport. From thence he went to his gallery, where the Queſtor found him, rather cheerefull then ſad, becauſe he had vnderſtood that Heluidius his ſonne in lawe was only baniſhed Italie. Then hauing receiued the order of the Senate, he brought Heluidius and Demetrius into a chamber, and ſtretching out the vaines of both his armes, after he ſaw the bloud guſh out, ſprinkling it on the ground, and calling the Queſtor neerer, ſaid: 
                     Let vs ſacrifice to Iupiter the deliuerer. Behold, yong man, yet the gods preſerue thee from the like lucke: neuertheleſſe thou art borne in thoſe times, in which it is expedient to ſtrengthen thy minde with conſtant examples: then the ſlow going out of the bloud, cauſing grieuous torments, turning to Demetrius. *
               
               
                  The reſt of the Latin is loſt.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            THE DESCRIPTION OF GERMANIE: AND CVSTOMES OF THE PEOPLE, BY CORNELIVS TACITVS.
            
               ALL Germanie is diuided from the Galli, the Rhaetians, and Pannonians, with two riuers, Rhene and Danubius; from the Sarmatians and Dacians by mutuall feare of one the other, or high hils. The reſt the Ocean doth enuiron, compaſſing broad and wide gulphes, and large and ſpatious Ilands; the people and Kings of which hath beene of late diſcouered by warre. The riuer of Rhene hauing his beginning on the top of the inacceſſible, ſteep Rhaetian Alpes, and winding ſomewhat towardes the Weſt, falleth into the North Ocean. Danubius ſpringing from the top of the hill Abnoba, not ſo ſteepe, paſſing by manie nations, falleth by ſixe channels into the Ponticke ſea: the ſeuenth is loſt in the mariſhes. I may thinke that the Germans are home-bred and the naturall people of their countrey, and not mixed with others, comming from other places; bicauſe ſuch as in times paſt ſought new habitations, came by ſea and not by land: and that huge and ſpatious Ocean, and as I may terme it, different from the other, is ſeldome trauelled by our men. For beſides the daunger of the rough and vnknowen ſea; who (vnleſſe it were his natiue ſoile) would leaue Aſia, or Affricke, or Italie, and plant himſelfe in Germanie? Being a countrey of it ſelfe rude, and the aire vnpleaſant and rough, to looke on ilfauoured; not mannured nor husbanded. They giue it out as a high point in old verſes (which is the onely way they maintaine the memorie of things, as their Annales) that the god Tuisto, ſonne of the earth, and his ſonne Mannus, were their firſt founders and beginners. To Mannus they aſſigne three ſonnes; whoſe names the Ingaeuones tooke, a nation neere the Ocean: the Iſtaeuones, and Herminones lying betweene them both. But ſome through a licence which antiquitie doth giue, affirme that the King had moe ſonnes, from which moe nations tooke their names; as the Marſi, Gambriui, Sueui, Vandali, all true and auncient names. As for the name, Germanie, it is a new name lately coyned: for thoſe which firſt paſt the riuer of Rhene & droue out the Gallois, were now called Tungri, now Germani: ſo the name of one people, not of the whole nation, growing great by little and little: as they were all at the firſt called for feare, as beſt liked the Conquerour; ſo at laſt, Germans, being a name of their owne inuention. And they record that Hercules, came amongſt them of all that euer was the valianteſt perſon. They goe ſinging to the warres. And haue certaine verſes, by ſinging of which, calling it Barditus, they incourage their people, and by the ſame ſong foretell the fortune of the future battell: for they both ſtrike a feare into others, and are themſelues ſtriken with feare, according to the meaſure and tune of the battell: ſeeming rather an harmonie of valour than voices; and do affect principally a certaine roughnes of the voice, and a broken confuſe murmur, by putting their targets before their mouthes, to the end their voice by the reuerberation might ſound bigger and fuller. Yea ſome are of opinion, that Vliſſes in his long and fabulous wandring, being brought to this Ocean, came into Germanie,

and built the towne Aſciburgium vpon the banke of Rhene and inhabited at this day, which he called 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . And that an altar conſecrated to Vliſſes hath been found in the ſame place, with his fathers name Laërtes: and that there are yet monuments extant, and certaine tumbes inſcribed with Greeke letters, in the confines of Germanie and Rhaetia: which I intend not to confirme by reaſons, or confute; and therefore I leaue it to euerie mans iudgement to beleeue or not. For mine owne part I hold with them, which thinke that the people of Germanie, not changed and altered by marrying with other nations, haue continued the true and pure nation like vnto none, but themſelues. And therefore you ſee they haue all one feature and making, though they be infinite in number: firie and gray eies, yellow haire, great bodies, and ſtrong at a puſh onely. Trauell and paine they cannot endure: nor yet thirſt nor heate; but to hunger and cold the aire and the countrey hath inured them. The ſoile, although differing ſomewhat in kind, yet generally is wilde with woods, or vnpleaſant and ilfauoured with mariſhes: moiſter towards Gallia: more windie towards Noricum and Pannony: batfull enough; but bad for fruit-bearingtrees; cattle plentie, but for the moſt part harletry runts: their kine and labouring beaſt hath no beautie in him: all their ioye is in plentie of them: and therein conſiſteth their wealth; & the wealth they chiefly deſire. Siluer & gold whether the angry or fauourablegods haue denied them, I doubt. Neither wil I affirme that there is no vaine in Germany which yeeldeth ſiluer & gold: for who hath ſought it? the poſſeſſion of theſe metals or vſe, they do not greatly affect. Yet veſſels of plate you may ſee among them preſented to their Embaſſadors & Princes; but as ſmally accompted of, as if they were of earth: although the borderers for commoditie of trafficke, like gold and ſiluer well; and do acknowledge and chooſe ſome coine, bearing our images. Thoſe which dwell further in the land, go more ſimplie to worke, and according to the old manner, haue no buying and ſelling, but by exchange of commodities. The older the money, and longeſt knowne, the better liked, as that which is toothed about like a ſawe: or hath the picture of a chariot drawen with two horſes. They deſire rather ſiluer then gold: not for any liking vnto it; but becauſe that, being in ſmaller money, it is eaſlier put away in buying and ſelling of ſmall wares. Yron they haue little among them, as by their weapons it may be gathered. Few of them vſe ſwords, or great lances: but carrie Iauelins, or as they terme them Frameas, with a narrow and ſhort yron, but ſo ſharp and handſome, that as occaſion ſerueth, with the ſame weapon they can fight both at hand, and a farre off: and the horſeman is contented with a ſhield and a framea. The footemen vſe weapons, to throw one man a great many, and that a great way off: naked, or couered with a light caſſocke. Handſomnes and neatnes in attire they do not brag of, but trim and diſtinguiſh their ſhields only with varietie of colours. Brigantine or cote of fence few haue. Salet or head-peece ſcarſe any one vſeth. Their horſes are neither beautifull to the eye, nor ſwift, nor mannaged to the carrire according to our faſhion; but to go on ſtraight, or turne on the right hand ſo cloſe and round, that not one drags behinde another. All things well conſidered, their greateſt ſtrength conſiſteth of footemen: and therefore in their fight they mingle the one with the other; the footemen which are a choſen number out of the youth, and placed before the battell, neither going too haſtily before the horſemen, nor drailing after, but marching in proportionable meaſure with them. There is a certain number ſet downe, that is, of euery towneſhip or borough an hundred, for ſo they terme themſelues: and that which was but a number at the firſt, is now a name and an honor. Their battels be pointed: to giue ground, ſo as they charge luſtely after, they thinke rather

a point of good policie then cowardlines. The bodies of their ſouldiers they carrie away, euen in doubtfull battels: to abandon his ſhield is the chiefeſt diſgrace and offence: an ignominious perſon is barred from their ſacrifices, and from their aſſemblies; and many which haue fled from battels, haue for ſhame hanged themſelues. Their Kings they chooſe by noblenes of birth, and their Captaines by valour. The Kings power is reſtrained, and not to do what he liſteth; and their Captaines if they be forward in ſight, and in the point of the battell, are admired and reuerenced rather for their example, then commanderie. Power to puniſh, to empriſon or beate, none haue but Prieſts: yet that not as a puniſhment, or at the Captaines commandement; but as it were by the commaundement of God, whom they beleeue doth aſſiſt warriors in battels; and carrie before them certaine images, and monuments taken out of the woods. And which is the chiefeſt encouragement of all, they make not their pointed battell at hap hazard, of all perſons as they come; but of their familie and friends, and kinsfolke, with their children not farre of; from whence they may heare the howling of their wiues, and crying of their children: which are to all, ſacred witneſſes of their valour, and beſt commenders. They goe when they are hurt to their mothers and wiues; which are not afeard to number or ſucke their wounds; and carrie the ſouldiers meate, and incourage them to ſtand to it. It is reported that ſome battels, euen readie as it were to be loſt, and diſcomfited, haue beene by the womens earneſt prayers, expoſing their bodies to the daunger, and by ſhewing how neere at hand their captiuitie was, recouered againe: which in regard of their wiues is a greater griefe and hart-breake vnto them; in ſo much that thoſe cities are more ſtraightly bound, which amongſt other hoſtages haue deliuered alſo noblemens daughters: for they dreame that they haue in them I know not what holines & foreſight of things; which maketh them regard their counſell, & giue credit to their oracle. Vnder Veſpaſian of famous memorie, we haue ſeene Velleda a long time and with many nations counted as ſome diuine thing: and in times paſt did adore Aurinia, and many others, not of flatterie, or as though they would haue made them goddeſſes.
            
               
                  II. Their religion and policie.
               OF all the gods, they adore eſpecially Mercurie; vnto whom they thinke it lawfull certaine daies, to offer men in ſacrifice: but Hercules and Mars they pacifie with beaſts, lawfully killed to that vſe: & ſom of the Sueuians ſacrifice to Iſis. What reaſon they haue to vſe that ſtrange ſacrifice, I know not: vnleſſe it be that the image of that goddeſſe, being faſhioned in forme of that kinde of boat, doth declare that their religion hath beene brought them from a ſtrange countrey. They thinke it a matter il beſeeming the greatnes of the gods, to incloſe them within wals, or paint them in mans ſhape. They conſecrate woods and forreſtes; which ſecret places they call by the names of gods: which they ſee onely by apprehenſion and reuerence.
               Soothſaying and lots they obſerue aboue all others. Their cuſtome in caſting of lots is without fraude: for they cut a branche from a fruit-bearing-tree, into many peeces; and diſtinguiſhed with ſeuerall markes caſt them vpon a white garment, at auenture: then if the matter belong to a communaltie, the Prieſt; if to a priuate perſon, the maſter of the houſe hauing prayed the gods, and looking vp to the heauen, taketh vp euerie of them three times: and interpreteth them according to their markes. If the lots fall contrarie to their mindes, they conſult no more that day,

the ſame matter. But if they do, yet they will trie what further credit there is in Soothſaying: for they are not ignorant in this countrey of obſeruing the ſinging of birdes and their flying, conſulting with their gods of both. And it is a thing peculiar vnto that countrey to trie the preſages and warnings of horſes; which are bred and maintained in thoſe woods and forreſts, white, vnbacked, or vnlaboured: which harneſſed and put to a ſacred chariot, the Prieſt, King, or Prince of the citie do follow; obſeruing their noiſe and neying. Of all preſages this is of greateſt credit with the Prieſtes, noblemen, and common people: thinking themſelues miniſters of the gods; and the horſes priuie to their ſecrets. They haue another obſeruation among them, by which they ſearch out the euent of great and weightie battels; which is this. They get ſome one, how they can, of that nation with whom the warre ſhall be; and take another choiſe man of their owne, and arme them, each according to his faſhion; and ſo trie their valour: and by that preiudice, coniecture on whoſe ſide the victorie ſhall fall. In ſmall matters, the Princes themſelues determine of them: but if they be of importance, they all in generall conſult: but yet ſo, that thoſe things whoſe determination belong to the people, are concluded before the Prince. And vnleſſe ſome caſuall or ſudden accident fall out, they make their aſſemblies certaine daies, either in the firſt quarter or full moone; thinking that to be the luckieſt time to begin their workes. The number of daies they recken not, as we do, but of nights; and in them make their appointmēts, and ſommonces to appeere, thinking that the day is gouerned by the night. Their libertie is cauſe, that they meet not togeither, nor as they are commaunded, but ſpende two or three daies in expecting one another. They ſit armed as they come, and the Prieſt, who hath authoritie to puniſh, commaundeth ſilence. Then the King or Prince, or euerie man according to his age, nobilitie, and renowne of warre, or as he is eloquent, beginneth to ſpeake. Vſing rather perſwaſion then authoritie of commaunding. If their opinion miſlike them, they reiect it with a murmuring noiſe: if it liked, they ſhake their iauelins: but the moſt honorable manner of liking is to approoue it by their weapons. It is lawfull in their councell to accuſe, and arraigne in criminall cauſes. Puniſhments are diſtinguiſhed by the offence: traitors and fugitiues they hang on trees: the cowardly and vnwarlike, and ſuch as were vnnaturally lewd of their bodies, they did drown in mud and marriſhes, and couer them with hurdles. The drift of that diuerſitie of puniſhments was; to declare that it was expedient to ſhewe offences as they were, in puniſhing, but hide heinous crimes. But in leſſer treſpaſſes, according to the qualitie of the puniſhmēts, the parties conuicted, are fined, in ſome number of horſes, or other cattell; whereof part goeth to the King, or citie; part to the partie damnified, or to his kindred. In the ſame councels they chooſe rulers, to adminiſter iuſtice in townes and villages: which haue an hundred choſen out of the people, to accompanie them, which are as their counſell, and authoritie. They conſult neither of publicke nor priuate affaires but armed: but yet it is not the maner for any to take weapons, vnleſſe he haue beene iudged before by the citie able to vſe them: and then in the councell, either one of the gouernours, or his father, or ſome one of his kindred, doth honour the yoong man with a ſhield and a Framea. This is with them a gowne; this is the firſt honor giuen to yoong men: before reputed a part of their particular houſe, but from thence forward, of the common wealth. High nobilitie, or merit of predeceſſors, maketh their children although they be but yoong, woorthie of dignitie, which aſſociat themſelues to the ſtronger, and long tried: and take it for no diſgrace, to be ſeene among their followers: among which there be likewiſe degrees according to his diſcretion of whoſe traine they be. And there is a great emulation

among the followers who ſhould be in greateſt fauour with his Prince: and amongſt the Princes, who ſhould haue the greateſt number following him, and moſt couragious. This is their honour, this their ſtrength; to be garded alwaies with a company of choiſe youth: which is a credit and reputation, in peace; and in warre, a defence. And it is not onely an honour and glorie in ones owne nation to haue a gallant number, and a valiant in his traine; but is alſo a matter of reputation with cities adioyning: as men ſought vnto by Ambaſſadors: and preſented with gifts: and do oftentimes by their onely fame end warres. When they come to ioyne battell, it is a diſhonor to the Prince, to be ouercome in valour: and to his followers, not to go as far in proweſſe as their Prince. Now to returne aliue from that battell, in which his Prince is ſlaine, is a perpetuall infamie and reproch: being the principalleſt part of their oath, to defend and maintaine him, and aſcribe their owne exploits to his glorie and honour. Princes fight for victorie; the followers, for the Prince. If the citie wherein they are borne, grow lazie with a long peace, and idlenes; moſt of the yoong noblemen, goe of their owne will to thoſe nations, wherein there is warres: bicauſe that nation diſliketh reſt and quietnes: as winning greater renowne in doubtfull and hazardeous attempts; and not able to entertaine ſo great number of followers, but by violence and warre: ſometimes by the liberalitie of their Prince getting that horſe of ſeruice, and bloodie and conquering ſword. Their bankets, and large, but rude diet, is inſteede of pay: but matter to miniſter liberalitie commeth by warre and rapine. To manure the ground, or expect the ſeaſon, thou canſt not ſo eaſilie perſwade them; as to prouoke the enimie, and deſerue wounds: to get that with the ſweate of thy browes, which thou maiſt winne by the loſſe of thy blood, they hold as an idle & ſlothfull part. When they are not buſied in wars, they giue not themſelues much to hunting: but ſpend more of their time in idlenes, as a people much giuen to ſleep and feed. When the valianteſt and warlikeſt are idle, they commit the care of houſhold affaires & tillage, to women & old men, & to the weakeſt of their family; and do themſelues grow heauie and lazie: a ſtrange diuerſitie of diſpoſition, that the ſame men ſhould ſo much loue ſlouth, and hate quietnes. The cuſtome is in cities to beſtow by pole vpon the Princes, either of their cattell or graine, which is receiued as an honor, yet ſupplieth their wants. But aboue all, they are exceeding glad if any thing be preſented them by neighbour-nations, which do ſend ſometimes in particular, ſometimes in common: as choiſe horſes, great weapons, furniture for horſe, and chaines; and now we haue taught them alſo to receiue money. It is well knowen that the Germans dwell in no cities, nor will not ſuffer their houſes to ioyne together, but aſunder, the one from the other, as they liked beſt of their fountaines, fields, or wood. They build not their villages as we do, one houſe cloſe to another: but euery man leaueth a ſpace about his houſe, either as a remedie againſt misfortunes of fire, or by vnskilfulnes in building. Parget and mortar they vſe not, nor tiles: and vſe to all buildings vnſquared and vnwrought timber, without any beautie or delight, but do daube ſome places very diligently with ſuch a cleare and ſhining earth, that it reſembleth a picture, or draught of colours. It is a faſhion amongſt them to dig deepe caues vnder ground, and couer them ouer with dung, as a ſuccour in the winter, and garner for their graine; tempering the rigour of the cold by ſuch places: and if at any time the enemie come vpon them, he forrageth all open places, but hidden vnder ground, are either not found, or elſe are ſaued, becauſe they are driuen to ſeeke them. They all weare a kinde of caſſock called ſagum, clapſed, or for want of one, faſtned with a thorne, and hauing no other garment, but naked, lye all day in the harth, or by the fire. The richer ſort are diſtinguiſhed from

the others by their garments, which are not large and wide as the Sarmates and Parthians vſe to weare them, but ſtraite, and ſhewing the proportion of euery part of the bodie. Beſides, they weare certaine pelts made of beaſts skins; thoſe neere the Rhene-banke careleſly; but thoſe which are farther off more curiouſly, as neuer trimming themſelues with far-fet merchandiſe. They make choiſe of certaine beaſts, and heere and there ſpecke their skins with ſpots: and the like with the skins of beaſts taken in the fartheſt Ocean, or vnknowen ſea. The man and womans attire differeth in nothing, ſauing that the women often vſe linnen garments trimmed and interlaced with purple: and the vpper parts of their bodies without ſleeues, their armes bare, and their boſome naked and vncouered. Yet matrimonie is ſeuerely kept among them: the thing moſt commendable of all their manner of life: for of all barbarous people, they alone content themſelues, euery man with one wife, except ſome very few: which not for vnruly luſt, but for their nobilitie are ſued vnto for ſundrie marriages. The wife giues not a dowry to her husband, but the husband to the wife. Their parents and neere kinſmen are preſent, when they giue any gifts the one to the other: which are not exquiſite as to daintie dames, or for to beautifie and trim the new married wife; but oxen, and a horſe with furniture, and a ſhield with a ſword, and lance. With theſe gifts the wife is taken, and ſhe alſo doth bring her husband ſome armes: this is the greateſt bond: theſe are the ſecret ceremonies: theſe they thinke to be the gods of marriage. And leaſt the woman ſhould thinke herſelfe exempt and free from bonds of vertue, or hazards of warre, in the very beginnings and firſt ſpeech of marriage, ſhe is put in minde, that ſhe commeth as a companion of his labours and dangers: and that ſhe ſhall ſuffer and venture the fame in peace and warre that he doth: that is the ſignification and conſtruction of the oxen yoked, of the horſe with bridle and furniture, this the meaning of the weapons and armes giuen on one ſide and the other: thus ſhe muſt liue, thus ſhe muſt die: ſhe receiueth that which ſhe muſt deliuer vnuiolated and pure to her children, which their daughters in lawe do receiue as worthie things, and yeeld againe to their nephues. They liue therefore in moſt ſtraite chaſtitie, vncorrupted with the allurements of ſhewes and ſpectacles, or prouocations in banketting. As well men as women are ignorant of the ſecrets of learning. Adulterie is ſeldome committed in ſo populous a nation, and the puniſhment for it incontinently inflicted, as beſt liketh the husband: who hauing cut her haire, turneth her naked out of his houſe in the preſence of her kinsfolks, and driueth and beateth her throughout all the towne: no pardon giuen to her that hath violated her chaſtitie: neither for her beautie, nor age, nor wealth, can ſhe euer after finde another husband▪ No man laugheth at vices: neither when any is corrupted, or doth corrupt, do they ſay, it is the time. Yet there is one thing more commendable in thoſe cities, that only virgins do marrie, and that only once, and the man the like, contracting with the hope and deſire of one wife. As they haue but one bodie, one life; ſo they take but one husband: that they might haue no other thoughts, no farther deſires, nor loue him as ſo deſeruing it, but becauſe of matrimonie. To preſcribe a certaine number of children, or kill any of their neere kindred, they compt it a heinous crime. Good manners are of greater authoritie and force among them, then elſewhere good lawes. They grow to haue theſe great lims and bodies which we maruell at, naked, and ſlouenly in euery houſe. Euery mother nurſeth her owne children with her owne breaſts, and ſend them not to nurſes or other women. Thou ſhalt not know the Lord from the ſlaue, by any note of deintie and nice education: for they liue amongſt the ſame cattell, and on the ſame ground, vntill age doth diſtinguiſh the

                  
                     〈…〉
                   his valour make him knowne. Yong men giue not themſelues too 
                     〈…〉
                  e with women; and therefore decay not ſo ſoone: neither are 
                     〈…〉
                  ed to marrie: they are of the ſame yeeres, of like growth: they are 
                     〈…〉
                   with ſuch as are of like ſtrength; and the children expreſſe and ſhew the ſtrength of their parents. Siſters children are as much ſet by in their vnckles houſe, as in their fathers. Some are of opinion, that this bond of bloud is the ſtraiteſt and holieſt, and moſt of all required, in taking of hoſtages: as thoſe which are of a more conſtant minde, and in the familie the greateſt part: yet euery mans children ſucceede as heires: and teſtament they make none at all. If there be no children to ſucceede, the next in degree are brothers, vnckles by the fathers ſide and by the mothers. The more kindred, the greater affinitie, the more an old man is honored: and to be without children, is of no reputation. They muſt as well become enemie to their fathers enemies or kinſmens, as friend to their friends. Their hatred is not implacable: for mans ſlaughter it ſelfe is ſatisfied and redeemed with a certaine number of beaſts, which contenteth the whole familie, and is profitable for the common good: for where libertie is, there priuate enmities are dangerous.
            
            
               
                  III. Their domesticall life and behauiour.
               GReater hoſpitality and entertainment is no where more bountiful than there, being a curſed deed to barre any man his houſe: and not giue him meate and drinke according to his abilitie. When all is ſpent, the laſt hoſte will be a guide and companion vnto him to the next houſe vninuited: for that skilleth not; but are receiued with like curteſie: in reſpect of hoſpitalitie making no difference whether he be of acquaintance or not. If any thing be demaunded of him which is going away, the manner is to graunt it; and he may with like facilitie aske againe. Gifts are things which pleaſe them well: but thoſe which giue them do not thinke they do you a benefit therein, and thoſe which receiue them not bound or beholden for them. They entertaine their gueſts courteouſly: immediatly after they riſe (which for the moſt part is verie late and the day well ſpent) they waſh, and moſt commonly in warme water, as hauing long winters: and when they haue waſhed, they fall to eate, eurie man his ſtoole and his meſſe to himſelfe: then they fall to their buſines; and as oft to banket and make good cheere all armed. To ſit a tipling a day and a night, is no diſgrace to any. There ariſe many quarrels (as commonly it happeneth where drunkards meete) which ſeldome end with brawling and iniurious termes, but oftner with murder and hurt. In their bankets they conſult of peace and warre, make attonements betwixt ſuch as are at debate, make marriages, and chooſe their Princes: as a time when the mind is neuer more open to plaine dealing; or more ſturred vp to great attempts. The people being neither craftie nor ſubtle, through the libertie of the place doth thē moſt diſcouer the ſecrets of his breaſt. Euerie mans minde then being open and diſcouered, the next day, they waigh and examine it; with a regard had to both the times. They deliberate when they cannot diſſemble; and reſolue when they cannot erre. Their drinke is a liquor made of barley and corne, corrupted into the likenes of wine. But thoſe which dwell neere the banke of Rhene, buie wine: their meats are ſimple; wilde Apples; freſh veniſon; or curds or creame: they driue away hunger without any ſolemne ſeruice, ordainties: but againſt thirſt they vſe not the like temperance. If thou wilt pleaſe their humour in drunkennes, in giuing them what they aske: they will be as eaſilie ouercome with vices as armes. They haue but one and the ſame kinde of: paſtime

in euerie aſſemblie. Yoong men, which know the ſport caſt themſelues naked, and leape betweene ſwords and launces. Practiſe bred the arte of doing it, and arte the grace; yet neither for gaine nor recompence: albeit the reward of bolde and raſh toies is the delight of the beholder. And (which thou wouldeſt maruell at) freſh and faſting, they play at dice, as a matter of ſerious and earneſt buſines, with ſuch a raſh deſire of winning and loſing; that whē all elſe is loſt, they lay their libertie and bodie vpon the laſt throw: and he who is ouercome entereth a voluntarie ſeruitude: and although he be yoonger, and ſtronger; yet ſuffereth himſelfe to be bound and ſold. Such is their obſtinacie in a bad matter; which they call faith: but ſlaues of this condition, they make away by marchandiſe, to rid themſelues of the ſhame of ſuch a victorie. Their other ſlaues they employ not in certaine affaires of houſe, as we do ours; but euerie one gouerneth his own houſe and houſhold. The Lord inioyneth him to pay a certaine of corne; or cattell, or apparell, as he doth his tenant, which the bondſlaue performeth & no more: other duties of houſe belōg to the wife & children. It is a rare matter to beat their ſlaues, or ouer-labour or empriſon them: yet they are woont to kill them; not by diſcipline and ſeueritie, but carried away with ſudden anger, as againſt an enimie, ſauing that it is vnpuniſhed. The freed men are not much aboue the ſlaue; they ſeldome beare any ſway in the houſe or city, ſauing in thoſe countries which haue a King. For there they are in greater authoritie, then ether free borne or noblemen: in other countries freed men being of vnequall condition, make libertie better knowen. To practiſe vſurie, and in rich themſelues with it, they know not what it meaneth: which is better kept then if it were forbidden. All the ground the inhabitants about do poſſeſſe, according to their number: which they diuide among themſelues, according to their calling; which is eaſily done by reaſon the fields are ſo ſpatious. Their earable land they change by yeeres: and let onelie; not labouring to ouercome the fertilnes and largenes of it by induſtrie; by planting of orchardes; incloſing their medowes; and watering their gardens: onely they vſe much tillage. Hereupon they diuide not the yeere into ſo many ſeaſons, as we do: the winter, ſpring time, and ſommer, they vnderſtand, and haue names for: but as for the autumne, as well the name, as the commodities it bringeth, are vnknowen. Ambition they vſe none in their funerals: onely that one thing is obſerued; that the bodies of noblemen are burned with a certaine kinde of wood. The pile of the funerall fire, they do neither fill vp with apparell nor ſweete odors: euerie mans armes, and ſomes horſe was burnt likwiſe. The toombe is raiſed vp with turnes of earth: great workes and laborious monuments they deſpiſe as heauie for the dead: lamentation and teares they quickly forbeare; but griefe and ſorrow ſlowly. It is ſeemely enough for the women to mourne; and for men to remember the dead. This is it which we haue learned in generall, of the beginning and cuſtomes of the Germans. Now I will lay downe the ordinances and cuſtomes of euerie people in particular; and how they differ; and what nations haue gone out of Germanie, to the Gallois.
            
            
               
                  IIII. What Gallois haue paſſed into Germanie.
               
                  IVlius of famous memorie, the chiefeſt of all authors doth deliuer, that the ſtate of the Gallois hath in times paſt beene of greater force and power, then now it is: and therefore not vnlike, but the Gallois went into Germanie. For what great hinderance could the riuer be; that, euerie nation as he was ſtrong, ſhould not ſet himſelfe in poſſeſſion and chaunge ſeats, yet vnoccupied, and not diuided by any

power of kingdomes? Therefore the Heluetians held that which lyeth betweene the Hercynian forreſt, and the two riuers Rhene and Moene: and the Boij that which is beyond, both nations of Gallia. The name of the Boiemi doth yet continue, and doth ſignifie the old memorie of theplace, although the inhabitants be changed: But whether the Arauiſci from the Oſi, a people of Germanie, came into Pannonia; or the Oſi from the Auariſci into Germanie, is yet vncertaine: conſidering they vſe the ſame language, lawes, and cuſtomes: for being equall in times paſt in pouertie and libertie; the commodities and diſcommodities of both the banks were common to them alike. The Treueri and the Neruij ambitiouſly ſeeme to haue their beginning frō the Germans: as though by this glorie of blood, they ſhould be vnlike, and differ in cowardlines from the Gallois. Without all doubt the banke of Rhene is inhabited with the people of Germanie, the Vangiones, Treboci, Nemetes. The Vbij, albeit they haue deſerued to be a Roman colonie: and deſire to be called rather Agrippinians by the name of their foundreſſe, though not aſhamed of their beginning, haue heretofore paſt ouer; and for good proofe of their fidelitie, haue beene planted vpon the banke of Rhene, to keepe off others, and not for any ſafetie of their owne. Of all theſe nations, the chiefeſt in valour are the Batauians, which inioye ſmall parte of the banke of Rhene, but inhabit an Ilande of the riuer ofRhene; in times paſt a people of the Catti, and went by reaſon of ciuill ſedition into thoſe countries to be a part of the Roman Empire. The honour and marks of auncient alliance do yet continue, for they are neither contemned by paying tributes, nor oppreſſed by the farmer of publick reuenues. They are exempted from charges and contributions, as reſerued for vſe of warre, as it were armes and weapons. The Mattiaci do the like allegeance: for the greatnes of the people of Rome hath been inlarged further then the old bounds of the Empire did extend, and beyond the Rhene. Therefore in regard of their habitation and bounds, they inhabit the banke, but in hart and minde dwell with vs: in other things like the Batauians; ſauing that by reaſon of their ſoile and aire, they are more forward and ſtout. I will not accompt them among the people of Germanie, albeit they are planted beyond Rhene, and the Danube, of whoſe land the tenth is raiſed. The lewdeſt of all the Gallois, and whom neede hath driuen to venture, haue poſſeſſed that countrey as doubtfully holden. Not long after, hauing inlarged their bounds, and placed fortreſſes farther, they are within the compaſſe of the Empire, and are a part of the prouince. Beyond theſe, the Cattians begin from the Hercynian forreſt, but haue not ſo wide & mariſh a countrey, as the other cities in which Germanie doth open and ſpread itſelfe: for the hils are one by another, and continue a certaine ſpace, and then by little and little waxe thinner: and the Hercynian forreſt doth containe the Catti, and is the bounds of their territorie. They are a people hardned to labour, well ſet, ſterne countenanced, and of greater courage. As Germans go, they are ſenſible wiſe men, and conſiderate: they preferre choiſe men, harken to their leaders, know their ranks, know where aduantages are, bridle their heate, diſpoſe of the day to their benefit, intrench in the night, hold fortune among things doubtfull, and eſteeme of valour as of certaintie: and which is moſt rare, and vnderſtood only by diſcipline, they repoſe more aſſurance in their leader, then in the armie. All their ſtrength conſiſteth in footemen, whom beſides their armes they loade with yron tooles and prouiſion. Thou maiſt ſee others go to skirmiſh: but the Catti march to warre. They ſeldome skirmiſh, or fight at aduenture. Their horſemen are of this propertie, that they either quickly win the victorie, or yeeld. Suddennes is neere vnto feare; lingering draweth neerer conſtancie. And that which is

ſeldome vſed among other people of Germanie, through their boldnes and hardines it is growen to a cōmon conſent among the Catteans: that is, when they come to ripe yeeres, they ſuffer their haire and beard to grow at length; and neuer put off that vowed ornament of the face, and as it were a bond of vertue, vntill they haue killed an enemie. Vpon bloud and ſpoile, they vncouer their forehead, and ſay, they haue paied back the price of their birth; and thinke themſelues worthie of their countrey and parents: the cowardly and vnwarlike remaine in their ilfauourednes. Beſides this, euery man as he is moſt valiant, weareth an yron ring (an ignominious thing to that people) as it were a bond, vntill they rid themſelues of it, by killing an enemie. This qualitie pleaſeth many of the Catteans. And then they grow graye, reſpected of their owne people and enemies: theſe begin euery battell: theſe make alwayes the firſt ranke; ſtrange to behold: for in time of peace, they are altogether as fierce in countenance. There is not one of them that hath a houſe, or liuing, or care of any thing. As they come to euery mans houſe they are maintained: prodigall of other mens; and contemners of their owne: vntill through feeble old age, they are no longer able to indure ſo hard a labour.
            
            
               
                  V. Of the Tencterians, Chamauians, and Friſians.
               NExt vnto the Catti, the Vſipij and Tencteri do inhabit the Rhene, running in a certaine channell, and which may ſuffice for a bound. The Tencteri beſides their auncient renowne of warres, excell the reſt in ſeruice of horſe: and the Catteans deſerue no greater commendation for footemen, then the Tencterians for horſemen. So did their predeceſſors ordaine it, and ſucceſſors follow it. Theſe are the childrens paſtimes; this the emulation betwixtyong men; and old men continue the ſame; and horſes are deliuered, as rights of inheritance among the familie: and the ſonnes receiue them, though not the eldeſt, but he who is moſt couragious, and likelieſt to make a marſhall man. Hard by the Tencteri, in times paſt the Bructeri did inhabit; but now it is reported that the Chamauians, and Angriuarians, are entred into that countrey, and wholie rooted out and chaſed the Bructerians, by agreement of nations adioyning: either as hating them for their pride, or for ſweetnes of pray, or ſome fauor of the gods towards vs; as not denying vs the ſpectacle of the battel, wherein there were ſlaine threeſcore thouſand, not by the Roman armes and weapons: but, which is more glorious, to ſhew vs paſtime, and pleaſe our eye. I wiſh that if thoſe people cannot loue vs, that they would hate one another, ſeeing that the ſtate of the Empire fatally declining, fortune can do vs no greater fauor, then ſowe ſedition among the enemies. The Angriuarians and Chamauians, haue behinde them the Dulgibini and Chaſuari, and other nations not greatly ſpoken of; and before them the Friſians. The Friſians are called great or ſmall, according to their ſtrength: the Rhene bordering both vnto the Ocean, and beſides that, do comprehend huge and ſpacious lakes, which the Roman nauie hath paſt: yea and the Ocean itſelfe we haue entred into and tried on that ſide. And the fame goeth, that Hercules pillers are yet there to be ſeene; either becauſe Hercules went ſo farre, or elſe becauſe by common conſent all that is any where magnificall, is attributed to his renowme. Druſus Germanicus wanted not courage: but the Ocean hindered vs for being ouer inquiſitiue of him or Hercules. After that, no man aſſayed to do it, as being an act of greater deuotion and reuerence, to beleeue the actions of the gods, rather then know them. Hitherto we haue ſeene the Weſt part of Germanie: towards the North it goeth bowing with a great compas. And firſt

of all the people of the Chauceans, although they begin at the Friſians, and poſſeſſe part of the ſhore, coaſt all thoſe nations I haue made mention of, vntill they wind into the Catti; and ſo ſpacious and huge countrey the Chauci do not only hold, but fill likewiſe: of all the German nation the nobleſt; and deſirous to maintaine their greatnes by iuſtice: without couetouſnes or vnbrideled luſt, quiet and retired; ſtirre vp no warres, neuer waſte, ſpoile, nor rob. And which is a ſpeciall marke of their valour and ſtrength, they got not their ſuperioritie ouer others by any wrongs offered. Yet they are all readie for warre, and if occaſion require to make an armie, wanting neither horſe nor men: and although they lie quiet, yet their reputation is neuer the leſſer. On the ſide of the Chauci and Catti, the Cheruſci haue nouriſhed long, beeing neuer prouoked, an idle and lazie peace: which was more ſweet than ſafe vnto them, bicauſe there is no ſure peace betweene ſtirring and ſtrong people. For when the matter is come to hand-ſtrokes, modeſtie and good dealing be termes which belong to ſuperiors. So the Cheruſci in times paſt good and iuſt, are now called cowards and fooles: and the fortune of the Catti being fauourable, is cauſe that they are counted wiſe. The Foſi, a people bordering vpon the Cheruſci, are touched with their ruine, companions in their aduerſitie, though in proſperitie they were inferiour vnto them. Neere vnto the ſame coaſt of the Ocean, the Cimbrians inhabite; now a ſmall people, but highly renowned: hauing yet remaining certaine markes of their old glotie; to wit, on both the bankes, trenches and lodges: by the circuit of which, thou maiſt yet meaſure the greatnes and ſtrength of that nation, and beleeue the number of ſo great an armie. It was ſixe hundred and fortie yeeres after the foundation of our citie, before the Cimbrians armes were heard of, when Caecilius Metellus, and Papirius Carbo were Conſuls. From that time, vnto the ſecond time that the Emperor Traian was Conſull, by iuſt account, are two hundred and ten yeeres: and ſo many yeeres we were a conquering Germanie. In the middle time, there were many loſſes on both parts. Not the Samnites, not the Carthagineans, not the Spaniards, or the Gallois; no, not the Parthian haue ſo often troubled vs: the libertie of the Germans being more earneſt, than the kingdome of the Arſacides. For what can the Eaſt obiect againſt vs, ſauing the death of Craſſus, when he had defeated Pacorus, before troden downe by Ventidius? But the Germans, hauing either ſlaine or taken Carbo and Caſsius, and Scaurus Aurelius, and Seruilius Cepio, and M. Manlius, haue defeated alſo fiue Conſularie armies, and Varus with three legions in Caeſars time: neither haue C. Marius in Italie, or Iulius in Gallia, Druſus, and Nero, and Germanicus, moleſted them in their houſes without blowes. After that C. Caeſars great threatnings were turned to a ieſt. Then there was quietnes, vntill our ciuill warres gaue them occaſion, when they had taken the ſtanding campes of the legions, to haue a deſire to enter Gallia: from whence being againe driuen out, in late times, they haue beene rather triumphed ouer then vanquiſhed.
            
            
               
                  VI. The Sueuians and other people.
               NOw we will ſpeake of the Sueui, which are not one nation as the Catti and Tencteri: and poſſeſſing the greater part of Germanie, and ſeuered by peculiar names and countries: although by one generall name they be called Sueui: whoſe marke is to curle their haire and tie it on knots. By that the Sueuian is diſtinguiſhed from the other Germans: and the free borne Sueuian from the bond man. That in other countries is vſed alſo but ſeldome times, either for affinitie

with the Sueuians; or as it often happeneth by imitation, and whileſt they be yoong: but the Sueuians euen vntill they be old and gray, haue their haire ſtanding an end, and often tie it on the crown only: princes weare it after a finer faſhion. That is the harmeleſſe care they haue of their beautie. For they vſe it not, either to winne loue, or be beloued: but turne it vp to a certaine height, to ſeeme to the enimie more terrible, when they go thus trimmed to the warre. The Semnones ſay, they are the moſt auncient of the Sueuians, and the moſt noble. The credit of their antiquitie they confirme with this ceremonie. At certaine times, all of one blood meet by their deputies in a wood, reputed holy by the auguration of their forefathers, and auncient reuerence; where publickly killing a man, they celebrate the barbarous beginnings of their ceremonie. Yet there is another reaſon why the wood is had in reuerence. No man entereth into it, but bound with ſomewhat as an inferiour perſon, and acknowledging the power of the god. If he fall by chaunce; it is not lawfull for him to riſe, or get vp: but is rowled out: all their ſuperſtition tending to this that from thence the nation had his beginning: that there dwelleth the God, ruler of all others; and vnto whom all other things are ſubiect and obedient. The fortune of the Semnones giueth this authoritie: their countrey is inhabited by an hundred villages: and by their great bodie, they take themſelues to be the head of the Sueuians. Contrarily, the Longobards are renowned, by reaſon their number is ſo ſmall: that being hemmed in with many, verie puiſſant nations; yet maintaine themſelues, not by doing any dutie to any but by warres and dangers. After them the Reudigni, and Auiones, and Angli, and Varini, and Eudoſes, and Suardones, and Nuithones, are defended by riuers or woods: hauing no notable thing particular in any; ſauing that generally they adore Herthum, that is, the mother-earth, whom they beleeue to be preſent at mens affaires. There is a wood called Caſtum in an Iland of the Ocean, and a chariot dedicated in it, couered with apparell, which one Prieſt onely may lawfully touch. He knoweth that the goddeſſe is in ſome ſecret part of the houſe, and followeth her with great reuerence as ſhe is lead by Kowes: and make thoſe holy daies & places of ioy which ſhe vouchſafeth to honor with hir preſence. Warre they make none, nor put on any armour, nor ſhew any weapon: but peace and quietnes is onely knowen and loued: vntill the ſame prieſt, bring backe the goddeſſe to her Temple, filled with the conuerſation of mortall men. Then the chariot and the apparell, if you will beleeue it, the diuinitie itſelfe is waſhed in ſome ſecret lake: bond men miniſter vnto her, which the ſame lake doth incontinently ſwallow vp. Whereof ariſeth a ſecret terror, and an holy ignorance, what that ſhould be, which they onely ſee which are a periſhing. And this part of Sueuia, reacheth far within the country of Germanie: the neerer (that I may deſcribe that part which lyeth by Danub, as I haue done that which lyeth along the Rhene) is the citie of the Hermunduri, faithfull to the Romans: and therefore of all the Germans trafficke, not onely vpon the banke of Rhene, but euen within the hart of the countrey, and in the moſt famous colonie of the Prouince Rhaetia. Theſe goe all ouer without a guard: and whereas we ſhew other nations, ſomtimes our armes, ſometimes our campe; to theſe we lay open our houſes, and villages, as people not deſiring them. In the countrey of the Hermunduri, the riuer Albis hath his beginning, in times paſt a famous riuer and well knowen; but now onely heard of. Neere vnto the Hermundurians dwell the Nariſci, the Marcomani, and Quadi. The greateſt renowne and ſtrength that the Marcomans haue, is in that they got their dwellings by valour and driuing out in times paſt the Boiens. Neither do the Nariſci, and the Quadi degenerate. And that is as it were the frontier of Germanie, on

that ſide which the Danube borders. The Marcomani and the Quadi, had euen vntill times of our memorie, Kings of their owne nation, of the noble ſtocke of the Marobodui, and Tudri: but now they ſuffer ſtrangers; which haue their ſtrength and power, by the authoritie of the Romans: and ſeldome vſe our armes, but are often helpt with our money. Neither are the Marſigni, Gothini, Oſi, Burij, which are behinde the Marcomani and Quadi, of leſſer valour: among which the Marſigni, and Burij, reſemble the Sueuians in ſpeech and attire. The Gallican toong doth conuince the Gothinos, and the Pannonicall the Oſos, not to be Germans: and that they endure to paie tribute; part of the tribute the Sarmates, part the Quadi charge them with, as ſtrangers. The Gothini, the more to their ſhame, dig for mines of iron: and all theſe people inhabite ſmall ſtore of plaine ground, but wood-landes, and hill tops. Sueuia is deuided by a continuall ridge of hils, beyond which dwell many nations: amongſt which, the name of the Lygians is fartheſt ſpread into many cities. It will ſuffice to reckon the ſtrongeſt, as the Arios, Helueconas, Maninos, Elyſios, Naharualos. Among the Naharualians there is a wood long agone conſecrated to religion, ouer which a Prieſt apparelled in womans attire is ſuperintendent: but the Romans interpret them to be the goddes Castor and Pollux. The name of the god is Alcis. Images there are none, nor ſigne of ſtrange ſuperſtition: yet they are reuerenced as brothers, and two yong men. But the Arij beſides their ſtrength, wherein they go beyond the other people I haue made mention of, fell and cruell, do ſet forth their naturall fiercenes with arte, & time: for they vſe black targets, and die their bodies with the ſame colour, and chooſe the darkeſt nights to fight in, ſtriking a terror with the ſhadow of ſo deadly an armie, into the enemies; none of them able to indure ſo ſtrange and as it were helliſh ſight, the eyes being firſt ouercome in all battels. Beyond the Lygians the Gothones liue vnder Kings in a more ſeuere gouernment then the other people of Germanie, and not in full libertie. Then from the Ocean follow the Rugij, & Lemouij, all of them bearing for their marke round bucklers, and ſhort ſwords, and liuing vnder the ſubiection of Kings. After thoſe are the cities of the Suionians, ſcituated in the Ocean; beſides men and armor, ſtrong in ſhipping; which in making differ from other veſſels, in that both ends are foreparts, readie to land at each end, without ſaile, or oares in a ranke in the ſides, but the mariners are at libertie readie to change hither and thither, as occaſion ſerueth, as in ſome other riuers. Thoſe people eſteeme of riches: and therefore one hath amongſt them abſolute rule and gouernmēt, and not at the will of the ſubiect. They are not all licenſed to weare weapons as in other parts of Germanie, but their weapons are ſhut vp vnder a keeper, and that a ſlaue, becauſe the enemie can make no ſudden incurſion againſt them, by reaſon of the Ocean. If the ſouldiers be idle and at reſt, they eaſily grow inſolent: and in deede it is not for the Kings profit to commit the charge of armor to noblemen, or free borne, or freed men. Beyond the Suionas, there is another ſea ſo ſlow and almoſt immoueable, that many thinke it to be the bounds which compaſſe in the whole worlde, becauſe that the Sunne continueth ſo cleare and bright from his ſetting till the riſing, that it darkneth the ſtarres. And ſome are further perſwaded, that the ſound of him is hard as he riſeth out of the ſea: and many ſhapes of gods ſeene, and the beames of his head. So farre the fame is true, and that there was the end of nature and the world. Now on the right ſhore of the Sweuian ſea the Aeſtyans inhabit, whoſe maner of life is like the Sweuians, but their language more like the Britains language. They adore the mother of the goddes: for a skutchion of their ſuperſtition, they carry the pictures of wilde Boares. That ſerueth them for all weapons and all defence, and aſſureth all

thoſe which worſhip that goddeſſe, euen amongſt the enimies. They haue ſmall vſe of iron, but great, of clubs. They ſowe corne and plant fruits, more painefully, than ordinarily the ſlothfull German is accuſtomed to do. They ſearch out what the ſea will yeeld: and onely amongſt all, gather on the flattes, and on the very ſhore Roſin or Amber., which they call Gleſum. Yet they haue not ſought out (ſo barbarous they are) what is the nature of it, or by what meanes it is ingendred. Yea a long time i
                     •
                   lay as nought worth, like other purgings of the ſea, vntill our wantonnes gaue it a name. They haue no vſe of it themſelues: but gather it foule & filthie; & ſo bring it, and maruell at the price we giue for it. But it is the iuice of trees: for there ſhine in them ſome birdes or foule, which wrapped in the humor, and afterwards waxt hard, are ſo ſhut in it. And as in the ſecret places of the Eaſt, there are fertill woods and forreſts, which ſweat Frankinſence and Balmes: ſo may I beleeue that in the Ilands of the Weſt, there are others, which being neere to the ſunne beames, yeeld an humor, which melted runneth into the next ſea, and by force of tempeſt is carried to the oppoſite ſhore. If by fire thou wilt make proofe what the nature of Amber is, it will burne like vnto wood pitched and roſened: and nouriſheth a fat and ſtrong ſauoring fire: then waxeth pliant and clammie like Roſin or Pitch. Hard by the Suionians, be the Sitones: alike in all things, ſauing one, which is, that a woman is their ruler: ſo far they degenerat, not onely from libertie, but alſo from bondage: and there is the end of Sueuia. I am in doubt, whether I ſhould reckon the Peucinians, Venedians, and Fennians, among the Germans, or Sarmates: although the Peucinians, which ſome call Baſtarnas, reſemble the Germans in language, behauiour, houſing, & dwelling: but all are generally, ſlouenly and lazie: and the noblemen allied by marriage with the Sarmates, are ſomewhat transformed into their vſage: and the Venedians haue learned many of their faſhions alſo. For they ſcowre and rob all the hils & woods which lie betweene the Peucinians and Fennians. Yet theſe may rather be accounted Germans; bicauſe they build houſes, carrie targets, and are good footmen. None of which the Sarmates do vſe, but alwaies ride in chariot, or on horſeback. The Fennians are verie barbarous & beggerly: hauing neither armes, horſes, nor houſes; no food but herbs; no apparell but leather pelts; no bedding but the ground: hauing all their hope in their arrowes, which for want of iron, they head with bones. Man and woman liueth by the ſame hunting: for the women follow, and aske for part of the pray. Yoong children haue no other ſuccour againſt wild beaſts, and hard weather, but ſome couerture made of boughes: that is the lodging of yoong and old. That they thinke to be more glorious and magnificall, than toile in manuring the earth; and trouble themſelues in building; and turmoile betwixt hope and feare, about their owne and other mens goods. Thus ſecure againſt men and gods, they haue woon this hard point, that they neede make no vowes at all. The reſt is fabulous, as that the Helluſij, and Oxionae, haue the viſage and countenance of men, but the bodies and members of beaſts: which I leaue as a thing to me vnknowen.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   