
      
         
            
            
            A
Myrror for Martinists,
And all other Schismatiques, which
in these dangerous daies doe breake the godlie
vnitie, and disturbe the Christian
peace of the Church.
            Published by T. T.
            
            
               
                  Math. 4. 24. 
               Take heed what ye heare.
            
            LONDON
Printed by Iohn VVolfe. 1590.
         
         
            
            
            The Preface.
            
               THE Apostle Paul exhorting euerie
Christian to take vnto him vniuersam
illam 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,Ephes. 6. 13. that same compleat
armour of a godly man, willeth him
to girde himselfe with the girdle of
truth. This truth seemeth to haue
great affinitie with mans nature, because
wee are made after Gods owne
image, (who is truth it selfe) that wee might expresse the
same in our life, in our words, and in our maners. But by
reason of original sinne, we all haue made shipwracke of
the truth, & euerie man is become a liar. Yet, what man
is he so vnregenerate, that in open shew seemeth not to
like and loue truth? Doe not the greatest liers and most
false accusers pretend truth? Celsus and Antiphon, two
heretiques, called their bookes, Bookes of truth. The
false Prophets which deceiued Achab, made a great brag
of truth. The deuill (who can transforme himselfe into an
Angel of light) when he tempted Christ, had in his mouth
the infallible truth of Gods word. But Prosper sayth very
well, Parum est, si verum in ore est, et falsum in corde. And an
other father to the same purpose saith: Nihil prodest, quia
hymnum cantat lingua tua si sacrilegium exhalat vita tua. It
is a verie vile thing to haue truth in the mouth, and falshood
in the heart. A theefe many times is not knowen
by his face from a true man. Experience proueth, that as
poisoning hearbes do grow greene as well as the wholesome:
And as counterfait golde looketh to the eie so
faire as good coine: so doth falsehoode appeare oftentimes
like the truth, yea to some, more plausible and acceptable.
For art and science, which should serue for the
truth, are by the subteltie of sathan verie often retayned
against the same.
            
               The wisest creature among beasts (the serpent I meane)
was by the deuil abused to set forth lies, to the seducing
of the first man. And do we not see that the same deuill
imploieth still art, learning, ripe wittes, and other good
gifts which God hath giuen vnto men, against the truth?
to wit, such as are in the Papists, Heretiques, Brownists,
the familie of Loue, Martinistes, and all Schismatiques,
which neuer cease peruerting the truth? It were to be wished
that the lips of these men might be continually sealed,
as was the mouth of the image Angerona, the Goddes
of silence. For better it were for them to be dumbe
images of a vaine Goddesse, then the clattering false spirites
of sathan.
            The hurt that may come vnto thee (Christian Reader)
by the poison of these vipers, if it do but touch thee, for
Sub melle latet venenum, vnder the greene grasse lieth a serpent,
and falsehood is couloured with truth, hath made
me carefull for thy good, to publish this small treatise.
Therefore such as it is, take it well in worth, and forget
not this caueat of our sauiour Christ, saying: Take heede
what ye heare.
               Marke. 4. 24.
            
            
               Vlterius ne tende odijs.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A Myrror for Martinists.
            
               WHen I call to minde the graue sentence of
our sauiour Christ,Math. 11. 19. 
               Wisedome is iustified
of her children, and doe beholde the
miserable contentions with which the
Church of England at this day is so vexed
and turmoiled by the children of follie,
I cannot but on the one side condemne
the late Martine libellers, and their fauorites,
who hauing a bad cause, do as leudly handle the same: and
on the other side mislike some repliers, who notwithstanding
they haue chosen the better part, yet handle it not so charitably
and modestly as it requireth. And albeit the first scandale commeth
by those foolish workers of iniquitie, yet Angerona the
Goddes of silence, might better haue answered them, then men
of vncircumcised lips, whose euill wordes corrupt good manners:
for wisedome will not in such sort be iustified of her children.Wisdome. 1. 6
She is louing (saith Salomon) and will not absolue him
that blasphemeth with his lips: nay, she will bring to passe,Verse. 8.
that the iudgement of reproch shall not suffer him to escape.
            
            These things considered, I haue thought good to tender this
Myrror, to take from the face manifest spots: wishing as hartely
that the Church might be as frée from those Martine Libellers,
as they séeme to wish it to bee without all manner of
blemishes and imperfections.Cant. 6. 8 But although the Church of
Christ for her simplicitie is called a doue:Isai. 5. 1 for her fruitfulnes, a
vine: for her beautie, a rose:Psal. 125. 1 for her strength, mount Sion:
               Isai 46. 13 and
for her holines,Cant. 2. 1 a Priesthood: yet is it not so pure and simple,
(so long as it is vppon earth) but that it fostereth foxes and
wolues:1. Pet. 2. 9 not so fruitfull, but it hath thornes and thistles: not so
strong, but the tyrants of the worlde doe sometime assaile and

shake the same: neither is it so holy, but that prophane and
wicked men séeme to haue place therein. Our sauiour Christ
sayd,Mat. 13. 47. that the kingdome of heauen (which is the Church (hath
in it fishes good and bad:Mat. 25. 1 virgins, wise and foolishe:Mat. 13. 24. cockle and
wheate: & yet these are not of the substance, but as it were the
dregs and excrements thereof. The bodie of Christ is liuely,
neither hath it anie dead members: and therefore Saint Iohn
speaking of false Apostles sayth,1. Iohn. 2. 19 
               They went out from vs, because
they were not of vs: for if they had ben of vs, they
had surely tarried with vs.
            
            Assuredly the wicked are conuersant in the Church no otherwise
(saith Saint Augustine) then are corrupt and naughtie
humours in a mans bodie: for euen as those trouble & corrupt
the health: so these vexe and disquiet the Church, and are
loathsome vnto Christ himselfe, insomuch that he spueth them
out of his mouth, and will saie vnto them in that great daie,Apoc. 3. 15.
               Depart from me, ye workers of iniquitie.
            
            They then are too péeuish and wayward,Math 7. 23. which at this day
doe faine and imagine to themselues a Church so reformed
héere in earth, as they will haue nothing out of square in the
same: & doe looke for that here, which is no where to be found
but in heauen. And if they finde not the Church according to
their conceit, they incontinent forsake the same and make a
scisme. Which to the Church (according to Cyprians opinion)
is more permitious than idolatrie. For hee sayth, that heresie
and schisme succéeded in the place and selfe same degrée that idolatrie
had afore time.Cyprian lib. de vnitate Ecclesiae. 
               Christi aduentu prostratus inimicus vides
idola derelicta, &c. The enimie Sathan being ouerthrowen
by the comming of Christ, séeing idols forsaken, and his
sees and temples to be left desart, by reason of the great multitude
of faithfull people, deuised a new subtiltie vnder the verie
title and name of Christianity, to deceiue the vnwary: he found
out (I saie) heresies and schismes, wherby he might ouerthrow
faith, corrupt the truth, & diuide the vnitie of Christs Church.
This title and name of Christianitie, whereof Cyprian speaketh,
is that cloke of schismatiques, by which they would séeme
holy and good to the detriment of the godlie.
            Schisme (according to Saint Augustines opinion) springeth

from a certaine hatred amongst brethren. Many causes hereof
are rehearsed by the fathers of the Primitiue Church: but they
all agrée that there be foure especiall meanes to hatch them,The causes of Schisme. all
which foure haue a soueraigne supremacie, and a supreame soueraigntie
in this latter age of the worlde. The first they set
down, is the contempt of Bishops,Ierom. in Epist. ad Euagrium. to whom (as Ierome saith)
euer since Saint Markes time, the gouernment of the Church
belonged: In hoc omnes sunt docti, &c. By so much bee they
nowe accounted better learned, by howe much they can whet
their tongues sharper, and shoote out more poisoned arrowes
euen bitter wordes against them. The second is, ambition, or
as some thinke, enuie at the preferment of others: This caused
of olde Arrius, Donatus, and Nouatius to straine theyr
braines, to finde out their monstrous assertions, & being found,
to teach and preach them openly: neither shall the sectaries of
our daies, euer cléere themselues from this suspition. The third
cause is, false loue. All men desire to bee commended for theyr
skill. They thinke nothing to be truly sayd, or well done, but
that which they themselues doe. The fourth is, couetonsnesse,
this caused Balaam to curse Gods people: and Simon Magus
to desire the giftes of the holy Ghost:Theodoret. li. 2. Fab. and hope of gaine is said
to be it, that caused Paulus Samosatenus to fall into his
damnable opinions.
            This contagion hath so spread it selfe like a canker through
the veines and hearts of the world at this daie, that there is almost
no hope of anie recouerie. In respect whereof it cannot
be sayd, as it was of Iay rouse daughter, that it is euen nowe
dead: but as they sayd of Lazarus, that it alreadie stinketh.
            These causes considered,A definition of Schisme. it may easily be séene what schisme
is, namely, a separation of a congregation, either through hatred
and contempt of Bishoppes, ambition, selfe-loue, or couetousnes,
by which there ariseth a diuersitie either of minde, or
opinion, or spéeches, or election of gouernours, whether ecclesiasticall
or ciuill, which things doe both bréede and increase that
hatred, contempt, &c.
            Howbeit all Schisme is not to be condemned. For there is
a separation which we may iustly allow & commend,A distinction of Schisme. as when
certaine partes separate themselues from the whole, because

they will not be corrupted and infected with vngodlynes. In
this respect Abraham is commended, because he forsooke Caldea
his natiue Countrie: Lot, Sodome: and Iohn Baptist
was no Schismatique, though he departed from the Leuitical
Priesthood, himselfe being of the same Tribe: Paul departing
from the Scribes and Pharesies: the Gentiles conuerted from
the Iewes: and we,Math. 10. 34 from the Church of Rome: For Christ
came not to send peace, but a sworde, and to seuere men from
their owne household.
            But if the body it selfe being good, and some members being
putrified and defiled are departed awaie,A most detestable schisme. such a schisme is most
detestable: both because the Church séeing it is a bodie of diuerse
partes, when it is diuided, is after a sort ruined: and also
because the parts thereof being distracted and torne a sunder,
doe perish, forsomuch as they do fall from eternall life.
            They that separate themselues in this kinde of Schisme,
what other thing do they but rip vp ye seamlesse coat of Christ,
and breake the limites he hath set, by disquieting the peace of
his Church, casting innummerable bones of debate, to set men
together by the eares, so destroying their owne soules, and so
much as in them lyeth, the whole Church, vnles Christ vouchsafe
his mercie, to restore and preserue the same. Here a question
may be asked, why God doth suffer his Church to be troubled
and turmoiled by Schismes, innouations, and fantasticall
deuices (of the which greate learned men are many times the
authors) in such wise, that not onely affinities, kindreds, friendships,
and whole families are subuerted, as if Bellona or the furies
were among them: but also Cities, Prouinces, and kingdomes
brought thereby to vtter desolation.
            Moses the man of God answereth this question thus, If
there arise among you a prophet or a dreamer of dremes,Deut. 13
(and giue thee a signe or a wonder, and the signe or the
wōder which he hath told thee come to passe) saying, Let
vs goe after other Gods which thou hast not knowen, &
let vs serue them: Thou shalt not hearken to the wordes
of that Prophet, or dreamer of dreames: for the Lorde
your God proueth you, to knowe whether yee loue the
Lord your God with all your heart, & with all your soule.

               The cause then we sée is as cléere as the light, why the diuine
prouidence sometime suffereth certain teachers in the Church-learned
men,
               False teachers a temptation. 
               to preach and maintain new opinions (sayth Moses)
That the Lord your God might trie or proue you. And
in verie déede this is a sore temptation, that hee whome thou
iudgest to be a Prophet, a disciple of the Prophets, whom thou
reputest to be a Doctor and teacher of the truth, whome thou
doest reuerence and greatly loue, that he (I saie) should sodainly
and couertly sowe hurtfull errours, which thou canst not
quickly find out, nor easily condemne.
            
            To make this place of Moses more manifest, I will set before
thée some Ecclesiasticall examples.
            When that vnhappie Nestorius was turned from a shéepe
to a woulfe, how grieuously did he then teare & spoile the flock
of Christ: when as they themselues were bitten of him, which
for the most part as yet tooke him for a shéepe, and therfore laie
more open to be deuoured of him. For who wold haue thought
yt he could easily haue erred, which was elected to be Bishop of
Constantinople by a generall consent of learned men, who
was beloued of the best, and reuerenced of all men: who dailie
handled Gods word, and confuted the pernitious errours both
of the Iewes and also of the Gentiles? Who would not haue
beléeued,
                  Nestorius held that Marie was the mother of Christ, but not the mother of God: making two Christs. that this man did teach and preache nothing but the
truth, & that he had bin of a sound iudgement? But he to make
a waie for his owne heresie (denying the diuinitie of Christ) inueighed
against the blasphemies of all heresies. And this is that
which Moses sayd, The Lorde your God doth proue you
whether ye loue him or not. Many things are reported by
Zozomenus in his Ecclesiasticall storie of the wickednesse of
this Nestorius, where amongst other things he setteth foorth
the wonderfull and terrible iudgement of God vpon this heretique,
whose tongue, with the which he had blasphemed Christ,
was immediatly after his death, found eaten & consumed from
within his mouth with wormes.
            But to leaue Nestorius, in whom there was more cause of
wonder then matter of profite, more fame then desert: who
was for a time more fauoured of the cōmon multitude (whom
he sought to please) then beloued of God. I will set before you

those of more deserued fame and learning, and thereby a greater
temptation to good men. Among which, Photinus is to bée
remēbred,
                  Photinus denied the Godhead of Christ who not long after that he was called to the Church
of Syrmitana by a general consent, shewed himselfe soone after
rather a tempter then a teacher, insomuch, that sodainly lyke
that euill Prophet, or dreamer of dreames, of whome Moses
speaketh, he began to persuade the people committed vnto him
to followe strange Gods, that is to say, strange errours, which
before they had not knowen: to bring which wickednesse to
passe, he had great helpes, as a singular wit, profound learning
and persuasible eloquence: insomuch that he could speake copiously
with delight, and dispute and write subtilly and sententiouslie
with commendation: as plainly appeared by his bookes
which he wrote in Gréeke and Latine. But happily it befell,
that the shéepe of Christ committed vnto him, hauing a vigilant
eie and carefull regard vnto their faith, soone remembred
the forewarning of Moses: and although they had in admiration
the learning and eloquence of their pastour and prophet,
yet were they not ignorant of the temptation. For him whom
afore they followed as the bel-weather of the flocke, the same
now they began to shunne and flie from as a most dangerous
woulfe.
            As we are warned by this example of Photinus, so also are
we taught by another of Appollinar, to beware of the danger
of this Ecclesiastical temptation, and to take diligent héed that
we kéepe the faith. This Appollinar was also a man of great
learning,
                  Apollinor held that Christ had no humane soule: & that he tooke no flesh of the virgin Marie, but brought it from heauē, &c as appeareth by those thirtie bookes which he wrote
against Porphyrius: and as he was learned, so also he séemed
zealous in ouerthrowing many heresies, and confuting such errours
as were contrarie to the faith. It were too tedious to
make report of all his workes, by which he might séeme equall
to the greatest builders of the Church. But sée the mallice of
sathan. This man through a certaine prophane desire of hereticall
curiositie, began to be new-fangled, and so as it were by
the contagion of a leprosie, he defiled and corrupted all his labours,
whereby his doctrine in the end shewed it selfe to be rather
an Ecclesiasticall temptation, than a building of the
Church.
            
               But of all the most dangerous tempters of olde time, none
may be compared to Origen, in whom many things were singular,
many excellent, and many wonderfull: to speak of whose
condigne praises, in respect of the mans rare gifts, a whole daie
will scarse suffice: all which notwithstanding did not make so
much for the glorie of religion, as they do set forth the greatnes
of the temptation. For what man is he, that rather than hée
would cast off one endued with such a wit, so profound in learning
in all science, such swéete eloquence, so holy a life, and with
so great grace, will not vse this sentence, that hee had rather to
erre with Origen, then with others to be of a true and sounde
iudgement. And yet for all this, no common, but a perillous
temptation by him (as the end shewed) carried many from the
integritie of faith: insomuch that the selfe same Origen, insolently
abusing the grace of God, trusting too much to his wit,
and standing too fast in his owne conceit, made smal account of
Christian religion, thought himself more wise then others, contemned
the ancient rites of the Church, and interpreted some
places of Scripture after a new and strange sense, giuing iust
occasion to Moses, to speak vnto the Church of Christ concerning
him, Thou shalt not heare the voice of that Prophet,
because the Lorde your God proueth you, whether yee
loue him or no.
            
            But what néede wée séeke examples so farre of, when as at
home daily we haue too many of these before our eies, of such
men as are indued with competent learning and other good
giftes, and hauing once begun well in the race of discretion, to
run a good course, and like good builders, to lay a good foundation
to reare vp the Church of Christ by the preaching of the
Gospel, are now at the last lyke those foolish builders of Babel,
confounded in their worke, building by presumption a tower of
fonde conceit to themselues, and are by the iust plague of God
so diuided therein, that some are Anabaptisticall Brownists,
some libertine Family-louists, and some (beside other sectes)
malecontent Martinists, birdes hatcht of an euill egge, a generation
of vipers, that can finde no life but by the destruction
of their mother, to too gréedie to séeke themselues & not Christ,
hauing no care to maintaine the peace of his Church, but contrariwise

séeke to disturbe the same: which preach not his Gospell
simply, but their selfe conceited deuises, which are infinite:
which masking kinde of hypocrites, haue their visors daily taken
from theyr faces, and the most godly wise do knowe them
perfectly, and can saie, that they are no better than those seducing
dreamers and false teachers, of whom Moses speaketh, by
which God vseth to trie vs, whether we loue him or not.
            Who therefore séeing these dangerous daies, doth not rather
wish with Ieremie to dwell in ye wildernes, that so they might
leaue the societie of sinfull men, and giue themselues onelie to
contemplation, that so also they might not sée the miseries like
to fall vpon vs.
            
               Polycarpus that holy martyr, scholler to Saint Iohn the
Euangelist, when he heard in his time but of a little discord, in
regard of that which at this daie raigneth both in Church and
common wealth, is reported to haue cried out, Deus bone, in
quae tempora me reseruasti vt haec audiam, Good God, vntill
what time hast thou kept & continued me, yt I shuld heare these
things? How much more iust occasion haue the godly of this
age, not onely to crie out with the heathen Oratour, O tempora,
ô mores: O times, O manners: but also with the Prophet
Isay, Heare O earth, and hearken O heauen, &c.
               Isai. 1
            
            The godly and faithfull of this most Christian Church of
England féeling and fearing the danger of Schisme, doe euery
where greatly complaine of the discorde among Ministers.
Such is the miserable corruption of this latter world, that
whereas calamities, troubles, and contentions do euery where
abound, and the dutie of the Ministers of the Church is, euen
as Fathers,The dutie of good ministers. chiefe men, and teachers, or rather as messengers
of peace in the house of God, to teach men plaine and simplie,
and instruct and confirme them in faith, to reproue sinne and
errours, to exhort vnto good workes, to comfort the afflicted, &
finally to stirre them vp both to peace, charitie and concord, to
amendement of life, and repentance from sinne: yet notwithstanding
many of them doe nothing lesse. And which is worse,
they themselues are the authors of schisme, and distracting of
the simple and ignorant multitude, vsing a contentious kinde
of teaching and quarrelling among themselues, that beeing ouerwhelmed

with these garboiles, they nothing regarde howe
they may (as cause requireth) prouide for the publique state, but
in stead thereof, vnder a great shew of holines and zeale, they
thrust into the house of God, before the whole congregation,
their contentious conceits & péeuish affections: and so by these
kinde of Sermons, the simple and silly people receiueth small
profit, being by these not instructed as they ought to be, in faith
confirmed, nor moued to repentance: but rather are troubled,
and made worse and disobedient. Whereby it commeth to passe
that they saie they cannot tell what to beléeue, nor to what
sound and true foundation to leane. And thus these Scismatiques
by their contentions (to vse Saint Ambrose wordes against
them) Quadam nuncapatiua fidei germanitate parricidialibus
gladijs homines cupiunt vulnerare.
               Ambr. de incarnat. Dom. cap. 2. With a certaine
brotherly affinitie or likenes of one faith, they couet to wound
men, as if one brother should drawe his sword against another.
Such false Apostles are craftie workers, transforming themselues
into the Apostles of Christ, and are excellently described
in the Apocalips, vnder the names of locusts, the formes wherof
were similes equis paratis in praelium,
               Apoc. 9. like horses redie to the
skirmish: that is to saie, hot and vehement, and they had vppon
their heads, as it were crownes, not crownes in déede, and like
to golde, but not golde: & their faces were as the faces of men,
that is, they séemed good and honest men: and they had hayre
like vnto womens haire,False Apostles described many faire shewes and resemblances,
and the noise of their wings, was like the noise of many
chariots and horses, but they had tayles like to Scorpions, and
their stings were in their tailes: that is to say, the end & effect of
all their labours, was to seduce men to euerlasting damnation.
            The state therefore of the Church in these our dayes, is like
a great houshold, wherein not onely the sonnes, daughters and
seruants are at continuall discord, & braule among themselues,
whereby it commeth to passe that none of them doth his dutie,
nor séeketh to vpholde the state of the house: but also the parents
themselues, which are chiefe of the house, and ought to
remoue those contentions, and put euery man in minde of his
dutie, are also at contention and strife together: and so hauing
respect onely to their owne contentions, they let the whole

house go to hauock, caring nothing at all whether it be gouerned
well or ill: yea by reason of these braules, they confirme the
troubled housholde in their conceiued wickednes, whereby at
last they altogether miserablie perish. For these vnhappie contentions
of the parents, are the chiefe meanes to vpholde the
cause of that heauie destruction of the whole housholde. This
is a verie fit reseblance of the Ministers of the Church of England
at this daie (I meane those that be faltie in this behalfe.)
For those which are not faultie, (as I hope through the grace
of God, the most are such) are not offended with this speach.
For the other doe grieuously offend, and no small parte of the
cause both of the corruptions of the present manners, and also
of the times doe rest in them. For whereas they ought by doctrine,
reprouing and exhorting grauely, to helpe the publique
state and preuent the worst, they doe not as they ought, imploy
their diligence herevnto,Contentious Ministers, but rather doe giue themselues to sow
sedition, then studie to follow their function: and so vnfruitfully
they continually wearie and offend the people, that many (the
more is to be lamented) do stubburnly persist and continue in
their incredulitie, and so repent not, to theyr owne destruction,
and at the last contemne both the Church and doctrine.
            But such as rather loue contentious inuectiues then quiet
preachings, and haue so vsed themselues thereunto, that they
can almost doe nothing els but contend, obiect to vs the saying
of Saint Paul,
               Tit. 1. 9 who commandeth a Bishoppe to holde fast that
faithfull word which tendeth vnto doctrine, that he may bée able
to exhort by wholesome instruction, and to confute such as
shall speake there-against.
            Truly I answere,Ministers must reproue errours. it is néedfull that euerie faithfull Minister
should stedfastly cleaue to wholsome doctrine, and earnestly
bend himselfe against that which is contrarie, and agaynst
such as peruert the same, so as hée may bée able with firme arguments
to confute their peruerse and false opinions, and so ouerthrowe
falshood before they can vtter it.
            This may be done stoutly,Modestie and mildnes of spirit becommeth Ministers. and yet modestly. And this graue
modestie is to be learned by the examples of the Apostles, who
although they had many enemies, yet notwithstanding did not
immodestly rage in any place of their writings and sermons against

a publike estate of the whole Church which themselues
had planted. The Apostle Paul, who would haue a Bishop to
holde fast true doctrine, and to resiste those that speake agaynst
the same, doth notablie speake of these things, charging thus,
The seruant of the Lord must not striue, but must be gentle
to all men:
               1. Tim. 2. 24. 
               apt to teach, suffering euill men patientlie,
instructing them with meeknes, that are contrarie minded,
prouoking, if God at anie time will giue them repentance,
that they may know he truth, &c. These precepts of
the Apostle are to be obserued by the Ministers of the worde,
in such wise, that they be not moued to immoderate heate and
rayling, whereby in déede they destroie more then they build.
            But (saie they) the euill manners of men must be restrained
by the straight discipline of the Primitiue Church, and religion
must be restored to that perfection, from which by the corruption
of times it is fallen, and this, say they, is the marke & ende
of all our labours.
            Let vs sée and consider this, haue these reformers taken in
hand to embrace méeknesse and humility?A comparison betweene the Apostles and our reformers Haue they cast from
them the bitter gall of hatred and cursed speaking? Haue they
crucified their fleshly desires? The Apostles, whose steps they
would séeme to followe, by their example exhorted the world to
humilitie, lowlynes, méeknesse and patience: these teach theyr
schollers pride, crueltie, scolding, and cursed speaking. The people
saie, they may not tarrie the leasure of the Magistrate in
reformation of religion: the present state is Antichristian. Againe,
they were all of one minde, disciples of one maister the
holy Ghost, they laboured to knit men together with the sure
bond of peace, and to fasten them with the gliewe of mutuall
loue: they praied to God for the health and wealth of them that
wronged them: being rayled on, they gaue not foule language
againe. Alas, the contrarie is true with them. Quot capita, tot
sensus. How many heads, so many opinions. Their shamefull
doings, do disproue their shamelesse sayings. They speake as if
they had in se nihil humanū, as if they had mortified al concupiscence
in their mortall bodies, as loosed from the bondage of sin,
as if God were the onely obiect of their thoughts, and the holie
Ghost their counsailour. Curios simulant, et Bacchanalia viuunt:
               
they doe outwardly pretend religion, and inwardly intend
subuersion: promise and proclaime that they will restore
ancient perfection, but they performe nothing but the idle conceites
of their owne fansies. What better argument can there
be of this, then their deadly hatred toward their brethren, their
daily contentions, their tanting & ribaldrie railings vpon theyr
superiours, and their Momish fault finding, wherein Saint
Augustine fitly compareth them vnto Iobs dogs, which licked
his sore partes onely. And Iustine Martyr compareth them
to flies, which doe euer gather about the diseased partes of anie
creature.
            Moreouer, many great Clarkes now a daies without anie
iust cause stirre vp grieuous contentions,Peruerters of good things. by mistaking and
peruerting the godly actions, and also the sound and wholsome
doctrine of reuerend Fathers and good men: and so by this
means those good Ministers which are giuen to peace, and had
rather applie themselues to teaching reformation of lyfe, and
edifying of the Church, are constrained by force to cease from
their function and labour (being a thing most néedful) and to applie
themselues for their defence against Brownists, Martinists,
and such other like pestilent Sectes and Schismatiques,
wherby it commeth to passe, that euen against their wils, they
are wrapped in contentions.
            But those that kindle these flames of discord, and by that
meanes prouoke other vnto schisme which are louers of peace,
doe greatly offend the maiestie of God. And those again on the
other side, are both before God and man to bee excused, which
stoutly and modestly withstand that viperous broode, and yet
so much as in them lieth, doe still prefer peace before Schisme.
            In the Primitiue Church of Christ, if there happened anie
sturre, or anie suspition of errour to arise, they sought the reformation
and quieting thereof farre otherwise, to wit, by admonition,
by friendly communication and brotherly conference:How schismes and errors in the Primitiue time of the Church were suppressed.
and when any manifest proofe of suspected opinion was euidently
shewed forth, they receiued the same, and quietly without
gainsaying yéelded themselues, as it may euidently appeare
in the reconciliation of Iohn the Bishop of Antioch, Theodoretus,
and others of the East, with Cirillus Alexandrinus.
               
And by this meanes they suffered not one braule to bréede of an
other: neither were their contentions endlesse, neither striued
they despitefully among themselues, but handled al things with
godly zeale vnto sound doctrine. But if anie had erred and persisted
obstinatly in his errour, then did they admonishe all men
to beware of him,Tit▪ 3. 10 and to auoide his companie, like as Saint
Paul both taught, and did also himselfe. And by this meanes all
things in the Church were in good state, and al contentions for
the most part were quieted. Also the ancient Fathers in all ages
did bend themselues against those which peruerted the godly
actions and sound doctrine of others,The ancient fathers were euer enemies to scismatikes and which went about
to stirre vp néedlesse contentions in the Church.
            And those which in the Primitiue Church professed one and
the same religion of Christ, could not easily bee stirred to contention
among thēselues, least they should giue occasion thereby
vnto their enemies the Philosophers, idolatrous Priestes,
and others of the subtill Gentiles and Heathen to reioyce, or
matter whereby they might be confirmed in their errors. But
they altogether gaue themselues vnto concorde,Concord. cutting off in
due time all occasions of discord, and ioyning their forces together
fought against the enemies of the Church: whereof Constantinus
magnus (that good Emperour) verie notablie admonished
the Bishops. But when they followed not his counsell,The mischiefe of discord.
but without all reconciliation stroue among themselues, there
arose héereof most lamentable miseries to the Church: as the
histories both of Arrius and Mahomet doe euidently proue.
            There arise also diuers discords and dissentions among the
Ministers of the Church:Singularitie. when some of them vse a proper and
peculiar forme and order which themselues haue deuised, both
of preaching, and also of other actions in religion, and woulde
binde others to the same, although they knowe that the whole
state being christian, hath otherwise decréed. And if peraduenture
their deuice be reiected, so that men do not conforme themselues
to their fantasticall conceits, by and by they iudge them
not onely enemies, but also crie out against them, and saie, that
they are Papists and seducers: being so contentious and péeuish,
that by no meanes they will bee satisfied, except that all
those things may bee receiued wherewith themselues are delighted.

But let them knowe, that where there is a Christian
Church once instituted and established,Order. all things ought to bee
done in ye same in due order: els why did Paul reproue some for
breaking customes of preaching,1. Cor. 11 of praying, of cutting of haire
&c. which order Anabaptists cannot abide, but woulde mingle
and confound all things by the subtill instigation of the deuill,Anabaptists hate order.
who misliketh not anie thing so much (especially in diuine
things) as a right and well ordered gouernment.
            As there is one God, one Faith, and one Baptisme: one
Christ, one holy Ghost, & one onely true religion: so is it néedfull
that all things be done according to one rule: els many, yea
infinite religions will rise, one contrarie to another, yea & contrarie
Churches to. For, euerie one will inuent a Church according
to his owne fantasie. We haue all one hope, one communion,
one bonde of peace, and one sacrifice: and who so euer
diuideth himselfe from this vnitie,Cyprian. lib. desimplicitate prelatorum. (sayth Saint Cyprian)
alienus est, prophanus est, hostes est: he is a stranger, he is a prophane
person, he is an enimie. And Saint Augustine saith,
Non potest esse particeps diuinae charitatis, qui hostis est vnitatis.
               Aug. epist. 152 contra Donatistas.
               Quisquis enim se ab Ecclesia seperauerit▪ quantumlibet laudabiliter
se viuere existimet, hoc solo scelere, quo a Christi vnitate
seiunctus est, nō habet vitam, sed ira Dei manet super eum:
that is, he cannot be partaker of diuine charitie, which is an enimie
of vnitie. For whosoeuer separateth himselfe from the
vnitie of the Church, how commendably so euer he séemeth in
his owne eies to walk, for this wickednesse alone, by which he
is seuered from the vnitie of Christ, hee hath no life, but the
wrath of God abideth vpon him.
            It is most conuenient that there be in the Church one vniforme
order as touching the times,Uniformity in the seruice of God. the places, the formes, and
other circumstances to be vsed in the seruice of almightie God,
for the honour of his name, as it is prescribed by the wisedome
and godly discretion of this whole Christian state, that all
Schismes and contentions might be taken awaie.Exod. 12. 49 Wherefore
els did the Lord God command his people of Israel to méet together
in one place, and to sacrifice all after one forme (in theyr
seuerall sacrifices) which he had prescribed? Assuredly euen because

there should be no occasion giuen of Schisme, as might
haue bene, if the Israelites had assembled together in diuers
places,Iohn. 4. 20 and had vsed such order and forme, as they themselues
liked,2. King. 17. 24. and as the Samaritans did, which caused great contention
betwéen them and the Iewes in religion, as it is to be séene
in Iosephus.
            
            Now a daies, this vniformitie of many inconstant men is
loathed, & noueltie desired, who are euer learning & deuising, &
neuer holde anie thing firme and certaine. Tertullian a most
ancient writer, doth in his booke de Praescriptionibus, shew
that in his time there were the like sort of men, which continually
did search the Scriptures, that they might thence bring
forth some new thing, and were wont alwayes to defend themselues
with these wordes of the Gospell, Seeke and yee shall
finde. To whom he answereth: in déede we must séeke, but
yet onely those things which pertaine to our saluation, and not
strange things which are nothing necessarie, but are rather
contrarie to the Scriptures, and rule of our faith. For like as
he which hath found that which is true & right ceaseth from
séeking: so he which continueth séeking, testifieth thereby that
he hath not yet found out the truth. There is an end of séeking,
beyond the which we may not passe. For the Christian faith
is not such, whose end cannot be found, so that we shoulde haue
néede alwayes to séeke. And this is confirmed by the Euangelist
S. Iohn, who sayth ye Christ did many things which were
not written, for if they shoulde haue beene orderly written, the
world could not containe them. But he addeth, These thinges
are written that ye might beleeue that Iesus is Christ the
sonne of God, and that so beleeuing yee might haue lyfe
through his name.
            
            And héerein wée sée commonly the most blinde, the most
bolde: the more ignorant, the more busie: and the least wittie,
to be most inquisitiue. With such kinde of men Saint Basil
was also troubled in his time, who beeing in godly conference
with the Emperour Valens about pointes of religion, one Demosthenes,
which was the Emperours cooke, rudely woulde
interrupt him, and peruert places of Scripture according to his
fantasie and purpose: whose presumption, Saint Basil béeing

no longer able to beare, hee méekely reproued him with these
wordes,Histor. tripart. lib. 7. cap. 36. 
               Tuum est de pulmentariis cogitare, non dogmata diuina
decoquere. It belongeth to thy office to make pottage, and not
to make a hotchpot of Scripture. The heathen misliked that
the shoomaker should censure aboue the shooe: and woulde that
Carpenters onely should (because they best coulde) deale with
buildings. Tractant fabrilia, fabri, &c.
            
            He therefore is a good and true Christian, which loueth the
simple truth of God, stayeth himself in true religion, and abideth
firme and stable in the faith, what nouelties so euer anie
one or a few light heads shall deuise in corners, knowing that
they doe not appertaine vnto religion, but rather vnto temptation:
the which also the Apostle confirmeth, saying: There
must bee sectes, that the perfect among you may bee
knowen.
            
            And obserue it who that list, at the first budding forth of euery
noueltie, the grauitie and steadfastnes of the wheate, and the
lightnes of the chaffe is by and by discerned.Inconstancie. For the chaffe is
carried hether and thether with euerie vaine blast of erronious
doctrine. One while through rash presumption, they approue
and allow those things which séeme vncertain, & another while
they stand in doubt through a feare without reason of those
things which are certayn: vncertayne they are which way to
take, or which way to returne, what to take holde of, or what
to let passe. Thus being out of the safe hauen of truth, they are
tossed with the waues of diuers cogitations, and so are compelled
to pull downe their sayles of pride, which before they had
spread abrode through the blasts of nouelties. Which when I
consider with my selfe, I cannot meruayle enough at so greate
madnes, and so great a desire that some men haue to erre, that
not being contented with good and profitable rules of most ancient
Ecclesiasticall gouernment, doe still from day to day deuise
and séeke after new and strange plats to fit theyr fansies,
and doe euer in the store house of theyr vayne conceites, finde
some thing to adde, to change, and to pull from religion, as if
it were not a diuine and heauenly thing, which sufficeth not to
be once well established, but an earthly institution, which cannot
otherwise be made perfect, but by a continuall and daylie

reformation, or rather reprehension. Whereas the wise man
giueth this counsaile,Eccle. 8. 9. 
               Goe not from the doctrine of the Elders,
for they haue learned it of their fathers, and of them
thou shalt learne vnderstanding. And the Apostle after the
same manner instructeth Tymothe, O Tymothe, keepe that
which is committed vnto thee: auoide prophane & vaine
bablings,
               2, Tim. 6 
               & oppositions of science, falsly so called, which
while some professe, haue erred concerning the faith. O
Tymothe (sayth hee) keepe that which is committed vnto
thee, &c. The Apostle begins with an exclamation, procéeding
from a propheticall and most charitable spirite, foreséeing & sorrowing
the errours to come. Tymothe doth beare the image
and representation of the cleargie at this daie. In consideration
of théeues and enemies,Math. 13 
               Tymothe hath matter of charge
committed to his safe kéeping, least men sléeping, they shoulde
sowe tares vpon the good séede wheate, which the sonne of man
hath sowen in his field. Keepe (sayth he) that which is committed
vnto thee: not that which thy selfe hast found: which
thou hast receiued, not that which thou hast deuised: a matter
not of wit, but of doctrine: not of priuate vsurpatiō, but of publique
tradition: a matter brought and deliuered vnto thée, not
set forth by thée: whereof thou oughtest not to be the author,
but the kéeper: not the institutor, but the follower. Keepe (saith
he) that which is committed vnto thee: that is, kéep the talent
of faith and truth inuiolate: let that abide with thée, which
is committed vnto thée: and let that onely be deliuered by thée:
Thou hast receiued gold, deliuer gold again. I would not haue
thée chop and change deceitfully, and as one deuoide of shame,
craftily to tender copper in stead of golde: but pure and perfect
golde, such as thou hast receiued. O Tymothe, O most reuerend
Doctor and teacher, as God hath furnished thée with good
giftes méete to teach;Exod. 35. 30. so shew thy self a right Bezaleel, of the
spirituall tabernacle: set forth the precious gemmes of Gods
word, place them faithfully, and polish them wittily, that they
may be resplendant and beautifull: let it be plainly vnderstoode
by thy exposition, which afore time was obscurely beléeued: let
this latter time be thankfull to thée for the vnderstanding of it,
which the former ages haue reuerenced, not vnderstoode: notwithstanding

so teach those things which thou hast learned, y•
when thou speakest them newly, thou speakest not nouelties.
            But some man will saie, do ye then mislike that there should
be anie profiting and good procéeding in religion? No verilie, it
is most to be desired. And who is he so enuious vnto men, and so
abhominable vnto God, which goeth about to forbid this? But
yet there must be great care had, that it be a procéeding in déed,
and not rather a backsliding, an innouation & alteration from
good to euill.
            It is a profiting and a good proceeding, when a thing is amplified
and enlarged in it selfe: and it is an alteration or innouation,
when one thing is transposed into another.
            The vnderstanding, knowledge and wisedome, as well of euerie
one as of all men, as well of one man, as of the whole
Church, must of necessitie grow & greatly profit by the degrées
of ages & times: but yet onely in one kind, y• is to saie, in one religion,
in one sense, and in one and the selfe same opinion.
            The religion of mens soules may be resembled vnto y• course
and order of their bodies, which albeit they growe to their full
stature and bignesse,Religiō compared to mens bodies. by processe of time and yeres, yet they are
the verie same still that they were before. There is great difference
betweene the blossome of youth, and the ripenes of age,
and yet olde men are the verie same that they were when they
were yong: insomuch, that although the stature, apparell, and
forme of the man be altered, yet the nature abideth all one, and
the person is the same. Small are the members of sucking
babes, greater when they be yong men, yet all one & the same.
The child hath as many sinewes, vaines, an
                  •
                bones as the olde
man, and looke what the more ripe age hath, the same did the
séede of infancie bring forth: so that olde men haue nothing new
in them, which afore time laie not hid in children. There is no
doubt then, but that this is the most true rule of profiting, the
sure and comely order of growing, when age alwaies discouereth
those partes and formes in the greater, which the wisdome
of the creator made before in the smaller. But if the forme of
man be turned afterward into any other similitude and likenes
then of his owne kinde: or if he haue anie more or fewer members
then he should, the bodie then must néedes either decay, or

els become monstrous. In like sorte Christian religion must
follow these lineaments of profiting, to wit, in yeres it must bée
made sound and perfect, in time extended and inlarged, & in time
extolled and aduanced, and yet so, that it abide vncorrupted and
pure, full and perfect in all the proper members and sences therof:
because it will not suffer alteration, or innouation, no losse
of propertie, nor anie varietie of definitiō. As for example, Our
forefathers of olde time, I meane in time of the Primitiue
Church did sowe in this ecclesiasticall sowing the séedes of pure
faith. It were now vnfit that we their posteritie, in sted of the
true and pure grain, should choose the deceitfull errors of tares:
but this rather is more méete and agréeing, that the first & the
last, not disagréeing with themselues, wée reape the fruite from
the increase of pure instruction, and also of pure religion: that
when the first sproutes of those séedes by processe of time begin
to appeare, and is now prosperous and garnished, yet nothing
of the propertie of the naturall séede is altered. And although another
forme, difference and distinction be added, yet the same
nature of kinde remaineth. For God forbidde that the rosarie
plant of true religion, should be turned into briers and thornes.
Yea God forbid that in this spirituall Paradise, the swéete Sinamom
and fragrant Balsamus trees, should yield forth fodenlie
and vnlooked for deadlie poison. Therefore whatsoeuer hath
bene sowen in this church, which is Gods husbandrie, hath bin
sowen by the faithfull and painfull labours of their fathers: the
same ought now to be trimmed and garnished by the industrie
of the children and posteritie: the same must flourish and waxe
ripe: the same must profite and be profited. For it is meet that
those ancient decrees of heauenlie Philosophie, shoulde by processe
of time be adorned, beautified and polished: but vnm
                  •
               et to
be changed,Innouation a dangerous euill. abridged or maimed. They may receiue cleerenes,
light and distinction, and yet retaine fulnesse, integrity, and proprietie.
If this wicked libertie to chop and change, to alter, to
innouate, to set vp and pull downe, according to euerie fantasticall
deuice, be granted, I feare to thinke, and quake to speak, in
what danger religion shall be to be defaced and quite abolished.
The which one done but in part, we shall haue euerie yere, euerie
moneth, nay euerie daie a new religion. For the parts by

little and little being reiected, what will followe at the last, but
that the whole also shall be banished. And if nouelties may displace
auncient godly rules, if prophane men may deface goldie
Fathers, which stand as pillers in the Church, it wil at the last
come to this, that nothing in the Church shall bee leste vntouched,
nothing sound, nothing free: whereby in the end, y• which
was afore time the closet of a chast, pure, and vncorrupt truth,
shall become a filthie sinke of abhominable errours, and a soule
cage of vncleane birdes. But God for his mercie furne this awaie
far from the mindes of his chosen, and let this bee rather
the furie and madnesse of the wicked.
            The Church of Christ being a vigilant and wary keeper of
the doctrine committed to her, doth not change, diminish nor alter
anie thing at anie time concerning the same. It cutteth not
off necessarie matter: it doth not adde superfluous thinges: it
looseth not that which belongeth to her: it vsurpeth not forain
and prophane things: but withall endeuour she seeketh this,
that making much, and embracing the most ancient rules and
precepts, faithfullie and wiselie the may further & aduance that
which at the first was but begun, she may ratifie and establish
things expressed and manifested, & may constantly keepe whatsoeuer
was before confirmed and determined.
            But to returne to the wordes of the Apostle, O Tymothe,
(saith he) keepe that which is committed vnto thee, and auoide
prophane and vaine bablings Shunne (saith he) such
as a viper, as a scorpion, and as a most dangerous serpent, least
they strike thee, not onely by touching thee, but also by their
sight and breath.1. Cor. 9. 11 
               Auoid them, that is, with such see you deale
not:2. Iohn. 1. 10 
               If anie come vnto you (saith the Apostle) and bringeth
not this doctrine. What doctrine? The Gospell of our Sauiour,
first preached by him, then by Saint Peter, Saint Paul,
and the rest of the Apostles, and which hath so remained from
age to age by the incorrupt tradition of truth, and shall also so
continue for euer vnto the worldes end. What then? Receiue
him not to house, neither bid him God speed: for he that
biddeth him God speed is partaker of his euill. Auoide
(saith Saint Paul) prophane and vaine bablings. And what
is that? Truelie such speeches and writings as sauour nothing

of holinesse or religion, with the which such as are members of the
true Church, are not acquainted. Compare then the late seditious
books of Martine and his mates with this sentence of the Apostle,Martine reprehended by Paul for vaine babling.
and iudge if they be not full stuffed with these prophane bablings
which we are commanded to shunne and auoide.
            Looke into them, and ye shal see both their mouthes and bookes
ouerflowe with euill speeches, braulings, nips and tants: yea, and
that against magistrates, and such as are in chiefe authoritie. Are
not Gods ministers in these daies vsed with much more contumelie
& despight by the prophane and shameles libellers of our time,
then euer the heathen durst vse the Priestes of Iupiter? Bee they
not much bolder in deprauing them (whom yet they know not) thē
               Michael the Arechangell durst be when he stroue against the deuill,Deprauers of good men,
to whom he would not giue railing speeches? Mos hic semper
fuit hereticorum, quorum doctrinam nō possunt, illorum vitam in odium
adducere. This euer was the custome (saith a learned Father)
of heretiques, to bring their doctrine into hatred, whose life
they could not depraue. The same also was the practise of the Arrians
long since, who seeing it impossible to induce the people to
their heresie, while the good Bishops were had in reputation, deuised
therefore slanders, and laied grieuous crimes against some of
them. Among which, they charged the godly and learned Bishop
Athanasius with murther and incontinencie.False accusers With murther, in
that he should haue cut off one Arsemius his arme, bringing forth
the arme of a dead man for proofe of their purpose, yet afterwarde
Arsemius himselfe was knowen to liue, and had both his armes.
With incontinencie, in that he should haue rauished a certain woman,
who being suborned for that purpose, did take a most shamelesse
harlot, without blushing to auouch it to his face, though (as
afterward it was proued) she neuer saw nor knew him. And haue
not like false accusations bene also of late forged against good and
godly Prelates, men for their profound learning and approued constancie,
worthie of all reuerence? Good Christians (which these
malcontents would faine seeme to bee) neuer vsed such prophane
bablings: this hath euer bene the manner of schismatiques and heretiques.
Who euer taught anie heresie that first began not with
prophane bablings and ianglings, so seuering and diuiding himselfe
from the true Church.Al heresie first beganne with vaine babling. That this is true, examples will make it
more then manifest. For who at anie time before prophane Pellagius,
durst arrogate so great vertue and power of free will,Pellagius. that he
thought not the grace of God necessarie to all good works?Celestinus. Who

before that monstrous disciple of his Celestius, denied all mankind
to be vnder the guilt of Adams transgression? Who before that
blaspheming Arrius,
               Arrius. durst once thinke to diuide the vnitie of y• blessed
Trinitie? Who before that abhominable Sabellius
               Sabellius. durst once
take in hand to confound the trinitie and vnitie? Who before that
cruell Nouatius,
               Nouatius. called God cruell, for that hee would rather haue
the death of a sinner, then that he should returne &liue? Who before
Simon Magus
               
                  
                     ••
                  mon Magus & Priscillianus
               
                  
                     •
                  iscilianus. euer affirmed, that God was
the author of euill? Who euer before the Anabaptists
                  
                     •
                  nabaptists. disallowed
baptisme to infants, denied warre, the power of the Magistrate,
and ecclesiasticall order, as doe also our Martinists? Who before
Pope Gregorie the seuenth, otherwise called Hildebrand,
               
                  
                     •
                  ildebrand. challanged
the authoritie of both swoordes to belong to the Church of
Rome,
               
                  
                     •
                  essalians. &c. Who before the Enchetai or Messalians, thought that
men ought to do nothing els but pray cōtinually, setting aside al other
worldly busines. And who before our new vpstart Martinists
affirmed, that men must doe nothing but to attende to preaching
continuallie, reiecting all formes of praier, except such as their fantasies,
(many times vnsauourly (God wot) vpon the sodaine do deuise?
Who before the Celestines & our late Puritans,
                  
                     •
                  eldstins. did so much
as dreame of a perfection in this life? What should I speake of the
Brownists, Papists, Family-louists, and such like? Many mo sectaries
and heretiques there be of like sort both old and new, which
for breuities sake, and loathing of Christian eares, I omit. By all
which notwithstanding it doth euidently appeare, that the guise of
heretiques euer is to be singular, new-phangled, to delight in vain
and prophane bablings, & by a false name of knowledge, to make
shipwracke of faith. Whereas contrariwise sincere preachers in
déede, and true Christians without hypocrisie, do continuallie and
steadfastly hold fast one truth, and doe condemne and abhorre prophane
nouelties, and as the Apostle said, & said againe, If any man
bring them any other doctrine then that which they haue alreadie
receiued, they should hold him accuised.
            
            Wherefore I most humbly and heartely beséech all the Ministers
of Christ,An exhortatiō 
                  
                     •
                  o y• ministers of the Church that they end and cast away al their controuersies,
and that they knit themselues together in true concord & charitie,
forgiuing each other their errors and offences, auoiding new deuises,
and to teach the people not onely to know the truth, but also to
auoid the fellowship of the enemies therof. So Saint Iohn taught
others, and so himselfe gaue example, Fugiamus hinc, ne balneum
cadat super nos, in quo est Cerinthus veritatis hostis. Let us (sayth

he) speedily depart hence, least the bath wherein Cerinthus, the enemie
of the truth is, doe fall vpon vs. Conuersing with them doth
argue consent and allowance of their doings. Digni sunt morte, non
solum qui faciunt illa,
               Rom. 1. 32 
               sed etiam qui consentiunt ea facientibus.
Not onely they which cōmit such things are worthy of death, but
they also which haue pleasure in thē y• do thē. Preach plain & sound
doctrine, which euermore agreeth wt it self. Bring the Church into
one vnity with Christ so nere as you can, & faithfully indeuor your
selues to preserue true concord therin: Let the rule of S. Augustine
preuaile with you,Ad Cassul. presbit. to wit, In quibus rebus nihil statuit certiscriptura,
mos populi Dei et instituta maiorum pro lege tenenda sunt. In
those things wherin the Scripture hath made no certain determination,
the manner & custome of Gods people, & the constitutions
of our ancestors, are to be holden for a law. But chiefly praie vnto
God deuoutly with all feruencie for his grace & holie spyrit, that ye
may do all these things with a willing and a ready mind. For these
things not obserued on your part, an infinit nūber of souls through
your fault shall most miserably be brought into danger of damnatio:
& how then will ye excuse your selues at the houre of death, and
in that great daie of the Lord.
            Weigh well these things with your selues: it is a horrible thing
to fall into the burning wrath of the Lord. And as y• Apostle warneth
you,Galat. 
                     •
                  
                
               If ye bite and deuour one another, take heede that
ye be not consumed one of another. Good, graue, and godlie
men are iustly offended with your contentions, for ye wounde the
weak consciences of your brethren.Math. 18. 
                     •
                  
                
               Ve vohis a scandalis, &c. Wo
vnto you because of offences. On the contrarie parte, Papists, Atheists,
and other wicked and godlesse men are delighted in them:
for that the idolatrous superstition and abhomination of the one is
not (as it ought to be) reproued and condemned, because you haue
now wholy turned the spyrituall swoorde from them against your
brethren, hauing giuen occasion to the Papistes to saie vnto vs,
Vos Christiani dissidetis inter vos, &c. Ye Protestants doe disagrée
among your selues,Clem. Stromat. lib. 7 and haue so many sectes among you, that
all which notwithstanding beare the title of Christianisme, yet doo
ye curse and condemne one another: wherefore your religion is no
true religion, neither hath it procéeded from God: and because the
hypocrisie and counterfait holynes of the other is not discouered,
who onely hope that will come to passe through your discention at
the last, that they shal possesse the whole patrimonie of the church.

Which if it shoulde so fall out (as God forbidde it shoulde) learning
thereby will decaie, barbarisme will take place, and so in time this
most flourishing Church in Christendome, shall be ouerthrowen.
            Moreouer, they which are come to a little tast of the Gospell, &
are now readie to forsake their errors and superstitions, purposing
to cleaue vnto the Gospell, are set backe and hindered by these contentions,
and saie they know ther are many ercors, abuses, & great
faults in the Popish Church, but yet they cannot ioyne themselues
vnto vs, who so sharply contend, accuse, and braule one with another.
Of these weaklings Chrisostome speaketh thus: Venit
gentilis et dicit, velim fieri Christianus, sed nescie cui adherem, &c.
The Gentile commeth and sayth, I woulde faine bee a Christian,
but I know not with whom to ioyne: there are many dissentions
and tumults among you, I knowe not what opinion to choose and
holde: for euery one sayth: I speake the truth. Also of this stumbling
blocke Melancton in his time complained, Quos fugiamus
habemus, sed quos sequamur non intelligimus. We know (saith he)
whom we should auoide, meaning the Papists, but whome to follow
we cannot determine. Such is the state of the church of England
at this day, through the diuersitie of opinions, that weaklings
are greatly dismaied. Yet this excuse in the day of iudgement, will
not make weaklings (whome Paul secludeth out of Gods kingdome)
faultlesse: & at the end of theyr life, except they conuert themselues
vnto Christ, and yéeld themselues wholy vnto him, they can
neuer haue a quiet conscience.
            Other some also saie (and most truely) that God is the God of
peace and concord, and not of strife: but these Preachers (say they)
are at dissention among themselues, and therfore God is not with
them. But this might haue bene obiected against the Churches in
all ages. For among the Iewes were sects, as the Saduces, the
Pharesies, the Essers and the Stoikes. Among the Schoole men
were Scotists, Tomists, and Occamists. Among the seuen Deacons
of the Primitiue Church,Act. 6. 4. was Nicholas, of whom came the
Nicholaitans,Apoc. 2. 6 mencioned in the Reuelation of Saint Iohn.
            Yea, this might haue bene obiected against the Primitiue and
most perfect and holy Church of Christ militant, wherin have bin
so many heresies, schismes and sects, as Irenaeus, Tertullian, Epiphanius
and Augustine do testifie, that in regard of them the verie
name of Christ began to be odious among the people: and as
Socrates reporteth, the christians were mocked and iested at on

publike stages, and in theyr common plaies and enterludes.
            Neuerthelesse by these obiections it may appeare, howe greate
heapes of euill suspitions these discords and contentions doe bring:
whereby we are put in minde, the more earnestly and diligently to
studie for peace and concord: so shall we shew our selues to bee of
that blessed number, of whom Christ pronounceth this benediction,Matth. 
                     •
                  . 
                     •
                  
               
               Blessed are the peace makers, for they shall bee called the
children of God.
            
            ANd as concerning you (men and brethren, beloued in Christ)
which are to heare and learne of vs,An exhortat
                     •••
                   to hearers an
                     •
                   readers. the pure and whoelsome
doctrine of the Gospell of Iesus Christ, take héede how and what
ye heare.Math. 4. 24 Proue the spirites whether they be of God or no, because
there be many seducers in the world:1. Iohn. 4. 1 and hold these for vndoubted
& approued rules:Rom. 16 17 first, that none can laie anie other foundation beside
that which is alreadie laide, that is, Christ Iesus: secondlie,
that the true Church is alwaies knowen by these thrée things, by
the preaching of the Gospell, the administration of the Sacraments,
and the exercises of holie life, as appeareth by the words of
the Apostle, Christ loued the Church, & gaue himselfe for it,
that he might sanctifie it, being cleansed by the washing of
water through the word, that he might make vnto himselfe a
glorious Church, not hauing spot or wrinkle, &c.
            
            The first two markes are expressed in these wordes, By the
washing of water through the word: and the last marke is this,
That hee might make it vnto himselfe a glorious Church
without spot, &c.
            
            Thirdlie, that the same Church is from time to time troubled
with false Apostles, whom Paul thus painteth out in their coulors,Rom. 16. 17
to the end ye may know them, Haue (saith he) a diligent eie
vnto such as cause diuisions and offences, contrarie to the doctrine
which ye haue learned, and auoid ye them. For they that are such,
serue not the Lord Iesus Christ, but their owne bellies, and with
faire speach and flattering deceiue the hearts of the simple:2. Tit 3. 6 they
créepe into houses,Tit. 1. 10. and leade captiue simple women, which women
are euer learning,2. Tim. 3. 8 and are neuer able to come to the knowledge of
the truth:1. Tim. 6. 4 they are vaine talkers and disobedient, subuerting whole
houses, teaching thinges which they ought not, for filthie lucers
sake: they are men of a corrupt minde, and reprobate concerning
the faith, puft vp, knowing nothing, but wering themselues about

questions and strife of wordes, whereof commeth enuie, strife, railings
and euill surmisings, and vaine disputations:1. Tim. 5. 13 men destitute of
the truth, which thinke that gaine is godlines: they are also idle, &
go from house to house: yea,1. Tim. 1. 7 and verse 19. they are not onely idle, but also partakers
and busie bodies, speaking thinges which are not comely:
they would be Doctors of the lawe, and yet vnderstande not what
they speake,2. Tim. 2. 16 neither whereof they affirme, but hauing put awaie
a good conscience from them,2. Tim. 3. 5 haue made shipwrack of faith: whose
prophane and vaine bablings shall increase vnto more vngodlines,verse. 9
and their word shall fret as a canker: they haue onely a shewe of
godlines, but haue denied the power thereof: but they shal preuaile
no longer, for their madnesse shall be euident vnto all men.
            These markes being so euident, you cannot be seuered from the
true Church, except ye wil most wilfully run to schisme, a monster
most perillous.Ecclesiast. hist. lib. 6. cap. 37 The famous Bishoppe Dionysius, as witnesseth
Eusebius, saith y• to suffer martyrdome for the auoiding of schisme,
is more commendable, then for the auoiding of idolatrie, because in
the one is the safetie of our soules, in the other is the saluation of
the whole Church. The place is pregnant. And Saint Augustine
proueth, that schisme offended God more then idolatrie, because it
was more grieuously punished, as in Chore, Dathan & Abiram,
who were schismatiques, then in Aaron: and them that worshipped
the golden calfe, who were idolaters. The greater punishment
most commonly is a token of the greater sinne. Also the danger is
greater which groweth by conuersing with schismatiques and heretiques,
then with Painims & idolaters, which Augustine noteth
verie well in these words (handling the Psal. 54.) Ab his qui longe
sunt a me, facilis cautio est. Non enim me tā cito fallit, qui dicit, veni,
Idolum adore: multū a me iste longe est. Christianus es. Christianus
inquit: ex propinque aduersatur, prope est, redime Domini pace
animam meam, ab his qui appropinquant mihi. I can easily beware
of them that are far off from me. He doth not so soone deceiue
me that saith, come worship an Idoll, he is verie far off from me:
but I saie to another, Art thou a Christian? Yea forsooth a Christian
(saith he.) This fellow standeth néere me and may quickly ouerthrow
me. Redéeme and deliuer my soule O Lord, from them
that after this sorte approch and come néere vnto me.Lib de vnitate ecclesiae. And Saint
Cyprian saith, Non aperta tantum periculia metuenda sunt: facilior
cautior est, vbi manifestier formido est: plus cauendus est inimicus
qui latentur obripit, &c.
            
            
               It is a most dangerous thing to be separated by anie occasion
from the true Church, the which (God be thāked) may be so plainly
séene at this day in this realme of England, that no man can
doubt of it. And yet very many haue bin carried awaie from the
same through the blasts of false doctrine: and some without anie
cause haue too too rashly diuorced themselues, what color of reformation
so euer they haue pretended. The Corinthians were very
much diuided among themselues: one woulde be of Paul, another
of Cephas, another of Apollo, and so they attributed as much to
theyr Ministers as vnto Christ. They brought their strifes and
contentions to the iudgement seate of Ethnikes: they suffered an
incestuous man, who had the wife of his Father, to be conuersant
among them: they thought not whooredome to be sinne: they did
euery where eate with the Painims, of things offered vnto idols:
they celebrated the supper of the Lord with vnquietnes of minde:
they abused the gift of tongues: neither did they iudge trulie and
godlie of the resurrection. These were no doubt grieuous blemishes,
yet notwithstanding Paul did not forsake the Church of Corinth.
Neuertheles some men can (as they thinke) with a safe conscience
condemne this our most Christian Church, both by speaking
and writing against it, and also by cutting off themselues frō
the same, gathering themselues together into corners and in secret
conuenticles, as the Family of Loue, the Brownists, the Martinists,
and others like vnto them.
            Such were in olde time theyr predecessors the Donatists, who
in comparison of thēselues condemned all other Christians. They
released theyr owne crue from the seueritie of the censure, and yet
in theyr congregation suffered most impure men, namely the Optatians,
the Gildonians, and the Primians.
            Be not ye like vnto those men? abstain from theyr companies,
refraine theyr assemblies, frequent not theyr sermons, reade not
theyr libels, defend not theyr opinions, but rather detest them. By
reading hereticall bookes,Eus. Eccle. hist. lib. 7. cap. 6 many learned men haue yéelded to error,
and may not ignorant men much sooner? Dionysius Alexandrinus
a most learned and vertuous Bishop, confesseth to a friend
of his, that he felt himself much the worse by reading of euil bookes.
If ye shall presume vpon your constancie & knowledge, that there
can insue no danger, Qui stat, videat ne cadat, Let him that standeth,
take héed least he fall. Yea know, he that toucheth pitch shall
be defiled therewith: and the wise man saith, Qui dormit iuxta sepem,

mordebit eum coluber. He that sleepeth by a hedges side, shall
be bitten of a snake. Euill wordes corrupt good manners, & so doth
euill companie to.
            Furthermore my brethren take heed of self-liking, of arrogancie,
of singularitie, and of contempt of wholsome doctrine deliuered
by this Church:The deuils cords, wherby he draweth men into heresie. for these are the deuils cordes, by which he draweth
men at the last into horrible heresies: fearfull examples wherof
there haue bene too many of late within this lande, especiallie in
the Countie of Suffolke, where sundrie persons within these three
or foure yeres, both men and women, beginning first to bee so singular,
that they controlled the Ecclesiasticall gouernment, & present
state of the Church, fell at the last yet further, & became plaine
Anabaptists, denying flatly the power and office of magistrates: &
not staying here, fell yet more horriblie into greater wickednesse,
namely into the heresie of the Arrians, most blasphemously denying
the Godhead of Christ Iesus. For the which most detestable
heresies,Lewes, Cole and Ket. three of them being by the deuill obdurated in their wickednesse
(namely Lewes, Cole and Ket) were burned at Norwich,
and some others of them abiured their heresies openly in the town
of Ipswich.
            Let these fearefull examples brethren, moue you to beware of
contempt of wholsome doctrine, and of singularitie, and so many of
you, in whom there resteth as yet such heart burning and diuision
about things of no moment, as if in religion we were vtterly sundered
one from another, and had no point of faith at all that were
common betwixt vs, I doe humblie beseech for Christes sake, and
of the peace of his Church, whereof you professe your selues to bee
members, that with all speed you returne vnto that vnitie againe,
from whence ye are most dangerouslie fallen. Amemus Dominum
Deum nostrum, &c.
               Aug. in Psa. 
                     ••
                  . sub finem. Let vs loue the Lord our God (saith S.
Augustine) and loue we his Church also: him as our Father, and
the Church as our mother: this matrimony is conioyned with singular
loue: no man offendeth she one, and hath the fauour of the
other.
            The Epharamites were of the people of God, and yet reuolted
awaie from the lawe, though still they held (after a sorte) the
profession thereof: and hauing so done, they so continued a long
time after, as a wanton, vntamed, and vnrulie heifer, notwithstanding
al the warnings that God by his Prophets did giue vnto thē.
But yet it is recorded of them, that at the length they returned againe,

smiting vpon the thigh, and acknowledging that they had
committed many shameful things. If now with Ephraim ye haue
so erred and stept aside, pittie it were but that ye should be as ready
with him to repent and returne againe. Remember what S.
Paul writeth to the Ephesians, Be ye careful to keep the vnitie
of the spirit through the bond of peace. Againe, One Lorde,
               Ephe. 4. 3.
               one Faith, one Baptisme, one God the Father of all, which is
aboue all, through all, and in all. Hee saith also that we bée one
bodie of the flesh and of the bones of Christ, that we be most néerely
conioyned vnto him, and the giftes which we haue, bee deriued
vnto vs by God through the flesh of Christ, giuen for our sake vppon
the crosse: and so by the flesh of Christ we be coupled and vnited
to God. And in the Gospel of Saint Iohn, Christ praieth thus
for his Church,Iohn. 17. 21. Cause you that they may be one, euen as I am in
thée, and thou art in me. The vnitie of the Church therfore by the
places alleadged, consisteth in the spirit, in the word of God, in the
Sacraments, & in a most néere bond with Christ, who is the head
of all the members of the Church. This vnitie we must by no
meanes breake, but first séeke all the waies that possible we can, to
make the same safe and sound.
            
               Bernard an ancient Father of the Church saith, that neyther
praier,Bernard in 
                     〈◊〉
                   quem habuit ad sor. de modo bene viuē
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                sacrifice, nor anie thing else, pleaseth God better then our
concord and vnitie, and that nothing grieueth the deuill more, then
that we should liue in vnitie: For if we fast (saith he) the deuill seareth
it not, because he neuer eateth: if we watch he careth not, because
he neuer sleepeth: if we praie, he regardeth it not, because he
neuer praieth: but that we should be in vnitie, it displeaseth him:
because we being men, and on the earth, should doe that which hée
could not doe, being an Angell in heauen. Wee knowe it now by
experience, that Fratrum odia acerbissima, and that inimici hominis
domestici eius, that the hatred of brethren is most grieuous, and
that a mans enemies shall be they of his owne housholde. The
Church of God neuer receiued more detriment by the tyrannie of
papists, then she hath and doth dailie by the cruell hatreds of false
and dissembling brethren.
            If therefore ye intend to be citizens of that heauenly Ierusalē,
Subtraite vos ab omni frate ambulante inordinatè, Withdrawe
your selues from euerie brother that walketh inordinatly, and vnderstand
that the earthly Ierusalem,Psal. 122. 3. is builded as a citie that is at
vnitie in it selfe. Of the Primitiue Church it is said, that they continued

with one accord in praier: and the multitude of them that
beléeued, were of one heart and of one soule. If ye wil abide in this
vnity,Act. 2. 46 then must ye be alwaies constant in the truth, and not depend
vpon men.Act. 4. 32 For through inconstancy the peace of the church,
which is the bond of vnitie, is many times broken, when as our
affections and likings of men is such, that therafter as ye loue thē,
so ye like their doctrine. For ye regard the messenger, and not his
message: ye looke vpon the earthen vessell, and not vpon the heauenly
treasure therein contained. And hereof it commeth to passe,
that ye doe contemne and despise, not onely wholsome doctrine, but
also the minister and preacher thereof: and then commeth such a
nicenes and choice liking of some, that at the last followeth also an
vtter loathing of others, whom before ye greatly liked.
            Thus hath the common multitude alwayes behaued thēselues
towards the ministers of the Gospell.Inconstancie of ye multitude Yea thus was our sauiour
Christ himselfe handled among the Iewes:Iohn. 6. 14. 15 who one while would
néeds make him a king,Iohn. 7. 1 and anon after was ready to kill him: one
while they called him Rabbi,
               Iohn, 6. 60 and another while a Samaritan,
saying that he had the deuill: they which once loued his doctrine,
sayd afterward, this is a hard saying. And as Christ himselfe: so
also were Apostles rewarded at their auditors hands: and no
meruaile,Luke. 6. 40 for the disciple is not aboue his master. It is inough for
the disciple,Luke. 3. 15 and verse 20 if he be as his master is. Therefore Iohn the Baptist
had such estimation for a while, when he first began to preach the
Gospell,Math. 14. 10 that he was taken of most men for the Messiah: yet stood
he not long before he lost his head.Act 14. 11 and verse 15. When Paul & Barnabas had
wrought that notable myracle vpon ye lame man, the people were
blindly carried with such inconsiderate zeale, that in all hast they
would haue done sacrifice vnto them as vnto God: but in a moment
this hot zeale was so cold towards Saint Paul, that they
stoned him almost for dead. The same Apostle was of the Galathians
also reputed for an Angell of God,Gal. 4. 14 and vers. 15. 16 insomuch, that if it had
bin possible, they would haue pluckt out their owne eies for him to
do him good, but afterward they tooke him for no better then their
enemie. And why? Forsooth because hee preached vnto them the
truth. Consider and sée, if the verie like inconstancie, and far worse
if worse may be, hath not bin among you. In the beginning of her
Maiesties most happie raigne, you had those learned and graue fathers
in great estimation, which during the time of Quéene Mary
suffered exile for the testimony of the gospel, some in Geneua, some

in Frankford, and some other in other partes of Germanie: and
at their first returne to the Church of Englande, beeing placed by
her Maiestie in the roomes of greatest charge in the Church, as
tried and approued men that had borne the whole heate and burthen
of the daie, ye estéemed of them worthily, ye were very glad
to sée and heare them, ye embraced theyr most wholsome doctrine,
and so ye begun to runne wel in a good course, but ye persisted not,
ye were soone wearie of your olde men, and yee must needes haue
new: and I feare me that this propheticall saying of the Apostle,
is verified vpon many of you, The time will come, when they wil
not suffer wholsome doctrine, but hauing their eares itching, shall
after theyr own lusts get them a heape of teachers,2. Tim. 4. 3 and shall turne
theyr eares from the truth,Gal 1. 6 and shall be giuen vnto fables.
            Be not carried about with euery winde,Eccle. 5 9 and goe not into euery
way: for (so sayth the wise man) doth the sinner that hath a
double tongue. Such double walking, and such dissembling talking,
will at the last, and that ere it be long, cause greater diuision
and contention among you, to the wofull ruine of vs all, if it be not
amended betimes. And if we goe forwarde in discorde and bitter
contentions, as we haue hetherto done, it is greatly to be feared,
least GOD haue appointed and ordayned that same agaynst vs,
which in time past he did in the raignes of Dioclesian and Maximian
the Emperors, when as there were like strifes and contentions
in the Church: as notably appeareth in the Ecclesiasticall
historie written by Eusebius: the effect of which history is diligently
to be marked for this cause, to wit, for that in those daies the
Church of Christ flourished. But the people were vnthankful vnto
God, and impenitent, and the ministers of the Church were ambitious,
and stirred vp grieuous and hot contentions among themselues.
Wherefore God being angry with them, gaue them into
the hands of tyrants, who raised vp greater persecutions agaynst
the Church then euer was heard of before. For thus writeth Eusebius.
            But when we were not touched with anie of these things, nor
went about to reconcile our selues vnto God, but as godles men,
supposed that God neither cared for, nor yet would visit our wickednesse,
but heaped sinne vpon sinne. And those which tooke vpon
them to be our patrones, shaking off and casting from them the
rule of godlynes, were kindled with hatred one agaynst another: &
whilest they gaue themselues onely hereunto, to wit, to threatenings,

pride, mallice and hatred, euery one gréedely, and in a manner
of a certain tyrannie followed their owne ambition. Then the
Lord, euen then I say, made the daughter of Sion obscure & dark,
according to the prophesie of Ieremie. For hee lifted vp the right
hand of her enemies, turned from her his sword of defence, & was
not her helpe in the day of battell, but ceased from purifieng her, &
threw her throne vnto the ground, and shortned her daies; aboue
all this he poured out confusion and shame vppon her. All these
things are fulfilled amongst vs, whilest we sée the places appointed
to praier, to be raced from the top to the very foundations, the diuine
and holy Scriptures to be burned in the middest of the market
places, and the Ministers of the Church with horrible confusion,
to run here and there to hide themselues, and some were taken
and put to open shame by theyr aduersaries: and according to another
prophesie, Contempt was poured out euen vpon their Princes,
&c.
            Thus farre Eusebius, who after through his whole booke following
describeth the martyrdomes, calamities & afflictions which
the faithful in that most cruel persecution suffered. Wherfore God
is most earnestly & diligently to be praied vnto, that he wil vouchsafe
to giue vs his grace, repentance, and mutuall concord: least for
our leude liues, ingratitude and contentions, he deale with vs as
he hath done with those fathers before vs, & so deliuer vs into the
cruell and bloudy hands of the Turkes, and others the enemies of
Christianitie. God in his mercie turne this euill from vs.
            Moreouer, all godly and Christian Princes and Magistrates, according
to their calling committed to them by GOD,An exhortatiō to magistrats. ought diligently
to take héed hereunto, and with al their might and wisdome
helpe, that the people of this Realme may altogether forsake those
vnprofitable and troublesome contentions, and cease to braule and
quarrell with their brethren and fellow-seruants: and that the ministers
may fruitfully with great modestie & grauitie, preach vnto
the congregation repentance & amendement of life, and true faith
in Christ.
            It is written of king Iosophat,
               2. Chron. 17 that he sent certaine Princes &
Leuites, and giuing vnto them the booke of the lawe of the Lorde,
commanded that they should teach true faith, and the sincere worshipping
of God. The like did the most holy kings Ezechias and
Iosias, who religiously depriued from their offices, all those which
walked not rightly in the way of the Lord, and did not according

to the law of God. Constantinus the great, followed the example
of those most holy kings, & performed the like in his Empire. For
when the Prelates in his time were at variance and contention among
themselues, and writ and preached one against another, and
were so bold to offer those contentious libels vnto the Emperour
himselfe, to the end that they might contend before him: he receiuing
al theyr bookes, sharply reproued them, inasmuch as they being
by the prouidence of God appointed vnto the people for pastors
and captaines of concord and charitie, were so at variance among
themselues. Neither would heee giue any iudgement as touching
theyr controuersies, or yet reade their libels which they deliuered
vnto him, but cast them into the fire: as he also commanded vpon
paine of death,
                  Martian and Iustiniā
                   mad careful lawe to the lame purpose. that no man should readeReade the bookes of Arrius, but
burne them at the first hand: that at the least they might thereby
learne that those contentions and braules displeased his maiestie:
and so setting discord apart, might afterwarde giue themselues to
peace and concord. In like manner when he sate with the Bishops
at the Counsell of Nice,Zozomenes li. 1. cap. 20 
                     •
                   le. 2. cap. 3. de libris 
                     〈◊〉
                   heretici. amongst whome also many contentions
were, he laying forth the bookes of the Prophets and Apostles, to
wit, the holy Bible, commanded them to decide and end theyr controuersies
by them, and all of them with one consent, to preach one
and the selfe same faith.
            This excellent example of the worthie Emperor Constantine,
whom God in this world honored with the title of Great, whose
name and glory through the whole world was famous & of greate
renowme among all men, and is much more excellent in the eternall
felicitie. This example I say, let all Princes and magistrates
of this age follow, touching the staying and suppressing of all controuersies
among the prrofessors of the Gospell, that thereby they
may prouide for the peace and publike health of the Church.
            Peace is that new yéeres gift, which Christ gaue vnto vs at his
birth.Luke. 2. 14 It is the bond of perfection which he commended to his disciples
in his whole life.Mat. 10. 1
                     •
                  . 1 It is the legacie which he bequeathed vs at
his death,Iohn 20. 26 
               Pacem meam relinquo vobis, My peace I leaue vnto
you. The Apostle Paul following the same example, in euery Epistle
that he wrote, exhorteth vs vnto peace. O nos miseros si quos
toties repetita pax non mouit▪
                O miserable wretches that we be, if
peace so often repeated doth not moue. Peius est (sayth a Father)
ecclesiam scindere,
               August. cont Pet
                     ••
                  anum. 
               quam Idolis sacrificare. It is a worse thing to
be a schismatike then an idolater. Also Saint Augustine exhorting

vnto peace, sayth, Fratres teneamus charitatem, sine qua fides nihil
est: habet
                     •
                  s autem charitatē, si teneatis vnitatem. Brethren, let vs
holde charitie, without the which faith is nothing: ye haue charity
if ye kéepe vnitie.
            The God of peace grant, that as we may alreadie say, in regard
of our most gracious soueraigne Ladie Quéene Elizabeth, mercy
and truth haue met together: so wee may one day also say, in respect
of our selues and this whole nation, righteousnesse and peace
haue kissed each other. And I beséech you brethren, by the bléeding
wounds of our sauiour and redéemer Iesus Christ, that none doe
increase olde faults by new offences, but rather that euery man in
sinceritie and holy obedience, reforme his owne waies, & conforme
his life according to the rule of perfect holinesse, that so our conuersation
before men, may witnesse our perfect religion, and we glorifie
our father which is in heauen. Let vs beautifie the chambers
of our hearts with the florishing branches of a godly life, mortifying
and killing all those euill and peruerse affections, which may
blemish and darken those bright beames of Christian profession.
Let vs beare the sailes of our conuersations euen with the winde
of Gods word: and beséech we the holy Ghost to rule the stearne,
and guide the rudder of our thoughts, least at anie time we cracke
the barke of our religion against the rockes of euill tongues. So
shall our aduersaries bee ashamed to mutter against vs for liuing
contrarie to that which we professe. And God who is the God
of peace shall in the end giue vnto vs his euerlasting
peace in his heauenlie kingdome through
Christ our Lorde,
Amen.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   