
      
         
            
            
            GODFREY OF
BVLLOIGNE,
OR
The Recouerie of
HIERVSALEM. An Heroicall poeme written in
Italian by Seig. Torquato Tasso,
and translated into English
by R. C. Esquire: And now the first part containing
fiue Cantos, Imprinted in
both Languages.
            LONDON
Imprinted by Iohn Windet for
Thomas Man dwelling in
Pater noster-Row.
         
         
            
            
            To the Reader.
            
               GEntlemen, let it be lawfull for
me with your leaues to trouble
you a little: It was my good
hap of late to get into my hāds
an English translated Copie of
Seig. Tasso's Hierusalem,
done (as I was informed) by a
Gentlemā of good sort & quallitie,
and many waies commended
vnto me for a worke of singular
worth, & ezcellencie: wherupon, by the aduise, or rather
at the instance of some of my best friends, I determined to send
it to the Presse: Wherin if my forwardnes haue fore-ranne the
Gentlemans good liking; Yet let mee winne you to make me
happie with the sweete possession of your fauours, for whose
sakes I haue done whatsoeuer herein is done. When first I sent
it to the Printer, I did not certainely know whose worke it was,
and so rested depriued of al meanes to gaine his assent and good
liking thereunto, and yet notwithstanding the perswasions of
some that would faine haue preuailed with me: I resolued (at
the motion, no doubt of some rare excellent spirit, that knew
and foresaw this to be the readiest meanes to draw him to publish
some of his many most excellent labours) to goe on with
what I had begunne, euer assuring my selfe, and neuer doubting,
but that you would like of it your selues, and intertaine it
with such deere affection as it doth worthily merit: Now if

it shall not in each part liuely resemble the absolute perfection
of the doer thereof, yet is hee blamelesse, and the fault as it is
mine, so I wil acknowledge it for mine: for by my haste it proues
his vntimely birth, and doubtlesse miserably wanteth of that
glorious beautie wherewith it otherwise would, and hereafter
happily may be richly honoured withal. Now wheras I thought
you should haue had all together, I must pray you to accept of
the fiue first Songes: For it hath pleased the excellent doer of
them (for certaine causes to him selfe best knowne) to command
a staie of the rest till the sommer. In that which is done,
I haue caused the Italian to be Printed together with the English,
for the delight and benefit of those Gentlemen, that loue
that most liuely language. And thereby the learned Reader
shall see to how strict a course the translator hath tyed himselfe
in the whole work, vsurping as little liberty as any whatsoeuer,
that euer wrote with any commendations. Thus (as in duetie I
ought) I haue presented vnto your views the course of my whole
proceedings herein, humbly praying you to censure of the work
with such respectfull consideration as shalbe meete, and to amend
with patience such faults as are vnwillingly escaped in
the Printing. And so you shall doe what shall well beseeme
you, and giue him his right that will neuer wrong you.
            
               From Exceter the last of Februarie, 1594.
                
               Yours C. H.
            
         
      
      
         
            
               
               
               THE RECOVERIE
OF HIERVSALEM OF
Sr. TORQVATO TASSO,
The first Song.
               
                  
                     I Sing the godly armes, and that
Chieftaine,
                  Who great Sepulchre of our
Lord did free,
                  Much with his hande, much
wrought he with his braine:
                  Much in his glorious conquest
suffred hee:
                  And hell in vaine hit selfe opposde, in vaine
                  The mixed troopes Asian and Libick flee
                  To armes, for heauen him fauour'd, and he drew
                  To sacred ensignes his straid mates a new.
               
               
                  O Muse, thou that thy head not compassest,
                  With fading bayes, which Helicon doth beare:
                  But boue in skyes, amids the Quyers blest,
                  Dost golden crowne of starres immortall weare,
                  Celestiall flames breath thou into my brest,
                  Enlighten thou my Song, and pardon where,
                  I fainings weaue with truth, and verse with art,
                  Of pleasings deckt, wherein thou hast no part.
               
               
                  
                  Thou knowst, where luring Parnase most poures out
                  His sweetenesse, all the world doth after runne,
                  And that truth season'd with smoth verse, from doubt,
                  The waywardst (flocking) to beleeue hath wonne,
                  So cup, his brimmes earst liquorisht about
                  With sweete, we giue to our diseased Sonne.
                  Beguilde he drinkes some bitter iuyce the while,
                  And doth his life receiue from such a guile.
               
               
                  Thou noble minded Alfonse, who dost saue
                  From Fortunes furie, and to port dost steare
                  Me wandring pilgrime, midst of many a waue,
                  And many a rocke betost, and drencht welneare,
                  My verse with friendly grace t'accept vouchsaue,
                  Which as in vow, sacred to thee I beare.
                  One day perhaps, my pen forehalsening,
                  Will dare, what now of thee tis purposing.
               
               
                  If euer Christians to agreement growe,
                  And with their Nauy, and their force by land,
                  A pray so great and wrong, from Turkish foe
                  Seeke to regaine, dew reason doth command,
                  That of that soyle the Scepter they bestowe,
                  Or of those seas, if so thy pleasure stand,
                  On thee, thou Godfreys countermate, my rime
                  Attend, and armes prouide in this meane time.
               
               
                  Since Christian campe for high exploit to th'East
                  Had past, the last of sixe yeares on now ranne,
                  And Nice by force, and Antioch not least
                  Of power, by warlike policie they wanne.
                  Wheregainst when Persians passing number preast,
                  In battaile bold they hit defended thanne.
                  And Tortose gat, which done, to winters raigne
                  They yeelde, and stay the comming yeere againe.
               
               
                  
                  The season, by his kind enclinde to weat,
                  Which layes vp armes, we
                        •
                     nie his course now ends,
                  When Sire eternall from his loftie seat,
                  Which in the purest part of heauen extends,
                  And from the lowest hell, what space is great
                  To starres, so farre aboue the starres ascends,
                  Lookes downe, and in one blinck, and in one vew,
                  Comprizeth all what so the world can shew.
               
               
                  Ech thing he viewes, and then he fixt his eye
                  On Syria, where Christian Princes stay,
                  And with that sight, which percingly can spy,
                  What closest vp humaine affections lay,
                  He Godfrey sees, who Panims lewd to fly
                  From sacred Citie would enforce away.
                  And full of faith, and full of zeale in heart,
                  All worldly wealth, rule, glory, layes apart.
               
               
                  But he in Baldwyn sees a greedie vaine,
                  Which bent to humaine greatnesse high aspires,
                  He Tancred sees, his life hold in disdaine,
                  So much a fond loue him afflicting fires,
                  And Boemund he sees, for his new raigne,
                  Of Antioch, foundations deepe desires
                  To ground, and lawes enacts, and orders layth,
                  And arts brings in, and plants the Christen fayth.
               
               
                  And in this course he entred is so farre,
                  That ought but that, hit seemes of nought he weyes,
                  He skryes Rinaldos mind, addict to warre,
                  And working spirits, much abhorring ease,
                  No lust of gold in him, no thoughts there are
                  Of rule, but great and much enflam'd of prayse,
                  He skryes, that at the mouth he hangs of Gwelfe:
                  
                  And old examples rare frames to himselfe.
               
               
                  
                  When inmost sense of these and other sprights,
                  The King of all the world had vnfould:
                  He calles him to, of the Angelicke lights,
                  Him that mongst first, the second ranck doth hould.
                  A faithfull Truchman, Gabriell that hights,
                  A Nuntio glad, twixt Soules of better mould,
                  And God to vs downe heau'ns decrees who shoes,
                  And vp to heau'n who with mens prayers goes.
               
               
                  God to his Nuntio said, seeke Godfrey out,
                  And tell him in my name, why stands he still?
                  The warres againe why goes he not about?
                  Hierusalem opprest to free from ill:
                  Captaines to counsell let him call, and rout
                  Of sluggards rayse, that he be chiefe I will:
                  I here him chuse, and those below that are
                  Tofore his mates, shall be his men of warre.
               
               
                  So spake he: Gabriel himselfe addrest,
                  Swift to performe the things in charge he takes,
                  His shape vnseene, with aire he doth inuest,
                  And vnto mortall sence hit subiect makes,
                  Mans lims, mans looke, t'apparence he possest,
                  Which yet celestiall maiestie pertakes:
                  Twixt youth and childhood bounded seeme his dayes,
                  His golden lockes he doth adorne with rayes.
               
               
                  He puts on siluer wings, yfrendg'de with gold,
                  Wearilesse nymble, of most plyant sway,
                  With these he partes the winds, and clouds, and hold
                  Doth flight with these aloft the earth and sea:
                  Attyred thus, to worlds lower mould,
                  This messenger of skyes directes his way:
                  On Liban mountaine hou'ring first he stayd,
                  And twixt his egall wings himselfe he wayd.
               
               
                  
                  There hence againe, to pastures of Tortose,
                  
                  Plump downe directly leuels he his flight.
                  From easterne coast the new sunne then arose,
                  Part vp, but of morepart waues hid the sight:
                  And earely Godfrey that mornetide bestowes
                  In prayre to God, as aye his vsage hight.
                  When like the Sunne, but farre and far more cleare
                  Th'Angell to him doth from the East appeare.
               
               
                  And thus bespake, Godfrey, now season tides,
                  That best with warriours seruice doth agree:
                  Why thwart you lingring then, while fast it slides▪
                  
                  And not Hierusalem from thraldo me free?
                  Do thou to counsaile call the peoples guides,
                  Do thou the slow their worke to finish see.
                  God for their Chiefetaine thee hath deemed fit,
                  And glad at once they shall themselues submit.
               
               
                  God me this message sent, and I reueale
                  To thee his mind in his owne name, how great
                  A hope of victorie to haue? a zeale
                  How great, of host thy charge hooues thee to heat?
                  He ceast, and vanisht flew to th'vpper deale,
                  And purest portion of the heauenly seat.
                  
                     Godfrey those words, and that his shining bright
                  Daz'led in eyes, and did in heart affright.
               
               
                  But fright once gone, and hauing well bethought,
                  Who came, who sent, and what to him was said:
                  Of earst he wisht, he now a fire hath cought
                  To end the warre whose charge God on him laid.
                  Not for the heau'ns him sole this honour brought,
                  Ambitious winde puffing his stomacke swaid:
                  But all his will did more in will enflame,
                  Of his deare Lord, as sparke becomes a flame.
               
               
                  
                  Then his Heroicke mates disperst about,
                  But not farre off, t'assemble he inuites:
                  Letter to letter, message on message out
                  He sendes, aduice with praier he vnites.
                  What so may slocke or pricke a courage stout,
                  What skill dull vertue to awake endites:
                  Seemes all he findes, with efficacie such,
                  As he enforceth, yet contenteth much.
               
               
                  The leaders came, the rest ensew'd also
                  
                     Boemund alone doth from this meeting stay:
                  Part campt abroad, part them in circuit stowe,
                  Another part within Tortosa lay.
                  The nobles of the campe to counsell goe,
                  (A glorious Senate) on a solemne day.
                  Then godly Godfrey thus makes silence breach,
                  Goodly of countnance, and as shrill of speach.
               
               
                  Champions of God chosen by king of sky,
                  Of his true faith the damage to restore,
                  Whom midst of armes, and midst of guiles, safely
                  He rul'de and guided both at sea and shore:
                  So as of rebell realmes many and many
                  In so few yeares through vs him now adore.
                  And mongst the Nations vanquisht and subdew'd,
                  His ensignes are aduanst, his name renew'd.
               
               
                  We haue not left our pledges sweete, nor neast
                  Natiue to vs (if I beleeue aright)
                  Nor sold our liues to trustlesse seas beheast,
                  And to the perill of farre distant fight,
                  To gaine of fames short blast the vulgar feast,
                  Or that Barbarians land, we claime our right.
                  For our deseigns in straight bounds thē were pent,
                  Slender our hire gainst soules or bloud yspent.
               
               
                  
                  But vtmost purpose which our thoughts did beare,
                  Was Sions noble wals by force to gaine:
                  And Christen brothers to enfranchize there,
                  From yoake vnworthy of their thralled paine,
                  In Palestine a kingdome new to reare,
                  Where safely plast, might godlines sustaine.
                  That holy Pilgrims farre from dread of way,
                  That great Tombe might adore, and vowings pay.
               
               
                  Our deedes till this, for perill haue beene great,
                  For trauell more then great, for honour small,
                  For our mayn purpose nought, if we as yeat
                  Make stop, or bent of armes elsewhere doe call.
                  What bootes it out of Europe to haue fett
                  Fewell of force, and Asia fire withall?
                  When as at last of these huge sturres we wend,
                  Not kingdomes rays'd, but ruin'd are the end.
               
               
                  He buildeth not, who so his soueraigntie
                  On worldly ground-plots vp to raise hath care:
                  Where midst vnnumbred troopes of Paganie,
                  Strangers in faith, few of his Countrey are,
                  Where of the Greekes he hopes no loyaltie,
                  And westerne succours can ariue so spare.
                  But ruynes he procures, with which opprest,
                  Sole for himselfe a Sepulchre he drest.
               
               
                  
                     Turkes, Persians, Antioch, noble matters be,
                  In name magnificent, and in effect:
                  Yet workes not ours, but heauens largesse we
                  Them deeme: Conquests of wonder vnexpect.
                  Now if the giuer them wrong turned see,
                  And misemployed from their course direct:
                  I feare he'l reaue them quite, and honour past
                  So great, will waxe the peoples scorne at last.
               
               
                  
                  Ah be there none (for loue of God) that guifts
                  So pleasing, to bad vses turne and spill,
                  To web of these so high attempting drifts,
                  Let threed and end of worke be suited still:
                  Now that the season to our seruice shifts,
                  Now that ech passage we haue free at will,
                  Why to the Citie runne we not? thats set
                  Our conquests bound: who ist that can vs let?
               
               
                  My Lords I do protest, and that which I
                  Do thus protest, the present world shall heare,
                  And that to come shall heare, and Saints on hie
                  Do heare, the time long since did ripe appeare:
                  And yet fits our exploit, but lie you still,
                  And t'will most doubtfull fall that now is cleare.
                  I prophesie if our course be delayde,
                  The Palestine from Egypt shall haue ayde.
               
               
                  He spake, his speech a muttring short befell,
                  Next after solitarie Peter rose,
                  Though priuate, mongst the princes at counsell,
                  As he from whom that voyage chiefly groes,
                  What Godfrey doth exhort, I say aswell,
                  No doubt here fals, the truth so certaine shoes,
                  It skryes hit selfe, he plaine demonstrance gaue,
                  Th'allowance longs to you, sole t'adde I haue.
               
               
                  If I remember well the brawles and shame,
                  As t'were of purpose by you made and borne,
                  Your froward counsels and proceedings lame,
                  Which midst of working made your works forlorne,
                  I gesse that from another head there came
                  The cause of all these stops, and concord torne,
                  Namely th'authoritie in many wits,
                  And many men that equall peyzed sits.
               
               
                  
                  Where onely one doth not command, from whom
                  Iudgement of paines and prices may depend:
                  From whom may offices and charges come,
                  There still the rule to eyther side will bend:
                  Ah of these members friendly ioyn'd, in some
                  One bodie make, and make a head to wend
                  And guide the rest, let one the Scepter beare,
                  And let him rule as King and Prince he weare.
               
               
                  The olde man silenst here. What thoughts? what breasts?
                  Are shut frō thee breath sacred! heat diuine!
                  Thou in the Hermite dost enspire these heasts,
                  And in the knights harts thou the same dost shrine,
                  Th'ingraft, th'inborne affections thou outwrests
                  Of rule, of libertie, of honours signe.
                  So as both Gwelfe and Guillam chiefe in place,
                  Did Godfrey first with name of Chieftaine grace.
               
               
                  The rest allowance gaue, henceforth must be
                  Their part t'aduise, the others to direct:
                  Conditions to the conquer'd grant shall hee,
                  Warre, peace, when, where he please elect,
                  The rest now brought to becke, earst equall free,
                  The charge of his commandments are t'effect.
                  This so agreed, the fame out flies, and wide
                  Spreading it self through tongs of men doth glide.
               
               
                  To Souldiers then he goes, him worthy they
                  Deeme of the high estate, that giu'n they haue,
                  And greetings glad, and warlick showts they pay,
                  Which he receiues with countnance mildly graue:
                  Thus when to showes of minds humble t'obay,
                  And deere in loue, he sitting answere gaue:
                  He points in field of scope muster to take,
                  To th'ensewing day what force the camp can make.
               
               
                  
                  The sunne from out the east return'd againe
                  So bright, and fairely lightsome, as but seeld:
                  Whē with the new daies beams came forth the traine,
                  And vnder Ensignes splayd their weapons weeld,
                  At Bullions hands ech seeking praise to gaine,
                  Beyond his mates, whil'string they cast in feeld:
                  Both horse and foote marshald in warlicke bands,
                  Before him on do march, where firme he stands.
               
               
                  Thou minde, of yeeres and of obliuion foe,
                  Of what so is, guardaine and steward trew:
                  Afford thy reasons helpe that I may showe
                  This camps ech Captaine, and ech band to view:
                  Let their old fame new sound, and ample growe,
                  On which late yeeres the vayle of silence drew:
                  Adorne my speech from out thy store to fet,
                  What eu'ry age may heare, and none forget.
               
               
                  The Franckes did muster first, of whom tofore
                  
                     Hugo had charge, a brother to their king.
                  From Ile of France issewd this warlicke store,
                  A soile faire, large, on foure streames bordering.
                  When Hue deceast, th'ensigne that Lilies bore
                  Of gold, Clotared still them conducting
                  They followed, who Captaine great in fame,
                  That nought might want, possest a royall name.
               
               
                  Of complet armed they are hundreds ten,
                  So many more of horse next them aduance,
                  So like the first, as twixt them none may ken,
                  In ordring, nature, armes, a variance:
                  
                     Normands they be, and Robert leades the men,
                  Their natiue prince borne and bred vp in France.
                  
                  Their squadrons next William and Ademere,
                  
                  Two Pastors of the people mustred there.
               
               
                  
                  The tone and t'other of them who but late
                  An holy office in Gods seruice beare,
                  Now playted lockes pressing with cap of plate,
                  Haue manly vse of armes falne to their share.
                  
                     Orenge Citie and confines of that state,
                  Foure hundred warriours to the first do spare.
                  The second those of Poggio doth guide,
                  Equall in tale, nor lesse in value tride.
               
               
                  Then Baldwyn makes his muster next in feeld,
                  With Bulleyners tofore his brothers band,
                  For his good brother them contents to yeeld:
                  Now he on Captaines Captaine doth command:
                  Th'ensewing roome th'Earle of Carnute helde,
                  Mightie in counsell, valiant of hand.
                  Foure hundred with him march, a treble force
                  Vnder his Cornet Baldwyn leades of horse.
               
               
                  
                     Gwelfe occupies the bordring circuit, one
                  Whose merit his high fortune egalleth,
                  By Latine Sire, of Estine graundsires gone,
                  A bedroll long and trew he reckoneth:
                  But he vnto the great house of Gwelfon,
                  
                  
                     Germayn in name, and Lordship succeedeth.
                  
                     Corinthia he rules, and neere the streames
                  Of Rhine and Isther, Sweue and Rhetian realmes.
               
               
                  To this liuelode that from his mother came,
                  Conquests he winned, glorious and great:
                  Thence brought he mē, who made (he bidding) game
                  To march where death they were assur'd to geat:
                  They winters cold by stooues to temper frame,
                  And with inuitings glad pertake their meat.
                  Fiue thousand came from home, but hardly tho
                  He could the thirds (the Persians reliques) show.
               
               
                  
                  White skins, and yealow locks next people haue,
                  Twixt Francks and Germans and the Sea bestowde,
                  Where bancks oreflow doth Mose and Rhenish waue,
                  Land that of graine and beasts, beares fruitfull lode:
                  Eke Iland men, whom Oceans swellings braue,
                  Gainst which they force vp rampires high & brode.
                  Ocean that not on wares alone hath power
                  And ships, but townes & kingdomes doth deuour.
               
               
                  These that a thousand are and other are,
                  Vnder another Robert make one band,
                  A greater squadron is the British farre,
                  Committed by their king, to Williams hand,
                  His yonger sonne, their bowes these English bare,
                  And people bring the pole that neerer stand.
                  Whom Ireland placed at the worlds end,
                  Doth from his wildwoods with locks shaggy send.
               
               
                  Then Tancred comes, there's none amongst the rout
                  
                     (Regnald except) a brauer warrier,
                  Nor of a stomacke noble more or stout▪
                  
                  Nor countnance and conditions more faire,
                  If cloud of blame wrapt his deserts about
                  Them dimme, loues folly sole the fault must beare,
                  Aboue twixt battailes borne, bred of short sight,
                  Fed with afflictions, still accreeuing might.
               
               
                  Fame tells what day the Francks with glory great,
                  The Persian troopes discomfited in fight,
                  After that Tancred in victorious heat
                  Chasing those runawayes, was tir'de outright,
                  Some cooly easefull place he sought to geat,
                  For his scorcht lips, and lims deuoide of might,
                  And drew whereas inuiting him to shade,
                  Closde with greene banks, a fresh spring issue made.
               
               
                  
                  Vnthought of there appeares to him a Dame,
                  All saue her face in complet armour dight:
                  Shee was a Painim, and she also came
                  Like rest to gaine in like betyred plight:
                  Her feature he beheld, he held the same
                  Most faire, he likes, his liking fire doth light.
                  Of loue, O wonder! loue then scarcely bred
                  Grew great, and flew and in armes triumphed.
               
               
                  On goes her helme, and she th'assaylers part
                  Had playd, saue others there by chance arriue:
                  The haughtie Dame doth from her thrall depart,
                  Who of sole force becomes afugitiue:
                  But he her warlike image farre in hart
                  Preserued so as hit presents aliue.
                  The chance, the place, how, wher she came in view,
                  In restlesse thought still feeding flame a new.
               
               
                  His looke was looke that did his folke to ware
                  In letters large, he burn'd of hope deuoyd,
                  So full of sighes he went, and so he bare
                  His eye-lids vayled downe and sadly cloyd:
                  Th'eight hundred horse which vnder-went his care,
                  
                     Campanias pleasant fields tofore enioyd,
                  Dame natures greatest pompe, and hils that lay
                  Mellow, fertill, woode by the Tirhene Sea.
               
               
                  Two hundred followed of the Greekish tong,
                  Who yron armour none in manner bring,
                  Their hooked swords vpon the tone side hong,
                  Their bowes and quiuers at their backes do ring,
                  Their light horse seruice doth to gallop long,
                  For trauaile tough, spare in their dyeting,
                  Readie t'assayle and to retire at will,
                  Disordred, scattred, fled, yet fight they still.
               
               
                  
                  
                     Latine that Cornet led, and only he
                  Of Greece the Latine armes accompanide.
                  O shame! O foule misdeede! and had not ye
                  O Greekes! these warres eu'n sticking in your side?
                  Yet (as at games) sluggards you sit to see
                  What issue will to these great actes betide:
                  Now if a slaue thou serue, this thy bondage
                  (Doe not complaine) is iustice, not outrage.
               
               
                  A squadron next there comes in order last,
                  But first for honour, valure and for art:
                  Inuict Heroick ventrers here are plaste,
                  
                     Asias terrour, and Mars thunder dart:
                  Cease Argos, Arther cease, vaine shootes you waste,
                  Knights saylers, and knights errants acts t'impart,
                  For old exployts comparde with these are winde.
                  Where shall we then for them fit Chieftaine finde.
               
               
                  
                     Dudon of Consa is their head, because
                  Hard t'was of bloud and vertue doome to geeue,
                  They all agree to vnder go his lawes,
                  Who did of all know most, and most atcheeue,
                  And graue of manlines and ripe of sawes:
                  He showes in hoarie lockes of strength the preeue.
                  He showes of wounds not foule the printed skarres,
                  The worthy steps of honour wonne in warres.
               
               
                  
                     Eustace is next amongst the chiefe, whose owne
                  Prayse makes him great, but brother Boglion more,
                  From stocke of Norway kings eke Gernand growne,
                  On Scepters, titles, crownes, him proud he bore:
                  
                     Roger of Balnauil mongst best is knowne:
                  Old fame, and Eugerlan do there him score.
                  Eke with the brauest they solemnize doo
                  One Genton, one Rambald, and Gerards too.
               
               
                  
                  
                     Vbald also, and Rosomond is praysd
                  Of Dutchy great of Lancaster the heire,
                  Nor can Obize the Tuscane downe be peyzd
                  By him that memories away doth beare,
                  Nor Lombard brothers three will be disseyzd,
                  
                     Achilles, Sforza, Palamede, of their
                  Cleare fame, nor Otto strong that wonne the shield
                  Where Serpents mouth sends forth a naked child.
               
               
                  Nor Guasco, nor Rudolfo left behinde,
                  Nor th'one nor th'other Guido, famous both,
                  Nor Eurard, nor Gernier must slip my mind,
                  To passe in gratelesse silence more then loth,
                  Whither do you louers and spouses kind?
                  
                     Gildip and Edward hale him, now that grow'th
                  Of numbring wearie? O consorts in warre!
                  Though dead, disioynd you neuer shalbe farre.
               
               
                  What can there not be learnd in schooles of loue?
                  There was she taught to waxe a warrie bolde,
                  To his deere side still cleaues she, and aboue
                  One destiny, his and her life doth holde:
                  No blow that hurts but one, they euer proue,
                  But ech wounds smart encreast is doublefold,
                  And oft the one is hit the other playnes,
                  Tone bleedes at soule, the tother at the vaynes.
               
               
                  But youth Rinaldo farre surpasseth these,
                  And passeth all that to the muster went,
                  Most sweetly fierce, vp should you see him rayse
                  His royall looke and all lookes on it spent:
                  He hope oregoes, he ouergrowes his dayes,
                  When bud was thought but bloome, out fruit he sent:
                  To such as armes him thundring saw embrace,
                  
                     Mars he did seeme: Loue, if he shew'd his face.
               
               
                  
                  Him on the banck of Adige foorth brought
                  
                     Sofia to Bertold, Sofia the faire,
                  To Bertold the puissant when newly rought
                  From mothers teat, and yet vnwayn'd welneare,
                  
                     Maued would him haue, and nurst him, & him tought
                  In princely skils, and kept him still with her,
                  Vntill his youthly minde plight his beheast,
                  T'ensew the trump that sounded from the East.
               
               
                  Then he thrice fiue of yeares could scantly skore,
                  Yet fled alone and walkt through vncouth wayes,
                  He past th'Egean Sea and Greekish shore,
                  And at the campe arriues, where far hit stayes,
                  Most noble flight, well worthy that once more,
                  Some Nephew chiualrous make like assayes:
                  Three yeeres are spent, and he in wars when now
                  His chyns soft downe, could scarce a beard auow.
               
               
                  The horsemen past, the muster next doth grow
                  Of men on foot, and Reymond leades the way,
                  
                     Tholouse he rulde, and brought his souldiers fro
                  
                     Mount Piren, Garon streame, and Ocean Sea,
                  Of thousands foure, well arm'd, well trayn'd, a show
                  He makes, whom toyle or want could not affray:
                  Tall were the men, and led they could not be
                  By one more strong, or better skil'd then he.
               
               
                  But thousands fiue doth Stephen from Amboise
                  
                  And Blois and Tours vnto the seruice bring:
                  Though sorted bright in armes and weapons choice,
                  For strength or paine not worth the valewing:
                  The soyle is tender, light, shapte to reioyce,
                  And like it selfe his dwellers fostering:
                  In battaile first they giue an onsett bold,
                  But soone waxt faint, and in their courage cold.
               
               
                  
                  
                     Alcasto commeth third (as Thebes by
                  Was Capaneus once) of visage grim:
                  Sixe thousand Swizzers commons, fierce, hardy,
                  From Alpine castles leuide come with him,
                  Who yron wont to plowes and clots t'apply,
                  To new shapes now and worthier vses trim.
                  And with the hand that kept the ragged heard,
                  Seemes kingdomes to defie, are not afeard.
               
               
                  He after saw the loftie Standard splayd,
                  With Peters Diademe and with his keyes,
                  These thousands seu'n doth good Camillus lead,
                  Footmen in armour bright, and huge of peyze,
                  He glad the heau'ns so great a charge obeyd,
                  There to renew his graundsires auncient prayse,
                  Or shew at least that to valure Latine,
                  
                  Or nothing lackes, or onely discipline.
               
               
                  But now the squadrons all in musters faire,
                  Were marching on, and this of all the last,
                  When Godfrey calles the greatest Captaines neare,
                  And by his words gaue of his meaning taste:
                  To morow when the dawning shall appeare,
                  I will that light and prest the hoast do haste,
                  So as vnto the sacred Citie we
                  May come vnlookt, as much as much may be.
               
               
                  Prepare you all both to the iourney than,
                  And to the fight, and to the victorie,
                  This hardie speech of so discreet a man
                  Gaue ech one care, and vaunst his courage hie,
                  All prest march on, when the first ray began
                  To sprout, loth them broad day should there deskry,
                  But Bollion prouident wants not his feare,
                  Though close conceald it in his breast he beare.
               
               
                  
                  For he by newes, for certaine vnderstood
                  Th'Egyptian king was now vpon his way
                  To Gaza ward, a foretresse strong and good,
                  Which frontier-wise to Sirian kingdoms lay,
                  Nor could he thinke a man of restlesse mood,
                  In high exploits, would trifle time away,
                  But him sharpe foe attends: and sayeth this
                  To Henryck a true messenger of his.
               
               
                  Vnto some Frigate light get thee aboord,
                  And toward Greekish soyle no fayling slake,
                  There shall you meet (so haue I written woord,
                  From one who newes of lyes will neuer make)
                  A royall youth, none brauer guirt with sword,
                  That part with vs in warre pretends to take:
                  He is the Prince of Danes, and leades a band
                  From where the Pole is Zenith to the land.
               
               
                  But for the Greekish Emp'rour fraught with guile,
                  With him perhaps will vse his wonted art,
                  To turne him backe or bend his course the while,
                  Farre off from vs vnto some forraine part:
                  My messenger and counsler true as stile,
                  Do thou in my behalfe dispose his hart,
                  To our and his owne good, and bid him speed,
                  For stay were now his most vnseemely deed.
               
               
                  Come not with him thy selfe, but tarry there
                  With Greekish king so to procure vs ayde,
                  Which more then once he hath vs promisde faire,
                  And by our league thus ought not be delayde,
                  So speakes he, so informes, and giues to beare
                  Letters, the which with greetings credence prayd.
                  
                     Henryck for speed, a present congey takes,
                  And with his thoughts a truce time Godfrey makes.
               
               
                  
                  Th'ensewing day when of the lightsome east,
                  The gates are opned to the Sunnes approch,
                  The Drums and Trumpets gaue the eare no rest,
                  Exhorting warriours on the way t'encroch,
                  Thunder in heat is no such welcome guest,
                  Which hope of nere showre to the world doth broch.
                  As all the hardy souldiers pleasing found,
                  Of warlicke instruments this shrilly sound.
               
               
                  Straightway ech one pricked with great desire,
                  Clothed his lims with his oft-worne spoyles,
                  Straightway ech one musters in complet tire,
                  Straightway ech one to his chieftaine recoyles,
                  And the well-marshald army ioyned nyre
                  His ensignes all displayes to Eols broyles.
                  And the Emperiall Standard stately-large,
                  A crosse triumphant ouer all doth charge.
               
               
                  This while the Sunne, which in the heau'nly ground
                  Still vauntage winnes, and vp ascendeth hie,
                  On th'armour beates and flashes makes rebound,
                  And quaking lightnings cleere, which bleare the eye:
                  The aire with sparckles seemes enflamed round,
                  And shines like burning fire that vp doth flie:
                  And with the neighings fierce accordes the noyse
                  Of clashing armour and the fields accloyes.
               
               
                  The generall, who from the en'mies snares,
                  Desires his troups in safetie may remaine,
                  Store of light horse from the maine armie pares,
                  And round to scoure the coast employes their paine,
                  And Pioners to send before he cares▪
                  
                  So for his campe an easie march to gaine,
                  The pits to fil, the cragges away to take,
                  And passages foreclosde wide ope to make.
               
               
                  
                  There are no Painim forces leauide yet,
                  No walles enuironed with trenches steepe,
                  No riuer broad, no combrous hill to get,
                  No forrest thicke their voyage backe to keepe,
                  Eu'n so the king of streames on priding set,
                  When as he growes past measure high and deepe:
                  Beyond his banckes abroad all wrackfull goes,
                  And nought is found that dare it selfe oppose.
               
               
                  Onely the King of Trypoli, who kept
                  Within well guarded walles, coyne, men and armes,
                  Athwart the Frankish army might haue stept,
                  Yet durst he not by warre to stirre vp harmes:
                  But he by presents to their fauour crept,
                  And by his fires at home them gladly warmes.
                  And such conditions of a peace doth take
                  As vertuous Godfrey likes with him to make.
               
               
                  There from Mount Seyr which vplifted hie,
                  Neere to the Citie stands on easterne side
                  Of true beleeuing wights a companie,
                  Mingled in age and Sexe downe slocking hide,
                  And Christens presents brought for victorie,
                  And glad them view, and with them talking bide,
                  Admiring vncouth armes, and to Godfrey
                  
                  They prou'd true faithfull guides to shew the way.
               
               
                  He euer butting on the salt-sea waue,
                  By wayes directest doth conduct his hoast,
                  Well weeting that th'associat shipping haue,
                  Resolu'd to sayle still hard aboord the coast,
                  Which course vnto his armie plenty gaue
                  Of vittaile, and what else was needfull most:
                  For him ech Ile of Greece their haruest rept,
                  And Creete and rocky Scio vintage kept.
               
               
                  
                  The bordering Sea vnder the waight did grone
                  Of the tall ships, and of the lightest pines,
                  So as safe passage there was open none
                  In Midland Sea to any Saracines:
                  
                  For mand out not from Marck and George alone,
                  In the Venetian and the Gene confines
                  Came fleetes: But England, France, & Holland some
                  Do send, and some from fruitfull Sicil come.
               
               
                  And these which now together are combinde
                  With soundest knot of loue in one consent,
                  At diuers shores had loden in ech kind
                  What by the Campe should needfully be spent.
                  So when the frontire coast they freed finde
                  From en'mies shipping, which are close vp pent:
                  With canvas spred at full they thither goe,
                  Where Christ for mortall men bare mortall woe.
               
               
                  But fame foreran', the ready carrier
                  Of true reports, and rumours fraught with lyes,
                  That safe is ioyn'd the army conquerer,
                  And now sets forth and all delaying flyes,
                  She of ech band, makes a perticular,
                  She showes their names whose prayse doth highest rise,
                  She showes their vaunts, and terrible of face
                  
                     Sions vsurpers ceasles doth menace.
               
               
                  And ill lookt for perhaps brings greater ill,
                  Then selfe ill doth, when it is present, beare,
                  On ech vncertaine breath of rumour still
                  Doubtfull hangs eu'ry mind, and eu'ry eare,
                  Muttring confusde, within, without doth fill
                  The fields, and dolefull Citie all with feare.
                  But th'aged King neere perill of such losse,
                  Counsels sauage in doubtfull hart doth tosse.
               
               
                  
                  
                     Aladine is his name who of that realme
                  Newe Soueraigne liued in continuall thought:
                  A man earst cruell, but that mood extreame
                  His riper age part had to mildnesse wrought:
                  He that conceau'd whereat the Latines ayme,
                  Who of his towne the walles to batter sought.
                  To auncient feare adioyneth new suspectes,
                  And dreads his foes, and dreadeth his subiectes.
               
               
                  For in one Citie mingled dwellings fall,
                  Of people contrarie in faith, the lesse
                  And weaker part on Christ their Sauiour call:
                  The great and stronger Mahomet professe.
                  But when the king first conquer'd Sion wall,
                  And there his seat to stablish did addresse,
                  From common taskes the Painims he set free,
                  And double lodes the Christians miserie.
               
               
                  The thought of this his natiue sauage mood,
                  Which couched lay, and languisht cold with yeares,
                  Angring eneigres and it makes new wood,
                  That thirst of bloud now more then aye appeares,
                  So gentle seemd a while, the Snakish brood,
                  That to his fiercenesse turnes as Sommer neares.
                  And so the tamed Lion takes againe
                  His natiue fury, if he wrong sustaine.
               
               
                  I see, sayes he, of new conceiued ioy,
                  Vndoubted signes in this vnfaithfull race:
                  What their sole good that proues our chiefe annoy,
                  Sole they do laugh in this our common case
                  Of woe and now perhaps their wits employ
                  To guile and treason, and discourse apace,
                  How me to slay, or to consorted mates,
                  Mine enemies, how they may d'ope the gates.
               
               
                  
                  But soft not so, I will preuent (I trow)
                  Their wicked purposes, I'le glut my will,
                  I'l hew them downe, I'l sharpe examples show,
                  I'l sucklings in their mothers bosoms kill,
                  I'l fire in ech their house and temples throw,
                  Such funerals shall their death rights fulfill:
                  I'l offer on that Sepulchre of theirs,
                  Their Priests for sacrifice amid their Preyrs.
               
               
                  So did this tyrant reason in his mind,
                  But thought so ill conceiu'd tooke no successe:
                  Yet if these innocents a pardon finde,
                  Base hart, not pittie doth him thereto presse.
                  For if one feare to crueltie him tinde,
                  Another greater doubt bridles no lesse.
                  He dreads all wayes of concord to debarre,
                  And armes of conqu'ring foes t'incense too farre.
               
               
                  This fellon then his mad rage tempereth,
                  Or rather seekes elsewhere the same to wrake,
                  The countrey houses downe he ruyneth,
                  And places well manur'd, a pray doth make
                  To flames: Nought leaues he whole or soūd vnneath,
                  Where any Franck may food or lodging take:
                  The springs and brooks he soyles & waters sound,
                  With deadly poysons he doth all confound.
               
               
                  He spitefull warie is, ne ought foreslackes
                  
                     Hierusalem with new force to supply,
                  On three sides strong before no helpe it lackes,
                  Onely the North part least assur'd doth lye,
                  But from his first suspect the same he backes,
                  On that his weaker flancke with rampires hye,
                  And numbers great of Souldiers cul'd in haste,
                  Hirelings and subiects by him there are plaste.
               
               The end of this first Song.
            
            
               
               GIERVSALEMME
LIBERATA DEL SIG
TORQVATO TASSO.
CANTO PRIMO.
               
                  
                     CANTO l'Armi pietose, e'l Capitano,
                  Che'l gran Sepolcro liberò di
CHRISTO.
                  
                  Molto egli oprò col senno, e con
la mano:
                  Molto soffrì nel glorioso acquisto:
                  E in van l'Inferno à lui s'oppose: e in vano
                  S'armò d'Asia, e di Libia il popol misto:
                  Che'l Ciel gli diè fauore, e sotto à i santi
                  Segni ridusse i suoi compagni erranti.
               
               
                  O Musa, tu, che di caduchi Allori
                  Non circondi la fronte in Helicona;
                  Ma sù nel Cielo infra i beati Chori
                  Hai di stelle immortali aurea Corona;
                  Tu spira al petto mio celesti ardori,
                  Tu rischiara il mio canto: e tu perdona,
                  S'intesso fregi al ver, s'adorno in parte
                  D'altri diletti, che de'tuoi le carte.
               
               
                  
                  Sai, chelà corre il Mondo, oue più versi
                  Di sue dolcezze il lusinghier Parnaso:
                  E che'l vero condito inmolli versi
                  I più schiui allettando hà persuaso.
                  Così à l'egro Fanciul porgiamo aspersi
                  Di soaui licor gli orli del vaso;
                  Succhi amari, ingannato, intanto ei beue,
                  E da l'inganno suò vita receue.
               
               
                  Tu Magnanimo ALFONSO, il qualritogli
                  Al furor di Fortuna, e guidi in porto
                  Me Peregrino errante infragli scogli,
                  Einfra l'onde agitato, e quasi absorto;
                  Queste mie carte in lieta fronte accogli,
                  Che quasiin uoto à te sacrate i porto.
                  Forfe undì fia, che la presaga Pènna
                  Osi scriuer di tequel, c'hor n'accenna.
               
               
                  E'benragion, s'egli auuerrà, che'n pace
                  Il buon popol di CHRISTO unquasi ueda:
                  Econ Naui, ecaualli al fero Trace
                  Cerchi ritor la grande ingiusta preda;
                  Ch'àte lo scet tro in Terra, ò se ti piace
                  L'alto Imperio de'mari altri conceda.
                  Emulo di Goffredo, i nostri carni
                  In tanto ascolta, e t'apparecchia à l'armi.
               
               
                  Gia'l sesto anno uolgea, che'n Oriente
                  Passò il campo Christiano àl'alta impresa:
                  E Nicea per assalto, e la potente
                  Antiochia con arte hauea già presa.
                  L'hauea poscia in battaglia incontra gente
                  Di Persia innumerabile difesa:
                  E Tortosa espugnata. indi à larea
                  Stagion diè loco, e'lnouo Anno attende
                        •
                     .
               
               
                  
                  E'l fine homai di quel piouoso Verno,
                  Chefe l'arme cessar, lunge non era;
                  Quando da l'alto Soglio il Padre eterno,
                  Ch'è ne la parte più del Ciel sincera:
                  E, quanto e da le stelle al basso Inferno,
                  Tanto è più in sù de la stellata spera;
                  Gli occhi in giù uolse, e in un sol punto, e in una
                  Vista mirò ciò, che'n se il Mondo aduna.
               
               
                  Mirò tutte le cose, & in Soria
                  S' affisò poi ne' Principi Christiani:
                  E con quel guardo suo, ch'à dentro spia
                  Nel più secreto lor gli affetti humani;
                  Vede Goffredo, che scacciar desia
                  Da la Santa Città gli empi Pagani:
                  E pien di fè, di zelo ogni mortale
                  Gloria, Imperio, tesor mette in non cale.
               
               
                  Ma uede in Baldouin cupido ingegno,
                  Ch' à l'humane grandezze intento aspira.
                  Vede Tancredi hauer la vita à sdegno:
                  Tanto un suo uano amor l'ange, e martira:
                  E fondar Boemondo al nouo Regno
                  Suo d'Antiochia alti principij mira:
                  E leggi imporre, & introdur costume,
                  Et arti, e culto di uerace Nume.
               
               
                  E cotanto internar si in talpensiero,
                  Ch' altra impresa non par, che più rammenti.
                  Scorge in Rinaldo & animo guerriero,
                  E spirti di riposo impatienti.
                  Non cupidigia in lui d'oro, ò d'Impero,
                  Ma d'honor brame immoderate, ardenti.
                  Scorge, che da la bocca intento pende
                  Di Guelfo, ei chiari antichi essempi apprende.
               
               
                  
                  Ma poi, c'hebbe di questi, e d'altri cori
                  Scorti gl'intimi sensi il Redel Mondo;
                  Chiama à se dagli Angelici splendori
                  Gabriel, che ne'primi era secondo.
                  E' tra DIO questi, e l'anime migliori
                  Interprete fedel, Nuntio giocondo:
                  Giù i decreti del Ciel pòrta, & al Cielo
                  Riporta de'mortali i preghi, e'l zelo.
               
               
                  Disse al suo Nuntio DIO. Goffredo troua,
                  E in mio nome dì lui; perche si cessa?
                  Perchela guerra homai non si rinoua
                  A liberar Gierusalemme oppressa?
                  Chiami i Duci à consiglio, e i tardi moua
                  A l'alta impresa: ei Capitan sia d'essa.
                  Io quì l'eleggo, e'lfarangli altri in Terra,
                  Già suoi compagni, hor suoi ministri in guerra.
               
               
                  Così parlogli: e Gabriel s'accinse
                  Veloce ad essequir l'imposte cose.
                  La sua forma inuisibil d'aria cinse,
                  Et al senso mortal la sottopose.
                  Humane membra, aspetto human si finse;
                  Ma di celeste maestà il compose.
                  Tragiouene, efanciullo età confine
                  Prese, & ornò di raggi il biondo crine.
               
               
                  Ali bianche vestì, c'han d'or le cime,
                  Infaticabilmente agili, e preste.
                  Fende i venti, e le nubi, e và sublime
                  Sourala terra, e soura il mar con queste.
                  Cosìvestito indirizzossi à l'ime
                  Parti del Mondo il Messaggier celeste.
                  Pria sul Libano monte ei siritenne,
                  E si librò sù l'adeguate penne.
               
               
                  
                  E ver le piaggie di Tortosa poi
                  Drizzò precipitando il volo in giuso.
                  Sorgeua il nouo Sol da i lidi Eoi,
                  Parte già fuor; ma'l più ne l'onde chiuso:
                  E porgea matutini i preghi suoi
                  Goffredo à Dio, come egli hauea per vso;
                  Quando à paro col Sol, ma più lucente
                  L'Angelo gli apparì da l'Oriente.
               
               
                  Egli disse. Goffredo, ecco opportuna
                  Già la stagion, ch'al guerreggiar s'aspetta.
                  Perche dunque trapor dimora alcuna
                  A liberar Gierusalem soggetta?
                  Tu i Principi à consiglio homai raguna:
                  Tu al fin de l'opra i neghittosi affretta.
                  Dio per lor Duce già t'elegge: & essi
                  Sopporran volontari à te se stessi.
               
               
                  Dio messaggier mi manda: io ti riuelo
                  La sua mente in suo nome. ò quanta spene
                  Hauer d'alta vittoria: ò quanto zelo
                  De l'hoste à tecommessa hor ti conuiene.
                  T acque, esparito riuolò del Cielo
                  A le parti più eccelse, e più serene.
                  Resta Goffredo à idetti, à lo splendore
                  D'occhi abbagliato, attonito di core.
               
               
                  Ma poi che si riscote, e che discorre,
                  Chivenne, chi mandò, che gli fù detto;
                  Se già bramaua, hortutto arde d'imporre
                  Fine à la guerra, ond'egli è Duce eletto.
                  Non che'l vedersi à gli altri in Ciel preporre
                  D'aura d'ambition gli gonfi il petto;
                  Ma il suo voler piùnel voler s'infiamma
                  Del suo Signor, come fauillain fiamma.
               
               
                  
                  Dunque gli Heroi compagni, i quai non lunge
                  Erano sparsi, à ragunarsi inuita.
                  Lettere à lettre, e messi à messi aggiunge:
                  Sempre al consiglio è la preghiera vnita.
                  Ciò, ch' Alma generosa alletta, e punge:
                  Ciò, che può risuegliar virtù sopita,
                  Tutto par, che ritroui: e in efficace
                  Modo l'adorna sì, che sforza, e piace.
               
               
                  Vennero i Duci, e gli altri anco seguiro:
                  E Boemondo sol quì non conuenne.
                  Parte fuor s'attendò: parte nel giro,
                  E tra gli alberghi suoi Tortosa tenne.
                  I grandi de l'Essercito s'vniro
                  (Glorioso Senato) in dì solenne.
                  Quì il pio Goffredo incominciò tra loro
                  Augusto in volto, & in sermon sonoro.
               
               
                  Guerrier di Dio, ch'à ristor are i danni
                  De la sua fede il Re del Cielo elesse:
                  E securi fra l'arme, e fra gl'inganni
                  Dela Terra, & del Mar vi scorse, e resse;
                  Sì c'habbiam tante, e tante in sì pochi anni
                  Ribellanti Prouincie à lui sommesse:
                  E fra le genti debellate, e dome
                  Stese l'insegne sue vittrici, e'l nome.
               
               
                  Già non lasciammo i dolci pegni, e l'nido
                  Natiuo noi (se'l creder mio non erra)
                  Nè la vita esponemmo al mar infido,
                  Et à i perigli di lontana guerra;
                  Per acquistar di breue suono un grido
                  Vulgare, e posseder barbara Terra:
                  Che proposto ci hauremmo angusto, e fcarso
                  Premio e in damno de l'alme il sangue sparso.
               
               
                  
                  Mà fu de'pensier nostri vltimo segno
                  Espugnar di Sion le nobil mura:
                  E sottrarre i Christiani al giogo indegne
                  Di seruitù cosi spiacente, e dura:
                  Fondando in Palestina un nouo Regno,
                  Ou' habbia la pietà sede secura:
                  Nè sia chineghi al Peregrin deuoto
                  D'adorar la gran Tomba, e sciorre il uoto.
               
               
                  Dunque il fatto sin'hora al rischio è molto,
                  Più che molto al trauaglio, à l'honor poco,
                  Nulla al disegno; oue ò si fermi, ò uolto
                  Sia l'impeto del'arme in altro loco.
                  Che giouerà l'hauer d'Europa accolto
                  Sì grande sforzo, e posto in Asia ilfoco,
                  Quando sia poi di sì gran moti il fine,
                  Non fabriche di Regni, ma ruine?
               
               
                  Non edifica quel, cheuuol gl'Imperi
                  Sù fondamenti fabricar mondani:
                  Oue hà pochi di patria, e fè stranieri,
                  Fra gl'infiniti popoli Pagani:
                  Oue ne'Greci non conuien, che speri,
                  E i fauor d'Occidente hà si lontani.
                  Ma ben moue ruine, ond'egli oppresso
                  Sol construtto un sepolcro habbia à se stesso.
               
               
                  Turchi, Persi, Antiochia (illustre suono,
                  E di nome magnifico, e di cose)
                  Opre nostre non già; ma del Ciel dono
                  Furo, euittorie in uer mer auigliose.
                  Hor, sedanoi riuolte, e torte sono
                  Contra quel fin, che'l donator dispose;
                  T emoce'n priui: e fauola à le genti
                  Quel si chiaro rimbombo al fin diuenti.
               
               
                  
                  Ah non sia alcun, per DIO, che sì graditi
                  Doni in uso si reo perda, e diffonda.
                  A quei, che sono alti principij or diti
                  Di tutta l'opra il filo, e'l sin risponda.
                  Hora, che i passi liberi, e spediti,
                  Hora, che la stagione habbiam seconda,
                  Che non corriamo à la Città, ch'è meta
                  D'ogni nostra uittoria: e che più'l uieta?
               
               
                  Principi, io ui protesto (i miei protesti
                  Vdrà il Mondo presente, udrà il futuro:
                  L'odono hor sù nel Cielo anco i celesti)
                  Il tempo de l'impresa è già maturo.
                  Men diuien opportun, più che si resti:
                  Incertissimo fia quel, che è securo.
                  Presago son, s'è lento il nostro cor so,
                  C'haurà d'Egitto il Palestin soccorso.
               
               
                  Disse: e à i detti seguì breue bisbiglio,
                  Ma sorse poscia il solitario Piero:
                  Che priuato fra Principi à consiglio
                  Sedea, del gran passaggio autor primiero.
                  Ciò, ch'essorta Goffredo, & io consiglio:
                  Nè loco à dubbio u'ha, sì certo è il uero,
                  E per se noto: ei dimostrollo à lungo,
                  Voil'approuate, io questo fol u'aggiungo.
               
               
                  Se ben raccolgo le discordie, el'onte,
                  Quasi à proua da uoi fatte, e patite,
                  I ritrosi pareri, e le non pronte,
                  E in mezo à l'esseguire opre impedite;
                  Reco ad un'alta originaria fonte
                  La cagion d'ogni indugio, e d'ogni lite:
                  A quella autorità, che in molti, e uari
                  D'opinion, quasi librata, è pari.
               
               
                  
                  Oue un sol non impera, onde i giudici
                  Pendono poi de'premi, e de le pene:
                  Onde fian compartite opre, & uffici;
                  Iui errante il gouerno esser conuiene.
                  Deh fate un corpo sol di membri amici:
                  Fate un Capo, che gli altri indrizzi, e frene:
                  Date ad un sol lo scettro, e la possanza:
                  E sostenga di Reuece, e sembianza.
               
               
                  Quì tac
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      il veglio. Hor quai pensier, quai petti
                  Son chiusi à te, sant' Aura, e diuo Ardore?
                  Inspiri tu de l'Heremita idetti:
                  E tu gl'imprimi à i Caualier nel core.
                  Sgombri gl'inserti, anzi gl'innati affetti
                  Disourastar, di libertà, d'honore:
                  Si che Guglielmo, e Guelfo, i più sublimi,
                  Chiamar Goffredo per lor Ducei primi.
               
               
                  L'approuar gli altri. Esser sue parti denno
                  Deliberare, e comandar altrui.
                  Imponga à i uinti legge egli à suo senno:
                  Porti la guerra e quàndo uuole, e à cui.
                  Cli altri, già pari, ubidienti al cenno
                  Siano hor ministri de gl'imperij sui.
                  Concluso ciò, fama neuola, e grande
                  Per le lingue de gli huomini si spande.
               
               
                  Ei si mostra à i soldati; e ben lor pare
                  Degno del'alto grado, oue l'hanposto:
                  Ericeue i saluti, e'l militare
                  Applausoin uolto placido, e composto.
                  Poi ch'à le dimostranze humili, e care
                  D'amor, d'ubidienza hehbe risposto;
                  Impon, ch'l dì seguente in un gran campo
                  Tutto si morsti à lui schierato il Campo.
               
               
                  
                  Facea ne l'Oriente il Sol ritorno
                  Sereno, e luminoso oltre l'usato;
                  Quando co'raggi i scì del nouo giorno
                  Sotto l'insegne ogni Guerriero armato:
                  E si mostrò quanto potè più adorno
                  Al pio Buglion, girando il largo prato.
                  S'era egli fermo, e si uedea dauanti
                  Passar distinti i Cauallieri, e i Fanti.
               
               
                  Mente, de gli anni, e de l'oblio nemica,
                  De le cose custode, e dispensiera,
                  Vagliami tua virtù sì, ch'io ridica
                  Di quel campo ogni Duce, & ogni schiera.
                  Suoni, e risplenda la lor fama antica,
                  Fatta da gli anni homai tacita, e nera:
                  Tolto da'tuoi tesori orni mia lingua
                  Ciò, ch'a scolti ogni età, nulla l'estingua.
               
               
                  Prima i Franchi mostrarsi: il Duce loro
                  Vgone esser solea del Re fratello.
                  Ne l'Isola di Francia eletti foro
                  Fra quattro fiumi, ampio paese, e bello.
                  Poscia ch'Vgon morì, de'Gigli d'oro
                  Seguì l'usata insegna il fier drappello
                  Sotto Clotareo Capitano egregio,
                  A cui, se nulla manca, è il sangue regio.
               
               
                  Mille sin di grauissima armatura:
                  Sono altrettanti i Caualier seguenti,
                  Di disciplina à i primi, e di natura,
                  E d'arme, e di sembianza indiferenti;
                  Normandi tutti: egli hà Robertoin cura,
                  Che Principe natiuo è de le genti.
                  Poi duo Pastor di popoli spiegaro
                  Le squadre lor Guglielmo, & Ademaro.
               
               
                  
                  L'vno, el'altro di lor, che ne'diuini
                  Vffici già trattò pio ministero,
                  Sotto l'elmo premendoi lunghi crini,
                  Essercita de l'arme hor l'vsofero.
                  Da la Città d'Orange, e da i confini
                  Quattrocento guerrier scelse il primiero.
                  Ma guida quei di Poggio in guerra l'altro:
                  Numero egual, nè men ne l'arme scaltro.
               
               
                  Baldouin poscia in mostra addur si vede
                  Co'Bolognesi suoi quei del Germano:
                  Che le sue genti il pio fratel gli cede
                  Hor, ch'ei de'Capitani è Capitano.
                  Il Conte dè Carnuti indi succede,
                  Potente di consiglio, e prò di mano.
                  Van con lui quattrocento: e triplicati
                  Conduce Baldouino in sella armati.
               
               
                  Occupa Guelfo il campo à lor vicino,
                  Huon, ch'à l'alto fortuna agguaglia il merte.
                  Conta costui per Genitor Latino
                  De gli Aui ESTENSI vn lungo ordine, e cer to.
                  Ma German di cognome, e di Domino,
                  Ne la gran casa de'Guelfoni è inserto.
                  Regge Carinthia, e presso l'Istro, e'l Reno
                  Ciò, che i prischi Sueui, e i Reti hauieno.
               
               
                  A'questo, che retaggio era materno,
                  Acquisti ei giunse gloriosi, e grandi.
                  Quindi gente trahea, che prende à scherno
                  D'andar contra la morte, ou'ei comandi:
                  Vsa à temprar ne'caldi alberghi il verno,
                  E celebrar con lieti inuitii prandi.
                  Fur cinquemila à la partenza; à pena
                  (De'Persi auanzo) il terzo hor qui ne mena.
               
               
                  
                  Seguia la gente poi candida, e bionda,
                  Che tra i Frāchi, e i Germani, e'l mar si giace:
                  Oue la Mosa, & oue il Reno inonda,
                  Terra di biade, e d'animai ferace.
                  Egli Insulani lor, che d'alta sponda
                  Riparo fansi à l'Ocean vorace:
                  L'Ocean, che non pur le merci, e i legni;
                  Ma intere inghiotte le Cittadi, e i Regni.
               
               
                  Gli vni, e gli altri son mille: e tutti vanno
                  Sotto vn'altro Roberto insieme à stuolo.
                  Maggior'alquanto è lo squadron Britanno:
                  Guglielmo il regge al Re minor figliuolo.
                  Sono gl'Inglesi sagittari, & hanno
                  Gente con lor, ch'è più vicina al Polo.
                  Questi de l'alte selue hirsuti manda
                  La diuisa dal Mondo vltima Irlanda.
               
               
                  Vien Poi Tancredi: e non è alcun fra tanti
                  (Tranne Rinaldo) ò feritor maggiore,
                  O più bel di maniere, e di sembianti,
                  O' più eccelso, & intrepido di core.
                  S' alcun ombra di colpa i suoi gran vanti
                  Rende men chiari, è sol follia d'Amore:
                  Nato fra l'arme Amor di breue vista,
                  Che si nutre d'affanni, e forza acquista.
               
               
                  E' fama, che quel dì, che glorioso
                  Fèla rotta de'Persi al popol Franco,
                  Poi che Tancredi al fin vittorioso
                  I fuggitiui di seguir fù stanco;
                  Cercò di rifrigerio, e di ripòso
                  A l'arse labra, al trauagliato fianco:
                  E trasse, oue inuitollo al rezo estiuo
                  Cinto di verdi seggi vn fonte viuo.
               
               
                  
                  Quiui à lui d'improuiso vna Donzella
                  Tutta, fuor che la fronte, armata app arse.
                  Era Pagana, e là venuta anch'ella
                  Per l'istessa cagion di ristorarse.
                  Eg li mirolla, & ammirò la bella
                  Sembianza, e d'essa si compiacque, en'arse.
                  O merauiglia; Amor ch'à pena è nato,
                  Già grande vola, e già trionfa armato.
               
               
                  Ella d'elmo coprissi, e se non era,
                  Ch'altri quiui arriuar, ben l'assaliua.
                  Parti dal uinto suo la Donna altera,
                  Ch'è per necessità sol fuggitiua;
                  Ma l'imagine sua bella, e guerriera
                  Tale ei serbò nel cor, qual essa è uiua:
                  E sempre hà nel pensiero e l'atto, e'l loco,
                  In che la uide, esca continua al foco.
               
               
                  E ben nel uolto suo la gente accorta
                  Legger potria▪ questi arde, e fuor di spene:
                  Così uien sospiroso, e così porta
                  Basse le ciglia, e di mestitia piene.
                  Gli ottocento à cauallo, à cui sa scorta,
                  Lasciar le piaggie di Campagna amene,
                  Pompa maggior de la Natura, e i colli,
                  Che uagheggia il Tirren fertili, e molli.
               
               
                  Venian dietro ducento in Grecia nati,
                  Che son quasi di ferro in tutto scarchi:
                  Pendon spade ritorte à l'unde'lati:
                  Suonano al tergo lor faretre, & archi:
                  A sciutti hannoi caualli, al corso usati,
                  A'la fatica inuitti, al cibo parchi:
                  Ne l'assalir son pronti, e nel ritrarsi:
                  E combat ton fuggendo erranti, e sparsi.
               
               
                  
                  Tatin regge la schiera: esol fù questi,
                  Che Greco accompagnò l'armi Latine.
                  O uergogna, ò misfatto; hor non hauesti
                  Tu Grecia quelle guerre à te uicine?
                  E pur quasi à spettacolo sedesti,
                  Lenta aspettando de'grand'atti il fine:
                  Hor se tu sè uil serua, è il tuo seruaggio
                  (Non ti lagnar) guistitia, e non oltraggio.
               
               
                  Squadra d'ordine estrema, ecco uien poi;
                  Ma d'honor prima, e di ualore, e d'arte.
                  Son quì gli Auuenturieri inuitti Heroi,
                  Terror de l'Asia, e folgori di Marte.
                  Taccia Argo i Mini, e tacota Artù que'suoi
                  Erranti, che di sogni empion le carte:
                  Ch'ogni antica memoria appo costoro
                  Perde. hor qual Duce fia degno di 
                        •
                     oro?
               
               
                  Dudon di Consa è il Duce. e, perche duro
                  Fù il giudicar di sàngue, e di uirtute;
                  Gli altri sopporsi a lui concordi furo,
                  C'hauea più cose fatte, e piu uedute.
                  Ei di uirilità graue, ematuro
                  Mostra in fresco uigor chiome canute.
                  Mostra, quasi d'honor uestigi degni,
                  Di non brutte ferite impressi segni.
               
               
                  Hustatio è poi fra' primi: e i propri pregi
                  Illustre il fanno, epiù il fratel Buglione.
                  Gernando u'è, nato di Re Noruegi,
                  Che scettri uanta, e titoli, e corone.
                  Ruggier di Balnauilli infra gli egregi
                  Lauecchia fama, & Engerlan ripone.
                  E celebrati son fra'piùgagliardi
                  Vn Gentonio, un Rambaldo, e duo Gherardi.
               
               
                  
                  Son fralodati Vbaldo anco, e Rosmondo
                  Del gran Ducato di Lincastro herede.
                  Non fia, ch'Obizo il Tosco aggraui al fondo
                  Chi fà de le memorie auare prede:
                  Nè i tre frati Lombardi al chiaro Mondo
                  Inuoli, Achille, Sforza, e Palamede:
                  O'l forte Otton, che conquistò lo scudo,
                  In cui da l'Angue esce il fanciullo ignudo.
               
               
                  Nè Guasco, nè Ridolfo adietro lasso:
                  Nè l'un, nè l'altro Guido, ambo famosi.
                  Non Eberardo, e non Gernier trapasso,
                  Sotto silentio ingratamente ascosi.
                  Oue uoi me, di numer ar già lasso,
                  Gildippe, & Odoardo amanti, e sposi
                  Rapite? 
                        •
                     ne la guerra anco consorti,
                  Non sarete disgiunti, ancor che morti.
               
               
                  Ne le scole d'Amor, che non s'apprende?
                  Iui si fè costei Guerriera ardita.
                  Và sempre affissa al caro fianco, e pende
                  Da un fato solo l'una, e l'altra uita.
                  Colpo, ch'ad un sol noccia, unqua non scende:
                  Ma indiuiso e il dolor d'ogni ferita.
                  Espesso è l'un ferito, e l'altro langue:
                  E uersa l'Alma quel, se questa il sangue.
               
               
                  Ma il fanciullo Rinaldo e suor a questi,
                  E soura quanti in mostra er an condutti,
                  D olcemente feroce alzar vedresti
                  La regal fronte, e in lui mirar sol tutti.
                  L'età precorse, e la speranza: e presti
                  Pareano i fior, quando n'usciro i frutti.
                  Se'l miri fulminar ne l'arme auuolto
                  Marte lo stimi: Amor, se scopre il uo lto.
               
               
                  
                  Lui ne la riua d'Adige produsse
                  A Bertoldo Sofia: Sofia la bella,
                  A Bertoldo il possente: e pria, che fusse
                  Tolto quasi il Bambin da la mammella,
                  Matilda il uolse, e nutricollo, e instrusse
                  Ne l'artiregie: e sempre ei fù con ella,
                  Sin ch'inuaghì la giouenetta mente
                  La Tromba, che s'udia da l'Oriente.
               
               
                  All'hor (nèpur tre lustri hauea forniti)
                  Fuggì solletto, e corse strade ignote:
                  Varcò l'Egeo, passò di Grecia i liti,
                  Giun se nel campo in region remote.
                  Nobilissima fuga, e che l'imiti:
                  Ben degnaalcun magnanimo Nipote.
                  Tre anni son, ch'è in guerra: e intempestiua
                  Molle piuma del mento à pena useiua.
               
               
                  Passatii Cauallieri, in mostra uiene
                  La gente à piedi, & è Raimondo auanti.
                  Regea Tolosa, e scelse infra Pirene,
                  E fra Garona, e l'Ocean suoi fanti.
                  Son quattromila, e ben' armati, ebene
                  Instrutti, usi al disagio, e toleranti.
                  Buona è la gente, e non può da più dotta,
                  O'da più forte guida esser condotta.
               
               
                  Ma cinquemila Stefano d'Ambuosa
                  E di Blesse, e di Turs in guerra adduce.
                  Non è gente robusta, ò faticosa,
                  Se ben tutta di ferro ella riluce.
                  Laterra molle, e lieta, e dilettosa
                  Simili à se gli habitator produce.
                  Impetofan ne le battaglie prime;
                  Ma di leggier pio langue, e si reprime.
               
               
                  
                  Alcasto il terzo uien, qual presso à Tebe
                  Già Capaneo, con minaccioso uolto.
                  Sei mila Eluetij audace, e fera plebe,
                  Da gli Alpini castelli hauea raccolto:
                  Che'l ferrouso à far solchi, à franger glebe,
                  In noue forme, e in più degne opre hà uolto:
                  E con laman, che guardò rozi armenti
                  Par, ch'i Regisfidar nulla pauenti.
               
               
                  Vedi appresso spiegar l'alto uessillo
                  Co'l diadema di Piero, e con le chiaui.
                  Quì settemila aduna il buon Camillo
                  Pedoni d'arme rilucenti, e graui:
                  Lieto, ch'à tanta impresa il ciel sortillo,
                  Ouerinoui il prisco honor de gli Aui:
                  O'mostri almen, ch'à la uirtù Latina,
                  O'nulla manca, òsol la disciplina.
               
               
                  Ma già tutte le squadre er an con bella
                  Mostra passate, e l'ultima fù questa;
                  Quando Goffredo i maggior Duci appella,
                  E la sua mente lorfà manifesta.
                  Come appaia diman l'Alba nouella
                  Vuò, che l'Hoste s'inuij leggiera, e presta:
                  Si ch'ella giunga à la Città sacrata,
                  Quanto è possibil più, meno aspettata.
               
               
                  Preparateui dunque, & al uiaggio
                  Et à la pugna, e à la uittoria ancora.
                  Questo ardito parlar d'huom cosi saggie
                  Sollecita ciascuno, e l'auualora.
                  Tutti d'andar son pronti al nouo raggio,
                  E impatienti in aspettar l'Aurora.
                  Ma'l prouido Buglion senza ogni tema
                  Non è però, benche nel cor la prema.
               
               
                  
                  Perch' egli hauea certe nouelle intese,
                  Che s'è d'Egitto il Re già posto in uia
                  In uerso Gaza, bello, e forte arnese
                  Da fronteggiarei Regni di Soria.
                  Nè creder può, che l'huomo, à fere imprese
                  A uezzo sempre, hor lento in otio stia;
                  Ma d'hauerlo aspettando aspro nemico,
                  Parla al Fedel suo messaggiero Henrico.
               
               
                  Soura vna lieue Saettia tragitto
                  Vuò, che tu facciane la Greca Terra.
                  Iui giunger deuea (così m'hà fcritto,
                  Chi mai per vso in auisar non erra)
                  Vn Giouene regal, d'animo inuitto,
                  Ch'à farsi vien nostro compagno in guerra:
                  Prence è de'Dani, e mena vn grandestuolo
                  Sin da i Paesi sottoposti al Polo.
               
               
                  Ma perche'l Greco Imperator fallace
                  Seco forse vserà le solite arti,
                  Per far, ch'ò torni indietro, ò'l corso audace
                  Torca in altre da noi lontane parti;
                  Tu, Nuntio mio, tu, Consiglier verace,
                  In mio nome il disponi à ciò, che parti
                  Nostro, e suo bene: e dì, che tosto vegna:
                  Che di lui fora ogni tar danza indegna.
               
               
                  Non venir seco tu; ma resta appresso
                  Al Re de'Greci à procurar l'aiuto:
                  Che già più d'vna volta à noi promesso,
                  E'per ragion di patto anco douuto.
                  Così parla, e l'informa: e poi che'l Messo
                  Le lettre hà di credenza, e di saluto;
                  Toglie, affrettando il suo partir, congedo:
                  E tregua fà co'suoi pensier Goffredo.
               
               
                  
                  Il dì seguente all'hor, ch'aperte sono
                  Del lucido Oriente al Sol le porte;
                  Di trombe vdissi, e di tamburi vn suono,
                  Ond'al camino ogni guerrier s'essorte.
                  Non è sì grato à i caldi giorni il tuono,
                  Che speranza di pioggia al mondo apporte;
                  Come fù caro à le feroci genti
                  L'altero suon de'bellici instrumenti.
               
               
                  Tosto ciasun, da gran desio compunto,
                  Veste le membra de l'vsate spoglie:
                  E tosto appar di tutte l'arme in punto:
                  Tosto sottoi suoi Duciogn'huom s'accoglie.
                  E l'ordinato Essercito congiunto
                  Tutte le sue bandiere al vento scioglie;
                  E nel vessillo Imperiale, e grande
                  La trionfante CROCE al Ciel si spande.
               
               
                  Intanto il Sol, che de'celesti campi
                  Và più sempre auanzando, e in alto ascende,
                  L'armipercote, e ne trahe fiamme, elampi
                  Tremuli, e chiari, onde le viste offende.
                  L'aria par di fauille intorno auampi,
                  E quasi d'alto incendio in forma splende:
                  E co'feri nitriti il suono accorda
                  Del ferro scosso, e le campagne assorda.
               
               
                  Il Capitan, che da'nemici aguati
                  Le schiere sue d'assecurar desia;
                  Molti à cauallo leggiermente armati
                  A'scoprir il paese intorno inuia.
                  E inanzii Guastatori hauea mandati,
                  Da cui si debbia ageuolar la via,
                  E i voti luoghi empire, e spianar gli erti:
                  E da cui siano i chiusi passi aperti.
               
               
                  
                  Non è gente Pagana insieme accolta,
                  Non muro cinto di profonda fossa,
                  Non grantorrente, ò monte alpestre, ò folta
                  Selua, che'l lor viaggio arrestar possa.
                  Così de gli altri fiumiil Re tal uolta,
                  Quando superbo oltra misura ingrossa,
                  Soura le sponde ruinoso scorre:
                  Nè cosa è mai, che gli s'ardisca opporre.
               
               
                  Sol di Tripoli il Re, che'n ben guardate
                  Mura, genti, tesori, & arme serra;
                  Forse le schiere Franche hauria tardate;
                  Ma non osò di prouocarle in guerra.
                  Lor con messi, e con doni anco placate
                  Ricettò volontario entro la Terra:
                  E riceuè condition di pace,
                  Sì come imporle al pio Goffredo piace.
               
               
                  Quì del Monte Seir, ch'alto, e sourano
                  Da l'Oriente à la Cittade è presso,
                  Gran turba scese di Fedelial piane,
                  D'ogni età mescolata, e d'ogni sesso.
                  Portò suoi doni al vincitor Christiano:
                  Godea in mirarlo, e in ragionar con esso:
                  Stupia del'armi peregrine: e guida
                  Hebbe da lor Goffredo amica, e fida.
               
               
                  Conduce eisempre à le maritime onde
                  Vicino il campo per diritte strade;
                  Sapendo ben, che le propinque sponde
                  L'amica Armata costeggiando rade.
                  Laqual può far, che tutto il Campo abonde
                  De'necessari arnesi; e che le biade
                  Ogni I sola de'Greci à lui sol mieta:
                  E Scio pietrosa gli vindemini, e Certa.
               
               
                  
                  Geme il vicino mar sotto l'incarco
                  De l'alte naui, e de'più leui pini:
                  Sì che non s'apre homai securo uarco
                  Nel Mar Mediterraneo à i Saracini.
                  Ch'oltra quei, c'hà Georgio armati, e Marco
                  Ne'Vinitiani, e Liguri confini;
                  Altri Inghilterra, e Francia, & altri Olēda,
                  E la fertil Sicilia altri ne manda.
               
               
                  E questi, che son tutti insieme uniti
                  Con saldissimi lacci in un uolere;
                  S'eran carchi, e prouisti in uari liti
                  Di ciò, ch'è d'uopo à le terrestri schiere:
                  Le quai trouando liberi, e sforniti
                  I passi de'nemici à le frrontiere;
                  In corso uelocissimo se'n uanno
                  Là, ue CHRISTO soffrì mortale affanno.
               
               
                  Ma precorsa è la Fama apportatrice
                  De'ueraci romori, e de'bugiardi:
                  Dh'unito è il Campo uincitor felice:
                  Che già s'è mosso: e che non è chi'l tradi.
                  Quante, e quai sian le squadre ella ridice:
                  Narra il nome, e'lualor de'più gagliar di:
                  Narra i lor uanti, e con terribil faccia
                  Gli usurpatori di Sion minaccia.
               
               
                  E l'aspettar del male e'mal peggiore
                  Forse, che non parrebbeil mal presente.
                  Pende ad ogn'aura incerta di romore
                  Ogni orecchia sospesa, & ogni minte:
                  E un confuso bisbiglio entro, e di fuore
                  Trascorre i campi, e la Città dolente.
                  Ma il uecchio Re ne'già uicin perigli
                  Volge nel dubbio cor feri consigli.
               
               
                  
                  Aladin detto è il Re, che di quel Regno
                  Nouo Signor, uiue in continua cura.
                  Huom già crudel; ma'lsuo feroce ingegno
                  Pur mitigato hauea l'età matura.
                  Egli, che de'Latini udì il disegno,
                  C'han d'assalir di sua Città le mura;
                  Giunge al uec chio timor noui sospetti:
                  E de'nemici paue, e de'soggetti.
               
               
                  Però, che dentro à una Città commisto
                  Popolo alberga di contraria fede.
                  La debil parte, e la minore in CHRISTO:
                  
                  La grande, e forte in Macometto crede.
                  Ma quando il Re fè di Sion l'acquisto,
                  Eui cercò di stabilir la sede;
                  Scemò i publici pesi a'suoi Pagani;
                  Ma più grauonne i miseri Christiani.
               
               
                  Questo pensier la ferità natiua,
                  Che dagli anni sopita, e fredda langue,
                  Irritando inasprisce, e la rauuiua
                  Sì, ch'assetata è piu chemai di sangue.
                  T al fero torna à la stagione estiua
                  Quel, che parue nel gel piaceuo l'Angue.
                  Così Leon domestico riprende
                  L'innato suo furor, s'altri l'offende.
               
               
                  Veggio (dicea) de la letitia noua
                  Veraci segniin questa turba infida.
                  Il danno uniuersal solo à lei gioua:
                  Sol nel pianto comun par, ch'ella rida.
                  E forse insidie, e tradimenti hor coua,
                  Riuolgendo fra se come m'uccida:
                  O come al mio nemico, e suo consorte
                  Popolo occultamente apra le porte.
               
               
                  
                  Ma no'l farà; preuenirò questo empi
                  Disegni loro, e sfogherommi à pieno.
                  Gli ucciderò: faronne acerbi scempi:
                  Suenerò i figli à le lor madri in seno:
                  Arderò loro alberghi, e insieme i Tempi.
                  Questi i debiti roghi à i mortì fieno,
                  E sù quellor sepolcro in mezoa i uoti,
                  Vittime pria farò de'Sacerdoti.
               
               
                  Così l'iniquo fra suo cor ragiona;
                  Pur non segue pensier sì mal concetto.
                  Ma s'à quegli innocenti egli perdona,
                  E'di uiltà, non di pietade effetto.
                  Che s'un timor'à incrudelir lo sprona,
                  Il ritien più potente altro sospetto:
                  Troncar le uie d'accordo, e de'nemici:
                  Troppoteme irritar l'arme uittrici.
               
               
                  Tempra dunque il fellon la rabbia insana:
                  Anzi altroue pur cerca, oue la sfoghi.
                  I rustici edifici abbatte, e spiana:
                  E dà in preda à le fiamme i culti luoghi,
                  Parte alcuna non lascia integra, ò sana,
                  Onde il Franco si pasca, oue s'alloghi:
                  Turba le fonti, e i riui, e le pure onde
                  Di ueneni mortiferi confonde.
               
               
                  Spietatamente è cauto: e non oblia
                  Di rinforzar Gierusalem fra tanto.
                  Da tre lati fortissima era pria:
                  Sol uerso Barea è men secura alquanto.
                  Ma da'primi sospetti ei le munia
                  D'altri ripari il suo men forte canto:
                  Eu'accogliea gran quantitade in fretta
                  Di gente mercenaria, e di soggetta.
               
               Il fine del Primo Canto
            
         
         
            
               
               THE SECOND SONG
OF THE RECOVERIE
OF HIERVSALEM.
               
                  
                     WHile thus the Tyrant doth prouide
to arme,
                  
                     Ismen one day comes to him all
alone,
                  
                     Ismen that from the Tombes can
draw, and warme
                  Life, breath, and sence giue corps
whence they were gone:
                  
                     Ismen that by the sound of mumbled charme,
                  Can Pluto in his Court cast feare vpon:
                  And all his Diuels employ in charges bad,
                  And bind, and looze, as if them slaues he had.
               
               
                  
                     Mahound he serues, that once did Christ professe,
                  Yet former rites wholy can not forgo,
                  But oft to vse of foulest wickednesse,
                  Confounds both lawes, though wel he neither know:
                  And now from caues where farre off common presse,
                  He wonts in hidden arts his time bestow:
                  He comes, in publicke perill of his Lord,
                  To wicked king a Counsler more abhord.
               
               
                  
                  My Liege (he sayes) the Campe doth hither speede
                  His march, that conquering hath so dismayd:
                  But let vs do what vs to do may steede,
                  The skyes, the world, will giue the hardy ayd.
                  Tis well that Kings, and Captaines store at neede
                  You haue, and for all wants foreorder layd.
                  If that all other ply their charges so,
                  This land for Sepulchre shall serue your foe.
               
               
                  As for my selfe I come my helpe t'impart,
                  Compagnion both of perill, and of paine,
                  What counsell best lyes stor'd in aged hart,
                  What Magicke skill I promise eu'ry graine.
                  I will constraine to beare of toyle their part,
                  Th'angels earst banisht from the heau'nly raine.
                  But how I meane these my enchantments frame,
                  And by what meanes, now will I shew the same.
               
               
                  An altar hid in Christian Temple lyes,
                  Lowe vnder ground and her caru'd picture there,
                  On whom as Goddesse vulgar sort relyes,
                  And mother that their bury'd God did beare,
                  Wrapt in a vayle it is, nor euer dyes,
                  The Lampe that shines before the image cleare.
                  A long in rankes there hang hit round about,
                  The offred vowes of credulous deuout.
               
               
                  This Image now from them bereft away,
                  I will that you transport with your owne hand,
                  And in your great Meschita safe vplay,
                  Then I by charme will shape so sure a band,
                  That whiles it there doth dewly guarded stay,
                  By it ech gate shall fatall fenced stand,
                  Your Empire so twixt walles impregnable,
                  This rare new secret shall make durable.
               
               
                  
                  He sayd, and swayd: then with impatience
                  The King vnto the house of God him hyes,
                  And forst the Priests, and voyde of reuerence,
                  On that chast picture seyz'd in rau'ning wise,
                  And bare hit to that Church, whereof offence
                  Of fond and wicked rites prouokes the skyes:
                  On sacred image in that place profane,
                  Th'enchaunter whispered his blasphemous bane.
               
               
                  But when new dawning peered in the sky,
                  The Sexten who this Temple (most vncleene)
                  Receiu'd in guard, the image cannot spy,
                  Nor where he sought, nor where it plast had beene:
                  Straight he enformes the king, whom egerly
                  This so vnwelcome newes incenst with teene:
                  And tooke conceipt t'was stolne by some of those,
                  Who Christ profest, and now conceale it close.
               
               
                  Were it the deede of some beleeuing wight,
                  Or wear't the heau'n that here his power displayd:
                  And for his Queene, and Goddesse tooke despight,
                  In so vile place to see her image layd:
                  (For fame as yet vncertaine doth endight,
                  Where this, or mans, or Gods worke may be sayd)
                  Godly it is that zeale and godlinesse,
                  Of man giue place, and hit heau'ns deede confesse.
               
               
                  The King doth cause with search importunest,
                  Ech house, ech Church, view'd and review'd to bee,
                  And him that hides, or maketh manifest
                  The theefe, or theft, proffers great paine, and fee:
                  Th'enchaunter giues to all his arts no rest,
                  To hunt the truth, but all in vaine hunts hee,
                  Frō where from heau'n or earth the practise came,
                  Heau'n close it kept, to this Enchaunters shame.
               
               
                  
                  But when the cruell king saw vnespyde,
                  That which he deem'd the faithfuls only feat,
                  Gainst them a fellon hate he tooke, and fryde
                  In wrath, and rage immoderate and great,
                  Respect he quite forgets, what so betyde,
                  Vengeance he'l take, and quench his furies heat:
                  Th'vnknowen theefe (sayth he) shall yet be slaine
                  In common wracke, nor my wrath tane in vaine.
               
               
                  So that the guiltie be not sau'd, let die
                  The iust and innocent, but which is iust?
                  Ech blame deserues, nor mongst them all see I
                  So much as one, whom we as friend may trust:
                  If some with this new fault haue none ally,
                  It serues old faults abuy new penance must.
                  Vp vp my loyals, vp in hand goe take
                  Both fire & sword, burne, & huge slaughter make.
               
               
                  So he his folke bespake, when forth ech where,
                  Straightwayes this fame amongst the faithfull flyes,
                  Who grew astonisht, so doth them the feare
                  Of death in eye now present quite surpryze,
                  Nor is there one that dew excuse, or preyre,
                  Or iust defence, or flight, once dares or tryes.
                  But these so faint, and vnresolu'd of mind,
                  Where least they hoped, did their safetie find.
               
               
                  Amongst them was a mayd of maidenhed
                  To ripenesse growne, of high and noble thought:
                  Of bewtie rare, but bewtie valewed,
                  Or nought or sole, for it to vertue brought
                  Accompt, most priz'd because straight cabyned,
                  Twixt wals her prices great to hide she sought.
                  And of her wooers vnbepranct and sole,
                  Both from the laud, and from the lookes she stole.
               
               
                  
                  But guard is none that wholy can conceale,
                  Bewtie of worth likt and admirde to be,
                  Nor loue consent will giue, but it reueale
                  Vnto a young mans hote desires doth hee,
                  Loue that now blinde, now Argos, now with vaile
                  Dost blind thine eyes, now open wide dost see,
                  Thou through a thousand watchers into chast
                  Maides lodgings others sight conueyed hast.
               
               
                  
                     Sofronia shee, Olindo he hath name,
                  One Citie both, and one faith both they haue,
                  For modest he, for faire she carries fame,
                  Desire much, little hope, nought he doth craue▪
                  
                  Nor can it show, or dares not do the same,
                  And she or scornes, or seeth not, or gaue
                  No semblance, so till then par thrall he peakt,
                  Or not seene, or ill knowne, or smally reakt.
               
               
                  This while runnes out the bruit, how there is prest
                  A wretched slaughter of this seely flocke,
                  Shee that is equall noble and honest,
                  Bethinkes what way to shield them from the shocke,
                  Valiance her great minde moues, shame it arrest,
                  And maidens modestie doth thwart a blocke.
                  Valiance orecomes, rather accordes, whiles she
                  Shamefast her selfe, shame valiant makes to be.
               
               
                  This maide alone through preace of vulgar went,
                  Bewty she couers not, nor sets to sight,
                  Shadow'd her eyes, in vayle her bodie pent,
                  With manner coy, yet coy in noble plight,
                  I note where car'de, or carelesse ornament,
                  Where chance, or art her fairest countnance dight.
                  Friended by heau'ns, by nature, and by loue,
                  Her meere neglects most artificiall proue.
               
               
                  
                  Lookt on by ech the stately Ladie goes,
                  But lookes on none, and to the King she came,
                  Nor for he angry seemes, one steppe she slowes,
                  But his grim sight fearelesse endures the Dame.
                  I come my Lord, sayth she, (your wrath for close
                  The while I pray, and your people reclame)
                  I come to show, and to you bound to gieue
                  The wight you seeke, and did you so aggrieue.
               
               
                  At t'honest boldnesse, at the vnforethought
                  Glympes of her bewtie, stately, and diuine,
                  As if confusde, as conquer'd he were cought,
                  He bridles rage, and sterne looke doth incline,
                  Had he a mind; or she a countnance brought
                  Ought lesse seuere, loue had him snar'd in line.
                  But wayward bewtie, wayward hart to moue
                  Serues farre vnfit, kindnes is bait of loue.
               
               
                  T'was stonishment, t'was rarenesse, t'was delite,
                  If t'were not loue that stir'd his villaine hart:
                  Declare (sayes he) the whole, no farder smite
                  Shall any sword to Christen peoples smart:
                  Then she here standes the guiltie of thy spite,
                  This hand (O King) did play this theeuish part,
                  Th'image I tooke away, and I am she,
                  That so thou seekst, and punisht ought to be.
               
               
                  Thus to the publicke fate her hautie hed
                  She offered, and sole on her it tooke,
                  Most noble lye, when so embellished,
                  As thee t'exceede, can truth selfe euer looke?
                  Suspenst a while and not so sodaine led
                  To wrath, this Tyrant fierce patience forsooke,
                  Then he reioyns thereto, I will thou show,
                  Who did aduise, and who did helpe bestow.
               
               
                  
                  Of this my glorie I would not pertake
                  One onely myte to any else (she sayd)
                  My selfe I sole did hereto priuie make,
                  My selfe sole counsaile gaue, sole gaue I ayde:
                  Then on thee sole (he out replying brake)
                  Shall all the wrath of my reuenge be layde:
                  Tis iust (quoth she) to me it so pertaynes,
                  At honour sole, sole will I be in paynes.
               
               
                  Fresh rage in Tyrant then beginnes accrew,
                  And asketh her: where is the image hid?
                  Not hid (quoth she) but I in fire it threw,
                  To fire the same most praysefull deeme I did:
                  For so at least, that myscreants hands a new
                  Might worke it farder wrong, all feare I rid.
                  Seeke you the theefe, or seeke you (Sir) the theft,
                  Her here you see, that aye from sight is reft.
               
               
                  Albe nor mine is theft, nor theefe am I,
                  Tis iust regayn'd, that wrongfully was got,
                  The hearing this doth force the Tyrant gry,
                  With threatfull sound, and raynes to wrath allot,
                  Noble visage, hart shamefast, stomach hye,
                  Now out may hope of finding pardon blot:
                  And loue in vaine against so cruell wrake,
                  Of deintie bewtie seekes a shield to make.
               
               
                  Arrested, and condemned is that faire
                  Dame, by that fellon King, in flames to die,
                  And now her vayle and mantle chaste they teare
                  Away, and with hard wythes armes tender tye,
                  She silent stands, and still stout hart doth beare,
                  No whit dismayd, though somewhat moou'd therby,
                  And her faire face is taynted with a hew,
                  That doth not palenesse, but a whitnesse shew.
               
               
                  
                  Now this great case is knowne, and thither packt
                  Huge preace of people, and Olindo came,
                  The person doubtfull is, certaine the fact,
                  He came as deeming it might be his Dame,
                  When as the prisner faire he found in act
                  Not of accusde, but cast to be the same.
                  And Sergeants busie bout hard office spide,
                  Therewith he headlong shooues the presse aside.
               
               
                  And cryes (O King) she is not guiltie, she
                  Not of this theft, through folly vaunts she it,
                  She thought it not, she durst it not, who see
                  Did e're lone woman, and vnskild commit
                  Such act? could watch by her beguiled be?
                  Had she to steale the sacred image wit?
                  If yes, tell how? my Lord, my selfe it was,
                  So loue not louing loued he alas.
               
               
                  He added then, I there where aire, and day,
                  Your stately builded Meschite in doth let,
                  By night vp clammer'd, and ech vncouth way
                  Assaying, through that narrow hole did get,
                  Mine only is this prayse, me onely slay
                  You ought, nor she vsurpe my penall det,
                  Mine are these chaines, for me you are too light,
                  These flames, this pile, is nones but mine of right.
               
               
                  
                     Sofronia mildely lifting vp her sight,
                  With eyes of pittie looketh him vpon,
                  Whereto comest thou, O wretched guiltles wight?
                  What counsaile, or what furie leades thee on?
                  Or drawes thee foorth? without thee want I might,
                  To beare the waight of humaine wrath alone?
                  I eke haue hart that thinkes for once to die,
                  It selfe can serue and craues no companie.
               
               
                  
                  She louer so bespake, but not dispose
                  Him can, t'vnsay his words, or change his minde,
                  Oh rare example where contention growes
                  Twixt noble vertue, and a loue as kinde,
                  Where winners onely price is life to lose,
                  And harme of vanquisht is safetie to finde,
                  But feller waxt the king that she and he,
                  Ech to condemne themselues so constant be.
               
               
                  He thinkes himselfe scorned by them to see,
                  Who for despiting him, despise the paynes:
                  Beleeue we both (he sayes) both I agree,
                  Shall winne, but conquest such as best pertaynes:
                  To Sergeants then he beckes, that readie bee
                  The youth to binde with their prepared chaynes.
                  Both to one stake they tye, and so them place,
                  As backe to backe is turn'd, not face to face.
               
               
                  Then was the pile fram'd vp about them round,
                  And now the bellowes kindle ginnes the flame,
                  When as the youth to layes of dolefull sound
                  Brake, and bespake his fellow tyed Dame,
                  Is this the cord I hoped should haue bound
                  Vs two copemates of life? and is this same
                  The fire I deemed should in ech our hart,
                  An equall heat of equall flames impart?
               
               
                  Flames other, other knots loue promised,
                  But diffrent much, our hard lot doth prepare,
                  Farre, ah too farre, it earst vs sundered,
                  And bitter now conioynes in dying care,
                  It likes me yet since I am destyned,
                  So strange a death, this stake with thee to share:
                  That bed I did not, thy fate sorrow I,
                  And not mine owne, since by thy side I die.
               
               
                  
                  And oh most happy death that could betide!
                  Oh fortunate these sweetest torments mine!
                  If I obtaine that breast to breast allyde,
                  My soule breath out into that mouth of thine,
                  And thee with me, so deaths selfe instant guyde,
                  As thy last sighes thou into me resigne,
                  So sayd he playning, she againe replyes
                  Sweetly, and with these words doth him aduise.
               
               
                  Friend other thoughts, and plaints of other kind,
                  For cause more vrgent this time doth require,
                  Bethinke you of your sinnes, and call to mind
                  What God he is, who good giues ample hire,
                  Suffer for him, so paynes sweet shall you find,
                  And glad to the supernall seat aspire:
                  Behold how faire heau'n showes, the sunne behold
                  You seemes t'inuite, and comforts to vnfold.
               
               
                  The Painims lift their playning voyce aloft,
                  And faithfull plaine, but in lower sound,
                  I wot nere what vnused earst, and soft,
                  To kings hard hart, seemes hath a passage found,
                  Him it foretels, and scornes, nor will be broft
                  To bend, but turnes his eyes, and left the ground,
                  Thou sole Sofronia dost not pertake
                  This common dole, nor plaint dost playned make.
               
               
                  In such their plight a Knight comes ryding loe,
                  (For so they ghesse) of goodly woorth and port,
                  Whom stranger by the armes and tire they tro,
                  That from farre parts, now thither made resort:
                  The Tygre which on helme for crest doth show,
                  Drawes on ech eye, as badge of rare report,
                  A badge in battaile by Clorinda vsde,
                  They thinke it's she, nor is their thought abusde.
               
               
                  
                  Of womens fashions and their vsuall guise,
                  Eu'n from her greenest yeares she takes disdaine,
                  Proud hand doth with Arachnes worke despise,
                  With Spindle, or with needle it selfe to staine:
                  Gay clothing, and close cabbanes eke she flyes,
                  For goodnes eu'n in fields may safe remaine:
                  She armes with pride her looke, and holds a bent,
                  Sterne it to make, yet sterne it doth content.
               
               
                  Tender as yet with daintie hand she straines,
                  And slips the raines vnto some courser braue,
                  She handles speare, and sword in armes she traines,
                  Enduring breath, and lims enur'd to haue:
                  Then through the wildest woods, and on mountaines
                  Chase to the Lions fierce, and Beares she gaue,
                  She warre ensewes, in which, and in forreasts,
                  Men sauage her, man her deeme sauage beasts.
               
               
                  From Persian Realmes she hither iourneyed,
                  That Christens to her power resist she may,
                  Albe tofore their members scattered
                  She had in fields, and mixt their bloud with sea,
                  Now here arriu'd, first sight was offered
                  Of those, who debt to death were prest to pay,
                  Willing to see, and know what fault did force
                  Them to such end, she forward spurres her horse.
               
               
                  The preace giues place, she doth some stay pretend,
                  The tyed paire more neerely to suruay:
                  She markes t'one silent, t'other sighes out send,
                  And sexe lesse strong more courage to display:
                  She sees him wayle, as one that pittie bends,
                  Not dole, or dole not for himselfe doth sway.
                  And silent her, with eyes so fixt on sky,
                  As parted hence, she seemes before she dy.
               
               
                  
                  
                     Clorinda moody grew, and griefe doth take
                  For both their sakes, and teares her visage taint,
                  Yet more bemones her that no mone doth make,
                  The silence moues her more, lesse the complaint:
                  Without long stay a man she thus bespake,
                  Whose haire old age did with new colour paint,
                  Ah tell me what are these, and to this death
                  What fate, or fault of theirs them conducteth?
               
               
                  So him she prayd, and he short answered,
                  But full exprest what she to learne was bent,
                  She wonders much, and soone imagined,
                  That both these wights were equall innocent▪
                  
                  Straight to forbid their death she purposed,
                  So farre as prayre, or force could make extent,
                  She nyres the flame, she bids take it away,
                  (That fast approcht) and doth to Sergeants say:
               
               
                  Not one amongst you once so hardy bee,
                  This office hard, yet harder to pursew,
                  Till with the King I speake, and trust you mee,
                  This lingring shall none your annoyance brew,
                  The Sergeants yeeld, as moued much to see,
                  That her so stately port, and royall hew,
                  Then to the king she goes, and met him there
                  Midway, he going likewise towards her.
               
               
                  I am (quoth she) Clorinda, you my name
                  Perhaps haue heard, and for defence
                  Of our beliefe, and of your raygne I came
                  Like prest for ech exploit, do you dispence
                  What I shall vndertake, I neither shame
                  The base, nor dread of highest daunts my sence,
                  Will you in open field, or will you vse
                  My seruice closde in walles? I none refuse.
               
               
                  
                  She peac'd, what land so wide, the king replyes,
                  From Asia standes, or from the course of Sunne,
                  Where (glorious maide) thy honour great not flyes,
                  Or where thy fame hath not arriuall wonne?
                  Now that thy sword his edge with mine allyes,
                  My feare is past, and comfort is begunne,
                  Not if an armie great my part should take,
                  My hope more sured could that army make.
               
               
                  Now now, me seemes, Godfrey beyond his dew
                  Protractes the time, and where you please, demaund
                  Employd to be, sole fit I deeme for you
                  Exploytes, where hazard hath most honour pawnd,
                  To you the charge of all my martiall crew
                  I here assigne: tis law what you commaund,
                  So spake the king, she courteous money payes,
                  Of thankes for prayse, and then thus farder sayes.
               
               
                  A strange case may it seeme to ech ones sense,
                  That seruice vnperform'd should guerdon haue:
                  Your bounty yet me cheeres, for recompence
                  Of seruice ment, those two condemn'd I craue:
                  Though if the fault do want sure euidence,
                  T'was cruell reason that such iudgement gaue:
                  But this I silence, and I silence signes
                  Expresse, through which their innocency shines.
               
               
                  I only say ech one holdes vaine to doubt,
                  That Christians haue this image stolne away,
                  But from you I dissent, ne am without
                  Sound reason, whereon this my gheasse I stay:
                  Th'enchanter, who this practise went about,
                  A pranke vnreu'rend gainst our law did play,
                  It not beseemes to make our Church a neast
                  For Idols, and for others Idols least.
               
               
                  
                  To Mahound rather I impute aboue
                  This straungy myracle, and he it wrought,
                  To shew into his temples did behooue,
                  No new defilde religion be brought:
                  Let Ismen his enchauntments vtmost prooue,
                  He that in stead of armes with charmes hath fought:
                  To handle steele is of vs Knights the scope,
                  This is our trade, this is our only hope.
               
               
                  This sayd, she ceast, and though an irefull hart
                  To pittie hardly can be drawne, yet would
                  The King her gratifie, and reason part
                  Perswades, part sway of her intreatie could
                  Him moue, haue they of life, and freedome mart,
                  (Quoth he) no nay, finde such an asker should.
                  Be it pardon, or be it iustice dew,
                  Guiltlesse I quit, guiltie I giue them you.
               
               
                  So were they looz'd of all haps happiest,
                  The fate was certes, that Olinda prou'd:
                  What act could show that in a noble brest,
                  Loue in the end another loue hath mou'd?
                  From stake to wedding goes he, Spowse addrest,
                  Of one condemn'd, not sole of louer lou'd:
                  He would with her haue dyde, her will doth giue,
                  Since with her he dyde not, with him to liue.
               
               
                  But this suspitious King doth parlous iudge,
                  So great vnited vertuous neighbour-hed:
                  And giues straight charge that both to exile trudge,
                  Beyond the bounds that Iury lymited:
                  Then following his earst resolued grudge,
                  Some faithfull he confines, some banished:
                  Oh! how the auncient syres, surpryz'd with woe,
                  Their tender younglings, and sweete beds forgoe?
               
               
               
                  (A seu'rance hard) he driues them sole away,
                  That strong of bodie, and are stout of mind,
                  But pawnd as hostages, doth force to stay
                  The milder Sexe, and weaker yeares behind:
                  Many went wandring, some the rebels play,
                  Whō more then feare could quench, anger doth tind.
                  These ioynd with Frankes, and them encountered,
                  Selfe day when they Emaus entered.
               
               
                  
                     Emaus is a Citie, which small space
                  Doth from royall Hierusalem depriue,
                  And he that for his pleasure walkes soft pace,
                  Parting at morne, may there at nine arriue:
                  Oh! how to Frankes this newes seemes full of grace,
                  Oh! how their longing doth to hasting driue?
                  But for the Sunne was now from South declinde,
                  The Captaine there to pitch his tents assignde.
               
               
                  And pitcht they were, and Phebus fostring light,
                  From Ocean was remou'd but litle space,
                  When two great Barons in strange vesture dight,
                  And of a port as strange approch in place:
                  Their fashions framed to a peacefull plight,
                  Witnesse of Captaines friends they beare a face:
                  Ambassadours from great Egyptian king,
                  They come, and store of Squires, and Pages bring.
               
               
                  
                     Aletes is the one, from worthles rabble
                  Mongst basest commons dregs who vp did spring:
                  Yet him to kingdoms highest honours able,
                  Did these: a speech, sly, currant, carrying
                  Fashions pliant, demeanure variable,
                  In faining prompt, skilfull in cousening:
                  A biter at the backe by such quaint wayes,
                  As when he carpeth most, he seemes to prayse.
               
               
                  
                  The tother is Circassian Argant cald,
                  Who stranger first, did court of Egypt haunt,
                  But now is mongst th'imperiall nobles stald,
                  And may of martiall chiefe preferments vaunt:
                  Vntreatable, vnpatient, vnappald,
                  In armes linelesse, and peerelesse valiaunt:
                  Despiser of ech God, alike as one
                  That law and right sets in his sword alone.
               
               
                  These crauing audience, straight vnto the sight
                  Of famous Godfrey, by admittance drew,
                  Whom on low seat, and in meane vesture dight,
                  Sitting amidst his Coronets they view:
                  But very valure, though in recklesse plight,
                  Doth to it selfe sufficing grace accrew.
                  
                     Argant a signe but slight of honour sparde,
                  As one of great estate, and small reguarde.
               
               
                  But right hand layd Aletes on his brest,
                  And bow'd his head, and cast to ground his eyes,
                  And honour'd him in eu'ry sort at best,
                  As of his nation can import the guise,
                  Then he began, and from his mouth sweetest
                  Riuers of eloquence flow hony-wise.
                  And for the Frankes, now Sirian speech had learnd,
                  That which he sayd, was perfectly discernd.
               
               
                  O worthy sole, whom deigne may to obey
                  This famous troup of ech Heroicke Knight,
                  Who conquests past, & Realmes that now they sway,
                  Knowledge as your, and your aduices right,
                  Within Alcides boundes your name to stay
                  Brookes not, but eu'n mongst vs takes farder flight,
                  And fame hath through ech part of Egypt spred
                  The tidings cleare of your great manlihed.
               
               
                  
                  Nor of so many any one not lent,
                  (As men to maruailes vse) hath listning eare,
                  But them, my king, not with astonishment
                  Alone, but with like great delight doth heare,
                  And glad in their report oft time hath spent,
                  Louing in you, what they enuy and feare.
                  He loues your valure, and doth free elect
                  With you to ioyne in loue, if not in sect.
               
               
                  So faire occasion him doth onward guide,
                  With you of friendship and of peace to treat,
                  And that ech sure may rest to other tyde,
                  If faith cannot, let vertue worke it yeat:
                  But for he learnes, you force of armes prouide,
                  His friend to chase from out his royall seat.
                  He chose ere any farder harme might growe,
                  We should you make his mind at full to knowe.
               
               
                  His mind is this, if pleasde you will remaine,
                  With what the warre already yours hath made,
                  Nor Iury seeke, nor th'other parts t'obtaine,
                  Which he with fauour of his raigne doth shade:
                  He promise plights you to assure againe,
                  Your yet not settled rule, if double blade
                  Of yours be ioynde, the hope is out of date,
                  For Turkes of Persians to regaine estate.
               
               
                  My Lord, great things in smal space haue you wrought
                  Which in obliuion longage cannot cast,
                  Armies, Cities vanquisht, destroyd to nought,
                  Wayes earst vntrode, distresses ouerpast:
                  So by your fame to fright, and stoyning brought
                  Are Realmes about, both farre and neerely plast.
                  And though more kingdomes rest as yet to gaine,
                  To gaine more glory you aspire in vaine.
               
               
                  
                  Your glory highest top hath wonne, tis dew
                  Henceforth you fly of warre the doubtfull chaunce,
                  By winning you can onely state accrew,
                  But no way more your glory ought aduaunce,
                  Where all is lost that earst you did subdew,
                  And honour too, if Fortune looke askaunce:
                  Tis game of Fortune, fond and bold away,
                  Gainst small vncertaine, certaine much to play.
               
               
                  But somes aduice, whom it perhaps imports,
                  That others farder conquests theirs assure,
                  And end to ech attempt that lucky sorts,
                  And that instinct which feruent doth enure,
                  High flaming harts to more and more efforts,
                  Whereby thral'd people may their yoke endure:
                  Will (peraduenture) make you fly as farre
                  From hauing peace, as others do the warre.
               
               
                  They will exhort you to ensew the way,
                  That is by fate so largely opened,
                  And not aside this famous sword to lay,
                  Whose edge hath conquest still ascertained,
                  Till Mahounds sect be brought to full decay,
                  Till Asia be quite abandoned:
                  Sweete things to heare, entrappings very sweet,
                  Which yet not feel'd extreamest dammage meet.
               
               
                  But if that courage blindfold not your sight,
                  Nor in you darken reasons clearest ray,
                  You shall perceiue in making choice to fight,
                  Well feare of much, but little hope you may:
                  For Fortune here below oft changeth plight,
                  While haps now good, now bad do ioy or fray,
                  And those who ouer high and hasty flye,
                  To steepest downefals come the sooner nye.
               
               
                  
                  Tell me if to thy dammage Egypt rise,
                  In gold, in armes, in counsell great of might,
                  If Persian, Turke, Cassans sonne likewise
                  Conspirde in one, hap to renew the fight,
                  What force gainst such a fury can suffize?
                  What place giue scape to such a parlous plight?
                  May be you on the Greekes lewd king affie,
                  Whom sacred league of cou'nants doth allie.
               
               
                  Who knoweth not in Greeks what faith there raines?
                  Yet by one treason ghesse the residew,
                  Nay by a thousand, for with thousand traines
                  Brewd hath your bane, that myser faithlesse crew,
                  Then who to stop your passage earst tooke paines,
                  Prepares he now his life to spend for you?
                  Who bare high wayes common to all that liue,
                  Denide, will he his proper bloud you giue?
               
               
                  May be you placed haue your hope alone
                  In bandes, of which this circuit maketh showe,
                  And whom disperst you vanquisht, knit in one,
                  Now eke assoone to ouercome you trowe,
                  Though of your troopes that store is scald and gone
                  Through wars and want, your selfe do see and knowe▪
                  
                  And though new foes against you still encrease,
                  Egyptians, Persians, Turkes, a hugy prease.
                  
               
               
                  But as thing fatall grant we this pretence,
                  That neuer weapon shall your force subdew,
                  Graunt that the heau'ns thereof giue euidence,
                  And as your selfe expound, so be it trew,
                  Yet famine shall you vanquish: what defence?
                  What refuge gainst this ill (for God) haue you?
                  Against this set your launce in rest, go trie
                  Your sword, and faine your selfe the victorie.
               
               
                  
                  The fields about burnt and destroy'd to nought,
                  Hath the inhabitants fore-seeing hand,
                  And to closde walles, and to high turrets rought,
                  And stowd their fruites ere you approcht the land,
                  Now you that (hardy) haue them hither brought,
                  Whence hope you feede, ech foot and horsed band?
                  You'll say our Nauy shall vs vittailes send,
                  And doth your liuing then on windes depend?
               
               
                  And doth your fortune then commaund the windes?
                  And bind and looze them, as you best may please?
                  The Sea whom ech at plaints, and prayers findes,
                  Still deafe, sole heres it you? sole you obeyes?
                  Or when a league the Turke, or Persian bindes
                  With warlicke force of ours, then cannot these
                  Assembly make of such a mightie fleete,
                  As is t'oppose against your Nauie meete?
               
               
                  My Lord, a double victorie you neede,
                  If you expect the honour of this warre,
                  Whereas one onely losse will doubtles breede
                  Great shame to you, but dammage greater farre,
                  For if then yours; our Nauie better speede,
                  Foorthwith in Campe you hunger-starued are:
                  And if your losse light on the land, in vaine
                  Your shipping shall a fruitlesse conquest gaine.
               
               
                  Now if in this estate you yet refuse
                  A peace and truce with great Egyptian King,
                  (Pardon the truth) to other your vertues
                  This your counsaile is no way answering:
                  But heau'ns vouchsafe that newer thoughts you chuse
                  If old liktwarre, and diuers end they bring,
                  That Asias waylments so take breath at last,
                  And of your conquests you the fruit may tast.
               
               
                  
                  Nor you, who of the perill and the paines,
                  And of the glory are with him consort,
                  Be not so farre mis-led by fortunes traines,
                  That to new warres she powerfull you exhort,
                  But like the Pilot, who from sea, where raignes
                  Mis-hap, hath brought his ship to wished port:
                  So strike you now the sayles you hoysed hie,
                  And do no more in ruthlesse flouds affie.
               
               
                  
                     Aletes peac'd, his speech doth straight ensew,
                  A murmur soft of that Heroicke race,
                  And well their actions disdainefull shew,
                  How much against their bent his tale did trace,
                  The generall about him castes his view,
                  And his lookes thrice or fouretimes in the face,
                  And then his eye on tothers countnance stayd,
                  Who answere did attend, and thus he sayd.
               
               
                  Your Kings message sweetly you haue exprest,
                  Part with a milde, and part with threatfull grace,
                  If I in loue, or deedes in price doe rest
                  With him, t'is kind, and I his loue embrace:
                  But where (Ambassadour) you do protest
                  Vnited warre of Painims in this case,
                  I answere will, as still mine vse affordes,
                  Franke senses in as single meaning wordes.
               
               
                  Know that till now, thus much we suffered
                  At sea, on land, by day, and in the night,
                  Only a way to haue recouered,
                  To sacred walles of most respected sight,
                  That merit might with God be fauoured,
                  Of freeing them from such hard thralled plight:
                  Nor can he grieuous seeme for so good end,
                  This worldly honour, life, and raigne to spend.
               
               
                  
                  For no ambitious bent or couetise
                  To this exployt edgde on, or vs addrest,
                  Purge from our breasts, O father of the skies,
                  So dismall plague if it in any nest,
                  Ne suffer it may spread infecting wise
                  Sweete venom, which bids death, as pleasures ghuest,
                  But let his hand that hardest harts gently
                  Doth pierce, them both vnstone and mollifie.
               
               
                  This hand vs raysd, this hath vs forward led,
                  From perils vs, from vs remouing stayes,
                  This playnes the hils, and dries ech riuers bed,
                  The Summers heat and Winters cold allayes,
                  Calmes flouds of Sea, with tempests billowed,
                  This fast and loose with windes in Lybume playes:
                  From it are highest walles pierst and reuerst,
                  From it the armed rankes slaine and disperst.
               
               
                  Courage from it, from it our hope doth breed,
                  Not from our forces, frayle and tyred out,
                  Not from our Nauie, nor from those, whom feed
                  Doth Greece, nor from the armes of Frankish rout,
                  Let that not faile, nor vs forsake at neede,
                  All other wants we lesse then nothing doubt,
                  Who knowes how this defends, and how it strikes,
                  Like this no succour for his perill likes.
               
               
                  But if through secret iudgement he denie,
                  Or for our sinnes the aide from him we craue,
                  Who ist of vs will there a buriall flie?
                  Where earst our God his bodie layd in graue?
                  Die will we, nor the liuing ought enuie,
                  Die will we, nor our death vnuenged haue,
                  Nor Asia shall at our mischance reioice,
                  Nor ours our death, mone with one wailing voice.
               
               
                  
                  Thinke not that we flie farre from peacefull ease,
                  As mortall warre-men fled and feared see:
                  Much would the friendship of your king vs please,
                  Nor with him to ally ought grieuous bee,
                  But where or no, Iury his rule obeyes,
                  You know, why then thereof such care hath hee?
                  Strange Realm es to winne let him vs not gainesay,
                  And his safe, glad, in peace long mote he sway.
               
               
                  So answer'd he, and this his answere knowne,
                  Pearst Argants hart with pricking furious,
                  Nor it conceald he, but with lips vp blowne,
                  Forth to the Captaine steps, replying thus:
                  Who list not peace, warre take he as his owne,
                  For store of brawles was neuer penurous▪
                  
                  And well you show that farre from peace you flie,
                  Since our first speech you cannot pacifie.
               
               
                  Then by the edge he doth his mantle take,
                  He bowes it, plaites it, reacheth towards him
                  The plait, and to these farder speeches brake,
                  More then tofore, of visage spitefull grim,
                  O thou that scorne of hardest brunts dost make!
                  I peace and warre bring in this plaited brim,
                  Thine be the choice, thy selfe well counsell now,
                  And stailesse take, which thou dost best allow.
               
               
                  At this fierce act, and speech they all betooke
                  Themselues to call for warre, conioyn'd in cry,
                  Nor stay could for their noble Chiefetaine brooke,
                  That Godfrey in his owne words might reply:
                  He fell vnfolds the plait, and mantle shooke,
                  And sayd, to mortall warre I you desye:
                  He sayd it in so fierce and fellon sort,
                  That seem'd he op'ned Ianus Temple port.
               
               
                  
                  Seem'd he the plait op'ning, thence haled came
                  Besotted rage, and discord cruellest,
                  And in his skowling eyes bigge torches flame,
                  Of hags Alecto and Megera rest,
                  That Giant earst, who raysd that loftie frame
                  Of errour gainst the heauens, may such be ghest:
                  And in such semblant him saw Babel great
                  Vaunce vp his forehead, and the starres to threat.
               
               
                  
                     Godfrey adioynes, now to your King resort,
                  And bid him come, and bid him hast a pace,
                  For we except your threatned warres effort,
                  And if he come not, looke he in short space
                  For vs at Nyle, in milde and gratefull sort,
                  Them licence giue, and with choice guifts them grace
                  He doth, Aletes hath a helme of price,
                  Which mongst the bootie he had wonne at Nice.
                  
               
               
                  A sword he Argant giues of gold and stone,
                  The hilts and pommell wrought so curiously
                  By workmans skill, that valew there is none
                  In that rich substance, if with forme it try,
                  When his long busie sight had skand vpon
                  The temper, richnesse, trymming thoroughly,
                  
                     Argant to Bolleyn sayd, soone shall you newes
                  Heare, how your guift I haue the skill to vse.
               
               
                  Then leaue receiu'd he to his fellowe spake,
                  Now will we ech of vs a diuers way,
                  I to Hierusalem, you t'Egypt take,
                  You with new Sunne, I with the nightly ray,
                  My letter or my presence nothing make,
                  Ought needfull whither you are faring may:
                  Beare you the answere backe, hence I depart
                  Will not where is of armes proclaymd a mart.
               
               
                  
                  Thus of a messenger he growes a foe,
                  Be it a timelesse, or a ripened hast,
                  Where law of Nations he offend or no,
                  Or old vse breake, no doubts he list to cast,
                  Answere not reakt, friended by silence so
                  Of twinckling starres, to those high walles he past,
                  Brooking no stoppe, the t'other eke that stayd,
                  What ere might linger, makes as ill apayd.
               
               
                  Now was it night, when in deepe rest en rold
                  Are waues & windes, and mute the world doth show,
                  Weari'd the beasts, and those that bottome hold,
                  Of billow'd Sea, and of moyst streames that flow,
                  And who are lodgde in caue, or pend in fold,
                  And painted flyers in obliuion low,
                  Vnder their secret horrours silenced,
                  Stilled their cares, and their harts suppelled.
               
               
                  But neyther faithfuls Campe, nor Francks Chieftaine
                  Betake themselues to sleepe, nor t'ease apply,
                  So much they long to see once shine againe
                  Th' expected gladsome dawning in the sky:
                  That it may show the way, and guide the traine
                  To towne, where doth of their great passage lye
                  The bound, now and now prying if there peere
                  One ray, or darke of night beginne to cleere.
               
               The end of the second Song.
            
            
               
               CANTO SECONDO
DI GIERVSALEMME
LIBERATA.
               
                  
                     MENT RE il Tiranno s'apparecchia
à l'armi,
                  Soletto Ismeno vn dì gli s'appresenta,
                  Ismen, che trar di sotto à i chiusi
marmi
                  Può corpo estinto, efar, che spiri, e
senta:
                  Ismen, che al suon de'mormorati carmi
                  Sin ne la Reggia sua Pluton spauenta,
                  E i suoi Demon ne gli empi vffici impiega,
                  Pur come Serui, e glidiscioglie, e lega.
               
               
                  Questi hor Macone adora, e fù Christiano,
                  Mai primi riti anco lasciar non puote.
                  Anzi souente in vso empio, e profano
                  Confonde le due leggi à se mal note.
                  Et hor da le spelonche, oue lontano
                  Dal vulgo essercitar, suol l'arti ignote,
                  Vien nel publico rischio al suo Signore:
                  A Re maluaggio Consiglier peggiore.
               
               
                  
                  Signor (dicea) senza tardar se'n viene
                  Il vincitor Essercito temuto.
                  Ma facciam noi, ciò che à noi far conuiene;
                  Darà il Ciel, darà il Mondo à i forti aiuto.
                  Ben tu di Re, di Duce hai tutte piene
                  Le parti, e lunge hai visto, e proueduto.
                  S'empie in tal guisa ogn'altro i propri vffici,
                  Tombo fia questa terra a'tuoi nemici.
               
               
                  Io quanto àme ne vengo e del periglio,
                  F del'opre compagno ad aitarte.
                  Ciò, che può dar di vecchia età consiglio,
                  Tutto prometto, e ciò, che Magica arte.
                  Gli Angeli, che dal Ciel hebbero essiglio;
                  Constringerò de le fatiche à parte.
                  Ma dond'io voglia incominciar gl'incanti,
                  E conquai modi, hor narrerotti auanti.
               
               
                  Nel Tempio de' Christiani occulto giace
                  Vn sotterraneo Altare; e quiui èil volto
                  Di colci, che sua Diua, e Madre face
                  Quel vulgo del suo Dio nato, e sepolto,
                  Dinanzial Simulacro accesa face
                  Continua splende: egli è in vn velo auuolto;
                  Pendono intorno in lungo ordine i voti,
                  Che vi portaro i creduli Deuoti.
               
               
                  Hor questa Effigie lor di là rapita
                  Voglio, che tu di propria man trasporte,
                  E la riponga entro la tua Meschita:
                  Io poscia incanto ado prerò sì sorto,
                  Ch'ogni hor, mentre ella quì fia custodita,
                  Sara fatal custodia à queste porte,
                  Tra mura inespugnabili il tuo Impero
                  Securo fia per nouo alto Mistero.
               
               
                  
                  Sì disse, e'l persuase: e impatiente
                  Il Re se'n corse à la Magion di Dio:
                  E sforzò i Sacerdoti, e irreuerente
                  Il casto Simulacro indi rapio:
                  E portollo à quel Tempio, oue fouente
                  S'irrita il Ciel colfolle culto, e rio.
                  Nel profan loco, e sù la sacra Imago
                  Susurrò poile sue bestemmie il Mago.
               
               
                  Ma come apparse in Ciel l'alba nouella,
                  Quel, cuil' immondo Tēpio in guardia e dato;
                  Non riuide l' Imagine, dou'ella
                  Fù posta, e in van cerconne in altro lato.
                  Tosto n'auisa il Re, ch'à la nouella
                  Ver lui si mostra fier amente irato.
                  Et imagina ben, ch'alcun Fedele
                  Habbia fatto quel furto, e che se'l cele.
               
               
                  O'fù di man Fedele opra furtiua,
                  O pur'il Ciel quì sua potenza adopra:
                  Che di colei, ch'è sua Regina, e Diua,
                  S degna, che loco vil l'imagin copra:
                  Ch'incerta fama e'ancor, se ciò, s'ascriua
                  Ad arte humana, od à mirabil opra.
                  Ben è pietà, che la pietade, e'l zelo
                  Human cedendo; autor se'u creda il Cielo.
               
               
                  Il Re ne fa con importuna inchiesta
                  Ri
                        •
                     car ogni Chiesa, ogni Magione:
                  Et à chi gli nasconde, ò manifesta
                  Il furto, ò il Reo, gran pene, e premi impone.
                  E'l Mago di spiarne anco non resta
                  Con tutte l'arti il ver; ma non s'appone:
                  Che'l Cielo (opra sua fosse, o fosse altrui)
                  Celolla ad onta de gl'incanti à lui.
               
               
                  
                  Ma poi che'l Re crudel vide occultarse
                  Quel, che peccato de'Fedeli ei pensa;
                  Tutto in lor d'odio infellonissi, & arse
                  D'ira, e di rabbia immoderata immensa.
                  Ogni rispetto oblia: vuol vendicarse,
                  Segua che puote, e sfogar l'Alma accensa:
                  Morrà (dicea) non andrà l'ira à voto,
                  Ne la strage comune il Ladro ignoto.
               
               
                  Purche'l Reo non si salui il Giusto pera,
                  El'Innocente, ma qual giusto Io dico?
                  E'colpeuol ciascun: nè in loro schiera
                  Huom fù giamai del nostro nome amico,
                  S'anima v'è nel nouo error sincera,
                  Basti à nouella pena vn fallo antico.
                  Sù sù, fedeli miei, sù via prendete
                  Lefiamme, e'l ferro: ardete, & vccidete.
               
               
                  Così parla à le turbe: e se n'intese
                  Lafama tra'Fedeli immantinente,
                  Ch'attoniti restar, sì gli sorprese
                  Il timor de la morte homai presente.
                  E non è chi la fuga, ò le difese
                  Lo scusare, o'l pregare ardisca e tente.
                  Ma le timide Genti, e irre solute,
                  Donde meno speraro hebber salute.
               
               
                  Vergine era fra lor di già matura
                  Virginità, d'alti pensieri, e regi:
                  D'alta beltà; ma sua beltà non cura,
                  O'tanto sol, quant'honestà sen'fregi.
                  E'il suo pregio maggior, che tra le mura
                  D'angusta casa asconde i suoi gran pregi:
                  E de'vagheggiatori illa s'inuola
                  A'le lodi, à gli sguardi inculta, e sola.
               
               
                  
                  Pur guardia esser non può, che'n tutto celi
                  Beltà degna, ch'appaia, e che s'ammiri:
                  Nè tu il consenti Amor; ma lariueli
                  D'vn Giouenetto à i cupidi desiri.
                  Amor, c'hor cieco, hor Argo, hora ne veli
                  Di benda gli occhi, hora ce gli apri, e giri,
                  Tu per mille custodie entro à i più casti
                  Verginei alberghi il guardo altrui portasti.
               
               
                  Cole i Sofronia, Olindo egli s'appella,
                  D'vna Cittate entrambi, & d'vna Fede
                  Ei che modesto è sì, com'essa è bella,
                  Brama assai, poco spera, e nulla chiede:
                  Nè sà scoprirsi, ò non ardisce: & ella
                  O'lo sprezza, ò no'l vede, ò non s'auuede.
                  Co sì fin'hora il misero hà seruito
                  O'non visto, ò mal noto, ò mal gradito.
               
               
                  S'ode l'annuntio in tanto, e che s'appresta
                  Miserabile strage al popol loro.
                  A lei che generosa è quanto honesta,
                  Viene in pensier come saluar costoro.
                  Moue fortezza il gran pensier: l'arresta
                  Poi la vergogna, e'l virg inal decoro.
                  Vince fortezza, anzi s'accorda, e face
                  Severgognosa, ela vergogna audace.
               
               
                  La vergine tra'l vulgo vsci soletta:
                  Non coprì sue bellezze, e non l'espose:
                  Raccolse gli occhi: andò nel vel ristretta,
                  Con ischiue maniere, e generose.
                  Non sai ben dir, s'adorna, o se negletta:
                  Se caso, od arte il bel volto compose.
                  Di Natura, d'Amor, de'Cieli amici
                  Le negligenze sue sono artifici.
               
               
                  
                  Mirata da eiascun passa, enon mira
                  L'altera Donna, einnanzi al Re se'n viene.
                  Nè, perche irato il veggia, il piè ritira,
                  Ma il fero aspetto intrepida sostiene.
                  Vengo, Signor (gli disse) e'n tanto l'ira
                  Prego sospenda e'l tuo popolo affrene:
                  Vengo à scoprirti, evengo à darti preso
                  Quel Reo, che cerchi: onde sei tanto offeso.
               
               
                  Al'honesta baldanza, à l'improuiso
                  Folgorar di bellezze altere, e sante,
                  Quasi confuso il Re, quasi conquiso
                  Frenò lo sdegno, placò il fier sembiante.
                  S'egli erad'alma, ò se costei di viso
                  Seuera manco, ei diueniane Amante;
                  Ma ritrosa beltà ritroso core
                  Non prende: e sono i vezzi esca d'Amore.
               
               
                  Fùstupor, fù vaghezza, e fù diletto,
                  S'Amor nonfù, che mosse il cor villano.
                  Narra (ei le dice) il tutto: ecco io commetto,
                  Che non s'offenda il popol tuo Christiano.
                  Ed ella. il reo si troua al tuo cospetto:
                  Opra è il furto, Signor, di questa mano:
                  Io l'magine tolsi: ioson colei,
                  Che tu ricerchi, e me punir tu dei.
               
               
                  Cosi al publico fato ilcapo altero
                  Offerse, e'l volse in se sola raccorre.
                  Magnanima menzogna; hor quando è il vero
                  Si bello, che si possa à te preporre?
                  Riman sospeso, e non sì tosto il fero
                  Tiranno à l'ira, come suol, trascorre.
                  Poi la richiede. Io vuò, che tu mi scopra.
                  Chi diè consiglio, e chi fù insieme à l'opra.
               
               
                  
                  Non volsi far de la mia gloria altrui
                  Nè pur minima parte (ella gli dice)
                  Sol di me stessa io consapeuol fui,
                  Sol consigliera, e sola essecutrice.
                  Dunque in te sola (ripigliò colui)
                  Caderà l'ira mia vendicatrice.
                  Disse ella. è giusto: esser'à me conuiene,
                  Se fui sola à l'honor, sola à le pene.
               
               
                  Quì comincia il Tiranno à risdegnarsi:
                  Pur le dimanda. ou'hai l'imago ascosa?
                  Non la nascosi (à lui risponde) io l'arsi:
                  E l'arderla stimai laudabil cosa.
                  Così almen non potrà più violarsi
                  Per man di miscredenti ingiuriosa.
                  Signore, ò chiedi il furto, o'l ladro chiedi;
                  Quel no'l vedrai in eterno, e questo il vedi.
               
               
                  Benche nè furto è il mio, nè ladra i sono:
                  Giusto è ritor ciò, ch'à gran torto è tolto.
                  Hor, questo vdendo, in minaccieuol suono
                  Freme il Tiranno: e'l fren de l'ira è sciolto.
                  Non speri più di ritrouar perdono
                  Cor pudico, alta mente, ò nobil volto:
                  E'n darno Amor contra lo sdegno crudo
                  Di sua vaga bellezza à leifà scudo.
               
               
                  Pre sa è la bella Donna, e incrudelito
                  Il Re la danna entro vn'incendio à morte▪
                  
                  Gia'l velo, e'l castomanto à lei rapito,
                  Stringon le molli braccia aspre ritorte.
                  Ella si tace, e in lei non sbigottito;
                  Ma pur commosso alquanto è il petto forte;
                  E smarrisce il bel volto in vn colore,
                  Che non è pallidezza, ma candore.
               
               
                  
                  Diuulgossi il gran caso, e quiui tratto
                  Già'l popol s'era: Olindo anco u'accorse,
                  Che dubbia la persona, e certo il fatto,
                  Venia, che fosse la sua Donna in forse.
                  Come la bella prigioniera in atto
                  Non pur di rea, ma di dannata ei scorse;
                  Come i ministri al duro ufficio intenti
                  Vide; precipitoso, urtò le genti.
               
               
                  Al Re gridò. Non è, non è già rea
                  Costei del furto, e per follia se'n vanta.
                  Non pensò: non ardì: nè far potea
                  Donna sola, e inesperta opra cotanta.
                  Come ingannò i custodi? e de la Dea
                  Con qual'arti inuolò l'imagin santa?
                  Se'l fece, il narri. Io l'hò, Signor, furata.
                  Ahi tanto amò la non Amante amata.
               
               
                  Soggiunse poscia. Io là, donde riceue
                  L'alta vostra Meschita e l'aura, e'l die,
                  Di notte as cesi: e trapassai per brèue
                  Foro tentando inaccessibil vie.
                  A mel'honor, la morte à me si deue:
                  Non vsurpi costei le pene mie.
                  Mie son quelle catene, e per me questa
                  Fiamma s'accende, e'l rogo à me s'appresta.
               
               
                  Alza Sofronia il viso, e humanamente
                  Con occhi die pietatein lui rimira.
                  A che ne vieni, o misero innocente?
                  Qual consiglio, ò furor tiguida, ò tira?
                  Non son'io dunque senza te possente
                  Afostener ciò, che d'vn huom può l'ira?
                  Ho petto anch'io, ch'ad vna morte crede
                  Di bastar solo, e compagnia non chiede.
               
               
                  
                  Così parla à l'Amante, e no'l dispone
                  Sì ch'egli si disdica, e pensier mute.
                  O spettacolo grande, oue à tenzone
                  Sono Amore, e magnanima virtute:
                  O ue lamorte al vincitor si pone
                  In premio: e'l mal del vinto è la salute.
                  Ma più s'irrita il Re quant'ella, & esso
                  E'più costante in incolpar se stesso.
               
               
                  Pargli, che vilipeso egli ne resti:
                  E che'n disprezzo suo sprezzin le pene.
                  Credasi (dice) ad ambo: quella, e questi
                  Vinca, a la palma sia, qual si conuiene.
                  Indi accenna à i Sergenti: i quai son presti
                  A legar il Garzon di lor catene.
                  Sono ambo stretti al palo stesso, è volto
                  E'il tergo al tergo, e'l volto ascoso al volto.
               
               
                  Composto è lor d'intorno il rogo homai:
                  E giàle fiamme il mantice u'incita;
                  Quando il Fanciullo in dolorosilai
                  Proruppe, e disse à lei, ch'è secò vnita.
                  Questo dunque è quel laccio, ond'io sperai
                  Teco accoppiarmi in compagnia di vita?
                  Questo è quel foco, ch'io credea, che i cori
                  Ne douesse infiammar d'eguali ardori?
               
               
                  Altre fiamme, altri nodi Amor promise:
                  Altrice n'apparecchia iniqua sorte.
                  Troppo, ahi ben troppo, ella già noi diuise:
                  Ma duramente hor ne congiunge in morte.
                  Piacemialmen, poi che'n sì stranie guise
                  Morir pur dei, del rogo esser consorte,
                  Se del letto non fui: duolmi il tuo fato,
                  Il mio non già, poi ch'io timoro à lato.
               
               
                  
                  Et, ò mia morte auuenturosa à pieno:
                  O fortunati miei dolci martiri;
                  S'impetrerò, che, giunto seno à seno
                  L'anima mia ne la tua bocca io spiri:
                  E venendo tu meco à vn tempo meno,
                  In me fuor màndi gli vltimi sospiri.
                  Così dice piangendo. ella il ripiglia
                  Soauemente, e in tai detti il consiglia.
               
               
                  Amico, altri pensieri, altrilamenti
                  Per più alta cagioneil tempo chiede.
                  Che non pensi à tue colpe? e non rammenti
                  Qual Dio ꝑmetta à i buoni ampia mercede?
                  Soffri in suo nome, e fian dolci i tormenti,
                  E lieto aspira à la superna sede,
                  Mira il Ciel com'è bello, e mira il Sole,
                  Ch'à se par, che n'inuiti, e ne console.
               
               
                  Quì il vulgo de'Pagani il pianto estolle:
                  Piange il Fedel, ma in voci assai più basse.
                  Vn non sò che d'inusitato, e molle
                  Par, che nel duro petto al Re trapasse.
                  Ei presentillo, esi sdegnò, nè uolle
                  Piegarsi, e gli occhitorse, e si ritrasse.
                  Tu sola il duol comun non accompagni,
                  Sofronia, e pianta da ciascun non piagni.
               
               
                  Mentre sono in tal rischio, ecco vn Guerriero
                  (Che tal parea) d'alta sembianza, e degna:
                  E mostra d'arme, e d'habito straniero,
                  Che di lontan peregrinando vegna.
                  La Tigre, che sù l'elmo hà per cimiero,
                  Tutti gli occhi à se trahe, famosa insegna,
                  Insegna usata da Clorinda in guerra:
                  Onde la credon lei, nè'l creder'erra.
               
               
                  
                  Costei gl'ingegni feminili, e gli vsi
                  Tulti sprezzò sin da l'età puì acerba:
                  A i lauori d'Aracne, à l'ago, à i fusi
                  Inchinar non degnò la man superba:
                  Fuggì gli habiti molli, e i lochi chiusi:
                  Che ne'campi honestate anco siserba:
                  Armò d'orgoglio il volto, e si compiacque
                  Rigido farlo, e pur rigido piacque.
               
               
                  Tenera ancor con pargoletta destra
                  Strinse, e lentò d'un corridore il morso:
                  Trattò l'hasta, e la spada: & in palestra
                  Indurò imembri, & allenogli al corso:
                  Poscia, ò per via montana, ò per siluestra
                  L'orme seguì difier Leone, e d'Orso:
                  Seguì le guerre, e'n quelle, e fra le selue
                  Fera à gli huomini parue, huomo à le belue.
               
               
                  Viene hor costei da le cantrade Perse,
                  Perche à i Christiani à suo poter resista:
                  Bench'altre volte hà di lor membra asperse
                  Lepiaggie, e l'onda di lor sangue hà mista.
                  Hor quinci in arriuando à lei s'offerse
                  L'apparato di morte à prima vista.
                  Di mirar vaga, e di saper, qual fallo
                  Condanni i rei, sospinge oltre il cauallo.
               
               
                  Cedon le turbe, e i duo legati insieme
                  Ella si ferma à riguardar da presso.
                  Mira, chel'vna tace, el'altrogeme:
                  E più vigor mostra il men forte fesso.
                  Pianger lui vede in guisa d'huom, cui preme
                  Pie tà, non doglia, ò duolnon disestesse:
                  E tacer lei con gli occhi al Ciel sì fisa,
                  Ch'anzi'l morir par di quà giù diuisa.
               
               
                  
                  Clorinda intenerissi, e si condolse
                  D'ambeduo loro, e lacrimonne alquanto.
                  Pur maggior sente il duol per chi non duolse,
                  Più la moue il silentio, e meno il pianto.
                  Senza troppo indugiare ella si volse
                  Ad vn'huom, che canuto hauea da canto.
                  Deh dimmi, chi son questi? & al martoro
                  Qual gli conduce, ò sorte, ò colpa loro?
               
               
                  Così pregollo: e da colui risposto
                  Breue, ma pieno à le dimande fue.
                  Stupissi vdendo, e imaginò ben tosto,
                  Ch'egualmente innocenti eran que' due.
                  Già di vietar lor morte hà in se proposto,
                  Quanto potranno i preghi, ò l'armi sue.
                  Pronta accorre à la fiamma, e fà ritrarla,
                  Che già s'appressa; & à i ministri parla.
               
               
                  Alcun non sia di voi, che'n questo duro
                  Vfficio oltra seguire habbia baldanza,
                  Sin ch'io non parlial Re: ben v'assecuro,
                  Ch'ei non v'accuserà de la tardanza.
                  Vbidiro i Sergenti, e mossi furo
                  Da quella grande sua Regal, sembianza.
                  Poi verso il Re si mosse, e lui tra via
                  Ella trouò, che'n contra lei venia.
               
               
                  Io son Clorinda (disse) hai forse intesa
                  Tal'hor nomarmi: e quì, Signor, ne vegno,
                  Per ritrouarmi teco alla difesa
                  De la Fede comune, e del tuo Regno.
                  Son pronta (imponi pure) ad ogni impresa:
                  L'alte non temo, e l'humili non sdegno.
                  Voglimiin campo aperto, ò pur tra'l chiuso
                  De le mura impiegar, nulla ricuso.
               
               
                  
                  Tacque, e rispose il Re. qual sì disgiunta
                  Terra è da l'Asia, ò dal camin del Sole,
                  Vergine gloriosa, oue non giunta
                  Sia la tua fama, el'honor tuo non vole?
                  Hor, che s'è la tua spada à me congiunta,
                  D'ogni timor m'affidi, e mi console.
                  Non, s'essercito grande vnito insieme
                  Fosse in mio scampo, haurei più certa speme.
               
               
                  Già già mi par, ch'à giunger quì Goffredo
                  Oltra il deuer indugi. hor tu dimandi,
                  Ch'impieghi io te: sol di te degne credo
                  L'imprese malageuoli, e le grandi.
                  Soura i nostri guerrieri à te concedo
                  Loscettro, e legge sia quel, che comandi.
                  Così parlaua. ella rendea cortese
                  Gratie per lodi: indiil parlar riprese.
               
               
                  Noua cosa parer deurà per certo,
                  Che preceda à i seruigi guider done;
                  Ma tua bontà m'affida. io vuò, che'n merto
                  Del futuro seruir que'rei mi done.
                  In don gli cheggio, e pur (se'l fallo è incerto)
                  Gli danna inclementissima ragione.
                  Ma taccio questo, e taccio i segni espressi,
                  Ond'argomento l'innocentia in essi.
               
               
                  E dirò sol, ch'è quì comun sentanza,
                  Che i Christiani togliessero l'Imago;
                  Ma discord'io da voi; nè però senza
                  Alta ragion del mio parer m'appago.
                  Fù de le nostre leggi irreuerenza
                  Quell'opra far, che parsuase il Mago:
                  Che non conuien ne'nostri Tempi à nui
                  Gl'Idoli hauere, e men gl'Idoli altrui
               
               
                  
                  Dunque suso à Macon recar mi gioua
                  Il miracol de l'opra: & ei la face,
                  Per dimostrar, chei Tempi suoi con noua
                  Religion contaminar non lece.
                  Faccia Ismeno incantando ogni sua proua:
                  Egli, à cui le malie son d'arme in vece;
                  Trattiamo il ferro pur noi Caualieri:
                  Quest'arte è nostra, e'n questa sol si speri.
               
               
                  Tacque ciò detto: e'l Re, bench à pietade
                  L'irato cor difficilmente pieghi,
                  Pur compiacer la volle: e'l persuade
                  Ragione, e'l moue autorità di preghi.
                  Habbian vita (rispose) elibertade:
                  E nulla à tanto intercessor si neghi.
                  Siasi questa ò giustitia, ouer perdono,
                  Innocenti gli assoluo, e rei gli dono.
               
               
                  Così furon disciolti. Auuenturoso
                  Ben veramente fù d'Olindo il fato,
                  Ch'attopotè mostrar, che'n generoso
                  Petto al fine hà d'amore amor destato.
                  Và dal Rogo à le nozze, & è già sposo
                  Fatto direo, non pur d'Amante amato.
                  Volse con lei morire: ella non schiua,
                  Poi che seco non muor, che seco viua.
               
               
                  Ma il sospettoso Re stimò periglio
                  Tanta virtù congiunta hauer vicina:
                  Onde (com'egli volse) ambo in essiglio
                  Oltra i termini andar di Palestina.
                  Ei, pur seguendo il suo crudel consiglio,
                  Bandisce altri Fedeli, altri confina.
                  O come lascian mesti i pargoletti
                  Figli, e gli antichi Padri, e i dolci letti.
               
               
                  
                  (Dura diuision) scacciasol quelli
                  Di forte corpo, e e diferoce ingegno;
                  Ma il mansueto sesso, e gli anni imbelli
                  Seco ritien, sì come ostaggi, in pegno.
                  Molti n'andaro errando: altri rubelli
                  Fersi, è più, che'l timor, potè lo sdegno.
                  Questi vnirsi co'Franchi, e gli in contraro
                  A ponto il dì, che'n Emaus entraro.
               
               
                  Emaus è Città, cui breue stradà
                  Da la regal Gierusalem disgiunge:
                  Et huom, che lento à suo diporto vada,
                  Se parte matutino, à nona giunge.
                  Ó quāto intender questo à i Franchi aggrada:
                  Ó quanto piu'l desio gli affretta, e punge.
                  Ma perch'oltra il meriggio il Sol già scende,
                  Quì fa spiegare il Capitan le tende.
               
               
                  L'hauean già tese, e poco era remota
                  L'alma luce del Sol dal' Oceano;
                  Quando duo gran Baroni in veste ignota
                  Venir son visti, e'n portamento estrano.
                  Ogni atto lor pacifico dinota,
                  Che vengon come amici al Capitano.
                  Del gran Re de l'Egitto eran messaggi:
                  E molti intorno hauean scudieri, e paggi.
               
               
                  Alete è, l'vn che da principio indegno
                  Tra le brutture de la plebe è sorto;
                  Ma l'innalzaro à i primi honor del Regno
                  Parlar facondo, e lusinghiero, e scorto,
                  Piegheuoli costumi, e vario ingegno,
                  Al finger pronto, àl'ingannare accorto:
                  Gran fabro di calunnie, adorne in modi
                  Noui, che sono accuse, e paion lodi.
               
               
                  
                  L'altro èil Circasso argante, huom, che straniero
                  Se'n venne à laregal Corte d'Egitto;
                  Ma de'Satrapi fatto è de l'Impero,
                  E in sommi gradi à la militia ascritto:
                  Impatiente, innessorabil, fero,
                  Ne l'arme infaticabile, & inuitto,
                  D'ogni Dio sprezzator, e che ripone
                  Ne la spada sua legge, e sua ragione.
               
               
                  Chieser questi vdienza, & al cospetto
                  Del famoso Goffredo ammessi entraro:
                  E in humil segio, e in vestire schietto,
                  Fra suoi Duci sedendo il ritrouaro:
                  Ma uerace ualor, benche negletto,
                  E'di se stesso à se fregio assai chiaro.
                  Pieciol segno d'honor gli fece Argante,
                  In guisa pur d'huom grande, e non curante.
               
               
                  Ma la destra si pose Alete al seno,
                  E chinò il capo, e piegò à terra i lumi:
                  E l'honorò con ogni modo à pieno,
                  Che di sua gente portino i costumi.
                  Cominciò poscia; e di sua bocca uscieno
                  Più che mel dolci, d'eloquenza i fiumi.
                  E perche i Franchi ham giàil sermone appreso
                  De la Soria, fù ciò, ch'ei disse inteso.
               
               
                  Ó degno sol, cui d'ubidire hor degni
                  Questa adunanza di famosi Heroi:
                  Che per l'adietro ancor le palme, e i Regni
                  Da te conobbe, e da i consigli tuoi;
                  Il nome tuo, che non riman tra i segni
                  D'Alcide, homai risuona anco franoi:
                  Ela fama d'Egitto in ogniparte
                  Del tuo ualor chiare nouelle hàsparte.
               
               
                  
                  Ne u'è fra tanti alcun, che non le ascolte,
                  Come egli suol le me rauiglie estreme.
                  Ma dal mio Re con istupore accolte
                  Sono non sol, ma condiletto insieme.
                  E s'appaga in narrarle anco più uolte,
                  Amando in te ciò, ch'altri inuidia, e teme:
                  Ama il ualore, e uolontario elegge
                  Teco unirsi d'amor, se non di legge.
               
               
                  Da sì bella cagion dunque sospinto
                  L'amicitia, e la pace à te richiede:
                  E'l mezo, onde l'un resti à l'altro auuinto,
                  Sia la uirtù, s'esser non può la fede.
                  Ma, perche inteso hauea, che t'eri accinto
                  Per iscacciar l'amico suo di sede;
                  Volse, pria ch'altro male indi seguisse,
                  Ch'à te la mente sua per noi s'apprisse.
               
               
                  Ela sua mente è tal; che s'appagarti
                  Vorrai di quanto hai fatto in guerra tuo,
                  Nè Giudea molestar, nè l'altre parti,
                  Che ricopre il fauor del regno suo;
                  Ei promette à l'incontro assecurarti
                  Il non ben fermo tato. e se uoi duo
                  Sarete uniti, hor quando i Turchi, e i Persi
                  Portranno unqua sperar di rihauersi?
               
               
                  Signor, gran cose in picciol tempo hai fatte,
                  Che lunga et à porre in oblio non puote,
                  Esserciti, Città, uinti, disfatte,
                  Superati disagi, e strade ignote:
                  Sì ch'al grido ò smarrite, ò stupefatte
                  Son le prouincie intorno, e le remote,
                  E, se ben'acquistar puoi noui Imperi,
                  Acquistar noua gloria indarno speri.
               
               
                  
                  Giunta è tua gloria al sommo, e per l'innanzi
                  Fuggir'le dubbie guerre à te conuiene:
                  Ch'oue tu uinca, sol di stato auanzi:
                  Nè tua gloria maggior quinci diuiene.
                  Ma l'Imperio acquistato, e preso dianzi,
                  E l'honor perdi, se'l contrario auuiene.
                  Ben gioco è di Fortuna audace, e stolto
                  Por contra il poco, e incerto il certo, e'l molto.
               
               
                  Ma il consiglio di tal, cui forse pesa,
                  Ch'altrigli acquisti à lungo andar conserue,
                  El'hauer sempre unito in ogni impresa,
                  E quella uoglia natural, che ferue,
                  E sempre è più ne'cor più grandi accesa,
                  D'hauer le genti tributarie, e serue;
                  Faran per auuentura àte la pace
                  Fuggir, più che la guerra altri nonface.
               
               
                  T'essorteranno à seguitar, la strada,
                  Che t'è del-Fato largamente aperta:
                  A non depor questa famosa spada,
                  Al cui ualore ogni uittoria è certa,
                  Sin che la legge di Macon non cada:
                  Sin che l'Asia per te non sia deserta.
                  Dolci cose ad udire, e dolci inganni,
                  Ond' esconpoi souente estremi danni.
               
               
                  Ma s'animosità gli occhi non benda,
                  Nè il lume of cura in te de la ragione;
                  Scorgerai, ch'oue tu la guerra prenda,
                  Hai di temer, non di sperar cagione:
                  Che Fortuna quà giù uaria, à uicenda
                  Mandandoci uenture hor triste, hor buone,
                  Et à'uoli troppo alti, e repentini
                  Sogliono i precipitij esser uicini.
               
               
                  
                  Dimmi, s'à danni tuoi l'Egitto moue,
                  D'oro, d'armi potente, e di consiglio:
                  E s'auuien, che la guerra anco rinoue
                  Il Perso, e'l Turco, e di Cassano il figlio;
                  Quai forze opporre à sì gran furia, ò doue
                  Ritrouar potrai scampo al tuo periglio?
                  T'affida forse il Re maluagio Greco,
                  Il qual da i sacri patti unito è teco?
               
               
                  La fede Greca à chi non è palese?
                  Tuda un sol tradimento ogn'altro impara:
                  Anzi da mille: perche mille hà tese
                  Insidie à uoi la gente infida, auara.
                  Dunque chi dianzi al passo à uoi contese,
                  Per uoi la uita esporre hor si prepara?
                  Chi le uie, che comuni à tutti sono,
                  Negò, del proprio sangue hor farà dono?
               
               
                  Ma forse hai turiposta ogni tua speme
                  In queste squadre, ond hora cinto siedi.
                  Quei, che sparsi uincesti, uniti insieme
                  Di uincer anco ageuolmente credi:
                  Se ben son le tue schiere hor molto sceme,
                  Tra le guerre, e i disagi, e tu te'luedi:
                  Se ben nouo nemico à te s'accresce,
                  E co' Persi, eco'Turchi Egitij mesce.
               
               
                  Hor, quando pur estimi esser fatale,
                  Che non ti possa il ferro uincer mai;
                  Siati concesso: esiatia punto tale
                  Il decreto del Ciel, qual tu te'l sai;
                  Vincer atti la fame: a questo male
                  Che rifugio, per Dio, che schermo haurai▪
                  
                  Vibra contra costei la lancia, e stringi
                  La spada, ela uittoria anco ti fingi.
               
               
                  
                  Ogni campo d'intorno arso, e distrutto
                  Ha la prouida man de gli habitanti:
                  E'n chiuse mura, e'n alte torri il frutto
                  Riposto al tuo uenir più giorni auanti.
                  Tu, ch'ardito sin quì ti sei condutto,
                  Onde speri nutrir caualli, e Fanti?
                  Dirai; l'armata in mar cura ne prende.
                  Da'Venti dunque il uiuer tuo depende?
               
               
                  Comanda forse tua Fortuna à i Venti,
                  E gli auinceà sua uoglia, e gli dislega?
                  Ilmar, ch'a i preghi è sordo, & à i lamenti,
                  Te solo udendo al tuo uoler si piega?
                  Ó non potranno pur le nostre genti,
                  E le Perse, e le Turche unite in lega
                  Così potente armata in un raccorre,
                  Ch'à questi legni tuoi si possa opporre?
               
               
                  Doppia uittoria à te, Signor, bisogna,
                  S'hai de l'impresa à riportar l'honore.
                  Vna perdita sola alta uergogna
                  Può cagionarti, e danno anco maggiore:
                  Ch'oue la nostra armata in rotta ponga
                  La tua, quì poi di fame il campo more:
                  E, se tu sei perdente, indarno poi
                  Saran uittoriosi i legni tuoi.
               
               
                  Hora, se in tale stato anco rifiuti
                  Colgran Re de l'Egitto e pace, e tregua;
                  (Diasi licenza al uer) l'altre uirtuti
                  Questo consiglio tuo non bene adegna.
                  Ma uoglia il Ciel, che'l tuo pensier si muti,
                  S'à guerra è uolto, e che'l contrario segua;
                  Sì che l'Asia respiri homai da i lutti,
                  E goda tu de la uittoria i frutti.
               
               
                  
                  Neuoi, che del periglio, e de gli affanni,
                  E de la gloria à lui sete consorti,
                  Il fauor di Fortuna hor tanto inganni,
                  Che noue guerre à prouocar u'essorti,
                  Ma qual Nocchier, che da i marini inganni,
                  Ridutti hà i legni a i desiati porti,
                  Raccor deureste homai le sparse uele,
                  Nè fidarui di nouo al mar crudele.
               
               
                  Quì tacque Alete: e'l suo parlar seguiro
                  Con basso mormorar que' sorti Heroi.
                  E ben ne gli atti disdegnosi apriro,
                  Quanto ciascun quella proposta annoi.
                  Il Capitan riuolse gli occhi in giro
                  Tre uolte, e quattro, e mirò in fronte i suoi:
                  E poinel uolto di colui gli affisse,
                  Ch'attendea la risposta, e così disse.
               
               
                  Messaggier, dolcemente à noi sponesti
                  Hor minaccioso, & hor cortese inuito.
                  Se'l tuo Re m'ama, e loda i nostrigesti,
                  E'sua mercede, e m'è l'amor gradito.
                  A quella parte poi, doue protesti
                  La guerra à noi del Paganesmo unito;
                  Risponderò, come da me si suole,
                  Liberi sensi in semplici parole.
               
               
                  Sappi, che tanto habbiam sin'hor sofferto
                  In mare, e in terra, à l'aria chiara, e scura,
                  Solo acciò che ne fosse il calle aperto
                  A'quelle sacre, e uenerabil mura:
                  Per acquistarci appo Dio gratia, e merto,
                  Togliendo lor di seruitù sì dura:
                  Nè mai graue ne fia, per fin sì degno
                  Esporre honor mondano, e uita, e Regno.
               
               
                  
                  Che non ambitiosi, auari affetti
                  Ne spronaro à l'impresa, ene fur guida:
                  Sgombri il Padre del Ciel da i nostri petti
                  Peste sì rea, s'in alcun pur s'annida:
                  Nè soffra, che l'asperga, e che l'infetti
                  Di venen dolce, che piacendo ancida;
                  Ma la sua man, che i duri cor penetra
                  Soauemente, e gli ammollisce, e spetra.
               
               
                  Questa hà noi mossi, e questa hà noi condutti,
                  Tratti d'ogni periglio, e d'ogni impaccio:
                  Questa fà i piani i monti, e i fiumi asciutti:
                  L'ardor toglie à la state, al verno il ghiaccio:
                  Placa del mare i tempestosi flutti:
                  Stringe, e rallenta questa à i venti il laccio:
                  Quindi son l'alte mura aperte, & arse:
                  Quindi l'armate schiere vccise, e sparse.
               
               
                  Quindi l'ardir, quindi la speme nasce,
                  Non da le frali nostre forze, e stanche,
                  Non da l'armata, e non da quante pasce
                  Genti la Grecia, enon da l'armi Franche.
                  Pur ch'ella mai non ci abbandoni, e lasce,
                  Poco debbiam curar, ch'altri ci manche.
                  Chi sà come difende, e come fere,
                  Soccorso à i suoi perigli altro non chere.
               
               
                  Ma quando di sua aita ella ne priui
                  Per gli error nostri, ò per giuditij occulti;
                  Chi fia di noi, ch'esser sepulto schiui,
                  Oue i membri di Dio furgià sepulti?
                  Noi morirem, nè inuidia hauremo à i viui:
                  Noi morirem, ma non morremo inulti:
                  Nè l'Asia riderà di nostra sorte:
                  Nè pianta fia da noi la nstra morte.
               
               
                  
                  Non creder già, che noi fuggiam la pace,
                  Come guerra mortal si fugge, e paue:
                  Che l'amicitia del tuo Re ne piace,
                  Nè l'vnirci con lui ne sarà graue.
                  Ma, s'al suo Impero la Giudea soggiace,
                  Tu'l sai: per che tal cura ei dunque n'haue?
                  De' Regni altrui l'acquisto ei non ci vieti,
                  E regga in pace i suoi tranquilli, e lieti.
               
               
                  Così rispose, e di pungente rabbia
                  La risposta ad Argante il cor trafisse:
                  Ne'l celò già, ma con enfiata labbia
                  Si trasse auanti al Capitano, e disse,
                  Chi la pace non vuol, la guerra s'habbia:
                  Che penuria giamai non fù di risse:
                  E ben la pace ricusar tu mostri,
                  Se non t'acqueti à i primi detti nostri.
               
               
                  Indi il suo manto per lo lembo prese,
                  Curuollo, e fenne vn seno, e'l seno sporto,
                  Così pur anco à ragionar riprese,
                  Via più, che prima dispettoso, e torto.
                  O'sprezzator de le più dubbie imprese,
                  E guerra, e pace in questo sen t'apporto:
                  Tua sia l'elettione; hor ti consiglia
                  Senz'altro indugio, e qual più vuoi, ti piglia.
               
               
                  L'atto fero, e'l parlar tutti commosse
                  A chiamar guerra in vn concorde grido,
                  Non attendendo, che risposto fosse
                  Dal magnanimo lor Duce Goffrido.
                  Spiegò quel crudo il seno, e'lmanto scosse,
                  Et à guerra mortal, disse, vi sfido.
                  E'l disse in atto si feroce, & empio,
                  Che parue aprir di Giano il chiuso Tempio.
               
               
                  
                  Parue, ch'aprendo il seno indi trahesse
                  Il Furor pazzo, e la Discordia fera:
                  E che ne gli occhi horribili gli ardesse
                  La gran face d'Aletto, e di Megera.
                  Quel grandegià, che in contra il Cielo eresse
                  L'alta mole d'error, forse tal'era:
                  E in cotal'atto il rimirò Babelle
                  Alzar la fronte, e minacciar le stelle.
               
               
                  Soggiunse all'hor Goffredo. Hor riportate
                  Al vostro Re, che venga, e che s'ffretti;
                  Che la guerra accettiam, che minacciate:
                  E, s'ei non vien, fra'l Nilo suo n'aspetti.
                  Accommiatò lor poscia in dolci, e grate
                  Maniere, e gli honorò di doni eletti.
                  Ricchissimo ad Alete vn'elmo diede,
                  Ch' à Nicea conquestò fra l'altre prede.
               
               
                  Hebbe Argante vna spada, e'l fabro egregio
                  L'else, e'l pomo le fè gemmato, e d'oro,
                  Con magisterio tal, che prede il pregio
                  De la ricca materia appo il lauoro.
                  Poi che la tempra, e la ricchezza, e'l fregio
                  Sottilmente da lui mirati foro,
                  Disse Argante al Buglion. vedrai ben tosto,
                  Come da me il tuo dono in vso è posto.
               
               
                  Indi tolto congedo, è da lui ditto
                  Al suo compagno. hor ce n'andremo homai
                  Io à Gerusalem, tu verso Egitto,
                  Tu col Sol nouo, io co'notturni rai.
                  Ch'uopo ò di mia presenza, ò di mio scritto
                  Esser non può calà, doue tu vai.
                  Reca tu la risposta, io dilung armi
                  Quinci non voglio, oue si trattan l'armi.
               
               
                  
                  Così di Messagier fatto è nemico.
                  Sia fretta intempestiua, ò sia matura:
                  La ragion de le genti, e l'vso antico
                  S'offenda, ò no; ne'l pensa egli, ne'l cura.
                  Senza risposta hauer và per l'amico
                  Silentio de le stelle à l'alte mura,
                  D'indugio impatiente: & à chi resta
                  Già non men la dimora anco è molesta.
               
               
                  Era la notte all' hor, ch'alto riposo
                  Han l'onde, e i venti, e parea muto il Mondo.
                  Gli animai lassi, e quei, che'l mare ondoso,
                  Ó de'liquidi laghi alberga ilfondo,
                  E chi si giace in Tana, ò in Mandra ascoso,
                  E i pinti Angelli ne l'oblio profondo
                  Sotto il silentio de' secreti horrori
                  Sopian gli affanni, eraddolciano i cori.
               
               
                  Ma nè'l Campo Fedel, nè'l franca Duca
                  Si discioglie nel sonne, òpur s'accheta:
                  Tanta in lor cupidigia è, che riluca
                  Homai nel Ciel l'alba aspettata, e lieta:
                  Perche il camin lor mostri, e gli conduca
                  A'la Città, ch'al gran passaggio è meta.
                  Mirano ad hor ad hor, seraggio alcuno
                  Spunti, ò rischiari de la notte il bruno.
               
               Il Fine del Secondo Canto.
            
         
         
            
               
               THE THIRD SONG.
               
                  
                     DAwnyng th'Embassadresse was
ris'ne from bed,
                  Tydings to beare, how now grey
morne annies,
                  The whiles she trimmes her selfe,
and golden hed
                  Beflowres with Roses culd in Paradize,
                  When from the Campe to armes which buskelled,
                  Doth voice of murmur shrill and loftie rise,
                  And Trumpets blast preuents, Trūpets now found
                  Then earst, more cherefull & more cleare of sound.
               
               
                  Th'aduised Chieftaine with a gentle bit
                  Guideth, and seconds their so bent desire,
                  To turne the course more easie seemeth hit,
                  Of winding waue that rouls Caribdis nire,
                  Or Boreas when at Sea he ships doth slit,
                  Or scoures Mount Peuine backe to make retire.
                  He rancks them, leades them, & alone them swayes
                  Swiftly, but swiftnes such as order stayes.
               
               
                  Winges to ech heart, winges to ech heele are tide,
                  Nor his so speedie march the Souldier knowes,
                  But when the Sunne with glowing beames had fride
                  The chapped fieldes, and now to height arose:
                  Behold Hierusalem t'appeare is spide,
                  Behold Hierusalem ech finger showes,
                  Behold in one a thousand voices meete,
                  And all Hierusalem are heard to greete.
               
               
                  
                  So hardy ging of Marriners forth blowne,
                  In venture to deskry some straungy shore,
                  Who in wild Seas, and vnder Pole vnknowne,
                  Proue waues deceitfull, and windes faithles more:
                  If eye at last the coast desirde can owne,
                  With glad showt gre'th it, their approch tofore,
                  And t'one to t'other showes it, and forgets
                  Old noyse, the while and all orepassed lets.
               
               
                  To pleasure great which sight thus first affixt,
                  Did breath most sweetly into eu'ry brest,
                  Succeedes a deepe contrition, that doth mixt
                  With fearefull, reuerend affection rest,
                  Scarce dare they looke vp now and then betwixt,
                  To towne which Christ as his choice bowre possest.
                  Where he deceast, where he was buryed,
                  Where he with limes himselfe new parrelled.
               
               
                  Lowe accents, silent words, broken sobbings,
                  And fearefull sighings of this warlike rout,
                  Mingling at once both ioyes and sorrowings,
                  A murmur make whirle in the aire about,
                  As in thicke forrests heard are soft whistlings,
                  When through the bowes the wind breathes calmely out:
                  Or as amongst the rockes, or neere the shore,
                  The driuen waue doth hisse and hoarsely rore.
               
               
                  Bare footed ech, him to the way addrest,
                  For Dukes example mooues the residew:
                  Trimming of silke or gold, proud plume, or crest,
                  Not one there is, who not from head withdrew:
                  All do their hearts of stately thoughts deuest,
                  And cheekes with skalding teares deuout embrew:
                  Yet as to plaint foreclosed were the way,
                  Ech gainst himselfe doth this accusall lay.
               
               
                  
                  Then where thou with a thousand streames, O Lord,
                  Bloody didst leaue the earth besprinckelled,
                  Of bitter plaints at so grieuous record,
                  Least wise two quicke-springs now can I not shed,
                  O frozen hart! these eyes that hast not gord,
                  And into drops of teares thy selfe melted!
                  Hard heart of mine why splintst? why breakst not thou?
                  Wayle motst thou aye, if thou waile nothing now.
               
               
                  This while one in the Citie, who descries
                  Both hils and plaines, an high Towre guarding there
                  Markes from below, a dust vpward to rise,
                  So as it seemes great cloud to print in aere,
                  It seemes that cloud lightens and burnes in guise,
                  As flames and flashes it did childing beare,
                  Then he the shining of the mettall cleare
                  Discernes, and tryes both men and horse appeare.
               
               
                  And loud he cryes, O what a dust I vew,
                  Spread in the aire! Oh how it seemeth bright!
                  Arme, arme to your defence you Citie crew,
                  Ech speede to armes, and to the walles you dight,
                  The en'my comes, and then he cryes anew,
                  Ech one make haste, ech furnisht be to fight:
                  The en'my (see) is come, the dust behold,
                  Vnder yon horrid cloud the sky to fold.
               
               
                  Then seely children, and vnarmed old,
                  And womens rout of feare ypaled hew,
                  To strike or fend, who can no weapons hold,
                  Sad and suppliant to ech Meschite drew:
                  The rest more firme of lims and stomacke bold,
                  Tofore on backe hasty their armour threw:
                  Some runne to gates, and some vnto the wall,
                  King goes about, and sees and carkes for all.
               
               
                  
                  He order giues, and then retires them fro,
                  Where twixt two gates a Turret doth arise:
                  So neere he is at neede, and thence more low,
                  The playnes and mountaines round about he skries,
                  With him he would there should Erminia go:
                  
                     Erminia faire, whom he in courteous wise
                  Receiu'd to Court, when Chistian squadrons gaine
                  Did Antioch, and King her Sire was slaine.
               
               
                  This while Clorinda gainst the Frankes is hide,
                  Store with her goes, and she before them all,
                  But at a posterne gate on t'other side,
                  
                     Argant for reskons stands at readie call:
                  The noble Dame her followers affide,
                  With words and with a looke that scornd to pall:
                  By some braue onset, vs behooues (quoth she)
                  This day the hope of Asia founded be.
               
               
                  While she her men bespake, not farre she spyes
                  A band of Frankes their rusticke prayes driuing,
                  Who coast for bootie skourde (as is the guyse)
                  Were now to Campe with flocks and heards turning▪
                  
                  She towards them, and towards her there hyes
                  Their Captaine, who her saw to him comming:
                  
                     Gard is the Captaine nam'd, a mightie man,
                  But might not such as her resist he can.
               
               
                  This fierce encounter Gardo ouerthrowes
                  In sight of Frankes, and Painims on the plaine,
                  Who all one outcry made, so lucky showes
                  This token of the warre, yet proued vaine,
                  Then with the rest in spurring gins she close,
                  Her hand the price from thousand hands doth gaine,
                  Her men her follow, by the way she made
                  Plaine with her shockes, and open with her blade.
               
               
                  
                  Soone from the prayer she doth pray retake,
                  The troope of Frankes now step by step retire,
                  Till on the top of hill a stand they make,
                  Where place to armes, new forces gan acquire:
                  Then as a tempest doth resoluing crake,
                  And from the clouds downe falles the airy fire:
                  Good Tancred so at Godfreys bidding prest,
                  His Squadron moues, and maine yard doth arrest.
               
               
                  So strong great launce he beares, and in such guyse
                  This youth comes on, both fierce and faire in sight:
                  That King who from aloft his port descryes,
                  Him deemes amongst the best a chosen Knight,
                  And sayes to her, who in next seat him nyes,
                  And now her hart feeles in a panting plight:
                  Through so long vse you may to me declare
                  Ech Christen, though in armes they closed are.
               
               
                  What then is he that doth so seemely frame
                  Himselfe to iust, and so fierce semblance beare,
                  Vnto the Ladie for an answere came,
                  On lips a sigh, and in her eyes a teare,
                  But breath and weeping backe she doth reclame,
                  Though so as yet they make some muster theare,
                  For her swolne eyes, a purple circle faire,
                  Tainted and hoarse halfe sight brake forth to aire.
               
               
                  Then sithens she contriues, and seekes to hide
                  Another longinge vnder cloke of hate,
                  Alas I know him well, cause doth betide,
                  Why mongst a thousand I should know his state:
                  For oft the fields, and oft deepe dikes I skride,
                  Him fill with bloud of vassals mine of late:
                  Ah how in striking fell he is? to wound
                  He giues in herbes, or spels no helpe is found.
               
               
                  
                  The Prince Tancred it is, ah once that hee
                  My prisner were, but yet aliue, not sleine
                  I would him haue, that fierce desire in mee
                  Of sweete reuenge might so some comfort geine:
                  This sayd she, and her words by hearers bee
                  Wrong turned from right sence, as she did meane.
                  And this last speech a mingled sigh out brought,
                  Which to suppresse, but all in vaine she sought.
               
               
                  
                     Tancreds assault this while Clorinda plyes
                  T'encounter, and in rest her Launce bestowes:
                  Ech t'others beauer hits, the splints to skyes
                  Vp start, and she in part disarmed showes:
                  For buckles broke, foorthwith the Helmet flyes
                  From off her head, (a blow whence wonder growes)
                  And golden lockes vnto the wind displayd,
                  She midst the field appeares a youthly mayd.
               
               
                  Her eyes do flash, her lookes do lighten bright,
                  Sweete eu'n in wrath, in laughter then what grace
                  They hold? Tancred whereon thinkst thou? thy sight
                  Where bendst thou? knowst thou not this noble face?
                  This is that visage faire whence thou in light
                  Flames burnst, thy hart (her pictures shrine) the case
                  Can show, this same is she whom quenching thirst
                  At solitarie spring thou sawest first.
               
               
                  He that of painted shield, and of her crest
                  Tooke earst no keepe, now seeing her doth grow
                  A stone, she bared head couers, as best
                  She may, and him assayles, he gets her fro,
                  And fell blade whirling makes against the rest,
                  Yet at her hand peace cannot purchase so:
                  But threatfull him pursewes, and turne she cries,
                  And to deathes twaine at once she him defies.
               
               
                  
                  Stroken this Knight, no strokes againe replyes,
                  Nor so from sword himselfe to guard attends,
                  As to regard her cheekes and fairest eyes,
                  From whence his bow, loue vneschewed bends,
                  T'himselfe he sayes, ech blow vnharmefull dyes,
                  Which force of her right hand (though armed) lends,
                  But neuer blow from her faire naked face
                  Falles vaine, but in my heart findes lighting place.
               
               
                  Last he resolues, though pitty hope he none,
                  As louer hid, not silent to decease,
                  That she her prisner strikes, to her make knowne
                  He will, trembling, vnarm'd, sewing for peace,
                  And sayes, O thou, that for thy foe alone
                  Seem'st me to take among so great a preace:
                  Let vs forsake this thrust, so may aside
                  My force with thine, thy force with mine be tride.
               
               
                  So better shall be seene if my prowesse
                  Thine counteruaile, she th'offer not gain-said,
                  And as she were of wanted helme recklesse,
                  Forth bold she goes, on followes he dismaid:
                  Now to the combat had this warriouresse
                  Plighted her selfe, and on some blowes now laid,
                  When he sayes stay, and of the fight lets make
                  The cou'nants, ere we vs to fight betake.
               
               
                  The stops and him of fearefull earst, hardy
                  Now makes, a loue conuerted to dispaire:
                  The cou'nants are (quoth he) since so you fly,
                  All peace with me that out my hart you teare,
                  My heart, no longer mine which glad will dy,
                  If of his farder life dislike you beare:
                  Long time it hath beene yours, now time is fit
                  The same you reaue, forbid I may not it.
               
               
                  
                  Behold mine armes downe held you I present,
                  Fencelesse my brest, why stay you it to cleaue?
                  Will you dispatch the worke? now, now content
                  Of curets go, if corps that bare I leaue,
                  You bid Tancred with threedes of more lament,
                  His woe (poore wretch) perhaps preparde to weaue:
                  But presse vntimely that still fast arriu'd,
                  Some his, some Painims farder time depriu'd.
               
               
                  The Palestines by Christens chaced, gan
                  Giue ground, were it for guile, or were it feare,
                  When of the chacers an vnmanly man
                  Wau'd by the wind, skrying her sparckled heare,
                  Lifts vp his hand as at her backe he ran,
                  And where she naked show'd, stroke at her there:
                  But Tancred cryed out thereof aware,
                  And with his sword that great blow off he bare.
               
               
                  Yet all in vaine not lights, but on the bound
                  Her hitt, twixt whitest necke and fairest hed,
                  And her beguiled lockes this slightest wound,
                  With some few drops, such wise betainted red,
                  As gold growes ruddie, which (some rubyes ground
                  By skilfull workeman set) doth sparkles shed:
                  But furious grew this Prince, and onward made
                  Against this villaine, and drew out his blade.
               
               
                  T'other avoides, and wrath enkindled hee
                  Pursewes, they go through aire as arrow-fares,
                  Suspenst, she stayes a while and both doth see,
                  Now parted farre, nor them to follow cares:
                  But backe retires with those of hers that flee,
                  And now showes face, nor Frankes t'assaile she spares,
                  Now turnes she, now returns, now fight, now flight
                  She makes, nor chac'd, nor chacer term'd aright.
               
               
                  
                  Right so fierce Bull sometimes in market place,
                  If hornes to dogges he turne, from whence he fled,
                  They there retire, and if to flight he pace,
                  Ech makes returne to chace emboldened:
                  At backe Clorinda (whiles she flight doth trace)
                  High holds her shield, and guards thereby her hed:
                  Defenced in Monseo pastimes so,
                  From balles against them throwne, the flyers go.
               
               
                  While these pursew, and those pursewed fly
                  To the high walles, they now approching drew,
                  When on the sodaine with a ghastly cry
                  Vpraysde, backe on them comes the Painim crew:
                  First wheeling farre aloofe, then turning ny,
                  At backe and sides return'd they fight renew:
                  Meane space Argante downe the mountaine led,
                  His band t'assault them also on the hed.
               
               
                  The fierce Circassian from the troup out went,
                  That his blow first the enimy might gall:
                  And whom he strooke he topsie-turuie hent
                  To ground, in plumpe both man and horse withall:
                  And ere his launce was into shiuers rent,
                  Many claim'd fellowship in th'others fall:
                  Then drawes his sword, and where it home doth come,
                  Still killes or felles, or least-wise woundeth some.
               
               
                  
                     Clorind his countermate of life reaued
                  
                     Ardelio strong, who farre in yeares did creepe,
                  But of old age, as yet vnmastered,
                  And fenst by two bigge sonnes, who safe him keepe
                  Could not, for from his fathers care sundred
                  Th'eldest Alcandro was, by wound full deepe,
                  And Poliferno who neere him abid,
                  Could scarce and scarce himselfe from perill rid.
               
               
                  
                  But Tancred when he could not ouer-get
                  That villaine, who his horse had swifter pac'd,
                  Lookt backe and saw his hardy men had fet
                  Too farre a course, while sole headlong they chac'd:
                  He saw them hemd, he spurres to courser set,
                  Turning the raynes, and thither speedes in haste:
                  Nor he alone brought succour to his band,
                  But eke that troupe which made for neede a stand.
               
               
                  That troup aduenturer which Dudon led,
                  Heroicke flowre, the Campes sinewes and might,
                  
                     Regnold shapt fairest, noblest couraged,
                  Fore-runnes them all, lightning takes slower flight,
                  
                     Erminia soone his port, soone th'azured
                  Shield had deskryde with siluer Eagle dight:
                  And sayes to King that on him fixt his eye,
                  Ther's he that beares on brauest masterye.
               
               
                  For trenchant blade he hath of equall prize,
                  Or few or none, yet but a child in age,
                  If but such sixe were mongst our enemies,
                  Ere now had Syria stoupt to seruiceage,
                  Ere now had neighbour-realmes, where Sun doth rise,
                  And Realmes that South most lye, endur'd bondage:
                  And Nile perhaps in vaine, from yoke should hide
                  His head farre distant, nor as yet deskride.
               
               
                  
                     Regnold he's called, and his wrathfull hand
                  More then all engines force the walles do feare,
                  Now turne your eyes where I am pointing, and
                  Mark him whose armes green with gold mixed beare,
                  That's Dudon, and by him is led this band,
                  This band which hath to name th'Aduenturer:
                  A warriour who well borne and well expert,
                  Exceedes in yeeres, nor wanteth in desert.
               
               
                  
                  That great one seene with blacke becouered so,
                  
                     Gernand he hight, brother to Norway King,
                  A prouder man the whole earth cannot shoe,
                  This sole the price of his acts shadowing,
                  Those two, who thus in one conioyned goe,
                  And parrell white, white haue their furnishing,
                  
                     Gildip and Edward loues, and spouses are
                  In loyaltie, and martiall prowesse rare.
               
               
                  So spake she, and they saw downe on the plaine,
                  How slaughter still encreaseth more and more,
                  For Tancred and Reynold brake through the traine,
                  That thicke of men and armes enringde tofore,
                  And then the band which Dudon led, amaine
                  Comes in, and on them likewise chargeth sore.
                  
                     Argant, Argant himselfe at shocke such wise,
                  
                     Reynold orethrew that scant he could arise.
               
               
                  Nor had he ris'ne perhaps, saue that the horse
                  Of Bertolds sonne, that instant tooke a fall,
                  And hauing vnder-caught his foot, did force
                  For plucking it thereout some stay withall:
                  The Painim troupe this while seekes to endorce,
                  Defeated, flying, chac'd the Citie wall:
                  Sole Argant and Clorinda bancke and barre,
                  Gainst fury that at backe orefloweth, are.
               
               
                  Last rancke they guard, & brunt at heeles some space,
                  Vpon them makes a stay, and is represt,
                  So as those folke with lesse endaunger'd case
                  Might fly, who first to flight themselues addrest:
                  
                     Dudon fierie through victorie giues chase
                  To flyers, and the fierce Tygran opprest,
                  With shocke of horses & then with drawne blade,
                  His body headlesse kisse the ground he made.
               
               
                  
                  Nor Algazzar good of tough Corslet tooke,
                  Nor mightie Corban of his strong Helmet,
                  For in the nape and backe them he so strooke,
                  That wound to face and brest did passage get:
                  And by his hand eke their sweet lodge forsooke,
                  The soules of Amurate and Mehemet,
                  
                  And of fell Almansor, nor great Circasse,
                  
                  One step by him can vnannoyed passe.
               
               
                  
                     Argant frets to himselfe, and eft he makes
                  A stand, and turnes, and then retires againe,
                  At last so suddaine turned, to him he rakes,
                  And rought his side with a reuerse so maine,
                  That deepe the blade it bathes therein, and takes
                  Life by that blow from Frankish Capitaine:
                  He falles, and eyes that scarce could open looke,
                  An yron sleepe, and hardest quiet tooke.
               
               
                  Thrice he them opens, and the heau'ns sweete rayes
                  Sought to enioy, and on his arme arose,
                  And thrice he fell, and his eyne ouer-layes
                  A darkesome vayle: in th'end weari'd they close,
                  His limmes dissolue, dead, cold, a sweat displayes,
                  And sensibly a sencelesse stifnes growes,
                  Vpon the corps (now dead) no longer stay
                  Fierce Argant brookes, but hies forth on his way.
               
               
                  Yet for all that though going keepe no stay,
                  He turn'd to Frankes, and (O ye Knights) he cride,
                  This bloudie sword is that, with which the day
                  Last past your Lord in guift me gratifide:
                  Tell him how now thereof I tooke assay,
                  For glad he would this newes be certifide:
                  And deere must take it that his Present faire
                  Is knowne by proofe, so great a worth to beare.
               
               
                  
                  Tell him henceforth account he looking make,
                  In his owne guts the same more sure to proue,
                  And if t'assaile no ouer speede he take,
                  I'le come vnlookt, be he the ground aboue:
                  The Christians angred at so fell a crake,
                  From all sides with all hands against him moue,
                  But mongst the rest he was too safety ronne,
                  And for his guard had wall befriending wonne.
               
               
                  The guarders busie, straight themselues addresse,
                  To haile downe stones aloft from garrets so,
                  And with such fast supply the numberlesse
                  Quiuers with arrowes stuffed eu'ry bow,
                  That to retrait forst is of Frankes the presse,
                  And Saracins into the Citie go.
                  But Reynold now from groueling horses side,
                  His foot out hauing pluckt, was thither hide.
               
               
                  He came on the Barbarian homicide,
                  A sharpe reuenge for Dudons death to take,
                  And being come to his, aloud he cride,
                  What looke you for? what lingring ist you make?
                  Since slaughtred lies the Knight that was our guide,
                  Why running haste we not his death to wrake?
                  In so great cause of iust displeasure can
                  A brittle wall thwart vs a stoppage than?
               
               
                  No not if double ire or Adamant,
                  This walling high not to be pierced were,
                  From higher prowesse yours, that fierce Argant
                  
                  With begged safetie should him neastle there:
                  Goe we vnto th'assault, and selfe instant,
                  Before the rest (so said) first doth he steare,
                  For his vndaunted courage ought affright,
                  Nor arrowes showre, nor storme all stony might.
               
               
                  
                  He tossing his stout head lifts vp his face,
                  Full of so terrible an hardiment,
                  That to the hearts of those, who guard the place,
                  An ycy cold of feare vnwonted went:
                  Whiles some he cheeres, and some he doth menace,
                  In commeth one, who slakes his eger bent:
                  For Godfrey to them sent the good Sigiere,
                  
                  Of his graue charges messenger seuere.
               
               
                  Who in his name their ouer-hardinesse
                  Vncries, and straight to turne doth straight impose,
                  Returne he sayes, for to your wrathfulnesse
                  Nor place serues fit, nor season tidie growes,
                  
                     Godfrey commaunds it you this word expresse,
                  
                     Regnold now raines, who earst was spurre to those:
                  Though inward much he frets, and out reueald
                  More signes then one of anger ill conceald.
               
               
                  Backe turne the bandes, nor their returne at all
                  Was by the counterwayting foe distrest,
                  Nor Dudons corps of his last funerall,
                  In any portion did defrauded rest:
                  Vpon their kindest armes his friends loyall
                  Him beare, a burden deere and nobellest,
                  
                     Bulleyn the while viewes from an higher part,
                  Of that strong Citie both the site and art.
               
               
                  
                     Hierusalem vpon two hils is set,
                  Of height vneuen, and turnde front to frount,
                  His middle part a lowly vale doth fret,
                  Which it deuides and t'one from t'other mount,
                  Three sides are coasted with a combrous let,
                  Fourth easie way, nor to ascend they count:
                  But with high raysed walles it selfe defends,
                  The playner part which gainst the North extends.
               
               
                  
                  Within the Citie sundry Cesterns are,
                  Raine to receiue, and brookes and liuing springs:
                  Without the earth about of grasse is bare,
                  Fountaines or lakes (barraine) none forth it brings:
                  Nor is it seene gladsome, or proud to fare
                  With trees; nor yeelds gainst Suns rayes shadowings:
                  Saue where some sixe miles off a wood vpgrowes
                  With noysome bugbears, that dark ghastly showes.
               
               
                  That side where rising first appeares the day,
                  The noble waue of happy Iordan flankes,
                  And on the westerne part of Midland Sea,
                  It buts vpon the sandy strowed bankes,
                  The North Betel (to golden calfe, where they
                  An alter raysd) and eke Samaria rankes:
                  
                     Bethlem is plast where South brings showry cloud,
                  Whose hap was earst in lap great birth to shrowd.
               
               
                  While Godfrey now both of the towne, and land
                  The loftie rampires, and the site surueyes,
                  And him bethinkes where best his campe may stand,
                  And where foes weakest wall t'assaile with ease,
                  
                     Erminia skryes him, and with stretched hand
                  Him points to Painim King, and farder sayes:
                  That Godfrey is, who clad in purple pall,
                  Beares port so king-like and maiesticall.
               
               
                  He (certes) borne seemes a Soueraigne,
                  So th'arts to rule, and to command he knowes:
                  Nor is he meaner Knight then Capitaine,
                  But all the points of double valure owes,
                  Nor man more warlike this so great a traine
                  Mongst all then him, nor more aduised showes:
                  In counsell Raymond sole, and sole in warre
                  
                     Reynold and Tancred his coegals are.
               
               
                  
                  The Painym King replies, him well I beare
                  In minde, as earst seene at great Court of France,
                  
                  When I Egyptian messenger was there,
                  In noble iusts I saw him ply his launce,
                  And though his yeeres, which then young springing were,
                  No tire of downe did on his cheekes aduaunce:
                  Yet both his words, & workes, and semblant braue
                  Of greatest hopes eu'n then foretoken gaue.
               
               
                  Foretoken ah too true, with that troubled
                  Ey-lids downe clines he, then them reares anew,
                  And sayes, tell me; whats he coat-armoured,
                  Whom weare, and t'others match to march we vew,
                  Oh how by this he is resembelled!
                  Though seemes to want a part of stature dew,
                  Thats Baldwyn answer'd she, to him showes he,
                  Brother by face, but more by facts to be.
               
               
                  Next marke the man on t'other side in guize,
                  That stands of one who counsaile doth endite,
                  He Reymond hights, whom I to you for wise,
                  Did so commend, a man all hoary white,
                  Skild to contriue more warlicke policies,
                  Theres neither Frankish nor Italian sprite,
                  But he that with guilt-helme doth farder stand,
                  Good William is, Kings sonne of Brittish land.
               
               
                  With him is Gwelfe and equall striues to goe,
                  In braue deedes, in great bloud, in high calling,
                  Full well by those square shoulders him I knowe,
                  And by that breast whole cheasted vp rysing,
                  But mongst these squadrons mine owne greatest foe
                  (Though wide I looke) to sight I cannot bring:
                  I meane that Boemund, that murderer,
                  Of my bloud royall cruell rauiner.
               
               
                  
                  So talked they, the whiles the Capitaine,
                  When he the walles had viewd, to his descends,
                  And for he deemes the Citie should in vaine
                  Assault receiue, where steepenesse most ascends:
                  Against the Northerne gate, he on the plaine,
                  That with it ioynes, his pitched tents extends:
                  And thence proceeding neere the towre below▪
                  
                  Cald Angolar, the rest he doth bestow.
               
               
                  The circuit of the Campe might neere comprize
                  The Cities third part, or but little lesse,
                  For to enclose it round the same suffize
                  At full could not, such was her hugynesse:
                  But all the wayes (at least) which might supplyes
                  Afford, Godfrey to stop gan him addresse:
                  And causeth to be seiz'd ech passage fit,
                  That seru'd to come, and go too and from it.
               
               
                  A charge he giues his Tents should fortefide
                  With diches deepe, and with strong trenches bee:
                  Which it from Townesmens sallyes on th'oneside,
                  And straunge assaults might on the tother free:
                  Then after these dew workes to end were hide,
                  
                     Dudons carcasse he tooke a mind to see,
                  And thither went where that good Captaine ded,
                  With sad and tearefull troupe was compassed.
               
               
                  His faithfull friends adorned his great Beare
                  With noble pompe, where plast aloft he lyes:
                  When Godfrey enters, and the people reare
                  More dolefull playning and more tatling cryes,
                  But with a looke nor troubled nor yet cleare,
                  Good Bulleyn bridles his affects, and tyes
                  His tongue, then when his sight on him had stayd,
                  Fixed in muse somewhile at last he sayd.
               
               
                  
                  To thee nor plaint, nor dole are dew, for death,
                  If world thee sent, heau'n giues thee birth againe,
                  And here where off thou threwest thy mortall sheath,
                  Steps of thy glory printed deepe remaine:
                  Thou liu'dst as Champion of the Christen faith,
                  And so thou did'st, now ioyest thou, and faine
                  In God dost feede thine eyes, O soule of blisse,
                  And crownd, and palmd thy well deseruing is.
               
               
                  Blessed liue thou for our condition,
                  Not thy mis-hap inuites these teares to fall:
                  Sith at thy parting parts a portion
                  Of vs, most worthy and most strong withall:
                  But if from vs an earthly aide is gon,
                  Depriu'd by that, which death the vulgar call:
                  An heau'nly aide for vs thy suit may gaine,
                  For mongst th'elect thee heau'n doth entertaine.
               
               
                  And as we saw for our aduantage thee,
                  Earst mortall man, these mortall armes to weeld,
                  So (sprite diuine) our hope assures to see,
                  With fatall armes of heau'n thou wilt vs sheeld:
                  Learne now the prayers to receiue which wee
                  Thee send, and succour to our euils yeeld:
                  Thence conquest I denounce, deuout we will
                  Triumphant vowes at Church to thee fulfill.
               
               
                  So spake he, and by this the Euening darke
                  Had quenched all the rayes of lightsome day,
                  And with obliuion of ech noysome carke,
                  Did truce on teares, and on lamentings lay:
                  But Godfrey warlicke engins want doth marke,
                  Which vnsupplide, t'were vaine the wals t'assay:
                  He casts where beames to get, and how to make
                  The engins frames, and small rest can he take.
               
               
                  
                  Vp with the Sunne he rose, and follow will
                  Himselfe the pompe of solemne funerall,
                  To Dudon at the foot of rysing hill,
                  A Sepulchre of Cipresse sweete they stall,
                  Their Barricados neere, and highest spill
                  Of Palme tree, with his boughs orespreads it all:
                  There was he layd, the whiles the Priestly throng,
                  Rest to his soule do pray for in their song.
               
               
                  Amongst the boughes, where hang'd vp here & there
                  Ensignes, and prisond armes of diuers sort,
                  From Syrians and Persians that were
                  Earst wonne by him, with better sped effort:
                  The armes and curets which he vsde to weare,
                  Did cloth the tronke, and tronke did them support:
                  Where after was ygrau'd: Here lyes Dudon,
                  
                  Yeeld honours dew to this braue Champion.
               
               
                  But godly Bulleyn hauing brought to end
                  This worke so dolorous and so deuout,
                  The Carpenters of all the Campe doth send,
                  With souldiers conuoy to the forrest out:
                  It lyes twixt valleyes hidden, and a friend
                  Of Syria made it knowne to Frankish rout:
                  March thither they to cut downe engines take,
                  Gainst which the Citie no defence may make.
               
               
                  Ech on his mate to fell the plants doth call,
                  And gainst the wood to worke vnusde outrage,
                  Hewne by the yrons piercing edge, downe fall
                  The sacred Palme-trees, and th'Ashes sauage,
                  The Maples, Pines, the Cipresse funerall,
                  High Firres, Beeches, and Holmes of thicke bowage:
                  The husband Elmes, to which the vine sometimes
                  Leanes, and with wrythed foot to heauen climes.
               
               
                  
                  Somes strokes in Ewes, somes are in Okes enchac'd,
                  Which haue a thousand times their lockes renewd,
                  And thousand times (at ech encounter fast)
                  The wrath of windes repulsed and subdewd:
                  And some on ratling wheeles the burdens plac'd,
                  Of Ornes and Ceders with sweete sent imbewd:
                  At sound of armes, at diuers cry the beasts,
                  And birdes forsake their caues, and fly their neasts.
               
               The end of the third Song.
            
            
               
               CANTO TERZO
               
                  
                     GI A' l'aura Messaggiera erasi
desta
                  A'nuntiar, che se ne vien l'Aurora:
                  Ella in tanto s'adorna, e l'aurea
testa
                  Di rose colte in Paradiso infiora;
                  Quando il Campo, ch'à l'arme homai s'appresta,
                  In voce mormoraua alta, esonora,
                  E preuenia le trombe: e queste poi
                  Dier più lieti, e canori i segni suoi.
               
               
                  Il saggio Capitan con dolce morso
                  I desiderij lor guida, e seconda:
                  Che più facil saria suolger il corso
                  Presso Cariddi à la volubil'onda
                  O' tardar Borea all'hor, che scote il dorso
                  Del' Apennino, e i legni in mare affonda.
                  Gli ordina, gl'incamina, e'n suon gli regge
                  Rapido sì, ma rapido con legge.
               
               
                  Ali hà ciascuno al core, & ali al piede:
                  Nè del suo ratto andar però s'accorge.
                  Ma, quando il Solgli aridi Campi fiede
                  Conraggi assai feruenti, e in alto sorge;
                  Ecco apparir Gierusalem si vede:
                  Ecco additar Gierusalem si scorge:
                  Ecco da mille voci vnitamente
                  Gierusalemme salutar si sente.
               
               
                  
                  Così di Nauiganti audace stuolo,
                  Che moua à ricercar estranio lido:
                  E in Mar dubbioso, e sotto ignoto Polo
                  Proui l'onde fallaci, e'l vento infido;
                  S'àl fin discopre il desiato suolo,
                  Il saluta da lunge in lieto grido:
                  E l'vno à l'altro il mostra, e in tanto oblia
                  La noia, e'l mal de la passata via.
               
               
                  Al gran piacer, che quella prima vista
                  Dolcemente spirò ne l'altrui petto,
                  Alta contrition successe, mista
                  Di timoroso, ereuerente affetto.
                  O sano à pena dinnalzar la vista
                  Ver la Città, di CHRISTO albergo e letto:
                  Doue morì: doue sepulto fue:
                  Doue poi riuestì le membra sue.
               
               
                  Sommessi accenti, e tacite parole,
                  Rotti singulti, e flebili sospiri
                  De la gente, che'n vn s'allegra, e duole,
                  Fan, che per l'aria vn mormorio s'aggiri,
                  Qual ne le folte selue vdir si suole,
                  S'auuien che tra le frondi il vento spiri:
                  O quale infra gli scogli, ò presso à i lidi
                  Sibila il mar percosso in rauchi stridi.
               
               
                  Nudo ciascuno il piè calca il sentiero:
                  Che l'essempio de' Duci ogn'altro moue.
                  Serico fregio, e d'or piuma, ò cimiero
                  Superbo dal suo capo ogn' vn rimoue:
                  Et insieme del cor l'habito altero
                  Depone, e calde, e pie lagrime pioue.
                  Pur, quasi al pianto habbia la uia rinchiusa,
                  Così parlando ogn'unse stesso accusa.
               
               
                  
                  Dunque, oue tu, Signor, di milleriui
                  Sanguinosi il terren lasciasti asperso,
                  D'amaro pianto almen duo fonti uiui
                  In sì acerba memoria hoggi io non uerso?
                  Agghiacciato mio cor, che non deriui
                  Per gli occhi, e stilli in lagrime conuerso?
                  Duro mio cor, che non ti spetri, e frangi?
                  Pianger ben merti ogn'hor, s'hora non piangi.
               
               
                  Dala Cittade intanto Vn, ch'à la guarda
                  Stà d' alta Torre, escopre i monti, e i campi,
                  Cola giuso la polue alzarsi guarda,
                  Sì che par, che gran nube in aria stampi:
                  Par, che baleni quella nube, & arda,
                  Come di fiamme grauida, e di lampi:
                  Poi lo splendor de' lucidimetalli
                  Distingue escerne gli huomini, e i caulli
               
               
                  All'hor gridaua, ò qual per l'Aria stesa
                  Poluere i veggio: ò come par, che splenda.
                  Sù, suso, ò Cittadini: à la difesa
                  S'armi ciascun veloce, e i muri ascenda:
                  Già presente è il nemico. è poi ri presa
                  La voce. Ogn'un s'affretti, e l'arme prenda;
                  Ecco il nemico è quì: mira la pòlue,
                  Che sotto horrida nebbia il Cielo inuolue.
               
               
                  I sempli ei fanciulli, e i vecchi inermi,
                  E'l vulgo de le Donne sbigottite,
                  Che non sanno ferir, nè fare schermi,
                  Trahean supplici, e mesti à le Meschite.
                  Cli altri di membra, e d'animo piùfermi
                  Già frettolosi l'arme hauean rapite.
                  Accorre altri à leporte, altri à le mura:
                  Il Reva intorno, e'ltutto vede, e cura.
               
               
                  
                  Gliordini diede, e poscia ei si ritrasse,
                  Oue sorge vna Torre infra due porte,
                  Si ch'e presso al bisogno: e son più basse
                  Quindi le piaggie, e le montagne scorte.
                  Volle, che quiui seco Erminia andasse:
                  Erminia bella, ch'ei raccolse in Corte,
                  Poi ch'à lei fù da le Christiane squadre
                  Presa Antiochia, e morto il Re suo padre.
               
               
                  Clorinda intanto in contra à i franchi è gita:
                  Molti ùan seco, & ella à tutti è auante.
                  Ma in altra parte, ond'è secreta uscita,
                  Stà preparato à le riscosse Argante.
                  La generosa i suoi seguaci incita
                  Co'detti, e con l'intrepido sembiante.
                  Ben con alto principio à noi conuiene,
                  (Dicea) fondar de l'Asia hoggi la spene.
               
               
                  Mentre ragiona a' suoi, non lunge scorse
                  Vn Franco stuolo addur rustiche prede:
                  Che (come è l'vso) à depredar precorse;
                  Hor con greggie, & armenti al Campo riede,
                  Ella uer loro, e uerso lei se'n corse
                  Il Ducelor, ch'à se uenir la vede.
                  Gardo il Duce è nomato, huom d igran possa,
                  Ma non già tal, ch'à lei resister possa.
               
               
                  Gardo à quel fero scontro è spinto à terra
                  In su gli occhi de'Franchi, e de'Pagani:
                  Ch'all' hortutti gridar, di quella guerra
                  Lieti auguri prendendo, i quai fur vani,
                  Spronando adosso à gli altri ella si serra,
                  E val la destra sua per cento mani.
                  Seguirla i suoi guerrier per quella strada,
                  Che spianar gli urti, e che s'aprì la spada.
               
               
                  
                  Tosto la preda al predator ritoglie:
                  Cede lo stuol de'Franchi à poco, à poco;
                  Tanto che'n cima à un colle ei si raccoglie,
                  Oue aiutate son l'arme dal loco.
                  All'hor sì come turbine si scioglie,
                  E cade da le nubi aereo foco,
                  Il buon Tancredi, à cui Goffredo acenna,
                  Sua squadra mosse, & arrestò l'antenna.
               
               
                  Porta sì salda la gran lancia, e in guisa
                  Vien feroce, e leggia dro il Giouenetto;
                  Che ueggendolo d'alto il Re, s'auuisa,
                  Che sia guerriero infra gli scelti eletto.
                  Onde dice à colei, ch'è seco assisa,
                  E che già sente palpitarsi il petto.
                  Ben conoscer dei tu per sì lungo vso
                  Ogni Christian, ben che ne l'arme chiuso.
               
               
                  Chi è dunque costui, che così bene
                  S'adatta in giostra, e fero in uista è tanto?
                  A quella, in uece di risposta, uiene
                  Sù le labra un sospir, sù gli occhi il pianto.
                  Pur gli spirti, e le lagrimeritene;
                  Ma non così, che lor non mostri alquanto:
                  Che gli occhi pregni un bel purpureo giro
                  Tinse, e roco spunto mezo il sospiro.
               
               
                  Poi gli dice infing euole, enasconde
                  Sotto il manto de l'odio altro desio.
                  Ohime bene il conosco, & hò ben donde
                  Fra mille riconoscerlo deggia io:
                  Che spesso il uidi i campi, e le profonde
                  Fosse del sangue empir del Popolmio.
                  Ahi quanto è crudo nel ferire: à piaga,
                  Ch'ei faccia, herba non gioua, od arte maga.
               
               
                  
                  Egli è il Prence Tancredi. ò Prigioniero
                  Mio fosse un giorno, e no'luorrei giàmorto:
                  Viuo il uorrei, perche'n me desse al fero
                  Desio dolce uendetta alcun conforto.
                  Così parlaua: e de'suoi detti il uero
                  Da chi l'udiua in altro senso è torto;
                  E fuor n'uscì con le sue uoci estreme
                  Misto un sospir, che'n darno ella già preme.
               
               
                  Clorinda in tanto ad incontrar l'assalto
                  Và di Tancredi, e pon la Lancia in resta.
                  Ferirsi à le uisiere, ei tronchi in alto
                  Volaro, e parte nuda ella ne resta:
                  Che, rotti i lacci àl'elmo suo, d'un salto
                  (Mirabil colpo) ei le balzò di testa:
                  E le chiome dorate al uento sparse,
                  Giouane donna in mezo'l Campo apparse.
               
               
                  Lampeggiar gli occhi, e folgorar gli sguardi,
                  Dolci ne l'ira, hor che sarian nel riso?
                  Tancredi, à che pur pensi? à che pur guardi?
                  Non riconoscitu l'amato uiso?
                  Quest'è pur, quel bel uolto, onde tutt' ardi:
                  Tuo core il dica, ou'è il suo essempio inciso.
                  Questa è colei, che rinfrescar la fronte
                  Vedesti già uel solitario fonte.
               
               
                  Ei, ch'al cimiero, & al dipinto scudo
                  Non badò prima, hor lei ueggendo impetra:
                  Ella, quanto può meglio, il capo ignudo
                  Si ricopre, e l'assale: & ei s'arretra.
                  Và contra gli altri, erota il ferro crudo;
                  Ma però da lei pace non impetra:
                  Che minacciosa il segue, e; uolgi, grida:
                  E di due morti in un punto lo sfida.
               
               
                  
                  Percosso il Caualier non ripercote:
                  Nè sì dal ferror à riguardarsi attende,
                  Come à guardar i begliocchi, ele gote,
                  Ond' Amor l'arco ineuitabil tende.
                  Fra se dicea. uan le percosse uote
                  Tal'hor, che la sua destra armata stende:
                  Ma colpo mai del bello ignudo uolto
                  Non cade in fallo, e sempre il cor m'è colto.
               
               
                  Risolue al fin, ben che pietà non spere,
                  Di non morir tacendo occulto Amante.
                  Vuol, ch'ella sappia, ch'un prigion suo fere,
                  Già inerme, e supplicheuole, e tremante.
                  Onde le dice. O tu, che mostri hauere
                  Per nemico me sol fra turbe tante;
                  Vsciam di questa mischia: & in disparte
                  I potrò teco, etu meco prouarte.
               
               
                  Così me'si uedrà, s'al tuo s'agguaglia
                  Il mio ualore. ella accetto l'inuito:
                  E, come esser senz'elmo à lei non caglia,
                  Già baldanzosa, & ei seguia smarrito.
                  Recata s'era in atto di battaglia
                  Già la Guerriera, e già l'hauea ferito;
                  Quand' egli; hor ferma, disse: e siano fatti
                  Anzi la pugna de la pugna i patti.
               
               
                  Fermossi, e lue di pauroso audace
                  Rendè in quel punto disperato amore.
                  I patti sian (dicea), poi che tu pace
                  Meco non uuoi, che tu mi tragga il core.
                  Il mio cor, non più mio, s'à te dispiace,
                  Ch'egli più uiua, uolontario more.
                  É'tuo gran tempo: e tempo è ben, che trarlo
                  Homai tu debbia, e non debb'io uietarlo.
               
               
                  
                  Ecco io inchino le braccia, e t'appresento
                  Senza dife sa il petto. hor che no'l fiedi?
                  Vuoi ch'ageuoli l'opra? i son contento
                  Trami l'vsbergo hor hor, se nudo il chiedi.
                  Distinguea forse in più duro lamento
                  I suoi dolori il misero Tancredi;
                  Ma calca l'impedisce intempestiua
                  De'Pagani, e de'suoi, che soprarriua.
               
               
                  Cedean cacciati da lo stuol Christiano
                  I Palestini, ò sia temenza, od'arte.
                  Vn de'persecutori, huomo inhumano,
                  Vide le suentolar le chiome sparte:
                  Eda tergo in passando alzò la mano,
                  Per ferir lei ne la sua ignuda parte;
                  Ma Tancredo gridò, che se n' accorse,
                  E con la spada à quel gran colpo occorse.
               
               
                  Tur non gì tutto in vano, e ne' confini
                  Del bianco collo il bel capo ferille.
                  Fù leuissima piaga, e i biondi crini
                  Rosseg giaron così d'alquante stille,
                  Come rosseg gia l'or, che di rubini
                  Per man d'illustre artefice sfauille.
                  Ma il Prence infuriato, all'hor si spinse
                  Adosso à quel villano, e'l ferro strinse.
               
               
                  Quel si dilegua, e questi acceso d'ira
                  Ilsegue: e uan, come per l'aria strale.
                  Ella riman sospesa, & ambo mira
                  Lontani molto, nè seguir le cale:
                  Ma co'suoi fuggitiui si ritira.
                  Tal'hor mostra la fronte, ei Franchi assale:
                  Hor si uolge, hor riuolge, hor fugge, hor fuga:
                  Ne si può dir la sua caccia, nè fuga.
               
               
                  
                  Tal gran Tauro tal'hor ne l'ampio Agone,
                  Se uolge il corno à i cani, ond' è seguito,
                  S'arretran'essi: e s'à fuggir si pone,
                  Ciascun ritorna à seguitarlo ardito.
                  Clorinda nel fuggir da tergo oppone
                  Alto lo scudo, e'l capo è custodito.
                  Così coperti uan ne'giochi mori
                  Da le palle lanciate i fuggitori.
               
               
                  Già questi seguitando, e quei fuggendo
                  S'eran à l'alte mura auuicinati;
                  Quando alzaro i Pagani un grido horrendo
                  E in dietro si fur subito uoltati:
                  E fecero un gran giro, e poi uolgendo
                  Ritornaro à ferir le spalle, e i lati.
                  E in tanto Argante giù mouea dal monte
                  La schiera sua per assalirgli à fronte.
               
               
                  Il feroce Circasso uscì di stuolo:
                  Che'esser uols'egli il feritor primiero.
                  E quegli, in eui ferì, fù steso al suolo,
                  E sossopra in un fascio il suo destriero.
                  E, pria che l'hasta in tronchi andasse auolo,
                  Molti cadendo compagnia glifero.
                  Poi stringe il ferro: e quando giunge à pieno
                  Sempreuccide, od abbatte, ò piaga almeno.
               
               
                  Clorinda emula sua tolse di uita
                  Il forte Ardelio, huom già d'età matura;
                  Ma diuecchiezza indomita, e munita
                  Di duo gran figli, e pur non fù secura.
                  Ch'Alcandro il maggior siglio aspra ferita
                  Rimosso hauea dalla paterna cura:
                  E Poliferno, che restogli appresso,
                  Á gran pena saluar potè se stesso.
               
               
                  
                  Ma Tancredi, dapoi ch'egli non giunge
                  Quel uillan, che destriero hà più corrente,
                  Si mira à dietro, e uede ben, che lunge
                  Troppo è trascorsa la sua audace gente.
                  Vedela intorniata, e'lcorsier punge
                  Volgendo il freno; e là s'inuia repente:
                  Ned egli soloi suoi guerrier soccorre;
                  Ma quello stuol, ch'à tutti rischi accorre.
               
               
                  Quel di Dudon auuenturier drappello,
                  Fior degli Heroi, nerbo, e uigor del Campo.
                  Rinaldo il più magnanimo, e'l più bello
                  Tutti precorre: & è menratto il lampo.
                  Ben tosto il portamento, e'l bianco augello
                  Conosce Erminia nel celeste campo:
                  E dice al Re, che'n lui fisa lo sguardo
                  Eccoti il domator d'ogni gagliardo.
               
               
                  Questi hà nel pregio de la spada eguali
                  Pochi, ò nessuno, & è fanciullo ancora.
                  Se fosser tra'nemici altri sei tali,
                  Già Soria tutta uinta, e serua fora:
                  E già domi sarebbono i più Australi
                  Regni, e i Regni più prossimi à l'Aurora:
                  E forse il Nilo occulterebbe in uano
                  Dal giogo il capo in cognito, e lontano
               
               
                  Rinaldo hà nome: e la sua destra irata
                  Temon più d'ogni machina lemura.
                  Hor uolgi gli occhi, ou'io ti mostro, e guata
                  Colui, che d'oro, e uerde hà l'armatura.
                  Quegli è Dudone: & è da luiguidata
                  Questa schiera, che schiera è di uentura.
                  É guerrier d'alto sangue, emolto esperto:
                  Che d'età uince, e non cede di merto.
               
               
                  
                  Mira quel grande, ch'è coperto à bruno:
                  É Gernando il fratel del Re Noruegio.
                  Non hà la Terra huom piu superbo alcuno:
                  Questo sol de'suoi fatti oscura il pregio.
                  E son que'duo, che uan sì giunti in uno,
                  Et han bianco il uestir, bianco ogni fregio,
                  Gildippe, & Odoardo Amanti, esposi,
                  In ualor d'arme, e in lealtà famosi.
               
               
                  Così parlaua: e già uedean là sotto,
                  Come la strage più, e più s'ingrosse
                  Che Tancredi, e Rinaldo il cerchio han rotto,
                  Benche d'huomini denso, e d'armi fosse.
                  E poi lo stuol, ch'è da Dudon condotto,
                  Vi giunse, & aspramente anco il percosse.
                  Argante, Argante stesso, ad un grand'urto
                  Di Rinaldo abbattuto, à pena è surto.
               
               
                  Nè sorgea forse; ma in quel punto stesso
                  Al figliuol di Bertoldo il destrier cade:
                  E restandogli sotto il piede oppresso
                  Conuien, ch'indi à ritrarlo alquanto bade.
                  Lo stuol Pagan frà tanto in rotta messo
                  Si ripara fuggendo à la Cittade.
                  Soli Argante, e Clorinda argine, e sponda
                  Sono al furor, che lor da tergo inonda.
               
               
                  Vltimi uanno, el'impeto seguente
                  In lor s'arresta alquanto, e si reprime:
                  Sì, che potean men periglio samente
                  Quelle genti fuggir, che fuggian prime.
                  Segue Dudon ne lauittoria ardente
                  I fuggitiui, e'l fer Tigrane opprime
                  Con l'urto del cauallo: e con la spada
                  Fà, che scemo del capo à terra cada.
               
               
                  
                  Nè gioua ad Algazarre il fino usbergo,
                  Ned à Corban robusto il forte elmetto:
                  Che'n guisa lor ferì la nuca, e'l tergo,
                  Che ne passò la piaga al uiso, al petto.
                  E per sua mano ancor del dolce albergo
                  L'alma uscì d'Amurate, e di Meemetto,
                  E del Crudo Almansor: ne'l gran Circasso
                  Può securo da lui mouer un passo.
               
               
                  Freme in se stesso Argante', e pur taluolta
                  Si ferma, e uolge, e poi cede pur' anco.
                  Al sin così improuiso à lui si uolta,
                  E di tanto rouescio il coglie al fianco;
                  Che dentro al ferro ui s'immerge, e tolta
                  É dal colpo la uita al Duce Franco;
                  Cade, e gli occhi, ch'a pena aprir si ponno,
                  Dura quiete preme, e ferreo sonno.
               
               
                  Gli aprì tre uolte, e i dolci rai del Cielo
                  Cercò fruire, e soura un braccio alzarsi:
                  E tre uolte ricadde, e fosco uelo
                  Gli occhi adombrò, che stanchi al fin serrarsi.
                  Si dissoluono i membri, e'l mortal gelo
                  Irrigiditi, e di sudor gli ha sparsi.
                  Soura il corpo già morto il fero Argante
                  Punto non bada, euia trascorre auante.
               
               
                  Con tutto ciò, se ben d'andar non cessa,
                  Si uolge a i Franchi, e grida. ò Caualieri,
                  Questa sanguigna spada è quella stessa,
                  Che'l Signor uostro mi donò pur hieri.
                  Ditegli, come in vso hoggi l'hò messa:
                  Ch'udir à la nouella ei uolentieri.
                  E caro esser gli dee, che'l suo bel dono
                  Sia conosciuto al paragon sì buono.
               
               
                  
                  Ditegli, che uederne homai s'aspetti
                  Ne le uiscere sue più certa proua.
                  E quando d'assalirne ei non s'affretti,
                  Verrò non aspettato, ou'ei si troua.
                  Irritati i Christiani à i feri detti
                  Tutti uer lui già si moueano à proua;
                  Ma congli altri esso è già corso in securo
                  Sotto la guardia de l'amico muro.
               
               
                  I difensori à grandinar le pietre
                  Da l'alte mura in guisa incominciaro:
                  E quasi innumer abili faretre
                  Tante saette à gli archi ministraro;
                  Che sorza èpur, che' l Franco stuol s'arretre:
                  E i Saracin ne la Cittade entraro.
                  Ma già Rinaldo, hauendo il piè sottratto
                  Al giacente destrier, s'era quì tratto.
               
               
                  Venia per far nel Barbaro homicida
                  De l'estinto Dudone aspra uendetta:
                  E fra'suoi giunto alter amente grida:
                  Hor qual indugio è questo? e che s'aspetta?
                  Poi ch'è mortoil Signor, che nefù guida,
                  Che non corriamo à uendicarlo in fretta?
                  Dunque in sì graue occasion di sdegno
                  Esser può fragil muro à noiritegno?
               
               
                  Non, se di ferro doppio, ò d'adamante
                  Questa muraglia impenetrabil fosse,
                  Colà dentro securo il fero Argante
                  S'appiatteria da le uostr'alte posse.
                  Andiam pure à l'assalto, & egli auante
                  A tutti gli altri in questo dir si mosse:
                  Che nulla teme la secura testa
                  Ó di sassi, ò di strai nembo, o tempesta.
               
               
                  
                  Ei crollando il gran capo alza la faccia,
                  Piena di sì terribile ardimento,
                  Che sin dentro àle mura i cori agghiaccia
                  Á i difensor d'insolito spauento.
                  Mentre egli altri rincora, altri minaccia,
                  Soprauien chi reprime il suo talento:
                  Che Goffredo lor manda il buon Sigiero,
                  De'graui Imperij suoi Nuntio seuero.
               
               
                  Questi sgrida in suo nome il troppo ardire,
                  E incontinente il ritornar impone.
                  Tornatene (dicea) ch'à le vostr'ire
                  Non è il loco opportuno, ò la stagione.
                  Goffredo il vicomanda. A questo dire
                  Rinaldo si frenò, ch'altrui fù sprone:
                  Benche dentro ne frema, e in più d'vnsegno
                  Dimostri fuore il malcelato sdegno.
               
               
                  Tornar le schiere indietro, e da i nemici
                  Non fù il ritorno lor punto turbato:
                  Nè in parte alcuna de gli estremi vffici
                  Il corpo di Dudon restò fraudato.
                  Sù le pietose braccia i fidi amici
                  Portarlo, caro peso, & honorato.
                  Mira intanto il Buglion d'eccelsa parte
                  De la forte Cittade il sito, e l'arte.
               
               
                  Gierusalem soura duo colli è posta
                  D'impari altezza, e volti fronte à fronte.
                  Và per lo mezo suo valle interposta,
                  Che lei distingue, e l'un da l'altro monte.
                  Fuor da tre lati hà malageuol costa:
                  Per l'altro vassi, enon par, che si monte.
                  Ma d'altissimemura è più disesa
                  La parte piana, e'n contra Borea stesa.
               
               
                  
                  La Citta dentro hà lochi, in cui si serba
                  L'Acqua, che pioue, e laghi, e fonti viui.
                  Ma fuor la terra intorno è nuda d'herba,
                  E di Fontane sterile, e di riui.
                  Nè si vede fiorir lieta, e superba
                  D'alberi, e fare schermo à i raggi estiui:
                  Se non se in quanto oltra sei miglia un bosco
                  Sorge d'ombre nocenti horrido, e fosco.
               
               
                  Hà da quel lato, dondeil giorno appare,
                  Del felice Giordan le nobil'onde.
                  E da la parte occidental del mare
                  Mediterraneo l'arenose sponde.
                  Verso Borea è Betel, ch'alzò l'altare
                  Al bue de l'oro, e la Samaria; e donde
                  Austro portar le suol piouoso nembo,
                  Bethelem, che'l gran parto accolse in grembo.
               
               
                  Hor mentre guarda el'altemura, e'l sito
                  De la Città Goffredo, e del paese:
                  E pensa, oue s'accampi, onde assalito
                  Sia il muro hostil più facile à l'offese;
                  Erminia il vide, e dimostrollo à dito
                  Al Re pagano, e così a dir riprese.
                  Goffredo è quel, che nel purpureo ammanto
                  Hà di regio, e d'augusto in se cotanto.
               
               
                  Veramente è costui nato à l'Impero,
                  Sì del regnar, del comandar sà l'arti.
                  E non minor, che Duce, è Caualiero;
                  Ma del doppio valor tutte hàle parti.
                  Nè fra turba si grande huom più guerriero,
                  O più saggio di lui potrei mostrarti.
                  Sol Raimondo in consiglio, & in battaglia
                  Sol Rinaldo, e Tancredi à lui s'agguaglia.
               
               
                  
                  Risponde il Re pagan. ben hò di lui
                  Contezza, e'lvidi la gran Corte in Francia,
                  Quand'io d'Egitto messaggier vi fui:
                  E'l vidi in nobil giostra oprar la lancia.
                  E se ben gli anni giouenetti sui
                  Non gli vestian di piume ancor la guancia,
                  Pur daua à i detti, à l'opre, à le sembianze
                  Presagio homai'altissime speranze.
               
               
                  Presagio, ahi troppo vero. e quì le ciglia
                  Turbate inchina, c poi l'innalza, e chiede.
                  Dimmi, chi sia colui, c'hà pur vermiglia
                  La soprauesta, e seco à par si vede,
                  Ó quanto di sembianti à lui simiglia,
                  Se ben alquanto distatura cede.
                  É Baldouin (risponde,) e ben si scopre
                  Nel volto à lui Fratel, ma più ne l'opre.
               
               
                  Hor rimira colui, che quasi in modo
                  D'huom, che consigli, stà da l'altro fianco.
                  Que gli è Raimondo, ilqual tanto ti lodo
                  D'accorgimento, huom già canuto, e bianco.
                  Non è, chi tesser me'bellico frodo
                  Di lui sapesse, ò sia Latino, ò Franco.
                  Ma quell'altro più in là, ch'orato hà l'elmo
                  Del Re Britanno è il buon figliuol Guglielmo.
               
               
                  V'è Guelfo seco, e gli è d'opre leggiadre
                  Emulo, e d'alto sangue, e d'alto stato.
                  Ben il conosco àle sue spalle quadre,
                  Et à quel petto colmo, e rileuato.
                  M'a'l gran nemico mio tra queste squadre
                  Già riueder non posso, e pur viguato.
                  I'dico il Boemondo il micidiale,
                  Distruggitor del sangue mio reale.
               
               
                  
                  Così parlauan questi. e'l Capitano,
                  Poi ch'intorno hà mirato, à i suoi discende.
                  E perche crede, che la terra in vano
                  S'oppugneria, doue il più erto ascende,
                  Contra la porta Aquilonar nel piano,
                  Che non lei si congiunge, alza le tende:
                  E quinci procedendo in fin la Torre,
                  Che chiamano Angolar, gli altri fà porre▪
                  
               
               
                  Da quel giro del Campo è contenuto
                  Da la Cittade ilterzo, ò poco meno:
                  Che d'ogn'intorno non hauria potuto
                  (Cotanto ella volgea) cingerla à pieno.
                  Ma le vie tutte, ond'hauer puote aiuto,
                  Tenta Goffredo d'impedirle almeno:
                  Et occupar fà gli opportuni passi,
                  Onde da lei si viene, & à lei vassi.
               
               
                  Impon, che sian letende indi munite
                  E di fosse profonde, e di trinciere:
                  Che d'vnaparte à Cittadine vscite,
                  Dal'altra oppone à correrie straniere.
                  Ma, poi che fur quest'opere fornite,
                  Vols'egli il corpo di Dudon vedere:
                  E colà trasse, oue il buon Duce estinto
                  Da mesta turba, e lagrimosa è cinto.
               
               
                  Di nobil pompa i fidi amici ornaro
                  Il gran Feretro, oue sublime ei giace.
                  Quando Goffredo entrò, le turbe alzaro
                  Lavoce, assai più flebile, e loquace.
                  Ma con uolto nè torbido, nè chiaro
                  Frena il suo affetto ilpio Buglione, etace.
                  E poi, che'n lui pensando alquanto fisse
                  Le luci hebbe tenute, al fin sì disse.
               
               
                  
                  Già non si deue à te doglia, nè pianto;
                  Che, se mori nel mondo, in Ciel rinasci,
                  E quì, doue ti spogli il mortalmanto,
                  Di gloria impresse alte vestigia lasci.
                  Viuesti qual guerrier Christiano, e santo;
                  E come tal sei morto; hor godi, e pasci
                  In Dio gli occhi bramosi, ò felice Alma,
                  Et hai del bene oprar corona, e palma.
               
               
                  Viui beata pur, che nostra sorte,
                  Non tua suentura a lagrimar n'inuita;
                  Poscia ch'al tuo partir sì degna, e forte
                  Parte di noi fà co'l tuo piè partita.
                  Ma, se questa, che'l vulgo appella morte,
                  Priuati hà noi d'vna terrena aita,
                  Celeste aita hora impetrar ne puoi,
                  Che'l Ciel t'accoglie infra gli eletti suoi.
               
               
                  E come à nostro prò veduto habbiamo,
                  Ch'vsaui, huom gia mortal, l'arme mortali;
                  Così vederti oprare anco speriamo,
                  Spirto diuin, l'arme del Ciel fatali.
                  Impara i voti homai, ch'à te porgiamo,
                  Raccorre, e dar soccorso à i nostri mali:
                  Tu di vittoria annuntio: à te deuoti
                  Soluerem trionfando al Tempio i voti.
               
               
                  Così diss'egli: egià la notte oscura
                  Hauea tutti del giorno i raggi spenti:
                  E con l'oblio d'ogni noiosa cura
                  Ponea tregua à le lagrime, à i lamenti.
                  Ma il Capitan, ch'espugnar mai le mura
                  Non crede senza i bellici tormenti,
                  Pensa ond'habbia le traui & in quai forme
                  Le machine componga, e poco dorme.
               
               
                  
                  Sorse à pari co'l Sole, & egli stesso
                  Seguir la pompa funeral poi uolle.
                  A Dudon d'odorifero Cipresso
                  Composto hanno il sepolcro a piè d'un colle.
                  Non lunge à gli steccati: e soura ad esso
                  Vn'altissima Palma i rami estolle.
                  Hor quì fùposto, ei Sacerdoti in tanto
                  Quiete à l'alma gli pregar co'l canto.
               
               
                  Quinci, e quindi fra irami erano appese
                  Insegne, e prigioniere arme diuerse,
                  Già da lui tolte in più felici imprese
                  Á le genti di Siria, & à le Perse.
                  De la corazza sua, de l'altro arnese
                  In mezo il grosso tronco si coperse.
                  Quì (vi fù scritto poi) giace Dudone:
                  Honorate l'altissimo Campione.
               
               
                  Ma il pietoso Buglion, poi che daquesta
                  Opra si tolse dolorosa, epia;
                  Tutti i Fabri del campo à la foresta
                  Con buonascorta di soldati inuia.
                  Ella è tra ualli ascosa, e manifesta
                  L'hauea fatta à i Francesi huom di Soria.
                  Quì per troncar le machine n'andaro,
                  Á Cui non habbia la Città riparo.
               
               
                  L'vn l'altro essorta, che le piante atterri,
                  E faccia al bosco inusitati oltraggi.
                  Caggion recise da'taglienti ferri,
                  Le sacre Palme, e i Frassini seluaggi,
                  I funebri Cipressi, e i Pini, e i Cerri.
                  L'Elci frondose, e gli alti Abeti, e i Faggi,
                  Gli Olmi mariti, à cui tal'hor s'appoggia
                  La Vite, e con piè torto al Ciel se'n poggia.
               
               
                  
                  Altri i Tassi, e le Quercie altri percote,
                  Che mille volte rinouar le chiome:
                  E mille uolte ad ogni incontro immote
                  L'ire de'venti han rintuzzate, e dome.
                  Et altri impone à le stridenti rote
                  D'Orni, e di Ce dri l'odorate some.
                  Lasciano al suon de l'arme, al uario grido
                  E le Fere, e gli Augei la tana, e'l nido.
               
               Il Fine del Terzo Canto.
            
         
         
            
               
               THE FOVRTH SONG.
               
                  
                     WHilst on so faire exploytes they
bend their mind,
                  Which to effect vse may employ
with haste,
                  He that graund foe was aie to humaine
kind,
                  His wannish eyes doth on the
Christians cast:
                  Whom for they ioyfull and contented find,
                  Both lips through rage he champs, and gnaweth fast:
                  And his fell griefe, as some begoared Bull,
                  Roaring and sighing, out he belkes at full.
               
               
                  Then hauing tossed ech deuise in braine,
                  Which might the Christians wrap in wretched case,
                  He giues commaund that gathred be his traine:
                  (A ghastly Senate) to his royall place,
                  As t'were, O foole, attempt of easie paine,
                  Against the will diuine t'oppose thy face:
                  Foole, that compares with heauens, and forgeates
                  How Gods incenst right hand doth thūder threats.
               
               
                  The dwellers of th'eternall shades he calles,
                  By hellish trumpet of hoarse iarring sound,
                  At such a dynne the wide darke vaulted walles,
                  All quake the misty thicke aire gan rebound:
                  Nor whistling so the flash downe euer falles
                  From vpper regions of the sky to ground,
                  Nor shogged earth so euer bideth throwes,
                  When bigge in wombe she doth the vapours close.
               
               
                  
                  The Deities of the deepe from all about,
                  In diuers troupes soone meete at t'haughty gates,
                  How strangy shapes them (oh) how vgly clout?
                  What dread, what death in their fell eyes amates?
                  With sauage insteps some the soyle bestrout,
                  With lockes of wrythed snakes some tire their pates:
                  A Dragging hugy tayle their croupper bindes,
                  Which as a rod oft foldes and oft vnwindes.
               
               
                  There thousands vncleane Harpyes might you vew,
                  And thousands Centaures, Sphinges, Gorgons pale,
                  And gulffy Scillaes an huge barcking crew:
                  There Serpents hisse, and Hidras whistle bale,
                  And sootie sparckles vp Chimeras spew:
                  Eke Gerions, Poliphems an vgly tale▪
                  
                  And in new monsters not earst heard or seene,
                  Confusde and mixt in one hewes sundry beene.
               
               
                  Part on the right, part on the left this band
                  Siedgeth it selfe, their wreakfull king before,
                  
                     Pluto sits in the mids, and with right hand
                  His rusty waightie Scepter vp he bore,
                  Not rocke in sea so much, nor cragge at land,
                  Nor Calp or Atlas great high vaunceth more:
                  Yea matcht with him they but as hillockes shoe,
                  So his great front, so his great hornes vp goe.
               
               
                  In his fierce looke an horred maiestie
                  Encreaseth terrour, and more proud it makes,
                  Ruddy his eyes and plaguefull venomy:
                  His countenance as lucklesse Comete flakes,
                  A beard bigge, bushy, knotted gristelly:
                  Frō wrapped muzzle down his rough bosom strakes,
                  And as a gulfe where bottome none is vewd,
                  He yawnes his iawes with clottie bloud embrewd.
               
               
                  
                  Like as the sulphure fumes encroaching flame,
                  And stinke, and thunder vp from Etna steeme,
                  From his fell mouth such blacky belches came,
                  And such the sent, and such the sparckles seeme,
                  The helhounds barcking (while he spake) became
                  Silent, his voice mute made men Hidra deeme,
                  
                     Cocytus flowed backe the deepes appall,
                  When his loud roarings to these speeches fall.
               
               
                  You hellish powres, whose birth-right shold aduance,
                  High boue the Sun your there deserued troane,
                  And whom from realmes so blest that great mischance
                  Earst to this ghastly denne with me hath throwne:
                  Both others old suspects and fierce vengeance,
                  And our braue on-set ouer well are knowne,
                  At pleasure now on starres empyreth he,
                  And we as rebell soules condemned be.
               
               
                  And in the liew of faire and clearest day
                  Of gold-bright Sunne, and of the faring starres,
                  In this darke depth he vs confines to stay,
                  And from aspiring to earst honour barres,
                  Then (ah this thought how heauie doth it way:
                  This tis which sharpely wounds a new my skarres)
                  To those faire heauenly seats he man hath cauld,
                  Vile man from vilest durt on earth ycrauld.
               
               
                  Nor this suffizde, but did his Sonne betake
                  In pray to death to worke our greater skath,
                  He came, and downe th'infernall gates he brake,
                  And in our kingdomes durst new tread a path,
                  And fetcht the soules which lot our owne did make,
                  And so rich spoyles to sky conueyed hath,
                  Triumphant victour, and vs to vpbrayd
                  Of vanquisht hell, th'ensignes he there displayd.
               
               
                  
                  But why do I by speech reuiue my woe?
                  Who hath not earst told of our wrongs the skore?
                  Where was the place? or who the time can shoe?
                  When euer he his vsed prankes forbore:
                  Our thoughts no longer backe to th'old must goe,
                  But cast to cure more then one present sore:
                  Ah! see you not hither his drifts to fall,
                  That eu'ry Nation on his name may call?
               
               
                  Shall we still sluggards then waste day and howre?
                  Nor any worthy carke our courage wake?
                  And shall we brooke that hourely greater powre
                  His faithfull people may in Asia take?
                  That Iury he subdew? that his honour,
                  And that his name more large and great he make?
                  That other tongs it sound? that other verse
                  It write? new brasse and marble it reherse?
               
               
                  That all our Idols downe to th'earth be throwne?
                  To him our alters by the world turned?
                  To him the vowes vp-hangd? to him alone
                  All incense burnt? gold and mirrhe offered?
                  That where to vs earst closde was temple none,
                  Now to our artes no way rest opened?
                  That of so many soules the wonted pay
                  Ceast? and an emptie Realme Dan Pluto sway?
               
               
                  Ah be it farre, of that first woorth as yet
                  In you the sprites quite are not vnder brought,
                  When round with steele, and haughty flames beset,
                  Against celestiall empire earst we fought,
                  We could (I not deny) no conquest get,
                  Yet valure did adorne so great a thought:
                  Be what it will that victory him gaue,
                  Of hearts inuict we yet the glory haue.
               
               
                  
                  But why thus linger I? oh you my crew!
                  Goe trusty on. oh you my power and might!
                  Goe hastie on, and these caitiues subdew,
                  Ere their stoupt forces rise to higher flight,
                  Ere whole consumed be the Realme Hebrew,
                  
                  Of this encroaching flame quench out the light:
                  Amongst them preace, and to their vtter harme,
                  Now heds with wiles, now hāds with forces arme.
               
               
                  My will shall dest'ny be disperst, let some
                  A wandring walke, let slaughter some vprake,
                  Let some with carkes of fond loue ouercome,
                  A sweete glance, a coy smile, their Idoll make,
                  Let weapons some against their leader clomme,
                  Let them grow mutinous, and parties take:
                  Let Campe with losse, and ruine be accloyd,
                  And eu'n his markes rest with it selfe destroyd.
               
               
                  Gods rebell soules stay could no longer barre,
                  That these last words might sort vnto an end,
                  But flying foorth a new to view ech starre,
                  From their deepe plunged might abroad they wend,
                  Much like the stormes of broylly whistling iarre,
                  Whom natiue caues foorth from their intrayls send,
                  To darke the welkin and a warre to band,
                  Against the great Realmes, both of sea and land.
               
               
                  Full soone to sundry coasts with wings displaide,
                  These thorough the world made their diuers starts,
                  And of entrappings straunge, and new they laid,
                  Sly framed plots, and gan apply their arts:
                  But of their first annoyes (O Muse) me aide,
                  To shew how source they tooke, and from what parts,
                  Thou wotst it well, fame brings thus farre vnneath,
                  Of so great workes to vs a feeble breath.
               
               
                  
                  A famous noble wisard Hidraote
                  
                  Ruled Damascus, and the Cities neere,
                  Who from his youth to arts of vncouth note
                  Addict, did day by day them more endeere▪
                  
                  But whereto booted this, if they ne mote
                  Of these vncertaine broyles the issue cleere?
                  Nor of the fixt or wandring starres th'aspect?
                  Nor hels swart cunning could to truth direct?
               
               
                  His iudgement led, ah blindest humaine minde!
                  How vaine and wrested wrong thy iudgements are?
                  That to the Campe of westerne armes combinde
                  The sky sole death, and ruines did prepare,
                  So deeming Palme for this attempt assignde,
                  Should in the end fall to th'Egyptians share:
                  He sought a portion on his people might,
                  Of victory and gaines, and glory light.
               
               
                  But for Frankes valure high he holds in price,
                  And harmes of bloody victorie doth feare,
                  He casts his penworths by some queint deuice,
                  The Christians force peecemeale-wise to impaire,
                  So as them downe more easly at a trice,
                  His and th'Egyptians armes vnite may beare:
                  In this conceit the Angell blacke him neeres,
                  And more him pricks, & more him onward steeres.
               
               
                  He counsell lendeth, and affords the meanes,
                  Which may to this exploit giue easie passe,
                  There dwelt a wench whose peereles bewty steines
                  Ech easterne Ladie, and his Neice she was:
                  The cunningst spels, and fardest fetched treines,
                  Of witch or womans skill well couth the lasse:
                  He her doth call, he her of counsell makes,
                  And vnto her the whole charge he betakes.
               
               
                  
                  My deere he sayes, who vnder golden haire,
                  And with a looke so delicate in show,
                  Dost aged wit, and manly stomacke beare:
                  And in mine owne skils farre my selfe outgo,
                  Thy seconding my huge conceiu'd affeyre,
                  Will to our hopes cause glad successes flow.
                  Weaue thou the web begun by my deuice,
                  Of warie age as bold executrice.
               
               
                  Goe to the en'mies Campe, and there employ
                  Ech womans wile, which loue may serue to slocke,
                  Let plants with prayres bedewd beare sweet alloy,
                  Let broken wordes with deepe sighes entershocke,
                  Let dolefull bewties pityed annoy,
                  Winne to thy will eu'n harts of stiffest blocke:
                  Thy too much boldnes shadow vnder shame,
                  And cloke of truth vnto thy leazings frame.
               
               
                  Catch (if it may be) Godfrey with the traine
                  Of thy sweete lookes, and of thy speeches faire,
                  That warre begun, the mans besotted braine
                  May loath, and it diuert some other where:
                  If this faile others of the greatst enchaine,
                  And leade where all returne they may despeire:
                  Then he his counsels sorts, and endeth thus,
                  For faith and countrey nought misseemeth vs.
               
               
                  The faire Armida priding in her hew,
                  And in th'endowments of her sexe and age,
                  This charge takes on her, and as eu'ning drew,
                  Doth part, and to close wayes her steps engage:
                  Stout harts she hopes, and arm'd hands to subdew
                  With her tresses, and wenches equippage:
                  But of her parting diuers tales are spred
                  By set deuice, t'amuze the peoples bed.
               
               
                  
                  Within few dayes this Dame her iourney ends,
                  There where the Frankes their large pauillions spred,
                  Whose bewtie rare at his apparence lends:
                  Babling to tongues and eyes a gazing led,
                  As when some Starre or Comete strange ascends,
                  And in cleere day through sky his beames doth shed:
                  They flocke in plumps this pilgrim faire to vew,
                  And to be wizde what cause her thither drew.
               
               
                  Not Argos, Cyprus, Delos ere present,
                  Paternes of shape, or bewtie could so deere,
                  Gold are her lockes, which in white shadow pent,
                  Eft do but glimpse, eft all disclosde appeare,
                  As when new clensde we see the element,
                  Sometimes the Sun shines through white cloud vncleere,
                  Somtimes frō cloud out gone his raies more bright
                  He sheads abroad, dubling of day the light.
               
               
                  The winde new crisples makes in her loose haire,
                  Which nature selfe to waues recrispelled,
                  Her sparing looke a coy regard doth beare,
                  And loues treasures, and hers vp wympelled,
                  Sweete Roses colour in that visage faire,
                  With yuorie is sperst and mingelled,
                  But in her mouth whence breath of loue out goes,
                  Ruddy alone and single bloomes the Rose.
               
               
                  Her bosome faire musters his naked snow,
                  Whence fire of loue is nourisht and reuiues,
                  Her pappes bitter vnripe in part doe show,
                  And part th'enuious weed from sight depriues:
                  Enuious, but though it close passage so
                  To eyes, loues thought vnstaid yet farder striues:
                  Which outward bewty taking not for pay,
                  Eu'n to his secrets hid endeeres a way.
               
               
                  
                  As through water or Christall sound the ray
                  Passeth, and it deuides or parteth not,
                  So piercing through her closed robe a way,
                  His daring thought to part forbodden got,
                  It roameth there, there true it doth furuay,
                  Of so great maruailes part by part the plot:
                  Then to desire it tels, and it descriues,
                  And in his breast the flames more quicke reuiues.
               
               
                  Eyed and praysd Armida past the while
                  Through the desirefull troupes, and wist it well,
                  But makes no show, though in her heart she smile,
                  And there deseignes of spoiles and conquests swell,
                  As thus some guide she craues with doubtfull stile,
                  For her safe conduct to the Coronel:
                  
                     Eustace her meetes, who claymes a brother-hed
                  In him, that chiefe those armed forces led.
               
               
                  As Fly at flame, so he about turned
                  At the brightnes of this bewtie deuine,
                  And neere those lights to view he couered,
                  Whom modest fashion sweetly can encline,
                  And cought great flame, and close it fostered,
                  As neered tinder doth the sparckle shrine:
                  And to her sayd: for hart and hardiment
                  The heat of yeares, and loue vnto him lent.
               
               
                  Lady, if you at least so base a name
                  Beseeme, who nothing earthly represent,
                  Nor euer skyes on daughter of Adame,
                  
                  Of their faire light so large a treasure spent.
                  What ist you seeke? whence is it that you came?
                  What fortune yours, or ours you hither bent?
                  Make me know who you are, make me not misse
                  To yeeld you right, and do what reason is.
               
               
                  
                  Your prayse too loftie mounts, she answering sayth,
                  Nor to such height our merit can arriue:
                  You see one Sir, not subiect sole to death,
                  But dead to ioy, onely to woe aliue:
                  My hard mis-hap me hither carryeth,
                  A pilgrim mayden poore and fugitiue:
                  I seeke good Godfrey, and in him affy,
                  Such fame about doth of his bountie fly.
               
               
                  Doe you to Captaine mine accesse obtaine,
                  If kinde and courteous (as you seeme) you be,
                  That to the one the t'other brothers paine
                  You guide, and him entreat tis meete, quoth he,
                  Faire maide you haue not made recourse in vaine,
                  Nor in the meanest grace he holdeth me:
                  At your best liking all is yours to spend,
                  What so his Scepter, or my sword my frend.
               
               
                  He ends and guides her where good Bulleyn stald
                  Twixt Worthies great, stolne from the vulgar was,
                  Lowly she bendeth, and with shame appald,
                  No word from out her lips could winne a passe:
                  But those blushings the Champion recald
                  To boldnes, and from feare assurde the lasse;
                  So as conceiu'd harmes she vnfoldes at last,
                  With tune which senses in sweete fetters cast:
               
               
                  Victorious Prince (she sayd) whose greatest name
                  With so rich furniture adorned flyes,
                  That Kings and Countries, whom subdew and tame
                  Thou dost in warre it as their glory prayse:
                  Well is thy valour knowne, and as the same
                  Is lou'd and praysd eu'n by thine enimies:
                  So it affies, and them inuites againe
                  Aide at thy hands to beg and to obtaine.
               
               
                  
                  And I borne in a faith so wide from thine,
                  As it thou quaylst, and now seek'st to oppresse;
                  Yet hope by thee that noble seat of mine;
                  And parents royall mace to repossesse:
                  And where kynnes, and others to craue encline
                  Gainst strangers fury, which workes their distresse:
                  I, since in them dew pittie beares no stroke,
                  Against my bloud mine en'mies armes inuoke.
               
               
                  On thee I call, in thee I hope alone,
                  In height (whence I was thrown) thou canst me place
                  Nor ought thy right hand show it selfe lesse prone,
                  Me to vp-rayse, then others to abase,
                  Nor yet lesse prayse doth vaunt of pittie owne,
                  Then when triumphant thou gieu'st en'my chace:
                  And as thou couldst their realmes from many rend,
                  So mine restord will equall glory lend.
               
               
                  But if our diuers faith perhaps thee moue
                  Mine honest prayre to scorne, let faith profest
                  Sole on thy pitie to relie approue
                  My suit, twere hard it should deluded rest,
                  Witnesse (O God) like good to all aboue,
                  Your iuster aide to none was euer prest:
                  But that the whole may in your knowledge fall,
                  Here my mis-haps, and others fraudes withall.
               
               
                  I daughter am to Arbylan, that raygn'd
                  On faire Damascus, though of meanely race:
                  But he Cariclia faire to spowse obtain'd,
                  And she him graced with th'imperiall mace:
                  On her fell death well neere the mastry gain'd,
                  Ere I had birth, for she did it embrace,
                  As I forsooke her wombe, one fatall day
                  Doth death to her, and me to life conuay.
               
               
                  
                  But the fifth yeare had scarce fulfild his date,
                  From time that she her mortall vayle off threw,
                  When as my father yeelding vnto fate,
                  In heau'n perhaps with her allyde anew,
                  Leauing the charge of me, and of the state
                  To brother, whom he bare a loue so trew:
                  As if goodnes in mortall breast remaine,
                  He might be sure of his true faith againe.
               
               
                  He then thus to my gouernment ordaynd,
                  Of my well-doing mustred such a care;
                  As price and prayse he wanne of faith vnstaynd,
                  And of a fathers loue and kindnesse rare;
                  Weart that his inward thought with malice staynd,
                  Then vnder other cloake conceyld he bare;
                  Or that his will as yet iust meaning led,
                  Because he ment me with his sonne to wed.
               
               
                  I grew, and his sonne grew, but neuer ought
                  Of knightly parts, or noble artes he reakes,
                  Nothing thats rare, no gentleman like thought
                  Buside his head, nor too much wit it breakes,
                  Vnder deform'd shape he a mind of nought,
                  And proud hart bare, addict to gluttish freakes,
                  In clownish acts, and fashions such an elfe,
                  As sole for vices he could match himselfe.
               
               
                  Now my good guardein, with so braue a mate
                  In wedlockes bondes resolues me fast to knit,
                  And him of bed, and of my royall state
                  Consort to make, and oft he told me it:
                  He vsde his tongue, and traines he vsde his pate,
                  That wisht effect might to his purpose fit:
                  Yet could he neuer me to promise sway,
                  But sowre still held my peace, or gaue a nay.
               
               
                  
                  At last he parts with looke darke clouded so,
                  As cleere there through his fellon hart shined,
                  And well the story of my future woe,
                  In his forehead (me seem'd) I written red,
                  Then were my night rests, when to couch I goe,
                  With strange dreames still and bugbeares troubelled,
                  And in my soule a fat all horrour pight,
                  Was of my harmes a halsner ouer right.
               
               
                  My mothers ghoast did oft it selfe present,
                  A paly image, and of dolefull plight,
                  Alas! how farre from that hew different?
                  Which elsewhere purtrayd earst had pleasd my sight:
                  Fly daughter, fly thy now, now imminent
                  And cruell death, (she sayd) make speedy flight:
                  I see (loe poyson) to thy wracke preparde
                  By the fell tyrant, and his weapon barde.
               
               
                  But what auaylde it; ah! that such presage
                  Of neering perill warning gaue my mind,
                  If that surprizde with feare my tender age,
                  All vnresolued could no nothing bind,
                  My flight to wilfull exile to engage;
                  And naked leaue my natiue Realme behind:
                  So grieuous seem'd as lesse I reckoned
                  Eyes there to close, where first I opened.
               
               
                  Alas! I feared death, and yet (who ere
                  Wist of the like) had not the hart to fly?
                  A frayd I was eu'n to disclose my feare,
                  Least haste might life sooner to death affy;
                  So restlesse and turmoyld my dayes out weare
                  In neuer ceasing martyrdome did I,
                  Like him that lookes ech stond with bared necke,
                  When cruell axe shall his liues warrant checke:
               
               
                  
                  In such my state, were it my friendly hap,
                  Or that for worse, me on my destny led,
                  One, whom in Court, eu'n from his mothers lap,
                  In neere seruice my father vp had bred,
                  To me bewrayes that of my fatall clap
                  Approcht the time, by tyrant limited,
                  And that selfe day he promisde had the beast
                  By poysoning me to complish his beheast.
               
               
                  And farder addes, that of my running dayes,
                  I onely could prolong the course by flight:
                  And since I hopte for aide none other wayes,
                  Prompt his owne paines vnto my helpe he plight,
                  Whose comforts so my drooping courage rayse,
                  As bit of feare lost his restrayning might:
                  And I resolu'd that night with him to go,
                  Flying mine Vnckle and my Countrey fro.
               
               
                  Vprose the night more darke then wonted was,
                  Whose well befriending shadowes vs protect,
                  So safely foorth with damsels twaine I passe,
                  For my downe fallen fortune mates elect,
                  But backe to Countrey walles mine eyes, alas!
                  Bayned with teares, I turning oft direct:
                  Nor euer of my natiue soyle the sight,
                  Me throughly satisfie at parting might.
               
               
                  The eye and thought both walked backe that way,
                  The foot much gainst his liking forward went,
                  Like ship from loued shore, where safe it lay,
                  Which some fierce sodaine storme hath wrackful rent,
                  That night we farde, and all th'ensewing day,
                  Through couerts where step earst was neuer bent:
                  And to a Castle we arriu'd at last;
                  Vpon the confines of my kingdome plast.
               
               
                  
                  
                     Aront the Castle ownd, Aront his name
                  Was, who me drew and kept this perill fro:
                  But when the traytour saw the deadly frame
                  Of his wiles falne, and me escaped so,
                  Kindled with rage his owne deserued blame,
                  On our two backes he labours backe to throw:
                  And vs to charge with that mis-doing sought,
                  Which he himselfe against me wold haue wrought.
               
               
                  He sayes how Aront I with guifts did bribe,
                  To spice his cup with iuyce enuenomed,
                  That he once gone, none might thenceforth prescribe
                  A law, or raine my will vnbridelled;
                  And then would hoyting wanton to a tribe
                  Of loues my body haue abandoned;
                  Ah! first let flame from sky on me descend,
                  Sacred vertue, ere I thy lawes offend.
               
               
                  That hungry teene of gold, and thirst withall
                  Of mine vnharmefull bloud her fell hath cought,
                  It sorely grieues, yet more my hart doth gall,
                  That my cleere honour he to blemish sought,
                  The wretch whom feares of peoples brunt appall,
                  With such embellishment his leasings wrought,
                  That doubtfull of the troth, and in suspence,
                  The towne rose not in armes for my defence.
               
               
                  Nor for he now is stalled in my seate,
                  And on his crowne my royall Crowne doth shine,
                  An end vnto my shame and harmes so great,
                  His still on pricking fiercenes will assigne:
                  But Aront in his fort to burne doth threat,
                  Vnlesse in prison vp himselfe he shrine;
                  And to my consorts, and poore soule to me,
                  Not warre, but wracks, and deaths denounceth he.
               
               
                  
                  This he pretends to do, as if he thought,
                  So from his face to wash away the shame;
                  And to restore dew place, whence I it rought,
                  To th'onour of my bloud and princely name:
                  But feare it causde, least Scepter might be cought,
                  Him fro, I being true heire to the same:
                  For onely if I fall, a setled stay
                  Plant on my ruines for his rayne he may.
               
               
                  And eu'n such end will iump with fell desire,
                  Whereto the tyrants mind is fully bent,
                  And by my bloud shall quenched be his ire,
                  Which at my teares would neuer yet relent:
                  If thou let not, to thee I fly (O Sire)
                  A wench, a wretch, orphane, and innocent:
                  Let this plaint, which mine eyes shed at thy feet,
                  Vayle me that bloud from vaines not also fleet.
               
               
                  By these legs which the proud and lewd down tread,
                  By this hand which assisteth aie the right,
                  By thine high victories, and by the aide,
                  Thou hast, and dost those holy temples plight,
                  Do thou my suit, that sole art able, stead;
                  Let both to life, and Realme thy pittie dight:
                  One helpe for all yet voyde let pittie bee;
                  If right and reason also moue not thee.
               
               
                  Thou whom the sky graunted, and gaue in fate
                  To will whats iust, and what thou will t'obtaine,
                  Mayst saue my life, and winne thy selfe a state,
                  For thine it shall be, if it I regaine,
                  Ten onely Champions of the brauest rate,
                  I seeke to cull amidst so great a traine:
                  For with my fathers friends and subiectes trew,
                  The'yll serue to roost me in my nest a new.
               
               
                  
                  Yea more one of the chiefe, whose loyaltee
                  With guard is trusted of a secret port:
                  It promiseth by night to d'ope, and mee
                  Into his pallace let, and doth exhort
                  That only some small aide I begge of thee;
                  And thereon more rely for sound comfort:
                  Then if I had huge troup of other freakes,
                  So much thine ensigne, and sole name he reakes.
               
               
                  This sayd, she peac'd, and his answere attends,
                  In act which silent doth both speake and pray:
                  
                     Godfrey his doubtfull mind tossing suspends
                  Twixt diuers thoughts, ne wots which side to sway;
                  He dreads Barbarians wiles, and well comprends;
                  Man findes no faith where God receiues a nay:
                  But t'other side a milde ruth him awakes,
                  Which in a worthy mind sleepe neuer takes:
               
               
                  Nor sole his natiue pitie vsde tofore,
                  Willeth that her of helpefull grace he deygne,
                  But profit moues him eke for profit store,
                  T'will bring that in Damascus such do reygne,
                  As may on him depend, and ope the dore,
                  And plaine the path to euery his deseigne:
                  And men may minister, and armes, and gold
                  Against th'Egyptians▪
                      and his party hold.
               
               
                  Whilst doubtfull thus his looke on ground he bends,
                  And in deepe thought reuolues, and tosseth carkes,
                  The Dames fixt eye on his countnance depends,
                  And all his acts obserues, and heedy markes,
                  And for delay time past her deeming spends,
                  With feares and sighes she for his answere harkes:
                  At last the craued grace he her denies,
                  But th'answere gaue in kind and gentle wise.
               
               
                  
                  If in Gods seruice, who vs thereto chose,
                  Our swords were not employed here to be;
                  On them you safely might your hope repose,
                  And you not pittie sole, but aide would we:
                  But till that these his flockes, and till that those
                  Oppressed walles we turne to libertie,
                  It is not iust that forces sent away,
                  On course of victory we thwart a stay.
               
               
                  I promise, yet do you my faith receiue
                  As noble pawne, and safe thereon rely;
                  If euer we may yoake vnworthy reaue
                  From those walles sacred, and most deere to sky,
                  As pitie bids vs we no care will leaue,
                  To winne againe your forlorne soueraigntie:
                  But pitie now my pietie would blot,
                  If first his right to God I render not.
               
               
                  At this speech downe the Lady cast, and stayd
                  Her eyes on th'earth, and stood vnmou'd a space,
                  Then them bedewed, vp she lifts, and sayd,
                  Accompaning her plaint with ruefull grace,
                  Ah wretch on whom hath sky els euer layd
                  A life so grieuous, and vnchangde to trace?
                  That others nature rather change, and mind,
                  Then my hard fortune should a changing find.
               
               
                  No farder hope is left, I wayle in vaine,
                  In humaine brest prayers haue no longer force:
                  How may I thinke the tyrant fell my paine
                  Will rew, which could in thee worke no remorse?
                  Yet will I not of thy hard hart complaine,
                  Which from my helpe doth this small aide diuorse:
                  But plaint gainst heauen my harms cause addresse,
                  Which makes in thee eu'n pitie pitilesse.
               
               
                  
                  Not you my Lord, not such is your bountie,
                  But tis my dest'ny, which me aie denies;
                  Dest'ny dismall, fell fatall destinie,
                  Yeeld eke my hated life to death a prize:
                  Was it (aye me) a slender iniurie,
                  To close in youthes flowre my deere parents eyes?
                  That thou must also see my kingdome rest?
                  And thrald to th'axe as sacrifice me left?
               
               
                  For since of vertues, law the dew respect
                  Brookes not, that here I trifle longer stay,
                  Where shall I fly the while? who shall protect?
                  What ah yeeld refuge gainst the tyrant may?
                  No place is vnder sky so closely deckt,
                  Which gold not opes: then why do I delay?
                  Death preast I see, which since to fly is vaine,
                  This hand shall go, and fetch and entertaine.
               
               
                  There silenc'd she, and seemed a disdaine
                  Royall, and noble flamed in her face:
                  Then turning steps, she showes to part againe,
                  With port all framde to sad despiteous grace,
                  Her ceaselesse mone in such a tune doth plaine,
                  As is begot when wrath and woe embrace▪
                  
                  And her new borne teares for they to see,
                  Gainst sunny rayes, Christall and pearle bee.
               
               
                  Her cheekes with those life humours sprinckelled,
                  Which trickling dropt down on her vestures hemme,
                  Seem'd entermingled roses white and red;
                  If so a dewy cloud do water them,
                  When to calme breath their closed lap they spred,
                  What time first peered dawning takes his stemme,
                  And morne which them beholds & in them ioyes,
                  Proud with their ornament her lockes accoyes.
               
               
                  
                  But that cleere humour which embellisheth
                  Her bosome and faire cheekes with drops so thicke,
                  Workes the effect of fire, and close creepeth
                  Into a thousand breasts, and there doth sticke:
                  O miracle of loue! which sparckes draweth
                  From teares, and harts in water kindles quicke
                  With flames, past nature still his powre extends,
                  But in her vertue boue it selfe ascends.
               
               
                  This fained sorrow drew from many a freake
                  True teares, and harts vnstoand most hardened,
                  Ech with her walles, and to himselfe doth speake,
                  By Godfreys ruth if thy suit be not sped,
                  His nurse some raging Tygre was, and eake
                  On rugged Alpes some hideous cragge him bred;
                  Or some sea waue which breakes, & froth vpcastes,
                  Fell man that broyles, and such a bewtie wastes.
               
               
                  But Eustace gallant youth, whom fierie brand
                  Of pitie and of loue, more feruent fride;
                  Whiles ech else mutters, or doth silent stand,
                  Steps foorth, and tongue to these bold words allide,
                  My Lord and brother, with too straight a band
                  Your stiffe minde is to your first purpose tide,
                  If ioynt consent, which doth intreat and pray,
                  To plyant bent, it somewhat cannot sway.
               
               
                  I say not that the Princes, who their care
                  Owe to these troopes, as they to them their awe,
                  Should from this siedge with steps backe-turned fare,
                  Or from their duetie their regard withdrawe:
                  But mongst our selues, who Knights aduentrous are,
                  Deuoyde of proper charge, nor bent to lawe,
                  That others vnderly you safely might
                  Cull out some ten to patronize her right.
               
               
                  
                  For from Gods seruice not bereft is hee,
                  Who doth a Virgin innocent defende,
                  And deere those spoyles vnto the heauens bee,
                  Which of a slaughtred Tyrant any sende:
                  If then to this attempt the profit mee
                  Not swayd, which thence assured we attende:
                  Yet duetie would me moue by dueties right,
                  Our order doth our aide to Ladies plight.
               
               
                  Ah be it farre (for-god) that any say,
                  In Fraunce or where-so else raignes courtesie,
                  That for a cause, which on a ground doth stay
                  So iust, and good, perill or paine we fly,
                  My selfe here downe my helme and curets lay;
                  Here I my sword vngird, nor more will I
                  My Courser manage, nor beare armes in fight,
                  Nor eare henceforth vsurpe the name of Knight.
               
               
                  So spake he, and with him his fellowes all,
                  Concording iangle in a shrilly sound,
                  And his aduice bootfull and good they call,
                  And Captaine presse with prayers, and around
                  I yeeld, then sayed he, me vanquish shall
                  So manies concourse, so together bound:
                  Graunt we her boon, if so your will encline,
                  But be it your aduice, and none of mine.
               
               
                  But if that Godfreys credit ought you prize,
                  Some measure yet on your affections place:
                  This sole he spake, and this can them suffize,
                  For what he graunted, ech gan soone embrace:
                  Now what worke not a faire Dames pewling eyes?
                  And in tongue amarous words hony grace?
                  From her sweet lips issues a golden chaine,
                  Which soules doth captiue, and at pleasure raine.
               
               
                  
                  
                     Eustace her calleth backe, and cease (he sayes)
                  Lady of bewtie, this your drooping cheere,
                  For we will yeeld such, and within few dayes,
                  As for your feare shall more then iust appeare:
                  
                     Armida then vnshrowdes her cloudie rayes,
                  And countnance doth with such a smile endeere,
                  As her bewtie enamoureth the skyes,
                  Whilst with her precious vayle she wipes her eyes▪
                  
               
               
                  Her selfe then yeeldes she in notes deerely sweet,
                  Gratefull for so large graces they bestow,
                  Which printed in her hart thence neuer fleet;
                  But them for euer shall the world know:
                  And what the tongue t'expresse appeares vnmeet,
                  Dumbe eloquence doth in her gestures show,
                  And close she hideth vnder borow'd looke,
                  That thought whereof no one suspition tooke.
               
               
                  Then seeing fortune fauour with a smile
                  The great beginning of her fraudfull parts,
                  Ere her conceipt be forst to vary stile,
                  This wicked worke she'll end, and more then th'arts
                  Of Circe or Medea could beguile:
                  Her sweet showes and faire lookes shall beizle harts,
                  And with well tuned voyce of Syrens kind,
                  A slumber cast on the most wakefull mind.
               
               
                  The wench ech art employes so to infold
                  Some new-come louer with out-spreaded net,
                  Nor alwayes, nor withall selfe looke doth hold,
                  But changde on face, and grace in season set,
                  Sometimes her basht eye seemes by shame controld,
                  Sometimes with wishfull roules abroad to iet,
                  With these the rod, with those she plyes the bit,
                  As for their swift or slow loue seemeth fit.
               
               
                  
                  When any soule she from her loue espies
                  Retire, and thoughts to bridle by despeires,
                  To him kinde smile she opes, to him her eyes
                  Sweet blinck, loues message cleare and cheery beares,
                  The dastard sluggardly desires thus wyse
                  She spurres, and doubtfull hope t'affiance reares,
                  And kindling flames in wils enamored,
                  Thaweth the yce by frozen feare ybred.
               
               
                  Againe to some who hardly ouergo
                  Dew bounds, led by their Chieftaine rash and blind,
                  Sweet lookes and louely words more sparely flow,
                  Whilst feare to reu'rence doth them prentise bind,
                  Yet when disdaine her countnance changed so,
                  Glimpsing therethrough some ray of pitie shind,
                  That feare they may, but not dispaire they need,
                  And she more longing doth more stately breed.
               
               
                  Somewhile she gets her selfe elsewhere a part,
                  And fashions frames, and doth a visage faine,
                  As woe begunne, and from her eyes out-start
                  Forst teares full oft, which in she drawes againe,
                  The whiles to weepe in deede by such her art,
                  A thousand simple soules she does constraine,
                  And shafts of loue seasons in pities fire,
                  That armes so strong may hart giue death to hire.
               
               
                  Then as she would stealing away beguile
                  Those thoughts, and new hope did awake her mind,
                  Towards her louers bent she steps and stile,
                  And in ioyes seemely weede her face she shrinde,
                  And her bright hew and faire celestiall smile,
                  Seem'd as a double Sunne, that gleaming shinde,
                  On thicke and mystie clowds of sorrow sad,
                  Which bout their breasts tofore it gathred had.
               
               
                  
                  But whiles she sweetly speakes, and laughes sweetly,
                  And with this two-fold sweetnes luls the sense,
                  Well neere she makes the soule from bodie fly,
                  As gainst so rare delites voyde of defence,
                  Ah cruell loue that slayth vs equally,
                  Where wormewood thou, or hony do dispence,
                  And equall deadly at all seasons bee
                  Mischiefes and medcines, which proceede of thee.
               
               
                  Twixt tempers crossing thus in frost and flame,
                  In plaint and laughter, and midst hope and feare,
                  The wylie wench them makes her gleefull game,
                  And more her state doth to assurance reare,
                  And if some one dare tongue all trembling frame,
                  With hoarse voyce witnesse of his paynes to beare,
                  She faines as one vnskild in louers trade,
                  Not see the mind whose words it ouert made.
               
               
                  Or she her shamefast, and downe clyned eyes
                  With tire and taint of honesty embowres,
                  So as her gayest verdure vayled lyes
                  Vnder the Rose, which her faire face beflowres,
                  As at first birth we see the morning ryse,
                  In his fresh blooming, and betimely howres,
                  And blush of scorne fellowd with that of shame,
                  Forth both at once, mixt and confused came.
               
               
                  But if she any by his fashions spy,
                  Bent to reueile his harts in burning paine,
                  Now steale and fly him fro, now meanes supply
                  Of speech she doth, and straight them reaues againe,
                  So tyrde and skornd all day he treads awry,
                  And at the last his hope she chops a twayne,
                  Like hunter that at eu'ning leeseth vew
                  Of Deere, whom long in chace he did pursew.
               
               
                  
                  These were the arts, with which she could surprize
                  A thousand thousand soules by theeuish trade,
                  Rather the armes with which in robbing wise,
                  To force of loue them humble slaues she made;
                  What maruaile then if fierce Achilles lyes,
                  Or Hercules or Theseus to blade,
                  Of loue a pray, if who for Christ it draw;
                  The naughtie-packe sometimes do catch in paw.
               
               The end of the fourth Song.
            
            
               
               CANTO QARTO
               
                  
                     MENTRE fan questi i bellici stromenti
                  Perche debbiano tosto in vso
porse,
                  Il gran Nemico de l'humane
genti,
                  Contra i Christiani i liuidi occhi
torse:
                  E lor veggendo à le bell' opre intenti,
                  Ambo le labra per furor si morse:
                  E, qual Tauro ferito, il suo dolore
                  Versò mugghiando, e sospirando fuore.
               
               
                  Quinci hauendo pur tutto il pensier volto
                  Arecar ne'Christiani vltima doglia,
                  Che sia, comanda, il popol suo raccolto
                  (Concilio horrendo) entro la regia soglia:
                  Quasi che sia leggiera impresa (ahi stolto)
                  Il repugnare à la diuina uoglia:
                  Stolto, ch'à Dio s'agguaglia, e in oblio pone,
                  Come di Dio la destra irata tuone.
               
               
                  Chiama gli habitator de l'ombre eterne
                  Il rauco suon de la tartarea tromba.
                  Treman le spatiose atre cauerne,
                  Et l'aer cieco à quel romor rimbomba.
                  Nè stridendo così da le superne
                  Regioni del Cielo il folgor piomba:
                  Nè si scossa giamai trema la Terra,
                  Quando i vapori in sen grauida serra.
               
               
                  
                  Tosto gli Dei d'Abisso in varie torme
                  Concorron d'ogn'intorno à l'alte porte.
                  Ó come strane, ò come horribil forme:
                  Quant'è ne gli occhi lor terrore, e morte.
                  Stampano alcuni il suol di ferine orme,
                  E'n frōte humana han chiome d'angui attorte,
                  E lor s'aggira dietro immensa coda,
                  Che quasi sferza si ripiega, e snoda.
               
               
                  Quì mille immonde Arpie vedresti, e mille
                  Centauri, e Sfingi, e pallide Gorgoni:
                  Molte, e molte latrar voraci Scille,
                  E fischiar Hidre, e sibilar Pitoni:
                  E vomitar Chimere atre fauille,
                  E Polifemi horrendi, e Gerioni:
                  E in noui mostri, e non più intesi, ò visti
                  Diuersi aspetti in vn confusi, e misti.
               
               
                  D'essi parte à sinistra, e parte à destra
                  Á seder vanno al crudo Re douante.
                  Siede Pluton nel mezo, e non la destra
                  Sostien lo scettro ruuido, e pesante.
                  Nè tanto scoglio in mar, nè rupe alpestra,
                  Nè pur Calpe s'innalza, ò'l magno Atlante,
                  Ch'anzi lui non paresse vn picciol colle,
                  Sì la gran fronte, e le gran corna estolle.
               
               
                  Horrida maestà nel fero aspetto
                  Terrore accresce, e più superbo il rende.
                  Rosseggian gli occhi, e di veneno infetto,
                  Come infausta Cometa, il guardo splende▪
                  
                  Gli inuolue il mento, e sù l'irsuto petto
                  Hispida, e folta la gran barba scende:
                  E, in guisa di voragine profonda,
                  S'apre la bocca, d'atro sangue immonda.
               
               
                  
                  Qual' i fumi sulfurei, & infiammati
                  Escon di Mongibello, e'l puzzo, e'l tuono;
                  Tal de la fera bocca i negri fiati,
                  Tale il fetore, e le fauille sono.
                  Mentre ei parlaua, Cer bero i latrati
                  Ripresse, e l'Hidra si fè muta al suono:
                  Restò Cocito, e ne tremar gli Abissi:
                  E in questi detti il gran rimbombo udissi.
               
               
                  Tartarei Numi, di seder più degni
                  Là soura il Sole, ond'è l'origin vostra,
                  Che meco già da i più felici Regni
                  Spinse il gran caso in questa horribil chiostra;
                  Gli antichi altrui sospetti, e i fieri sdegni
                  Noti son troppo, e l'alta impresa nostra.
                  Hor colui regge à suo uoler le stelle,
                  E noi si am giudicate Alme rubelle.
               
               
                  Et in uece del dì sereno, e puro,
                  De l'aureo Sol, de gli stellati giri,
                  Ń hà quì rinchiusi in questo abisso oscuro,
                  Nè uuol, ch'al primo honor per noi s'aspiri.
                  E poscia (ahi quanto à ricordarlo è duro,
                  Questo è quel che più inaspra i miei martiri)
                  Nè bei seggi celesti hà l'huom chiamato:
                  L'huom uile, edi uil fango in terra nato.
               
               
                  Nè ciò gli parue assai: ma in preda à Morte,
                  Sol per farne più danno, il figlio diede.
                  Ei uenne, e ruppe le Tartaree porte,
                  E porre osò ne'Regni nostri il piede,
                  E trarne l'alme à noi deuute in sorte,
                  E riportarne al Ciel si ricche prede
                  Vincitor trionfando: e in nostro scherno
                  L'insegne iui spiegar del uinto Inferno.
               
               
                  
                  Ma, che rinouo i miei dolor par lando?
                  Chi non hà già le ingiurie nostre intese?
                  Et in qual parte si trouò, nè quando,
                  Ch'egli cessasse da l'usate imprese?
                  Mon più dessi à l'antichè andar pensando,
                  Pensar debbiamo à le presenti offese.
                  Deh non uedete homai, come egli tenti
                  Tutte al suo culto richiamar le genti?
               
               
                  Noi trarrem neghittosi i giorni, e l'hore,
                  Nè degna cura fia, che'l corn'accenda:
                  E soffrirem, che forza ogn'hor maggiore
                  Il suo popol Fedele in Asia prenda?
                  E che Giudea soggioghi, e che'l suo honore,
                  Che'l nome suo più si dilati, estenda?
                  Che suoni in altre lingue, e in altri carmi
                  Si scriua, e incida in noui bronzi, e in marmi?
               
               
                  Che sian gl'Idoli nostri à terra sparsi?
                  Che i nostri altari il Mondo à lui conuerta?
                  Ch'à lui sospesi i uoti, à lui sol' arsi
                  Siano gl'Incensi, & Auro, e Mirra offerta?
                  Ch'oue à noi Tempio non solea serrarsi,
                  Hor uia non resti a l'arti nostre aperta?
                  Che di tant' Alme il solito tributo
                  Nè manchi, e in uoto Regno alberghi Pluto?
               
               
                  Ah non fia uer, che non sono anco estinti
                  Gli spirti in uoi di quel ualor primiero,
                  Quando di ferro, e d'alte fiamme cinti
                  Pugnammo già contra il celeste Impero.
                  Fummo (io no'l nego) in quel conflitto uinti:
                  Pur non mancò uirtute al gran pensiero.
                  Die de che che si fosse à lui uittoria:
                  Rimase à noi d'inuitto ardir la gloria.
               
               
                  
                  Ma perche più u'indugio? Itene, ò miei
                  Fidi consorti, ò mia potenza, e forze,
                  Ite ueloci, & opprimete i rei,
                  Prima che'l lor poter più si rinforze,
                  Priache tutt'arda il Regno de gli Hebrei,
                  Questa fiamma crescete homai s'ammorze.
                  Fra loro entrate, e in ultimo lor danno
                  Hor la forza s'adopri, & hor l'inganno.
               
               
                  Sia destin ciò, ch'io uoglio. altridisperso
                  Se'n uada errando: altri rimanga ucciso:
                  Altri in cure d'Amor lasciue immerso
                  Idol si faccia un dolce sguardo, e un riso:
                  Sia'l ferro incontro al suo Rettor conuerso
                  Da lo stuol ribellante, e'nse diuiso:
                  Pera il Campo, è ruini, eresti in tutto
                  Ogni uestigio suo con lui distrutto.
               
               
                  Non aspettar già l'alme à Dio rubelle,
                  Che fosser queste voci al fin condotte;
                  Ma fuor volando, à riueder le stelle
                  Già se n'vscian da la profonda notte,
                  Come sonanti, e torbide procelle,
                  Che uengan fuor de le natie lor grotte
                  Ad oscurar il Cielo, à portar guerra
                  Á igran Regni del mare, e de la terra.
               
               
                  Tosto, spiegando in vari lati i vanni,
                  Si furon questi per lo Mondo sparti:
                  E'n cominciaro à fabricar inganni
                  Diuersi e noui, & ad vsar lor arti.
                  Ma dì tu Musa, come i primi danni
                  Mandassero à i Christiani, e di quai parti,
                  Tu'l sai, e di tant'opra à noisì lunge.
                  Debil'aura di fama à pena giunge.
               
               
                  
                  Reggea Damosco, e le Città vicine
                  Hidraote famoso, e nobil Mago:
                  Che sin da'suoi prim'anni à l'indouine
                  Arti si diede, e ne fù ogn'hor più vago.
                  Ma che giouar, se non potè del fine
                  Di quella incerta guerra esser presago?
                  Ned aspetto di stelle erranti, ò fisse,
                  Nè risposta d'Inferno il ver predisse.
               
               
                  Giudicò questi (Ahi cieca humana mente
                  Come i giudicij tuoi son vani, e torti)
                  Ch'à l'essercito inuitto d'Occidente
                  Apparecchiasse il Ciel ruine, e morti:
                  Però, credendo, che l'Egittia gente
                  La palma de l'impresa al fin riporti,
                  Desia, che'l popol suo ne la vittoria
                  Sia de l'acquisto à parte, è de la gloria.
               
               
                  Ma, perche ilualor Franco hà in grande stima
                  Di sanguigna vittoria i danniteme:
                  E và pensando, con qual' arte in prima
                  Il poter de'Christiani in parte sceme:
                  Sì, che più ageuolmente indi s'opprima
                  Da le sue genti, e da l'Egittie insieme.
                  In questo suo pensier il sour agiunge
                  L'Angelo iniquo, e più l'instiga, e punge.
               
               
                  Esso il consiglia, e gli ministra i modi,
                  Onde l'impresa ageuolar si puote.
                  Donna, à cui di beltà le prime lodi
                  Concedea l'Oriente, è sua Nepote.
                  Gli accorgimenti, e le più occulte frodi,
                  Ch'usi ò femina, ò Maga, à lei son note.
                  Questa à se chiama, e seco i suoi consigli
                  Comparte, e uuol, che cur a ella ne pigli.
               
               
                  
                  Dice. ò diletta mia, che sotto biondi
                  Capelli, e fra sì tenere sembianze
                  Canuto senno, e cor uirile ascondi,
                  Egià ne l'arti mie me stesso auanze;
                  Gran pensier uolgo, e se tu lui secondi,
                  Seguir anno gli effetti à le speranze:
                  Tessi la tela, ch io ti mostro ordita,
                  Di cauto vecchio essecutrice ardita.
               
               
                  Vanne al Campo nemico: iui s'impieghi
                  Ogn'arte feminil, ch'Amore alletti.
                  Bagna di pianto, e fa melati preghi:
                  Tronca, e confondi co'sospiri i detti.
                  Beltà dolente, e miserabil pieghi
                  Al tuo uolerei più ostinati petti:
                  Vela il souerchio ardir con la uergogna,
                  Ef à manto del uero à la menzogna.
               
               
                  Prendi (s'esser potrà) Goffredo à l'esca
                  De'dolci sguardi, e de'bei detti adorni:
                  Sì ch'al'huomo inuaghito homai rincresca
                  L'incominciata guerra, e la distorni.
                  Se ciò non puoi, gli altri più grandi adesca:
                  Menagli in parte, on d'alcun mai non torni.
                  Poi distingue i consigli: al fin le dice.
                  Per la Fè, per la Patria il tutto lice.
               
               
                  Labella Armida di sua forma altera,
                  E de'doni del sesso, e de l'etate,
                  L'impresa prende: e in sù la prima sera
                  Par
                        •
                     e, e tiene soluie chiuse, e celate:
                  L'n treccia, e'n gonna faminile spera
                  Vincer popoli inuitti, e schiere armate.
                  Ma son del suo partir tra'l uulgo ad arte
                  Diuerse uoci poi diffuse, e sparte.
               
               
                  
                  Dopo non molti dì uien la donzella,
                  Doue spiegate i Franchi hauean le tende.
                  A l'apparir de la beltà nouella
                  Nasce un bisbiglio, e'l sguardo ogn'un u'in tende
                  Si come là, doue Cometa, ò Stella,
                  Non più uista di giorno in Ciel risplende:
                  E traggon tutti per ueder chi sia
                  Sì bella peregrina, e chi l'inuia.
               
               
                  Argo non mai, non uide Cipro, ò Delo
                  D'habito, ò di beltà forme sì care.
                  D'auro hà la chioma, & hor dal bianco uelo
                  Traluce inuolta, hor discoperta appare.
                  Così qual'hor si rasserena il Cielo,
                  Hor da candida nube il Sol traspare;
                  Hor da la nube uscendo, i raggi intorno
                  Più chiari spiega, e ne raddoppia il giorno.
               
               
                  Fà noue crespe l'aura al crin disciolto,
                  Che Natura per se rincrespa in onde,
                  Stassi l'auaro sguardo in se raccolto,
                  Ei tesori d'Amore, ei suoi nasconde.
                  Dolce color dirose in quel bel uolto
                  Fra l'auorio si sparge, e si confonde:
                  Ma ne la bocca, ond'esce aura amorosa,
                  Sola rosseggia, e semplice la rosa.
               
               
                  Mostra il bel petto le sue neui ignude,
                  Onde il foco d'Amor si nutre, e desta.
                  Parte appar de le mamme acerbe, e crude,
                  Parte altrui ne ricopre inuida uesta.
                  Inuida, ma, s'à gli occhi il uarco chiude,
                  L'amoroso pensier già non arresta:
                  Che non ben pago di bellezza esterna.
                  Ne gli occulti secreti anco s'interna.
               
               
                  
                  Come per acqua, ò per cristallo intero
                  Trapassa il raggio, e no'l diuide, ò parte;
                  Per entro il chiuso manto osa il pensiero
                  Sì penetrar ne la uietata parte.
                  Iui si spatia, iui contempla iluero
                  Di tante merauiglie à parte, à parte:
                  Posci al desio le narra, e le descriue,
                  E ne fà le sue fiamme in lui più uiue.
               
               
                  Lodata passa, e uagheggiata Armida
                  Fra le cupide turbe, se n'auuede.
                  No'l mostra già, benche in suo cor ne rida,
                  E ne disegni alte vittorie, e prede.
                  Mentre sospesa alquanto alcuna guida,
                  Che la conduca al Capitan, richiede;
                  Eustatio occorse à lei, che del sourano
                  Principe de le squadre era germano.
               
               
                  Come al lume Farfalla, ei si riuolse
                  A lo splendor de la beltà diuina:
                  E rimirar da presso i lumi volse,
                  Che dolcemente atto modesto inchina:
                  E ne trasse gran fiamma, e la raccolse,
                  Come da foco suolse esca vicina:
                  E disse verso lei, ch'audace, e baldo
                  Il fea de gli anni, e de l'amore il caldo.
               
               
                  Donna, se pur tal nome à te conuiensi:
                  Che non simigli tu cosa terrena:
                  Nev'è figlia d'Adamo, in cui dispensi
                  Cotanto il Ciel di sua luce serena;
                  Che da te si ricerca? & onde viensi?
                  Qual tua uentura, ò nostra, hor quì ti mena?
                  Fà, ch'io sappia, chi sei: fa, ch'ia non erri
                  Ne l'honorarti, e s'è ragion, m'atterri.
               
               
                  
                  Risponde. il tuo lodar troppo alto sale:
                  Nè tanto in suso il merto nostro arriua.
                  Cosa vedi Signor, non pur mortale,
                  Ma già morta à i diletti, al duol sol viua.
                  Mia sciagura mi spinge in loco tale
                  Vergine peregrina, e fuggitiua.
                  Ricorro alpio Goffredo, e in lui confido,
                  Taluà di sua bontate intorno il grido.
               
               
                  Tu l'adito m'impetra al Capitano,
                  S'hai, come pare, alma cortese, e pia.
                  Et egli. è ben ragion, ch'à l'vn germano
                  L'altro ti guidi, e intercessor ti sia,
                  Vergine bella, non ricorri in vano:
                  Non è vile appe lui la gratia mia.
                  Spender tutto potrai, come t'aggrada,
                  Ciò, che vaglià il suo scettro, ò la mia spada.
               
               
                  Tace, e la guida, oue trai grandi Heroi
                  All'hor dal vulgo ilpio Buglion s'inuola.
                  Essa in chinollo riuerente, e poi
                  Vergognosetta non facea parola;
                  Ma quei rossor, 
                        •
                     a quei timori suoi
                  Rassecura il Guerriero, e riconsola,
                  Sì che i pensati inganni al fine spiega
                  In suon, che di dolcezza i sensi lega.
               
               
                  Principe inuitto (disse) il cui gran nome
                  Se'n vola adorno di sì chiarifregi,
                  Che l'esser date vinte, e in guerra dome.
                  Recansi à gloriale Prouincie, e i Regi.
                  Noto per tutto è iltuo valore, e come
                  Sin da i nemici auuien, che s'ami, e pregi,
                  Così anco i tuoi nemici affida, e inuità
                  Di ricercarti, e d'impetrarne aita.
               
               
                  
                  Et io, che nacqui in sì diuersa fede,
                  Che tu abbassasti, e c'hor d'opprimer tenti,
                  Per te spero acquistar la nobil sede,
                  E lo scettro regal de miei parenti.
                  E s'altri aita à i suoi congiunti chiede
                  Contra il furor de le straniere genti;
                  Io, poi che'n lor non hà pietà più loco,
                  Contra il mio sangue il ferro hostile inuoco,
               
               
                  Te chiamo, & in te spero re in quell' altezza
                  Puoi tu sol pormi, onde sospinta io fui.
                  Nè la tua destra esser dee meno auuezza
                  Di solleuar, che d'atterrar' altrui:
                  Nèmeno il vanto di pietà si prezza,
                  Che'l trionfar de gli auuersari sui;
                  E s'hai potuto à molti il Regno torre,
                  Fia gloria egual nel Regno hor me riporre.
               
               
                  Ma se la nostra Fè variati moue
                  Á disprezzar forse i miei preghi honesti,
                  Lafè, c'ho certa in tua pietà, mi gioue:
                  Nè dritto par, ch'ella delusa resti.
                  Testimone è quel DIO, ch'à tutti è Gioue,
                  Ch'altrui più giusta aita vnqua non desti.
                  Ma perche il tutto àpieno intenda, hor odi
                  Le mie suenture insieme, e l'altrui frodi.
               
               
                  Figlia i son d'Arbilan, che'l freno tenne
                  Del bel Damaso, e in minor sorte nacque,
                  Ma la bella Cariclia in sposa ottenne,
                  Cui farlo hercde del suo Regno piacque.
                  Costei co'l suo morir quasi peruenne
                  Il nascer mio, che'n tempo estinta giacque,
                  Ch'io fuori vscia de l'aluo: e fù ilfatale
                  Giorno, ch'à lei die morte, à me natale.
               
               
                  
                  Ma il primo lustro a pena era varcato
                  Dal dì, ch'ella spogliossi il mortal velo;
                  Quando il mio Genitor, cedendo al Fato▪
                  
                  Forse con lei si ricongiunse in Cielo:
                  Di me cura lassando, e de lo stato
                  Á fratel, ch'egli amò con tanto zelo,
                  Che, se in petto mortal pietà risiede,
                  Essar certo deuea de la sua fede.
               
               
                  Preso dunque di me questi il gouerno
                  Vago d'ogni mio ben si mostrò tanto,
                  Che d'incorrottafè, d'amor paterno,
                  E d'immensa pietade ottenne il vanto.
                  O che'l maligno suo pensiero interno
                  Celasse all'hor sotto contrario manto;
                  Ó che sincere hauesse ancor le voglie,
                  Perch'al figliuol mi destinaua in moglie.
               
               
                  Io crebbi e crebbe il figlio, e mai nè stile
                  Di caualier, nè nobil'arte apprese,
                  Nulla di pellegrino, ò di gentile
                  Gli piacque mai, nè mai troppo alto intese:
                  Sotto diforme aspetto animo vile,
                  E in cor superbo auare voglie accese;
                  Ruuido in atti, & in costumitale,
                  Ch'è sol ne'vitij à se medesmo eguale.
               
               
                  Hora il mio buon custode ad huom sì degno
                  Vnirmi in matrimonio in se prefisse,
                  E farlo nel mio letto, e del mio Regno
                  Consorte: e chiaro à me più uolte il disse.
                  Vsò la lingua, e l'arte, vsò l'ingegno,
                  Perche'l bramato effetto indi seguisse:
                  Ma promessa da me non trasse mai;
                  Anzi ritrosa ogn'hor tacqui, ò negai.
               
               
                  
                  Partissial fin con vn sembiante oscuro,
                  Onde l'empio suo cor chiaro trasparue.
                  E ben l'historia del mio mal futuro
                  Leggerg liscritta in fronte all'hor mi parue.
                  Quinci i notturni miei riposi furo
                  Turbati ogn'hor da strani sogni, e larue:
                  Et vn fattale horror ne l'alma impresso
                  M' era presagio de'miei danni espresso.
               
               
                  Spesso l'ombra materna à me s'offria,
                  Pallida imago, e dolorosa in atto.
                  Quanto diuersa, ohime, da quel, che pria
                  Visto altroue il suo volto hauea ritratto.
                  Fuggi, figlia (dicea) morte sì ria,
                  Che ti sourasta homai, partiti ratto:
                  Già veggio il tosco, e'l ferro in tuosol danno
                  Apparecchiur dal perfido Tiranno.
               
               
                  Ma che giouaua (ohime) che del periglio
                  Vicino homai fosse presago il core,
                  S'irresoluta in ritrouar consiglio
                  Lamia tenera età rendea il timore?
                  Pranderfuggendo uolontario essiglio,
                  E ignuda vscir del patrio Regno fuore
                  Graue era sì, ch'io fea minore stima
                  Di chiuder gli occhi, oue gli apersi in prima.
               
               
                  Temea, lassa, la morte, e non hauea
                  (Chi'l crederia?) poi di fuggirla ardire:
                  E scoprir la mia tema anco temea,
                  Per non affrettar l'hore almio morire.
                  Così inquieta, e torbida trahea
                  La vita in un continouo martire,
                  Qual'huom, ch'aspetti, che su'l collo ignudo
                  Ad hor ad horgli caggia il ferro crudo.
               
               
                  
                  In tal mio stato, ò fosse amica sorte,
                  O, ch'à peggio miserbi il mio deftino,
                  Vn de'ministri de la Regia corte,
                  Che'l Re mio padre s'alleuò bambino,
                  Mi scoperse, che'l tempo à lamia morte
                  Dal Tiranno prescritto era uicino:
                  E ch'egli à quel crudele hauea promesso
                  Di porgermi il uelen quel giorno stesso.
               
               
                  E mi soggiunse poi, ch'à la mia uita
                  Sol fuggendo allungar poteua il corso:
                  E, poi ch'altronde io non speraua aita,
                  Pronto offrìse me desmo al mio soccorso:
                  E confortando mirendè sì ardita,
                  Che del timor non mi ritenne il morso▪
                  
                  Sì ch'io non disponessi, à l'aer cieco,
                  La Patria, e'l Zio fuggendo, andarne seco.
               
               
                  Sorse la notte, oltra l'usato oscura,
                  Che sotto l'ombre amiche ne coperse,
                  Tal che con du e donzelleuscij secura,
                  Compagne elette à le fortune auuerse.
                  Ma pure indietro à le mie patrie mura
                  Le luci io riuolgea di pianto asperse:
                  Nè de la uista del natio terreno
                  Potea partendo satiarle à pieno.
               
               
                  Fea l'istesso camin l'
                        ••
                     chio, e'l pensiero:
                  E mal suo grado ilpiede inanzi giua,
                  Si comenaue, ch'improuiso, e fero
                  Turbine scioglia da l'amata riua.
                  La notte andammo, e'l dì feguente intero
                  Per lochi ou'orma altruinon appariua
                  Ciricour ammo in un Castello al fine,
                  Che siede del mio Regno in su'l confine.
               
               
                  
                  É d'Aronte il Castel: ch'Aronte fue
                  Quel, che mi trasse dì periglio, e scorse.
                  Ma, poi che me fuggito hauer le sue
                  Mortali insidie il traditor s'accorse;
                  Aceeso di furor contr' ambidue
                  Lesue colpe medesme in noi ritorse:
                  Et ambo fece rei di quell' eccesso,
                  Che commetter in me uolse egli stesso.
               
               
                  Disse, ch'Aronte i hauea con doni spinto
                  Frasue beuande à mescolar ueneno;
                  Per non hauer, poi ch'egli fosse estinto,
                  Chi legge mi prescriua, ò tenga àfreno:
                  E ch'io, seguendo un mio lasciuo instinto,
                  Volea raccormi à mille Amanti in seno,
                  Ahi, che fiamma dal Cielo anzi in me scenda,
                  Santa Honestà, ch'io le tue leggi offenda.
               
               
                  Ch'auara fama d'oro, c sete insieme
                  Delmio sangue innocente il crudo hauesse,
                  Graue m'è sì; ma via più il cor mi preme,
                  Che'l mio candido honor macchiar uolesse.
                  L'empio, che i popolari impeti teme,
                  Così le sue menzogne adorna, e tesse,
                  Che la Città del ver dubbia, e sospesa
                  Solleuata non s'arma à mia difesa.
               
               
                  Nè per c'hor sieda nel mio seggio, e'n fronte
                  Già gli risplenda la regal corona,
                  Pone alcun fine a'miei gran danni, àl'onte:
                  Sì la sua feritate oltra lo sprona.
                  Arder minaccia entro'l Castello Aronte,
                  Se di proprio voler non s'imprigiona:
                  Et à me (lassa) e'nsieme a'miei consorti
                  Guerra annutia non pur, ma stratij, e morti.
               
               
                  
                  Ciò dice egli di far, perche dal volto
                  Così lauarsi la vergogna crede:
                  E ritornar nel grado, ond'io l'ho tolto;
                  L'honor del sangue, e de la regia sede.
                  Mà il timor n'è cagion, che non ritolto
                  Gli sia lo scettro, ond'io son vera herede:
                  Che sol, s'io caggio, por fermo sostegno
                  Con le ruine mie puote al suo Regno.
               
               
                  E ben quel fine haurà, l'empio desire,
                  Che già il Tiranno hà stabilito inmente:
                  E saran nel mio sangue estinte l'ire,
                  Che dal mio lagrimar non fiano spente;
                  Se tu no'l vieti à te rifuggo, ò Sire,
                  Io misera fanciulla, orba, innocente:
                  E questo pianto, on'hò i tuoi piedi aspersi
                  Vagliami sì, che'l sangueio poinon versi.
               
               
                  Per questi piedi, onde i superbi, e gli empi
                  Calchi: per questa man, che'l dritto aita:
                  Per l'alte tue vittorie: e per que'Tempi
                  Sacri, cui desti, e cui dar cerchi aita;
                  Il mio desir tu, che puoi solo, adempi:
                  E in vn col Regno, à me serbi la vita
                  La tua pietà; ma pietà nulla gioue,
                  S'anco te il dritto, e la ragion non moue.
               
               
                  Tu, cui concesse il Cielo, e dielti in fato
                  Voler'il giusto, e poter ciò, chevuoi,
                  A'me saluar la vita, à te lo Stato
                  (Che tuo fia, s'io'l ricouro) acquistar puoi.
                  Fra numero sì grande à me sia dato
                  Diece condur de'tuoi più forti Heroi:
                  C'hauendo i padri amici, e'l popol fido
                  Bastan questi à ripormi entro al mio nido.
               
               
                  
                  Anzi vn de'primi, à la cuifè commessa
                  É la custodia di secreta porta,
                  Promette aprirla, e ne la Regia stessa
                  Porci di notte tempo: e sol m'essorta,
                  Bh'io da te cerchi alcuna aita, e in essa
                  Per picciola, che sia, si riconforta
                  Più, che s'altronde hauesse vn grande stuolo:
                  Tanto l'insegne estima, e'lnome solo.
               
               
                  Ciò detto tace, e la risposta attendè
                  Con atto, che'n silentio hà voce, e preghi.
                  Goffredo il dubbio cor volue, e sospende
                  Fra pensier vari, e non sà doue il pieghi.
                  Teme ibarbari ingannie ben comprende,
                  Che non è fede in huom, ch'à DIO la neghi.
                  Ma d'altra parte in luipietoso affetto
                  Si desta, che non dorme in nobil petto.
               
               
                  Nè pur l'usata sua pietànatia
                  Vuol, che costei de la sua gratia degni;
                  Ma il moue vtile ancor: ch'vtil glifia.
                  Che ne l'Imperio di Damasco regni
                  Chi da lui dipendendo apra la via,
                  Et ageuoli il corso a i suoi disegni,
                  Egenti, & arme gli ministri, & oro
                  Contra gli Egitij, e chi sarà con loro.
               
               
                  Mentre ei così dubbioso à terra volto
                  Lo sguardo tiene, e'l pensier volue, e gira,
                  La Donna in lui s'affisa, e dal suo uolto
                  Intenta pende, e gli atti osserua, e mira:
                  Eperche tarda oltra'lsuo creder molto
                  Larisposta, ne teme, e ne sospira.
                  Quegli la chiesta gratia al fin negolle;
                  Ma die risposta assai cortese, e molle.
               
               
                  
                  Se in seruigio di DIO, ch'à ciò n'elesse,
                  Non s'impiegasser quì le nostre spade;
                  Ben tua speme fondar potresti in esse,
                  Esoccorso trouar, non che pietade.
                  Ma se queste sue greggie, e queste oppresse
                  Mura non torniam primain libertade,
                  Giusto non è, con iscemar le genti,
                  Che di nostra uittoria il corso allenti.
               
               
                  Ben ti prometto, e tu per nobil pegno
                  Mia fène prendi, e uiui in lei secura;
                  Che se mai sottrarremo al giogo indegno
                  Queste sacre, e dal Ciel dilette mura;
                  Di ritornarti al tuo perduto Regno;
                  Come pietà n'essorta, haurem poi cura.
                  Hor mi farebbe la pietà men pio,
                  S'anzi il suo dritto io non rendessi à DIO.
                  
               
               
                  Á quel parlar chinò la Danno, e fisse
                  Le luci à terra, e stette immota alquanto:
                  Poi solleuolle rugiadose, e disse
                  Accompagnando i flebil' atti al pianto.
                  Misera, & à qual' altrail Ciel prescrisse
                  Vita mai graue, & immutabil tanto;
                  Che si cangia in altrui mente, e natura
                  Pria, che si cangi in me sorte sì dura.
               
               
                  Nulla speme più resta: in uan mi doglio:
                  Non han più forza in human petto i preghi
                  Forse lece sperar, che'l mio cordoglio,
                  Che te non mosse, il reo Tiranno pieghi?
                  Nè giàte d'inclemenza accusar uoglio,
                  Perche'l picciol soccorso a me si neghi,
                  Ma il Cielo accuso, onde il mio mal discende,
                  Che'n te pietate inessor abil rende.
               
               
                  
                  Non tu, Signor, nè tua bontade è tale;
                  Ma'l mio destino è, che mi nega aita.
                  Crudo destino, empio destin fatale
                  Vccidi homai questa odiosa uita.
                  L'hauermi priua (ohime) fùpicciol male
                  De'dolci padri in loro età fiorita,
                  Se non mi uedi ancor del Regno priua,
                  Qual uittima al coltello andar cattiua:
               
               
                  Che, poi che legge d'honestate, e zelo
                  Non uuol, che quì sì lung amente indugi,
                  Á cui ricorro in tanto? oue mi celo?
                  Ó quai contra il Tiranno haurò rifugi?
                  Nessun loco sì chiuso è sotto il Cielo,
                  Ch'all'hor nō s'apra; hor perche tanti indugi?
                  Veggio la Morte, e se'lfuggir la è uano,
                  Incotro à lei n'andrò conquesta mano.
               
               
                  Quì tacque, e parue, ch'un regale sdegno,
                  E generoso l'accendesse in uista:
                  E'l piè uolgendo di partir fea segno,
                  Tutta ne gli atti dispettosa, etrista.
                  Il pianto si spargea senza ritegno,
                  Com'ira suol produrlo à dolor mista:
                  E le nascenti lagrime à uederle
                  Erano à i raidel Sol cristallo, e perle.
               
               
                  Le guancie asperse di que' uiui humori;
                  Che giù cadean sin de la ueste al lembo,
                  Parean uermigli insieme, e bianchi fiori.
                  Se pur gli irriga un rugiadoso nembo;
                  Quando su l'apparir de'primi albori
                  Spiegano à l'aure liete il chiuso grembo:
                  El'Alba, che gli mira, e se n'appaga
                  D'adornarsene il crin diuenta uaga.
               
               
                  
                  Ma il chiaro humor, che di sì spesse stille
                  Le belle gote, e'l seno adorno rende,
                  Opra effetto di foco, il qual'in mille
                  Petti serpe celato, e ui s'apprende.
                  Ó miracol d'Amor, che le fauille
                  Tragge del pianto, e i corne l'acqua accende.
                  Sempre soura Natura egli hàpossanza;
                  Ma in uirtù di costei se stesso auanza.
               
               
                  Questo fin to dolor da molti elice
                  Lagrime uere, e i cor più duri spettra.
                  Ciascun non lei s'afflige, e fra se dice.
                  Se mercè da Goffredo hor non impetra,
                  Ben fù rabbiosa Tigre à lui nutrice,
                  E'l produsse in aspr'alpe horrida pietra,
                  Ó l'onda, che nel Mar si frange, e spuma:
                  Crudel, che tal beltà turba, e consuma.
               
               
                  Ma, il giouenetto Eustatio, in cui la face
                  Di pietade, e d'Amore è più feruente;
                  Mentre bisbiglia ciascun'altro, e tace,
                  Si tragge auanti, e parla audacemente.
                  Ó Germano, e Signor, troppo tenace
                  Del suo primo proposto è la tua mente,
                  s'al consenso comun, che brama, e prega,
                  Arrendeuole alquanto hor non si piega.
               
               
                  Non dico io già, che i Principi, che à cura:
                  Si stanno quì de'Popoli soggetti,
                  Torcano il piè da l'oppugnate mura:
                  E siangli uffici lor da lor negletti.
                  Ma fra noi, che guerrier si am di uentura,
                  Senz'alcun proprio peso, e meno astretti
                  A le leggi de gli altri, elegger diece
                  Disensori del giusto à te ben lece.
               
               
                  
                  Ch'al seruigio di DIO già non si toglie
                  L'huom, ch'innocente Vergine difende.
                  Et assai care al Ciel son quelle spoglie,
                  Che d'ucciso Tiranno altri gli appende.
                  Quando dunque à l'impresa hor nō m'inuoglie
                  Quell'util certo, che da lei s'attende,
                  Mi ci moue il deuer, ch'à dar tenuto
                  É l'ordin nostro à le Donzelle aiuto.
               
               
                  Ah non sia uer, per DIO, che si ridica
                  In Francia, ò doue in pregio è cortesia,
                  Che si fugga da noi rischio, ò fatica
                  Per cagion così giusta, e così pia.
                  Io per me quì depongo elmo, e lorica:
                  Quì mi scingo la spada: e più non fia,
                  Ch'adopri indegnamente arme, ò destriero,
                  O'lnome usurpi mai di Caualiero.
               
               
                  Così fauella, e seco in chiaro suono
                  Tutto l'ordine suo concorde freme:
                  E chiamando il consiglio utile, e buono,
                  Co'preghi il Capìtan circonda, e preme.
                  Cedo (egli disse all'hora) e uinto sono
                  Al concorso di tanti uniti insieme,
                  Habbia, se parui, il chiesto don costei,
                  Da i nostri, sì non da i consigli miei.
               
               
                  Ma se Goffredo di credenza alquanto
                  Pur troua in uoi, temprate i nostri affetti.
                  Tanto sol disse: e basta lor ben tan to,
                  Perche ciascun quel, ch'ei concede, accetti.
                  Hor che non può di bella Donna il pianto,
                  Et in lingua amorosa i dolci detti?
                  Esce da uaghe labra aurea catena,
                  Che l'alme à suo uoler prende, & affrena.
               
               
                  
                  Eustatio lei richiama, e dice. homai
                  Cessi uaga Donzella il tuo dolore:
                  Che tal da noi soccorso in breue haurai,
                  Qual par, che più richeggia il tuo timore.
                  Serenò all'hora i nubilosi rai
                  Armida, es ì ridente apparue fuore,
                  Ch'innamorò di sue bellezze il Cielo,
                  Asciug andosi gli occhi co'l bel uelo.
               
               
                  Rendè lor poscia in dolci, e care note
                  Gratie per l'alte gratie à lei concesse,
                  Mostrando, che sariano al mondo note
                  Mai sempre, e sempre nel suo core impresse:
                  E ciò, che lingua esprimer ben non puote,
                  Muta eloquenza ne'suoi gesti espresse:
                  E celò sì sotto mentito aspetto
                  Il suo pensier, ch'altrui non diè sospetto.
               
               
                  Quinci uedendo, che Fortuna arriso
                  Al gran principio di sue frodi hauea,
                  Prima che'l suo pensier le sia preciso,
                  Dispon di trarre al fin opra si rea:
                  E far con gli atti dolci, e co'l bel uiso
                  Più, che con l'arci lor Circe, ò Medea:
                  E in uoce di Sirena à i suoi concenti
                  Ad dormentar le più suegliate menti.
               
               
                  Vsa ogn'arte la Donna, onde sia colto
                  Ne la sua rete alcun nouello Amante;
                  Nè con tutti, nè sempre un stesso uolto
                  Serba; ma cangia à tempo atti, e sembiante.
                  Hor tien pudica il guardo in se raccolto,
                  Hor lo riuolge cupido, e uagante.
                  La sferza in quegli, il freno adopra in questi,
                  Come lor uede in amar lenti, ò presti.
               
               
                  
                  Se scorge alcun, che dal suo amor ritiri
                  L'Alma, a i pensier per diffidenza affrene;
                  Gli apre un benigno riso, e in dolci giri
                  Volge le luci in lui liete, e serene:
                  E così i pigri, & timidi desiri
                  Sprona, & affida la dubbiosa spene:
                  Et infiammando l'amorose uoglie
                  Sgombra a quel gel, che la paura accoglie.
               
               
                  Ad altri poi, ch'audace il segno uarca,
                  Scorto da cieco, e temerario Duce,
                  De'cari detti, de'begli occhi è parca,
                  E in lui timore, e riuerenza induce.
                  Ma fra lo sdegno, onde la fronte è carca,
                  Pur anco un raggio di pietà riluce,
                  Si ch'altri teme ben, ma non dispera:
                  E più s'inuoglia, quanto appar più altera.
               
               
                  Stassi tal uolta ella in disparte alquanto,
                  E'l uolto, egli atti suoi compone, e finge
                  Quasi dogliosa: e in fin sù gli occhi il pianto
                  Tragge souente, e poi dentro il respinge.
                  E con quest'arti à lagrimar'intanto
                  Seco mill'alme semplicette astringe:
                  E in foco di pietà strali d'Amore
                  Tempra, onde pera a sì fort'arme il core.
               
               
                  Poi sì come ella à quei pensier s'inuole,
                  E nouella speranza in lei si deste,
                  Ver gli Amanti il piè drizza, e le parole,
                  E di gioia la fronte adorna, e ueste:
                  E lampeggiar fà, quasi un doppio Sole,
                  Il chiaro sguardo, e'l bel riso celeste
                  Sù le nebbie del duolo oscure, e folte,
                  C'hauea lor prima intorno al petto accolte.
               
               
                  
                  Ma mentre dolce parla, e dolce ride,
                  E di doppia dolcezza inebria i sensi;
                  Quasi dal petto lor l'alma diuide.
                  Non prima usata à quei diletti immensi.
                  Ahi crudo Amor, ch'egualmente n'ancide
                  L'assentio, e'l mel, che tu fra noi dispensi;
                  E dogni tempo egualmente mortali
                  Vengon da te le medicine, e i mali.
               
               
                  Fra sì contrarie tempre in ghiaccio, e in foco,
                  In riso, e inpianto, e fra paura, e spene
                  Inforsa ogni suo stato, e di lor gioco
                  L'ingannatrice Donna à prender uiene.
                  E s'alcun mai con suon tremante, e fioco
                  Osa parlando d'accennar sue pene,
                  Finge, quasi in amor roza, e inesperta,
                  Non ueder l'alma ne'suoi detti aperta.
               
               
                  Ó pur le luci uergognose, e chine
                  Tenendo, d'honestà s'orna, e colora:
                  Sì che uiene à celar le fresche brine
                  Sotto le rose, onde il bel uiso infiora;
                  Qual ne l'hore più fresche, e matutine
                  Del primo nascer sno ueggiam l'Aurora:
                  E'l rossor de lo sdegno insieme n'esce
                  Con la uergogna, e si confonde, e mesce.
               
               
                  Ma, se prima ne gli atti ella s'accorge
                  D'huom, che tenti scoprir l'accese uoglie,
                  Hor gli s'inuola, e fugge, & hor gli porge
                  Modo, onde parli, e in un temporitoglie.
                  Così il dì tutto in uano error lo scorge
                  Stanco, e deluso poi di speme il toglie.
                  Ei si riman, qual cacciator, ch'à sera
                  Per da al fin l'orma di seguita fera.
               
               
                  
                  Queste fur l'arti, onde mill'Alme, e mille
                  Prender furtiuamente ella poteo;
                  Anzi pur furon l'arme, onde rapille,
                  Et à forza d'Amor serue le feo.
                  Qual merauiglia hor fia, se'l fero Achille
                  D'Amor sù preda, & Hercole, e Theseo,
                  S'ancor chi per GIESV la spada cinge
                  L'empio ne'lacci suoi tal'hora stringe?
               
               Il Fine del Quarto Canto.
            
         
         
            
               
               THE FIFTH SONG.
               
                  
                     WHile as Armida treacherous,
thus-wise
                  The Knight entyceth her loues
maze to tread,
                  Nor on the promisde ten alone
relyes,
                  But trusts her stealth should more
a gadding lead:
                  On whom to charge this daung'rous enterprize,
                  Which she must guide, Godfrey wist not a read:
                  For ventrers store, and worth in generall
                  Breedes doubt, nor lesse their bent in speciall.
               
               
                  At last he orders with well-ware foresight,
                  That choyce of one from out themselues they take,
                  Who should succeede to noble Dudons right,
                  And this election at his pleasure make,
                  That so no one with iust exception might
                  Complaine, or he their causefull wrath awake:
                  And show withall, how this most worthy band
                  With him, in price doth of high valew stand.
               
               
                  Then he them to him cals, and gan to say,
                  You haue already vnderstood my minde,
                  Which for the Damsels aide gaue not a nay,
                  But to a riper season it assignde,
                  This I propound a new, and well it may
                  A dew assent of your opinions finde:
                  For in the world light and chaungeable,
                  T'is constance oft t'ensew thoughts variable.
               
               
                  
                  But if yet still you deeme it foully staine
                  This your degree, such perils to refuse,
                  And if your noble courage seeme disdaine,
                  What so a counsell ouersafe ensewes,
                  I will you not against your wils retaine,
                  Nor calling backe my graunt, my faith abuse:
                  But with you be it, as to be is right,
                  The bridle of our rule gentle and light.
               
               
                  To go then or to stay, content I rest,
                  That on your pleasure freely it depend,
                  Yet will, that first you make to Duke decest
                  New successour, who may your charge attend,
                  And mongst you ten out-cull, as likes him best,
                  But take of ten expirde the choice shall end:
                  For herein I reserue my sou'raignty,
                  In all els, franke be his authority.
               
               
                  So Godfrey spake, and th'answere to impart,
                  Ech ones consent vpon his brother threw:
                  Like as (O Captaine) this farre seeing art
                  Of lingring vertue best beseemeth you,
                  So vigour of the hand and of the hart
                  Of vs is lookt, as debet by vs dew:
                  And that ripe firmenesse, which in others case
                  Is prouidence, in vs were vilety base.
               
               
                  And since light harmes, which from this perill grow,
                  Weyd with the profit, make the ballance rise:
                  Your liking had, the chosen ten shall go
                  With this Damsell to that braue enterprise:
                  Thus he concludes, and with guile tyred so,
                  Seekes close to vayle the minde, which inly fries
                  With colour'd zeale; honours desire did moue
                  The rest (as seem'd) but t'was desire of loue.
               
               
                  
                  But youngest Bulleyn with repining eye
                  Vpon the Sonne, who of Sophia leeres,
                  Whose vertue he admires enuiously,
                  Which in fine feature more it selfe endeeres,
                  His mateship nould, and suttle iealously,
                  Wary conceipts vp in his fancie steeres,
                  Whence he his counterstriuer drawne apart,
                  Arraisons him with this besmoothing art.
               
               
                  O of great Sire, thou greater Sonne that art!
                  Who young in price of armes bearst highest fame
                  Of this braue band, whereof we make a part,
                  Who shall be graced with commanders name?
                  I that to famous Dudon, scarce my hart
                  Sole for the honour of his age could frame
                  T'obey, I Godfreys brother cannot see,
                  Whom I should yeeld to, saue alone to thee.
               
               
                  Thee whose high lynage egals all the rest,
                  Whose glory me, and merit hath out-gon,
                  Nor lesse himselfe, in price of martiall quest
                  To hold, disdaynes the greater Boglion:
                  
                  Thee I for Captaine craue, if in thee nest
                  No will to be this Squadrons Champion,
                  Ne thinke I thou wilt for that honour carke,
                  Which may proceed from deeds obscure & darke.
               
               
                  Nor here wants place where you may bewtify
                  Your haughtie valour with fames brighter ray,
                  Now I'le procure (if you it not deny)
                  This chiefe honour, the rest on you shall lay,
                  But for I wot not well, what way to ply
                  My hart, which plants in doubts his fickle stay:
                  Let me obtaine that Armide at my will
                  I follow may, or with thee tarry still.
               
               
                  
                  Here Eustace held his peace, nor vttered
                  These later accents without blushing face,
                  And his hot burning thoughts ill couered
                  T'other well spide, and smiled at the case:
                  But for loues slower stroakes, scarcely perced
                  The vtter rinde, which did his brest embrace,
                  Nor at a countermate he takes offence,
                  Nor to pursew the wench he makes pretence.
               
               
                  But deepely grau'd in holdfast thought abides
                  
                     Dudons sharpe death, whom long to ouer-liue,
                  That it audacious Argant so betides,
                  He counts will blemish of dishonour giue,
                  And part into his eares with pleasing slides
                  This speech, which him doth to dew honour driue:
                  And his young courage ioyes and well appayes,
                  In the sweet sound of his true tuned prayse.
               
               
                  Whence thus he answerd, I hold more desire,
                  Chiefe places to deserue then to obtaine,
                  And if I may to vertues height aspire,
                  Enuy I neede not others haughty raigne,
                  Yet to this honour, as my fitting hire,
                  If you me call, I will not curchy straine,
                  But deere repute, that you so plaine a signe
                  Expresse, how your good wils to me encline.
               
               
                  Thus I it not desire, nor yet refuse,
                  And I made Duke, you shall be of th'elect,
                  So Eustace leaues him, and gins trauaile vse,
                  This with his mates good liking to effect:
                  But for selfe roome Prince Gernand hotly sewes,
                  Whom though Armidas poisned shafts enfect,
                  Yet in proud hart, lesse Ladies loue preuailes,
                  Then thirst of honour, which more sharpe assailes.
               
               
                  
                  From Norway great Kings Gernand came of yore,
                  Who many Realmes swayd with Emperiall blade;
                  Which store of Crownes, and royall Scepters store
                  Of Sire and Graundsires, him much haughtie made:
                  Th'other on his owne worth him haughtie bore,
                  More then on acts of elders noble trade,
                  Albe of hundred yeares many a leace,
                  They were renownd in warre, & knowne in peace.
               
               
                  But the Barbarian Lord, who measur'de sole,
                  So farre as gold and rule can stretch the line,
                  And deem'd ech vertue darke as quenched cole,
                  Wherein some royall title did not shine,
                  In no wise brookes that to the craued gole,
                  The Knights like merit should their course combine▪
                  
                  And growes so teasty, that by teeny spite,
                  Past reasons bounds he is transported quite.
               
               
                  So as the sprite malignant of the deepe,
                  Who open in him saw this largy gate,
                  Into him gan with couert silent creepe,
                  And at the helme of his thoughts fleeing sate,
                  And there his wrath ginnes more in hate to steepe,
                  And more his hart to pricke, and more to grate,
                  And worketh so that in his soule still sounds
                  A voice, which reasons such to him propounds.
               
               
                  Doth Reynold iust with thee? beares his vaine ranke
                  Of elder worthies such Nobilitie?
                  Then let him show (since thee he mates so cranke)
                  The Nations thralled to his soueraigntie,
                  Shew he his Realmes, his dead ones let him flanke,
                  With thine that liue in royall dignitie,
                  Ah how this Lord presumes of worthlesse rate!
                  Lord borne in Italy of thrall estate!
               
               
                  
                  Winne he or leese he, he is victor yet,
                  Eu'n since he was thy countermate at first,
                  What will the world say (and saying set
                  His prayse a flaunt) with Gernand match he durst,
                  That roome to thee some fame and credit get
                  Well might, which noble Dudons glory nurst:
                  But yet thy selfe wouldst it no lesse a grace,
                  Where he by crauing it, doth it abase.
               
               
                  And if they, who no longer breath or speake,
                  To our affaires their knowing thoughts apply,
                  Into what noble flame of wrath out breake
                  Doth good old Dudon (thinke you) boue in sky?
                  Whiles he aduiseth this, our copy freake,
                  And on his sawcy boldnesse bends his eye,
                  Who eu'n with him (scorning his worth and age)
                  Dares to compare fond ouer-weening Page.
               
               
                  Yea dares, and it attempts, and beares away
                  In liew of chasticement, honour and laud,
                  And some there are, who for him do and say,
                  (O common shame) and vnto him applaud:
                  But if Godfrey it see, and pleasde appay,
                  That of what is thy dew he thee defraud,
                  Bear't not, nor it to beare it is thy part,
                  But shew him what thou canst, and who thou art.
               
               
                  At such a speeches sound vpflames disdaine,
                  And as a tossed brand in him it growes,
                  Nor stuft and swollen heart it can containe,
                  But out through eyes, and at the tongue it goes,
                  What so blamefull, vndew, he deemes may staine
                  
                     Rinaldos honour, he doth all disclose.
                  Him proud and vaine he faines, and his manhood
                  He termes by name of rashnes, fond and wood.
               
               
                  
                  And what so of a great and haughty hart,
                  Of loftie, and of noble, in him shinde,
                  All this (shading the truth with euill art)
                  He blames, as it were vice, and fault doth finde:
                  And prateth so, as fame it gan impart
                  To counter-knight by vulgars blabbing winde:
                  Nor yet his wrath he slakte, or bridelled
                  The blindfold bent, which should to death him wed.
               
               
                  For that lewd feend, who mouing rulde his tong,
                  In steede of breath and all his words did frame,
                  Him made renew ech his outragious wrong,
                  Still beeting fewell to his bosomd flame,
                  Wide place there was in Camp, where seemly throng
                  Of choicest persons euer flocking came:
                  Where ioynd in wrastling and in turneyment,
                  More vigour, and more skill, their lims they bent.
               
               
                  Now there what time thickest encreast the preace,
                  He (as his dest'ny gaue) Reynold accusde,
                  And like keene shaft, against him gan addresse
                  His tongue, in venom of Auerne infusde,
                  And of his speech Reynold was my witnesse,
                  Nor longer could restraine his wrath vnusde,
                  But cryes thou lyest, and on him sets amaine,
                  And in right hand doth naked weapon straine.
               
               
                  His voice a thunder seemd, lightning his blade,
                  Which tidings bringeth of the falling flash,
                  He quakes, nor sees how fly, or how euade
                  He may deathes present vneschewed lash,
                  Yet since the whole Campe witnesse stood, he made
                  Semblant, as nought him could dismay or bash:
                  And his great foe attends, and weapon barde
                  (Close setled for defence) he lyes at warde.
               
               
                  
                  Seene fiery swords wel-neere a thousand are
                  That time at once to flame, for there around
                  In flockt, and shoou'd, and prest of folke vnware
                  A diuers troope, and through the aire rebound
                  And whirle of voices that vncertaine fare,
                  And of confused accents doth the sound:
                  As at sea shore is heard when wind and waue,
                  Murmures diuers in one confounded haue.
               
               
                  But not a whit for others voices flakes,
                  Th'offended warriour eyther brunt or ire▪
                  
                  Fences and cryes he scornes, or what so brakes
                  A stop, and to reuenge doth whole aspire:
                  And through the men, & through their armes he rakes,
                  And whirles about his sword of flashy fire:
                  So as to thousand guarders shame all lets
                  Away he thrusts, and on Gernando sets.
               
               
                  And with a hand, eu'n angry skild in fight,
                  A thousand blowes quartring on him he layes,
                  Now in the brest, now in the head, now right,
                  Now left side, busie he to wound assayes:
                  And his right hand so wimble was and wight,
                  That eyes and art came short of his sly wayes:
                  So as vnseene, and vnaduisde it lights,
                  And strikes, & foines, where least his feare affrights.
               
               
                  Nor euer ceast, till in his brest plunged,
                  Once and againe he had his fierce Morglay,
                  The wretch fals groueling on his wound, and shed
                  Foorth soule and spirits, by that dubble way:
                  The vanquisher his sword yet sprinckelled
                  With bloud, vpsheathes, nor there brooks longer stay:
                  But turnes elsewhere, and casteth off withall
                  His cruell mood, and his incensed gall.
               
               
                  
                  Good Godfrey to this tumult drawne the while,
                  Findes dismall sight of vnexpected case,
                  
                     Gernand out stretcht his haire, and mantle vile,
                  And moyst with bloud, and full of death his face:
                  He heares the sighes and plaints, and diuers stile
                  Of moanes, for warriour slaughtred in the place:
                  Stonisht he queres, here where tis most forbid,
                  Who ist that so much durst, and so much did?
               
               
                  
                     Arnalt one deerest to the Prince deceast,
                  The case tels, and it telling gan augment,
                  How Reynold slew him, and how thereto prest
                  He was, by slight cause of a braine-sicke bent:
                  And how the sword which guirded was to quest
                  Of Christi gainst Christen Champions now he hent,
                  And how he scornde his rule, and fore-restraint,
                  And how herewith all did themselues acquaint.
               
               
                  And that death to his guilt by law is dew,
                  And ought (as was proclaimde) be punished,
                  Both for the fault selfe beares a heynous hew,
                  As for in such a place it happened,
                  For if his errour such pardon accrew,
                  More by his sample will be couraged,
                  And that the wronged will to vengeance band
                  Themselues, which now th'attend at Iudges hand.
               
               
                  Which discord will beget, and bring forth blowes,
                  Twixt such as part with tone and tother take,
                  The dead mans merits vp he rips and showes,
                  What so may pitie or disdaine awake,
                  But Tancred it denies, and doth oppose
                  Himselfe, and skusing forth accused spake:
                  
                     Godfrey listneth, and with a face seueare,
                  Small cause affords of hope, but more of feare.
               
               
                  
                  
                     Tancred then addes, my wise Lord, please it you,
                  What and who Reynold is, in mind to call,
                  What honour in his owne regard is dew,
                  Both for his stocke renowmed, and royall,
                  And for his Vnckle Guelfe, nor ought ensew,
                  From rulers doome, on ech a paine equall:
                  In diuers callings, one offence appeeres
                  Diuers, and eu'nesse sole is iust with pheeres.
               
               
                  The lower shall (answerd the Captaine) learne,
                  By sample of the higher to obay,
                  
                     Tancred, you counsell ill, and ill discerne
                  To thinke, Ile beare with greats vnruly sway,
                  What were my rule, if sole with vulgar sterne,
                  On none but base, and vile commaund I may?
                  A powerlesse Scepter, a charge full of shame,
                  If such law gaue it, I renounce the same.
               
               
                  But franke and awfull it was giuen mee,
                  Nor this authoritie shall any bate,
                  And well I know, where, and when ought to bee
                  Now price and paines, imposde of diuers rate,
                  Now keeping tenour of equalitee,
                  Not lowest seuer'd from the highest state:
                  So spake he, t'other answere none affords,
                  As vanquisht by the reu'rence of his words.
               
               
                  
                     Raymond a follower of the seuere,
                  And sterne antiquitie, his speech commends,
                  With these arts (sayes he) who so well doth beare
                  His rule, the subiects to his reu'rence bends:
                  For discipline is neuer soundest, where
                  The guilty pardon more then paine attends:
                  Downe fals ech Realme, ech mercy ruineth,
                  Which on the base of feare not fasteneth.
               
               
                  
                  So spake he, and Tancred did well aduise
                  These words, nor there time longer spent,
                  But to Rinaldo-ward foorthwith him hies
                  On steed, who seemed winged as he went:
                  
                     Reynold, when from fierce foe he had thus wise
                  Reft, pride and soule returned to his tent:
                  There Tancred found him, and makes full report,
                  What sayd and answerd was, in eu'ry sort.
               
               
                  Then he adioynes, albe no outward show,
                  As faithfull witnes of the hart I prize,
                  For in too inward part, and too hollow
                  The thought of mortall wights conceiled lies:
                  Yet dare I vouch by that on sight I know,
                  In the Chieftaine (nor it he whole denies)
                  That to the common law for guilt ordaind,
                  He'll haue you thrald, and in his power restrainde.
               
               
                  
                     Rinaldo somewhat smilde, and with a face,
                  In which twixt laughter, flashed a disdaine,
                  Let him (quoth he) in bonds goe plead his cace,
                  Thats bond, and fit for bondage hath a graine,
                  I free was borne, and liue, and free in place
                  Will die, ere base cord hand or foot astraine:
                  Vsde to my sword, and vsed Palmes to beare,
                  Is this right hand, and scornes vile gyues to weare.
               
               
                  But if for my deserts such recompence
                  
                     Godfrey will yeeld, and me in prison cast,
                  As I of vulgar were, and beare pretence
                  In common fetters to vptie me fast,
                  Then let him come or send, I will not hence:
                  Twixt vs shall chance, and armes be Iudges plast,
                  Ile of a dismall Tragedy the shoe
                  Present for pastime to our forraine foe.
               
               
                  
                  This said, he cals for armes, and head and brest,
                  In steele of finest choice most seemely shrines,
                  And with his waighty shield his arme he prest,
                  And fatall blade vnto his side combines,
                  And with a semblant braue and nobellest,
                  (As lightning wonts) he in his armour shines,
                  
                     Mars he resembles thee, when from fift heau'n
                  Thou comst down guirt with ire & ghastly leau'n.
               
               
                  
                     Tancred this while his fierce sprites doth procure,
                  And hart vpswolne with pride to mollifie:
                  Inuict young man (he sayes) to your valure,
                  I know, ech hard and tough attempt will plie
                  With ease, I know, that euer most secure
                  Midst armes and terrour stands your vertue hie:
                  But God forbid you make it such appeere,
                  So cruelly to our annoyance heere.
               
               
                  Tell me, what meane you do? will you go staine
                  Your yet cleane hands in bloud of ciuill warre?
                  And with Christens vnworthy wounds, againe
                  Peirce Christ, of whom we part and members are?
                  And shall respects of fading honour vaine?
                  (Which like sea waues soone flow, and ebbe as farre)
                  Worke more with you, then either faith or zeale?
                  Which glory bring of heauens endlesse weale?
               
               
                  Ah no (for God) conquer your selfe, and kill
                  This fiercenesse of your ouer haughty minde,
                  Giue place, it is no feare but holy will:
                  For Palme is to your giuing place assignde,
                  And in my yeeres of young vnripened skill,
                  If any may sutewoorth example finde,
                  I also was prouokt, yet neuer grew
                  Gainst faithfull fierce, but did my selfe subdew.
               
               
                  
                  For when Cilicia Realme, by mine effort
                  I wanne, and Christen Ensignes there addrest,
                  
                     Baldwyn comes on, and in vnworthy sort
                  It straightwayes seizd, and made a base conquest:
                  Whilst bearing of a friend ech way the port,
                  At his so greedy bent I neuer ghest,
                  Yet seeke thereof recouery by fight
                  I nould, though it perhaps performe I might.
               
               
                  And if you also prisonment refuse,
                  And fetters fly, as waight vnmoble fro,
                  And th'uses rather and th'opinions chuse,
                  On which men name of honours lawes bestow,
                  Let me alone, Ile you to Captaine skuse,
                  Do you to Boemund at Antioch goe,
                  That he you out in this first brunt may beare,
                  So gainst his sentence safe bide shal you theare.
               
               
                  Soone will it hap, if the Egyptian state,
                  Or other Painim troope against vs warre,
                  That clearer much your valour of high rate
                  Will shine, while that from hence it bideth farre,
                  And Campe will seeme (you wanting) out of date,
                  As corps whose arme and hand off chopped are,
                  Here Guelfe comes in, & doth this speech approue,
                  And wils that thence he speedily remoue.
               
               
                  To their aduises the disdainefull hart,
                  Of this audacious youth, beturning plies,
                  So as foorthwith from thence aside to start,
                  To such well-willers he no more denies,
                  Friends store (the while) flocke in from euery part,
                  And with him craue to goe in earnest wise,
                  He thankes them all, and for attendants chose
                  Two only Squires, and so to horse he goes.
               
               
                  
                  He parts, and of high glory a large bent
                  Pertakes, the spurre and rod of noble sprite:
                  His hart all vowd t'exploits magnificent,
                  Doth none but workes of rarest price endite,
                  Midst foes (as champion of the faith) he ment,
                  That Palme or Cypresse should his paines acquite:
                  He'll Egypt scoure, and pierce eu'n to the hole,
                  Where from his vncouth spring Nile doth outrole.
               
               
                  But Guelfe, when as the fierce young man thus wise,
                  Prest to depart, had bid them all adew:
                  There brookes no longer stay, but speedy hies,
                  Where guesse might Godfrey soonest yeeld to vew,
                  Who spying him, with voyce of higher size,
                  Said (Guelfe) this very time I wisht for you,
                  And sent but late to sundry wheres about,
                  Some of our Herhaults to enquire you out.
               
               
                  Then makes all els withdraw, and turning low,
                  Begins with him a graue speech to contriue,
                  Your Nephew verily (my friend Guelfo)
                  
                  To headlong runnes, where heats his courage driue,
                  And of his deede (I deeme) can hardly show
                  Some cause, that may to iust pretence arriue:
                  Deere would I hold that so it might befall,
                  But Godfrey stands an equall Duke withall.
               
               
                  And will, of what so lawfull is and right,
                  In ech case guardeine and defender bee,
                  Preseruing still from tyrant passions might,
                  His vnsubdewed hart in iudging free,
                  Now if that Reynold by constraint him dight,
                  To wrong th'edict, and sacred maiestee
                  Of discipline, as some alleage, behooues
                  He can, and take our doome, & make his prooues.
               
               
                  
                  Come he to his restraint in liberty,
                  What may be to his merits I consent,
                  But if he this disdaine, and stand stiffely,
                  (Well wot I his vntamed hardiment)
                  Do you to bring him your best care apply,
                  Least he force one of slow and gentle bent,
                  Seuere auenger be of his Empire,
                  And of the lawes, as reason doth require.
               
               
                  So did he speake, and Guelfe replyed thus,
                  No minde that shames what iustly may defame,
                  Can speeches heare of scorne iniurious,
                  And not repulse them backe from whence they came,
                  If wrongers slaughter then the wrong discusse,
                  Who ist that bounds can to iust furie frame?
                  Who can his blowes, and what to fault is dew,
                  In heat of bickring wey, and measure trew?
               
               
                  But that the youth should come in, and obay
                  Your sou'raigne iudgement, as you now require,
                  Me greeues, it cannot be, for farre away
                  He straight his steps did from the hoast retire,
                  Yet this right hand a gage of proofe I lay,
                  Gainst him that blew this false accusals fire,
                  Or who so els beares like malicious hed,
                  That shame vniust, he iustly punished.
               
               
                  I say, with reason he Gernando hault,
                  Downe forst the hornes of his stout pride to bend,
                  Your broken charge (if any) was his fault,
                  This sole I sorrow, nor will it commend:
                  He peac'd, let him (quoth Godfrey) fetch his sault,
                  And brawles beare other where, nor I intend,
                  That you more seede here of new quarrels sow,
                  Ah no (for-God) let old strifes also go.
               
               
                  
                  This while her proffred succour to procure,
                  The lewd deceitfull wench no time forslowes,
                  All day she spends in prayres, and puts in vre,
                  What helpe from art, or wit, or bewtie growes,
                  But when the night spreading her robe obscure,
                  The day light in the West gan vp to close,
                  Twixt her two Knights, and matrons twaine aside,
                  Where her pauilion pitched was, she hide.
               
               
                  But though for art of wiles the price she bare,
                  And kind her port were, and her manners quent,
                  And she so faire as neuer greater share
                  The heau'ns tofore on any woman spent,
                  So as in Campe most of the Champions rare,
                  She with a strong and holdfast pleasure hent,
                  Yet on the bayt of any her delite,
                  No tycing could good Godfrey winne to bite.
               
               
                  In vaine she sought to slocke, or with mortall
                  Sweetnings t'enroll him in Cupidos pay:
                  For as a gorged Hawke stoupes not at call.
                  Of Faulkners lure, vpon his traine to pray;
                  So he full of the world, frayle pleasures all
                  Scornes, and mounts to the sky by vncouth way:
                  And what so snares, vnfaithfull loue contriues,
                  Gainst his faire flight he of effect depriues.
               
               
                  Nor any let could make his steps retrace
                  From path, which God points holy thoughts t'ensew,
                  With him a thousand arts she tryes, and face
                  Of thousand formes him showes (as Prote new)
                  Well might her gestures sweet, and seemely grace
                  Wake loue, where cold sleepe did it most imbew:
                  But here (mercy the Lord) ech proffer vaine
                  Proued, ne bootes it to beginne againe.
               
               
                  
                  The faire Dame who to kindle did suppose
                  Ech chasest hart with onely blincke of eye:
                  O how she haultnes (now) and pride forgoes!
                  How this her spite with meruaile gan ally,
                  At last, where lesse doubt of gainestriuing shoes,
                  She new resolues her forces to apply,
                  Like tyred Captaine, who leaues siedge of fort
                  Impregnable, and makes elsewhere resort.
               
               
                  But gainst this wenches armes his hart no lesse
                  Inuict to be, Tancredi will approue,
                  For other longings his whole brest possesse,
                  Nor any new heat may the old remoue,
                  For as one venom vseth to represse
                  The tothers force, so tone doth tother loue,
                  These sole, not much or little could she gaine,
                  Ech els, her fairest fire enflamde amaine.
               
               
                  She though it greeu'd, that not a thorow sway,
                  Fortune allowd her purpose and her art,
                  Yet of so many Champions a pray
                  So noble, somedeale comforteth her hart:
                  And ere some one her fraudes discouer may,
                  Thinkes to conduct them to a safer part:
                  Where them she will in other chaines enfold
                  Then those, wher with thē thral she now doth hold
               
               
                  So when the tearme was present come, that dayd
                  The Captaine had, some succour her to yeeld,
                  Before him reu'rent she appeares, and sayd,
                  Time out doth date (Sir) of your promise weeld,
                  And if fell Tirant learne, that vnder ayd.
                  Of these your armes, I seeke my selfe to sheeld,
                  He will prepare his forces for defence,
                  Nor we shall easly compasse our pretence.
               
               
                  
                  Then ere the newes hereof, some certaine spy
                  Him beare, or flying flames vncertaine winde:
                  Let of your valiantst men by your pitty,
                  Some few with me to march be straight assignde:
                  For if the heau'ns view not with froward eye
                  Mens workes, nor innocence cast out of minde,
                  I shall my Realme regaine, and Towne and field,
                  In peace and warre shall you still tribute yeeld.
               
               
                  So said she, and the Captaine to her woordes
                  Graunteth what could not be denyde,
                  Though whiles to parture she no stay affoordes,
                  He sees himselfe to this election tyde,
                  But of the ten, ech one the number boordes,
                  And with strange instance to be chosen plyde:
                  And emulation, which in them awakes,
                  More in the suit importunate them makes,
               
               
                  She, that in them wide open sees the hart,
                  It hauing seene, takes a new argument,
                  And iealousies grim feare lasheth a part
                  On their haunches, as scourge of dire torment:
                  Well weeting that at last without such art,
                  Loue waxeth old and slow, and slaketh bent,
                  Much like a Steede who neuer gallops swift,
                  Vnlesse some after, some tofore him shift.
               
               
                  And in such wise she can her words allot,
                  And her entycing looke and louely smile,
                  That none there is, who t'other enuies not,
                  Nor so they feare, but that they hope the while,
                  Thus the fond, rout of ech inamourd sot,
                  Spurd on by show of hew all shapte to guile,
                  Vnbridled runs, nor shame restraines them ought,
                  And Captaine backe to rayne them vainly sought.
               
               
                  
                  He that to please ech partie doth aspire,
                  With equall bent, and leanes to neither side,
                  Though somewhat now with shame, & now with ire,
                  At these his Knights such peeuishnes he fride:
                  Yet since so obstinate grew their desire,
                  On a new fetch (t'accord them) he relide,
                  Write you your names, and in a vessell place
                  Me them, (quoth he) and lots shall try the cace.
               
               
                  Foorthwith then ech ones name is papered,
                  And in small pitcher cast, and all too shooke,
                  And drawne by hap, and first that issued,
                  
                     Artemedoro was, Earle of Pembrooke,
                  
                  Next Gherards name fild eares that listened,
                  And passage after these Wincelay tooke,
                  
                     Wincelay who so graue and sage tofore,
                  Now old is louer, and a princox hore.
               
               
                  O how these three that first were chosen, haue
                  Their countnance mery, and their eyes with child
                  Of ioy, which doth from brinefull hart out-waue,
                  Fortune (loues friend) speede eu'ry plot they build,
                  The rest whose names the pitcher held in graue,
                  Showd doubt, and iealousie were not exilde,
                  And at his mouth they hang, whose hād forth drew
                  The opned briefes, and red the residew.
               
               
                  
                     Guasco the fourth came forth, to whom succeedes
                  Ridolfo, and to Ridolfe, Olderick,
                  Then of Ronciglio he Gulielmo reedes,
                  
                     And Eurard the Bauier, and Francke Henrick,
                  
                     Rambaldo was the last, who changing creedes,
                  Made choice gainst Iesus damned foe to kick,
                  Eu'n so much loue could do, tennes number he
                  There closed vp, the rest excluded be.
               
               
                  
                  Which rest with wrath, enuie and iealousy
                  Enflamde, fortune vniust, and brothell call,
                  And blame thee loue that didst her not deny,
                  Within thy Realme her iudgement throne to stall:
                  But for engraffed in mankind we try,
                  That most forbidden, most we couet all:
                  In spite of fortune many them dispose,
                  To follow her when darke the welkin growes.
               
               
                  They will her follow still, in Sunne and shade,
                  And for her (fighting) hazard life and soule,
                  She spares some becks, & with chopt words that wade
                  Halfe-way, and with sweet sighes them on doth toule:
                  And that them left, her parture must be made,
                  With tone and tother eft she gan condoule:
                  Buskled in armes this while, them readie make
                  The ten Knights, and of Godfrey congey take.
               
               
                  This wise man ech one monisheth a part,
                  How Painims faith vncertaine is and light,
                  And ill assured pledge, and by what art
                  Men snares may shunne, and haps of heauy plight:
                  But with the wind his words away do start,
                  Nor loue brookes counsell of aduised wight,
                  At last he giues them licence, and the Dame
                  Stayes not her parting till the morrow came.
               
               
                  The conqueresse departs, and her before,
                  Those riuals she in Triumph marshalled,
                  As prisoners, and to harmes hugy store,
                  The rest of all her loues abandoned,
                  But vnder wings, when night out issew'd, bore
                  Silence, and sweums roaming idlehed,
                  Then secretly (as loue them counsell lent)
                  Tracing Armidas steps, full many went.
               
               
                  
                  
                     Eustace her followes first, who scarce abide
                  Could, till nights shadow day-light had yshrinde,
                  But hasty hyes where him best pleasd to guide,
                  Through blind darkenes, a Chieftaine all as blind:
                  That faire coole night his wandring way he plide,
                  But when the ioyous light appearing shinde,
                  
                     Armide appeared likewise with her troope,
                  Where a burgage had beene their lodging coope.
               
               
                  To her-ward fast he fares, and by his crest
                  
                     Rambaldo soone him knowes, and asking cryde,
                  Why there he came, and what he had in quest:
                  I come to follow (answerd he) Armide,
                  
                  Nor (if vnscornd) lesse shall mine aide be prest,
                  Nor lesse my faith be in her seruice tryde:
                  T'other replies, so great honour to proue,
                  Who hath thee chosne? and he reioyned, loue.
               
               
                  Loue chused me, thee Fortune, now decree
                  Who choicest right, from iustest chuser hath
                  Quoth Rambalt then, nothing auayleth thee,
                  This title false, these arts are way to skath,
                  Nor mongst her lawfull Champions, mayst thou bee
                  Allow'd to trace this royall Virgins path,
                  Seruant of lawlesse rate, and who (replies
                  The youth now waxeth hoat) it me denies?
               
               
                  I it forfend, then answer'd he againe,
                  And with that word against him marching went,
                  And holding will of equalling disdaine,
                  T'other him moues with equall hardiment,
                  But here her hand out stretcht a twixt them twaine,
                  Steps their soules Tyrant midst their furious bent,
                  And sayes to th'one, ah this your grudging cease,
                  That you compagnion I a champion crease.
               
               
                  
                  If you my safety loue, why me depriue,
                  In such neede, do you, of this new supply?
                  Then sayes to him, you fit and thankt arriue,
                  On whose defence my fame, my life, rely,
                  No reason would that I should packing driue
                  So welcome and so noble company,
                  Thus talking, whiles on way they vantage win,
                  Some new come Champion hourely droppeth in.
               
               
                  Some come from thēce, & some frō hence, ne knowes
                  Tone of the tother, but ech lookes a skance,
                  She glad them entertaines, and all she showes,
                  For such their comming, mirth and iouyssance,
                  But when the dimmy ayre now cleerer growes,
                  
                     Godfrey gate of their parture cognisance,
                  And his mind (which their damage did foregeeue)
                  At some their future ill, seem'd to aggreeue.
               
               
                  Whilst more hereon he casts, there doth appeere
                  A messenger, dusty, panting, with grace
                  All sad, and port, which newes of heauy cheere
                  Brings, and beares sorrow written in his face,
                  My Lord (quoth he) there will at sea appeere
                  Th'Egyptian great fleete within little space:
                  
                     William (to whom the Gene ships subiect bee)
                  This fresh aduiso sendeth you by mee.
               
               
                  He addes, whiles a conuoy was conducted
                  Of vittailes to the Campe-ward from the fleet:
                  Their horse and Camels heauy burdened,
                  Amids the way a grieuous cumber meet:
                  So as guarders all slau'd, or slaughtered
                  In fight, none could his fellowes safety greet,
                  And that th'Arabian theeues, at front and backe,
                  Them in a vale assayling, wrought this wracke.
               
               
                  
                  And how the mad rage and licentiousnesse
                  Of those Barbarian rogues, so greatly grow,
                  That like a hugy floud past all redresse,
                  Around they spred, and ech place ouer-flow:
                  Whence needs (to th'end some awe may thē represse▪
                  
                  A band of men gainst them be sent to go:
                  Who from the sands of Palestina sea,
                  Scowring, may to the Campe assure the way.
               
               
                  From one to th'other language straight the fame
                  Hereof passeth, and soone extendeth wide,
                  And common Souldier to himselfe doth frame
                  Great feare of famine, which will soone betide,
                  The Generall discreete, who findes now lame
                  The haughtie courage wont in them to bide,
                  Doth by this cheerefull looke and words, procure
                  Their drooping to reuiue and reassure.
               
               
                  Oh you that with me past haue here and there
                  A thousand perils, and a thousand woes,
                  Champions of God, whom his faith to repaire
                  Euen from your birth, deere Christians he chose,
                  You that Greeke guiles, and Persian armes ech where
                  Vanquisht, and hils, and seas, and winter throwes,
                  And thirst, and pinching famines hard distresse,
                  Shall daunting feare your spirits now possesse?
               
               
                  Can then the Lord, who you doth stirre and guide,
                  Well knowen earst in oft more grieuous case,
                  Not now assure you? as if turn'd aside
                  His hand of mercy were, or holy face?
                  One day t'will ioy to thinke what harmes betide
                  Vs did, and vowes to pay to th'eauenly grace,
                  Now hold couragious on, and keepe I pray,
                  Your selues to fortune of a better day.
               
               
                  
                  With these words he their minds, tofore dismaide
                  Comforts, and with a cleere and cheerefull looke,
                  But yet amid his brest, in heapes vplaide
                  A thousand sad sharpe cares their lodging tooke,
                  How he so many men may feed and aide,
                  Twixt want & dearth his thoughtfull mind it shooke▪
                  
                  How he may fleete at Sea withstand, and how
                  Th'Arabian robbers he may breake or bow.
               
               FINIS.
            
            
               
               CANTO QVINTO
               
                  
                     
                        MENTRE in tal guisa i Caualieri
alletta
                  Ne l'amor suo l'insidiosa Armida:
                  Nè solo i diece à lei promessi aspetta,
                  Ma di furto menarne altri
confida;
                  Volge tra se Goffredo à cui commetta
                  La dubbia impresa, ou'ella esser dee guida:
                  Che de gli Auuenturier la copia, e'l merto,
                  E'l desir di ciascuno il fanno incerto.
               
               
                  Ma con prouido auiso al fin dispone,
                  Ch'essi vn di loro scelgano à sua voglia,
                  Che succeda al magnanimo Dudone,
                  E quella elettion soura se toglia.
                  Così non auuerrà, ch'ei dia cagione
                  Ad alcun d'essi, che di lui si doglià:
                  E insieme mostrerà d'hauer nel pregio,
                  In cui deue à ragion, lo stuolo egregio.
               
               
                  Á se dunque gli chiama, e lor fauella.
                  Stata è da voi la mia sentenza vdita:
                  Ch'era, non di negare à la Donzella,
                  Ma di darle in stagion matura aita.
                  Di nouo hor la propongo, e ben puote ella
                  Esser dal parer vostro anco seguita:
                  Che nel Mondo mutabile, e leggiero,
                  Costanza è spesso il variar pensiero.
               
               
                  
                  Ma, se stimate ancor, che mal conuegna
                  Al vostro grado ilrifiutar periglio:
                  E se pur generoso ardire sdegna
                  Quel, che troppo gli par
                        •
                     cauto consiglio;
                  Non fia ch'inuolontarij io vi ritegna,
                  Nè quel, che già vi diedi, hor mi ripiglio;
                  Ma sia con esso uoi, com'esser deue,
                  Il fren del nostro Imperio lento, e leue.
               
               
                  Dunque lo starne, e'l girne i son contento,
                  Che dal vostro piacer libero penda:
                  Ben vuò, che pria facciate al Duce spento
                  Successor nouo, e di uoi cura ei prenda:
                  E tra voi scelga i diece à suo talento,
                  Non già di diece il numero trascenda;
                  Ch'in questo il sommo Imperio à meriseruo.
                  Non fia l'arbitrio suo per altro seruo.
               
               
                  Così disse Goffredo, e'l suo Germano,
                  Confentendo ciascun, risposta diede.
                  Sì come à te conuiensi, ò Capitano,
                  Questa lenta virtù, che lunge vede;
                  Così il vigor del core, e de la mano,
                  Quasi debito à noi, da noi si chiede:
                  E saria la matura tarditate.
                  Che'n altri è prouidenza, in noi uiltate.
               
               
                  E poi che'l rischio è di sì lieue danno
                  Posto in lance co'l prò, che'l contrapesa,
                  Te permettente, i dieci eletti andranno
                  Con la Donzella à l'honorata impresa.
                  Così conclude, e con sì adorno inganno
                  Cerca di ricoprir la mente accesa
                  Sotto altro zelo: e gli altri anco d'honore
                  Fingon desio quel ch'è desio d'amore.
               
               
                  
                  Ma il più giouin Buglione, il qual rimira
                  Con geloso occhio il figlio di Sofia:
                  La cui uirtute inuidiando ammira,
                  Che'n sì bel corpo più cara venia;
                  No'l vorrebbe compagno; e al cor gli inspira
                  Cauti pensier l'astuta gelosia,
                  Onde, tratto il riuale à se in disparte,
                  Ragiona à lui con lusingheuol'arte.
               
               
                  Ó di gran Genitor maggior figliuolo,
                  Che'l sommo pregio in arme hai giouenetto;
                  Hor chi sarà del valoroso stuolo,
                  Di cui parte noi siamo, in Duce eletto?
                  Io, ch'à Dudon famoso à pena, e solo
                  Per l'honor de l'età, viuea soggetto:
                  Io, fratel di Goffredo, à chi più deggio
                  Cedere homai? se tu non sei, no'l veggio.
               
               
                  Te, la cui nobiltà tutt'altre agguaglia,
                  Gloria, e merito d'opre à me prepone:
                  Nè sdegnerebbe in pregio di battaglia
                  Minor chiamarsi aneo il maggior Buglione.
                  Te dunque in Duce bramo, oue non caglia
                  Á te di questa Sira esser campione.
                  Nè già cred'io, che quell'honor tu curi,
                  Che da' fatti verrà notturni, e scuri.
               
               
                  Nè mancherà quì loco, oue s'impieghi
                  Con più lucida fama il tuo ualore.
                  Hor io procurerò, se tu no'l neghi,
                  Ch'à te concedan gli altri il sommo honore.
                  Ma perche non sò ben, doue si pieghi
                  L'irresoluto mio dubbioso core,
                  Impetro hor' io date, ch'à uoglia mia
                  Ó seg
                        •
                     a p
                        •
                     scia Armida, ò teco stia.
               
               
                  
                  Quì tacque Eustatio, e questi estremi accenti
                  Non proferì senza arrossarsi in viso:
                  E i mal celati suoi pensieri ardenti
                  L'altro ben uide, e mosse ad un sorriso.
                  Ma perch'a lui colpi d'amor più lenti
                  Non hanno il pe
                        •
                     to oltra la scorza inciso;
                  Nè molto impatiente è di riuale,
                  Nè la Donzella di seguir gli cale.
               
               
                  Ben altamente hà nel pensier tenace
                  L'acerba morte di Dudon scolpita:
                  E si reca à disnor, ch'Argante audace
                  Gli soprastia lunga stagion'in vita:
                  E parte di sentire anco gli piace
                  Quel parlar, ch'al deuuto honor l'inuita:
                  E'l giouenetto cor s'appaga, e gode
                  Del dolce suon de la verace lode.
               
               
                  Onde così rispose: i gradi primi
                  Più meritar, che conseguir desio:
                  Ne pur, che me la mia uirtù sublimi,
                  Di scettri altezza inuidiar degg'io.
                  Ma, s'àl'honor mi chiami, e che lo stimi
                  Debito à me, non ci verrò restio:
                  E caro esser mi dee, che mi sia mostro,
                  Sì bel segno da uoi del ualor nostro.
               
               
                  Dunque io no'l chiedo, e no'lrifiuto: e quando
                  Duce io pur sia, sarai tu de gli eletti.
                  All'hora il lascia Eustatio, e uà piegando
                  De'suoi compagni al suo voler gli affetti.
                  Ma chiede à proua il Principe Gernando
                  Quel grado, e ben ch'Armida in lui saetti,
                  Men può nelcor superbo amor di donna,
                  Ch'auidità d'honor, che se n'indonna.
               
               
                  
                  Sceso Gernando è da'gran Re Noruegi,
                  Che di molte prouincie hebber l'Impero;
                  E le tante corone, e scettri regi
                  E del Padre e de gli Aui il fanno altero▪
                  
                  Altero è l'altro de'suoi proprij pregi
                  Più, che de l'opre, che i passati fero;
                  Ancor che gli Aui suoi cento, e più lustri
                  Stati sian chiariin pace, e'n guerra illustri.
               
               
                  Ma il Barbaro Signor, che sol misura,
                  Quanto l'oro, o'ldomino oltre si stenda:
                  E per se stima ogni virtute oscura,
                  Cui titolo regal chiara non renda;
                  Non può soffrir, che'n ciò, ch'egli procura
                  Seco di merto il Caualier contenda:
                  E se ne cruccia sì, ch'oltra ogni segno
                  Di ragione il trasporta ira, e disdegno:
               
               
                  Tal che'l maligno Spirito d'Auerno,
                  Che'n lui strada sì larga aprir si vede,
                  Tacito in sen gli serpe, & algouerno
                  De'suoi pensieri lusingando siede:
                  E quì più sempre l'ira, e l'odio interno
                  Inacerbisce, e'l cor stimola, e fiede:
                  E fà, che'n mezo à l'alma ogn'hor risuoni
                  Vna voce, ch'à lui così ragioni.
               
               
                  Teco giostra Rinaldo: hor tanto vale
                  Quel suo numero van d'antichi Heroi?
                  Narri costui, ch'à te vuol farsi eguale,
                  Le genti serue, ei tributarij suoi:
                  Mostri gli scettri, e in dignità regale
                  Paragoni i suoi morti à i uiui tuoi.
                  Ah, quanto osa vn Signor d'indegno stato:
                  Signor, che ne la seruà Italia è nato.
               
               
                  
                  Vinca egli, ò perda homai, fù vincitore
                  Sin da quel dì, ch'emulo tuo diuenne:
                  Che dirà il mondo, (e ciò fia sommo honore)
                  Questi già con Gernando in gara venne.
                  Poteua à te recar gloria, e splendore
                  Il nobil grado, che Dudon pria tenne;
                  Ma già non meno esso da te n'attese:
                  Costuiscemò suo pregio all'hor, che'l chiese.
               
               
                  E, se poi ch'altri più non parla, ò spira,
                  De'nostri affari alcuna cosa sente;
                  Come credi, che'n Ciel nobil'ira
                  Il buon vecchio Dudon si mostri ardente?
                  Mentre in questo superbo i lumi gira:
                  Et al suo temerario ardir pon mente:
                  Che seco ancor, l'e tà sprezzando, e'l merto,
                  Fanciullo osa agguagliarsi, & inesperto.
               
               
                  E l'osa pure, e'l tenta, e ne riporta
                  In vece di castigo honore, e laude:
                  Eu'è chi ne'l consiglia, & nel'essorta,
                  (Ó vergogna comune) e chi gli applaude.
                  Mase Goffredo il vede, e gli comporta,
                  Che di ciò, ch'à te dessi, egli ti fraude;
                  No'
                        •
                      soffrir tu: nè già soffrir lo dei;
                  Ma ciò, che puoi dimostra, e ciò che sei.
               
               
                  Alsuon di queste uoci arde lo sdegno,
                  E cresce in lui, quasi commossa face:
                  Nè capendo nel cor gonfiato, e pregno
                  Per gli occhi n'esce, e per la lingua audace.
                  Ciò, che di riprensibile, e d'indegno
                  Crede in Rinaldo, à suo disnor non tace,
                  Superbo, euano il finge, e'l suo ualore
                  Chiama temerità pazza, e furore.
               
               
                  
                  E quanto di magnanimo, e d'altero,
                  E d'eccelso, d'illustre in lui risplende,
                  Tutto (adombrando con mal arti il uero)
                  Pur come uitio sia biasma, e riprende:
                  E ne ragiona sì, che'l Caualliero
                  Emulo suo publico il suon n'intende.
                  Non però sfoga l'ira, ò si raffrena
                  Quel cieco impeto in lui, ch'à morte il mena.
               
               
                  Che'l reo Demon, che la sua lingua moue
                  Di spirto in uece, e forma ogni suo detto,
                  Fà, che gli ingiusti oltraggi ogn'hor rinoue,
                  Esca aggiungendo à l'infiammato petto.
                  Loco è nel Campio assai capace, doue
                  Ś aduna sempre un bel drappello eletto:
                  E quiui insieme in torneamenti, e in lotte
                  Rendon le membra uigorose, e dotte.
               
               
                  Hor quiui all'hor, che u'è turba più folta,
                  Pur, com'è suo destin, Rinaldo accusa:
                  E quasi acuto strale in lui riuolta
                  La lingua del uenen d'Auerno infusa:
                  E uicino è Rinaldo, e i detti ascolta:
                  Nè puote l'ira homai tener più chiusa;
                  Ma grida; menti▪ e adosso à lui si spinge,
                  E nudo ne la destra il ferro stringe.
               
               
                  Parue un tuono la uoce, e'l ferro un lampo,
                  Che di folgor cadente annuntio apporte,
                  Tremò colui, nè uide fuga, ò scampo
                  Da la presente irreparabil Morte.
                  Pur, tutto ossendo testimonio il Campo,
                  Fà sembianti d'intrepido, e di forte;
                  E'l gran Nimico attende, e'l ferro tratto
                  Fermo si reca di difesa in atto.
               
               
                  
                  Quasi in quel punto mille spade ardenti
                  Furon vedute fiammeggiar insieme:
                  Che uaria turba di mal caute genti
                  D'ogn'intorni v'accorne, e s'vrta, e preme.
                  D'incerte voci, e dì confusi accenti
                  Vn suon per l' aria si raggira, e freme,
                  Qual s'ode in riua al mare, oue confonda
                  Il vento i suoi co'mormorij de l'onda.
               
               
                  Ma per le voci altrui già non s'allenta
                  Ne l'offeso Guerrier l'impeto, e l'ira
                  Sprezza i gridi, e i ripari, e ciò, che tenta
                  Chiudergli il varco, & à vendetta aspira:
                  E fra gli huomini, e l'arme oltre s'auuenta,
                  E la fulminea sp
                        •
                     da in cerchio gira:
                  Sì che le vie si sgombra, e solo and onta
                  Di mille Difensor Gernando affronta.
               
               
                  E con la man ne l'ira anco maestra
                  Mille colpi uer lui drizza, e comparte.
                  Hor al petto, hor al capo, hor'à la destra
                  Tenta ferirlo, hora à la manca parte;
                  E impetuosa, e rapida la destra
                  E'in guisa tal, che gli occhi inganna, e l'arte:
                  Tal ch'improuisa, e inaspettata giunge,
                  Oue manco si teme, e fere, e punge.
               
               
                  Nè cessò mai, sin che nel seno immersa
                  Gli hebbe vna volta, e due la fera spada.
                  Cade il meschin sùla ferita, e uersa
                  Gli spiriti, e l'alma fuor per doppia strada.
                  L'arma ripone ancor di sangue aspersa
                  Il uincitor, nè soura lui più bada;
                  Ma si riuolge altroue, e insieme spoglia
                  L'animo crudo, e l'adirata voglia.
               
               
                  
                  Tratto al tumulto il pio Goffredo intanto
                  Vede fero spettacolo improuiso:
                  Steso Gernando il crin di sangue, e'l mante
                  Sordido, e molle, e pien di morte il viso.
                  Ode i sospiri, e le querele, e'l pianto,
                  Che molti fan soura il Guerriero ucciso,
                  Stupido chiede. Hor quì, doue men lece,
                  Chi fù, ch'ardì contanto, e tanto fece?
               
               
                  Arnaldo vnde'più cari al Prence estinto
                  Narra, e'l caso in narrando aggraua molto:
                  Che Rinaldo l'uccise, e che fù spinto
                  Da leggiera cagion d'impeto stolto.
                  E che quel ferro, che per CHRISTO è cinto,
                  Ne'campioni di CHRISTO hauea riuolto:
                  E sprezzato il suo impero, e quel diuieto,
                  Che fè pur dianzi, e che non è secreto.
               
               
                  E che per legge è reo di morte, e deue,
                  Come l'editto impone, esser punito:
                  Sì perche'l fallo in se medesmo è greue,
                  Sì perche'n loco tale egli è seguito:
                  Che se de l'error suo perdon riceue
                  Fia ciascun'altro per l'essempio ardito:
                  E che gli offesi poi quella vendetta
                  Vorranno far ch'a i Giudici s'aspetta.
               
               
                  Onde per tal cagion discordie, e risse
                  Germoglier an fra quella parte, e questa.
                  Rammentò i merti del'estinto, e disse
                  Tutto ciò, ch'ò pietate, ò sdegno desta.
                  Ma s'oppose Tancredi, e contradisse,
                  E la causa del Reo dipinse honesta.
                  Goffredo ascolta, e in rigida sembianza
                  Porge più di timor, che disperanza.
               
               
                  
                  Soggiunse all'hor Tancredi. hor ti souuegna
                  Soggio Signor, chi sia Rinaldo, e quale:
                  Qual per se stesso honor gli si conuegna,
                  E per la stirpe sua chiara, e regale,
                  E per Guelfo suo Zio. non dee chi regna
                  Nel castigo con tutti esser' eguale.
                  Vario è l'istesso error ne'gradi vari:
                  E sol l'egualità giusta è co' pari.
               
               
                  Risponde il Capitan. da i più sublimi
                  Ad vbidire imparino i più bassi.
                  Mal, Tancredi, consigli, e male stimi,
                  Se vuoi, che i grandi in sua licenza io lassi.
                  Qual fora Imperio il mio, s'à vils, & imi
                  Sol Duce de la plebe io comandassi?
                  Scettro impotente, e vergognoso Impero:
                  Se con tal legge è dato, io più no'l chero,
               
               
                  Ma libero fù dato, e venerando:
                  Nè vuò, ch'alcun d'autorità lo scemi.
                  Esò ben'io, come si deggia, e quando
                  Hora diuerse impor le pene, e i premi,
                  Horà, tenor d'egualità serbando,
                  Non se parar da gli infimi i supremi.
                  Così dicea, nè rispondea colui,
                  Vinto da riuerenza, ai detti sui.
               
               
                  Raimondo, imitator de la seuera
                  Rigida antichicà, lodaua i detti.
                  Con quest'arti (dicea) chi bene impera
                  Si rende venerabile à i soggetti:
                  Che già non è la disciplina intera,
                  Ou'huom perdono, e non castigo aspetti.
                  Cade ogni regno, e ruinosa è senza
                  La base del timor ogni clemenza.
               
               
                  
                  Tal ei parlaua: e le parole accolse
                  Tancredi, e piùfra lor non si ritenne;
                  Ma uer Rinaldo immantinente volse
                  Vn suo destrier, che parue hauer le penne.
                  Rinaldo, poi ch'al fier nemico tolse
                  L'or goglio, e l'alma, al padiglion se'n venne.
                  Quì Tancredi trouollo, e de le cose
                  Dette, e risposte à pien la somma espose.
               
               
                  Soggiunse poi, bench'io sembianza esterna
                  Del cor non stimi testimon verace:
                  Che'n parte troppo cupa, e troppo interna
                  Il pensier de'mortali occulto giace;
                  Pur'ardisco affermar', à quel, ch'io scerna
                  Nel Capitan, che'n tutto anco no'l tace,
                  Ch'egli ti voglia à l'obligo soggetto
                  De'rei comune, e in suo poter ristretto.
               
               
                  Sorrise all'hor Rinaldo, e con vn volto,
                  In cui tra'l riso lampeggiò lo sdegno;
                  Difenda sua ragion ne'ceppi inuolto
                  Chi seruo è, disse, ò d'esser seruo è degno.
                  Libero i nacqui, e vissi, e morrò sciolto
                  Pria che man porga, ò piede à laccio indegno:
                  Vsa à la spada è questa destra, & vsa
                  Á le Palme, e vil nodo ella ricusa.
               
               
                  Ma, s'à'meriti miei questa mercede
                  Goffredo rende, e uuole imprigionarme,
                  Pur com'io fossiue'huom del uulgo, e crede
                  Á carcere plebeo legato trarme;
                  Venga egli, ò mandi: io terro fermo il piede.
                  Giudici fian tra noi la sorte, e l'arme:
                  Fera Tragedia uuol, che s'appresenti
                  Per lor diporto à le nemiche genti.
               
               
                  
                  Ciò, detto l'armi chiede, e'l capo, e'l busto
                  Di finissimo acciaio adorno rende:
                  E fà del grande scudo il braccio onusto,
                  E la fatale spada fianco appende:
                  E in sembiante magnanimo, & augusto,
                  Come folgore suol, ne l'armi splende.
                  Marte, e'rassembrate, quel'hor dal quinto
                  Cielo di ferro scendi, e d'horror cinto.
               
               
                  Tancredi in tanto i feri spirti, e'l core
                  In superbito d'ammollir procura.
                  Giouene inuitto (dice) al tuo ualore
                  Sò, che fia piana ogni erta impresa, e dura:
                  Sò, che fra l'armi sempre, e fra'l terrore
                  La tua eccelsa uirtute è più secura.
                  Ma non consenta DIO, ch'ella si mostri
                  Hoggi sì crudelmente à danni nostri.
               
               
                  Dimmi, che pensi far? vorrai le mani
                  Del ciuil sangue tu dunque bruttarte?
                  E con le piaghe indegne de'Christiani
                  Trafiger CHRISTO, ond'ei son mēbra, e parte.
                  Di transitorio honor rispetti uani,
                  Che, qual'onda di mar se'n uiene, e parte,
                  Potranno in te più, che la fede, e'l zelo
                  Di quella gloria, che n'eterna in Cielo?
               
               
                  Ah, non per DIO: uinci te stesso, espoglia
                  Questa feroce tua mente superba.
                  Cedi: non fia timor, ma santa uoglia,
                  Ch'a questo ceder tuo palma si serba.
                  E se pur degna, ond'altri essempio toglia,
                  É la mia giouenetta etate acerba;
                  Anch'io fui prouocato, e pur non uenni
                  Co'Fedeli in contesa, e mi contenni.
               
               
                  
                  C'hauendoio perso di Cilicia il Regno,
                  E l insegne spiegateui di CHRISTO;
                  
                  Baldouin sopragiunse e con indegno
                  Modo occupollo, e ne fè uile acquisto:
                  Che, mostrando si amico ad ogni segno,
                  Del suo auaro pensier non m'era auuisto;
                  Ma con l'arme però di ricourarlo
                  Non tentai poscia, e forse i potea farlo.
               
               
                  E se pur ancola prigion ricusi,
                  Ei lacci schiui quasi ignobil pondo:
                  E seguir uuoi l'opinioni, e gli vsi,
                  Che perleggi d'honore approuail Mondo;
                  Lascia quimè, ch'al Capitan ti scusi:
                  Tu in Antiochia vanne à Boemondo:
                  Che nè sopporti in questo impeto primo
                  A suoi giuditij assai securo stimo.
               
               
                  Ben tosto fia, se pur quì contra hauremo
                  L'arme d'Egitto, od altro stuol Pagano
                  Ch'assaipiù chiaro il tuo ualor estremo
                  N'apparirà, mentre starai lontano.
                  E senza te parranne il Campo scemo,
                  Quasi corpo, cui tronco è braccio, ò mano.
                  Quì Guelfo sopragiunge, e ì detti approua:
                  E uuol, che senza indugio indi si moua.
               
               
                  Á i lor consigli la sdegnosa mente
                  De l'audace Garzon si uolge, e piega:
                  Tal ch'egli di partirsi immantinente
                  Fuor di quell'hoste à i fidi suoi non nega.
                  Molta intanto è concorsa amica gente:
                  E seco andarne ogn'un procura, e prega.
                  Egli tutti ringratia, e seco prende
                  Sol duo scudieri, e sù'l cauallo ascende.
               
               
                  
                  Parte, e porta un desio d'eterna, & alma
                  Gloria, ch'à nobil core è sferza, e sprone.
                  Á magnanime imprese intenta hà l'alma,
                  Et insolite cose oprar dispone.
                  Gir fra' nemici: iui ò Cipresso, ò Palma
                  Acquistar per la Fede, ond'è campione:
                  Scorrer l'Egitto, e penetrar sin doue
                  Fuor d'incognito fonte il Nilo moue.
               
               
                  Ma Guelfo, poi che'l Giouene feroce
                  Affrettato al partir preso hà congedo;
                  Quiui non bada, e se ne uà ueloce,
                  Oue egli stima ritrouar Goffredo.
                  Il qual, come lui uede, alza la uoce;
                  Guelfo, dicendo, à punto hor te richiedo:
                  E mandato hò pur hora in uarie parti
                  Alcun de'nostri Araldi à ricercarti.
               
               
                  Poi fà ritrarre ogn'altro, e in basse note
                  Ricomincia con lui graue sermone.
                  Veracemente, ò Guelfo, il tuo Nepote
                  Troppo trascorre, ou'ira il cor gli sprone:
                  E male addursi à mia credenza hor puote
                  Di questo fatto suo giusta cagione.
                  Ben caro haurò che la ci rechi tale;
                  Ma Goffredo con tutti è Duce eguale.
               
               
                  E sarà del legitimo, e del dritto
                  Custode in ogni caso, e difensore,
                  Serbando sempre al giudicare inuitto
                  Da le tiranne passioni il core.
                  Hor, se Rinaldo à uiolar l'editto,
                  E de la disciplina il sacro honore
                  Costretto fu, come alcun dice; à i nostri
                  Giuditij uenga ad inchinarsi, e'l mostri.
               
               
                  
                  A sua ritention libero uegna:
                  Questo, ch'io posso, à i merti suoi consento.
                  Ma s'egli stà ritroso, e se ne sdegna,
                  (Conosco quel suo indomito ardimento)
                  Tu di condurlo, e proueder t'ingegna,
                  Ch'ei non isforzi huom mansueto, e lento
                  Ad esser de le leggi, e de l'impero
                  Vendicator, quanto è ragion, seuero.
               
               
                  Così disse egli: e Guelfo à lui rispose.
                  Anima non potea d'infamia schiua
                  Voci sentir di scorno ingiuriose,
                  E non farne repulsa, oue l'udiua.
                  E se l'oltraggiatore à morte ei pose,
                  Chi è, chi meta à giust'ir aprescriua?
                  Chi contra i colpi, la deuuta offesa,
                  Mentre arde la tenzon, misura, e pesa?
               
               
                  Ma quel, che chiedi tu, ch'al tuo soprano
                  Arbitrio il Garzon venga à sottoporse,
                  Duolmi, ch'esser non può: ch'egli lontano
                  Dal'Hoste immantinente il passo torse.
                  Ben m'offro io di prouar con questa mano
                  Á lui, ch'à torto in falsa accusa il morse,
                  Ó s'altri v'è di sì maligno dente;
                  Ch'ei punì l'onta iniusta giustamente.
               
               
                  Á ragion, dico, al tumido Gernando
                  Fiaccò le corna del superbo orgoglio.
                  Sol, s'egli errò, fù nel oblio del bando;
                  Ciò ben mi pesa, & à lodar no'l toglio.
                  Tacque, e disse Goffredo. hor vada errando,
                  E porti risse altroue: io quì non voglio,
                  Che sparga seme tu di noue liti.
                  Deh, per Dio, si an gli sdegni anco forniti.
               
               
                  
                  Di procurare il suo soccorso intanto
                  Non cessò mai l'ingannatrice rea.
                  Pregaua il giorno, e ponea in vso quanto
                  L'arte, e l'ingegno, e la bella potea.
                  Ma poi, quando stendendo il fosco manto
                  La notte in occidente il dì chiudea;
                  Fra duo suoi Caualieri, e due matrone
                  Ricouraua in disparte al padiglione.
               
               
                  Ma ben che sia mastra d'inganni, ei suoi
                  Modi gentili, e le parole accorte,
                  E bella sì, che'l Ciel prima, nè poi
                  Altrui non diè maggior bellezza in sorte:
                  Tal, che del Campo i più famosi Heroi
                  Hà presi d'vn piacer tenace, e forte;
                  Non è però, ch'à l'esca de'diletti
                  Il pio Goffredo lusingando alletti.
               
               
                  In van cerca inuaghirlo, e con mortali
                  Dolcezze attrarlo à l'amorosa vita:
                  Che qual saturo augel, che non si cali
                  Oue il cibo mostrando altri l'inuita;
                  Tal ei, satio del mondo, i piacer frali
                  Sprezza, e se'n poggia al Ciel ꝑ via romiat:
                  E quante insidie al suo bel volto tende
                  L'infido Amor, tutte fallaci rende.
               
               
                  Nè impedimento alcun torcer da l'orme
                  Puote, che Dio ne segna, i pensier santi.
                  Tentò ella mill'arti, e in mille forme,
                  Quasi Proteo nouel, gli apparue auanti:
                  E desto Amor, doue più freddo ei dorme
                  Haurian gli atti dolcissimi, e i sembianti;
                  Ma quì (gratie Diuine) ogni sua proua
                  Vana riesce, e ritentar non gioua.
               
               
                  
                  La bella Donna, ch'ogni cor più casto
                  Arder credeua ad vn girar di ciglia,
                  Ó come perde hor l'alterezza, e'l fasto:
                  E quale hà di ciò sdegno, e merauiglia.
                  Riuolger le sue forze, oue contrasto
                  Men duro troui, al fin fi riconsiglia:
                  Qual Capitan, ch'inespugnabil Terra
                  Stanco abbandoni, e porti altroue guerra.
               
               
                  Ma contra l'arme di costei non meno
                  Si mostrò di Tancredi inuitto il core;
                  Però ch'altro desio gli ingombra il seno,
                  Nè ui può loco hauer nouello ardore.
                  Che sì come da l'un l'altro veleno
                  Guardar ne suol, tal l'un da l'altro amore.
                  Questi soli non vinse: ò molto, ò poco
                  A uampò ciascun'altro al suo belfoco.
               
               
                  Ella, se ben si duol, che non succeda
                  Sì pienamente il suo disegno, e l'arte;
                  Pur fatto hauendo cosi nobil preda
                  Di tanti Heroi, si riconsola in parte.
                  E pria, che di sue frodi altri s'auueda,
                  Pensa condurgli in più secura parte:
                  Oue gli stringa poi d'altre catene,
                  Che non son quelle, ond'hor presi gli tiene.
               
               
                  Essendo giunto il termine, che fisse
                  Il Capitano à darle alcun soccorso,
                  A lui se'n venne riuerente, e disse.
                  Sire, il dì stabilito è già trascorso.
                  E se per sorte il reo Tiranno vdisse,
                  Ch'i habbia fatto à l'arme tue ricorso,
                  Prepareria sue forze à la difesa:
                  Nè cosi ageuol poi fora l'impresa.
               
               
                  
                  Dunque, prima ch'à lui tal noua apporti
                  Voce incerta di fama, ò certa spia,
                  Scelga la tua pieta fra'tuoi più forti
                  Alcuni pochi, e meco hor hor gli inuia:
                  Che, se non mira il Ciel con occhi torti
                  L'opre mortali, ò l'innocenza oblia;
                  Sarò riposta in Regno, e la mia Terra
                  Sempre haurai tributaria in pace, ein guerra.
               
               
                  Così diceua: e'l Capitano à i detti
                  Quel, che negar non si potea, concede:
                  Se ben, ou'ella il suo partir affretti,
                  In se tornar l'elettion ne vede.
                  Ma nel numero ogn'vn de'diece eletti
                  Con insolita instanza esser richiede:
                  E l'emulation, che'n lor si desta,
                  Più importuni gli fà ne la richiesta.
               
               
                  Ella, che'n essi mira aperto il core,
                  Prende vedendo ciò noua argomento:
                  E sù'l lor fianco adopra il rio timore
                  Di gelosia per ferza; e per tormento;
                  Sapendo ben, ch'al fin s'inuecchia Amore
                  Senza quest'arti, e diuien pigro, e lento,
                  Quasi destrier, che men veloce corra,
                  Se non hà chi lui segua, ò chi'l precora.
               
               
                  E in tal modo comparte i detti sui,
                  E'l guardo lusinghiero, e'l dolce riso,
                  Ch'alcun non è, che non inuidij altrui:
                  Nè il timor de la speme è in lor diuiso,
                  La folle turba de gli Amanti, à cui
                  Stimolo è l'arte a'un fallaceuiso,
                  Senza fren corre, e non gli tien vergogna:
                  E loro indarno il Capitanrampogna.
               
               
                  
                  Ei, ch'egualmente satisfar desira
                  Ciascuna de le parti, e in nulla pende:
                  Se ben alquanto hor di vergogna, hor d'ira
                  Al vaneggiar de'Caualier s'accende;
                  Poi ch'ostinati in quel desio gli mira,
                  Nouo consiglio in accordarli prende.
                  Scriuansi i vostri nomi, & in vn vaso
                  Pongansi (disse) e sia giudice il caso.
               
               
                  Subito il nome di ciascun si scrisse,
                  E in picciol'vrna posti, e scossi foro,
                  E tratti à sorte: e'l primo, che n'uscisse,
                  Fù il Conte di Pembrotia Artemidoro.
                  Legger poi di Gherardo il nome vdisse:
                  Et vscì Vincilao dopo costoro:
                  Vincilao, che sì graue, e saggio auante,
                  Canuto bor pargoleggia, e vecchio Amante.
               
               
                  Ó come il uolto han lieto, e gli occhi pregni
                  Di quel piacer, che dal cor pieno inonda,
                  Questi tre primi eletti, i cui disegni
                  La Fortuna in amor destra seconda.
                  D'incerto cor, di gelosia dan segni
                  Gli altri, il cui nome auuien, che l'vrna asconda:
                  E da la bocca pendon di colui,
                  Che spiega i breui, e legge i nomi altrui.
               
               
                  Guasco quarto fuor venne, à cui successe
                  Ridolfo, & à Ridolfo indi Olderico:
                  Quinci Guglielmo Ronciglion si lesse,
                  E'l Bauaro Eberardo, e'l Franco Henrico.
                  Rambaldo vltimo fù, che far si elesse
                  Poi, fè cangiando, di GIESV nemico,
                  Tanto puote amor dunque? e questi chiuse
                  Il numero de'diece, e gli altri escluse.
               
               
                  
                  D'ira, di gelosia, d'inuidia ardenti
                  Chiaman gli altri Fortuna ingiusta, e ria:
                  E te accusano Amor, che le consenti,
                  Che ne l'Imperio tuo giudice sia.
                  Ma perche instinto è da l'humane menti,
                  Che ciò, che più vieta, huom più desia;
                  Dispongon molti ad onta di Fortuna
                  Seguir la Donna, come il Ciel s'imbruna.
               
               
                  Voglion sempre seguirla àl'ombra, al Sole,
                  E per lei combattendo espor la vita.
                  Ella fanne alcun motto, e con parole
                  Tronche, e dolci sospiri à ciò gli inuita:
                  Et hor con questo, & hor con quel si duole,
                  Che far conuienle senza lui partita.
                  S'erano armati intanto, e da Goffredo
                  Toglieano i diece Caualier congedo.
               
               
                  Gli ammonisce quel saggio à parte, à parte,
                  Come la fè Pagana à incerta, e leue,
                  E mal securo pegno: e con qual'arte
                  L'insidie, e i casi auuersi huom fuggir deue.
                  Mason le sue parole al uento sparte:
                  Nè consiglio d'huom sano Amor riceue.
                  Lor dà commiato al fine, ela Donzella
                  Non aspetta al partir l'Alba nouella.
               
               
                  Parte la uincitrice, e que'riuali,
                  Quasi prigioni al suo trionfo auanti,
                  Seco n'adduce, e tra infinitimali
                  Lascia la turba poi de gli altri amanti.
                  Ma, come uscì la notte, e sotto l'ali
                  Menò il silentio, e i lieui sogni erranti:
                  Secretamente, com'Amor gli'informa,
                  Molti d'Armida seguitaron l'orma.
               
               
                  
                  Segue Eustatio il primiero, e puote à pena
                  Aspettar l'ombre, che la notte adduce.
                  Vassene frettoloso, oue ne'l mena
                  Per le tenebre cieche un cièco Duce.
                  Errò la notte tepida, e serena;
                  Ma poi ne l'apparir de l'alma luce
                  Gli apparse insieme Armida, e'l suo drappello.
                  Doue un borgo lor fù notturno hostello.
               
               
                  Ratto ei uer lei si moue, & à l'insegna
                  Tosto Rambaldo il riconosce, e grida;
                  Che ricerchi fra loro, e perche uegna.
                  Vengo (risponde) à seguitarne Armida:
                  Ned ella haurà da me, se non la sdegna,
                  Men pronta aita, ò seruitù men fida.
                  Replica l'altro. & à cotanto honore
                  Dì, chi t'elesse? egli soggiunge. Amore.
               
               
                  Me scelse Amor, te la Fortuna: hor quale
                  Da più giusto elettore eletto parti?
                  Dice Rambaldo all'hor, nulla ti uale
                  Titolo falso, & usi inutil' arti:
                  Nè potrai de la uergine regale
                  Fra i campioni legitimi meschiarti
                  Illegitimo seruo e chi (riprende
                  Cruccioso il Giouenetto) àme il contende?
               
               
                  Io te'l difenderò, colui rispose:
                  E feglisi à l'in contro in questo dire.
                  E con uoglie egualmentein lui sdegnose
                  L'altro si mosse, e con eguale ardite.
                  Ma quì stese la mano, e si frapose
                  La Tiranna de l'Alme in mezo à l'ire:
                  Et à l'uno dicea. deh non t'incresca,
                  Ch'à te compagno, à me Campion s'accresca.
               
               
                  
                  S'ami, che salua i sia, perche mi priui
                  In sì grand'uopo de la noua aita?
                  Dice à l'altro. opportuno, e grato arriui
                  Difensor di mia fama, e di mia uita.
                  Nè uuol ragion nè farà mai, ch'io schiui
                  Compagnia nobil tanto, e sì gradita.
                  Così parlando, ad hor ad hor trauia
                  Alcun nouo Campion le soruenia.
               
               
                  Chi di là giunge, e chi di quà, nè l'uno
                  Sapea de l'altro, e'l mira bieco, e torto.
                  Essa lieta gli accoglie, & à ciascuno
                  Mostra del suo uenir gioia, e conforto.
                  Ma già ne lo schiarir de l'aer bruno
                  S'era del lor partir Goffredo accorto:
                  E la mente indouina de'lor danni
                  D'alcun futuro mal par, che s'affanni,
               
               
                  Mentre à ciò pur ripensa, un messo apparè,
                  Polueroso anhelante, in uista afflitto,
                  In atto d'huom, ch'altrui nouelle amare
                  Porti, e mostri il dolore infronte scritto.
                  Disse costui. Signor, tosto nelmare
                  La grande armata apparirà d'Egitto:
                  E l'auiso Guglielmo, il qual comanda
                  Á i Liguri nauigli, àte ne manda.
               
               
                  Soggiunse à questo poi, che da le naui
                  Sendo condotta uettouaglia al Campo,
                  I Caualli, ei Cameli onusti, e graui
                  Trouato haueano a meza strada inciampo:
                  E che i lor difensori uccisi, ò schiaui
                  Restar pugnando, e nessunfece scampo,
                  D'ladroni d'Arabia in vna valle
                  Assaliti à la fronte, & à le spalle.
               
               
                  
                  E che l'insano ardire, e la licenza
                  Di que'barbari erranti è homai sì grande,
                  Che'n guisa d'vn diluuio intorno senza
                  Alcun contrasto si dilata, e spande:
                  Onde conuien, ch'à porre in lor temenza
                  Alcuna squadra di guerrier si mande,
                  Ch'assecuri la via, che da l'arene
                  Del mar di Palestina al Campo viene.
               
               
                  D'vna in vn'altra lingua in vn momento
                  Ne trapassa la Fama, e si distende:
                  E'l vulgo de'Soldati alto spauento
                  Hà de la fame, che vicina attende.
                  Il saggio Capitan, cbe l'ardimento
                  Solito loro in essi hor non comprende:
                  Cerca con lieto volto, e con parole,
                  Come gli rassecuri, e riconsole.
               
               
                  Ó per mille perigli, e mille affanni
                  Meco passati in quelle parti, e in queste,
                  Compion di DIO, ch'à restorare i danni
                  De la Christiana sua fede nasceste;
                  Voi, che l'arme di Persia, ei Greci inganni,
                  E i monti, e i mari, e'l verno, ele tempeste,
                  De la fame i disagi, edela sete
                  Superaste; voi dunque hora temete?
               
               
                  Dunque il Signor, che n'indirizza, e moue,
                  Già conosciuto in caso assai più rio,
                  Non v'assecura? quasi hor volga altroue
                  La man de la clemenza, e' l guardo pio.
                  Tosto vn dì fia, che rimembrar ui gioue
                  Gli scorsi affanni, e sciorre i voti à DIO.
                  
                  Hor durate magnanimi, e voi stessi
                  Serbate, prego, à i prosperi successi.
               
               
                  
                  Con questi detti le smarrite menti
                  Consola, e con sereno, e lieto aspetto;
                  Ma preme mille cure egre, e dolenti
                  Altamente riposte in mezo al petto.
                  Come possa nutrir sì uarie genti
                  Pensa fra la penuria, e fra'l difetto:
                  Come à l'armata in mar s'opponga, e come
                  Gli Arabi predatori affreni, e dome.
               
               FINIS.
            
         
      
   